Public Disclosure Authorized

Document of
The World Bank

Public Disclosure Authorized

Report No 24122 MAU

MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENT OF
THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION

Public Disclosure Authorized

Public Disclosure Authorized

TO THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS
ON A COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
OF THE WORLD BANK GROUP
FOR
THE ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF MAURITANIA

May 6, 2002

Currency Unit
US$1

CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS
=
Mauritanian Ouguiyas (UM)
279 UM

WEIGHTS AND MEASURES Metric system
FISCAL YEAR January 1 - December 31

AfDB
APL
BMCI
CAS
CDF
CG
CPPR
DO
EU
FADES
FAO
FDI
FHH
GBM
GIRM
HIPC
ICT
ICR
IDA
IDB
IFC
IMF
LIL
MIGA
MTEF
NGO
OED
ONS
PDIAIM
PRGF
PRSP
ROSC
SIP
SNIM
SOMELEC
SSA
UNDP

ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS
African Development Bank
Adaptable Program Lending
Banque Mauritanienne pour le Commerce et l'Industrie
Country Assistance Strategy
Comprehensive Development Framework
Consultative Group
Country Program Performance Review
Development Objectives
European Union
Fonds Arabe de Developpement Economique et Sociale
Food and Agriculture Organization
Foreign Direct Investment
Female-Headed Households
Generale des Banques de Mauritanie
Government of the Islamic Republic of Mauritania
Heavily Indebted Poor Countries
Information and Communication Technologies
Implementation Completion Report
International Development Association
Islamic Development Bank
International Finance Corporation
International Monetary Fund
Learning and Innovation Loan
Multilateral International Guarantee Agency
Medium-Term Expenditure Framework
Non Governmental Organisation
Operations Evaluation Department
Office Nationale de la Statistique
Integrated Development Program for Irrigated Agriculture in Mauritania
Poverty Reduction Growth Facility
Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper
Report on the Observance of Standards and Codes
Sector Investment Program
Societe Nationale Industrielle et Miniere
Societe Nationale d'Electricite
Sub-Saharan Africa
United Nations Development Program
Vice President
Country Director
Sector Manager
Task Team Leader
Core Team Members
:
:
:

Callisto Madavo
A. David Craig
Emmanuel Akpa
Miquel Saponara
Agnes Soucat
Govindan Nair
Eavan O'Halloran
Steve Wan Yan Lun

ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF MAURITANIA
COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY

TABLE OF CONTENTS
i
Executive Summary..................
1
I.
INTRODUCTION ....................
II. MAURITANIA'S DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM AND PROSPECTS ................
..................... 2
A. THE PRSP ..............................................................
2
B. EcoNoMIc & SOCIAL PERFORMANCE AND PRSP IMPLEMENTATION ........................................... 3
C. ECONOMIC OUTLOOK .............................................................
10
13
D. THE CDF, PARTNERSHIPS AND PARTICIPATION .............................................................
III. THE WORLD BANK GROUP COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY FOR
MAURITANIA DURING FY03-05 .................................................................
15
A. PROGRESS UNDER THE FY98-01 CAS AND LESSONS LEARNT
.15
B. STRATEGIC ELEMENTS OF THE FY03-05 CAS .20
C. ASSISTANCE PROGRAM .23
D. SELECTIVITY AND CHOICE OF INSTRUMENTS .30
E. PORTFOLIO PERFORMANCE AND MANAGEMENT .31
F. SCENARIOS AND TRIGGERS .32
IV. RISKS ..................................................
33
V.
CONCLUDING REMARKS ...................................................
34
Table
Table 1: Mauritania: Macroeconomic Framework, 2000-2005 ................................................. 11
Boxes
BOX 1: A COUNTRY PROFILE ......................
.I
BOX 2: SOCIAL INDICATORS ......................
BOX 3:WHERE ARE THE POOR?..........................................
..................
....
BOX 4: A PROFILE OF POVERY INMAURITANIA ...................................................
BOX 5: SUMMARY ECONOMIC INDICATORS ..................................................
BOX 6: MAJOR STRUCTURAL REFORMS ...................................................
BOX 7: EXTERNAL FINANCING REQUIREMENTS ..................................................
BOX 8:PARTICIPATORY PROCESS FOLLOWED ..................................................
BOX 9: LENDING FY98-02 ..................................................
BOX 10: ESWFY98-02 ..................................................
BOX 11: MAKING COMPETITION WORK ..................................................
BOX 12: LESSONS LEARNED FROM CLIENT SURVEY ..................................................
BOX 13:MAURITANIA'S PERFORMANCE UNDER THE HIGH CASE SCENARIO ............................................
BOX 14: BANK GROUP'S ROLE IN OVERALL DONOR EFFORT ......................
............................
BOX 15: IDA ASSISTANCE PROGRAM ..................................................
BOX 16:SCENARIOS AND TRIGGERS ..................................................

4

S
6
7
8
12
14
15
16
17
18
18
19
22
33

Attachment I
STANDARD ANNEXES ...................................................

35

MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE
INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION TO THE
EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS ON A COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
OF THE WORLD BANK GROUP FOR THE ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF MAURITANIA
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
1.
Over the past decade, the Government of the Islamic Republic of Mauritania (GIRM) has
undertaken a wide-reaching macroeconomic, structural and social reform program that has been
both ambitious and successful. Mauritania has gained a solid international reputation as having
liberalized both economically and politically, with a market-driven economy and a relatively
open political landscape with elections held regularly and considered fair. Significant progress
has been made in reducing poverty with the proportion of individuals estimated to be living on
income below the poverty line declining from 56.6% in 1990 to 46.3% in 2000. Mauritania is
also on track to reach the Millennium Development Goals with major improvements already
achieved on social indicators.
2.
Mauritania has undergone rapid transformation from a traditionally nomadic society to
one where over half the population now lives in urban areas. The economic structure still
presents a sharp contrast between a relatively small modern sector and traditional subsistence
sectors.
While economic growth has been strong throughout the 1990s, it remains
overwhelmingly based on fishing and iron ore although good growth potential has been
identified in agricultural diversification, livestock and tourism.
3.
Mauritania was one of the first countries to finalize its Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper
(PRSP) in early 2001 and, since then, it has been implementing this strategy in a satisfactory
manner. The PRSP places poverty reduction at the center of the GIRM's economic development
strategy and outlines the following four strategic axes for achieving this: (i) accelerating private
sector-led growth; (ii) anchoring growth in the economic environment of the poor; (iii)
developing human resources and ensuring universal access to basic infrastructure and services;
and (iv) institutional development and governance.
4.
The GIRM has streamlined the principles of the Comprehensive Development
Framework into the PRSP. The long-term development vision has been clearly articulated as the
PRSP covers the 2001-2015 period. The GIRM has taken the leadership on developing effective
partnerships through the participatory way in which the PRSP was developed and is being
implemented, and through its donor coordination efforts.
5.
Objectives. The main objective of the Country Assistance Strategy for FY03-05 is to
support the GIRM in the implementation of the PRSP. In particular the following strategic
elements are pursued: (i) the program of lending and non-lending operations has been
specifically designed to support implementation of the four strategic axes of the PRSP; (ii)
capacity building is the main emphasis of the CAS; (iii) the focus of the Bank's lending program
will be through programmatic support through three PRSCs: (iv) fiduciary issues are fully taken
into account into the scope and sequencing of the PRSCs; and (v) the shift to programmatic
lending through the PRSCs will be underpinned by the Bank's core diagnostic ESW.

MauritaniaCAS

ii

6.
Approach. While building on the experience and lessons learnt from the FY98-01 CAS,
this CAS also:
*
*
*
*
*

Builds on the participatory process of the PRSP and furthermore incorporates the
results of intensive CAS consultations with GIRM, civil society and the donor
community;
Integrates the results of the 2000 Client Feedback Survey;
Pursues the goal of selectivity of activities to ensure greater complementarity with
other development partners;
Addresses key cross-cutting and capacity building issues;
Recommends a progressive shift to programmatic support to improve public sector
management and increase the efficiency of public resources.

7.
A series of Poverty Reduction Support Credits (PRSC) would be the main pillar of the
lending prograrn. However, it is recognized that the shift from traditional investment lending to
programmatic lending will be phased in gradually. During this CAS, the Bank will continue
with select investment projects which directly target poverty reduction, institutional
strengthening and capacity building while gradually phasing-in PRSCs. The base case lending
level of US$110 million assumes that the PRSP and reform program will continue to be
implemented in a timely manner. The high case lending would be triggered by (i) accelerated
progress being made in implementing the PRSP and on achievement of the PRSP poverty,
growth and macroeconomic targets; (ii) significant increase in the absorptive capacity; (iii)
strong performance in public finance management including full implementation of the
recommendations of the CFAA, ROSC and the CPAR action plans; (iv) major improvements on
strengthening institutional capacity in the ministries of rural development, education and health;
(v) strong portfolio performance with disbursement rates higher than Bank average and less than
15 percent of the portfolio rated at risk. A lending total of up to US$140 million is envisaged
under the high case.
8.
Risks. Mauritania has proven to be a reliable and committed development partner.
Nevertheless, Mauritania remains a small economy with a narrow resource export base and thus
is vulnerable to external shocks. The HIPC debt relief, efforts to diversify the economy, the
implementation of the PRSP, and the current level of international reserves should increase
Mauritania's ability to absorb such temporary shocks. Another potential risk to be considered is
the ability of Mauritania to move away from its traditional way of private sector business and
adapt a more modem and innovative approach to increase competitiveness. The achievements
over the past decade have shown that Mauritania is able and willing to implement ambitious
reforms and adapt as it moves forward.
9.

The following issues are suggested for Board discussion:
*
*

Does the proposed assistance program adequately target Mauritania's private sectorled growth and poverty reduction challenges?
Does the Board consider the mix of Bank instruments, including the gradual shift to
programmatic support, appropriate?

MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE
INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION TO THE
EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS ON A COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
OF THE WORLD BANK GROUP FOR THE ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF MAURITANIA

I. INTRODUCTION

1.
Since 1992, Mauritania has undertaken an ambitious and successful transition to an
economically liberalized and politically diverse country. This has been managed by a reformminded, competent and committed team in Government which has implemented wide-reaching
macroeconomic, structural and social reforms. In ten years, Mauritania has been transformed
from a country with a predominantly nomadic population, limited economic base and poor social
indicators to one that is highly urbanized, market-driven, with sustained economic growth (albeit
narrowly based) and a growing international reputation as a location for investment. There has
also been significant progress in maintaining macroeconomic stability and in improving social
indicators, thus placing Mauritania on the path towards achieving the Millennium Development
Goals. Mauritania was one of the first countries to present a full Poverty Reduction Strategy
Paper (PRSP) to the Boards of the Bank and the IMF in February 2001 and it has been
successfully implementing this strategy since then.
Box l Mauritania - A Country Profile
Population. About 2.7 million with a growth rate of 2.7 percent. The socio-cultural landscape has undergone rapid transformation
_from a traditionally nomadic society at independence (1960) with only 5 percent of the population in urban centers, to an urbandominated one whereby over half the population (1.6 million) livein urban centers (1998 figure). This urbanization was caused by
rapid population sedentarization and migration from rural areas,' particularly since the mid-1980s: Nouakchott, the capital city,
represents one third of the total population. Mauritania has an intricate dual culture with traditional ties with the Magbreb countries
to the North and with Senegal and Mali in the South and East.
Economic Activities. Mining and fisheries activities domiunate the industrial sector and together account for nearly all export
eamnings. The rural sector is the main source of incorne for the population and employs an estimated 64 percent of the labor force.
Diversification and modemization of agricultural production along the Senegal'River Valley, although incipient, are showing
progress. Potential sources of gtowth have been identified in the livestock, agri-business, artisanal fisheries and tourism sectors but
these have been given insufficient attention'to date.
The-Environment. More than 90% of the land surface is desert and water scarcity is a widespread problem. Desertification and
environmental 'degradation are threatening arable land (0.5 percent of the total surface) and urgent actions are needed to mitigate
this threat. Irrigation and other infrastructure investments in the Senegal River Valley are crucial but challenging as there is a
complex mix of economic, environmental and social concems which also impact neighboring countries. Improved fishing'resource
management, including better conservation and surveillance, is necessary for ensuring sustainable supplies of fish. In'urban areas,
the most important issues are improving sanitation and waste management and expanding access to water.
History of Bank Relations. The first Bank operation in Mauritania was an IDA credit of US$8 million for a Roads project in 1964.
Since then, there have been 61 IDA Credits, 3 IBRD Loans and 2 IFC investments, totaling US$912 million. Thitteen operations
are currently under implementation. In May 2002, disbursements were US$692 million, and there was an undisbursed balance of
US$203 million.
Political'Outlook. Since opposition political parties were legalized in 1992, Mauritania has held two presidential elections.
Legislative and municipal elections are conducted regularly and have become accepied practice in the country - the'most recent
were held in October 2001. International' observers welcomed the smooth organization, the manner, and the results of the two
rounds of these elections and the fact that they allowed for proper participation of all electors in an atmosphere of normality and
dembcratic openness. There was widespread international recognition that these elections reflected a sound development of
political.pluralism in Mauritania.

MauritaniaCAS

2

2.
The last Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) was presented to the Board on June 10,
1997. At that time, Mauritania was deepening the implementation of a major stabilization
program and initiating the implementation of additional structural reforms aimed at eliminating
macroeconomic imbalances and liberalizing the economy. Over the past four years, considerable
progress has been achieved on both fronts. This Country Assistance Strategy (FY03-05)
continues the approach of the previous CAS which is to emphasize poverty reduction policies
and programs through broad-based economic growth led by the private sector. The important
difference in the country context now is that Mauritania has prepared and has been implementing
its PRSP1 which forms the main framework for the CAS and all other donor activities in
Mauritania.

II.
A.

MAURITANIA'S DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM AND PROSPECTS

THE PRSP

3.
Mauritania's first PRSP, which covers the 2001-2015 period, was finalized in January
2001, at the national conference on the struggle against poverty. The PRSP is based on a
participatory approach which envisages poverty reduction as part of a long-term economic
development strategy. It sets targets between now and 2015 that are in line with the Millennium
Development Goals. The PRSP has been well received by all the country's development
partners who endorsed the way it was prepared, its objectives, strategic guidelines, and action
plan. The four strategic axes of the PRSP are:
*
*
*
*
(i)

Accelerating private sector-led growth
Growth anchored in the economic environment of the poor
Developing human resources and ensuring universal access to basic infrastructure and
services
Institutional development and governance

Accelerating Private Sector-led Growth

4.
The Government's objective is to enhance competitiveness by promoting the
development of a dynamic private sector and fostering an incentive framework which is
attractive to private foreign investment. The strategy of the Govermnent of the Islamic Republic
of Mauritania (GIRM) for accelerating private sector-led growth is based on: (i) the effective
implementation of far-reaching reforms of the legal and judicial framework focused on the
application of the different business law codes already adopted; (ii) deepening the tax reform to
further simplify business taxes; (iii) amending labor laws with a view to making them more
flexible; (iv) enhancing the competitive business environment by securing a level playing field
for all private sector operators; (v) improving trade facilitation for existing and potential
exporters; and (vi) helping exporters meet product and phyto-sanitary standards to export

' The full PRSP and its joint staff assessment (JSA) (IDA/SecM2001/0024, dated 1/16/2001) were discussed by the World Bank
Board on February 6, 2001.

MauritaniaCAS

3

markets and implementing an integrated approach to rural development based on policies to
promote growth and diversification of the agriculture and livestock sectors.
(ii)

Growth Anchored in the Economic Environment of the Poor

The development of the rural and infrastructure sectors are essential to developing trade,
5.
reducing production costs, and enhancing the competitiveness of the national economy. The
objective sought is to promote diversified growth of the agriculture and livestock sectors as well
as the sustainable provision of basic infrastructure in telecommunications, electricity, roads,
airports, and new Information and Communication Technologies (ICTs), primarily through
private investment and service delivery, and efficient management and maintenance systems.
Developing Human Resources and Ensuring Universal Access to Basic Services and
(iii)
Infrastructure
As the PRSP indicates, public services such as education, health care, safe drinking
6.
water, sanitation and energy have a direct impact on strategies aimed at accelerating growth and
ensuring that the quality of life of the poor is improved. Within a policy of universal access to
basic services and infrastructure, private provision and delivery of services in under-serviced
areas will be encouraged. In the education sector, the GIRM will continue to implement an
ambitious strategy for primary education by providing the necessary infrastructure and teachers
while fine-tuning its strategy for post-primary and higher education. In the health sector, the
GIRM will continue to implement its ten-year plan aimed at providing universal access to basic
health services. In addition, the strategy of anchoring growth in the economic environment of
the poor is a major focus of the PRSP. This strategy is based on an integrated approach, of
which the recently adopted urban development policy aims at creating the necessary conditions
for urban centers to serve as focal points for regional development and for promoting the
economic integration of the population living in outlying districts.
(iv)

Institutional Development and Governance

The GIRM is aware that institutional development and good governance are essential for
7.
making substantive progress in the other three axes of the PRSP. Actions detailed in its "General
Framework for the National Program of Good Governance" adopted by the GIRM in 1999
revolves around five main themes: (i) consolidation of the rule of law; (ii) strengthening of civil
service capabilities; (iii) support for decentralization; (iv) effective management of public
resources including use of Information and Communication Technologies (ICTs) and websites to
achieve greater transparency; and (v) involvement of the poor and strengthening of civil society
capabilities, particularly those of NGOs operating in new and more complex areas.
B.

ECONOMIC & SOCIAL PERFORMANCE AND PRSP IMPLEMENTATION

8.
The achievements made by the GIRM have underlined the depth of its commitment to
place poverty at center stage of its development strategy and reform the role of the State to be the
main facilitator for ensuring a market-led economy with a conducive and effective incentive
framework for the private sector. While much remains to be done on that front, particularly to

4

MauritaniaCAS

modernize the public administration, improve civil service capacity and carry out wide-reaching
judicial reforms, the PRSP has articulated a coherent strategy in these areas. The implementation
of the PRSP strategy has been satisfactory during its first year, as documented in the PRSP
progress report and the associated Joint Staff Assessment (JSA) 2 . The PRSP builds and expands
on the successful performance achieved during the 1990s on implementing macroeconomic,
structural and social policies reforms and on reducing poverty.
(i)

Progress in the Social Areas, Human Development and Poverty

9.
Over the past decade, the GIRM has significantly increased public spending for education
and health services, implemented a series of significant reforms and thus improved social
indicators. Education sector reforms were started in 1987 and were designed to expand access
to primary education, improve the
Box 2:'Social 1idicators:-Mauritania and SSA :
quality of primary and secondary
education, reduce illiteracy, and
SSA
-Mauritaniia_
strengthen job-oriented vocational
350
480
'
Mauritania has made GNI per-capita (atlas US$, 2001)
training.
considerable efforts to improve the Pouation
growth
rt
'
- 62,
2
2.6
38
Adult illiteracy
(%~,
26000~
84.4
78
overall level of education and the Piimnary enrollment, boys and 'girls (%/0)
skills of its population, especially of

women. These efforts have resulted
in a rapid increase in primary school
enrollments from 49 percent of the

7
7-12 year age
group
in 1986/87/ to
to
12yea
goup
age in1986/8
84.4 percent in 2000/01 and with a

Primary enrollment, girls (0,)

82.2

71

53Life expectancy at birth (yrs,)
116
Under 5 mortality rat'(per000) -,
4.7
Fertility (per woman),
9000
Population,perphysician
~~~~~~~~~~HIV/AIDS
prevalence rate (IAD)05%84
OD!l,mn
s6v!i,,,
Sorce-A
DIeVaeC02-scal'c,
'2001.&2002, SociiilJndicators:ofDevelop.ment.
GNI per capita:SSA includingSouthAfrica:480
-'

47
151
5.6
10000

completion rate of about 62 percent an important achievement. The recently completed Education Medium Term Expenditure
Framework (MTEF) shows an increase in spending in education from 3.7 percent of GDP in
1996 to 4.6 percent in 2001. In 2001, the GIRM finalized its Ten Year Education Development
Program which is being implemented with support from the Bank and several other donors.
10.
With regard to health, the sector focus has been on preventive health care and access to
primary care services. Since 1996, primary health care has received about 40 percent of the
sector's budgetary resources, significantly higher than the Sub-Saharan Africa (SSA) average of
25 percent. As a result, access to primary health care increased from 30 percent in 1990 to about
70 percent in 2001/02. In addition, the GIRM has increasingly provided funding for safety nets
to protect the most vulnerable groups of society. The HIV prevalence rate is among the lowest in
SSA at 0.52 percent at end 2001. Thus, health indicators in Mauritania in 2001 are better than
those in other Sub-Saharan countries (Box 2). Between 1990-2000, expenditures more than
doubled from a low of 1 percent of GDP to 1.6 percent in 2000 and to 2 percent in 2001. A
national strategic framework for the health sector has been developed and a MTEF has been
prepared to underpin the strategy. The analytical basis has been strengthened by a Demographic
and Health Survey (DHS) and a health expenditures and demand survey conducted in 2001 by
the GIRM, with the Bank's support.

2

See JSA and PRSP Progress Report, IDA/SecM2002-0259, May 9, 2002

5

MauritaniaCAS

11.
Gender. The roles of men and women in Mauritania have changed as rapidly as the
structure of the population. With the rapid population urbanization and sedentarization,
particularly of men, there is a high number of female-headed households (FHH) that is also
linked to socio-cultural disincentives to marriage and a high (37 percent) divorce rate. Women
in rural areas have therefore taken charge of farming activities and are assuming greater roles in
areas previously reserved to men. Women predominate in agricultural production despite their
continued low access to economic and financial resources, and the insecurity of their access to
property rights and land tenure. In urban areas, women dominate the informal sector and are
active traders. The productivity of women across the full range of their economic activities
remains very low, due to lack of skills and access to training, and weak organizational structures
and capacity among women's groups and associations.
12.
The Secretariat d'Etat ai la Condition Feminine (SECF) is responsible for planning and
monitoring improvements of the socio-economic and legal status of women, and coordination
with key line ministries and the donor community on specific initiatives to promote women's
status at both central and moughataar (local) levels. The GIRM signed and ratified the
Convention for the Elimination of all forms of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW, 2001)
and adopted a Personal Status Code (Code du Statut Personnel, 2001) aimed inter alia at
defining a more conducive legal framework for the protection of the rights of women and
children. In addition, the GIRM has established several Centres de Promotion Feminine (CPF)
throughout the country to provide women with literacy and non-formal education, skills training,
and assistance in the formation of cooperatives. These actions are contributing to raising the
literacy rate, the level of income among women, and their greater awareness of the importance of
their potential contribution to economic growth, poverty reduction and development. Since
1999, the World Bank has been providing technical and financial support, through an IDF Grant,
to gender-responsive legal reform, legal literacy and education, and increased access to legal and
judicial services especially targeted to women. This led to the launch of the first legal aid clinic
in Nouakchott (1999), which should gradually be extended to cover other regions where women
experience severe conflicts on personal and family law related issues as well as access to
resources.
13.

Poverty.

The results of the 2000 Integrated

Box 3: Where are the poor?

Household Survey indicate that significant progress has

been made in reducing poverty in Mauritania (Box 3).
Between 1990 and 2000, the proportion of individuals
estimated to be living on income below the poverty line
declined from 56.6 percent to 46.3 percent. The 2000
Household Survey has provided a solid basis for poverty
diagnosis, although more in-depth analysis of the
outcomes is needed. The results of the survey provide a
good basis for monitoring and evaluating poverty trends
and they constitute the starting point of the PRSP
implementation. The outcomes point to a decline in the
average poverty rate in recent years (from 50.5 percent
in 1996 to 46.3 percent in 2000), with poverty declining
in some urban centers and northern rural areas and

Of poor

of

1Q90
1996

'56.6'
50.5

Poverty
28.2
32.6

2000

46.3

'31.4

Nouakchott

1990
1996
2000

36.1
21
25.1

13.2
7.7
12.3

Autres villes

1990

44.5

17.9

2000

25.7 ^

National

13.2-

Rural Fleuve

1990
1996
2000

73.8-.
60.7
-71.5.

39.2
37.0
53.7

l RuralAutres

1990

69.3

38.7

1996

71.7

52.5

MauritaniaCAS

6

worsening in Nouakchott and the Senegal River Valley. Overall, the groups most vulnerable
include independent farmers and agricultural salaried workers in the Senegal River region, as
well as the population from urban settlements, which are mostly unemployed, or in the informal
sector.
Box 4. A Profile of Poverty in Mauritania
Poverty in Mauritania. Between 1990 and 2000, it is estimated that the incidence of poverty as.a whole fell from 56.6 to 46 3 percent. This is
clearly a major achievement The decline in poverty was not uniform across the country however, as shown in Box 3. jAlmost all gains come
from economic growth and the resultant increase in incorme and expenditure. Gains appear to have benefited urban areas and the "rural other"
regions but not Nouakchott and the "rural fleuve" (Senegal River Valley). Other urban poor gained from the improved,economic performance
and the growth in informal sector activities.
What does poor mean? In 1990, the absolute poverty line was established at a level.of annual expenditure equivalent of UM 32,800 per adult,
per year. In 1996, the absolute poverty line adjusted for inflation was set at an annual expenditure equivalent of UM 53,840. In 2000, this line'
was set at UM 67,316 per adult, per year. The extreme poverty line was defined as an annual expenditure of UM 40,709 '(1996) and UM 50,897
(2000).
The changingnature ofpoverty. While the GIRM actions succeeded in reducing poverty-over the last decade, Mauritania faces new challenges
from: (i) rapid urbanization of its population which has increased sharply in,absolute terms due to migration from rural and secondary cities to
Nouakchott; and (ii) an increase of absolute and extreme poverty levels in the "rural fleuve" region.
Gains in Inequality. The overall Gini coefficient shows that inequality has deteriorated: it was 39 percent in 2000 against 33.8 percent in 1996.
A regional analysis of the distribution of household per capita expenditure shows that inequality is higher in the urban centers including
Nouakchott (35.1 %/6),and the "rural fleuve" (33.8 %) but lower in "riral other' (37.1%/o): The'magnitude of the estimated measure of inequality
associated with Nouakchott (34.6%) can be attributed to a less homogeneous population due to the rural migration while 'other cities" includes
Northem cities with higher per capita expenditure than Southem cities.

Who are the poor? Vulnerable groups include households headed by people of 60 years or more, households deriving their income mainly from
agriculture, populations of the spontaneous urban settlements, and the unemployed. Female headed households appear to. be better off
irrespective of regions and household location, with an incidence of poverty systematically lower than the national and male-only estimates.
This suggest that the sex and the gender of the household head is not in itself a good predictor of the poverty status and thatfurdther analysis is
needed to address the complex gender dimension of poverty in Mauritania. The rural poor have lower literacy rates (38%), compared with the
national average (57.2%/o), lower access to water (22. 1% vs 50.4%) and lower access to electricity (1.5%vs_18.1%/o).
The working popYlation is estimated

at 700,000 people, of which the modem sector,, including the civil service, emp(bys only about 70,000.
Urban unemployment, a result of rapid rural-urban migration and the inability to absorb the uriskilled labor force, is estimated at 26 percent.
Targeted programs. In the context of the PRSP, several targeted anii-poverty programs have been elaborated to provide assistance to
disadvantaged groups. These programs include: (i) labor-intensive public works; (ii) credit-based programts (micro-financing, artisanal fisheries
credit, rural credit); (iii) rural water programs; and (iv) investments in human capital through significant-shifts in public spending in favor of
education and health. Several other activities are being financed through HIPC interim assistance: TWIZE: "social habitat" programr which
include self-construction of homes in the poorest suburban areas of Nouakchott and other large cities, micro-credit, 'etc.; TOUMZE' "small'
livestock" distributed to the poorest households in rural areas,.to constitute their sometimes only productive assets; AGR: revenue generating
activities, particularly in favor of women organized in cooperatives. Early indications concerning TWIZE and TOUMZE are that these programs
are effectively targeting the poor, judging by the ever-increasing demand from their elected representatives.

14.
The PRSP First Annual Progress Report revised the poverty reduction strategy targets to
take into account the results of the 2000 Household Survey as well as the lower economic growth
resulting from the adverse global economic slowdown in the second half of 2001. The GIRM
also recognizes that bottlenecks remain at the level of project implementation, monitoring of
public expenditures, and evaluation of their impact on the poor. As stated in the JSA of the
progress report, implementation capacity needs to be strengthened, so as to improve the
monitoring of budget execution and poverty reducing expenditures, and more actions are needed
to improve performance in education and health. In addition, further work is needed to analyze
the outcomes of the recent household survey, so that policy lessons could be drawn for the
future, and to make poverty and social impact analysis an integral part of future progress reports
and updated PRSPs.
(ii)

Economic Performance

15.

During the period 1997-2001, macroeconomic performance held firm resulting at end

7

MauritaniaCAS
led
rate of| 4.6. percent
2001 in a real GDP growth
. .
. .
. ~~~~~~~~~~Box 5: Summiary Eeonomie Indicators
- 1
by the fisheries, rural and mining sectors as well
RealGrowth Rates
as by the new traditional sectors of construction,
public works and telecommunications. The GDPo
F
3.2
-17.8
Exports (F.O.B)
current account (including official transfers) Shares of nominal GDP ( nercent):
17.6
balance was -5.7 percent of GDP and gross Gross domestic investment
17.6
official reserves rose to US$286 million, Domesticsavings
75.8
Fiscal
Private
consumption
of
imports.
to
6.3
months
equivalent
Consolidated
Go.
perations
(%of
GDP)
and
permitted
an
policy
approprite
was
policy was appropriate and permitted an COverall surplus or deficit (excd. grants)
4.2

appreciable increase in social and poverty Primary balance (excl. grants)
Account Balance: (% of GDP)
reduction expenditure from 7.5 percent of GDP in in durrent
Excluding offipial transfers,
Including official transfers
2000 to 8.5 percent of GDP at end-2001. By end2001, key economic and financial indicators were Debt Service I Exports (PRGF Data)
in line with the macroeconomic program (Box 5) Inflation (CPI, annual average %) as outlined in the PRSP.

Structural reforms

related to exchange rate policy, deregulation and

7.1

4.6

-3:9

26.7

21.0
70.3

-5.6
-2.7

-9.5
1.5
29.8

-10.0
-5.7
15.5

4.5

4.7

Gross intl. Reserveslimports (mos.)

4.3

6.3

Debt outstanding/GDP (DRS data)

194

212

system,
educational
privatization,
competitiveness, public resource management, and tax and tariff reforms have been implemented
(Box 6). The revised medium-term projections in the PRSP economic framework (2002-05)
aims at accelerating diversified private sector-led economic growth from 4.6 percent in 2001 to
6.4 percent in 2005, thus increasing employment and reducing poverty from 46.3 percent in 2000
to 42.3 percent in 2005, with gains in all regions and without increases in inequality 3 .
(iii)

Structural Issues

16.
Although Mauritania's economy has been substantially liberalized since the early 1990s,
the economic structure still presents a sharp contrast between a relatively small modem sector
and traditional subsistence sectors. Furthermore, the economy is extremely dependent on two
commodity exports - fishing and iron ore - and is thus vulnerable to terms of trade shocks and
the increasing likelihood of over-exploitation. The sustainability of higher economic growth in
Mauritania will depend on how the economic and export bases are expanded beyond mining and
fisheries and how agricultural crop production can be diversified and non-farm activities
developed, the livestock sector integrated into the modem economy, and the value-added of the
fisheries sector increased. It is recognized that this is a difficult challenge which will involve a
comprehensive approach. In particular, private sector-led growth in the above sectors will
require, as shown in a recent private sector survey, the development of an adequate
infrastructure, improved trade facilitation, certification to allow product standards to be met, an
effective financial sector and business services, the removal of remaining private sector
constraints and lowering of high transaction costs.

The "Loi d'Orientation" on poverty reduction, voted by the Parliament in July 2001, states that the PRSP is to be implemented through
Regional Poverty Reduction Programs (PRLP). These PRLPs will be gradually elaborated for each of the 13 wilayas (regions). Much
like for the PRSP, this will be done through: (i) a largely participatory process, (ii) a diagnosis of the situation of poverty in the wilaya,
and (iii) a comprehensive approach to poverty reduction and development.
3

MauritaniaCAS

8

.
1I93-1997

Box 6: Ten Y.ears of Sustained Structural Reforms

I'

.

Fisheries. The fishing marketing board and sectoral public enterprises privatized, a license system for industrial fishing
implemented; the Oceanographic Research Center 'and the-Sui'veillance Uniit strengtheneda Fishing activities .opened to foreign'
operators; regulation of ship chandlery activities adopted; fishing resources management program adopted; a system of territorial
rights for artisanal fisheries implemented.
Mining. The "Socidte Nationale Industrielle etMinimre" (SNIM) has been successfully restructured
Transport.Air and land transport activities.liberalized, port services privatized.'
Educadon and Health. Technical training centers strengthened,-mediuitni4erinliteracy program implemented, action plan for basic
education in rural areas implemented, reform-of the educational system adopted. Primary health program implemented, Service
delivery system strengthened and decentralized to the regions; community based healthpJolicies implemented.
Banking. The Development Bank abolished; all comtiercial banks privatized; new banking law enacted, market'for Treasury Bills
created, regulation of savings and loans associations adopted,: framework for micro-finance adopted, and the foundation for a
stronger banking sector supervision has been established: .
".
lublic
Enterprises, All public enterprises,, except for SNM, liquidated or privatized; subsidies, tax exemptions and cross-debts
eliminated.
Insurance. The GIRM-owned insurance conpany pnivatized and sector activities liberalized.
PrivateSedor. Measures to promote private sectorjdevelopment implemented in banking, 'foreign exchange, tiriffs, pricing, and
marketing. The GIRM has withdrawn from all commercialFand industrial activities,'state monopolies abolished, Chamber of
Commerce re-invigorated, regulation' pertainingto the creation of economic interest groups (EIGs) adopted. Tle New York,
Vienna and La Hague Conventions;ratified.
e
1998-2001
Governance. New regulations fo'r legal professions adopted, judicial system modernized, Natiol -Audit Office strengthened, new
procurement code adopted, tax directorate reorganized, custom's administration strengthened,'expenditure clearing law adopted.
Quarterly reports on tracking of poverty related expenditures published.
.
RuraL Achievements in the rural sector include:' Pricing.and mnarketing fully liberalized; rice-mills privatized; land-tenure reforml
undergoing implementation and monitoring in the Trarza regi on and' in the entire niddle and upper Senegal River Valley;' a
cooperative credit system strengthened, veterinary services privatized, livestock developmiJent code adopted.'
.
Energy. Electricity company (SOMELEC) in the process of being privatized.
Transport. Air-Mauritaniaprivatied. '
Mining. Mining sector opened-to private investm,nent.:' New mining code adopted.
'
Telecommunications. Telecommunications and' postal services lawsi'adopted. Postal and telecom activities separated. Competition
introduced in telecom services and state operator privatized. .
'
FiscaL Tariff, VAT and direct taxation reform implemented, new investment code adopted, MTEFs for health &-education
prepared, new budget nomenclature implemented, computerization of the entire expenditue chain initiated.
Public Administration. Recommendations of the audit of "the civil service implemeonted: Ministries of Rural'Development,
Economic Affairs and Development, Educatiori Finance, Fisheries and Commerce reorganized. Education and Health- Services
decentralized; municipal decentralization ongoing. A Secretariat d'Etat for New Tech^n;ologies and a ((Commissariat aux droits de
I'homme, a la lutte contre ia pauvrete et a'la reinsiertiorn,'the Office of the Ombudsman of,the Republic and a multi-sectoral

regulatory agency have been created. *

(iv)

.

l

l

-

Other Cross-Cutting Issues

17.
Environment Mauritania is implementing, with IDA support under the Rainfed Natural
Resources Management project, community-based natural resources management operations in
the rainfed area. In addition, Mauritania has joined the regional RPTES (Review of Policies,
Strategies and Programs of the Traditional Energy Sector) program that builds local capacity
through a mix of policy and operational support to review policies, strategies and programs in the
traditional energy sector. There is an urgent need to improve targeting of GIRM actions to
address the country's growing environmental problems. This will include:
*
*
*
*

improving the management of renewable and non-renewable resources
addressing desertification and deforestation issues
sustainable natural resource development, particularly in the Senegal River valley
coastal zone and fisheries management

MauritaniaCAS
*
*

9

urban environmental issues
establishment of a legal and institutional framework for environmental management of
oil, mining and other productive activities which can have potential negative impacts on
the environment.

18.
Core Labor Standards. Mauritania has ratified all ILO conventions related to Core
Labor Standards. Mauritanian law prohibits all forms of slavery and forced and bonded labor, as
well as the trafficking in persons, and there are no reports that persons were trafficked through,
to, or within the country. The Labor Code states explicitly that children must not be employed
before the age of 14 in the nonagricultural sector unless the Minister of Labor grants an
exception due to local circumstances. The GIRM has a functional labor inspectorate empowered
to refer violations directly to the appropriate judicial authorities. Also, the Constitution provides
for freedom of association and the right of citizens to join any political or labor organization. All
workers, except members of the military and police, are free to associate in and establish unions
at the local and national levels. General or sectoral agreements on wages, working conditions,
and social and medical benefits are negotiated in tripartite discussion and formalized by
government decree. Wages and other benefits also can be negotiated bilaterally between
employer and union and the results of such negotiations are filed with the Directorate of Labor.
19.
Regional Integration. Mauritania plays its part in a variety of activities at the regional
level and is comrnmitted to enhancing effective cooperation with other countries in the region.
Mauritania is a member of the Arab Maghreb Union4 and has participated in the meetings of the
Euro-Mediterranean countries. In addition, Mauritania is working with Senegal and Mali, within
the framework of the "Organisationde la Mise en Valeur du fleuve Senigal " (OMVS), on the
development of the Senegal river basin. Mauritania is also working with Guinea-Bissau, Cape
Verde, The Gambia and Senegal on the implementation of a fisheries resource management
program, while a similar program is being implemented in coordination with Morocco and
Spain. While not a member of the "Organisationpour l'harmonisationdes droits des affaires"
(OHADA), the GIRM recognizes the importance of sub-regional market integration and is
actively implementing policy measures to harmonize its business law, fiscal and monetary
policies.
20.
Governance. The GIRM has prepared in consultation with civil society, private sector
and development partners, a "General Framework for the National Program of Good
Governance", covering the central government, parliament, judiciary, local governments, civil
society and human rights. The UNDP and other donors are providing assistance to GIRM to
prepare an action-plan setting priorities for each component in order to better establish the
coherence of the ongoing actions and take advantage of possible synergies.
21.
In the area of public resource management, Mauritania has made significant progress.
This includes the recent preparation of medium-term expenditure frameworks (MTEF) for
education and health, which have enabled the GIRM to shift the priority of public spending
toward social sectors - a key component of the PRSP. The preparation of MTEFs for other
priority sectors (rural development, urban development and infrastructure) has experienced some
4Mauritania

withdrew from the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) in December 2000.

MauritaniaCAS

10

delay, but along with the MTEF for all public expenditures, they should be completed before end
2002. The goal of the MTEFs, including the public investment program is to be integrated fully
with the macroeconomic framework. However, there is a need to enhance public expenditure
tracking and evaluation. Although the monitoring of the HIPC-financed expenditures has
improved significantly, as evidenced by the quarterly reports produced by the committee in
charge of monitoring these expenditures, further actions are needed in other areas to: (i) identify
all poverty-related expenditures; (ii) reinforce reporting on budget execution; (iii) strengthen the
systems of internal and external audits, and (iv) prepare reports on the poverty impact of public
spending.
C.

ECONOMIC OUTLOOK

22.
Mauritania's economy has been transformed by the implementation of stabilization and
structural policy measures since the early 1990s (Boxes 2, 3, 4, 5 and 6). It is now liberalized
and market-oriented and there is sound economic and financial management, sustained real GDP
growth, good prospect for export diversification and a reduction in the incidence of poverty.
(i)

External Environment

23.
The variability of Mauritania's economic performance in the last ten years demonstrates
the degree to which the economy remains vulnerable to exogenous factors. Of these, the most
significant are: (i) fluctuations in world prices for its principal exports: iron-ore and fisheries
products; (ii) climatic fluctuations, such as in rainfall and plagues (desert locusts and birds); (iii)
international aid, given Mauritania's high dependency on aid for investments; and (iv)
Mauritania's significant debt burden.
World prices and trade. The Mauritanian economy is highly vulnerable to both price
24.
fluctuations and changes in demand in world markets. Exports of goods and non-factor services
were equivalent to about 40 percent of GDP in 2001. Iron ore and fisheries products accounted
for nearly 100 percent of total merchandise exports. Mauritania is heavily dependent on fuel and
food imports which accounted for some 36 percent of total imports (GNFS) in 2001; their price
fluctuations have a major impact on the country's external terms of trade. Mauritania's terms of
trade declined by 10 percent in 1999, improved by 4.8 percent in 2000 and by 4.9 percent in
2001.
25.
Climatic fluctuations. Cereals and livestock production remain heavily dependent on
rainfall. Since the last CAS, Mauritania has experienced droughts, flooding and severe frost in
the main agricultural regions. As a result, total cereal production declined from 223,200 tm in
1999/00 to 207,200 tm in 2000/01. Climatic fluctuations also caused massive losses of livestock
and rendered about 7,000 families homeless.
InternationalAid/Foreign Savings. For the foreseeable future, Mauritania will remain
26.
dependent on inflows of concessional external assistance for the implementation of its PRSP. To
use this assistance most effectively, the GIRM, donors and principal creditors will need to
improve further their coordination efforts to ensure that implementation of the PRSP is effective

MauritaniaCAS

11

and that appropriate levels of financing are available for investment in basic infrastructure such
as transport, urban and rural development, water supply and modernization of the economy.
(ii)

Scenarios

27.
The Government's macro-economic objectives for 2002-05 comprise: (i) sustaining an
average real GDP growth rate of 5.8 percent; (ii) stabilizing inflation at about 3.7 percent; and
(iii) increasing the Central Bank's international reserves to cover about 7.5 months of imports by
2005. During this period, the GIRM will continue to pursue appropriate macroeconomic policies
and deepen further the implementation of its reform programs, strengthen economic
management, governance and modernization of the public sector apparatus and reduce poverty
by at least 4 percent points.
Table 1: Mauritania: Macroeconomic Framework, 2000-2005

Economic growth and prices
Real GDP (percentage change)
Nominal GDP (percentage change)
GDP Implicit deflator (percentage change)
Consumer price index (annual percentage change,
period average)
Grossdomesticexpenditures
Consumption
Govemment
Non-government 1/
Gross fixed investment
Government
Non-govemment2/
Private
Gross national savings
Govemment
Non-government 1/
Current account (including official
transfers) %of GDP
Net exports of goods and services
Exports of goods and services
Imports of goods and services
Net factor income
Net transfers
Memorandum item
Nominal GDP (in billions of Ouguiyas)
Govemment revenue/GDP, excluding grants
Govemment expenditures/GDP
Overall government balance/GDP

2000

2001
Actual 3/

2002
Prog. 3/

2003

2004

2005

5.0
11.3
6.1
3.3

4.6
9.8
5.0
4.7

5.1
8.9
3.6
4.0

5.5
9.4
3.7
3.8

6.1
10.0
3.6
3.5

6.4
10.2
3.6
3.5

111.8
81.6
17.3
64.3
30.3
7.5
22.7
10.2
31.1
4.7
26.4
0.8

112.6
86.0
15.6
70.3
26.7
8.3
18.3
10.0
21.0
2.5
18.5
-5.7

(%of GDP)
118.7
119.5
94.0
92.4
18.4
18.4
75.6
74.0
24.7
26.9
10.7
11.4
13.9
15.5
9.2
9.7
28.4
21.2
16.9
8.6
11.5
12.5
3.8
-5.7

120.2
92.4
18.4
74.0
27.8
11.9
15.9
10.4
21.9
8.4
13.5
-5.9

120.7
92.2
17.8
74.3
28.5
12.2
16.3
11.0
21.7
8.2
13.6
-6.8

-11.8
40.7
52.5
2.0
10.6

-12.6
40.0
52.6
-2.4
9.3

-18.6
37.8
56.4
13.5
8.9

-19.3
37.8
57.1
6.2
7.4

-20.2
37.8
58.1
6.0
8.3

-20.7
37.6
58.3
5.8
8.2

223.7
25.9
30.3
-4.5

245.6
21.1
26.7
-5.6

267.3
37.1
30.8
6.3

292.5
28.8
31.0
-2.2

321.7
27.7
30.9
-3.1

354.5
26.7
30.9
-4.2

l/ Includes public enterprises with SNIM.
2/ The decline in the share of non-government investment to GDP reflects the decline in public enterprises' share
which is partially offset by the increase in private sector investment share over the period 2000-05.
3/ The delayed payment of the 2001 fish royalties explains the uneven movements in gross national saving,
govemment balance and saving, the current account, and net factor income.

28.
The PRSP acknowledges that achieving higher growth rates and accelerating poverty
reduction will certainly involve substantial structural changes. This will imply diversifying the
economic base, removing constraints to private sector development, mobilizing savings,
increasing the absorptive capacity and the competitiveness of the Mauritanian economy. The

MauritaniaCAS

12

development of basic infrastructure will be key to underpin these objectives and will need an
increased availability of concessional financial resources.
29.
While the medium term growth objective appears achievable, either a more positive
scenario or a less positive one can be envisioned: (a) if the recovery of the global economy
intensifies and if oil and other mineral exploration materialize in the next few years, growth
would be higher than forecast and thus lead to a more sustained and faster reduction of poverty;
or (b) if the recovery of the global economy is slower than anticipated, with the vulnerability of
the economy to external shocks, the medium term growth and poverty reduction performance
could be weaker.
(iii)

Financial Requirements

30.

Mauritania's

financing requirements

total

|Box

7, Extemal Financing Requirements
and Sources, 2002-2005 -'Base Case Suienario
.(JS million)

external

2002

203

2004

2005

are estimated at

Eat

PrOi

Proj.

Proj.

02

-973

-101.3

70.5
17.1
, 1
0

61.3
13.9
33
0

62.4
12.1
23
O

38.4

35.8

38.1

18.7
-3.7

19.9
0

21.1
2.8

US$690.3 million for the 2002-05 period.
Of this amount, about US$399 million are
expected to be generated from Mauritania's

Cota Rentairenents

own resources, leaving a gap of about

(excl.allofficial lanfes) Long-ierm debi amanizalion au7e /
1mF fineil
I*ncease in gross official re,enecs
Arream reduction

US$272.7 million to be financed from

Officialtmnsferspayments

external sources including debt relief At
the CG meeting held in Paris in December

TetalRaumsr

2001, donors pledged adequate resources to
cover Mauritania's external financing gap
over the next three years which coincide
with the CAS period. The prospects for
disbursements of that high level donor
financing, particularly for social sector and
other priority areas, appear favorable.

(iv)

-/

7
.
74.3
0.4
86
7.5

-119.9

Ltng-erm loandi5burremers
S todirect foreign investment
Net
oher capimal i neel2'

35
36.9
42.6'
17.7
-24.0

Debt relief

35.3

69.1

55.7

53.8

0

Z0.3

-38.7

-38.4

Official h3ris

receipts

Financinggap 3/

'Onprihcipal aftet traditional debt relief mechanisms only (i.e.excludes enhanced
I

net ho....em

anc/al
rial(nettrade credit +net liabilities ofbanking system),

3i Assumed to be filled with debt relief extended by official bilateral creditors an

-borrowingonhighlyconcessionalterms

Debt and Creditworthiness

31.
Mauritania ranks among the Highly Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC) and, as mentioned
earlier, is very vulnerable to external shocks. Mauritania's total outstanding and disbursed
external debt was estimated, at the end of 2001, at US$2.0 billion, equivalent to 212 percent of
GDP. Multilateral debt, including use of IMF credit, accounted for 55 percent (and IDA alone
for 23.3 percent), bilateral debt for 45 percent, and private and short-term debt for 0 percent.
Mauritania has benefited from the Paris Club rescheduling under the Naples terms. Mauritania
was declared eligible to benefit from the HIPC initiative on January 1999 and reached the
Decision Point in January 2000. A detailed analysis of debt sustainability is presented in the
Mauritania: President's Memorandum and Recommendation and Completion Point Document
for the Enhanced Heavily Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC) Initiative which is to be presented to
the Board at the same time as this CAS. In the post-HIPC context, it is particularly important
that concerted efforts are made by GIRM, with the support of all donors, to continue to practice
prudent debt management policies and avoid a build-up of new non-concessional official
external debt.

MauritaniaCAS
D.

13

THE CDF, PARTNERSHIPS AND PARTICIPATION

32.
Comprehensive Development Framework. The GIRM, in coordination with donors and
other development partners, has carried out substantial work in the context of the CDF. The
main principles of the CDF - long-term vision, ownership, partnership and results focus - all
feature strongly as core elements in Mauritania's PRSP and in this CAS. The long-term vision
has been well formulated in the PRSP and the main objective of the Bank's program is to
provide support to the GIRM to continue to implement the PRSP. The GIRM, donors and the
Bank are working towards strengthening PRSP monitoring and evaluation, agreeing on a
common set of PRSP implementation indicators to which donors will tie the performance of their
aid programs, and developing more quantifiable and time-bound indicators of performance,
particularly with respect to progress on reaching the Millennium Development Goals.
33.
A feature of the CDF in Mauritania is the GIRM's leadership on donor coordination - at
the Consultative Group (see next paragraph) as well as on an on-going basis in Nouakchott which has allowed close coordination between the World Bank and all resident UN agencies,
IMF, EU, AfDB, IDB, and bilateral donors. The CAS fully recognizes the leadership role being
played by the GIRM which has been evidenced by the satisfactory way in which the PRSP was
prepared and is being implemented, and by the GIRM's efforts to lead on donor coordination.
34.
Consultative Group Meeting. At the fourth CG meeting in Paris in December 2001,
multilateral and bilateral donors underlined the strong interest of the international community to
assist Mauritania in achieving its development objectives. Over 200 representatives of private
sector companies also attended, attesting to the very strong and growing international interest in
Mauritania as a location for private investment. The GIRM acknowledged the need to further
enhance its leadership of aid coordination in light of the large role external financing plays in the
Public Investment Program (PIP) 5 and the PRSP. All development partners pledged their full
support to the GIRM's efforts to improve donor coordination and effectiveness and to work
towards harmonization of aid procedures. The CG has proven to be an effective tool for
promoting the CDF approach, both by broadening participation from donors and the private
sector and by strengthening the leadership role of GIRM. The Group agreed to continue to hold
CG meetings every three years and to adopt new coordination measures for systematic
information sharing and periodic reviews of the PRSP and PIP. The next CG will be held in late
2004 or early 2005.
35.
Partnerships & Participation. Since the last CAS, and particularly in the context of the
PRSP, the GIRM has demonstrated its willingness to work in close partnership with the World
Bank and other development partners, which was solidified during the December 2001 CG
meeting. The partnership with civil society and stakeholders was deepened through the
preparation of the PRSP and the CG6 . The participatory process used in the preparation of the
PRSP and the PRSP Progress Report was extensive, involving representatives from the private
sector, NGOs, elected officials, and civil society, as well as Mauritania's development partners.
The experience of preparing and implementing the PRSP over the last two years has resulted in
very high expectations from all actors (administration, civil society, private sector).
5 At the CG meeting, Mauritania's development partners pledged about US$412 million to support PIP 2002-05 implementation.
6

All documentation related to the PRSP and Consultative Group was posted in the GIRM's internet site www.mauritania.mr

14

MauritaniaCAS

36.
The work of the World Bank Group in Mauritania has become increasingly participatory
in the past several years. Donors and civil society at large are systematically consulted and have
been fully involved in the preparation of investment operations, economic policy reforms,
preparation of MTEFs for education and health, and organization of the CG. The Bank's
operations have also been discussed with the press on a regular basis and the Information
Center/Library of the Country Office has been opened to the public for several years.
Participation has been and will continue to be an essential element for the implementation of
both the PRSP and the CAS and, therefore, supporting the GIRM in facilitating participation,
donor coordination and partnerships will continue to be part of the WBG's work in Mauritania.
37.
Interaction on a project-by-project basis with NGOs has been part of the Bank's practice
and the Bank is increasingly coordinating its programs with national and international NGOs and
civil society. The Bank is pursuing more detailed sector-specific initiatives to enhance this
collaboration. While collaboration with the donor community is excellent, the Bank believes
that there is room for further improvement, in particular in cross-cutting areas/themes such as
governance, decentralization, public sector reform and the environment. One recent example of
effective coordination is the GIRM's leadership in preparing an action-plan based on the
recommendations of the Integrated Framework exercise aiming at improving Mauritania's export
competitiveness and integration into the world trade. The Bank, together with other donors, will
assist the GIRM in implementing this action plan.
38.
The CAS builds on the participatory process of the PRSP and pursues the goal of
selectivity of activities to ensure greater complementarity with other donors. In this regard,
preparation of the CAS followed the participatory model set by the PRSP (Box 8). With respect
to results focus, the key outcome of success of the CAS will be strong implementation of the
PRSP and the Program Matrix in Annex B9 sets out a selection of results from the PRSP against
which progress will be assessed. Finally, the CAS draws extensively on the lessons leamed from
the implementation of the FY98-01 CAS and the results of the 2000 Client Survey (Box 12).
39.
Collaboration with the IMF. Since 1992, staff of the Bank and the IMF have
collaborated effectively to support the GIRM's macroeconomic and sectoral reform programs.
Going forward, the Bank and the IMF will continue to support the implementation of the PRSP,
the scope and emphasis of the second-generation reforms and the medium-term macroeconomic
policies.
Box 8: CAS Participatory Process
|

In December.2001, the documents presented at the fourth Consultative Group included the full PRSP: and the draft PRSP Progress Report.
Both documents laid out Mauritania's priorities regarding accelerated private sector-led growth and poverty reduction and were carried out
in a fully participatory manner. Also, several sectoral papers/strategies prepared with donors assistance were presented.' The GIRM's
leadership of the CG, as well as. of donor coordination on an on-going basis, has allowed the Bank and donors to discuss the PRSPl
priorities in detail, decide together on specific areas of intervention depending on the comparative advantage of each donor and on
requests from the GIRM for specific donor involvement in certain areas, work towards complementarity of activities and then commit
assistance fully within this collaborative framework.
In January 2002, the Country Team (CT) worked on the details of the issues to be raised in the CAS as prioritized in the PRSP and as
agreed with partners during the CQ.
In February 2002, the CT brainstonned together with the GIRM officials, donors and civil society in Nouakchott.
* Brainstorming continued with GIRM in March 2002. IFC &MIGA staff participated. This brainstorming benefited 'reatly foni the First
Annual Progress Report on the PRSP which had then become available and which provided further guidance for areas and sectors needing
attention and Bank Group support.
. In late March 2002, the Bank circulated and discussed the draft CAS in Nouakchott with the GIRM officials, donorsi private sector, NGOs
and civil society representatives. Comments and reactions were fully incorporated.

MauritaniaCAS
III.

A.

15

THE WORLD BANK GROUP COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY FOR
MAURITANIA DURING FY03-05

PROGRESS UNDER THE FY98-01 CAS AND LESSONS LEARNT

40.
The overall objective of the FY98-01 CAS was to assist the GIRM to achieve accelerated
growth andpoverty reduction through: (i) maintaining macroeconomic stability; (ii) promoting
rural development; (iii) promoting urban development; (iv) promoting private sector
development; and (v) promoting human resources development. Significant progress has been
made towards the first objective (see para. 15). Recent data indicate encouraging results in the
second objective, particularly with respect to successful pilot exports of a broad range of fruits
and vegetables which clearly confirm Mauritania's potential in crop diversification.
41.
Progress in promoting urban development shows a mixed-record with slow progress in
developing basic services to the cities in the interior of the country. In Nouakchott and
Nouadhibou, the GIRM has made efforts to develop basic infrastructure although this has been
constrained by the high level of immigration to these cities. With reference to the fourth and
fifth objectives, considerable progress has been made with the opening of all sectors to private
investment and the implementation of regulatory policy measures as well as in improving key
social indicators and in reducing poverty (Boxes 3 and 4). To assist the GIRM in reaching its
development objectives and implementing its reform program, the Bank prepared several lending
operations (Box 9).
42.
A considerable amount of Economic and Sector Work (ESW) was prepared by the GIRM
in partnership with IDA or carried out by IDA, including core ESW (Box 10). This work has
established the knowledge and analytical base which underpins the Bank's policy dialogue and
project design. A particularly important piece of analytical work was the 2001 Integrated
Framework Report which analyzed trade issues and identified actions aimed at increasing trade
opportunities and capacity. The action-plan of this report is being implemented by GIRM with
the assistance of several donors.

(i)

What worked well

43.
All but one of the ten projects under
implementation at the time of the Board
discussion of the FY98-01 CAS has closed

and the one still-active project is due to
close by June 2002. At exit, all except one
of these ~~t
rated
Satisfactory
of these projects were rated as Satisfactory

for Development Objectives (DO) and
The
results
Implementation Progress (IP). The results

of the 2000 Client Survey show that the
GIRM has a positive perception of the
efficiency and effectiveness of the Bank's
assistance (Box 12).

Box 9: Lending FY98-02
Adj,,tment

FY01FiscalReformSupportOperation

SDR

FY01 Supplemental oil prices

SDR

14.1

SDR

36.5

SDR
SDR

17.8
11.1

SDR

3.8
28.2

SDR

7.4

FY02 Education Sector Developmet(AAPPL) SDR

359.8

s/t

Investment
FY98 Health (SIP)
~~ FY99 Mining Sector Capacity Building)
FY99 Nutrition (LIL)

FY99-Telecom and Postal Reform

~FY00 Cultural Heritage (LIL)

FY00 Integrated Devt. Prog (APL)
FY00 Energy/Water/Sanitation Reform ITA)
FY02 Global Distance Leaming (LIL)

- total

SDR
SDR
SDR-

22.4

3.6
8.0

SDR

2.6

SDR

213:9

MauritaniaCAS

16

Boxl0: ESWFY9802
44.
Under the FY98-01 CAS, the Bank's assistance 1- to Mauritania covered both adjustment and investment Done by GIRM, with support from the World Bank
Group
operations in support of the GIRM's economic and Ta Reorf
social development strategy (Box 10).
Twelve Tar,If Rform
'he Marginal Effective Rate of Taxation: Analysis and
operations were approved of which two were quick Recommendations
disbursing adjustment credits. The adjustment credits - Potert3'.4ssessmeniand HouseholdSurvey
a one tranche FiscalReform Support Operation and a Ubman Secitor Medium-tenrmExpenditureFramework
Supplemental Credit relating to the impact of oil Health: Medium-tenn Expenditure Framework
Education Medium-Term Expwndirure Framework
prices on Africa - successfully supported Mauritania s The EducationalSystem in Mauritania
efforts to improve public finance management. They RuraldevelopmeniStrategy
Agro-businessStrategy

were implemented in close coordination with the IMF-

Mrifania IntegratedFramework -Poverty Focused

supported program. The investment operations are
supporting a range of sectors and now account for all of
Bank operations.
In the area of private sector

Trade Strate
Integration ofSVHinIo the NationalEconomy
Livestopk Dev elopment Strategy,

development,

both

the

FisheriesSector: Stock Evaluation
ArttsanialFisheriesD)evelopment;

Mining Sector Capacity IaDA

Building project and the Telecommunications/Postal
Reform project have been highly successful in

Macro-mode,iing
"
'
C'F
Cout 'roief
FinancialAccountability (CPFA)
Updated ProcurementAssessme't

strengthening the GIRM's capacity to act as facilitator I___

-_______

"'_.":___

and regulator of utility sectors and mining activities and significantly increase private investment
in Mauritania (Box 11).
45.
Two rural sector APLs - a Rainfed NaturalResources Management project (PGRNP)
and an IntegratedDevelopment Programfor IrrigatedAgriculture in Mauritania (PDIAIM)
are contributing to provide consumers with new agriculturalproducts, improving the balance of
trade through a reduction in agricultural imports and the development of exports, and increasing
agriculture value-added as well as generating income and employment for the population living
in the Senegal River Valley and the rain-fed zones. The Energy, Water and Sanitation Sectors
Reform TA credit has led to a successful restructuring of the legal and institutional framework of
the water/sanitation and energy sectors and created an environment for private sector
participation. In the social sectors, a Health SIP is supporting the implementation of the GIRM's
program for the health sector while a Nutrition LIL is assisting the GIRM in testing the
effectiveness of various activities to improve mother and child nutrition status and health through
the provision of technical and financial resources. A Cultural Heritage LIL is assisting the
GIRM of Mauritania in testing appropriate methods to determine how to safeguard and enhance
its cultural heritage while contributing to the revitalization of economic activities through the
creation of small-scale enterprises and by capitalizing on tourism potential.
46.
Three new operations were approved in FY02: (i) a Global Distance-LearningCenter
LIL that will test mechanisms of public and private sector partnership to promote better access to
and dissemination of information relevant for country development and policy reforms; (ii) an
Urban Development ProgramAPL which supports alleviation of urban poverty, by reducing the
proliferation of slums and improving the living conditions of the poor, strengthening capacity for
urban management and decentralization and involving communities in decision-making and in
the provision of urban infrastructure and services; and (iii) an Education Sector Development
Program APL in support of implementing phase I of the Education Sector Development
Program which aims at completing universal primary education and expanding significantly

17

MauritaniaCAS

access to the first cycle of secondary education, improving quality, and piloting new training
arrangements in vocational and higher education.
(ii)

What worked less well

47.
As it expanded its lending program, IDA came across two constraints common to Bank
programs in many sub-Saharan countries: the relatively low absorptive capacity and the weak
implementation and monitoring capacity. The main area of weakness relates to absorptive
capacity of the rural sector APLs (PDIAIM and PGRNP) whereby the IDA available resources
are disbursed slowly due to delays or difficulties with project implementation, although on the
whole, these projects are being implemented in a satisfactory manner.
Box 11: Making competition work
The case of telecommunications
In mid-1998, Mauritania faced several constraints as it embarked 'on a competitive program of private provision of infrastructure services relatively high country risk, a small domestic market, and virtual absence of institutional capacity for regulating competitive utility sectors.
By end-2001, highly successfil reforms in telecommunications overcarne these constraints well beyond expectations, and also laid the
foundations for similar reforms in other utility sectors such as power and water. The monopoly of the state-owned telecommunications
operator ended in mid- 2000 when the first mobile telecommunications license was granted through a competitive tender, generating proceeds
of US$28 million. Eight months later in February 2001, a competitive tender for privatizing the state-owned operator yielded a postprivatization enterprise value of US$48 million or US$4,065 per access line, well above the previous record in Sub-Saharan Africa and the
world average of US$2,500. Competing in all segments of telecommunications services, both operators have now multiplied access lines from
20,000 at the beginning of 2000 to over 130,000 by end-2001. Furthermore, competition has accelerated investment in the sector which in the
years 2000 and 2001 alone were equivalent to more than 10% of GDP.
A windfall from competition has been the creation of 2000 telecommunications-related jobs in the informal sector, as over 300 microenterprises have sprung up in the main cities to sell prepaid calling cards and mobile handsets and repair telephone equipment Similar reforms
in the power sector have benefited from a significantly improved country risk as well as a well-tested institutional framework for privatization
and for regulation.
The case of mining
A preliminary analysis of mining sector reform policy shows a considerable increase in investment in mining exploration. FDI in 2001
amounted to US$15 million compared to US$10 million for 1999. The area covered by the exploration has increased from 477,132 km2 in
1999 to 532,136 km2 in 2000 but it went down to 389,338 km2 in 2001, due to the introduction of area fees, but this translated into an
increase in investment per km2. The number of operators has gone from 6 in 1999 to 13 in 2001. Just three operators held about 96% of the
area and more.than 80% of investment in 1999. In 2001 these percentages decreased to less than 7.0% of the area and 60% of investment.
One can also observe the presence of an increased number of foreign investors: the only national operator (SNiM) has seen its share of
investments in mining exploration go from 10% to 7 % between 1999 and 2001 while its share of exploration area i:overed has gone from
53% to 15% in the same period.

48.
These weaknesses have been recognized - in the Mid-Term Reviews of the two projects
- as needing specific attention and action plans have been developed to strengthen capacity, to
better streamline project activities with objectives and to outline clear performance indicators.
This would allow planned disbursement rates to be more realistic and in line with absorptive
capacity. With the goal of further increasing disbursement rates and project performance across
the whole IDA portfolio, the January 2002 CPPR broadened this approach to all projects in the
portfolio and recommended that they elaborate or enhance Annual Technical and Financial
Execution Programs and include more targeted performance indicators which conform to those
outlined at project appraisal. It was also recommended that periodic progress reports on
technical and financial management be prepared and discussed regularly between the Bank and
the GIRM.
49.
Another cause of difficulties in project implementation in the past is related to the
tendency for project structures and some administrative agencies to evolve in a strictly sectoral
context without adequate consideration of macro-economic engagements and constraints. It is

MauritaniaCAS

18

expected that the PRSP will mitigate this weakness as it provides the framework for the planning
and implementation of all projects. Weak capacity of human resources, in project units as well
as in the civil service as a whole, is also a reason behind poor project implementation,
particularly with respect to building procurement capacity of project personnel. It is recognized
that capacity building must be a core element of the Bank's approach so that adequately trained
staff can be made available during the project preparation stage as well as the execution phase.
Additional measures have been identified to increase collaboration within and across ministries
to gather and disseminate key information to facilitate the monitoring of investment projects.
Box 12: Lessons from Client Survey
In 2000, a Client Survey in Mauritania was carried out among over fifty clients from a broad range of backgrounds. All aspects of the
World Bank staffs interactions with clients as well as the Bank's technical know-how are among the areas rated most important and
effective by clients in Mauritania. In particular, the Bank is rated highly in its reliability in delivering on commitments (which is also
rated first in imnportance to clients), honesty, clarity of comnmunication, respect for the country's culture, accessibility and technical
jcompetence. Also highly rated are,,the Bank's overall contributions to Mauritania's development in bringing aboit economic growth,
strengthening and maintaining sound macroeconomic and trade policies, strengthening the private sector and the framework for a
market economy and supporting programs that include all social groups in development. Bank policy advice is judged as realistic and
providing a convincing rationale for reform.
In project design and implementation, the Bank is effective in assuring that project benefits justify the costs, laying the institutional
and managerial structures needed for imnplementation, resolving implementation problems and supporting the GIRM in its efforts to
manage any negative project impacts.
Areas of high importance to clients in Mauritania but where the Bank's effectiveness is below the average for the Africa Region,
include giving appropriate priority to poverty reduction in the Bank's program of support, respecting Mauritania's social priorities,
providing recommendations that are practical, establishing the conditions for long-term project sustainability aid promoting private
involvement in effective delivery of public services.,
Overall, the work of the Country: Office in Mauritania is judged as more effective than average for the Africa Region and is
particularly effective at improving the understanding of the Bank's role and program of assistance and helping to make project
implementation efficient.
On the strategic issues of building effective partnerships, the World Bank is judged as working well with others in Mauritania.
Clients agree fairly strongly that the Bank works in partnership with the GIRM, works harmoniously with othder donors to further
Mauritania's development and is ready to learn from its partners. With respect to resource mobilization, clients gave fairly good
ratings to the Bank's effectiveness in helping to attract project co-financing from, other donors and using consultative groups to
advance donor support for Mauritania's development agenda. The Bank is rated as average in effectiveness at helping the GIRM
obtain maximum benefit from the synergy between private and public investment.

(iii)

Mauritania's Performance under the FY98-01 CAS

50.

In the area of macroeconomic

stabilization, key macroeconomic
stabinicatior improved s ady ad t
indicators improved steadily and the

Box 13: Mauritania's Performance under the High Case Scenario
Over the period 1997-2001 Mauritania has successfully achieved all but
one of the benchmarks envisaged under the "high case scenario"

IMF has successfully completed all

presented in the 1997 CAS.

five mid-term reviews of the Poverty

'Benchmarks met:

Reduction Growth Facility (PRGF).
Reduction Growth

rFacility

(PRGF.

Regarding private sector development

*

. Efficient

the GIRM\4 has fully implemented all
agreed policy reforms and private
investment in telecommunications,

miningresult
and
rose, as a
of oil
bothexploration
the privatization

result of both the privatization
program and the liberalization of the
economy, from US$6 million in

C

Macroeconomic stabilization (Efficient and diversified revenue base,
Implementation of tariff and direct tax reform)
and effective management and allocation of public resources,

private sector development (Opening of telecomm., water and electricity

to pivate investment)

.
.

Implementation of agreed judicial and regulatory policy actions

Eliminate obstacles for entry and factor mobilization in transport

* activites,
Satisfactory portfolio'imnlementation
Benchmark not met:
. Vaccination of children <I year >75% (Actual rate 670%)
. Primary enrollment ratio  90% (Actual ratio 88%)

MauritaniaCAS

19

1996/97 to about US$150 million in 2000/01. As for the social indicators, these have improved
vis-a-vis those prevailing in 1996. With respect to portfolio performance, the last Country
Portfolio Performance Review (CPPR) was carried out in January 2002 and assessed that project
implementation has been good overall, though somewhat slower than projected.
Box 14: Bank Group's Role in the Context of the Overall Donor Effort in Mauritania in 2001

.s

a E 

>

o

o
_-

3.8

Iw>

Specific Interventions

IDA as Lead Donor

Macroeconomics
Rural Sector
Fisheries
Livestock
Trade/export diversification
(Integrated Framework)
Private Sector/econ. regulation
Energy/Water/Telecom
Mining
Urban Dev.
FinanciaUBanking Sector
e-government
New Technologies
Roads

IDA

A

Other Donors

IMF/EU/FR/GER
EU/FR/GER/AfDB/IDB/IFAD/JN/FAO/UNDP/IDA
EU/FADES/AfDB/FR/JN/FAO
FAO/IDA
IMF/WTO/UNDP/UNTAC/ITCADA
FADES/AfDB/EU/UNDP
EU/FR
EU/FRiGER/UNDP
IMF/IDA

IDA
EU/AfDB/IDB/FADES/FR/China

Decentralization

FR/UNDP/IDA

Land Management
Micro-finance
Rural energy
Rural Irrigation

FRIGERIUNDP/IDA
FR/GERIUNDP/IDA
FADES/UNDPMDA
IDB/FADES/IFAD/FR/GER/JN/UNDP

Education Sector
. Health Sector
| gFinancial
go
Services
F
Nutrition

,u gt

IDA
IDA
IDA
IDA

[

IDA
IDA

EU/FR/GER

IDA

Culture

HIV/AIDS
Judicial Refonn
Public Sector
Public Resource Mgmt
'
Tax /Tariff Reform
Governance
.Transparency/Financial

FR/AfDB/IDBfUN/JN
EU/AfDB/IDB/UN/FADES/FRIGER
UNDP
UNESCO/FR/China/lDA

UN/WHO/IDA

IDA

FRIDA
EU/FR/GER/IDA
IMF/FR
IMF/IDA
IMFIUNDP/FR/IDA
IMF/IDA

Accountability

.a i3

(iv)

Fiduciary Framework
Capacity Building

IDA
IDA

IMF
IMF/UNDP/AfDB/FR/GER

IFC and MIGA Activities

51.
IFC has ongoing operations in agribusiness and fisheries. It has approved an equity
participation in one bank (GBM), the extension of credit lines to two banks (GBM, BMCI) and is
also considering possible investments in other commercial ventures (e.g. fish processing,
furniture, leasing company). IFC provided privatization advisory services for the privatization of
the state telecommunications operator, effectively complementing the focus of the Bank in
creating a pro-competitive regulatory framework. On January 15, 2000, MIGA approved its first

MauritaniaCAS

20

guarantee for Mauritania for US$66.3 million related to the first mobile telecommunications
network. Mauritania has participated in all Annual African Mining, Investment and Business
Opportunities Symposium organized by MIGA, and has indicated that it will continue to
participate in these Annual Symposiums.
(v)

Lessons Learnt

52.
The lessons learnt from the experience of the previous CAS, together with the results of
the Client Feedback Survey (Box 12) provide some clear messages about ways in which the
World Bank can improve its effectiveness including: (i) greater focus on poverty reduction and
other social priorities; (ii) ensuring elements necessary for long-term project sustainability are in
place; (iii) promoting private involvement in delivery of public services; (iv) devote more time
and effort to build understanding of reforms and commitment to them at both the political and
administrative levels; and (v) provide better targeted capacity building efforts. In particular, the
significant progress made on macroeconomic and structural reforms, in contrast to the weaker
performance at the sector levels, indicates that the Bank's assistance program should
increasingly focus on multi-sectoral and cross-cutting public sector management and capacity
building issues. Finally, the Client Feedback Survey also concluded that the Bank should
strengthen its assessment of the most effective sequencing and timing of reforms.
B.

STRATEGIC ELEMENTS OF THE FY03-05 CAS

53.
The World Bank Group strategy for FY03-05 will continue, as in the FY98-01 CAS, to
be fully supportive of the GIRM's development program. However, the context for World Bank
support has now changed in several fundamental respects.
54.
The PRSP Framework. The GIRM has committed itself to the PRSP process and has
successfully implemented its program for more than 12 months, as documented in the First
Annual PRSP Progress Report. The Bank's CAS should be regarded as a Business Plan that
outlines the Bank's modalities of support to the implementation of the PRSP over the coming
three years. The CAS also emphasizes selectivity and complementarity with the efforts of other
development partners, all of which fall into the PRSP framework.
55.
Focus on Capacity Building. The PRSP recognizes that the GIRM's weak administrative
capacity has become the binding constraint on Mauritania's ability to absorb concessional
assistance, both in the form of HIPC-related debt relief and new concessional funding. For this
reason, this CAS increases the emphasis on capacity building, not only in IDA-funded PIUs, but
also more broadly in core government ministries and agencies, both central and local. The focus
of the Bank's assistance program will thus shift away from the more traditional approach of
adjustment and investment operations towards sectoral and cross-cutting public sector
management and capacity building issues.
56.
ProgrammaticApproach. The Bank's strategy will be focused on support to the PRSP
through a series of Poverty Reduction Support Credits (PRSC), to be disbursed against progress
in policy reforms and institutional capacity building. The PRSCs are justified for the following
reasons: (i) macroeconomic progress achieved to date has been strong and there has been no
need for adjustment lending since FY01; (ii) the fiduciary framework is improving (see next

MauritaniaCAS

21

paragraph) to allow the move to programmatic support and the PRSCs will focus on continued
reforms in public sector management, procurement and financial management, thus further
strengthening the fiduciary framework and the overall cross-sectoral approach; (iii) the MTEF
already prepared in the health and education sectors provides a comprehensive sectoral focus and
permits the piloting of health reforms and capacity building under a PRSC which is a more
effective mechanism to address constraints at the sector level than a limited investment
operation; and (iv) tying the PRSCs directly to the PRSP will allow for greater country
ownership and enhanced donor collaboration.
57.
FiduciaryIssues. Mauritania is on-track to meet the Fiduciary Safeguard requirements
for phasing-in of PRSCs during FY03. The GIRM is already implementing the action plan
recommended by the Country Procurement Assessment Review (CPAR) carried out in 2001. By
September 2002, it will have completed a Country Financial Accountability Assessment
(CFAA), with an associated action plan, as well as the Report of the Observance of Standards
and Codes (ROSC). It is also ready to start an environmental management capacity building
program in key ministries. A key part of the Bank's dialogue with the GIRM in FY03 therefore
will be to agree on how to link each of these implementation plans with the series of PRSCs.
The Bank will also continue to assist the GIRM, in coordination with the IMF, France, UNDP,
Germany and the EU, in the implementation of the National Program of Good Governance. The
Bank's strategy in this area is to assist the GIRM to build an efficient, market-oriented public
sector apparatus and a strong civil service able to practice sound economic management.
58.
TransitionalCAS. As the GIRM gains experience in implementing the PRSP, with the
support of the PRSC program, it is expected that PRSCs will take a progressively larger part of
the lending program. During this period, the share of traditional investment lending, and the
importance of the associated PIUs, will therefore decline. Nonetheless, the shift will be gradual.
The PRSCs will be phased-in as the basic building blocks are put into place and the Bank will
continue with select investment projects which directly target poverty reduction and institutional
strengthening. These would include a supplemental credit for Mining Sector Capacity Building
(crucial for the diversification of mining revenues), the Financial Sector Reform Project and the
Natural Resource Management Capacity Building Project. A detailed matrix linking Bank Group
objectives and instruments to the PRSP is provided in Annex B9.
59.
Core Diagnostic ESW. The shift to the PRSC approach will continue to be underpinned
by the Bank's core diagnostic ESW. During FY03-05, the Bank Group will continue, in close
coordination with the IMF, to assist the GIRM in maintaining and consolidating macroeconomic
stability and improving public resource management, external debt and foreign exchange
management. The preparation of a Country Economic Memorandum (CEM) is planned for
FY03. Together with the IMF, the Bank will assist the GIRM in building capacity for
quantitative analysis of growth and poverty reduction (revising the macroeconomic model to
simulate the sources and effects of different growth scenarios). The Bank will continue its
support to GIRM for preparing sectoral PER/MTEFs and for developing poverty and social
impact analysis. Core aspects of the Bank's M & E work will include assistance in: (i)
conducting poverty diagnosis and updating the poverty profile, (ii) strengthening the Statistical
Office (ONS) to develop better social and poverty indicators; and (iii) putting in place
institutional mechanisms to ensure feedback from monitoring agencies to policy makers. The

22

MauritaniaCAS

Bank will also continue to assist the GIRM, in coordination with the IMF, EU, UNDP, France,
and Germany, in implementing its National Program of Good Governance.
Box 15. IDA Base-Case Assistaince Program for Mauritania;(FY@35)
Lsending/lnvestment (US$110 million),,

'_____________
,

FY05.,

FY04

FY03
Financial Sector Reform
PRSC I
Supplemental Credit for
Mining Sector Capacity
Building project
Multi-Sectoral HIV/AIDS
and Communicable
Diseases Project (MAP)*
Partial Risk Guarantee for
SOMELEC Privatization
TOTAL

-

15.0
15.0
5.0

PRSC 11
Water Supply project

15.0
20.0

PRSC 111
Natural Resource Management
Capacity Building project
PGRNP 11project

15.0
5.0

TOTAL

30.0

10.0

(15.0)

10.0
45.0

35.0

TOTAL

;BaseCase Non-Lending Tasks and'ESWI
FY03

FY04

. CEM
. Economic Regulation
. Country Financial Accountability
assessment (CFAA)
. Regulatory framework oil sector
. PRSP Monitoring
. IDF grant for PRSP implementation
. IDF for Procurement Reform
. IDF grant on Legal Status of Women
. IDF grant for Judicial Reform and
Private Sector Development

FY05.
. Country Procurement Assessment Review
(CPAR)

. PRSP monitoring
. IDF grant for Judicial Reform and Private
Sector Development

High-Case Scenario (US$140 million)
FY03
Financial Sector Reform
PRSC I
Supplemental Credit for
Mining Sector Capacity
Building project
Multi-Sectoral HIV/AIDS
and Communicable
Diseases Project (MAP)*
Partial Risk Guarantee for
SOMELEC Privatization
TOTAL

.
15.0
15.0

FY04

FY05'

-

PRSC 11
Water Supply project
PGRNP 11project

20.0
30.0
10.0

PRSC 111
PDIAIM 11
Natural Resource Management
Capacity Building project

20.0
10.0
5.0

TOTAL

60.0

TOTAL

35.0

5.0

(15.0)
10.0
45.0

High-Case Non-Lending Tasks and ESW
FY03
Base-Case plus:
. Gender Assessment

_

FY04

-

|

Base-Case plus:
Labor market study
| Private Participation in infrastructure
. Issues and Perspectives of the housing
sector
| Market dynamics in the health sector

*This project does not affect IDA allocation as it is part of the Africa Regional MAP

!

.

.

i

:

Base-Case plus:
. Consultative Group
. Agriculture statistics
. Rural business development services
| . Development prospects of Arabic Gum

MauritaniaCAS
C.

23

ASSISTANCE PROGRAM

The Four Strateyic Axes of the PRSP
(i)

Accelerating private sector-led growth

60.
Private sector-led growth is critical to poverty reduction, income generation and
employment opportunities. Given Mauritania's proximity to European markets, a dynamic
private sector, relatively low labor cost, and a decade of comprehensive and sustained structural
reforms, Mauritania has significant potential for private sector driven export-oriented growth.
Unleashing that potential requires preserving a stable macro-economic framework and enhancing
Mauritania's competitiveness, improving public resource management, developing
infrastructure, modernizing and strengthening the judiciary system and developing a sound and
diversified financial system. To help the GIRM make progress in these areas, the Bank's
strategy provides for using the full range of services (lending, ESW and technical assistance,
supplemented by IFC services and lending and by MIGA advisory services) towards: (i)
removing remaining barriers to competition and factor mobility; (ii) improving the legal and
regulatory environment; (iii) further streamlining tax regulations; (iv) exploiting new market
opportunities; (v) facilitating savings mobilization and access to services and credit, and
developing financial intermediation; (vi) lowering production costs; (vii) increasing private
sector participation in the delivery of public services; and (viii) increasing internal/external
competitiveness.

61.

ESW and Advisory Services

Base Case
*

The findings of recently completed studies on "Rural Development Strategy", "Agrobusiness Strategy", "Livestock Development Strategy", "Integrated Framework - Poverty
Focused Trade Strategy", "Micro-Finance Development Strategy", "Fisheries Resource
Management" and "National Strategy for the Development of New Technologies", as well as
of the ongoing "Financial Sector Development" and "Economic Regulation" studies will be
used to address concerns regarding increased private sector participation in these
productive/service sectors.

*

The Bank will provide technical advice on the restructuringof ruraldevelopment institutions

and associations.
*

*

Based on the recommendations of the "Fisheries Resource Management" study, the Bank
will continue its policy dialogue with GIRM and donors, on how best to implement a
comprehensive Fisheries Resource Management System. Concrete actions in the areas of
research, surveillance, infrastructure, transformation of fisheries products and artisanal
fisheries development are being supported by the EU, FAO, AfDB, FADES, Germany,
France and Japan.
The Bank will provide policy advice in assisting the GIRM to prepare a legal and regulatory

ftameworkfor the sustainabledevelopment ofthe oil sector.

MauritaniaCAS

24

*

The Bank will continue to assist the GIRM to attractforeign direct investment (FDI), in order
to broaden and diversify its productive base and upgrade its technological base so it can be
translated into higher and sustained growth.

*

The Bank intends to continue to coordinate with MIGA, IFC and the African Project
Development Facility (APDF) to identify investment opportunities, promote small and
medium enterprise development, and provide technical assistance and advisory services to
the private sector.

*

An IDF grant for Judicial Reform and Private Sector Development (FY03) will aim at
strengthening the office of the Inspecteur de Juridique, supporting the establishment of a
legal information center, implementing reforms in court administration and strengthening the
new Chambre de Commerce and the Comite national de concertation Etat-Secteurprive to
become educated clients of the judiciary and promoters of good justice.

High Case
*

In the high case scenario, the Bank also envisages providing assistance to the development of
agriculturalstatistics as well as a census on agriculture and livestock and will conduct a
study of ruralbusiness development services to strengthen and harness the synergies between
rural communities/farmers organizations supported by IDA's programs (PDIAIM and
PGRNP) and small-scale, private, rural enterprises in order to boost farm productivity,
generate rural non-farm income, and increase rural non-farm employment opportunities to
fight poverty in rural areas.

62.
Lending. The above analytical framework will form the basis for the following planned
investments:
Base Case
*

To assist the GIRM in developing financial intermediation, attracting savings and utilizing
such savings for economic growth while promoting competition in the financial sector, the
Bank will support a FinancialSector Reform Operation(FY03).

*

A program of PRSCs (FY03-04-05) will be prepared to assist the GIRM in: (i) strengthening
public sector management and financial management; (ii) implementing a full judiciary
reform and capacity building; and (iii) supporting managerial, institutional and capacity
development in the Ministry of Finance, the High Commission on Poverty Reduction and
Human Rights and the Ministry of Health.

*

To assist the GIRM in the privatization of SOMELEC (the national electricity company),
IDA is preparing a PartialRisk Guarantee for up to US$ 10 million.

*

The IFC intends to intensify its activities in Mauritania by expanding its operations to the
fisheries, industry and banking sectors.

*

In the livestock sub-sector, the Bank will continue to support the reform of pasture and
rangeland management through the second phase of the APL Rainfed Natural Resource
Management Project (PGRNP) (FY05).

MauritaniaCAS

25

High Case
*

Should the CAS move to the high case, then the preparation of the second phase of the APL

Rainfed NaturalResource Management Project (PGRNP) will be accelerated from FY05 to
FY04.

*

A second-phase of the eleven-year APL Integrated Development Program for Irrigated
Agriculture (PDIAIM)7 (FY05) will also be brought forward from FY06 to FY05. This APL
will continue to support the objectives of private sector development, capacity building,
poverty reduction, rehabilitation of irrigated agriculture, land tenure, provision of basic social
and economic rural infrastructure, environmental protection in the Senegal River Valley,
promoting agriculture export diversification and helping agricultural producers to meet the
necessary sanitary and phyto-sanitary standards.

(ii)

Growth Anchored in the Economic Environment of the Poor

63.
)While Mauritania has made good progress in the modernization of its basic infrastructure
by privatizing telecommunications and in launching the privatization of electricity, by building
and maintaining main roads and by negotiating concessions with the private sector to manage
urban water distribution in the slums and serviced sites, rapid urbanization has not been
accompanied by sufficient investments in urban and rural infrastructure, hence the emergence of
slums around the major cities and the isolation of most rural areas. A large part of the urban
population suffers from low living standards with very poor access to basic services such as
roads, water, sanitation, electricity, and waste disposal services.

64.

ESWandAdvisory Services

Base Case
*

Given the importance of basic infrastructure to improve living standards and the
competitiveness of the Mauritanian economy, the Bank will help the GIRM to maintain and
expand its infrastructure services through enhanced public sector management and the
refocusing of public investment in the infrastructure sector by assisting in the preparation of a
MTEFfor the InfrastructureSector and by continuing its work on Municipal Taxation.

High Case
*

The Bank will also prepare a study on "Private Participationin Infrastructure and Supply

Chain " (FY04) and on "Issues and Perspectives of the Housing Sector" (FY04).

7Water resource management issues are dealt with within the framework of the OMVS regional project.

MauritaniaCAS
65.

26

Lending

Base Case
*

In FY02, IDA approved an Urban Development Program APL to: (i) support Mauritania's
central and local governments to improve living conditions and promote employment
opportunities in the main towns and, in particular, in slums; (ii) support decentralization; and
(iii) strengthen the institutional framework and capacity for urban and land management at
the central and municipal levels.

*

The Bank also plans to participate in the financing of the Aftouf-Es-Saheli Water Supply
Project (FY04), for US$20 million, which aims at providing a more cost-effective and
environmentally sustainable solution to Nouakchott's current and projected demand for
water. A project supporting the environmental and social mitigation of the OMVS multidonor regional power project was presented to the Board in FY98 which, inter-alia, is
providing support to the Governments of Mauritania, Mali and Senegal to develop and sign
the Water Charter for the Senegal River. Completion and signature of this water charter will
be a crucial building block in the development of the Aftout-Es-Saheli project.

High Case
*

The lending amount for the Aftouf-Es-Saheli Water Supply Project (FY04) will be increased
to US$30 million.

*

The second-phase of the eleven-year APL Integrated Development Programfor Irrigated
Agriculture (PDIAIM) (FY05), mentioned above, will be brought forward to FY05.

*

The preparation of the second PGRNPproject would be accelerated from FY05 to FY04.

(iii)
Developing human resources and ensuring universal access to basic infrastructure
and services
As stated in the PRSP, the poor are particularly concerned about their lack of access to
66.
basic services such as primary education, primary health care, clean water and sanitation. Given
that these services have a major impact on the quality of life of the population, and that achieving
the MDGs will necessitate significant improvements in these sectors, IDA will assist the GIRM
in improving their delivery. As a general rule the Bank will ensure that gender aspects are fully
taken into account and reflected in its ESW and in the design and implementation of investment
operations.
67.
In the health sector, the Bank will support the GIRM towards achieving the following
specific goals: (i) decreasing under 5 mortality and maternal mortality by 25 percent by the end
of 2004, as well as reducing fertility and malnutrition; (ii) reduce the burden of expenditures on
health on the poor; and (iii) promote participation and involvement of communities and users in
the management and delivery of health interventions. The Bank will therefore support the
development of the primary and secondary health services along the following strategic
directions: (i) increase the availability and quality of human resources for primary and secondary
services in the rural areas; (ii) improve access to functional services including equipment to

MauritaniaCAS

27

conduct outreach activities to the village and household levels; (iii) ensure continuous
availability of essential low cost drugs and other essential consumables; (iv) improve quality of,
and stimulate demand for, essential health interventions affecting health indicators including
malaria, HIV/AIDS and TB control as well as maternal and child health services; (v) implement
financial protection including risk sharing and subsidy mechanisms to raise financial access to
services of the poor and protect them from the impoverishing effect of out-of pocket spending on
health including third party payment and community financing mechanisms; (vi) support
decentralized participatory management of health services through the institutionalization of
health committees and promotion of participation by women and the poor; and (vii) the annual
analysis of the efficiency and equity of public expenditures on health through the development of
a public expenditures monitoring mechanism.
68.
In the education sector, the Bank will assist the GIRM, together with other development
partners, to implement the first phase of its Educational Sector Development Program (ESDP),
which aims at: (i) implementing bilingual education at the primary and secondary levels; (ii)
improving access and equity; (iii) enhancing quality and increasing the internal efficiency of the
education system; and (iv) improve the relevance and the external efficiency of the vocational,
technical and higher education levels. Expected outcomes at the end of the first phase include:
universal access to primary education, increased completion rates, expanded access to secondary
education and improved quality of education at all levels.

69.

ESW and Advisory Services

Base Case
*

The Bank will continue to support the national goals and strategic options outlined in the
PRSP and will work closely with the GIRM to measure the progress of the health and

education sectors towards achieving the Millennium Development Goals by focusing, interalia, on reducing disparities between the urban and rural areas as well as between richer and
poorer groups. This will include support for: (i) yearly rapid surveys measuring malnutrition,
immunization rates, use of bed nets, HIV rates, primary school enrollment rates, and literacy
rates; and (ii) a Demographic and Health survey in 2004 to measure progress in terms of
health outcomes: under 5 mortality, fertility and maternal mortality.
*

The IDF grantsfor the promotion of the application of the law and the advancement of the
legal status of women andfor PRSP implementation will both be extended into FY03.

High Case
*

The Bank will conduct an overall analysis of the Market Dynamics in the Health Sector
(FY04) including: (i) an analysis of the health labor market focusing on demand, monetary
and non monetary incentives in the health sector in relation to the internal and global health
market, in order to support the policy dialogue regarding human resources development and
retention in the health sector; (ii) an analysis of both public and private spending on health
through preparing and institutionalizing National Health Accounts; and (iii) an analysis of the
pharmaceutical market, drug prices in the formal and informal sector, importance of use of
fake drugs and incidence on the health sector.

MauritaniaCAS

28

*

The Bank will conduct a Labor Market Study (FY04), in coordination with the Chamber of
Commerce, the Federation of Employers, the ONS and the NGO community to investigate
employment creation opportunities and training needs and increase the relevance of training
and employment creation in accordance with the signals of the labor market.

*

The Bank will conduct a Strategic Country Gender Assessment (FY03) to provide a
foundation for addressing the gender dimensions of growth and poverty reduction and to
assist the GIRM in identifying priority gender-responsive interventions.

70.

Lending

Base Case
*

The Bank's strategy is to assist the GIRM via an APL Education Reform Sector Program,
approved in FY02, to: (i) implement bilingual education at the primary and secondary levels
of education; (ii) improve access and equity; (iii) enhance quality and increase the internal
efficiency of the educational system; and (iv) improve the relevance and external efficiency
of the vocational, technical and higher education systems.

*

The PRSC program (FY03-04-05) will, inter alia, focus on supporting managerial,
institutional and capacity development in the Ministry of Finance, the High Commission on
Poverty Reduction and Human Rights and the Ministry of Health.

*

The Bank's assistance to the health sector and, more generally, to social protection issues
will continue within the framework of the ongoing Health Sector Investment operation and
the the planned PRSCs mentioned above, particularly with respect to institutional and
capacity building.

*

In the context of the Multi-SectoralAIDS Programfor Africa (MAP), the Bank will prepare a
project in FY03 to keep the prevalence of HIV/AIDS at the current low level and, in parallel,
reduce the incidence of other communicable diseases.

High Case
*

(iv)

In the high case scenario, the scope of the PRSCs will be extended to assist in the financing
of the proposed Universal Access Strategy which will involve developing public-private
partnerships for working towards universal access of the population to basic infrastructure
and services such as water, energy, electricity and telecommunications. Therefore, the
amount of PRSC II and III will be increased from US$15 million to US$20 million.
Institutional Development and Governance

71.
Despite encouraging results from structural reforms, privatization, and decentralization of
some GIRM services and functions to municipalities, the GIRM's institutional apparatus needs
to be fully adapted to its new role of promotion and regulation. Regarding the institutional
framework, Mauritania has, as a result of its high aid-dependence, developed a dual structure for
managing sectoral strategies and projects. Sectoral Ministries and donor-financed Project
Implementation Units (PIUs) co-exist side by side, each with separate authority to hire staff,

MauritaniaCAS

29

commit resources and sign contracts. In general, Ministries have very limited administrative
budgets, low salaries, and therefore under-qualified and poorly motivated staff. In many cases,
Ministries are almost entirely dependent on their associated PIUs for higher-level technical
expertise and basic logistical necessities, such as vehicles and computers. Rather than
contributing to capacity building in Mauritania, the existence and dominance of these PIJs have
become a major obstacle to developing a strong public service, both at the central and
decentralized levels. The focus of the Bank's assistance program will thus shift away from
building institutional and human capacity through traditional investment operations with PIUs:
rather, it will concentrate on overall public sector management and cross-sectoral capacity
building.
72.
ESW and Advisory Services. The Bank will continue to conduct ESW and provide
advisory services/technical assistance on several important fronts:
*

The Bank will work towards improving economic management, including public resource
management and fiscal decentralization by: (i) incorporating social analysis in public
investment projects; and (ii) carrying out annual reviews of the Public Investment Program
(PIP) and increasingMauritania's absorptive capacity. The Bank will also assist the GIRM
in the preparation of two MTEFs (ruraland urban sectors) and in defining/implementing a
reform of sub-national taxation.

*

In the area of governance, the Bank will together with the IMF and other developing
partners, assist the GIRM to implement the National Program of Good Governance through
efforts to improve accountability of public resource management and enhance institutional
capacity to deliver essential services that are of quality, cost-effective and timely. This will
include completing the Country FinancialAccountability Assessment (FY03) and the Report
on the Observance of Standards and Codes (ROSC) which analyze all aspects of financial
management and provide a set of recommendations to be carried out. The Bank will also
carry out a Country ProcurementAssessment Review (CPAR) in FY05 which will analyze
progress being made on implementing procurement reforms. In addition the Bank will
provide advice on the following critical areas of action in the short and medium-term: (i)
improving budget formulation, execution and reporting; (ii) strengthening monitoring of
poverty-reducing public expenditure; (iii) developing a transparent and efficient fiduciary
framework; and (iv) fiscal decentralization.

*

The Bank will carry out an "Economic Regulation" study (FY03) to help the GIRM in
refocusing the role of the State, in building the necessary institutional and administrative
regulatory capacity aimed at removing inefficient and arbitrary regulatory checks and
balances and in developing a strong partnership between the State and the civil society at
large.

*

The Bank will continue to assist the GIRM via an IDFfor Completing ProcurementReform
(FY03) and in monitoring public expenditures towards poverty reduction.

*

World Bank Institute: Several activities for the remainder of FY02 and for FY03 are being
prepared and implemented by the World Bank Institute. There is a comprehensive program
of training seminars on several aspects of the PRSP process and public expenditure
management- participation by all actors and stakeholders, strengthening of capacity, poverty

MauritaniaCAS

30

analysis and diagnostic tools, and monitoring and evaluation of poverty impacts. This
program streamlines a multi-sectoral approach into the activities and is targeted at a variety
of participants in and outside GIRM. Other trainings being undertaken or planned by WBI
include training of joumalists on economic issues, labor market policies, and capacity
building in aspects of health sector reform and financing.

73.

Lending

Base Case
*

The PRSC program (FY03-04-05) is centered on building institutional and administrative
capacity in the GIRM for public sector management and financial management. The focus of
the PRSCs will initially be on support to managerial, institutional and capacity development
in the Ministry of Finance, the High Commission on Poverty Reduction and Human Rights
and the Ministry of Health.

*

The Bank will assist in financing an Institutional and Capacity Building Projectfor Natural
Resource Management (FY05) which will be aimed at radically overhauling the
environmental and natural resource management and control capabilities of the GIRM.
Components of this project will include: (i) establishment of an Environmental Regulatory
and Enforcement Agency which is independent of any Ministry and is multi-sectoral; (ii)
capacity building in individual sectoral Ministries to deal with environmental management
and mitigation, with a focus on the multi-dimensional needs of the Senegal River Valley
area; and (iii) developing an appropriate environmental legislative and regulatory framework
for management of the Banc d'Arguin to govern oil exploration which is being conducted
both on and off-shore around that area.

*

The Bank also envisages providing continued support to sustainable natural resource
exploitation in the mining sector through continuing the activities already being implemented
in the Mining Sector Capacity Building Project through a supplemental credit to the existing
project (FY03).

High Case
*

The scope of the PRSCs (FY03-04-05) will be broadened to include support to GIRM to use
Information and Communication Technologies to achieve greater transparency and efficiency
in public sector transactions. The PRSCs will also provide assistance to pilot modernization
of the state and E-Government in one or two Ministries initially.

D.

SELECTIVITY AND CHOICE OF INSTRUMENTS

74.

The principles of selectivity that the Bank will observe are the following:

(i)

Knowledge-based comparative advantage: Given Mauritania's sustained track record in
stabilization and structural reform, non-lending products will become increasingly
important in assisting the GIRM to identify new sources of growth, accelerate growth in
sectors with high growth potential, enhance overall economic management, develop human

MauritaniaCAS

31

capacity, improve mobilization and allocation of resources and reduce poverty. The Bank
will endeavor to disseminate its ESW/non-lending products and to improve communication
with the population regarding economic and social policy reforms. As for lending, the
Bank will continue to be selective in its focus and provide investment resources to
overcome critical bottlenecks. In this endeavor, the Bank will continue to work closely
with the GIRM, the IMF, the AfDB, the EU, bilateral donors, NGOs, the private sector and
civil society;
(ii)

Focus on poverty reduction: The Bank's interventions will be fully in line with the
priorities of the PRSP and will directly target poverty reduction;

(iii) Empowerment of private sector and communities: The CAS is based on the PRSP which
was elaborated and is being implemented in a fully participatory manner. The CAS also
focuses on a private sector-led approach to development involving civil society and
stakeholders in the design and delivery of activities; and,
(iv) Improved coordination with donors and burden-sharing: The recent Consultative Group
meeting allowed the World Bank Group to consolidate its understanding of the priority
activities of other donors and development partners and to come to agreement on the
comparative advantage of each partner and the areas for complementarity of activities.
Where other donors have the lead, the Bank will only intervene when its expertise can help
to clarify issues/strategies and improve the impact of donors assistance.
E.

PORTFOLIO PERFORMANCE AND MANAGEMENT

75.
The current project portfolio consists of 13 investment operations for a total commitment
of SDR 224 million (US$294 million) with an undisbursed balance of SDR 166 million (US$203
million or 75 percent of the total). Excluding the Education Sector Development Program and
Urban Sector Development Project which both only recently became effective, 47.8 percent of
the total committed amount has already been disbursed. Over the past three years, disbursement
rates for the Mauritania portfolio have increased from 14 percent in FY99 to 19 percent in FY00,
reached almost 22 percent in FY01 and are currently estimated at 25.6 percent for FY02. This
represents a strong improvement and is above the Bank's average of 20 percent. However, in
order to strengthen the portfolio further, enhanced efforts to increase disbursement are being
prioritized, particularly because nine projects have already passed the Mid-Term Review stage.
76.
The most recent Country Portfolio Performance Review (CPPR) was carried out in
January 2002 and showed that, overall, the projects in the World Bank portfolio are performing
well. This confirms OED reviews of the Mauritania portfolio in the last three years which are
broadly favorable: OED evaluations show FY98-01 Satisfactory outcomes at 82 percent, likely
sustainability at 73 percent, realism and pro-activity indexes have continuously been 100 percent.
Of the 13 projects, only the Regional Power project is rated Unsatisfactory for Development
Objectives (DO) and Implementation Progress (IP). All others are rated Satisfactory for both
DO and IP except for the Telecommunications project which is rated Highly Satisfactory for DO.
Another project - the Infrastructure and Pilot Decentralization Project - recently closed at end
December 2001 and was also rated Satisfactory.

MauritaniaCAS

32

77.
The CPPR highlighted one of the main systemic problems in the project portfolio as
being the need to develop capacity and it established a new and more focused framework for
joint portfolio management between the Bank and the GIRM. It was agreed that stepped-up
efforts at implementation would be carried out at all levels - project, Ministerial, executing
agency and by the Bank. Each actor has committed to conducting a follow-up review on the
recommendations of the CPPR in 9-12 months time which will focus on technical issues of
implementation and will do a stock-taking of progress achieved. Both the GIRM and the Bank
agreed that implementation difficulties are often a result of insufficient consideration of crosssectoral issues in project design so, for the projects planned in this CAS, particular attention will
be given to the establishment of multi-sectoral teams in Bank and in GIRM to design and
implement future and on-going projects.
78.
The World Bank Country Office will play the key role in following up on portfolio
management and will strengthen its capacity by hiring an urban development expert to follow the
Urban Development Program and a water and energy expert to follow the Aftout-Es-Saheli
project and the Universal Access agenda. A regional financial management specialist is being
recruited in the Bank's Country Office in Mali who will also cover Mauritania. Increased
training of client counterparts in procurement and disbursement issues is planned for the coming
year as well as on-going strengthening of project management skills. All Country Team
members are undertaking efforts in their respective sectors to provide support to building
programmatic and planning skills with their counterparts in the GIRM to ensure more effective
sectoral strategies and program targeting and to build towards Medium-Term Expenditure
Frameworks in all sectors, along the lines of those already carried out for the Health and
Education sectors. Finally, there is a strong consensus between the Bank and the GIRM on
implementing the priority actions, developing better cross-sectoral links and synergies, and
working together as a team to accomplish this as rapidly as possible.
F.

SCENARIOS AND TRIGGERS

79.
Bank financing would focus primarily on providing support to the implementation of the
PRSP through PRSCs, on-going APLs and targeted investment projects. The base case
assistance scenario (approximately US$110 million), assumes that: (i) the PRSP will be
implemented in a timely manner (as laid out in 4nnex 2 of the PRSP Progress Report); (ii) that
all poverty-reducing expenditures are duly identified and integrated into the accounting system;
(iii) that satisfactory progress is made in implementing the main recommendations of the ROSC,
CFAA and CPAR action plans; and (iv) that the disbursement ratio for projects is at the Bank
average of 20 percent.
80.
Given Mauritania's track record in implementing macroeconomic and structural reforms
over the last ten years and its demonstrated commitment to its reform program and poverty
reduction, the Bank would consider increasing its support for implementation of the PRSP and
thus move to a high-case assistancescenario. This scenario would depend on the following: (i)
accelerated progress being made in implementing the PRSP and on achievement of the PRSP
poverty, growth and macroeconomic targets (a satisfactory implementation would mean reaching
all or most of the targets by 2004/05 as planned, while reaching these targets before would be
considered as accelerated implementation); (ii) significant increase in the absorptive capacity;
(iii) strong performance in public finance management including full implementation of the

MauritaniaCAS

33

recommendations of the CFAA, ROSC and the CPAR action plans; (iv) major improvements on
strengthening institutional capacity in the ministries of rural development, education and health;
(v) strong portfolio performance with disbursement rates higher than Bank average and less than
15 percent of the portfolio rated at risk. Under this scenario, totaling up to US$140 million, the
Bank would increase the amounts for the PRSCs and APLs.
81.
Failing to the low case would result from the macroeconomic program going off track
and a slow down in the PRSP implementation. This scenario would result in a revised CAS
proposing a reduced assistance program. At the present time, the Bank sees the probability of
this case as very low.
Box 16: Scenarios and Triggers
HIGH

PRSP Implementation

BASE
Base case plus:
. Accelerated progress made in implementing
the PRSP
Satsfactory implementaton of the PRSP as
specified in Annex 2 of the PRSP
. Increase absorptive capacity as
. Identification of all poverty-reducing expenditures
demonstrated by the speed and level of
implementation of priority poverty reduction and integration of all executed expenditure into the
accounting system
.
. programs

Govemance and
Accountability
. .

.

Competitiveness and
Trade

. Major improvements in strengthening
institutional capacity in the ministries of
rural development, education and health

Portfolio performance
ond absorption:

Strong performance in public finance
management withuJll implementation of the
ROSC, CFAA and CPAR action plans
Major improvements in strengthening
institutional capacity

Disbursement ratio for projects > 20% and
<15% of portfolio at risk

Improvements in public finance management with
progress made in implementing the main
recommendations of the ROSC, CFAA and CPAR
action plans

Disbursement ratio for projects 20%
..

82.
Monitoring Outcomes, CAS Performance and Self-Evaluation. A selection of
measurable outcomes will be used to monitor Mauritania's progress in implementing its PRSP
(Annex B9). These will include standard growth, and indicators related to the four axes of the
PRSP. To evaluate its own performance, the Bank is in the process of defining a results
monitoring framework for evaluating the effectiveness of on-going operations (in particular, for
APLs), and it will continue to carry out independent client surveys. The Bank will also closely
monitor portfolio performance indicators for all IDA-financed operations. In addition, the Bank
will continue with regular consultations with GIRM, civil society, donors and NGOs to get
feedback and monitor how well the Bank is implementing the stated CAS priorities. All these
actions will allow the Bank to fine-tuning the CAS so it becomes a living strategy.

IV.

RISKS

83.
There are few risks associated with the Bank's strategy in Mauritania. On the basis of its
macroeconomic and structural reform performance during the last ten years and the recent CPPR,

MauritaniaCAS

34

Mauritania has shown itself to be a very reliable partner. Nevertheless, Mauritania remains a
small economy with a narrow resource export base dependent on just two commodities: iron-ore
and fisheries (see para.23-26). Climate and external shocks have to be considered as potential
risks. These external shocks affect negatively the GIRM effort to promote diversified economic
growth and poverty reduction. However, the HIPC debt relief and the current level of
international reserves should increase Mauritania's ability to absorb temporary external shocks.
Another potential risk to be considered is the ability of Mauritania to change its traditional way
of doing private sector business and, therefore, to continue to pursue its goal to expand its
economic and export bases and to increase its competitiveness. During the last decade,
Mauritania has proved its commitment and capability to implement bold reforms, adapt and
move forward. The Bank's goal is to assist Mauritania to continue along this path.

V.

CONCLUDING REMARKS

84.
The main goal of the GIRM's PRSP is to achieve accelerated private sector-led growth and
to significantly reduce poverty. The Bank's assistance program described in this CAS are
specifically designed to support Mauritania to reach this goal.

James D. Wolfensohn
President
by Shengman Zhang

Washington, D.C.
May 6, 2002

35

MauritaniaCAS

Attachment I

REPUBLIC OF MAURITANIA
COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
Standard Annexes

Annexes
Al
A2
B2
B3
B4
B5
B6
B7
B8
B9
B10

Key Economic and Program Indicators - Change from the Last CAS
Country At a Glance
Selected Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
IBRD/IDA Program Summary
Summary of Non-lending Services
Social Indicators
Key Economic Indicators
Key Exposure Indicators
Statement of IFCs Held and Disbursed Portfolio
Bank Group Operations Portfolio (IBRD/IDA and Grants)
CAS Program Matrix
CAS Summary of Development Priorities

Annex Al
Page 1 of I

MauritaniaCAS

Key Economic and Program Indicators - Change from Last CAS
Current CAS Forecast

Forecast in Last CAS Actual
Economy (CY)

Growth rates (%)
GDP

1998a 1999"

Inflation (%)
National accounts (% GDP)
Current account balance
(excl. all ext. transfers)
Gross investment
Public finance (% GDP)
Overall surplus (+)/deficit (-)
(excl. grants)
Foreign financing*
Intemational reserves

1998" 1999" 2000"

2001c 2002a

2003"

2004D

2005"

5.3

3.7

4.1

5.0

4.6

6.1

6.4

..

..

-7.3

-9

8.7

-2.2

5.1
-4

5.5

..

5.5

7.9

7.3

0.4
5.6

2.8
-0.4

6.2
3.9

-11.8 -7.4
0.7 -14.9

7.8
13

-3.9
4

-4.6
7

5.4
7

8.1
5

7.2
13

4.6

4.0

3.0

8.0

4.1

3.3

4.7

4.0

3.8

3.5

3.5

-6.0

-4.5

-3.4

-6.4

-4.3

-6.0

-10.0

0.0

-9.4

-9.1

-10.0

17.7

18.1

20.5

19.0

17.5 30.3

26.7 24.7

26.9

27.8

28.5

3.7

3.8

4.0

2.1

2.2

-4.5

-5.6

6.3

-2.2

-3.1

-4.2

5.0

6.1

6.8

4.1

5.4

6.5

6.3

7.5

7.0

6.9

6.9

FY98a FY99

FY00"

FY01' FY02

FY035

FY04"

FY05D

45.0

35.0

30.0

5.1

Export of goods and

services
Exports (Fob)
Imports (Fob)

2000'

5.3

(as months of imports)

Program (Bank's FY)

FY98c FY99 FY00
c

b

Lending ($ million)
Gross disbursements

36.8
26.6

25.0
17.8

($ million)

a. Estimated year
b. Projected year
c. Actual outcome
*90% of public investment is foreign financed

25.0
13.0

24.4
20.5

30.8 83.1
21.0 27.1

a

b

18.3
76.9

122.5
26.1

Annex A2
Page 1 of 2

MauritaniaCAS

Mauritania at a glance
POVERTY and SOCIAL
MaurtanIa

SubSaharan
Africa

LowIncome

Develmnt diamond'

2001

6859

2,459

350
0.97

480
313

420
1,030

2.7

2.6

2.7

Population, mid-year (millions)
GNI per capita (Atlas method, USS)
GNI (Atlas method, USS billions)

Lfe exewncy

Average annual growth, 1995-01
Population (%)

Labor fbrce (%)

19

214

G2.
GNI

Gross

~~~~~~~primary

p.r

enmllment

capita

Most recent estmate (latest year avallable, 199541)
Poverty (%of population below national poverty line)
Urban population (X of total population)
Life expectancy at birth (years)
Infant mortality (per 1,000 live births, 2000)
Child mainutrition (X of children under 5, 2000)
Access to an improved water source (%of poputbon)
Illiteracy (%of population age 15+)
Gross primary enrollment (%of school-age populaon)
Male
Female

46.3
58
53
74
32
76
42.8
88
89
82

34
47
92

32
59
77

55
38
78
85
71

76
38
9B
102
86

Acosss to improved water source
Maurtanba
Low-income group

-

KEY ECONOMIC RATIOS and LONG-TERM TRENDS
1961

181

2000

2001

0.66
26.5
39.3
0.5

1.1
17.9
44.1
9.7
12.0

0.98
30.3
40.7
18.4
31.1

1.0
26.7
40.0
14.0
21.0

-17.1
2.1
112.7
22.4

-8.2
2.2
193.8
17.3

0.8

-5.7

189.5
24.6

1981-91

188s141

2000

2001

200148

0.2
-2.5
0.2

4.3
1.5
3.1

5.0
2.3
8.7

4.6
1.9
-2.2

5.8
3.1
6.4

1981

1991

2000

2001

GOwt

31.9
26.2

22.0
31.0
8.5
47.0

22.0
30.0
8.0
48.0

eo 40 -

GDP (USS billions)
Gross domesbc InvestmentVGDP
Exports of goods and services/GDP
Gross domestic savings/GDP
Gross natonal savingstGDP
Current account balance/GDP
Interest paymenWGDP
Total debGODP
Total debt service/exports

..

Present value of debt/GDP (after enhanced HIPC)
Present value of debtexports (after enhanced HIP(

Economic rIo
Trade

Domestic
Investment

..

212
15.5
1441.1
384.9
Indebtedness

(average annual gtowth)
GDP
GDP per capita
Exports of goods and services

-M

aulltanla
Low-income group

STRUCTURE of the ECONOMY
(%of GDPJ
Ag9culture
Industry
Manufacturing
Services

41.9

2867
30.0
10.8
41.3

Private consumption
General govemment consumption
Imports of goods and services

85.4
34.2
85.3

72.1
18.2
52.3

64.3
17.3
52.5

70.3
15.6
52.6
2001

20
0
401

97

9e

0
0*GDP

Growth of export and Imports (%)

1981-91

1991401

2000

1.4
4.7
-1.6
1.1

4.6
2.1
-0.5
5.6

2.8
8.7
3.3
5.9

Private consumpton

-0.9

2.7

3.2

1.3

1

General govemment consumpton
Gross domestc investment
Imports of goods and services

-3.5
3.4
-1.7

2.6
9.6
2.9

2.9
41.3
14.0

88
-4.8
4.8

o

-02
1.4
5.9
8.5 o

'a

GDI

Agriculture
Industry
Manufacturing
Services

(average annual growth)

ofInvstmnt and GDP (%)

40

2s

1o
1
-n

Epeds

Omports

The diamonds show four key indicators in the country (Inbold) compared with Its Income-group average. If data are missing, the diamond vwll
be incomplete.

01

Annex A2
Page 2 of 2

MauritaniaCAS

Mauritania
PRICES and GOVERNMENT FINANCE
1981
Domeslic prices
(%change)
Consumer prices
Implidt GDP deflator

1991

2000

2001

Inflation (%)
10

a
..

7.3

5.6
9.8

3.3
6.1

4.7
5.0

Goverment flnance

;
4
2 -

(%of GDP, includes curent grants)
Current revenue

22.6

25.9

21.1

o-

Current budget balance
Overall surplus/defict

1.4
-5.7

8.6
-4.5

11.9
-5.6

L

2000
359
193
164

2001
345
199
158

Export and Import levels (US$ mill.)

.

98

97

-GDP

98

deflator

99

00

01

eCPI

TRADE
(US$ millions)
Total exports (fob)
Iron
Fish

1981
..

Manufactures
Total imports (cif)

Food
Fuel and energy
Capital goods
Export price index (1985=-100)
Importprieindex(1985=100)
Terms of trade (1985=100)

1991
434
212
222
.4
416

343

357

..
..
..

121

120

113

39
78

100
78

92
61

..

110
108
101

103.5
94.1
110.0

114.2ss
98.6
115.8

1981

1991

2000

200

319
514
-196

498
591
-93

392
493
-101

385.9
496
-110.1

-51
99

-61
62

-20
128.9

-58
113.4

..
..

100
a
9

0
mExports

o
*rinports

o

BALANCE of PAYMENTS
Current account balance to GDP (%)

(US$ millions)
Exports of goods and services
Imports of goods and servioes
Resource balance
Net income
Net current transfers
Current account balance

-147

-93

7.9

-54.7

Finandng items (net)
Changes in net reserves

171
-24

121
-28

31.9
24

85.7
31

168
48.3

67
81.9

255
240.0

286
254.3

1981

1991

2000

2001

967
"1
44

2,188
43
224

1,768
0
449

2043.6
0
475

77

88

115

67

Memo:
Reserves including gold (US$ millions)
Conversion rate (DEC, locat/US5)

4
2

.-2

9700

*4

*10
-12

EXTERNAL DEBT and RESOURCE FLOWS
(US$ millions)
Total debt outstanding and disbursed
IBRD
IDA
Total debt service

Composidon of 2000 debt (US$ mill.)

IBRD

1

15

2

0

IDA

0

2

7

9

66.0

42.2

2

40

14

Composition of net resource flows
Official transfert
Official creditors

Private creditors
Foreign direct investment
Portfolio equity
World Bank program
Commitments

..

..

145

25

-15

-2

12
0
3

0

30

31

Disbursements

17

14

57

47

Prncipal repayments
Net flows
Interest payments
Net transfers

0
17
1
16

12
1
5
-4

6
51
3
48

5
42
3
38

Development Economics

G:

324

c: 116

D

A- IBRD
B-IDA
C-IMF

S

I23

D- Other rrulblateral

E -Bilateral
F- Private
G -Short-term

5/7/02

Annex B2
Page 1 of 1

MauritaniaCAS

Mauritania
Selected Indicators* of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management

Indicator
Portfolio Assessment
Number of Projects Under Implementation a
Average Implementation Period (years) b
Percent of Problem Projects by Number at c
Percent of Problem Projects by Amount a c
Percent of Projects at Risk by Number a, d
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount d
Disbursement Ratio (%)e
Portfolio Management
CPPR during the year (yes/no)
Supervision Resources (total US$000)
Average Supervision (US$000/project)
Memorandum Item
Proj Eval by OED by Number
Proj Eval by OED by Amt (US$ millions)
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Number
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
*

1999

2000

2001

2002

12
2.7
8.3
7.3
8.3
7.3
14

14
2.6
0
0
0
0
19.2

11
3
0
0
0
0
21.8

13
2.8
7.7
3.8
7.7
3.8
25.6

Yes
585
49

No
1,016
73

No
736
67

Yes
1,015
78

Since FY 80

Last Five
FYs
9
152.6
22.2
0

32
496.6
34.4
0

As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY).
Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio.
Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) and/or implementation progress (IP).
As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the
beginning of the year: Investment projects only.
All indicators are for projects active in the Portfolio, with the exception of Disbursement Ratio,
which includes all active projects as well as projects which exited during the fiscal year.

Annex B3

Page 1 of 2

MauritaniaCAS

IDA Program Summary
Mauritania
Proposed IDA Base-Case Lending Program
Fiscal year

Proj ID

8

US$(M)

Strategic Rewards
b (HA/L)

Implementation b
Risks (HAML)

15

H

L

15
5
(15)

H
M
H

M
L
M

10
45
15

H

M

2003

Financial Sector Reform Project

2004

PRSC 1
Supplemental Credit for Mining Sector
Mutli-Sector HIV/AIDS Project *
Partial Risk Guarantee for SOMELEC
Privatization
Result
PRSC 2

H

M

20
35
15

H

M

2005

Water Supply Project **
Result
PRSC 3 **

H

M

PGRNP l1
Natural Resource Mgmt Capacity Bldg Project
Result

10
5
30

H
M

H
M

Overall result

110

* Does

not impact IDA allocation as is part of Regional MAP

**FY04 high case: the lending amounts would be increased - PRSC 11to US$20 million and the Water Supply Project to US$30
million. PGRNP 11 would also be brought forward to FY04. This would make a total high case lending amount of US$60 million in
FY04.

*** FY05 high case: the lending amount for PRSC III would be increased to US$20 million and PDIAIM If would be brought into

the CAS lending program (in FY05) for an amount of US$10 million. This would make a total high case lending amount of US$35
million.

Annex B3
Page 2 of 2

MauritaniaCAS

IFC & MIGA for Mauritania
Mauritania - IFC and MIGA Program, FY 1999-2002
1999 2000 2001 2002
IFC approvals (US$m)

7.00

Sector (%)
ACCOMMODATION/TOURIST
FINANCE & INSURANCE

100

Total

100

100

100

0

0

0

0

Investment instrument(%)
100

Loans
Equity
Quasi-Equity
Other

Total
MIGA guarantees (US$m)

0

0
66.30

Annex B4
Page 1 of 1

MauritaniaCAS

Summary of Nonlending Services Mauritania
Product

Completion FY

Cost (US$000)

Audiencea

ObjectiveD

Recent completions
MTEF Education
MTEF Health *

FY02
FY02

...
...

G, D, B
G, D, B

K
K

FY02

...

G, D, B, P

FY02
FY02
FY02

...
...
...

G, D, B, P
G, D, B
G, D, B

K, P
K, D

Integrated F'work Trade Strategy *
Dev't of New Technologies

FY02
FY02

...
...

G, D, B, P
G, D, B, P

Micro-Finance Dev't Strategy

FY02

...

G, D, B

FY02

...

G, D, B

Macro-Modelling

FY02

...

G, D, B

K, D, P
K, D, P
K, P
K, P
K, P

Underway
Financial Sector Development*

FY03

...

G, D, B, P

K, D, P

Planned
CEM
Economic Regulation
CFAA

FY03
FY03
FY03

105
50
65

G, D, B
G, D, B
G, D, B

Gender Assessment
Regulatory framework oil sector

FY03
FY03

...
...

G, D, B, P
G, D, B, P

PRSP Monitoring
Labor Market Study
Private Participation in Infrastructure
Issues & Perspectives in Housing
PRSP Monitoring
Market Dynamics in Health Sector
CAS
Consultative Group
Agriculture Statistics
Rural Business Devt Services
CPAR
Devt Prospects of Arabic Gum

FY03
FY04
FY04
FY04
FY04
FY04
FY05
FY05
FY05
FY05
FY05
FY05

61
50
50
50
30
50
50
170
50
50
80
50

G, D, B, P
G, D, B, P
G, D, B, P
G, D, B, P
G, D, B, P
G, D, B, P
G, D, B, P
G, D, B, P
G, D, B
G, D, B
G, D, B, P
G, D, B

K, P
K, P
K, D, P
K, D, P
K, P
K, D
K
K
K
K, D
K, P
K, D
K, D
K
K, P
K, D, P
K, P

*

Fisheries Resource Management*
The Education System in Mauritania
Rural Development Strategy *
Agro-Business Strategy *

Livestock Dev't Strategy

*

*

*

* Prepared and financed by the Government of Mauritania in partnership
with the Bank and other donors
a. Government (G), donor (D), Bank (B), public dissemination (P)
b. Knowledge generation (K), public debate (D), problem-solving (P)

K, P
K, P

Annex B5
Page 1 of 1

MauritaniaCAS

Mauritania Social Indicators
Latest single year

POPULATION
Total population, mid-year (millions)
Growth rate (Y. annuai average forperiod)
Urban population ('Y of population)
Total fertility rate (births per woman)

Same region/income group

1970-75

1980-85

2001

SubSaharan
Africa

1.4
2.3
20.3

1.8
2.6
35.0

2.7
2.7
57.7

658.6
2.6
34.4

..

..

4.7

5.3

3.7

..

..

46.3

..

61.2

480
133

420
142

2.4
4.1

1.2
3.3

76
88
70

LowIncome
2,458.7
1.9
31.9

POVERTY
(%of population)
National headcount index
Urban headcount index
Rural headcount index

INCOME
GNI per capila (US$)
Consumer price index (1995=100)
Food price index (1995=100)

..
..

390
..
..

380
50

350
127

INCOMEICONSUMPTION DISTRIBUTION
Gini index

..

Lowest quintile (%of income or consumption)
Highest quintile (%of income or consumption)
SOCIAL INDICATORS
Public expenditure
Health (%of GDP)
Education (%of GDP)
Social security and welfare (%of GOP)
Gross primary school enrollment rate
(%of age group)

..
..

Total

..

39.0

..
..
..

..
..

1.6
4.5

..

..

84.4

..

..

82.2

17
98
10

37
80
16

..
..

55
82
41

..
..

..
..

..
..

57
59

64
70

..

..

32

Male
Female

Access to an Improved water source
(%of population)
Total
Urban
Rural

..

Immunization rate
(%under 12 months)
Measles
DPT
Child malnutrition (Y. under 5 years)

Life expectancy at birth
(years)
Total
Male
Female

43

53

47

59

..
..

47
..
..

..
..

46
48

58
60

..

..

..

..

74
116

92
159

77
116

..

..

..

..

..

..

499
453

288
258

..

57

Mortality
Infant (per thousand live births)
Under 5 (per thousand live births)
Adult (15-59)
Male (per 1,000 population)
Female (per 1,000 population)

Maternal (per 100,000 live births)
Births ahended by skilled health slaff (%)

..
..

CAS Annex 85. This table was produced from the CMU LDB system.
Note: 0 or 0.0 means zero or less than half the unit shown. Net enrollment ratios exceeding 100 indicate discrepancies
between the estimates of school-age population and reported enrollment data.

05/07/02

Annex B6
MauritaniaCAS

Page 1 of 4
Mauritania - Key Economic Indicators

1997

1998

Actual
1999

2000

2001

2002

100.0
25

100.0
24

100.0
25

100.0
22

100.0
22

100.0
21

30
46

31
44

29
46

31
47

30
48

31
48

*-...

...

...

92
18
6
12

95
19
6
13

93.7
17.5
5.8
12

81.6
30.3
7.5
22.7

86
26.7
8.3
18.3

94
24.7
10.7
13.9

92.4
26.9
11.4
15.5

92.4
27.8
11.9
15.9

92.2
28.5
12.2
16.3

39
49

40
54

39
49

40.7
52.5

40
52.6

37.8
56.4

37.8
57.1

37.8
58.1

37.6
58.3

7.9
19.1

5
15

6.3
21.7

18.4
31.1

14
21

6
28.5

7.6
21.2

7.6
21.9

7.8
21.7

1096

1002

958

931

966.

983

998

1026

1052

450

420

400

390

350

...

...

3.2

3.7

4.1

5.0

4.6

5.1

5.5

6.1

6.4

6.1

3.7

4.1

7.0

3.7

-2.9

6.0

5.5

6.5

Real annual per capita
growth rates (%, calculated
from 1985 prices)
Gross domestic product at market prices
Total consumption
Private consumption

0.4
-1.9
-1.8

0.9
6.4
6.2

1.3
-2.6
1.0

2.2
3.6
3.2

1.9
1.4
-1.4

2.4
2.2
-1.9

2.8
3.0
2.1

3.4
2.9
0.6

3.7
3.3
2.0

Balance of Payments
(US$m)
Exports (GNFS)b
Merchandise FOB
Imports (GNFS)b
Merchandise FOB
Resource balance

430
408
536
355
-106

399
360
538
358
-139

370
333
471
305
-102

378
345
486
343
-108

386
345
495.7
357
-109.7

370.5
329
554.1
382
-183.6

390.9
347.8
587.7
400.7
-197

421.6
375.3
649.1
453.1
-227

452.5
402.3
696.4
492.4
-243

1.0

-36

-41.4

-58.1

-96.9

0.2

-97.3 -101.3

-119.9

16.9

-11.2

40.0

7.9

-54.7

37.1

Indicator

Est.
2003

2004

Proj.
2005

100.0 100.0
...
...

100.0
...

National accounts
(as % GDP at current
market prices)
Gross domestic product
Agriculture
Industrya
Services'
Total Consumption
Gross domestic fixed investment
Government investment
Private investment 1/
(includes increase in
stocks)
Exports (GNFS)b
Imports (GNFS)
Gross domestic savings
Gross national savings'
Memorandum items
Gross domestic product
(US$ million at current prices)
Gross national product per
capita (US$, Atlas method)
Real annual growth rates
(%, calculated from 1985 prices)
Gross domestic product at
market prices
Gross Domestic Income

Current account balance (excluding
official transfers)
Current account balance
(including official transfer)

(contn 'd)

1/ Non Government

-59

-65.5

-81.8

Annex B6
Page 2 of 4

MauritaniaCAS
Mauritania - Key Economic Indicators

Indicator:",
Net private foreign direct
investment
Long-term loans (net)
Official
Private
Other capital (net, including
errors and omissions)
Change in reservesd

Memorandum items
Resource balance (% ofGDP)
Real annual growth rates ( YR85
prices)
Merchandise exports (FOB)
Primary
Manufactures
Merchandise imports (CIF)
Public finance
(as % of GDP at current
market prices)'
Current revenues
Current expenditures
Current account surplus (+) or
deficit (-)
Capital expenditure
Foreign financing

1997

1998

-3

0

...
...

...
...

Actual
1999

Est.

Proj 2
2005

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

0

40.8

14.4

17.7

18.7

19.9

21.2

-38.2

-8.4

-29.7 -31.7

-32.7

-27.2

-25.2

-20.6

-30.2

-27.4

-24

-3.7

0

2.8

-61

-19

-23

24

33

86

1

33

23

-9.7

-13.9

-10.6

-11.6

-11.3

-18.7

-18

-22

-22.8

-17.8
-23.8
-6.4

-1.8
-3.4
14.1

5.6
3.4
-3.4

2.3
0.2
6.2

1.0
0.5
8.9

2.0
7.0
-0.9

...
...

...
...
...

...

26.5
16.9

26.5
17.7

27.7
18.2

25.9
17.4

21.1
16.9

37.1
19.1

28.8
19.0

27.7
18.7

26.7
18.3

9.7
5.9
0.9

8.9
7.3
-1.8

9.4
7.5
0.5

8.6
13.3
1.1

11.9
9.1
0.8

18
11.0
-0.6

9.8
...

9.0
...
...

8.4
...
...

...

Monetary indicators
M2/GDP (at current market prices)
GrowthofM2(%)
Private sector credit growth / total credit
growth (%)

16.0
8.0

14.7
4.1

14.6
5.1

14.7
12.6

15.7
17.3

15.7
9.1

...
...

...
...

...

-36.0

-29.4

-290.4

351.9

156.9

-62.2

...

...

...

Price indices( YR85 =100)
Merchandise exportprice index
Merchandise import price index
Merchandise terms oftrade index
Real exchange rate (US$/LCU)r

139.0
117.1
118.7
66.2

123.6
105
117.7

104.0
99
105.3

103.5
94.1
110

114.2
106
115.8

101.6
97.8
107.7

102.6
103
94.8
95.3
107.7 108.7

105
95.4
110.1

4.0
8.0
...
2.1
(contn 'd)

3.3
6.1

4.7
5.2

4.0
3.6

Consumer price index (% growth rate)
GDP deflator (% growth rate)

4.5
...

..

3.8
3.7

3.5
3.6

3.5
3.6

Annex B6
Page 3 of 4

MauritaniaCAS
Selected Indicators Table
Base-case (most likely) projection

1997

199

1999

2000

200

200

21003 2004

2005

Part A: Main Macro Aggregates
Annualgrowth rates, calculatedfromconstant
1985price data
GDP(mp) percapita
Total consumption per capita
GDP at market prices
Total consumption
Private consumption
Gross domestic investment (GDI)
Gross dom. fixed investment (GDFI)
Exports (GNFS)
of which Goods
Imports (GNFS)
of which Goods
Savings-investment balances, as percentage of
GDP
Gross Domestic investment
of which Government investment

0.4
-1.9

0.9
6.4

1.3
-2.6

2.3
3.6

1.9
1.4

2.4
2.2

2.8
3.0

3.3
2.9

3.7
3.3

3.2
0.9
1.0
15.9
15.9

3.7
9.3
9.1
0.0
0.0

4.1
4.2
3.7
-8.9
-8.9

5.1
0.0
-0.5
41.3
41.3

4.6
6.3
1.3
-4.8
-4.8

5.0
4.1
0.7
6.4
6.4

5.5
4.8
4.8
14.0
14.0

6.1
5.7
3.2
10.0
10.0

6.4
5.5
4.6
10.3
10.3

-7.3
9.0
-11.8 -7.4
13.7 -1.1
0.7 -14.9

8.7
7.8
14.8
13

-2.2
-3.9
4.8
4

-4.0
-4.6
9.9
7

5.5
5.4
9.6
7

7.9
8.1
8.0
5

7.3
7.2
7.2
13

-18.3
-17.8
-11.6
-6.4

17.6
5.6

19.0
5.6

17.5
5.8

30.3
7.5

26.7
8.3

24.7
10.7

26.9
11.4

27.8
11.9

28.5
12.2

Foreign savings
Gross national savings

-0.1
17.6

3.6
15.4

-2.2
21.7

-0.8
31.1

5.7
21

-3.8
28.5

5.7
21.2

5.9
21.9

6.8
21.7

Gross domestic savings

7.9

5

6.3

18.4

14

6

7.6

7.6

7.8

9.4
6.2
188.5 209.5

6.1
240.0

5
254.3

3.6

3.7

3.6

3.6

..

..

..

..

Other
GDP implicit deflator (% change)
Annual average exchange rate (LCU/US$)
Index real average exchange rate (YR85 =100)

Termsoftradeindex(YR85=100)
Incremental capital-output ratio (GDI based)
Import elasticity with respect to GDP
Money growth

5.4
151.9
66.2

118.7
6.7
-203.5
8.0

..

..

..

117 105.3
6.5
5.7
381.5 -83.4
4.1
5.1

..

110
4.0
122.2
12.6

115.8
5.9
192.6
17.3

(contn 'd)

107.7 107.7 108.7 110.1
4.8
4.5
4.5
4.3
-18.4 86.2 85.9 75.8
9.1
..

Annex B6
Page 4 of 4

MauritaniaCAS
Selected Indicators Table
Esdmate

Projecdon

1997

1998

1999

2000

2001 2002

2003 2004

2005

27.0
15.7
22.7
9.7
4.3

27.1
15.7
25.0
10.0
2.2

27.9
14.9
25.8
10.6
2.2

25.9
14.8
30.3
10.6
-4.5

21.1
14.2
26.7
9.9
-5.6

37.1
14.4
30.8
11.2
6.3

28.8
14.4
31
11.0
-2.2

27.7
14.6
30.9
11.1
-3.1

26.7
14.6
30.9
11.0
-4.2

...
...
...

...
...
...

...
...
...

6.4
-7.8
0.2

6.0
-9.4
1.6

7.0
-13.3
2.8

...

...
-

--

194
18.8

214
22.4

212
22.6

189.5
22.2

212
21.1

...
19.5

18.1

15.8

14.4

2456
194
106.5

2444
214
92

2033
219
107

...
...
...
...
123.4 120.8 104.6

102.2

29.8

20

22.5

24.6

15.5

12.3

11

10.3

10

4.3

4.1

5.4

6.5

6.3

7.5

7

6.9

6.9

36.6
17.7
..
21.5

35.8
19.9
...

38.1
21.2
...
*-

Part B: Government Finance Indicators
Percentage of GDP
Total revenues, of which
Tax revenues
Total expenditures, of which
Govemmentconsumption
Deficit(-)/Surplus(+) excl grants
Financing:
Foreign (external net)
Monetary sector
Other domestic
Other
Total Debt/GDPmp
Total interest payments/Tax revenues
Part C: Debt & Liquidity Indicators
Total DOD and TDS
DOD (US$ millions)
DOD / GDPmp ratio
TDS (US$ millions) before debt relief
TDS/Exports (XGS) ratio exci arrears
reduction
Total gross reserves (months' imports G&S)
Part D: External Financing Plan
(USS, millions)
Official transfers
Private investment (net)
Net Long term borrowing exci IMF
Adjustments to scheduled debt service
Financing Requirements (incl IMF)
of which current account deficit
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f

70 112
-3.3 -0.3
...
...
49.0 44.5
...
...

...
...

1766 2043.6
189
...
120
120

81.4
0.0
...
42.4

66
40.0
..
105.6

42.2
14.4
.
46.7

-18.8
-41.0

11.1
-58.1

-97.5
-82.6

If GDP components are estimated at factor cost, a footnote indicating "Data-YR" fact should be added.
"GNFS" denotes "goods and nonfactor services."
Includes net unrequitted transfers excluding official capital grants.
Includes use of IMF resources
Should indicate the level of the govemment to which the data refer.
"LCU" denotes "local currency units." An increase in US$/LCU denotes apprec

38.4
18.7
...
-

0.9 -76.7 -72.8
-83
0.2 -97.3 -101.3 -199.9

Annex B7
Page 1 of 1

MauritaniaCAS

Key Exposure Indicators
Projection

Estimate
1997

1998

1999

2444 2033.1

2002

2003

2000

2001

1766

2043.6

...

...

2004 2005
...

...

Total debt outstanding and
disbursed (TDO) (US$m)a

2456

Net disbursements (US$m)'

-18

-4.8

-38.2

-8.4

-29.7

-31.7

-32.7

-27.2 -25.2

Total debt service (TDS)

106

92

107

120

120

123.4

120.8

104.6 102.2

...
194

612.5
214

559.8
212

393
189.5

...
212

.
...

...
.

...

...

29.8

20

22.5

24.6

15.5..

12.3

11.0

10.3

10

2.2
62.9
0.5
6

2.3
77.8
0.5
3

2.1
77.8
0.5
1

1.9
73.9
0.4
2

...

...
...

...
...

.
...
...
...

...
373

398

.....
415

...
440

...

...

...

...

...

...

...

...

...

(Us$m)a before debt relief

Debt and debt service indicators (%)
TDO/XGSb
TDO/GDP
TDS/XGS
IBRD exposure indicators (%)
IBRD DS/public DS
Preferred creditor DS/public DS (%)
IBRD DS/XGS
IBRD TDO (US$m)d
Of which present value of
guarantees (US$m)
Share of IBRD portfolio (%)
IDA TDO (US$m)d

IFC (US$m)
Loans
Equity and quasi-equity /c

...
...

MIGA
MIGA guarantees (US$m)

...

...

*-

*-

...

...

...

Annex B8
Page 1 of 2

MauritaniaCAS

IFC for Mauritania
Mauritania
Statement of IFC's
Held and Disbursed Portfolio
As of 12/31/2001
(In US Dollars Millions)
Held
FY Approval
1997
1996
1997
1997
1996/00
0
1999

Company

Loan

AEF Codipal
AEF Mayo Fish
AEF STEP
BMCI
GBM
PAL-Tiviski
SEF Lemhar

Total Portfolio:

Equity

Disbursed
Quasi

Partic Loan

Equity Quasi

0
0
0.56
5.45
7
0.44
0.39

0
0
0
0
0
0
0

0.47
0.17
0
0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0
0
0
0

0
0
0.56
5.45
7
0
0

0
0
0
0
0
0
0

0.47
0.17
0
0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0
0
0
0

13.84

0

0.64

0

13.01

0

0.64

0

Approvals Pending Commitment
Loan

Partic

Equity

Quasi

Partic

Annex B8
Page 2 of 2

MauritaniaCAS
Bank Group Operations Portfolio (IBRD/IDA and Grants)
As Of Date 04/0212002
Closed Projects
IBRD/IDA I
Total Disbursed
(Active)
of which has
been repaid
Total Disbursed
(Closed)
of which has
been repaid
Total Disbursed
(Active +Closed)
of which has
been repaid
Total Undisbursed
(Active)
Total Undisbursed
(Closed)
Total Undisbursed
(Active +Closed)

51
89.3
0.00
603.1
114.8
692.4
114.8
203.0
1.4
204.4

Active Proiects
Last PSR
Supervision Rating
Project ID

Project Name

P064570
P071308

Cultural Heritage
Education Sector Devt.
Program
General Education
Global Distance Learning
Center
Health Sector Investment
Integrated Devt Program
(PDIAIM)
Mining Sector Capacity
Building
Telecom. & Postal Reform
Energy/Water/Sanitation
Regional Power
Nutrition (LIL)
Natural Resources Mgmt
(PGRNP)
Urban Development Program

P001857
P071881
P035689
P044711
P057875
P063791
P066345
P046650
P055003
P001875
P069095
Overall result

Develooment Imolement.
Obiectives
Proaress
S
S
S
S

Fiscal
Year
2000
2002

Oriainal Amount In USS
Millions
IBRD
IDA GRANT Cancel. Undisb.

Difference Between
Expected and Actual
Disbursements"
Orig.

5
49.2

3.7
49.2

2.1

S
Not effective

1995
2002

35
3.3

5.8
3.3

32.1
1.3

S
S

S
S

1998
2000

24
38.1

14.2
22.4

11.6
29.5

S

S

1999

15

8.4

3.6

HS
S
U
S
S

S
S
U
S
S

1999
2000
1997
1999
1997

10.8
9.9
11.1
4.9
18

6.4
6.2
3.3
3
7.1

6.2
5.8
3.4
1.7
6

S

S

2002
Result

70
294.3

70
203.0

S
Not effective

4.8
108.1

Frm Revd

8.2

2.6

10.8

Annex B9
Page 1 of 5

MauritaniaCAS

CAS PROGRAM MATRIX
PRSP
OBJECTIVES

GIRM's STRATEG'

-

SELECTED GIRM & WBG PROGRESS
BENCHMARKS

_________.________________.________

Accelerating
Private SectorLed Growth

Maintaining macroeconomic stability . Maintain stable macro-framework
* Ensure sustained and diversified real economic
growth

WBG INSTRUMENTS
AND TIMING (* DENOTES
HIGH CASE)

* PRSC (FY03- 04- 05)
* CEM (FY03)
* Econ. Regulation (FY03)

OTHER
DEVELOPMENT
PARTNERS
IMF, EU, AfDB, FR, UN

* Ensure fiscal and external position
* Satisfactory implementation of PRSP

* PRSP monitoring (FY03-04-

. Develop competition in the financial
sector and stimulate savings

* Implementation of financial sector development

* Financial Sector Reform

study recommendations
* Develop appropriate savings mobilization
instruments

(FY03)
* PDIAIM I (FY00), PDIAIM
II (FY05)*

. Fostering incentive framework for
private sector

*Application of revised codes for business laws
* Reduction and simplification of direct and indirect

* PRSC (FY03-04-05)
IMF, FR, UNDP
* Economic Regulation (FY03)
* Labor Market Study (FY04) *
* IDF for Judicial Reform and

tax system
* Suppression of obstacles.to competition and
progressive expansion of the jurisdiction of the
regulatory authority
. Improve the economy's
attractiveness to foreign investment

* Reduce cost of doing business (transport, water,

electricity, telecomm.) and foster private
participation in all sectors
* Promotion of export sectors: mines, tourism,
fishing, agriculture and livestock
* Increase volume/value of non-traditional exports

05)
* IDF for PRSP implementation
(FY03)
IMF, FR, GER

Private Sector Development

* PRSC ((FY03-04-05)
* Water Supply Project (FY04)
* Mining Sector Capacity

Building Project and
Supplemental Credit (FY9903)
* Telecoms &Postal Reform
Project, PDIAIM (FY00),
PDIAIM 11 (FY05) *
* PGRNP I (FY97), PGRNP II
(FY05)
* MIGA & IFC activities
* Private participation in
infrastructure (FY04) *
* Legal and Regulatory

IMF, FR, WTO, UNDP,
UNTAC, ITC, IFAD, FAO

Annex B9
Page 2 of 5

MauritaniaCAS

PRSP
OBJECTIVES

GIRAM's STRATEGY-i

SELECTED GIRM & WBG PROGRESS
BENCHMARKS

WBG
W
INSTRUMENTS
AND TIMING (* DENOTES
HIGH CASE)

* Develop livestock potential, increase
its productivity and exports

* Diversify agricultural production
and improve the productivity of
small farmers

Fostering Basic
Infrastructure to
Support Growth

. Increase the supply, quality and
accessibility of basic infrastructures

* Integrate livestock sector into economy
* Implementation of Farming Code

* Implementation of priority investment program
* implementation of a support program for small
facilities to develop livestock by-products for
export
* Consolidation of opening up of agricultural
production
* Support for diversification for domestic and
intemational markets, and training for small
farmers
* Implementation of the national agronomics
research plan and improvement of extension
services
* Improve marketing channels for inputs and
agricultural products
* Implementation of rural infrastructure program
(construction of roads and works to open up arid
areas)
* Revision of land instruments to facilitate access to

OTHER
DEVELOPMENT
PARTNERS

Framework for Oil Sector
(FY03)
__Consultative Group (FY05)
* PGRNP I (FY97) - PGRNP II FR, FAO, IFAD
(FY05)
* Agriculture statistics (FY05)*
* Rural business development
services (FY05)*
* PDIAIM I (FY97) -PDIAIM

EU, FR, GER, AfDB,
II (FY05)*
IDB, IFAD, FAO
* PGRNP I (FY97) - PGRNP II
(FY05)
* Rural business Development
Services (FY05)*
* Gender Assessment (FY03)*

* Urban Dev. Prog. (FY02)
EU, FADES, AfDB, IDB,
real property, particularly for the poor
* PRSCs (FY03-04-05)
FR, GER, UNDP
* Implementation of the Urban Development
* Energy/Water/Sanitation
Program
Project (FY00)
* Extension of program providing access to low-cost * PDIAIM I (FY00), PDIAIM
housing
11 (FY05)*, PRGNP I (FY97),
* Private sector participation in the delivery of basic
PRGNP II (FY05)
services - water, energy, sanitation
* Water Supply Project (FY04)
*Issues and Perspectives of the
Housing Sector (FY04)*
* Private Participation in
Infrastructure (FY04)*

Annex B9
Page 3 of 5

MauritaniaCAS

PRSP
OBJECTIVES

GIRM's STRATEGY
___________

SELECTED GIRM & WBG PROGRESS
BENCHMARKS
_________________________________

* Promote development of areas of
extreme poverty and involvement of
local communities

* Continuation of regional and local programs to

* Promote employment, microfinance, micro- and small businesses

* Consolidation and extension of micro-credit

* Improve the natural resources
management and protect the
environment

* Implementation of international conventions on
the environment and PANE
* Improve management of renewable and nonrenewable resources
* Enhance the legal and institutional framework for
environmental management

combat poverty involving local groups and NGOs

programs
* Continuation and implementation of program to
incorporate young graduates to the labor market, in
collaboration with the private sector
* Improve legal and institutional framework of the
craft industry
* Expand the geographic reach of the micro-finance
program
* Increase the monetarization of farm and artisanal
fisheries output
* Promote income-generating activities

WBG INSTRUMENTS
AND TIMING (* DENOTES

OTHER
DEVELOPMENT
PARTNERS

* PRSCs (FY 03-04-05)
* PDIAIM I (FY00), PDIAIM
11 (FY05)*, PGRNP I
(FY97), PGRNP II (FY05)
* PDU (FY02)
* PRSP monitoring

EU, FADES, AfDB, IDB,
FR, GER, UNDP

~~~~~~HIGH
CASE)

* IDF for PRSP implementation
* Financial Sector Adjustment

IMF, GER, UIN, FR,
Project (FY03)
AfDB,
* Labor Market Study (FY04)*
* IDF on Legal Status of
Women
* IDF for PRSP implementation
* Gender Assessment (FY03)*

* Natural Resource

Management Capacity
Building project (FY05)
* Mining Sector Capacity
Building Project and
Supplemental Credit (FY99,
03)
* Regulatory framework for oil
sector (FY03)
* Regional Program for
Traditional Energy Sources
(on-going)

EU, IFAD, FR, GR, UN,
,N

Annex B9
Page 4 of 5

MauritaniaCAS

GIRM's STRATEGY

PRSP
OBJECTIVES
Developing
Human
Resources and
Ensuring
Universal
Access to Basic
Infrastructure
and Services

SELECTED GIRM & WBG PROGRESS
BENCHMARKS

:

________________________
._____________________:__________

.

Raise access, equity, and both
internal and external efficiency, and
quality of the education

* Satisfactory implementation of the Education

Improve the health status and
indicators, reduce the burden of
expenditures on health on the poor;
and promote participation

* Satisfactory implementation of on-going Health

. Improve supply of and access to
quality drinking water

. Promote access to universal services
(drinking water, electricity, mail,
NTIC) among population groups in
disadvantaged areas

Sector Development Program

Sector Investment Project and Nutrition LIL
* Preparation and launching of a Multi-Sectoral
HIV/AIDS and Communicable Diseases Project

* Improve the living conditions of the population of

Nouakchott by increasing the quality/quantity of
potable water available
* Involvement of the private sector in financing,
management and maintenance of infrastructures
* Strengthening of the capacities of new operators
*promote integrated universal services solutions
and implementation of its infrastructure
development program
* Implement postal reform
* Establishment of a transparent legal framework to
provide incentives for NTIC operators

WBG INSTRUMENTS
AND TIMING (* DENOTES

OTHER
DEVELOPMENT

HIGH CASE)

PA RTN ERS

* ESDP First phase (FY02)
* Distance Learning Center
Project (FY02)
* IDF on Legal Status of
Women
* General Education project
(extended to 12/31/02)
* Labor Market Study (FY04)*
* Gender Assessment (FY03)*
* PRSC (FY03-04-05)
* Health Sector Investment
Project (FY98)
* Nutrition LIL (FY99)

FR, AfDB, IDB, UN, JN

EU, AfDB, IDB, UN,
FADES, FR, GER

* Multi-Sectoral HIV/AIDS
and Communicable Diseases
Project (FY03)
* Market dynamics in the
health sector (FY04)*
* Gender Assessment (FY03)*
* Water Supply project (FY04) FADES, AfDB, EU, IDB,
FR, GER, JN
* PRSC (FY03-04-05)
* Energy/Water/Sanitation
Project (on-going)
* Gender Assessment
* Urban Development

Program (FY02)
* PRSC (FY03-04-05)
* Telecoms & Postal Reform
project (on-going)
* Energy/Water/Sanitation

Project (on-going)
* Private Participation in
Infrastructure (FY04)*
* Gender Assessment (FY03)*

FADES, AfDB, EU, IDB,
FR

Annex B9
Page 5 of 5

MauritaniaCAS

PRSP
OBJECTIVES

GIRM's STRATEGY

SELECTED GIRM & WBG PROGRESS
BENCHMARKS

WBG INSTRUMENTS
AND TIMING (* DENOTES

OTHER
DEVELOPMENT

HIGH CASE)

PARTNERS

________________________
________________________________

Institutional

.

Strengthening the judiciary system

Development
and Govemance

* Continuation ofjudicial reform
* Implementation of a program to strengthen judicial
capacities and infrastructures

* PRSC (FY03-04-05)
* IDF for Legal Status of
Women

FR, UN

* IDF Judicial Reform &
Private Sector (FY02)
. Reform public sector

* E-Government

* PRSC (FY03-04-05)

EU, FR, GER

. Decentralize public administration

* Strengthen local govemments responsive to

FR

population needs
* Decentralize delivery of public services

* Urban Development
UranDeeomn
Program (FY02)

* Strengthen management and monitoring

* CFAA (FY03)

mechanism of public resources
* Computerization of expenditures

* IDF for Procurement Reform
(FY03)

IMF, EU, UNDP, FR,
GER

* Submission of budget closure law to Parliament
* Support to the government Audit Office for audits
and preparation of its annual report
* Develop multi-sectoral framework for medium
term expenditures

* PRSP implementation (FY03)

* Assess impact of poverty-related public
expenditures upon priority sectors

* PRSCs (FY03-04-05)
* Consultative Group (FY05)

_ Improve the management of public
resources and accountability

* PRSP monitoring
* CAS (FY05)
* WBI learning program

(FY02-03-04-05)

* Improve coordination of aid
* Increase absorptive capacity
* Implement good governance action-plan
. Building capacity

* Implementation of the Capacity Building

Programs

*Natural Resource Mgmt
Capacity Building Project
(FY05)
* Mining Sector Capacity
Building Project and
Supplemental Credit (FY99,
03)

* WBI LP

IMF, UNDP, AfDB, FR,
GER

Annex B10
1 of 1

MauritaniaCAS Page

CAS Summary of Development Priorities
As Of Date 04/0212002

Network area

Country

Major issue'
8

perfornance

Country

Bank

pfiorityC

pniority'

Poverty Reduction & Economic Management
Poverty reduction
Economic policy
Public sector
Gender
Human Development Department
Education
Health, nutrition & population
Social protection

Good
Good
Good
Good

Rural poverty
None
Civil service reform
Inequality

High
High
Medium
Medium

High
High
Medium
Medium

Excellent
Good
Good

Quality
Primary care
Vulnerable groups

High
High
High

High
High
High

Good
Fair
Good

Crop diversification
Desertification
Inequality

High
Medium
High

High
Medium
High

Good
Good
Good
Good

Promote financial intermediation
Eliminate remaining admin. barriers
Private investment
Water supply provision to main cities

High
Medium
Medium
High

High
Medium
Medium
High

Environmentally & Socially Sustainable Development
Rural development
Environment
Social development
Finance, Private Sector & Infrastructure
Financial sector
Private sector
Energy & mining
Infrastructure

a. Use 'excellent,' "good," "fair," or"poor."
b. Indicate principal country-specific problems (e.g., for poverty reduction, "rural poverty;" for education, 'female secondary completion;"
for environment, "urban air pollution").
c. To indicate priority, use "low," "medium," or "high."
d. Give explanation, if priorities do not agree; for example, another MDB may have the lead on the issue, or there may be ongoing
dialogue.

