Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized

Document of
The World Bank

Report No. 24783-POL

MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENT
OF THE
INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT

Public Disclosure Authorized

AND THE
INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION
TO THE
EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS
ON A
COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
FOR

Public Disclosure Authorized

THE REPUBLIC OF POLAND

November 13, 2002

CURRENCY EQUIVALENT
(Exchange rate as of October 17, 2002)
Currency Unit = zloty (PLN)
US$1 = PLN 4.12
PLN I = US$0.24

GOVERNMENT' S FISCAL YEAR
January I to December 31

ABBREVIATIONS& ACRONYMS
CAS
EIB
EMU
EU
FDI
FSAP
GDLN
GDP
GEF
GUS
IAS
IBRD
IDF
IFC
ILO
KRUS
MPC
NIK
OECD
OED
PCF
PLN
PPO
RDP
SAPARD
SECAL
SIM
SOE
ZUS

Country Assistance Strategy
European Investment Bank
European Monetary Union
European Union
Foreign Direct Investment
Financial Sector Assessment Program
Global Distance Leaming Network
Gross Domestic Product
Global Environment Facility
Central Statistics Office
International Accounting Standards
Intemational Bank for Reconstruction and Development
Institutional Development Fund
Intemational Finance Corporation
International Labor Organization
Farmers' Social Security System
Monetary Policy Council
Supreme Chamber of Control
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development
Operations Evaluation Department of the World Bank
Proto-type Carbon Fund
Polish zloty
Public Procurement Office
Rural Development Program
Special Assistance Program for Agricultural and Rural Development
Sector Adjustment Loan
Sector Investment and Maintenance Loan
State-owned Enterprise
Social Insurance Institution

The World Bank Group Team Responsible for this CAS
IFC
IBRD
Assad Jabre
Vice President:
Johannes Linn
Vice President:
Edward A. Nassim
Director:
Roger W. Grawe
Country Director:
Country Manager: Laurence Carter
Pawel Kaminski / Chris Hall
CAS Team Leader:
CAS Team Members: Poland Country Team

Table of Contents

i

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY ....................
I. INTRODUCTION .1
II. COUNTRY CONTEXT

1

..

Political scene .
Macroeconornic trends .
:.4
Social Context ........
EU accession .............................................................
Environment

6
.6

III. POLAND'S DEVELOPMENT AGENDA

.6

.7
Reforming Public Finance
Restoring Growth - Increasing Employment and Public Investment .10
IV. ECONOMIC PROSPECTS AND EXTERNAL ENVIRONMENT .14
External financing.15
V. THE BANK GROUP'S ASSISTANCE PROGRAM .15
Learning from past experience .15
The Bank Group's role.
The Bank Group's assistance program .18
Country creditworthiness and Bank exposure .22
Coordination with other partners .........
VI. RISKS .27
VII. CONCLUDING REMARKS .28

6

26
26.........

TEXT TABLES

Table 1: Key Economic Indicators, 1996-2002 .......................................................
Table 2: Savings-Investment Balance, 1997-2002 ......................................................
Table 3:
Table 4:
Table 5:
Table 6:
Table 7:
Table 8:

Local Poverty Indicators ...........................................................
.............................
Projected Outcomes of Reform Scenarios ..............................
External Financing ...........................................................
FY03-05 Lending and Non-Lending Activities ......................................................
Indicative Lending Program (US$ millions) ...........................................................
Poland and the Millennium Development Goals ...........................................................

2
3
4

14
15
21
21
29

TEXT BOXES
Box 1: Portfolio Management in Poland ........................................................... 17
.......................................... 22
Box 2: Activities Supporting Good Govemance .................
Box 3: Triggers for Bank Lending Program ........................................................... 24
TEXT FIGURES
Figure
Figure
Figure
Figure

1:
2:
3:
4:

Employment Structure by Wages and Gender, Poland 1999 ...................................................... 5
Social security and welfare (% of total expenditure and net lending, 2000) ................................. 7
22
Poland's Sovereign US$ Eurobond Spreads ...........................................................
Coordination of Future External Assistance to Poland ........................................................... 26
ANNEXES

Annex Al:
Annex A2:
Annex B2:
Annex B3:
Annex B3:
Annex B4:
Annex B5:
Annex B6:
Annex B7:
Annex B8:
Annex B8:
Annex B9:
Annex B1O:
Annex BI 1:
Annex B 12:

Key Economic & Program Indicators-Changes from Last CAS
Poland at a Glance
Selected Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
IBRD Program Summary
IFC and MIGA Program
Summary of Non-Lending Services
Social Indicators
Key Economnic Indicators
Key Exposure Indicators
Operations Portfolio (IBRD and Grants)
Statement of IFC's Held and Disbursed Portfolio
eAS Summary of Development Priorities
CAS Matrix FY03-05
Coordination of Extemal Assistance to Poland
Consultations with Representatives of the Civil Society on the World Bank's Country
Assistance Strategy for Poland

Map

IBRD 26058R

MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE
INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT
AND THE INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION
TO THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS ON A
COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY OF THE WORLD BANK GROUP
FOR POLAND
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
i.

The Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) for Poland builds on four basic propositions:
a. Poland remains a creditworthy, low risk, sophisticated upper middle-income borrower;
b. Nevertheless, Poland's current situation is characterized by persistent and serious structural
problems that impair its capacity to sustain its growth potential and reduce poverty;
c. In this context, the Polish authorities foresee a continuing role for World Bank assistance in the
-short to medium terrn, even as Poland prepares to join the European Union (EU), with all the
additional challenges of economic adjustment and management that entails; and
d. The proposed World Bank response builds on its broad experience in Poland, but with a marked
increase in selectivity and an explicit link to the policy framework supporting each proposed
activity, recognizing the time-bound nature of the Bank's likely involvement in Poland.

ii.
After a remarkable economic transfornation and record of achievement over the past decade, and
just as the country is poised to enter the EU, Poland is now facing a number of serious economic problems.
Though inflation has declined impressively to just over I percent per annum and the current account deficit
has improved from 7.5 percent of GDP in 1999 to 3.6 percent in 2002, overall economic growth has slowed
from 5 percent per annum over the 1990s to presently about 1 percent Per annum and unemployment has
risen rapidly to over 17 percent. With poverty particularly associated with low levels of human capital and
lack of employment, Poland's good record of cutting the incidence of poverty during the 1990s is at risk.
in.
The last Poland CAS was prepared in 1997, and a CAS Progress Report was discussed by the Board
in 1999. Since that time, Poland ably weathered the Russia crisis with economic growth averaging 4 percent
per annum during 1998 and 1999. However, the loss of export mnarkets to the east at the onset of the Russia
crisis triggered a new round of enterprise restructuring, whose positive impact on productivity did not
translate into a new round of growth or employment creation as it occurred at the same time that the
macroeconomnic framework became increasingly unbalanced: concerns over inflation caused the monetary
authorities to raise interest rates to high levels, and with large general government deficits - rising from 2.8
percent of GDP in 2000 to 6.7 percent of GDP in 2002 - real interest rates remained high, and private
investment fell significantly (gross fixed capital formation grew by less than 3 percent in 2000 and fell by 10
percent in 2001). By 2001 low domestic demand combined with sluggish economies in Poland's trading
partners and a substantial real effective appreciation of the zloty led to the growth slowdown.
iv.
Poland's unfinished structural reforms exacerbate the impact of the unbalanced macro-policy mix
and represent a substantial barrier to faster sustainable growth. Key medium-term structural issues include:
a)

strengthening the effectiveness of government expenditures and programs through:
* better composition of public expenditure with reduced outlays on social transfers and lower
subsidies to the large, inefficient, inadequately restructured state enterprises (such as coal,
railways and steel), thereby freeing up resources for increased and much-needed public
infrastructure investment; and
* more effective public administration by building capacities, strengthening budget management,
improving accountability and reducing corruption at all levels of government, and by
completing systemic reforms in education, health, local government and the pension system;
and
b) enhancing private sector-led growth. enterprise entry and job creation through an improved business
environment, labor mnarket reforrns and reducing the currently high payroll taxation, modernized
infrastructure, and initiatives promoting a knowledge-based society.

-

jj -

In January 2002. the Government announced an economic program which addresses many of these
v.
challenges. The prograrm, with its later revisions of July 2002, sets out to restore fiscal equilibrium and
hence to rebalance macroeconomic policies, restructure public expenditure by increasing public spending on
development and infrastructure while lowering expenditure on social transfers, strengthen public
administration including at sub-national levels, create a more encouraging environment for enterprise entry
and job creation through more flexible labor market policies, develop agriculture and the rural economy, and
complete the far-reaching public sector decentralization that was begun 3-4 years ago. The program
identifies education and health reforms, further poverty reduction, and the remaining enterprise restructuring
and privatization agenda as priorities. With accession to the EU as the major near-term goal, the
Government's program recognizes the need to strengthen public administration for the implementation of
new and often complex policies under the acquis communautaire, to increase absorptive capacities for
maximum utilization of EU pre-accession and structural funds, to build Poland's capacity to compete within
the EU, and to prepare for participation in the European Monetary Union (EMU).
vi.
The 1997 CAS identified four priorities for World Bank/IFC support: sustaining private sector
growth; managing the transformation of the state in support of the market economy; achieving
environmental sustainability; and enhancing the social sustainability of reforms. By 1999, as that year's
CAS Progress Report reflected, the Bank's program had evolved to one sharply focused on the structural
reform agenda for EU accession and real convergence. Since 1999, this has included advisory assistance on
the overall reform agenda, public expenditure composition and transparency, incentives for agriculture
reform, anti-corruption and roads financing; and lending assistance for coal sector restructuring, railway

reforms, rural development, infrastructure (roads, ports), environmental sustainability and energy efficiency.
While Poland's per capita income (US$4,230 in 2001) is 18 percent below the threshold at which
vii.
discussions on fornal graduation would normally commence, the Polish authorities wish to regard this as a
pre-graduation CAS. Based on the view that focused Bank support can help achieve its reform goals, the
Government has endorsed continuing World Bank assistance in a limited number of areas. In light of
Poland's ability to access other funding sources and of increasing constraints on the administrative budget
resources that the Bank can devote to Poland, Bank support would be provided selectively based on its
contribution to one or more of the following:
a) systemic reforms with lending based on an explicit, mutually agreed reform strategy;
b) institutional development to facilitate access to EU or other resources, or improve performance in
areas not covered in the EU accession negotiations; and
c) a consolidated or coordinated approach among Poland's partners.'
In addition this CAS identifies a base case lending program of up to US$1.3 billion during FY03viii.
05, so long as agreed macroeconomicandproject-specific triggers are met. Lending would be linked to an
improving macroeconomic framework as evidenced by a continuous improvement in public savings totaling
at least I percent of GDP by 2005 compared with the 2002 level, which will entail both fiscal deficit
In addition to promoting a rebalanced
reduction and an improved composition of expenditure.
macroeconomic framework, analytic work and new lending would be organized around two specific
objectives:
a) improving the effectiveness of Government expenditures and programs
* areas for analytic work and dialogue: public expenditure and institutional analysis; living
standards analysis; pensions, anti-corruption
* areas for potential lending: health sector reform; education sector reform
b) enhancing private sector-led growth and employment creation
* areas for analytic work and dialogue: labor market reform; competition policy; energy policy;
knowledge economy
* areas for potential lending: coal sector restructuring; enterprise restructuring; rural
development; roads
This approach is consistent with that set out in the Frameworkfor World Bank Group Support to European
Union (EU) Accession Candidate Countries of Central andEastern Europe (SecM2001-0564, October 10, 2001).

- iii -

The Bank would take a lead role in assisting systemic reforms in health and education given the less
ix.
substantial involvement of other partners. In coal, lending would represent the culmination of the Bank's
corrmitment begun in 1999 to assist Poland in restructuring and privatizing this key sector; the emphasis
under this CAS would be on mitigating the social impact of further restructuring under a mutually agreed
plan which would lead to a sustainable privately owned coal sector. The Bank's potential role in lending for
roads and rural development reflects not only their importance to growth and poverty reduction but also the
role that the Government would like the Bank to play in coordinating and consolidating the support of other
partners by supporting appropriate policies and institutions. The Bank will also act as executing agency for
a limited number of GEF/PCF projects aimed at generating global environmental benefits, provided they
have significant demonstration effects. The IFC will contribute technical assistance and lending in areas
where its participation would be expected to yield significant results in terms of development impact, social
benefits and institutional development. IFC expects to undertake relatively few investments, although if the
Government accelerates the privatization of some of the remaining major state-owned financial and
infrastructure assets, IFC could participate.
Poland's external debt is moderate by international standards. Reflecting the substantial progress
x.
over the last decade, and indeed the limits on borrowing Government has set for itself, the need for the
Bank's financial assistance at the levels of the past has diminished. However, as Poland remains a
creditworthy client, the Bank stands ready to respond to Government requests up to the planned lending
levels.
Poland faces several risks to its prospects for returning to a higher growth path and to improved
xi.
social policies. The first is that failure to achieve and sustain more balanced macroeconomic policies and to
advance key structural reforms would have an adverse impact on investor confidence, macroeconomic
stability, growth prospects and real convergence following EU accession. Failure to continue adjustment in
the Government's fiscal framework leading to the monetary authorities reversing the current trend of
declining interest rates could dampen and delay economic recovery and further undermine enterprise
profitability and liquidity with subsequent pressures on unemployment and an increasing proportion of nonperforming loans. Even though the Government has prepared a credible reform program, this risk is difficult
to mitigate given the vested interests around public expenditures. However, moving early ahead with
necessary fiscal adjustments would help mitigate the risk of costly adjustments later and pressures from EU
member states, the Commission, and the accession negotiations support undertaking further reforms. The
Bank will contribute through its dialogue, project preparation activities and its ability to highlight issues for
consideration by key stakeholders. In addition, the impact of this risk on the results of Bank operations is
attenuated by the lending strategy which links decisions to proceed on individual loans to improvements in
the macroeconomic framework and to progress with the relevant structural reforms. Another risk to growth
would be a further economic slowdown in Europe. The impact would flow through the adverse effects on
Poland's exports to European markets whose contribution to GDP growth has increased significantly in
recent years. This risk would require mitigation through more stringent structural reforms that would
encourage the rejuvenation of domestic demand, especially in investment. The final risk is the timing of EU
accession. If joining the EU were to take substantially longer than now contemplated, or if a Polish
referendum results in a "no" vote and hence an indefinite delay in accession, this would undoubtedly have
significant political and economic impacts., In such an event, the Bank would need to reassess plans for
work in Poland. This risk now appears to be rapidly declining; but there are still some significant steps
remaining.
This CAS benefited from and reflects substantial public dialogue which took place during the spring
xii.
and summer of 2002 in several cities in Poland with a range of civil society groups including representatives
of NGOs, academia, the media, think-tanks, politicians, and business and professional associations, in
addition to the Government.
The Executive Directors may wish to discuss the following questions:

xiii.
*

Does the Board agree that the Poland Country Assistance Strategy is appropriately consistent with
the Frameworkfor World Bank Group Support to EU Accession Countries of Central and Eastern

- iv -

Europe, the Bank's policies for engaging middle income countries, and the Bank's graduation

poli.^y?
*

Are the strategic pillars of the CAS - improving the effectiveness of Government expenditures and
programns, enhancing private sector-led growth and employment creation, while promoting a
rebalancing of the macroeconomic policy framework - appropriate, and does the assistance program
reflect these priorities?

* In light of the economic challenges facing Poland and in view of the country's objective to join the
EU in the coming years, does the Board concur with the selective approach to lending and the
increased prominence of analytic work?

MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE
INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT
AND THE INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION
TO THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS ON A
COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY OF THE WORLD BANK GROUP
FOR POLAND
I. INTRODUCTION
This document presents the World Bank Group Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) for Poland for
1.
the period FY03-05. This is a joint Bank-IFC strategy and presents planned programs for both institutions
under a unified framework. The document reflects a significant amount of discussion with Government and
a series of consultations with civil society in Poland.
Despite a remarkable record of achievement over the past decade, Poland faces considerable
2.
economic challenges in the period ahead. A major priority of the new Government is Poland's accession to
the EU, but it also faces the need for further structural and institutional reforns not formally required by EU
accession. Over the past 2 years, growth has slowed to less than I percent per annum and, unemployment
has risen rapidly to over 17 percent. While EU accession will broaden opportunities, achieving faster
growth and reducing unemployment depends in large part on the extent to which Poland implements its
remaining agenda of structural and institutional reforms. The Polish authorities have indicated that they
welcome continued Bank assistance, in partnership with others, to help Poland achieve its key development
goals for the medium-term.
II. COUNTRY CONTEXT
PoliticalScene. Poland's Government until October 2001 was led by Election Action Solidarity
3.
(the political arm of the Solidarity trade union plus other small right wing parties). A considerably smaller
coalition partner, the Freedom Union, withdrew from Government in mid-2000. The Government's
principal goals were to speed up remaining structural reforms and prepare for EU accession, while
maintaining a stable economy and sound macro-economic management. It moved ahead with the design and
initial implementation of complex reforms in four key areas: education, health, pensions, and local
government. It also made substantial progress in privatization and enterprise restructuring, and in
negotiations with the EU. However, implementation of the reforms proved to be politically costly, owing in
part to the unpopular nature of some changes, but also to ineffective implementation in some areas. By the
end of the Government's term, reform momentum had faltered and control over fiscal management had
significantly weakened.
In parliamentary elections at the end of September 2001, the Democratic Left Union and Labor
4.
Union Coalition emerged as the largest bloc by far, but fell slightly short of an overall majority. The
Coalition moved quickly to form a government with the Peasants Party thus commanding a clear majority in
both chambers of Parliament. As a result, the new Government has an opportunity to push forward the
economic reforms necessary for Poland's longer-term prosperity, though it must also take into account the
concerns of its supporters not all of whom champion change. The opposition is fairly equally divided
between the conservative Citizens Platform and Law and Justice parties, the nationalist Self-defense and the
right wing Polish Families League. The previous governing parties failed to attain parliamentary
representation.
Macroeconomic trends. The start of Poland's transition in 1990 was marked by exceptionally
5.
difficult macroeconomic conditions, which included high inflation, a large legacy of external debt, and a
high black market foreign exchange premium. Saddled with an enterprise sector that was considered in large
part "value subtracting," Polish policymakers took huge risks by liberalizing prices, making the Zloty
convertible, fixing the exchange rate and lowering import barriers. With privatization lagging, many
predicted a crisis based on the notion that enterprises would not be able to cope with market conditions,
leading to politically unacceptable mass bankruptcy and social upheaval. This did not happen. To the

-2contrary, Poland turned out to be unique among the large front-running European transition countries in
having an unbroken growth record once growth resumed after the initial output collapse.
Table 1: Key Econonic Indicators, 1996-2002
:-_
:,f'..Annuiii/Dali
GIDPGrowth (constantppnces)
.
Domestic DemandGrowth (constantprces)
Gross Domesticln vestment Growth (constant prices)
ExportsofGoods. &Services Growtb(constantprices)
Itnpon,ofGoods&Servtces,Growth(constntprices)

Current Account Balance (%/of GDP)'

.

Central Govcrnment,Revenues (%ofGDP),
an aspercentage,ofplanned
,'
,"

1996
- .-- 1997
60
6.8

9.7
-

.

10O
-

'

,

-

Central Govrnmeni Deficit(ofGDP) -.
Gcnetal Government Deficit (
-ofGDP) '

-.

'

.

:'

-' - -

_

',

.48

1999 : 2000,- 2001
200
4.1
4.0
1.0 1.2

4.8

2.8

-1.9

0.7

21.7 ; 14.2
-12.2
14.3
21.4 .18.5

6.8
-2.6
1.0

2.7
23.2 .
15.6

-9.8 |
9.3
-1.5

3.1
-4.0
.1.4

5 -4.4
.4

7 -7.5

-6.3

-4.1

' ,, ',-3.0
',

257
995
'28.1
99.2
3
23

.
.........................

1998

9.2 ,6.4

19.7
12.0
28.0

_

Central Government Expenditures (%of GDP)
as percentage9ofplanned
--.

Unemploymcasnt
f
Enploy/ment (cud of period; in thousands),',,

~

-

25,.4 ,
103.8
98.5
-2.6
- -2.9

22.9
98.1
25.2
97.4
-3.0
-2.6

32 -,10.3
-15,103 ,I5,315

-10.
15,335

. 26.6

20.5
97.4''

22.5

-

97.4
-2.0
-3.0

22.1

24.0

25,5

96.6
-2.2
-2.8

95.2
,4.5 ,
-5.3

5,4
-67

6.1

4.0

9.2

w.,v'thro'ugh changes in employment (year-on.-ydar, %chinge)'
Overall Real Wage Growth (year-on-yar, %changc)

-1R5
'5.9

-1.5
3.3

4.
4.0
4.7

1.8
. 1.0

21.0
8.6
. 24.5

21.5

24.0
,2.50
20.0

-W

Real Effctive
i<Rate'.(nclof periodch,an,F)
Excha
Nomintial' chgRa t(Pl NUS%,enid ofperiod)- -

,26.0
i)

28.0
.185. 13.2
2661
7.J-;5.O 25:0
-

6
2.8

.

- -:

.13.1 1
5.1
.
17.4 -7l
14,573 14,540 ' 14,043 .13,821 l

Labor P_roductivtylintfrbunessetr(a-oya, %change)

NBPRefinicingrute
ndofpeiod,)'
,-c ., infla'don(endofpe'riod,.year-on-year;change
Letiding
rate (peio,d avorage, jear-on-year.
h.a change).
1~c6din
-4.5

. -3.6

19.8
-1.9.5
20.1
96.3
_ v 87.3
- . , --- :

, -,04

-4.5
%4

.9.80
1-7.0
-.
e';0

-3.52

3.50

:-.4.15

.-

6.4

-

.3.9

.2.7
-,
,

3.3
16.5

-A10.
1.3
3.6 ,
3
-18.4

-13.0
4.14

-11:1

3.99

--11.2

i4oi

usid-on-ocn'caiCiWWi0s, i,

indites areductio in
in oymentr'
.
.
3iWorld Bank Staff aittaiH. anniual
esimIatts oreato o vatito;
'.4/ Ai of Sptanba 2002;,f%
X chamge
then hidicter
.has heel calcoutale
to flect 12months %chan
5/AsofanWofJunc,2002; S-.
-*- .
2VItfS-ti.t ReeR uincrea ind"caui
appciauiot; -

6/As of June 200, r*flectsh chnm
8 e fo.-t2 months paiod iding UIe 2002;.
7/AsoaO0dobir20,2001
-..-,

Sources' GUS, NBP, OECD,'IMFand Bank Staff esdmates

-.

..

.

..

.

'

-

.

-

6.
While nany factors can explain this, including consistent economic policies despite frequent
changes of Government, the main economic factor was that Poland managed the "macro-micro policy
linkages" well. At its core, this meant the maintenance of a combination of hard budget constraints for
enterprises, a competitive real exchange rate, and a post-privatization governance structure that allowed
business, in particular small and medium size enterprises, to flourish. By reducing fiscal deficits and placing
public debt on a stable and sustainable trajectory, including through debt reduction agreements with the Paris
Club, Poland was able to achieve a macroeconomic environment that was conducive to growth and allowed
a gradual decline in inflation. However, it is important to note that during the early years of transition the
restructuring process was aided by relatively easy access to social safety net programs by redundant workers.
7.
On the surface, the Russian crisis of 1998 did not seem to have affected Poland, as growth remained
robust at or above 4 percent per annum during 1998-2000 (see Table 1). However, the loss of export
markets in the East, which amounted to around 3 percentage points of GDP, triggered a new round of
enterprise restructuring to curtail falling profitability. The resulting imnprovements in productivity were
brought about in large part by reducing employment. This trend, coinciding with increased numbers of
newcomers to the labor market due to the baby boom of the early 1980s, resulted in unacceptable increases
in unemployment. By September 2002, over 3.1 million people were unemployed, or 17.6 percent of the
labor force.
8.
These developments coincided with a shift in monetary policy in 1999 and the creation of an
independent Monetary Policy Council (MPC), when inflation targeting became the main anchor of monetary
policy, consistent with eventual accession to the EMU. When inflation rebounded during 1999 and 2000
into double digits, the MPC progressively tightened monetary policy by raising its rediscount rate to a peak
of 21.5 percent in August 2000. As a result, ex-post real lending interest rates increased to over 13 percent

~

',

:

-3during 2001, up from around 10 percent during 1999-2000. As a consequence, and in combination with
possible over investment during the high growth years of 1996-1999, domestic demand and in particular
investment declined significantly starting in the second half of 2000. Inflation has indeed declined
impressively and stands as of September 2002 at a post-transition low of 1.3 percent (year-on-year).
9.
A strong rebound of export growth during 2000 initially contributed considerably to maintain GDP
growth for that year at an acceptable level of 4 percent. However, following the global slowdown in 2001,
Poland could not sustain export growth sufficient to keep overall economic growth at a high level. With
negative growth of domestic demand and falling export growth, although still at impressive levels of just
below 10 percent, GDP growth fell to a mere 1 percent in 2001. Weak import growth, due to the recession
in domestic demand, allowed the current account deficit to improve markedly to 4.1 percent of GDP in 2001.
Table 2: Savings-Investment Balance, 1997-2002

Savings-investment Balances 1997-2002
as percentage of GDP
Foreign Savings

1997
1998.
3.o% 4.4%

1999
7.5%

2000
6.3%

2001
4.1%

2002'
3.6%

Government balance
Government savings
o.w. Central Government
Governrent investment

-3.2%
0.2%
-1.4%
3.4%0

-3.3%
0.3%
-0.9%/o
3.6%

-3.4%
-0.2%
-1.2%
3.2%

-3.1%
0.1%
-1.2%
3.2%

-5.3%
-2.3%
-3.6%
3tl%

-5.7%
-2.4%
-4.1%
3.3%

Rest of the economy
Savings
Investment
Savings (excl. changes in stock)

0.2%
21.3%
21.2%
20.3%

-1.1%
21.5%
22.6%
20.4%

*4.1%
19.1%
23.2%
18.2%

-3.2%
20.1%
23.3%
18.5%

13%
21.5%
20.2%
19.8%

2.1%
21.2%
19.0%
18.5%

I/ World Bank staff estimates
Sources: GUS, IMF and Bank Staff estimates
10.
The budgetary consequences of the unfavorable economic dynamics were not recognized in time.
The Central Govermment's deficit increased significantly from a planned 2.6 percent to 4.5 percent of GDP
in 2001. These fiscal developments led to a significant deterioration in the government's savings-investment
balance despite continuation of the long-terrn trend of inadequate levels of public investment (see Table 2).
Consequently, a substantial share of net government borrowing in 2001 financed government recurrent
expenditures. This has continued during 2002, indicating difficulties with tightening of fiscal policy and
adjusting its composition. To begin tackling the emerged fiscal imbalances, the Government announced in
2001 as part of its overall economic strategy, a fiscal rule that would limit Central Government expenditure
growth to 'CPI+1 percent'. The 'CPI+l percent' rule was, however, replaced during the 2003-budget
preparation for a deficit targeting mechanism, which is to bring the General Government deficit within
Maastricht criteria in 2005 i.e. below 3 percent of GDP. The budget proposal for 2003 would lower the
General Government deficit from an expected 6.7 percent of GDP in 2002 to 6.2 percent in 2003;
expenditures are expected to increase for Central and General Government by no less than 2.2 and 2.9
percent respectively postponing the much needed fiscal adjustment to 2004-2005.
11.
Since 2001, a sub-optmal macroeconomic policy mix, with monetary policy (over) compensating
for expansionary fiscal policy, led to relatively large portfolio capital inflows and contributed to a real
appreciation of the zloty, which has hampered Polish export growth which had become a key contributor to
overall GDP growth. The recent strengthening of the Euro has partly reversed these trends, contributing to
continued positive external developments. Following announced Government commitment to contain
expenditure growth and limit deficits, and supported by falling inflation, the MPC has lowered the
intervention rate by a cumulative 1400 base points since the last interest rate hike in August 2000. Recent
rate declmes constitute real monetary loosening; nevertheless, real interest rates remain at high levels.
Further monetary loosening appears unlikely and the adequacy of the growth stimulus uncertain.

-4 The recent economnic slowdown has not significantly affected the soundness of Poland's banking
12.
system, even though non-performing loans (under Poland's strict definition) have risen from 13 percent of
total loans at the end of 1999 to about 20 percent by mid-2002. Although the 2002 profit outlook for the
banking sector is relatively low, Poland's banking system remains well capitalized. In addition and as a
follow-up to the Financial Sector Assessment undertaken jointly by the IMF and the Bank in 2000, the
National Bank of Poland with assistance from the IMF has further strengthened its stress testing capabilities.
The main source of external risk is a continued slowdown in Western European economies, since
13.
these are now Poland's main trading partners. Potentially, however, this impact need not be large, since
with appropriate policies Poland can still increase its competitiveness and therefore its penetration of
European mnarkets. Private capital flows to Poland have remained robust as to-date the markets regard
Poland as relatively low risk. However, the current global economic slowdown strengthens the case for
more rapid imnplementation of structural reforms to improve the business environment and investment
climate to realize Poland's potential for rapid economic growth and lower unemployment.
Table 3: Local Poverty Indicators
fi.-.Pop,Verlines. r ,, n,=_, ,,-_,_,
(percentofpopulation below respective
poverr level)
ffi -. -

At 54.30day',

6
,Ut4DPmeasure

Subsistence minimumn

_- _

1994 .

1992
_ v_

1999

1000

2001

-

190

-

-

1996i

-

6.4

-

~~~~

~~~~
14.9

4.3

6.9

Ta
151'
~~~~16.1,

95

170
- 17.
; 165;
14.0f
13.5
12.0
Relanvepoverry line'
,324
32
344
48
30.5
33.0
32.6
Subject) e
570
52 2
538
46.7
47.9
32.4
Social mrnimum
l basedon a sandard 5forld Bank measurrepr middle income coumnes of L'SS4.3t per day
.
) based on social assistance incomne threshold in Polandfor 1999 in subsequentfbars prices.
Jod;
.9Subsistenceminimun shows the.leveloaincomeunder hich person 's lifs in danger, basedon ileibaske rof
anddwellingcosrs only; Laref& (4QJ 200/). oneperson househdld- PiN 338 4persons hou ekOld--PLXJ916.-¾ i -*.
alofaverage rpendiiure perOECDconsumptionunit, lately. PLN 426.
4).0pe&cen
5) Subtec-ite - informs how people perceiti their situation in relarion to ihenr understanding ofpos erty Lately: one
: .
person household - PLIV 954; 4p pr.sons household - PLN1696 (or the househol4h
6) Social minanmum - tde notion of social minimum includes highe;liei neekds ike tbr examnple cultutie. So the basket of
di'l7i cosr thealth transpor and
social minirmm is wide: measures ih' costs o/lingint tkh basic leivel(foo,d. Ilotides.
corlmunicathon. educat ion, culture), Latedy one person household - PLN 754 6; J persons.household- PL/N 2231.5
Source World Bank, GUS, IPiSS, MPrPS. UNDP

Social Context
Poverty and the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs). Poverty2 still affects 7 rnillion or mne
14.
of Poland's population (about 18 percent) and is relatively more widespread compared with other advanced
transition economies of Central Europe (e.g., Hungary and Czech Republic). Other measures of poverty
vary widely depending on the use of relative versus absolute or subsistence measures, on the inclusion of
subjective elements, and on the definition of minimum needs (see Table 3). Most recent studies, based on
data before the slowdown, revealed that Poland's income poverty has tended to be shallow, i.e., most poor
people have had income not far below the poverty line and are often in transient poverty. Income poverty is
especially associated with large families, poor human capital, and lack of employment. Accordingly,
poverty is particularly prevalent for the long-term unemployed and farmers. Given the rise in
unemployment over the last few years and the increase in the incidence of long-term unemployment, it is
most likely that both the incidence and depth of poverty has increased. In addition, low productivity of the
agricultural sector associated with large hidden unemploymnent makes poverty largely a rural phenomenon.
2 Based on the Bank standard poverty line of US$4.30 a day, which is calculated based on nationally determined
minimum food basket plus an allowance for nonfood expenditures adjusted for the middle income group of countries.
Source: Making Transition Workfor Everyone: Poverty and Inequality in Europe and Central Asia; World Bank, 2000.

This for the most part explains the regional variation in poverty, which is concentrated in those regions that
depend heavily on agriculture (eastern regions in particular). Poland's income inequality is moderate,
3
approximnately the same as for Germany (Gini coefficient for Poland is 31 and 30 for Germany) and slightly
higher than for Hungary and the Czech Republic (24 and 25 respectively) and has been roughly stable during
second half of 1990s. Table 8 reflects where Poland stands in meeting the MDG goals; it underscores that
unemployment, with youth unemployment an emerging issue, is a key aspect of poverty in Poland. With
respect to the other MDGs, Poland fares quite well as indeed one would expect of a country at its income
4
level, therefore, Poland has recently modified the standard MDGs to make them Poland-specific taking into
account-the current country's socio-economic situation.
Poland's comprehensive system of social protection has mitigated most syrmptoms of open poverty.
15.
However, Poland spends a disproportional amount on social protection and assistance compared to its per
capita income, which would indicate that eligibility criteria to qualify for benefits have been rather lenient.
This has become a key source of budget disequilibrium (see paras. 22-29). The costs of the social security
system at the beginning of transition were relatively high in comparison with countries with a similar level
of development. The newly introduced
Figure 1: Employment Structure by Wages
market rules at that time caused the need
and Gender, Poland 1999
against
protect
to
programs
additional
for
new risks which were absent in centrally
=women
% 25 planned economy (e.g., labor market
-men
20programs
old
programs). However, the
15were not reformed which in effect led to
massive overuse of benefits granted under
10 those programs. The bulk of benefit
5was
there
when
growth occurred in 1991,
0
an explosion of most benefits. Since that
e o . , p ,° ,gP 4° O° ;P v
d ° 0
time many attempts have been made to
,$P l'
PiP
P .f
e
6 P
curb expenditures, only some successful.
month
per
zloty
In
curmnt
Earnings
GUS
source.
high
cost,
financial
the
In addition to
expenditures on poorly targeted programs
have also led to high labor costs that contribute to higher unemployment.
Gender. By international standards, gender disparities are low in Poland. The UNDP 2000 Human
16.
Development Report gives Poland a Gender Related Development Index (GDI) rating of 0.874 out of a
possible 1.00. This in part reflects that the socialist system in place prior to 1990 provided greater
opportunities for women in higher education and employment than most West European countries. Overall,
female education attainmnent rates are higher than for males. In primary and secondary schools, female gross
enrollment rates are 96 percent and 97 percent respectively, and females account for 57 percent of gross total
student enrollment in tertiary education. In addition, female health statistics are also positive and women
have a higher life expectancy than men (77 and 69 years respectively). Despite these achievements, women
in Poland do face a number of problems. Women's pay tends to be lower than for men for equal positions,
and as reflected in the above graph (Figure 1), there are fewer women than men in higher income-earning
brackets. In addition, the unemployment rate for women typically is 2-4 percent greater than that for men
and tends to fall more slowly than that for men when employment increases.
Labor Market and Unemployment. After several years of declining unemployment rates, reaching
17.
10 percent in 1998, unemployment has begun rising again. As of August 2002, unemployment was at 17.4
percent as officially registered at labor offices, and about 20 percent according to ILO methodology, the
highest level since the beginning of transition. The main reason behind the sharp increase in unemployment
3Gini index measures the extent to which the distribution of income (or consumption expenditures) among individuals
or households within an economy deviates from a perfectly equal distribution. Thus a Gini index of zero represents
perfect equality, while an index of 100 represents perfect inequality. Gini index for Brazil is 60, for Russia 48, for US
40, and 25 for Sweden. Source: World Development Indicators, 2002, World Bank.

modified MDGs for Poland were published in the UNDP Report of Millennium Development Goals for Poland,
UNDP, Warsaw, 2002.

4The

-6 has been the acceleration of enterprise restructuring, including but not limited to downsizing of large loss
making State-owned Enterprises (SOEs) (e.g., in the mnining, steel and railway industries), with the rate of
job destruction outpacing the rate of job creation. Barriers to faster job creation have resulted inter alia from
rigid labor market regulations embedded in the Labor Code and a relatively high statutory minimum wage
which discourages the creation of low skilled jobs. Poland also has high payroll taxes on labor of around 50
percent which creates a wedge between labor costs and wages that both burdens employers and discourages
labor supply. In addition, while Poland has done relatively better than other countries in the region,
bureaucratic and regulatory obstacles to entry of new firms encumber job creation. For the longer term,
Poland faces the challenge of upgrading skill levels to meet the needs of a modem, technology-based
economy.
18.
EU Accession. In October 2002, the European Commission (EC) indicated that, after a slow start,
Poland along with nine other countries has fulfilled the essential political and economic criteria for accession
to the EU and that Poland would be able to assume the obligations of membership in accordance with the
envisaged timetable; thus Poland is on track to being able to achieve its objective of acceding to the Union in
2004. At present, negotiations have been completed in 26 areas - those where negotiations are continuing
are competition policy, agriculture, and financial and budgetary provisions, where difficult choices and
extensive reforms continue to be needed for harmonization. At this stage in the process for accession, the
EC has pointed to the following priorities: reinforcement of administrative capacities at both central and
sub-national levels, getting results from and continuing with judicial reforms, continuing to address
corruption and getting results from the recently-adopted anti-corruption strategy, improving fiscal policies,
completing the enterprise restructuring and privatization agenda, improving economic efficiency particularly
in agriculture and some utilities, following through with needed infrastructure and environmental
investments, developing the framework and institutions to support effective absorption of large pre- and
post-accession funding; and developing mechanisms for controlling state assistance.
19.
Environment. Since the transition began, Poland has made major progress in improving its
environment and harmonizing its standards and legal framework to comply with EU requirements. In the
past decade, large investments were made in reducing sulfur emissions from power and other industry
sectors. However, ambient air quality is still a problem for many cities, primarily a result of in-city
transportation and in Silesia where hard coal continues as the main fuel for poorer households and small
heating plants. Hence, further work at developing renewable energies and energy efficiency investments
would help Poland improve ambient air quality and provide global benefits through reduction of greenhouse
gas emissions. While much progress has been made in terms of upgrading waste water treatment and
management systems, and with World Bank assistance Poland is undertaking a demonstration project aiding
farmers to put in place environmentally responsible practices and reducing discharge of organic matter into
the Baltic Sea, solid waste treatment and management is still not planned or managed in a comprehensive
way in many smaller gniinas. As in other accession countries, Poland will need to make huge additional
investments to meet EU requirements by the end of the agreed derogation period.

m.

POLAND'S DEVELOPMENT AGENDA

20.
The Government's strategy to accelerate growth has three main elements: (i) measures to promote
higher labor utilization through liberalization of the labor market and assisting small and medium-sized
firms; (ii) a 'first employment' scheme offering incentives to encourage employers to take on recent
graduates; and (iii) an investment program in municipal, communication and transport infrastructure to
provide a basis for growth and improved quality of life, including, inter alia, revitalization of housing,
highway and road construction in the next four years. The strategy for EU integration looks beyond
successful accession negotiations to build the capacity for Poland to use effectively the structural and
cohesion funds that the EU will make available to contribute to rapid real convergence.
21.
The Government's program provides a good basis for support from Poland's partners, including the
EU, EIB, EBRD, IMF and the World Bank. The program recognizes the need to rebalance macro-economic
policy, to change the composition of public expenditure (notably to increase public investment and reduce
spending on social protection), to make the Labor Code more flexible, to reduce bureaucratic red-tape
hindering the creation and growth of small and medium-sized enterprises, to continue economic
restructuring and downsizing in low productive sectors such as coal and steel, to promote institutional

development in rural areas, and to increase public investment in infrastructure such as transport. In areas
where the framework is less specific, for instance, education and health, work continues to identify
appropriate objectives and effective programs. Some laudable objectives of the Government's plan, for
example, to reduce public ownership in the economy from the present 30 percent to 10-15 percent by 2005,
will certainly require a reversal of current trends, 'for example, the sharp slowdown in privatizations during
2002. The following two sections highlight a number of the challenges facing Poland as it implements the
Enterprise- Growth - Employment program and sets out recommendations concerning additional directions
and actions that might benefit Poland's economy (particularly in the components related to public finance
and growth).
Reforming Public Finance
22.
Rebalancing Macroeconomic Policies. The Government recognizes that for the medium-term,
further steps are necessary to rebalance the current economic policy mix so that it better supports sustained
economic expansion. A key requisite is to tighten fiscal policy progressively over the medium term so as to
facilitate further reduction of interest rates. Given Poland's already high level of taxation and the need to
reduce the tax wedge on labor, the main emphasis should be on the expenditure side, especially on better
targeting of social expenditures - also necessary to allow scope for more infrastructure investment.
However, Poland's fiscal pressures have been exacerbated by weaknesses in public administration and
expenditure management. Strengthening the efficiency and efficacy of the public sector, in particular public
expenditure management, and streamlining radically the Government's interactions with private sector
should be high priority.
23.

Public Expenditure Management.

Figure 2: Social security and welfare (% of

The recent slowdown of the Polish economy
and the re-emergence of large fiscal deficits
requires a serious examination of the
efficiency, economy, and effectiveness of
public expenditures. This reflects two sets
of issues: (i) the lack of incentives for better
aligning resources with policies and
perfornance; and (ii) the extent to which the
large share of resources consumed by
general govemment and other expenditure
policies act as a drag on Poland's economic
growth. Fiscal pressures emanate primarily

from high social expenditures, particularly

total expenditure and net lending, 2000)

60.00
50.0
30
20.0
10.00
0.00

*

I

_

J

iX

X

[

transfers for social security and welfare (see
9
Figure 2).
In 2000, the total fixed
expenditures on social protection and welfare accounted for almost 60 percent of total budget expenditures.
24.
In recent years, Poland has made some significant strides in reforming its budget and expenditure
management system
'Improvements include a modem budget law, an objective system for
intergovernmental transfers, improved transparency with the publication of budget documents, and the
recent initiation of intemal control and internal audit capacity development. However, several weaknesses
remain. First, an excessive number of extra-budgetary funds and public sector agencies, limits effective
budget and expenditure management. A careful scrutiny of all existing extra-budgetary funds and
autonomous agencies should determine which, if any, should be retained "off-budget." Those retained offbudget should be subject to the same degree of accountability, reporting, auditing, and transparency as
regular on-budget operations. Second, policy fomnulation should be better linked with the budgeting process
through a medium-term expenditure framework. Third, public service systems are not well-aligned with
local preferences, needs, and accountability. The direction of reform should be to strengthen local revenue
autonomy, reduce legally-mandated expenditures which limit policy and budgetary flexibility, and shift from
a culture of comnpliance with law towards one of performance and public service delivery. Finally, given the
heavy burden of "fixed" social expenditure programs, Govemment should promote a "fundamental review"
of the effectiveness of major programs (including pre-retirement, disability, and sickness benefits and
agricultural pensions) to assess how effectively they actually reach the poor and needy in Poland's society.

-8 -

25.
Pensions. Until the 1999 reforms, Poland's pension system consisted of a publicly-managed,
defined benefit single pillar pay-as-you-go system under which old-age, disability, survivor and sickness
benefits were paid through two off-budget funds, ZUS for the general population and KRUS for farmers.
Public expenditures on pensions increased dramatically during the 1990s from 4 percent in 1990 to over 8
percent of GDP by 2001, representing the single largest spending program in Poland (6.4 percent of GDP for
ZUS; 1.6 percent of GDP for KRUS). With the 1999 reform, the system for the general population evolved
into a notional defined contribution public scheme (first pillar); a mandatory, funded, privately-managed
second pillar; and a privately-managed voluntary scheme for employees (third pillar). While the reform
concept and much of its implementation was impressive, the information technology aspects were not fully
prepared, which was particularly costly, and the supervision agency over-regulated the private pension
funds, which undermined the credibility of the reforms. To complete the reforms, the Government is now
considering new legislation on phasing out remaining privileges and converting pension savings into pension
payouts (the first pensions will be paid out in 2009).
26.
The 1999 pension system reform did not include reform of KRUS, the pension scheme for farmers.
Pension and health insurance contributions by farmers are much lower than by other labor groups and are
linked to land ownership, which discourages farmers from pursuing other forms of employment and distorts
proper functioning of an agricultural land market by discouraging land consolidation. KRUS is a pay-asyou-go system which involves a very large subsidy (amounting to some 8.7 percent of public expenditure
and 2.1 percent of GDP in 2001), as there is no ihnk between farmers' incomes and contributions. In
addition to the financial cost, continuation of the current system impedes reform of agriculture and helps
perpetuate rural unemployment and long-term rural poverty.
27.
Disability Benefits, Pensions and Sickness Benefits. Poland spends an extraordinary amount of
public funds (3.2 percent of GDP in 2001) on disability benefits. According to surveys, about one-third of
those receiving this assistance do not perceive themselves as disabled. Additional measures to tighten
eligibility criteria and put in place transparent procedures for granting aid could help reduce the drain of
expenditures in this area. The 1999 reforms did introduce greater oversight over sickness benefits and
reduced sickness spending by 0.3 percent of GDP. Nevertheless, sick leave costs are still high (0.5 percent
of GDP). Following a Bank-supported review, the Government has recently shifted part of the
administrative burden of the sickness benefit to employees by introducing a one-day waiting period before
sickness benefits are provided.
28.
Health Sector. In January 1999, Poland introduced major systemic changes in the health sector by
thoroughly overhauling health financing, management and organization. Social health insurance was
introduced, and all citizens belong to one of 17 (regional) Sickness Funds which contract with public and
private health providers. The 1999 reforms were intended to break away from 'incremental' budget
financing for health care towards financing based on tasks and programs performed. Despite many gains,
several problems remain. In particular, as a result of persisting inefficiencies in resource allocation and poor
financial discipline overall, health delivery units continue in arrears. The financial condition of the system
faces further strains from a costly hospital system in need of urgent rationalization. In addition,
inappropriate staffing patterns, uneven and fragmented delivery of primary and specialist care, and the
prevalence of informal payments adversely affect access to health services. At the same time, emphasis on
health promotion and healthy life styles remains low. As a result, significant improvements in the overall
health status are not forthcoming.
29.
The Government has recently developed plans to eliminate the regional Sickness Funds, replacing
them with one national health fund with branches in each of the 16 voivodships. With an emphasis on
standardization of provider contracts and patient services, the consolidation of the Sickness Funds is to be
accompanied by rationalization of hospitals based on the creation of a national network. The Government
proposes to improve access to health services by promoting family doctors, streamlining procedures
governing specialists' consultations and providing 24-hour access to health services through a publiclyfunded emergency system The Government plan would increase emphasis on health promotion programs
and improve quality of care though better accreditation systems and monitoring. These useful steps would
have greater impact if they were accompanied by measures to improve resource allocation and introduce
appropriate incentives in the health system to maintain focus on cost containment and quality enhancement.

-9Compensation needs to be linked with services provided, and the principle of "money following the patient"
needs to be adopted and implemented throughout the health system to ensure that the allocation of scarce
resources takes place in an effective manner and according to the actual need and benefit of the patient,
especially hospital and pharmaceutical expenditures.
30.
Education. Poland's education system has wide coverage and, in general, education outcomes with a literacy rate of 99.8 percent - are commendable. Net enrollment in primary schools is 98.6 percent,
while in secondary schools the rate is 84 percent, of which 34 percent attend general education and 50
percent attend vocational schools. Tertiary enrollment is 35 percent Overall education expenditures as a
share of GDP are comparable to other Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD)
countries, and no real increases in expenditures for education are likely for some years: hence the
importance of steps to improve efficiency within current financing levels. Such steps need to focus on two
main problems: Education quality in terms of the relevance of the curriculum and of the quality of teaching
to produce the skills required to participate in the global knowledge economy and inefficient use of resources
as indicated by low teaching hours per teacher, declining student-teacher ratios, small numbers of pupils
attending certain schools, and the low energy efficiency of schools. Both these problems are particularly
acute in rural schools. Consolidation could help; but this is a complex question as very often rural schools
are the only centers for social and cultural development in comrnmunities.
31.
In 1999, the Government initiated an Education Reform whose main elements were: (i)
decentralizing much responsibility for planning and for financing schools to local governments;
(ii) changing primary education to 6 years followed by 3 years of a new lower-secondary school level;' (iii)
reforming curricula; (iv) establishing a system of state examinations; and (v) creating a system for career
development for teachers. Though some of these elements have been fully implemented and others are in
process, results have not met expectations and indications are that access and quality gaps between urban
and rural areas are increasing. The Government's next steps include imnproving the system of vocational
training and lowering the age for school entry. These are steps in the right direction: but a clearer overall
direction for refornns is needed.
32.
Anticorruption In addition to undermining confidence in Government generally, corruption distorts
public finances and must be addressed in any reform effort. Poland is perceived to have moderate levels of
both administrative corruption and state capture. An inefficient judiciary is a particular problem; but there
are also concerns in the areas of public procurement, local goveriiments and the health sector. In recent
years, Poland has passed several laws to combat corruption. For example, in 2001, the Parliament passed a
law that institutionalizes public access to central and sub-national government deliberations and decisions,
although implementation of the law is still at issue. The Govermment has recently begun taking some more
radical steps to deal with corruption. An inter-ministerial working group, established in 2002, proposed an
anticorruption strategy that the Government approved in September 2002. The strategy describes areas of
public life in which corruption should be eliminated and proposes actions to achieve three goals: (i)
effective penalties for corruption; (ii) implementation of effective mechanisms to fight corrupt practices in
public administration; and (iii) increased public awareness of corruption and promotion of good ethical
behaviors. The strategy proposes to achieve these goals through, inter alia, creating sound legislative
judicial and prosecution procedures, strearnlining adrninistrative procedures and limiting areas for
discriminatory decisions of public servants, and promoting ethical behaviors of public officials through
educational campaigns and closer cooperation with the NGO community.
33.
To improve the operation of the judiciary, the key actors - e.g., the Supreme Audit Chamber, the
Prosecutors Office, the Ministry of Justice, professional organizations of lawyers and the judiciary - need to
work together to identify and implement a joint strategy. To support the efforts and commitment of the
Office of Civil Service and the National School for Public Administration, further actions are needed to
build an independent professional civil service in Poland, including depoliticizing appointments, and
rationalizing the structure of pay and incentives. With regard to procurement, problems have been identified
in the past with large IT contracts and in roads and other construction projects. Incompetence may have
been a factor, but most reports clearly identified corruption. One helpful step the Government is taking is to
imnprove transparency and efficiency through preparation of standard bidding documents for different types
of procurement. Other shorter and longer term steps to be taken were reflected in the Country Procurement
Assessment Report and include reforms on neutral specifications, objective evaluation criteria, adequate

- 10time for the various procurement steps, improving appeals procedures, and establishing procurement as a
career.
34.
Local AdministrationReform. In 1999, Poland instituted a decentralization program and reform of
local governments which had the objective of moving public responsibilities to administration levels closer
to beneficiaries. At that time two new stages of local government were established: 308 powiats (counties)
and 16 self-goveming voivodships (regions). Powiats were entrusted with responsibilities beyond those of
the existing gminas (municipalities), related mainly to secondary education, culture, roads, and social
assistance. Voivodships became mainly responsible for regional policy and, indirectly, through the Sickness
Fund supervision, for financing health services. They also run supra-powiat educational and cultural
institutions and are responsible for voivodship roads. These reforms raised the amount of public funds
disbursed at the sub-national level by over 2 percent of GDP and created the regional structures expected by
the EU. The Government is working now on new legislation to transfer more financial responsibilities to
local govenmments by increasing their revenue base with a parallel reduction of subsidies and subventions.
This involves an equalization formula that would minimize the volume of inter-govenmmental transfers.
Another reform task is to improve local governnents' capacity for service delivery. Overall these steps
should increase accountability and transparency and thereby reduce opportunities for corruption.
Restoring Growth - Increasing Employment and Public Investment
35.
The growth strategy underpinning the Government's program clearly recognizes that sustained,
rapid, job-rich growth in Poland must be led by a private sector equipped to compete not only in the EU but
in the global marketplace. In the past decade Poland has made major progress in transforming its industries
into a competitive economy. Today, about 70 percent of GDP is generated by the private sector. An
appropriate regulatory and supervisory legal framework has been adopted for the power, banking, insurance
and telecommunication sectors. But this is-not enough. To achieve the Government's ambitious but feasible
growth and employment targets, the authorities will need to take steps to promote further enterprise
restructuring and stronger competition, accelerate the remaining privatization -agenda, improve the
environment for small and medium enterprise (SME) growth, implement reformns and restructuring and
increase investment in public infrastructure, develop and implement strategies to deal, on the one hand with
the lagging but heavily populated rural sector and on the other with the cutting edge of the knowledge
economy. Although this list appears daunting, the Govemment has clear intentions and the capacity to fulfill
them in each of these areas. But achieving results will, no doubt, require strong political will and leadership.
The remainder of this section deals with each of these areas in turn.
36.
Enterprise Restructuring. While Poland has made substantial progress in establishing the
institutional structures for a market economy, with about 3 million independent fimns, there still remain
about 3,000 firms under state ownership. Of those, about a third are undergoing liquidation and a third are
in the process of being privatized. The Government recognizes that many of the remaining state controlled
enterprises (notably in the coal, steel and power industries) remain uncompetitive and a drain on public
resources, particularly in the form of unpaid taxes, social security arrears and a build-up of corporate debt.
To promote restructuring, yet at the same time ward off near-term unemployment increases, the Government
announced a new set of measures in July 2002 to augment its Enterprise-Growth-Employment program. In
addition to labor market reforms liberalizing hiring/firing, hours and wage regulations for some classes of
workers and changes in the bankruptcy law to allow for the option of a work-out period as an alternative to
immediate liquidation, a further new measure focuses on cleaning up balance sheets of distressed companies
and improving their cash flow. This is to be acconplished by granting write-offs of tax and social security
arrears of enterprises that present viable restructuring plans, allowing certain inter-company payment arrears
to be treated as costs and thus be used to reduce taxable income; allowing commercial banks to treat
payment arrears as costs under the tax code; and requiring that participating companies stay current on tax
and social security payments from the moment they enter the plan. With respect to the debt write-off
initiatives, international experience suggests that such programs may have short term benefits of preserving
employment but that the positive effects are generally short-lived. To have longer term positive impact such
programs should include profound measures aimed at cost reductions and productivity gains, that can truly
rebuild enterprises' ability for cash generation, and eventually be associated with privatization, imposition of
market test which can bring about transparency of decision-making and structural reforms that will have
sustained impact.

-11 -

Business Environment for Small & Medium Enterprises. The importance of SMEs for the Polish
37.
economy has been steadily growing - their contribution to GDP, to exports and to employment generation
have all increased markedly since transition began. In addition to the need to ensure a macroeconomic
environment that is conducive to business development and structural reforms to continue the move towards
a market economy, it is important to alleviate microeconomic and institutional constraints, e.g., registration
process and fees and labor market rigidities, that discriminate against small firms and reduce their growth
and competitiveness. In financial markets, improving access to credit requires an increase in the number of
financial institutions that find lending to SMEs to be profitable, and therefore sustainable. Government
intervention should be aimed at strengthening laws governing the enforcement of contracts, forfeiture and
collection of collateral, the use of movable assets as collateral, and promoting innovations in specialized
lending technologies that reduce the administrative costs associated with credit application, monitoring, and
payment. While the Government's current restructuring program gives prominence to SME support,
including a recent initiative to provide interest-free tax credits to newly created firms that employ less than
50 workers, lasting gains will only follow from a reinvigorated initiative to improve the business
environment more generally, with special attention to simplifying procedures and reducing opportunities for
corruption which have a disproportionate impact on SMEs.
EnerRv Sector. Poland's long-term goal is to create a competitive sector with strong government
38.
policy oversight, independent regulation and a multiplicity of private players. Successive governments have
been implementing policies to achieve this goal including separating the power sector into generation,
The key objectives of the
transmission and distribution segments and establishing a regulator.
Government's present program are to strengthen regulatory capacity, remove barriers to competition and
market liberalization, continue with coal reform and privatization and demonopolize the gas and power
sectors. Considerable progress in needed reforms and privatization has been achieved in power while in gas
the main state-owned company, which is responsible for imports, transmission, storage and distribution, has
been corporatized but has not yet been restructured further. Most difficult are the further reforms in the hard
coal sector, which will be socially and fiscally a great challenge. While financial results of the coal sector
have improved substantially from about US$1.0 billion loss in 1998 to US$0.2 billion loss a year in 2001
implying a significant reduction in subsidies, further reform is essential to comply with EU regulations
regarding state support and rules on competition and environment. Even after the substantial restructuring
that has taken place, with production capacity being reduced from 136 million tons in 1997 to 100 million
tons currently, and with employment being reduced from 243,000 in 1998 to 145,000 in mid-2002, further
restructuring will need to include further reductions of work force and production capacity, and shifting
ownership to the private sector. Adequate social mitigation measures must accornpany any further
restructuring. Finally the energy sector can deliver significant environmental benefits through fuel
switching, enforcing environmental standards, and appropriate pricing.
FinancialSector. Poland is well-advanced in its transition agenda in the financial sector, with the
39.
high degree of foreign ownership contributing to its stability. Privatization of the remaining state owned
institutions, constituting 28 percent of banking assets, needs now to be on the agenda as these deal with
critical sectors such as agriculture. Only privatized fnancial institutions can be counted on to enforce the
hard budget constraints which are the basis for a thriving market economy. Other outstanding issues are
similar to the challenges of emerging markets generally, namely to improve the efficiency of financial
intermediation, broaden the access to financial services, and widen the diversity of financial instruments.
Progress will require sustained macroeconomic stability, continued build-up of legal and institutional
support for financial intermediation, improvements in regulation and supervision, and continuation of
complementary structural reforms in other sectors, particularly privatization of remaining large SOEs.
While the overall stability of the financial sector is not a concern at this time, enhanced oversight of risk
management systems of financial institutions and improvements in crisis prevention and management
procedures would strengthen the system further. To further reduce the likelihood of systemic problems,
regulation and supervision of the financial sector, including pension funds and other non-bank financial
services, needs to be strengthened and possibly consolidated. Particular attention should be paid to the need
for consolidated reporting by and supervision of large financial groups. Stronger legal backing is required
for enforcing principles of good corporate governance.

- 12

-

40.
Improving Infrastructure. While there has been some enhancement of Poland's infrastructure over
the past decade, it is clear that further infrastructure development, including policies, institutions and
investments to support an appropriate modal mix, are now both urgent and essential for improved
competitiveness, economic growth and environmental sustainability.
41.
In railthe Government is undertaking a restructuring program aimed at revitalizing the rail transport
industry and thereby relieving the state budget of losses of about US$1.5 million a day. Better rail transport
also has the objective of slowing the growth of road transport, easing the pressure to build more roads and
benefiting the environment. Already PKP has been broken into 24 subsidiary companies and employment
restructuring progressed (29,000 employees, 16 percent of the PKP work-force, were retrenched and
received job loss compensation through financing by the World Bank and EBRD between August 2001 and
December 2001). The newly restructured rail industry should also have the incentive to price cargo traffic
properly, which in the past - due to the internal cross subsidy between profit-making freight towards lossmaking passenger operation - has been too expensive and has pushed freight traffic to road transport. The
reforms need to follow up on the successes of the past two years and further concentrate on elements
including appropriate pricing of access to the railway infrastructure, reducing the overall amount of railway
passenger transport subsidies while shifting part of the burden to municipalities, privatizing the subsidiary
companies of PKP, and infrastructure upgrading - bottleneck elimination.
42.
Poland is also making large investments in and restructuring its ports sector, aiming to promote
private investment and operation of the ports. In addition to improving land-side access to the ports of
Gdansk, Szczecin and Swinoujscie, and modernizing vessel tracking and safety-enhancing systems, the
Government is working to consolidate the role of the new port authorities as landlords with municipal
participation, and to improve navigation safety.
43.
The poor quality of the road network is a key factor that increases the cost of doing business in
Poland, and the Government attaches high priority to investing in improving road infrastructure. Many
Polish roads date from the central planning era when traffic was light because most long-distance transport
was by rail. Over the past decade, the demand for road transport has grown radically but the supply has not
kept pace, and the road network has been a victim of under-investment in renewal and modernization. Road
expenditures are well below the levels needed to properly maintain the road network. At present, out of
almost 18,000 km of the national network, 34 percent are in unsatisfactory condition and require immediate
maintenance treatment; only 28 percent are in good condition. Total maintenance backlog is at the level of
PLN 7.8 billion, surface treatment immediate needs are PLN 3.2 billion, yet maintenance expenditures in
2002 are less than PLN 1.0 billion (including state budget allocation together with IFIs loans and EU grant
assistance). At the same time road network users are paying significant amounts of excise tax added to the
fuel price while only 12 percent of the taxes on fuels are allocated to the national road network.
44.
As a result, the roads are now congested, slow, polluting and unsafe. Investments to bring the roads
up to EU standards will yield high returns in reduced transport costs, less pollution and fewer accidents
(Polish consumers spend about 16 percent of GDP on vehicle operating costs, and road accidents cost
society about 2 percent of GDP each year in physical damage, medical costs and lost productivity), but the
public expenditure needed will be massive (fully financing maintenance and investment would cost US$1
billion per year in 2002 (about 0.5 percent of GDP) and almost US$3 billion by 2005 (about 1.4 percent of
GDP)). The parliament is now considering legislation which would commercialize road administration and
introduce free market type discipline in roads management. Once implemented, this change will help build
Poland's institutional capacity to design and implement economically well-selected investments and lay the
basis for substantial financial resources which should be forthcoming from Poland's European financial
assistance partners, including the EU, EIB, and EBRD, as well as from the World Bank.
45.
Water supplv and waste water systems are important infrastructure needs for quality of life of the
population at large and for business development. The biggest medium term challenge is to meet EU
standards for wastewater treatment; other needs include ensuring appropriate sizing of treatment plants,
strengthening use of competitive procurement procedures, irnproving pricing and subsidy policies and
strengthening coordination among agencies involved. Meeting EU accession standards for wastewater
treatment would require annualized investments and operating costs of about US$2.5 billion, equivalent to
about I percent of GDP.

-

13 -

Rural Development and Azriculture. Rural incomes, opportunities and living standards have
46.
typically been lower than in urban areas. As the 1996 Poverty Assessment update indicated, 60 percent of
Poland's poor live in rural areas. Yet the recent growth of SMEs has largely been an urban phenomena, and
rural areas continue to have education levels and job and business opportunities that are far behind those
found in urban settings. In addition, inadequate infrastructure in terms of roads, water supply networks,
wastewater collection and solid waste management have also deterred new enterprise investment in rural
areas. Hence unemployment in rural Poland, both official and hidden, is high and persistent (registered
unemployment is around I mnillion, hidden employment in agriculture is between 1.0 and 1.5 million).
Poland has initiated steps to improve the livelihood of rural inhabitants by supporting market mechanisms to
create non-farm businesses and employment, by implementing public administration and decentralization
reforms in the past few years, and by preparing local Governments to make efficient use of resources to be
provided by the EU in the future, both before and after Poland's accession to the Union. These actions need
to be pursued vigorously and complemented by efforts to improve quality of and accessibility to education in
rural areas.
The 1996 Poverty Assessment update also notes that much of the rural poverty in Poland is
47.
associated with agriculture. Reduction in rural poverty will therefore depend in part on increasing farm
incomes. Improving productivity will increase farm incomes, yet at the same time reduce the number of
people engaged in agriculture. Hence it is important that those leaving agriculture be equipped for off-farm
employment, and that off-farm jobs be available. Clearly, this will be a gradual process, but Government's
policies will need to facilitate this adjustment rather than delay it. Presently, however, a number of obstacles
constrain the functioning of rural labor and land markets. For example, the current functioning of the social
insurance system for farmers (KRUS), with contributions far less than the cost of benefits and a substantial
subsidy to those owning at least one hectare of land, creates disincentives for people to leave agriculture and
constrains land consolidation for productivity gains. While meeting EU standards will impose new costs on
Poland's agriculture, it will also create new opportunities. With EU assistance, Government is working to
put in place policies to facilitate the integration process by providing public support to producing and
processing high quality and safe food products, strengthening quality and food safety certification for
agricultural products, implementing environmental standards associated with agriculture, advertising and
promoting Polish farm products on domestic and export markets, and designing professional marketing and
promotion strategies for regional and traditional food product labels and for certified organic farm and food
products.
The Knowledgae Economv. With the unprecedented pace of modem technological development,
48.
ensuring an environment which promotes the appropriate development and adoption of new technologies is
more important than ever before. This is an issue with many facets: for example, the development of
appropriate education and training, access to information, competition in the telecommunications sector and
incentives for technical change. There is a strong case for the Government to work in close consultation
with the business and academic communities to develop, adopt, disseminate, and implement a
comprehensive knowledge management strategy.
An overarching issue: the challenge of iob creation. Even with sustained and coordinated policies,
49.
unemployment will come down rather slowly. A key condition for success will be a substantial acceleration
in economic growth. This in turn depends on sustained implementation of a better fiscal-monetary policy
mix and the structural reforms outlined in the preceding paragraphs. In particular, job-rich growth will
require easier entry of firms, particularly SMEs, and better functioning labor markets. The recent changes to
the Labor Code to make employment relations more flexible (by, inter alia, facilitating employment,
working hours and wage adjustments) are significant steps in the right direction. However, further reforms
are necessary to foster labor demand by lowering labor costs relative to productivity. They include first of
all lowering labor taxes (such as payroll taxes, employee social security contributions and the personal
income tax) and differentiating the statutory minimum wage by introducing a youth sub-minimum. On the
supply side, the Government will also need to support redeployment of labor through training programs and
incentives with strong links to enterprises and, for the longer-term, education reforms. Finally, given the
well-established relationship between SMEs and jobs, improving the business environment for SMEs will no
doubt have as great or greater an impact on job growth than any direct labor market interventions or
employment incentives.

- 14 -

IV.

ECONOMIC PROSPECTS AND EXTERNAL ENVIRONMENT

50.
The prospects for rapid and sustained growth of Poland's economy will depend in the short run on
the authonties' continued success in rebalancing macroeconomnic policies, while the medium term prospects
depend on the extent, mix and pace of structural reforms. Under a scenario of vigorous reform with EU
accession proceeding in 2004, as now seems possible, GDP growth could rebound to an average of 5.0 - 5.5
percent per annum from 2004. Without decisive fiscal action and appropriate monetary policy response and
slow implementation of structural reforms, Poland will find it difficult to reap the benefits of EU accession
and could easily remain on a low growth path (see Table 4).
Table 4: Projected Outcomes of Reform Scenarios
Indicative Scenarios
GDP Growth (constant prices,%)

Estimnated
2002

GDP per capita (current USS)
Domestic Demand Growth (constant prices, Ia)
Current Account Balance (% of GDP)
of GDP)
Foreign Debt (%/o
General Government Budget Deficit (%of GDP)1

1.2
4686
0.7
-3.6
37.4
-6.7

Central Government Budget Deficit (%of GDP)

Central Government Savings
Public Debt (% of GDP)
Consuiner Price Index (period average, %)

Accelerated Reforms
2003
2004
2005
5.5
3.5
5.0

Gradual Reforms
2003
2004
2005
1.5
1.8
1.8

5044
3.7
-3.8
36.5
-6.2

5450
5.2
-4.3
35.8
-5.3

5931
5.6
-4.3
34.6
-4.1

4866
1.2
-3.3
37.2
-6.2

5062
1.9
-3.8
37.8
-5.8

5246
1.6
-3.8
38.4
-5.5

-5.4

4.9

-4.5

-3.5

-5.0

-4.7

-4.4

-4.1
49.8
1.7

-3.3
52.5
2.1

-2.5
53.3
2.8

-1.0
52.4
3.0

-3.4
53.3
3.3

-2.9
56.1
3.9

-2.7
58.3
3.4

ItGeneasI Govanment inchdes CentraI Government, Extra budgettry findg (EBFs) and agencies LOCaI
Governments and theirEBFs and
rgencies. excl. s.aled compensation payment for pensioners and civil seryvnt * .

51.
The short-term outlook for 2002 is constrained as prospects for external demand have dimmed and
domestic demand remnains weak. Even though inflation is expected to remain subdued between 2-3 percent
per annum, contiued easing of monetary policy is not expected unless the Govenunent contains the General
Government deficit in 2003 and prepares a credible public finance reform program for the years thereafter.
The Central Government budget deficit for 2002 is planned to be not more than PLN 40 billion, which
implies a deficit of 5.4 percent of GDP. Measures to limit additional fiscal expansion and some monetary
easing in response to slowing of inflation, together with a recovery of Poland's major trading partners,
should help GDP growth to strengthen to 3.5 percent for 2003 in the "accelerated reform" scenario.
52.
Looking to the medium term, the "accelerated reform" scenario envisages a continuation of fiscal
consolidation and public expenditure management reform, which will not only reduce the General
Government deficit from 6.7 percent in 2002 to 4.1 percent In 2005, but will also change the composition of
expenditures to support the infrastructure investments emphasized in the Government's program. Financing
such investments will depend critically on the Government curtailing subsidies to loss-making state
enterprises and improvmg the efficiency and effectiveness of the social programs that currently make up
over 50 percent of budgetary expenditures. Successful fiscal consolidation, together with forceful
implementation of other structural reforms, should bolster confidence in Poland's EU accession and
economic prospects. Improved macro and structural policies, together with a stable or improving external
outlook, should stimulate faster growth of corporate investment (including FDI), help to maintain external
competitiveness, and bring about a gradual improvement of domestic demand so as to return to broad-based,
rapid growth. The return to robust growth, together with measures to make production more job-rich, could
facilitate a steady reduction of unemployment and poverty in the medium-term.
53.
The significantly slower growth path under the "gradual reform" scenano would result from the
Government's inability to move forcefully ahead with structural reforms, and the resulting decline in
investor confidence. Failure to improve targeting of social protection expenditures and delays in
restructurng state sectors would be particularly costly to the state budget and to the economy. In such a
scenario, fiscal consolidation would be difficult to accomplish, blocking further monetary easing, and
therefore constrainmg a recovery of domestic demand and harming external confidence, which in turn would
make external finance comparatively more expensive. Growth would remain subdued at levels of around

- 15 1.5-1.8 percent. In addition, public debt would rise more rapidly and exceed 55 percent of GDP in 2004 and
reach 58 percent in 2005 (see Table 4). Such developments would obviously adversely impact income
convergence with Poland's fellow EU members.
Table 5: External Financing
Accelerated Reform Scenario
In billion US$
Financing Requirements
Current Account Balance
Amortization
Reserves build-up
Financing Sources
Direct Foreign Investments
Portfolio Investmnents
Loans & other capital

Cumulative
Estimated
Projected
2001 2002 2003 2004 2005
2003-05
41.2
13.6 12.3 12.7 13.6 14.9
7.2
6.7
7,4
9.0, 10.0
26.4
6.
4.9
4.7
4.4
4.5
13.6
0.4
1.1
-0.4
0.7
0.5
0.2
13.6 12.3 12.7 13.6 14.9
41.2
6.9
5.3
4,8
5.5
6.5
16.8
1.1
2.7
1.7
2,0
2.3
6.1
5.6
4.3
6.2
6.1
6.1
18.4

54.
External Financing. Poland's extemal position as measured by its current account balance has
markedly improved over the last two years. In the aftermath of the Russian crisis, Polish exporters have
aggressively sought access to Westem European markets. This has resulted in double digit export growth
for 2000, just below 10 percent for 2001, and preliminary data for 2002 suggest a somewhat slower
continuation of this trend. At the same time, import growth has been constrained in particular because of the
weakening of domestic demand in 2000, 2001 and 2002. As a consequence, the current account deficit
significantly improved from 7.5 percent of GDP in 1999 to 6.3 percent in 2000 and 4.1 percent for 2001, and
has lowered the need for extemal financing. The current account deficit for 2002 as a whole is estimated to
be -3.6 percent of GDP; under the accelerated reform scenario the external balance will stabilize in later
years at around -4.3 percent of GDP.
55.
Between 2003 and 2005, gross external financing under the accelerated reform scenario is estimated
at about US$41.2 billion (see Table 5). These resources would finance US$26.4 billion in current account
deficits, a US$1.1 billion increase in international reserves and the remainder for debt repayment. Private
investment inflows are expected to finance about 55 percent of these needs, partly driven by privatization
transactions in the energy sector and selling of the remaining treasury stakes in the financial and
telecommunication sectors to foreign investors, as well as green-field investments. The remaining financing
for the period 2003-05 will need to come from loans directed mostly towards the private sector in Poland. In
the "slow reform" scenario, less favorable domestic demand performance limits the increases in imports and
leads to marginally less external financing needs than in the accelerated scenario. External financing in the
slower reform scenario would be almost US$5 billion less (driven by lower demand for imports) amounting
to approximately US$36.5 billion. Delayed privatization and less green-field investment will lead the
economy to rely on a larger loan financing, i.e., US$20 billion or 55 percent of total financing in "slow
reform" scenario.
V. THE BANK GROUP'S ASSISTANCE PROGRAM
Learninz from Past experience
56.
As the 1997 Operations Evaluation Department of the World Bank (OED) Country Assistance
Review for Poland reported, and as confirmed in a 2002 update which OED commissioned from a local
research foundation, the Bank Group has contributed to Poland's progress in a wide range of areas,
notwithstanding which Poland's need for Bank assistance has diminished given Poland's own substantial
and growing technical and management expertise and its access to international capital markets at
competitive rates. While the authorities in Poland have always set their own reform course, they have
valued the Bank's contribution to policy dialogue and knowledge transfer - drawing on the Bank's
international experience. They also appreciate the Bank's active role in supporting project preparation, and
in sponsoring seminars and other dissemination activities which promote debate throughout government and
society. Finally, the authorities value the Bank's focus on building human resource capacities and strong
institutions.

-

16

-

The findings of the country assistance reviews and recent implementation experience in Poland
57.
suggest four general lessons for future Bank support to Poland. First, the Bank's resources are limited
relative to the European institutions - EIB, EBRD and the EU all have prospective programs larger than the
World Bank's. This reinforces the case for Bank selectivity, which means focusing on areas where other
institutions are either not present or unwilling or unable to take the lead, or in some cases facilitating the
greater assistance of our Euro-partners. Second, Bank-supported programs need to be demand-driven and
linked to commitment by the Polish authorities. Major stakeholders should participate in analytical work
and project preparation. Third, World Bank financing of Government programs is no longer additional to
the budgets of line ministries. This underscores the need for high quality technical inputs, both in project
design and implementation, and for building in flexibility in the use of Bank resources. Consequently, sector
investment and program loans or adjustrnent lending seem most appropriate for Poland. Finally, the
decentralization of the Country Director to Poland since 1997, the placement of financial management and
procurement specialists in Warsaw since 1999 and 2000, and co-location of the Bank and IFC beginning in
1999, have all contributed to more direct relations with the Government, business community and civil
society. Building capacities in the Warsaw Office has given national staff the opportunity for taking on task
leadership responsibilities particularly for project implementation. It has also allowed the Bank to respond
quickly when asked to become involved in new activities (e.g., anti-corruption).
The Bank's portfolio in Poland is generally satisfactory with only two projects presently having an
58.
unsatisfactory implementation rating and in both cases actions are underway to resolve the problems (see
Box 1).
The Bank Group 's Role
59.
The 1999 CAS Progress Report, noted that the Bank's program had already then become sharply
focused on the structural reform agenda for EU accession. Since 1999, the Bank's program has included
advisory assistance on the overall agenda for reform, public expenditure composition and transparency,
incentives to agricultural reform, anti-corruption and roads financing; and lending assistance for coal sector
restructuring, railway reforms, rural development, infrastructure (roads, ports), environmental sustainability
and energy efficiency.
60.
Poland has reached an advanced stage in its economic transition, and the Government anticipates
graduation probably during the next CAS cycle. Poland's successes during the transition decade have
brought it to the brink of membership in the EU and have given it ready access to financial markets at rates
which confirm its significantly improved creditworthiness. Nevertheless, Poland continues to face complex
challenges in resuming and sustaining rapid growth, reducing poverty and unemployment, and building
strong institutions for a resilient market economy. Poland wishes to retain active Bank Group involvement
as it tackles these challenges during the next 3-5 years. The civil society consultation process that
accompanied the preparation of this CAS strongly endorsed this view.

- 17 -

Box 1: Portfolio Management in Poland
i. Poland rejoined the World Bank in 1986 and Bank lending to Poland started in 1990. Since then, the Bank
has committed about US$5.4 billion (USS4.3 billion net of cancellations) for 37 operations (of which US$1.3 billion in
13 operations in the past five years). About US$3.8 billion of the Bank's total net commitment has been disbursed and
US$1.3 billion repaid. At present 12 operations (commitments of US$1.1 billion) are under implementation, with an
undisbursed balance of US$417 million. The FY02 disbursement ratio was 30 percent. The pro-activity and realism
indices for the portfolio are both at 100 percent.
ii. Over the past five years, the OED has evaluated 26 Poland projects. Of these, 21 (81 percent) received
satisfactory ratings for outcome (6 Highly satisfactory, II Satisfactory, 4 Moderately Satisfactory) and five (19 percent)
an unsatisfactory rating. In general, for those projects rated satisfactory, OED's assessments indicate that the Bank's
support has contributed to fundamental structural reforms in Poland (e.g., Coal, Enterprise and Financial Sector
adjustment loans), that institution building was under way and can be effective when there is strong commitment of the
borrower and implementing agencies to the programs (e.g., Heat Supply, Forest Development), and that the legal and
regulatory frameworks needed for successful transition to market economies have been strengthened through Bankfinanced programs (e.g., Employment Promotion, Financial Institutions Development).
iii. On the negative side, however, some Bank-supported programs were judged to be too ambitious and were
thus not able to achieve their objectives, and in some instances, OED also concluded that the Bank may not have
pressed hard enough during implementation for fundamental restructuring when, at least with hindsight, such
restructuring had been clearly needed. Some specific issues regarding financial management have also affected project
performance. Overly complex accounting procedures in some of Poland's budgetary institutions can delay both
payments to contractors and Bank loan disbursements. Weak corporate govemance in large state enterprises has affected
their operation, reinforcing the need to improve application and enforcement of accounting standards and the quality
and scope of auditing practices.
iv. At present, Poland has two projects rated unsatisfactory for implementation progress. One, Power
Transmission, is at risk due to weak financial and management controls in the implementing agency. These are
currently receiving priority attention by agency management and should be rectified during the coming months as the
company implements recommendations of its extemal auditors as agreed with the Bank. The other, the Rural
Development Project (RDP), is a complex multi-sectoral project involving a number of components executed by several
central Govemment ministries, voivodship offices and gminas. Coordination at the local level has been satisfactory; but
the project faces exceedingly complex public finance rules. On the one hand the public finance law in Poland requires
that all disbursements be made to Govemment accounts. Poland's cash accounting procedures, however, preclude the
Government's pre-financing of Bank disbursements using other budgetary funds; they also preclude direct
reimbursement to contractors and the use of special commitments. Review procedures for World Bank-financed
expenditures (as for all Government spending) tend to over-emphasize multiple, ex-ante controls leading to micromanagement by some Central Govemment agencies, especially for expenditures made by sub-national administrations.
The result has been slow loan disbursement rates for RDP, leading to implementation problems on the ground. Bank
staff have been working with an inter-ministerial working group to identify procedural changes that could improve
performance, and in recent months disbursements have speeded up, allowing an upcoming reassessment of overall
implementation progress.

In the light of Poland's special circumstances the Bank Group's strategy would be guided by the
61.
following considerations:

(i)

selectivity consistent with the Framework for World Bank Group Support to EU Accession
Candidate Countries of Central and Eastern. Europe. Thus, in agreement with the Government,
World Bank activities will be linked to systemic reforms in areas where the Bank can facilitate
access to EU or other funding or areas not linked directly to the EU acquis communautaire and
where the Bank has a comparative advantage, and could, as appropriate, promote a consolidated
approach among Poland's partners. For IFC, given the growing availability of long-term financing
from private sources and Poland's prospects for EU accession, the program will focus on a few

-

18 -

areas where the signaling impact of IFC's participation is expected to yield significant results in
terms of development impact, social benefits, and institutional development.
(ii)

an increasing emphasis on policy dialogue. The Government appreciates the Bank's policy analysis
and international experience, a view broadly supported by the series of in-depth interviews with 58
Polish opinion-makers in preparation for this CAS and by participants in the civil society
discussions. While the main focus for the Bank is policy discussion with the Government, the Bank
also aims to foster in society at large a broader understanding and debate on the country's socioeconomic challenges and reform agenda.

(iii)

partnership based on close consultation between the Bank Group and Poland's other external
partners -especially the EU, EIB and EBRD - to ensure that the Bank Group's activities are focused
on areas in which its value-added is highest.
The Bank Group 's Assistance Program

Focus of Bank Activities. The Bank's business plan for FY03-05 has three pillars: (i) promoting
62.
the continued rebalancing of macroeconomic policies, especially through support to fiscal reform;
(ii) improving the effectiveness of Government expenditures and programs; and (iii) enhancing private
sector-led growth and employment creation. By design and agreement with Government these categories
map directly into the main elements of the Government's program (Section III above). The activities agreed
with the Government under the business plan continue to reflect a progressive shift in the balance away from
lending towards focused non-lending support, consistent with Poland's progression towards eventual
graduation.
Rebalancing macroeconomic policies throuzh fiscal reform. Tightening fiscal policy over the
63.
medium term needs to focus on the expenditure side, including better targeting and monitoring of outcomes,
and on longer-term structural reforms (e.g., coal restructuring) both necessary for easing fiscal pressures and
to make room for the re-composition of expenditures to accommodate increased investment in public goods
and infrastructure. On-going work continued under this CAS will include monitoring of macroeconomic
developments in Poland as a means of informing policy dialogue. In terms of ESW, the Bank plans to
prepare a Development Policy Review in FY04 which will reassess the impact of the macroeconomic
framework on growth and policy outcomes. Operationally, this CAS links financial support to Poland to a
"macro trigger," which specifies the minimum progress needed toward fiscal reform for Bank lending to
Poland (see para 72).
Strengtheninz the effectiveness of public expenditures. Current and on-going activities continued
64.
under this CAS include a Public Expenditure and Institutional Review (PEIR) to assist the Government in
identifying and implementing expenditure priorities across sectors and in assessing the incentive framework
embedded in the budget process. An Institutional Development Fund (IDF) grant has recently been
approved to assist the follow up to the PEIR, specifically to help the Ministry of Finance make the budgetary
process more efficient, flexible, performance oriented, and predictable. Complementing the analytic and
advisory work of the past several years regarding pension reform, further technical assistance and policy
dialogue are planned to assist the Government in designing a system for converting pension savings into
pension payouts, which Poland will need well before 2009 when the first payouts must begin. Further policy
dialogue (in the context of the planned second rural development project) will aim toward the reform of
KRUS, Poland's agricultural pension scheme which not only has great fiscal cost but also impedes
agricultural reform. In this regard the planned Poverty Assessment update will also aim at helping to rethink
some policy regarding social assistance expenditure. The Bank plans to continue its support to the HighLevel Working Group on Corruption and cooperation with civil society on anti-corruption issues as
opportunities arise. As judicial corruption and inefficiency have been identified in Poland as critical
impediments to a less-corrupt environment, the Government has requested the Bank to support its
preparation of a Judicial Assessment. In the area of public procurement, the Bank will continue its dialogue
on improving the legal framework and will continue to support improvements through the recently-approved
IDF grant for preparation of standard bidding documents. Given the substantial attention Poland receives
from the European institutions in the area of local administration reform, Bank support will be limited to
selected cities in the Cities of Change program to help build institutional capacity at the municipal level.

-19-

The Bank will give operational priority to assisting systemic reforms in health and education given
65.
the importance of improving opportunities and living standards and as other partners have less substantial
involvement in these sectors. A proposed health operation would improve the health systems effectiveness
and efficiency through health promotion programs and information systems, assisting hospital restructuring
and rationalization, and improving health care quality. The Bank will also work with other agencies
interested in supporting elements of the health reform, including EBRD, EIB, IFC and the Council of Europe
Development Bank. IFC has made two investments to date in Poland's health sector and will continue to
identify opportunities to support the entrance of experienced, credible private investors. In education, Bank
support would initially concentrate on an intensive policy reform dialogue, particularly on ways of raising
overall education quality and narrowing the access and quality gap between urban and rural schools. An
education project could follow if a consensus is reached on appropriate content and sequencing of specific
next steps.
Enhancing private sector-led growth and iob creation. The Bank will continue its policy dialogue
66.
with the Government on labor market and improvements in the business environment that would encourage
job-rich growth, in particular by following up on the recently-completed review of labor market issues,
continuing with seminar series on related topics and helping to analyze follow-up business environment
surveys. The Government recognizes the importance of an effective and well-functioning competition
regime and has asked the Bank to support this by preparation of a Competition Policy Review. In the energy
sector, the Government has asked the Bank to continue its long-standing policy dialogue, to help
policymakers draw on international experiences and address the main challenges of promoting competition,
clarifying the structure and rules of energy markets following initial privatizations in generation and
distribution, strengthening the effectiveness of regulation, developing public understanding and support for
the reforms, and supporting further restructuring and privatization. The Bank is prepared to act as executing
agency for GEF/PCF and to support preparation and implementation of renewable energy projects that aim
at achieving significant global environmental benefits. IFC will explore opportunities to facilitate privately
financed energy conservation investments, whether through direct investment or via financial intermediaries.
Operationally the Bank will continue to support the implementation of ongoing ports and railway
67.
restructuring projects. New lending would help finance increased infrastructure investment particularly in
roads. A proposed loan would support the commercialization of the national roads agency and development
of other institutional capacity, and help Poland address road financing and other key sector policy issues. As
a number of Poland's other partners are involved in roads, including the EU, EIB and EBRD, with far
greater resources at Poland's disposal in the coming years than from the World Bank, the Bank's financing
would be structured in such a way to facilitate the full use of those other funds.
The Bank will continue its ongoing dialogue on changes needed to Poland's bankruptcy legislation
68.
and procedures and on other issues bearing on successful enterprise restructuring. The Bank will assist
Poland's enterprise restructuring plans primarily through continuation of the assistance to the coal reform
program, which began in 1999. Two previous coal sector adjustment loans have successfully supported
capacity and employment downsizing, planning for privatization, improved management and corporate
governance arrangements including a hard budget constraint on the coal companies, and helped mitigate the
effects of the industry reform on individuals and local communities through retraining and financial
assistance. The continuation of the Bank's support for the coal sector program would include a third
adjustment operation which would support actions to privatize the bulk of the sector and finance social
mitigation and aspects of coal restructuring. To support the Government's plan of undertaking restructuring
of public enterprises through work-outs under the Government's new restructuring program (which includes
potential use of bankruptcy procedures), the social mitigation assistance to the coal sector may be expanded
to cover a broader spectrum of enterprise restructuring if accompanied by other actions geared to increase
the likelihood of positive long term outcomes (see para. 36).
In addition, the.Bank will assist Poland to promote employment growth in rural areas and
69.
restructure the agriculturesector through ongoing project implementation support to the Rural Development
Program. In addition, an ongoing IDF grant is funding pilot land registration and cadastre work to help
Poland develop a properly functioning land market; the Bank's recent sector report on agricultural land,
labor and financing issues pointed out that lack of such a system is a significant disincentive to raising

-20 agricultural productivity. As the Government realizes that the challenge of adjusting agriculture to operate
competitively within the EU is closely related to development of the non-farm rural sector, the
Government's and the Bank's objectives in a potential Second Rural Development Project would be to
enhance labor force quality through skills improvement, invest in the future labor force by improving
education quality for children, raise the quality of public administration in rural areas, and build new and
upgrade existing public infrastructure.
Finally in the area of knowledge economy, the Government has asked the Bank to play a lead role in
70.
assisting its preparation of a Knowledge Self Assessment which is to begin later this year. The Bank will
also continue to support the Global Distance Learning Network (GDLN) which is expanding the Bank's
outreach and knowledge-sharing through partnerships and network-supported events. Now that Warsaw
University became a GDLN affiliate center in Poland in May 2002 and a subsidiary site in Poznan was
connected to multi-country dialogues on issues of municipal management in May and June of 2002,
GDLN's policy-related services will target participation of government officials and others in discussion of
worldwide best practices on a range of issues.
In each of the three operational pillars of the CAS, the Bank's analytic and advisory work will be
71.
undertaken in partnership with either the Government, which would contribute through substantial staff time
and participation of experts, and by taking on responsibility for consultation and dissemination activities, or
with other agencies or research foundations. During the CAS period, the Bank will document the share of
the cost of analytic work bome by the Government and work with the Government to agree on cost-sharing
guidelines appropriate for Poland's income and capacity. The Bank will also draw on the analytic work of
other partners notably the IMF and OECD to supplement its own limited resources. The main new areas of
the Bank Group's activities for the coming three years are summarized in Tables 6 and 7 below.
Performance during this upcoming CAS period will be evaluated based on the progress benchmarks set out
in the Poland CAS Matrix (Annex B1O, attached).

- 21 Table 6: FY03-05 Lending and Non-Lending Activities
Activity

FY

Rebalancing the Macroeconomic Policy Framework
Policy Dialogue and macro monitonng
Development Policy Review

03-05
04

Improving the Effectiveness of Government Expenditures and Programs
Public Expenditure Review
Pensions in Multi-pillar System
Living Standards Assessment Update
Education Policy Dialogue
Health Policy Dialogue
HIV/AIDS in Poland and the Baltics
Anticorruption Policy Dialogue
Judicial Assessment
Cities of Change
IDF on Procurement
IDF on Land Administration
IDF on Strengthening Budget Management
Lending: health sector reform, education sector reform

02-03
03-04
03
02-03
03
02-03
03-05
03
03-05
02-04
02-03
03-04

Enhancing Private Sector-led Growth and Employment Creation
Competition Policy Review
Energy Sector Policy Dialogue
Social Assessment of Energy Tariff Reform
Labor Market Reform Policy Dialogue
FSAP Follow-up
Knowledge Economy Assessment
Global Distance Leaming Network
Lending- coal reform and social mitigation for enterprise restructuring,
rural development, roads, GEF

Table 7: Indicative Lending Pr

^ ^si4irU

e

gram
XW

03
03-05
05
04-05
04
03
03-05

(US$ millions)
}*n W!FYY4

't

F Y05i

400

Roads 3
Coal 3
Social Mitigation for Enterprise Restructuring
Rural Development 2
Health 2
Education Opportunities

Indicative Total

-

200
200
200
1 50
150

_

400

400

500

Note: the choice of lending instrument will be decided on a project basis; depending on need, World Bank
lending may be provided through specific investment, sector investment and maintenance, adjustment,
,hybrids, or progrmnmatic loans.

-22

-

Box 2: Activities Supporting Good Governance
Analytical and Advisory Activities

IBRD Loans and IDF Grants

Area of
Governance
Anti-Corruption
Strategy
Legal Reform

IDF on Land Administration and Registration
Reform (FY01)
IDF for Monitoring/Evaluation of EU and
Other Funds Use (FY00)
IDF on Procurement (FY02-04)
IDF on Strengthening Budget Management
(FY03-04)
Rail Restructuring Project (FY01 )
Coal SECAL 11, 111 (FY02, FY03)

CPAR (FY01)
Anti-Corruption Policy Dialogue (FY03-05)
Judicial Assessment (FY03)

Health Reform Impact (FY01)
Financial Sector Assessment (FSAP) (FYD1)
Road Financing Study (FY02)
ROSC (FY02)
Development Policy Agenda (FY02)
Public Management (FY02)
Development Policy Review (FY04)
FSAP Follow-up (FY04)
_________________________________________________
Labor Market Study (FY01)
Geothermal and Environment Project (FY00)
Transparency
Public Expenditure Review (FY02-03)
Rural Environment Protection Project (FY00)
Competition Policy Review (FY03)
Social Mitigation for Enterprise Restructuring
Social Assessment of Energy Tariff Reform
(FY04)
(FY05)
Labor Market Reform Policy Dialogue (FY0405)
Education Opportunity Pilot (FY00)
Rural Development Project I (FY00)
Participation
Farmers Pension (FY01)
Factor Markets in Agriculture (FY01)
Client Survey (FY02)
Living Standards Assessment Update (FY03)
Global Distance Learning Network (FY03-05)
Knowledge Economy Assessment (FY03)
_____________________________________________
Public
Administration
Reform

Bank activities to help strengthen governance are summarized in Box 2 above. For examnple, as part

72.

of the Bank's fiduciary requirements, an Accounting and Auditing Standards Review and a Procurement

Review were completed in 2000. The Bank will continue to monitor the application of auditing and
financial management practices through supervision of ongoing projects and the development of
procurement regulations and procedures under the recently approved IDF grant. Since Poland is nearing
accession with the EU, and the EU will adopt and imnplement international accounting standards in all its
member countries, the Bank will continue to support smooth implementation of LAS in ongoing and future
projects. During this CAS period, other analytical work will include a PER, follow up to the FSAP as may
be agreed with the authorities, a poverty analysis update and a Development Policy Review.
Country Creditworthiness and Bank Exposure. Poland's external debt remains relatively moderate
by intemational standards (43.6 percent of GDP at the
end of 2000 and 39.4 percent of GDP at the end of
Figure 3: Poland's Sovereign USS

73.

2001).

Eurobond Spreads
, -A
g7

-190-

-1-

-

--------------------------------------------------------

°-. 9 --t--------------------u---------------2

F.

10-

o so 0 -…
701

_----------on

-.

Poland has made substantial

economic

progress over the last decade and the need for Bank
financial assistance has dimninished, as reflected in the
adjacent graph which depicts the declining spread
Poland has been facing from rmid-1998 until mnid-2002
its Eurobond issues. Given the current trajectory
t,oward EU membership in 2004, spreads should

continue to reflect the anticipated application of EU
While a delay in the
parameters in Poland.
by a major reversal
accompanied
membership timetable would undoubtedly impact spreads, unless this were
of reforms and sustained macroeconomic mismanagement, Poland would remain creditworthy. External
debt is projected to decline to 34.6 percent of GDP by the end of 2005 in the "accelerated reform"' scenario

(see Table 4). In the "gradual reformn" scenario, the ratio of external debt to GDP is projected to rise to 38.4

- 23 percent of GDP by the end of 2005, just above its level at the end of 2001. Should Bank lending reach the
ceiling set out in this CAS of US$433 million a year from FY03 to FY05 with a sharp decline of lending
thereafter, Bank exposure would peak at US$2.7 billion in 2005, and would decline from 6.6 percent of
exports in 2000 to 5.6 percent of exports in 2005 under the "accelerated reform" scenario. The Bank's share
of total debt outstanding would remain around 3.4 percent during the CAS period and would decline from
1.4 percent of GDP in 2000 to 1.2 percent in 2005. Debt service to the Bank is estimated to reach US$436
million in 2005, representing 0.9 percent of exports, 4.7 percent of total public debt service, and 0.9 percent
of central government revenue. The "gradual reform" scenario increases Bank exposure indicators only
marginally, even if disbursements from Bank operations were to remain at the upper end of the proposed
lending range.
74.
Bank Lending Triggers. This CAS is based on a single lending scenario for Poland in the coming
years. In this base scenario, as the project-specific triggers set out below are met and agreement reached on
project content, the Bank could lend up to a cumulative US$1.3 billion during FY03-05. This ceiling is
lower than Poland's risk indicators could justify and reflects the limits the Government has determined for
itself in its borrowing plan. The base scenario lending program assumes the maintenance of an appropriate
macroeconomic framework. The fiscal deterioration of the last few years took place almost completely in
the Central Government's recurrent balance (see Table 2). The macro trigger therefore concentrates on
improving this balance from 2002. This would also facilitate a much-needed re-composition of expenditures
away from current towards investment. New lending would be suspended in the unlikely case that there is
significant backtracking on reforms and/or sustained weak fiscal management, a failure to make progress in
rebalancing the mix of fiscal and monetary policy, and no progress in re-composition of expenditures.
Specifically the Bank has agreed with the authorities on the following:
;Macro trigger: On track for an increase in central government savings'of 1 percent of GDPover the period of the CAS. comnpared with an,estimated level of--4.11 percent of GDP in 2002,
,, - nclpdmg mcreases each year of atJleast 0.25 percent of GDP, and without evidence of
-detenoration'in recurrent balances of the rest ofrgeneral government.
75.
Proceeding with each operation in the base scenario would also depend upon the adoption and initial
implementation of reform actions related to project objectives. As it is possible that the conditions for some
operations will be met while others could be delayed, the CAS in this sense is self-correcting for reform
performance, and actual total lending may be smaller than the estimate above. While project design details
are yet to be finalized, it is likely that a number of these operations could take the form of SIMs or SECALs.
The specific triggersfor each loan are summarized in Box 3 below.
76.
IFC Operations. Since Poland joined IFC in 1987, the Corporation has invested over US$550
rnillion (US$404 million for its own account and US$153 million in syndications) in a wide range of sectors,
including manufacturing of glass, paper, electrical equipment and steel, hotels, telecommunications, urban
development, ietailing, agribusiness, mortgage financing, SME financing, banking and private equity funds.
IFC has also approved a further US$200 million for investments in the Central Europe region, much of
which has been invested in Poland.
Furthermore, IFC has undertaken many technical assistance and
advisory assignments in Poland, ranging from privatization of several cement plants in the early l990s to
advice on leasing, housing finance and pension reform. IFC's current portfolio in Poland stands at US$88
million. As part of IFC's strategy of consolidating its field offices into regional hubs, in July 2001 IFC's
Warsaw office was converted into a hub covering the Corporation's work in Poland, Czech Republic, Slovak
Republic, Hungary, Estonia, Lithuania and Latvia. IFC is co-located with the World Bank office in Warsaw,
which facilitates close cooperation.

5

"General government" includes the central government and, inter alia, extra budgetary funds and agencies, local

governments and their funds and agencies (see Table 4).

-24 -

Box 3: Triggers for Bank Lending Program
i -ird Roads Proleci - Developtnent and' initiation of- a cohereit roadsexpenditure/investment program to meet Poland's needs as it joins the EU,' including '
consolidating responsibility for management of road construction and mainienance into one.,
organizaton. and ensuring sufficient -financing. This project would on*I proceed if.,
agreement is reached on measwes aimed at improving institutional capacity regardirig road- managernent and planning and financial constraints related to Poland's absorpti'on of fuindsr
.
longer-term partners, notably EU, EIB and EBRD.
| fronmother,
-

,-

-

Third Coal ProEgrm -- Adopton and initial implementation of a reform program to mike.
j. the coal sector profitable, to-privatize the bulk of the sector in a time-bound manner, to
'open the sector to cormpetifioo and to put in place appropriate social supportSocial Afitiiation for Enrerprise Restrucruring - Passage of a new bankruptcy2law allowing' -,
TCbapter- l t-pe work out arrangements. and implementation of the enterpnse'restructufing`%&.
;~ $. pirogram with appropriate market test, privatizaton, financial accountability and oversight'
-.transparency and social mitigation arrangements.
, Second Rrurai Develo-nenr -Proiect - Satisfactory implementaton of the- first rural
1I ;,development 'project anid initial .steps to improve incentives.- includmng the be-nefito
_ 'I ontribufownofor-the future operations of KRUS. The loan for this project would.only
,---a-proceed if agreernent is reached on measures to inprove the nstitutional capacity aid-to--*
m!anarfinancial flows 'includin funds from other long-term partners, notably the
'-'h

:t4,i;Educau3~P?o,ec.i`-Adoption-and initial implem.entation of an education reform prograrn.'.
to foU6v:'up'the-1999-reforms, geared to imipro .e quality of outcomes, including closing
* -gaps between urban and rural schools performance, and rntionatzing school infrastructure
',J-t

and resource allocation.

--

' '

-

-

-

"

2'SSeconmd
.-

Projecr- Adoption and initnal implementation of measures to uncrease
fHealthe fficiency 4n resource allocanon and management. aimed at reduction of,arrears by half,
setting up.of quality accreditation centers, and rationalizing the hospital system by
preparing a master plan for consolidation of health facilities and hospital beds.

IFC's Strategy. Given the growing availability of long-term financing from private sources and
77.
Poland's prospects for EU accession soon, IFC will focus its investment and advice selectively in a few
areas where the signaling impact of IFC's participation is expected to yield significant results in termns of
development impact, social benefits, and institutional development In the context of Bank Group prograrn,
IFC will coordinate its activities closely with other international financing agencies such as EBRD, to ensure
that it focuses on areas where its value-added is highest, and to ensure that IFC's private sector activities are
consistent with policy reforms being supported by the Bank. Potential examples are illustrated below:
*

Complex privatization and post-privatization cases where IFC's participation may help to strengthen
the transparency and credibility of the privatization process, and assist with structuring the postprivatization investment program - particularly where potential investors might be concerned about
regulatory or environmental risks. IFC's involvement might encourage the participation of credible
strategic investors. Possible areas for IFC participation in privatization include the financial sector,
chemical plants and refineries, municipal infrastructure and other infrastructure sectors where private
investor interest might be limited, such as railroads.

*

Promoting public-private partnerships in health and education. Private participation in both of these
sectors is nascent, although growing. IFC is in a good position to promote socially responsible, efficient
private participation in these sectors by strongly capitalized and well-managed strategic investors, within
the framework of an evolving policy and regulatory environmnent under discussion with the Bank. IFC has
recently made two health-related investments in Poland.

-25 *

Supporting further institutional development in the financial sector. EFC's interventions would focus
mostly in areas involving more complex funding instruments. This could include, among other areas,
supporting the expansion of access to housing finance (which remains under-developed in Poland),
stimulating the corporate bond market, facilitating the sale of non-perforning loans, developing the
securitization market and, perhaps supporting further development of the pension fund industry. In
addition, to the extent that SMIEs are not being adequately serviced by financial intermediaries, particularly
in rural areas, there may be a role for IFC to work with domestic financial institutions to improve access to
SME funding.

*

Promoting renewable energy sources and energy efficiency. IFC will consider investments in
commercially viable and environmentally sustainable projects which promote renewable energy or
energy savings. Such projects might involve the commercial application of technologies such as wind
or biomass generation, or rehabilitating existing assets to make them more environmentally efficient.

*

*

Strengthening corporate governance. Through its participation in Supervisory Boards of investee
companies, technical advisory work and the screening process for new investments, IFC will continue to
place emphasis on strengthening corporate govemance. For example, IFC has recently undertaken an
assignment with the Warsaw Stock Exchange to advise on corporate governance issues.
Selective financing of domestic manufacturing companies. On a very selective basis, IFC will
consider financing domestic companies where a clear, strong role for IFC financing can be established.
Examples might include large, complex projects requiring very long term financing, projects where
private financiers are cautious about investing (e.g., because there is little prior history of private
investment, or because of significant environmental risks) or projects involving the use of financing
instruments which would have a positive wider inpact, such as corporate bonds.

*

Eastward investments by Polish companies - projects involving investment into the CIS countries by
Polish firms.

Before IFC considers any new investment in Poland, it will consider its potential role carefully. If
78.
IFC judges that private financiers would be willing to provide funds without its participation, or if the wider
development impact of its participation is not likely to be significant, IFC will not proceed further. While the
number of IFC transactions is expected to be relatively low, one important determinant of demand for IFC
financing will be the pace and depth of the Government's program to privatize some of the remaining large
financial and infrastructure assets.
The Bank and IFC will seek to ensure coordinated approaches where this would be helpful. There
79.
is scope for strong complementarities between World Bank Group support for sectoral pre-privatization
restructuring and social support programs and IFC support for specific privatization transactions and postprivatization development. There is also potential for close cooperation in health, education, and renewable
energy.
MIGA currently does not have any exposure for projects in Poland and, given continued progress
80.
toward EU accession, it is unlikely that the agency will be asked to issue political risk guarantees in the
future. MIGA did, however, play an important role in providing guarantees for investments into Poland in
the early and mid-1990s, issuing a total of 12 contracts for over US$146 million of coverage. One of
MIGA's strategic priorities is to promote "south-south" investments, i.e. among emerging markets and
developing countries. In that context, MIGA is ready to assist Polish investors as they begin to venture into
markets in the former Soviet Union and into developing countries. MIGA also may provide assistance to
Poland's official export credit and investment insurance agency, either through co- and reinsurance or
through hands-on training regarding the underwriting and issuance of investmnent insurance.

-

26 -

Figure 4: Coordination of Future External Assistance to Poland
(Involvement of Poland's External Partners)

o

____

*0E

_

IMFD.

_

Creatin

4

*

EuropeanUio_

EIB

Enhancing Sustainable Private Sector Growth and Job
Ceto

Strengthening the
Effectiveness of Public
Expenditures

-

_

U . :--

:

_

_

0

_

. c1

_

.

_

=-3_

a.... =

:_

E

E

E

Note: See also Annex B II for details on program activities.
Major role with intensive

dialogue
m

on systemic reforms

involvement
[n
consistent with needed reforms L
Li] Substantial
m

Less substantial or no

involvement

Coordination with other partners. Poland receives substantial financial and other assistance from
81.
other international financial institutions, in particular from EfIB and EBRD, and from the European
COmmTiSSiOn as the country prepares to accede into the EU. The Bank Group's planned assistance program
takes this other assistance fully into account. The EIB with a lending program of E500-600 million annually
and a total portfolio of around ES billion plans to be mainly involved in infrastructure and environmental
protection. In past years it has also had large programs in municipal and private sectors, including
privatization of SOEs. The EBRD with a total portfolio of about £2.5 billion has a lending program to
support the private sector including SMEs and in the past has also been involved in infrastructure,
environmental protection, municipal and private sectors. The EU is assisting the pre-accession process
through PHARE (technical support) and ISPA (investment financing). Poland expects to start receiving
SAPARD funds for agricultural investment and rural development in 2003. At present, the EU is allocating
about e900 million per year though Poland has not taken full advantage of this funding due to absorptive
capacity constraints.
82.
While no formnal donor coordination mechanisms exist for Poland, there is a long tradition of
informal coordination on an as-needed basis among the different organizations supporting Poland's
development efforts. Recent examples of such close cooperation are the first Hard Coal Sector Adjustment
Loan (where the EU-financed special training and job creation programns for miners as a complement to the
Bank-supported sectoral reform-program); the Railway Restrcturing Loan (in which the Bank and EBRD
cofinanced implementation of severance packages for railway workers); and the Bank's work on anticorruption, carried out in close cooperation with NGOs. Such cooperation will continue in the future. As
depicted in Figure 4 above, the Bank will take a major role in aspects of public sector reform, and health and
education reforms, which are areas where Poland's other partners have assistance programs but are less
engaged with the systemic reform issues. In economic restructuring, infrastructure, and rural development,
various European institutions (e.g., EU, EI, EBRD) play roles; the Bank's involvement in these areas will
complement other partners by working with the Government on systemic and institutional reforms needed to
facilitate the absorption and effectiveness of the greater financial resources that these other institutions will
provide. In other areas such as private sector development, in economic restructuring other than the coal
sector, financial systems, and environment, other institutions will take a lead role while the Bank and IFC will
have limited programs.

-27 -

VI. RISKS
Poland faces several risks to its prospects for returning to rapid economic growth leading to real
83.
convergence with the EUI 5 and improved social outcomes that are essential for broad based improvements
in living standards. One internal risk relates to the possible inability to bring about imnproved coordination in
macroeconomic management and implement admittedly difficult structural reforns. It is widely understood
that these reforms are critical to Poland's development prospects, but it is less clear how to forge a sufficient
political consensus for the reforms to proceed quickly and consistently. On balance, there is a risk that
reform implementation will face some delays and be less than comprehensive, and that, accordingly, growth
over the next few years would be closer to the gradual reform scenario presented above. In the case,
however, of a failure to quickly reduce budget deficits combined with dismal growth performance, Poland's
public debt dynamics could approach the constitutional limit of 60 percent of GDP within a few years. If the
limit is reached, a balanced budget would automatically be imposed, which could result in an abrupt and
costly fiscal adjustment. To mitigate this risk, and to ensure investor confidence and macroeconomic
stability, Poland would benefit from moving ahead with fiscal adjustment well before the debt limit is
reached. Nonetheless the Bank's lending strategy, based on gradual improvement in the underlying fiscal
balance and linking individual loans to progress with relevant reforms, would provide adequate protection to
the Bank in such a scenario. IFC's investments would probably be very limited, however, if the privatization
of major assets stalled. A more extreme scenario, where fiscal management collapses dramatically because
of a halt to structural reforms, appears unlikely both because of the underlying track record of fiscal
prudence which Poland has shown during transition so far, and because of the growing discipline that
approaching EU accession provides.
In a scenario of no or minimal fiscal adjustment, prospects for monetary easing would be very slim.
84.
If inflation were to reemerge, a tightening of monetary policy would clearly be more likely. This would
create a risk of sustained economic slowdown that would continue to harm enterprise profitability, with
adverse social consequences as unemployment would further rise. It would also have harmful effects on the
soundness of the banking sector as losses on loan portfolios could accumulate. In effect, banks might
increase provisioning and interest margins, hence further increasing the cost of borrowing and prolonging
the economic slowdown. In this environment the Bank's role would be limited to analysis and policy
dialogue.
Another risk to Poland's growth may be imposed by further economic slowdown in Europe.
85.
Although exports as a percent of GDP are not that high, 29 percent in 2001, exports' contribution to GDP
growth has greatly increased in recent years. Hence, a protracted slowdown in Europe would have a more
pronounced impact on Poland's economy than just a few years ago. The indirect effect of the diminished
opportunities for Poland's exports to the West would be reduced output and profitability of those firms
engaged in export activities and those linked to it. Although the extemal imbalance has improved
significantly over the last few years, Poland's borrowing requirements remain significant. While much of
the external borrowing is undertaken by the private sector, a negative shift of sentiment toward emerging
markets would increase costs and put pressure on firms' profitability. The direct balance of payment impact
would be an increase in the current account deficit and hence increased extemal borrowing requirements,
negatively affecting the trend of creditworthiness indicators. However, as long as Poland's fundamental
economic management and response to a deteriorating external environment remained sound, the Bank
would continue to engage and could review the level of its assistance to take into account Poland's increased
needs.
The last risk relates to the timing of EU accession. At this point it looks likely that accession will
86.
take place in 2004. According to the current timetable this will require that Poland and other accession
countries complete negotiations in late 2002, that there is then a successful referendum on accession in
Poland, and that existing EU members ratify the Accession Treaty without significant delay. Some delay in
accession due to "technical " factors such as delay in completing negotiations could impact the investment
climate in Poland, and thus affect its growth prospects temporarily; but a rapid recovery would be likely
once accession is completed. Considerably more serious - but at this time judged less likely -would be a
scenario where an event (such as a "no" vote in the Polish referendum) would delay Poland's EU accession

-

28 -

indefinitely. This would have imnportant political and economic impacts, and, in this unlikely case, the Bank
would need to reassess its work in Poland.
VII. CONCLUSION
87.
The main aim of this World Bank Group strategy is to support achievement of Poland's near term
goal of EU accession and the longer term objectives of achieving sustainable growth and higher living
standards. The proposed Bank strategy and program: to help Poland improve the effectiveness of
Government expenditures and programs, and to enhance private sector-led growth and employment creation,
while supporting the rebalancing of the macroeconomic policy framework, is consistent with the broader
"Frameworkfor World Bank Group Support to European Union (EU) Accession Candidate Countries of
Central and Eastern Europe" (SecM2001-0564, October 10, 2001). The Bank Group plans to prepare a
CAS Progress Report towards the end of this CAS period to update the Board on the evolution of future
Bank Group assistance to Poland.
James. D. Wolfensohn
President
By:
Shengman Zhang
Washington D.C.
November 7, 2002

Peter L. Woicke

-

29 -

Table 8: Poland and the Millennium Development Goals
Targets
1. Reduce the proportion of
people living in extreme
poverty and suffering from
hunger by half between
1990 and 2015.

Position of the World
20% of the world population
live on less than US$1/day
(WBG estimate for 2000).

2. Achieve universal
completion of primary
education by 2015 for both
boys and girls.
3. Eliminate gender
disparities in primary and
secondary education by
2005, and for all levels by
2015.
4. Reduce infant and child
mortality rates by two thirds
between 1990 and 2015.

90% of the world's
elementary-school-age
children (6-14) are enrolled
(WBG estimate for 1997).
Worldwide, there is a gender
gap of 7.6% in the primary
education Gross Enrollment
Ratio (WBG estimate for
1996).
Worldwide, the infant
mortality rate per 1,000 live
births was 54.2 (WBG
estimate for 1999).
Worldwide, there are 400
maternal deaths per 100,000
live births (estimates depend
on method used; UNFPA
1995). The goal for births
attended by skilled health
staff is 90% by 2015.
In 1999, the worldwide
prevalence rate of HIV/AIDS
among adults aged 15-49 was
1.07% (WHO data).

5. Reduce maternal
mortality rate by three
quarters between 1990 and
2015.

Current Position of Poland
Using the US$ 1/ day measure, in 1998 fewer than 2% of
the Polish population live in poverty. A more relevant
middle income country threshold would be US$4.30/day.
Using this measure 18% of the population in 1999 lived
below this line. During the past two-three years this
indicator has likely increased due to the high rise of
unemployment.
Poland has achieved this goal: the net enrolment rate in
primary school was 98.6% in 2001. The gross enrolment
rate is 100.4%.
No gender gap in primary or secondary education exists in
Poland.

Infant mortality in Poland in 2000 was 9 per 1000 live
births, which higher than for high income and EU
countries (about 5-6 per 1000) and lower than world
averages.
Matemal mortality rate for Poland in 1995 was 12 per
100,000 live births, as compared to Sweden's 8 per
100,000, and France's 20 per 100,000.
Births attended by skilled health staff was 99.8% in 2000

In 1999, the prevalence rate of HIV/AIDS among adults in
Poland was 0.07%, lower than the average for EU
countries (0.31%). New infections are thought to be at a
stable rate; preventive actions continue to be important
given the higher incidence of new infections in Poland's
neighbors.
In 2000 98% of urban homes and 83% of rural homes had
Worldwide, in 2000,
7. Ensure environmental
access to water mains network. Quality of water, which is
approximately 80% of the
sustainability. One indicator
poor in some areas, is more of an issue for Poland than
population had access to
is access to an improved
access.
water.
water source.
Youth unemployment rate (percent of total labor force
8. Youth unemployment
ages 15-24) for Poland swelled from 30% in 1999 to 45%
rate
mid-2002, a substantial problem for Poland.
__in
_____ _____ ____
_____
____________
Note: The Millennium Development Goals were adopted unanimously by the intemational community at the UN's General Assembly
meeting in September 2000. Goals which are adapted to country circumstances can be important aspects of a country's poverty
reduction strategy and can represent part of the road map for development aims and assistance.
6. Halt and reverse by 2015
the spread of HIV/AIDS,
malaria, and other diseases.

Key Economic & Program Indicators - Changes from Last CAS

Annex Al
Page I of I

Preparedforall CASs/ProgressReports, but included in Board version of ProgressReports Only

As Of Date 08/29/2002

Forecastin Last CAS

Actual

Current CAS Forecast
(Accelerated Reform Scenario)

Economy (CY)

1998a

1999b

2000b

Growth rates (%)
GDP
Exports
Imports

4.8
6.5
18.2

3.5
3.2
2.3

4.5
7.2
3.3

Inflation (%)

9.3

7.6

National accounts (% GDP)
Current account balance
Gross investment

4.3
25.6

Public finance (% GDP)d
Fiscal balance
Foreign financing
International reserves

2001

1999a

2000 a

2001 b

2002c

2003c

2004c

2005c

5.1
8.2
4.7

4.1
-2.6
1.0

4.0
23.2
15.6

1.0
9.3
-1.5

1.2
4.0
1.4

3.5
3.9
4.5

5.0
5.7
6.4

5.5
6.2
6.5

7.6

6.9

7.3

10.1

5.5

2.1

2.3

2.4

2.5

-6.3
26.9

-6.4
27.6

-6.2
27.7

-7.5
26.4

-6.3
26.1

-4.1
21.6

-3.6
22.3

-3.8
23.3

4.3
24.8

-4.3
25.5

0.1
-0.3

0.3
-0.3

0.8
-0.5

0.9
-0.6

-2.0
-0.2

-2.2
-0.7

4.5
-1.5

-5.4
0.4

-4.9
0.7

-4.5
0.2

-3.5
0.2

7.2

7.2

5.7

4.7

6.7

7.1

6.9

7.0

6.5

6.1

5.8

FY00
160.7
261.5

FYOI
154.5
323.4

FY02 b
100.0
314.3

FY03
400.0
234.6

FY04
400.0
440.4

FY05
500.0
488.5

FY06
N/A
354.5

(as months of imports)

Program(Bank's FY)
Lending ($ million)
Gross disbursements
($ million)

a.
b.
c.
d.

Estimated year
Actual outcome
Projected year
Central Government

FY98
522.0
192.7

FY99
327.0
139.7

FY00
435.1
530.0

FYOI
500.0
350.0

Annex A2
Patge I of 2

Poland at a glance
POVERTY and SOCIAL
2001
Population. mid-year (mililons)
GN per capita (AUas method, US$)
GNI (Atlas method, USS billions)

Europe &
Central
Asia
Poland

Uppermiddleincome

38.7
4,230
163.6

475
1,960
930

504
4,460
2,248

0.0
0.6

0.1
0.6

1.3
1.8

9/2102

Development diamond'
LIfe expectancy

Average annual growth, 199541
Population (%)
Labor force (%)
Most recent estimate (latest year available, 1995-01)
Poverty (%of population below national poverty llne)1
Urban population (%of total population)
Life expectancy at birth (years)
Infant mortality (per 1.000 live births)
Child malnutrition (%of children under 5)
Access to an Improved water source (%of populaton)
Illiteracy (%of populatIon age 15+)
Gross primary enrollment (%of school-age populaton)
Male
Female

18
62
73
9

24
63
69
20

..

..

97
0
100
101
100

90
3
102
103
101

77
71
24
9
87
10
127
128

1991

2000

2001

GDP (US$ billions)
Gross domestic Investment/GDP
Exports of goods and services/GDP
Gross domesUc savings/GDP
Gross national savings/GDP

76.5
19.9
23.5
18.0
15.9

157.6
26.1
29.3
19.2
21.8

176.3
21.6
29.1
17.8
20.5

Current account balance/GDP
Interest payments/GDP
Total debt/GDP
Total debt service/exports
Present value of debtVGDP
Present value of debVexports

-1.8
0.6
69.9
6.5

-6.3
1.5
44.1
30.9

*4.1
1.6
40.2
28.4

1991-01

2000

2001

200145

5.1
4.9

4.0
4.0

1.0
0.9

3.3
3.1

(%of GOP)
Agriculture
Industry
Manufacturing
Services

Access to Improved water source

Poland

Upper-middle-income group

-

Economic ratios'
Trade

Investment

Domestic
savings
svn

Poland
Upper-middle-incomegroup

12.1

23.2

11.8

5.8

1981

1991

2000

2001

Growth of Investment and GDP (%)

..

Private consumption
General govemment consumption
Imports of goods and services

6.6

3.7

34.9
20.6

3.68
37.3
19.7

20

46.1

61.4

59.1

01

57.9
24.1

64.4

65.7
16.6

16.0

36.3

33.0

199141
0.1

2000

2001

-6.0

1.5

Industry
Manufacturing
Services

5.5
7.1
4.5

6.5
7.1
4.2

-0.6
-0.6
3.9

Private consumption
General govemment consumpton
Gross domestic Investment
Imports of goods and services

5.0
2.6

2.7
1.7

2.1
0.5

11.6

3.9
15.6

-13.6
3.2

1981-91

Agriculture

.

_

47.3

25.4

(average annual growth)

|primary

enrollment

Indebtedness
1981-91

STRUCTURE of the ECONOMY

pGross

>

\

126

KEY ECONOMIC RATIOS and LONG-TERM TRENDS
1981

(average annual growth)
GOP
GDP per capita
Exports of goods and services

GNp
per
capita

15.8

010

ooNs

s9

-20

-

GD1

-- t-GDP

1

_

Growth of exports and imports %)
30
20.

o

9a

9g7 9S

9

00

-

uimports

-10i
-Exprts

Note: 2001 data are preliminary estimates.
The diamonds show four key Indicators in the country (in bold) compared with its income-group average. If data are missing, the diamond will
be incomplete.
Based unon data from Worid Bank Publication 'Maklno transition work for evervone' (20001 in table 1.1: ECA number Is unweiohted averaae

01

Annex A2
Page 2 of 2

Poland
PRICES and GOVERNMENT FINANCE

Domestic prices

1981

1991

2000

2001

(%change)

Inflation (%)
d

Consumer prices
Implicit GDP deflator

..
..

70.3
55.2

10.1
7.1

5.5
4.3

Govemment flnance

.40

30
20

10.

(%of GOP, includes current grants)

l

0

Current revenue

..
..
..

Current budget balance
Overall surplus/deficit

l

I

25.9

19.8

19.5

go

97

-2.1
-4.0

-1.8
-2.2

-3.4
-4.5

-

GDPdeflator

98

99

00

01

CPI

_

TRADE

(US$ millions)

1981

Total exports (fob)
Food and Live Animals
Machinery and Transport Equipment
Manufactures

Total imports (cif
Food
Fuel and energy
Capitalgoods

..
..
..
..
..
..

-.
..

Export price Index (1995=100)
Import price index (1995=100)
Terms of trade (1995=100)

..
..

1991

2000

2001

14.903

31,651
10,820
13,680

36,092
2.678
13,089
30,281

15,522

48,940

50,275

..
..
..

2,561
5,307

2,678

20,0z

5,487

11,672

11,817

10.000
o

143
146
98

137
146
94

..
..
..

40
49
82

2,367

Export and Import levels (US$ mill.)
60,000

d_ii,

soo
4000030000-

_

97

* Exports

_

i

ntImports

BALANCE of PAYMENTS

(US$ millions)

1981

1991

2000

2001

..

14,337
14,050
287

31,760
46,614
-14,854

34,263
46,914
-12,651

Net income
Netcurrenttransfers

..
..

-2,863
1,217

-759
5.661

-896
6,381

0
2

Current account balance

..

-1,359

-9,952

-7,166

-

Financing items (net)
Changes In net reserves

..
..

493
866

10,627
-675

6,726
440

..

3,814
1.1

27,466
4.3

26,564
4.1

1981

1991

2000

2001

(US$ millions)
Total debt outstanding and disbursed
IBRD
IDA
IDA
Total debt service
IBRD
IDA

13.649
0
0
0
1,300
0
0

53,420
417
0
0
969
8
0

69,497
2,229
0
0
10,520
318
0

70,815
2,151
0
0
10,466
357
0

Composition of net resource flows
Official grants
Official creditors
Private creditors
Foreign direct investment
Portfolio equity

0
813
1,907
18
0

909
253
244
117
0

259
-1,108
-2,755
9,338
894

276
-999
354
6,928
-306

0
0
0
0
0
0

1,085
349
0
349
8
341

197
349
199
150
119
31

0
140
219
-79
138
-217

Exports of goods and services
Imports of goods and services
Resource balance

..
..

Current account balance to GDP (%)
6
4

2

_
i

-.
8
.10-

Memo:
Reserves including gold (US$ millions)
Conversion rate (DEC, local/USS)
EXTERNAL DEST and RESOURCE FLOWS

Worid Bank program
Commitments
Disbursements
Principal repayments
Net flows
Interest payments
Net transfers
Development Economics

________________

Composition of 2001 debt (USS mill.)

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~G:
9382 A:2,151
0~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~:4,617
.
.
/
E20,506

<
F: 34 19-

-

A- IBRD
B-IDA
0 -Other multiateral
C-IMF

E-Bilateral
F- Prtivate
G-Short-tefn

9/2/02

Annex B2
Page I of 1

Poland
Performance and Management
Portfolio
Selected Indicators* of Bank

Indicator
Portfolio Assessment
Number of Projects Under Implementation
Average Implementation Period (years) b
Percent of Problem Projects by Number ^ c
Percent of Problem Projects by Amount a,c
Percent of Projects at Risk by Number , d
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount 4d
Disbursement Ratio (%) '
Portfolio Management
CPPR during the year (yes/no)
Supervision Resources (total US$'000)
Average Supervision (US$'000/project)

Memorandum Item
Proj Eval by OED by Number
Proj Eval by OED by Amt (US$ millions)
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Number
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt

a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
*

2000

2001

2002

2003

19
3.5
6.3
1.3
6.3
1.3
24.3

17
4.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
20.4

15
4.2
8.3
14.6
8.3
14.6
29.8

12
4.6
16.7
25.7
25.0
34.7
10.8

no
$1,700.0
$89

no
$1,300.0
$76

no
$1,200.0
$80

no
$852.0
$71

Since 1990
27
3,125.6
22.2
13.4

Last Five Years
26
2,663.3
19.2
13.0

As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY).
Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio.
Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) and/or implementation progress (IP).
As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the
beginning of the year: Investment projects only. .
All indicators are for projects active in the Portfolio, with the exception of Disbursement Ratio,
which includes all active projects as well as projects which exited during the fiscal year.

Annex B3
Page 1 of 2
Poland
IBRD Program Summary
Proposed IBRD Base-Case Lending Program a
Strategi'c
Rewards b
(HIMIL)
400.0
H
400.0

Fiscalyear

ProjID

2003

Roads 3
Sub-total FY03

2004

Coal SECAL 3
Social Mitigation for Enterprise
Restructuring
Sub-total FY04

400.0

Rural Development 2
Health 2
Education Opportunities
Sub-total FY05

200.0
150.0
150.0
500.0

2005

TOTAL FY03-05

2003
2004

US$(M)

200.0
200.0

Implementation b
Risk (HIMIL)
M

H
H

H
H

H
H
H

M
H
H

M
M

M
M

1,300.0

Proposed GEF/PCF Program
GEF Krakow Energy Efflciency
PCFRenewable Energy

a/ This table presents the proposed program for the current and the next two fiscal years.
b/ Each project is rated high (H), moderate (M) and low (L) for strategic rewards and
implementation risks.

Annex B3
Page 2 of 2

Poland
IFC and MIGA Program
FY 2000-2003
2000 2001 2002 2003
IFC approvals (US$m)

2.13

Sector (%)
PULP & PAPER

100

Total

100

0

0

0

0

0

0

Investment instrument(%)
Loans
Equity
Quasi-Equity
Other

Total
MIGA guarantees (US$m)

100

0
2.20

Annex B4

Page 1 of I
Poland
Summary of Nonlending Services

Product

Recent completions
Labor Market Study
Fnancial Sector Assessment (FSAP)
Factor Markets in Agriculture
Development Policy Agenda
Public Management
Distance Leaming
Energy Policy Notes
Client Survey

Completion
FY

Cost
(US$000) Audiencea Objectiveb

01
01
01
02
02
02
02
02

233
256
232
66
75
18
27
50

G/P
G/B
G/P
G
G
G/P
G
B

K/PD
K/PS
K/PD
PS
PS
K
PS
PD

Underway
Public Expenditure Review
HIV/AIDS in Poland and the Baltics
Education Policy Dialogue
Judicial Assessment
Knowledge Economy Assessment
Living Standards Assessment Update
Labor Market Policy Dialogue
IDF on Strengthening Budget Management
IDF on Procurement
Cities of Change
Health Policy Dialogue
Competition Policy Review
Anticorruption Policy Dialogue
Energy Sector Policy Dialogue
Pensions in Multipillar System
Global Distance Learning Network

02-03
02-03
03
03
03
03
04-05
03-04
02-04
03-05
03
03
03-05
03-05
03-04
03-05

330
50
50
50
75
175
75
15
45
40
.30
50
363
75
150
75

G
G/P
G
G/P
G/P
G/P
G/P
G/P
G
G/P
G
G/P
G/P
G/P
G
G/P

PS
K/PD
PS
K/PD
K
K/PD
PS
PS

Planned
Develoment Policy Review
FSAP Follow-up
Social Assessment of Energy Tariff Reforn

04
04
05

275
40
100

G/B/P
G
G

K
PS
K

a. Government, donor, Bank, public dissemination.
b. Knowledge generation, public debate, problem-solving.

PS
K/PS
PS
K/PD
K/PD
K
PS
K

Annex B5

Page I of I

Poland Social Indicators
Latest single year

1970-75

1980-85

34.0
0.9
55.4
2.3

37.2
0.9
60.0
2.3

POPULATION
Total population, mid-year (miilions)
Growth rate (%annual average for period)
Urban population (%of population)
Total fertility rate (births per woman)

Same regionflncome group

199440

Europe &
Central
Asia

UppermiddleIncome

38.7
0.0
65.6
1.4

474.3
0.2
65.4
1.6

647.0
1.3
75.9
2.3

4,190

2,010
187

4,640
138

4.7
5.4
17.4

4.1
4.4
8.8

2.9
4.2
7.9

99

97

..

100

97
96

..

97
98
96

POVERTY

(%of population)
National headcount index
Urban headcount index
Rural headcount index
INCOME
GNI per capita (US$)
Consumer price index (1995=100)
Food price index (1995100)

..

..

..

..

..

0

0
0

..

INCOMEICONSUMPTION DISTRIBUTION
Gini index
Lowest quintile (%of income or consumption)
Highest quintile (%of income or consumption)
SOCIAL INDICATORS
Public expenditure
Health (%of GDP)
Education (%of GDP)
Social security and welfare (%of GDP)
Net primary school enrollment rate
(%of age group)
Total
Male
Female
Access to an Improved water source
({ of population)
Total
Urban
Rural
Immunkaton rate
(%under 12 months)
Measles
DPT
Child malnutrition (%under 5 years)
Life expectancy at birth
(years)
Total
Male
Female
Mortality
Infant (per 1,000 live births)
Under 5 (per 1.000 live births)
Adult (18-59)
Male (per 1,000 population)
Female (per 1,000 population)
Matemal (per 100,000 live births)
Births antended by skilled health staff (%)

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

96
96
96

99

182
164
31.6
7.8
39.7

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

87
92

..

..

..

..

70

..
..
..

92
94

90

97
98

93
93

92
88

..

71
67
74

71
67
75

73
69
76

69
64
74

70
67
73

29
36

22

9
I1

20
25

28
35

217
101

254
105

221
86
12

298
127

224
136

..

..

..

..

Note: 0 or 0.0 means zero or less than half the unit shown. Net enrollment rabos exceeding 100 indicate discrepancies
between the estimates of school-age population and reported enroliment data.
2002 World Development Indicators CD-ROM, World Bank

Annex B6
Page I of 3

Poland
Key Economic Indicators
Accelerated Reform Scenario
-t

hIndicator

National accounts (as % of GDP)
Gross Domestic Product3
Agnculture
Industry
Services

1997

9Actual2sm
2
199A u 000

1998

0

Projectedl
2004

2

tOO

'

2

200

20a|

100.0
5.5
37.3
57.2

100.0
4.8
36.3
59.0

100.0
3.9
36.0
60.1

100.0
3.7
34.9
61.4

100.0
3.6
33.7
62.7

100.0
3.4
33.8
62.8

100 0
33
33.7
63.0

100.0
3.2
33.7
63 1

100 0
3.1
33.7
63.2

Total Consumption
Gross Domestic Investment
Central Govemment Investment
Private Investment
(includes increase in stocks)

79.8
24.6
1.6
22.9

79 0
26.2
1.7
24.5

80.0
26.4
1.2
25.2

80.8
26.1
1.1
25.0

82.2
21.6
0.9
20.8

83.9
22.3
1.2
21.1

82.9
23.3
1.6
21.6

81.5
24.8
20
22.8

80.3
25.5
2.5
23.0

Expons (GS)b
imports (GS)

25.5
29.8

28.2
33.4

26.1
32.5

29.3
36.3

28.9
32.8

29.4
35.7

29.5
35.6

29 5
35.7

29.5
35.3

Gross Domestic Savings
Gross National Savingsc

20.2
20.2

21.0
21.5

20.0
22.7

19.2
20.1

17.8
20.5

16.1
18.7

17.1
19.5

18.5
20.5

19.7
21 2

Memorandum items
Gross Domestic Product
(US$ million at current pnces)
Gross National Product per
Capita (USS, Atlas method)

143,974

158,445

155,039

157,585

176,256

181,623

195,844

211,924

230,958

3,810

3,940

4,010

4,190

4,240

4,470

5,030

5,530

6,030

Real Annual Growth Rates (%, calculated from 1990 prices)
Gross domestic product at market prices
6.8
Gross Domestic Income
6.2
Real Annual per Capita Growth Rates (%, calculated
Gross Domestic Product at market prices
Total Consumption
Private Consumption

4.8
6.2

from 1990 prices)
6.7
4.8
7.8
5.3
9.7
68

4.1
33

4.0
1.3

1.0
1.4

1.2
1.6

3.5
4 1

5.0
5.1

5.5
6.6

4.1
5.1
5.2

4.0
2.5
2.7

1.0
2.3
2.3

1.0
1.6
1.2

3.3
2.4
2.4

4.8
3.3
3.4

5.3
4.6
4.7

Annex B6
Page 2 of 3

Key Economic Indicators
Accelerated Reform Scenario

1997

Actual
1998
]999

2000

Estimated
2001
2002

30,953
27,229
41,968
38,549
-11,015
458
7,161
-4,312

33,799
30,122
48,028
43,842
-14,229
-567
7,937
-6,858

29,657
26,347
45,661
40,727
-16,004
-793
5,238
-11,558

31,772
28,256
46,624
41,424
-14,852
-761
5,667
-9,946

34,263
30,275
46,914
41,950
-12,651
-896
6,381
-7,166

35,985
31,836
47,313
42,138
-11,328
-975
5,757
-6,544

38,901
34,284
50,903
45,330
-12,002
-1,244
5,833
-7,404

5,139
334
-140
474
2,429
-3,590

6,296
1,587
487
2,074
4,683
-5,708

7,797
2,045
-441
2,486
1,884
-168

12,189
1,379
-569
1,948
-2,947
-675

7,115
246
-999
1,245
-635
440

5,250
-1,489
-1,359
-130
3,297
-514

4,750
482
-1,625
2,106
2,358
-185

Memorandum items
Resource balance (%of GDP)
Current Account balance (% of GDP)

-7.7
-3.0

-9.0
4.4

-10.3
-7.5

-9.4
-6.3

-7.2
4.1

-6.2
-3.6

Real annual growth rates ( YR90 prices)
Merchandise exports (FOB)
Merchandise imports (CIF)

13.7
22.0

9.4
14.6

2.0
4.4

25.3
10 8

11.6
1.0

5.3
3.1

t .e i 14 Indicator
Balance of Payments (US$ millions)
Exports (GS)b
Merchandise FOB
Imports (GS)b
Merchandise FOB
Resource balance
Net current income
Netcurrenttransfers
Current account balance'
Net private foreign investment
Long-term loans (net)
Official

Private
Other capital (net, incl. errors & ommissions

Change inreserveSd

'Proected
'2003: k 2004

2005 "

42,097
37,015
55,312
49,310
-13,215
-1,612
5,795
-9,043

45,796
40,223
59,240
52,758
-13,445
-2,186
5,689
-9,978

5,500
-1,809
2,867
2,896
-412

6,500
543
-2,503
3,046
3,183
-249

-6.1
-3.8

-6.2
-4.3

-5.8
4.3

8.5
7.8

6.5
6.9

6.7
6.7

,1,058

Annex B6
Page 3 of 3

Key Economic Indicators
Accelerated Reform Scenario

Indicator

197-

4;;714959ni

1998

7,(90
l2 fr2002

r

>200

6204,

4-

205

Public Finance (as %of GDP at market prices)'
Current revenues
Current expenditures
Current account surplus (+) or deficit(-)
Capital expenditure
Overall Balance
Foreign financing

24.0
25.0
-1.1
1.5
-2.6
-0.5

22.9
24.5
-1.7
1.3
-3.0
-0.6

20.5
21.3
-0.8
1.2
-2.0
-0.2

19.8
20.9
-1.1
1.1
-2.2
-0.7

19.5
22.8
-3.4
0.9
4.3
-1.5

20.1
24.2
-4.1
1.3
5.4
0.4

20.5
23.8
-3.3
1.6
4.9
0.7

20.2
22.7
-2.5
2.0
4.5
0.2

20.1
21.1
-1.0
2.5
3.5
0.2

Monetary Indicators
M2/GDP
Growth ofM2 (%)

37.3
30.9

39.9
25.2

42.8
19.3

43.0
11 8

46.0
12.7

47.6
9.0

49.4
10.8

51.3
12.3

52.6
11.8

Pnvate sector credit growth /

..

..

.

..

..

67.5

83.8

88.3

89.3

111.0
111.9
99.2
111.4

111.2
108 6
1024
117.0

105.8
101.5
104 2
112.3

97.5
97.7
99.9
121.6

93.6
97.9
100.9
138.2

94.6
97.2
97.3
138 6

98.3
99.9
98.4
139.4

100.7
102.0
98.7
140.3

102.7
102.5
100.3
142.1

10.5
14.9

12.8
11.8

10 4
7.3

10.4
10.1

15.1
5.5

2.1

2.3

2.4

2.5

14 0

11.8

6.7

7.1

4.3

1.7

2.4

2.6

2.7

total credit growth (%)
Price Indices (YR90 =100)
Merchandise export pnce index
Merchandise import price index
Merchandise terms of trade index
Real exchange rate (US$/LCU)
T
Real interest rate
Consumerppnceindex
(% change, penod average)
GDP deflator (%change)

a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.
g.

GDP components estimated at factor cost, as a %of GDP at factor prices
"GS" denotes "goods and services."
Includes net unrequited transfers excluding official capital grants.
Includes use of IMF resources.
Central Government.
"LCU" denotes "local currency units." An increase in US$/LCU denotes appreciation.
Average interest rate charged for loans deflated by ex-post period average consumer price index.

..

Annex B7
Page I of I

Poland
Key Exposure Indicators
Accelerated Reform Scenario
Actual
Indicator

Total debt outstanding and
disbursed (TDO) (US$m)a

1997

1998a

timtted

; 199*

2066 -

49,647

59,135

65,444

69,497

Net disbursements (US$m)'

2,459

4,210

1,773

1,405

Total debt service (TDS)
(US$m)a

2,562

4,534

8,374

153.3
34.5
7.9
15.5

162.1
37.3
12.4
13.4

17.7
17.7

2001

65,775

- 20672at

2004
0i

1;

75,864

005,

67,926

71,514

79,985

214

2,018

3,588

4,352

4,124

12,568

10,466

8,305

8,736

8,793

9,291

207.5
42.2
26.6
11.1

202.1
43.6
36.9
9.9

178.2
38.0
28.4
9.5

176.2
37.4
21.5
8.4

172.0
36.5
21.0
7.2

169.0
35.8
19.6
5.9

164.2
34.6
19.1
4.6

11.7
11.7

14.7
14.9

9.4
9.4

10.4
10.4

9.1
9.1

9.1
9.1

9.0
9.0

9.4
9.4

0.9
2,078
1.9
0.0

0.8
2,156
1.8
0.0

1.0
2,185
18
0.0

0.9
2,229
1.8
0.0

0.9
2,210
1.8
0.0

0.8
2,293
1.8
0.0

0.9
2,383
1.8
0.0

0.9
2,658
2.0
0.0

0.9
2,725
2.1
0.0

115.7
55.7

99.4
51.4

93.3
852.2

62.1
768.9

38.6
725.1

36.0
327.2

Debt and debt service indicators
(%)

TDO/XGSb
TDO/GDP
TDS/XGS
Concessional/TDO
IBRD exposure indicators (%)
IBRD DS/public DS
Preferred creditor DS/public
DS (%)'

IBRD DS/XGS
IBRD TDO (USSm)d
ShareoftBRDportfolio(%)
IDA TDO (US$m)d
IFC (US$m)
Loans
Equity and quasi-equity'

a. Includes public and publicly guaranteed debt, private nonguaranteed, use of IMF credits and net shortterm capital.
b. "XGS" denotes exports of goods and services, including workers' remittances.
c. Preferred creditors are defined as IBRD, IDA, the regional multilateral development banks, the IMF, and the
Bank for International Settlements.
d. Includes present value of guarantees.
e. Includes equity and quasi-equity types of both loan and equity instruments.

Annex B8
Page 1 of2

Poland
Operations Portfolio (IBRD and Grants)
Closed Projects
IBRD/IDA ^
Total Disbursed (Active)
of which has been repaid
Total Disbursed (Closed)
of which has been repaid
Total Disbursed (Active +Closed)
of which has been repaid
Total Undisbursed (Active)
Total Undisbursed (Closed)
Total Undisbursed (Active+Closed)

27

595.23
22.29
3,214.17
1,275.90
3,809.40
1,298.19
405.62
0.00
405.62

Active Prolects

Difference Between
Expected and Actual

Last PSR
Supervision Rating
Project

Project Name

P008563 Coal to Gas Conversion (GEF)
P008595 Bielsko-Biala Water Supply
P008604 Power Transmission
P036061 Port Access and Management
P053796 Emergency Flood Project
P008593 Roads 2
P057993 Geothermal and Environment (GEF)
P037339 Geothermal and Environment (IBRD)
P058202 Rural Development
P050660 Rural Environmental Protection
P059613 Rural Environmental Protection (GEF)
P065059 Krakow Energy Efficiency
P040795 RailwayRestructuring
P008615 Seaway/Port Modemization
Total

Ort1. Amt in US$Millions

DO

IP

FY

S
HS
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S

S
HS
U
S
S
S
S
S
U
S
S
S
S
S

1995
1996
1996
1997
1998
1998
2000
2000
2000
2000
2000
2001
2001
2001

a. Intended disbursements to date minus actual disbursements to date as projected at appraisal.

IBRD

Undisb.

Orig.

25.0

6.5
6.0
50.3
6.3
51.4
106.8
3.0
27.2
77.0
0.6
1.9
15.4
29.0
35.7
417.0

9.8
8.7
69.8
10.3
51.4
108.1
3.0
17.7
51.6
0.7
1.8
5.9
18.2
17.7

21.5
160.0
67.0
200.0
300.0
5.4
38.2
120.0
2.5
3.0
15.0
101.0
38.5
1063.7

Disbursements'

GRANT

33.4

Revmd
1.4
1.4
-0.6
3.0

Annex B8
Page 2 of 2

Poland
Statement of IFC's
Held and Disbursed Portfolio
As of 6/30/2002
(In US Dollars Millions)
Disbursed

Held
FY Approval
1996
1997
1999
1996/97
1998
1993
1995/97/98/00
1997
1998
1993
1994/96
1993

Company
Baltic Malt
CPF
ESCO Polska
Gaspol
Global Hotels
Huta Warszawa
Intercell
Norgips
Paroc Polska
PEF-Poland
Peters
Pilkington

Total Portfolio:

Loan Equity Quasi Partic
0.00 1.94 0.00
2.16
1.60 0.00 0.00
0.00
0.21 0.00 0.00
0.00
0.00 5.98 0.00 0.00
3.20 4.37 0.00
3.18
0.00 0.00 0.00
4.58
0.00 13.57 0.00 0.00
0.00 0.00 13.97
8.04
0.00 0.00 0.00
5.92
1.50 0.00 0.00
0.00
0.12 0.00 0.00
5.58
0.00 0.00 0.00
6.51
35.97

26.18

6.31 13.97

Loan Equity Quasi Partic
0.00 1.87 0.00
2.16
1.49 0.00 0.00
0.00
0.21 0.00 0.00
0.00
5.98 0.00 0.00
0.00
3.20 2.76 0.00
0.00
0.00 0.00 0.00
4.58
0.00 13.57 0.00 0.00
0.00 0.00 13.97
8.04
0.00 0.00 0.00
5.92
1.50 0.00 0.00
0.00
0.00 0.00
0.00
5.58
0.00 0.00 0.00
6.51
32.79

25.95

4.63 13.97

Annex B9
Page I of 1
Poland
CAS Summary of Development Priorities
Network area

Country
performance°

Major issue

Country
Bank
priority' priority'

Reconciliationof country
andBankprioritiesd

Poverty Reduction &Economic Management
good record of poverty
Poverty reduction

good

reduction in the 1990s is
at risk in latest
economic slowdown

high

high

Economic policy

good

unbalanced macro
policy mix

high

high

Public sector

fair

improving composition
of public expenditure
and effectiveness of
moderate
and effectiveness
of
public administration

Gender

good

women have slightly
lower wages

moderate

moderate

Education

fair

improving quality of
ruraleduc.ati .iske
rural education Iskey

high

high

Health, nutrition &population

good

low quality of service;
inefficiency in use of
resources

high

high

high

PER being undertaken to
assist in restructuring of
~expenditures and
institutional improvements

Human Development Department

reducing untargeted
social expenditures

moderate

high

Govemmenfs 2002
program includes objective
of reducing social
protection expenditures

Environmentally &Socially Sustainable
Development
Rural development

fair

high unemployment;
rural education

high

high

Environment

*
good

water
water supply
supply and
and
wastewater treatment;
solid waste management

high

moderate

Substantial
from
~~~~~~~~~~EUBank issupport
administering
EF
iS with
GEF projects with
substantial demonstration

Finance, Private Sector &Infrastructure
lack of financial
Financial sector

good

As FSAP indicated, Poland
has stable financial system.

j

pinvate SMEs

high

moderate Support for SMEs from

development
business environment
could be improved
Private sector

good

through greater labor
market flexibility,
reducing labor costs,

EBRD, EU and possibly
Bank support for labor
high

moderate reform through dialogue;
other institutions providing
financial assistance

hpttr mAcrn
mnoim, mix

Energy &mining

good

Infr-astructure

fair

low competitiveness and
high costs; reforms and
privatization needed

high

high

high

high

need for substantial
increase in public
infrastructure
investment

a. Use "excellent," "good," "fair," or "poor."
b. Indicate principal country-specific problems (e.g., for poverty reduction, "rural poverty;" for education, "female secondary completion;"
for environment, "urban air pollution").
c. To indicate priority, use "low," "moderate," or "high."
d. Give explanation, if priorities do not agree; for example, another MDB may have the lead on the issue, or there may be ongoing dialogue.

Annex B 10
Page I of 5
Poland - CAS Matrix, FY03-05

hENET'

iNEN

S

7

<'P>'j
1

Wo

p'4t,,
'

__i.GOvEKNMEX NU~
NSII(UMENTh
'

{-t9,*

,
FVRLD
%P .o.SJ#TRUA1ENTS
j
b
BA4NKv GROt

LENDING

NON-LENDING

Rebalancing the
macroeconomic policy
framework

Tighten fiscal policy over the
medium term to facilitate a
reduction in real interest rate
levels, and addressing the
longer term structural issues as
indicated below

Macro-monitonng (ongoing)
Policy dialogue
Development Policy Review

Inproving the
effectiveness of
Government expenditures
and programs

Improve the composition of
public expenditures

Public Expenditure Review
IDF on strengthening budget
management.

Improving social protection
through better targeting and
continuation of pension system
reform

Poverty assessment update
Pensions in Multi-Pillar
system analysis

;

,C V A*
R

K)CYAT4Q~I
;
U
O.

FO
RS~

For Poland: Reduction in
Government dis-savings by at least
0.25 percentage point per annum,
from the 2002 budget (savings deficit
of 4.1% of GDP).
World Bank Group: Enhanced
understanding among policy-makers
and in the country of key macro
vulnerabilities and of the need to
redress them to regain economnc
growth and to promote job creation.
For Poland: Easing the existing
fragmentation in budget
management, by reducing the number
of extra-budgetary funds. Improving
comnposition of expenditure,
including through raising public
spending on public infrastructure
while better targeting social
expenditures.
World Bank Group: Catalyst role
in improving expenditure
composition improvements.
For Poland: New legislation in
place to phase out remaining
privileges and converting pension
savings into pension payouts (ZUS).
Better targeting and reduction of cost
of KRUS pension system for farmers.

Annex B IO
Page 2 of 5
vwfi

.Q;WOi},
.L.R. .

*-

=

I

-|-?jF
4X'

'+~'

*ORLD
B

K,GROUPSLNSTRV1,1EN-S

LENDING

;

BENC .ASG

NON-LENDING
World Bank Group: Deliver
technical assistance in analyzing
poverty trends in recent years.

Enhancing the quality and
efficiency of public education

Education sector reform

Education policy dialogue

For Poland: Adoption and initial
implementation of an education
reform program to follow up the
1999 reformns within existing budget
constraints, aimed at imnproving
quality of outcomes, arresting the
gaps between urban and rural schools
and rationalizing schools.
World Bank Group-: Delivery of
technical assistance promoting
continuation of education reforms.

Enhancing the quality and
efficiency of the health sector

Health sector reform
Possible IFC involvement to
support entrance of private
investors

Health policy dialogue

For Poland: Adoption and initial
implementation of steps to reinforce
the 1999 health reforms within
existing budgetary constraints, aimed
at reduction of arrears by half, setting
up accreditation centers and
preparing master plans to guide
rationalization of health facilities and
hospital beds.
World Bank Group: Delivery of
technical assistance promoting
continuation of health reforms.

Reducing corruption

Anti-corruption dialogue and
technical assistance
Judicial assessment
IDF on procurement

For Poland: Adoption by
Government of an anti-corruption
strategy and of standard bidding
documents.

Annex BIO
Page 3 of 5
,-4NizTJ

y

2!

WORLD BANX GRO UP'S

'i

E

7*.

-!

NON-LENDNNG

-LENDING

World Bank Group: Facilitation of
discussions of the High Level Group
on Corruption.
Enhancing private sectorled growth and
employment creation

Improvmg the business
environment, implementing
needed labor market reforms
and reducing wage costs caused
by high payroll taxation and
laying a basis for taking
advantage of knowledge
economy opportunities

Possible IFC operation
supporting small and
medium enterprises and
job creation
Possible IFC operations in
support of privatizations

Competition policy review
Labor market reform policy
dialogue
Review of regulations for
credit guarantees to
SMEs Knowledge
Assessment
IFC dialogue on improving
the business environment
FSAP Update

For Poland: Achievement of
Government's target of reducing
public share of GDP to 15% by 2005.
Adoption of planned improvements
in the Labor Code.
World Bank Group: Facilitation of
policy dialogue on competition and
labor market reforms and on
environment for SME development.

Creating a competitive energy
market.
Implementing further policy
reforms; state-enterprise
restructuring and privatization
in the power, gas and coal
sectors. Implementation of
2003-2006 coal reform program
including privatization.

Global Environment Facility
and Proto-type Carbon
Fund projects with
global environmental
benefits and
demonstration effects
Third coal sector loan
Possible EFC financing of
viable renewable energy
projects
Possible social mitigation for
enterprise restructuring
project

Energy sector policy dialogue
Social assessment of energy
tariff reform
Policy dialogue on stateenterprise restructuring
Review of the draft of
bankruptcy and restructuring
law

For Poland: Strengthening
regulatory capacity, removing
barriers to competition and market
liberalization and accelerating
privatization. Adoption of detailed
plans and implementation of further
reform and privatization of the
power, gas and coal sectors.
Adoption of a reform program that
assumes substantial capacity and
labour force down-sizing and leads to
privatization. Implementation of
enterprise restructuring clearly
featuring market tests and
Itransparency.

Annex BIO
Page 4 of 5
CONEXTI,'
Cot

' *;&..j-o

++

~D

z s

'

,S

XER - EL0.$EAT t

~OBJLcTP~ES_J~NSTRUIMENTS-

p v~

%0ttl
WoJuU

Gro}L P'jS
P lS bsG
SRUNIENS

0} E6S1E.;Ts
sLENlWNG

I. e

ENciIARKS FOR

NON-LENlDINSG AE< t.GP°*X
World Bank Group: Delivery of
technucal assistance promoting
further reform and privatization, and
supporting mechanisms for
environment benefiting energy
projects. Techmcal assistance and
dialogue on strengthening regulatory

~~~~~~~~~~~capacity.

______________________________

Building capacities and
mifrastructure in rural areas

Second rural development
project

________________________

Raising productivity in the
agriculture sector

For Poland: Implementation of
further programs aimed at improving
education and infrastructure in rural
areas. Institutional capacity built for
absorption and efficient use of EU
accession funds, as evidenced by preaccession and structural funds being
utilized.
World Bank Group: Delivery of
technical assistance and close

~~~~cooperation with other partners.

For Poland: Strengthening quality
and food safety certification
procedures; adoption of strategies
aimed at marketing good quality
agricultural products.
World Bank Group: Delivery of
policy dialogue and possible
technical assistance.

Annex B IO
Page 5 of 5
C L,|t'dk y:7
LOMEI
$2WPM Nr'S
jO1~~JEcT:4s~
~
1~STRIJMENTh
.

Improving infrastructure

O

B>X

BRNCFD1ARSF-

E
GROLfQYSTR1'MENTS
-0

EvXALCJJ1'
LENDING
Third roads project

KG

NO-LENDING
For Poland: Establishment of
ensure funds for rnainterlance and

new construction are used
effectively. Imnproved roads quality
by reduction of maintenance backlog
(backlog is PLN 7,8 billion of which
PLN 3,2 billion for immediate
needs). Improved roads safety by
reduction of the numnber of accidents
and fatalities.
World Bank Group: Delivery of
the policy advice for sound system of
road financing and management.
Facilitate effective use of pre and
accession EU funds.

__post

Annex B I1

-

1

Coordination of external assistance to Poland

w.

-To eradicate poverty through growth, employment creation
and social protection
Gwe,neralI stratiegy, andv -Poverty assessment update as fiduciary responsibility
,i<4,.fj,Fa8miSs
^ ¢, '-Bank has committed $5.4 bIn in 37 projects, about
1
$250mln/year in past 5 years
.ci,, .,,, i..f'.;i:e-:e,
b i;i -Ongoing Macro monitoring
Riebalaricirigtii'rc
-Policy dialogue
'-Xiroe' o - or om!k zig.i ' Development Policy Review laying out post-EU-accession
-7 -tEfrussew
i;
h,
~ development & reform agenda
;,it Xl
,XHs7 11, -ib5
Public
.
'r

.-

' Public expenditure review

-Public sector. -°Policy dialogue with govemment working groups on public
'
refoirni
: sector finance reform
-a
.
-.Pensions study
Heaith
oo
.
olntensive policy dialogue on health reform
13,..:al.
-Second Health Loan might be considered
f
uiatibn
.
:EI -Intensive policy dialogue on education reform
-0,
. -C.Era
Education Opportunities Project mighi be considered

EU: Assist accession of Poland to the EU; annually ca. 900 mmn
Euro PHARE (370), ISPA (350) and SAPARD (170). In the 3 years
after accession, funding could total Euro 13-14 billion so long as capacity exists to make use of the funds.
EIB: Investing in key sectors of EU policy. Providing co-financing funds. Total lending 4.9 bin Euro, commitments ca.
E600mln/year
EBRD: Transition-promoting investment. Currently total lending is 155 projects, 2.5 bIn Euro financing, commits ca. E250min/year
EBRD: Research into issues oftransition.
EU: Assessment of country's readiness for accession:
OECD: Research and policy recommendation and reports on various fields meant to help the govemments tackle the economic,
social and govemance challenges.
tl'X Annual Article IV consultations
IMF:
PHARE: Under "EU-Integration" part of PHARE: support for public administration capacity building ("Access 2000" for adopting

the Acquis, cadastral system, NBP, public finance, tax administration etc.). Preparations for adopting CAP: help and training.

v-

EU: Education exchange programs

-Continued support for preparation of anti-corruption strategy
Institutional Development Facility grant to prepare standard
.

An corrttp

n'

Economic
'Restructuring

A
X
0

Investment
cllnatel
/regulation
framework

.
.f*
Financial .o

.:
v)
o
rJ)
e

.systents

Infrastructure
En
Environment
Reglonal.and
rural

| development

bidding documents (public procurement office)

-Judicial assessment and update of corruption report planned
-Continuing policy dialogue on energy sector reform
-Technical assistance on social assessment of tariff reform
-Dialogue on coal sector restructuring
-Possible Third Coal Adjustment Loan
-Labor market policy dialogue
-Competition policy review
"IFC: policy dialogue on improving business climate,
strengthening corporate govemance in cooperation with
Warsaw Stock Exchange
IFC support on corporate social responsibility
-Financial Sector Assessment Program (FSAP) Review
completed which indicated overall stability is not an issue
°FSAP update
-Rail Loan (ongoing)
-Investment lending for ports and roads
'Policy dialogue on transport sector reform, eg. institutional
refomis, financing
-Possible Roads 3 Project
°Ongoing supervision of Rural Environment and geothermal
projects.
°GEF/PCF geothermal demonstration projects
-Cities of Change project (strengthening local capacities)
-Rural Development Project (RDP), aiming at enhancing
capacities of local communities (possible RDP2).

EBRD: Through involvement catalyze investment and privatization process. Policy dialogue (e.g. in energy sector) and selectively
support the restructuring and investment needs of locally- or state-owned companies.
EBRD: Support and possible lending for restructuring of sensitive heavy industry, eg. chemical, steel and fuel sectors.
EIB, EBRD: Through financial involvement and partial ownership decrease perceived investment risk and improve corporate
govemance.
PHARE: cofinancing for institution building inSME sector.

EBRD: Equity investment in commercial banks and equity funds (venture capital). 30% of total financing in financial institutions.
EBRD: Develop and support SME finance schemes (eg introduction on EU/EBRD SME Facility), also plans to help develop
mortgage, leasing, insurance markets
EIB: developing local currency financing schemes
EIB: Special focus on lending for infrastructure (e.g. road rehabilitation), telecommunication and environment (32% of cumm. loan
portfolio) and for transport (42%)
EBRD: support local and national investment financing needs through Municipal Environment Infrastructure (MEI) projects and/or
developing effective PPP structures (e.g. A I highway). Cofinanced railway restructuring loan. Power generation upgrading project.
ISPA: Large scale transport-related projects (road rehabilitation etc. 8 projects in 2001)
EBRD: Environmental Action Plans, MEI projects
[SPA: : Large scale transport-related projects and a Krak6w waste water treatment project.
EIB: Assisting medium and larger municipalities in financing investment - finance needs (9 projects)
EBRD: encourage local revenue-backed financing schemes (Krakow, Rybnik)
PHARE's Economic and Social Cohesion Funds channeled through Polish Agency for Regional Development. SAPARD:

Improvement of the agricultural and food processing sectors' effectiveness and Improvement of conditons for the economic activity
and creation of newjobs

Other activities
-P.rmoting Knowledge Economy (KE), -KE Assessment
1; Otbser donra' - financial assistance isof much lower magnitude and is to much extent focused on cooperation with non-governmental organizations and local communities (KHF, UNDP, GEF etc.)

Annex B12
Page 1 of 3
Consultations with Representatives of the Civil Society
on the World Bank's Country Assistance Strategy for Poland
As part of the preparations of the Country Assistance Strategy (CAS), in the summer of 2001 the
Country Team launched a program of consultations on the Strategy with representatives of the
Polish civil society. While the prime purpose of the program was to seek input from a wide
spectrum of stakeholders in regard to the future activities of the World Bank Group in Poland, the
Team used the opportunity to solicit the respondents' views on a set of wider topics such as the
awareness level about the Bank in Poland, the respondents' perception of the key developmental
challenges faced by the country as well as their opinions regarding the functioning of the Bank's
office in Warsaw.
The program was initiated at an early stage of the actual drafting of the CAS and consisted of
several quantitative and qualitative feedback instruments: (i) a quantitative baseline survey
carried out in June 2001, (ii) an electronic consultation through the Country Office website
(February - May 2002), (iii) a program of In-Depth Interviews (IDIs) conducted with 58 preselected individuals familiar with the activities of the World Bank in Poland (January - February
2002), and (iv) a series of consultation meetings held in Poland's three major cities: Gdansk,
Warsaw and Katowice (April 17 - 19, 2002) and two meetings with local politicians and
representatives of city council of Szczecin and neighboring regions and of business community
held in Szczecin on August 13, 2002..
Polish and English language drafts of the Strategy were placed on the Warsaw Office's web site
starting mid-January 2002. Public access to the draft document resulted in a number of
comments submitted by Non-Governmental Organizations (NGOs) and individuals (see below).
The comments themselves were also placed on the web site.
The baseline survey covered a nation-wide sample of 1,200 households. The main highlights of
the research included the finding that 69% of the country's adult population was aware of the
World Bank. Among those who heard about the Bank, 78% had a favorable opinion about the
Compared to other major
organization, 8% unfavorable and 14% could not say.
intergovernmental organizations active in Poland, the Bank enjoys quite high favorabilty rate
(second after the United Nations).
The in-depth interviews, which targeted a wide spectrum of civil society representatives (e.g.
politicians, scholars, NGO representatives, private entrepreneurs and journalists), provided useful
information in regard to the country's economic priorities and the role of the Bank in addressing
these priorities. Support to the EU accession process was seen by the respondents as the
country's highest priority. Addressing the key social issues such as unemployment and
pauperization of the population were seen as issues requiring urgent attention by the government
and the donor community, including the World Bank. The respondents praised the role of the
Bank as a catalyst, facilitating dialogue between the government, civil society and other donor
agencies. The IDI results also highlighted the professionalism and competence of Bank staff,
their commitment, objectivity and experience. Finally, the respondents praised the effectiveness
of the Country Office in Warsaw. The Bank was criticized, however, for its bureaucratic
procedures, communication barriers, lack of adjustment to the local conditions, excessive use of
foreign experts and their poor knowledge of the local realities and for not utilizing Polish experts
sufficiently.
To obtain unrestricted feedback, the baseline survey and the IDIs were carried out by external
contractors. The material obtained from these proved useful background for the CAS and for the

Annex B 12
Page 2 of 3

consultation meetings. The public meetings were organized by the Bank's Warsaw Office but
they were prepared and facilitated by two professional moderators from Poland who ensured that
the consultations proceeded in an informal yet structured fashion. The list of invitees was drawn
by the Warsaw Office with input from three local advocacy NGOs who circulated the information
about the CAS consultations and the forthcoming meetings among their contacts and provided a
list of NGO representatives to be included in the consultation meetings. The information about
the public consultations was placed on the Country Office website.
The number of participants in each of the meetings ranged from 32 to 39. Each meeting brought
together a group of representatives of NGOs, professional and business associations, think-tanks
and academic research institutions, trade unions, municipal authorities. All participants received
the draft of the Strategy (in Polish) prior to the meeting.
Each meeting consisted of two parts. During the first session, the discussion centered on the
diagnostics of the country social and economic situation and the key challenges that should be
addressed. In this regard, the participants were encouraged to review the analysis provided in the
CAS and comment on issues that were, in their view, poorly addressed or omitted in the analysis.
The second and the final round of discussions focused on the way forward: how the above
challenges should be addressed and what would the role of the Bank be. Also during this stage,
the participants verified their views and opinions against the recommendations proposed by Bank
staff in the draft CAS document. The bulk of the discussions at the consultation meetings took
place in small working groups who then reported their observations and recommendations during
the plenary sessions. The fact that the meetings brought together a variety of participants
representing various backgrounds and institutions contributed to quite intense debate during the
meetings.
The consultations resulted in a number of comments and suggestions regarding both the
diagnostic part of the draft CAS and the proposed strategy itself. The summnary list below reflects
comments received verbally in the public consultation meetings and those sent to the Bank office
in writing thereafter:
* The assessment was correct and adequate in regard to the macroeconomic situation as well
as sector specific issues such as: social protection, the energy sector, the EU accession
process, rural development and corruption.
* Views were expressed that poverty analysis and in particular the current prevalence of
poverty in Poland, unemployment and income diversification, communicable diseases, TB
and HIV/AIDS could be strengthened; in regard to poverty, a number of participants had
questions about the sources and accuracy of date on which the Bank based its analysis.
* The areas of functioning of judicial system and law enforcement, the prospects for the
renewable energy, and the causes for unemployment should be strengthened;
recommendations were made for more comprehensive analysis of labor market, regional
differences (including degradation of urban areas), sustainable development, situation of
the disabled and the development of civil society;
* Agreement was expressed regarding the.proposed strategy and the Bank's operations in
public finance reform, including public expenditure, education and health reform, heavy
industries restructuring, knowledge-based economy, and anti-corruption; some participants
expressed satisfaction with the proposed future role of the International Finance
Corporation especially regarding proposed activities in business environment and job
creation. The participants encouraged the Bank to remain involved in Poland;

Annex B 12
Page 3 of 3
* Suggestions were made that the Bank consider strengthening or adding activities in access
to social services and social assistance, support to civil society, development of renewable
energies and tourism, organic farming, R&D, and the assistance to the elderly;
* in the area of the labor market and unemployment, requests were made to elaborate on the
proposals for revising the current Labor Code, and for more extensive analysis of the labor
market and reforms needed
* the suggestion was made that the Bank articulate better its views on the development of the
Polish agriculture sector, including creation of small farms producing organic and other
healthy foods, and the principles of balanced growth and environmental protection;
* in the area of environmental protection, suggestions were made that the Bank strengthen or
add activities in promoting energy efficiency and addressing the problems of depletion and
wasteful use of natural resources such as water;
* in relation to industrial restructuring in, for example, coal and energy, questions were raised
about assistance to be given to deal with the social consequences of those reforms;
* questions were asked about the Bank's views on the possibility of introducing taxes on
capital flows (e.g., the Tobin tax) in Poland and to the possible consequences of WTO
TRIPS Agreement;
* a suggestion was made for the Bank to define the urban transport problems in the context of
environmental protection, to consider support to altematives to road transport including
development of rail transport;
* concern was expressed that the state of the country's roads was seen as the main obstacle to
economic growth, rather than stressing the need for balanced infrastructure development
including public transport;
* that the CAS omitted public control on public expenditures as important for anticorruption;
* a recommendation that the diagnosis in the area of environmental protection include a
definition of the state of environment and consider environmental protection in the context
of rural development,
* a suggestion of more emphasis on balanced growth, environmental hazards of expansion of
housing and pollution in urban areas caused by transport, and support for renewable energy
sources;
* a suggestion to emphasize renewable energy and the role of the Bank, GEF and PCF;
* a suggestion that the CAS review the needs for further local govemment reform;
* suggestions for using easier access of NGOs in implementation of the rural development
project;
* requests for clarification of the Bank's views on selective financing of enterprises and for
defining cooperation between the Bank and EFC;
* a request for more analysis on the effectiveness of teaching and of education reform;
The full text of all the comments was placed on the Warsaw Office website.
In the process of consultation the Bank indicated it would take these views and comments from
civil society very seriously, and the comments received were analyzed and discussed among the
staff responsible for various sectors. Resulting from the consultations the CAS document was
modified to reflect a number of these views and legitimate criticism about omission of important
areas or analysis (e.g., the analysis of poverty was substantially changed as a result of the
consultations, also gender, labor markets, education, health, balanced infrastructure and
environment). Some of the comments could not be taken into account, but we assured the civil
society representatives that we would inform the government of all comments received.

MAP SECTION

IRED260558R

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~USIAN

c
Ba/tic Sea

)

Ii>GDANSK
S U~~~~~~~~~PSK

4*

Gdoook

Golf of

S-1ka

6

oool,o*

2

EBA
4

5

A

1P

FEDE~RATION

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~O
MAIN ROADS

________

OSTColRAILROADS

~~~~O

~~~~~~~~~T.

KOSZALINp~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~U

Oloolyn

AIRPORTS

V,o,,

ZEI;-

T. Rolo

MAJOR PORTS

~~rooeo
2 ~~~~~'

~~GOSZCZ
~~ ~~~ ~ ~~ ~~~ ~~~ ~ ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~Ii
Y

T.

~

.\J.

ORZOW

~

-~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

~

NATIONAL CAPITAL
PROVINCE IWOJEWODZTWO)

MAJOR URBAN AREAS

~

OSRERIVERS

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

WIE
Z

opoii

~~~~~~~~~~
~~~

L

~

EPROVINCE

(WOJEWODZTWO)

~520

.

4

BOUNDARIES

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
ROUNDARIES

To

-

CAPITALS

KG

IN

~~~~PLOCK
oor

-'

I

TB
9

CLAW
)\LOR

PI(
TRY

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~b

CHELM

IOo

.

B

25

510

715

-do,d byh. Mo
'
9A

-p
Th,o,oP
T

T. R.-o

ITT
II

I

?

~~

i~~P
A'~op~o~~2-~'
'o

ll-

U- ,if G, A-.,ddo-k
d.

STHM

Z--~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~NRW

toch-"

,,
SWEDEN
Nooll

7.~

~~~~T

...

T

olo

0

~~BIAL
~ ~~~~~'..~~Oo
0

1 0

O
NoO.I&S
0

50

D NM

116-

~~~~~~~~~~ISLOV'A

K

R EP U BL IC

RUSSIAN

RZT.t.

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
GERMANY
W
~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~~~~~~
-.

22'

~~"'

N
0

LATVIA L\ FEDERATION

S

to

14-

/ ~~

D

V

*~~~~~~~

200 KILOMETERS
JOB0MILES

4

~SWITZ

/Ti<

ASRA

~~~~~~~~~~UKRAINE
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

'I

HUNGARY

ROMANIA

\
OCTORER
1996

IMAGING

Report No.:
CAS
Type:

24783

POL

