d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

Document of
The World Bank

Report No. 25498-SE

MEMORANDUM OF TIHE PRESIDENT

OF THE:

INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION

TO THE

EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS

ONA

COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY

FOR

THE REPUBLIC OF SENEGAL

March 5, 2003

Senegal Country Office
Country Department 14
Africa Region

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS

Cunrency Unit = CFA Franc
US$1 = CFAF 607.5 (March 2003)

WEIGHTS AND MEASURES
Metric system

FISCAL YEAR
January I - December 31

ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS

AAA Analytical and Advisory Activities 

APL Adaptable Program Lending 

APIX Agence de Promotion des Investissements et des 

Grands Travaux (Investment Pronotion and 
Infrastructure Agency) 
ASPOP Agricultural Services and Producer Organizations 
Project 

BCEAO Banque Centrale des Etats de IAfrique de I*Ouest 

(Central Bank of West African States) 

BOAD Banque Ouest Africaine de Developpement (West 

African Development Bank) 
CDD Community Driven Development 
CEM Country Economic Memorandum 

CFAA Country Financial Accountability Assessment 

CFR Country Framework Report 
CPAR Country Procurement Assessment Report 
CPPR Country Portfolio Performance Review 
DPT Diphtheria-Polio-Tetanus 
DSA Debt Sustainability Analysis 
DTIS Diagnostic Trade Integration Study 
ECOWAS Economic Community of West African States 
FIAS Foreign Investment Advisory Service 
FNR Fonds National de Retraite (National Retirement 
Fund) 
FSAP Financial Sector Assessment Program 
GEF Global Environmental Fund 
GIABA Groupement inter-gouvernemental d'action contre le 
blanchiment de I 'argent (Inter-governmental 
Action Group against Money Laundering) 
IDF Institutional Development Fund 
IFC International Finance Corporation 

GEF Global Environmental 
Fund 

IHSDP Integrated Health Sector Development Program 

IPRES Institut de la Prevoyance Retraqite du Senegal

(Retirement Institute of Senegal)

IsDB Islamic Development Bank

LIL Learning and Innovation Loan
MDG Millennium Development Goal
METR Marginal Effective Tax Rate
MIGA Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency

NEPAD New Economic Partnership for African Development

NRIP National Rural Infrastructure Progran

OED Operations Evaluation Department

OHADA Organisation pour l 'Harmonisation en Afrique des
Droits des Affaires (Organization for
Harmonization of African Commnercial Law)

OMVS Organisation de la Mise en Valeur dueFleuve

Sdnigal (Organization for the Development of the
Senegal River)
PCI Per Capita Income
PER Public Expenditure Review
PFP Policy Framework Paper
PRSC Poverty Reduction Support Credit
PRG Partial Risk Guarantee
PRSP Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper
PSAS Private Sector Advisory Service
QEFA Quality Education for All
SENELEC Societe Nationale d'Electricite du Sendgal (National
Electricity Comnpany of Senegal)
E 
ll and Medium E 
nerpis

SME Small and Mediurn Enterpfise
SONACOS Socite Nationale de Commercialisation des

Oliagineux du Senegal (National Oilseeds
Company of Senegal)
UDDP Urban Development and Decentralization Program
UNDP United Nations Development Programmne
WAEMU West Africa Economic and Monetary Union (Union

Economique et Monetaire de l Afrique de l 'Ouest)

Vice President: Callisto E. Madavo
Country Director/CAS Team Leader: 
John Mclnfire

CONTENTS

Executive Summary ........................................ 

Background ................................................. 

Bank Strategy ................................................. 
Implementation ................................................. 
Risks .................................................. 
Measuring results ........................... 

I. 

Introduction 

.1

II. Economic Context ........................................
III. Poverty Reduction Strategy of Senegal ........................................
1. Poverty profile of the PRSP ............................................
2. PRSP objectives ............................................
3. Financing requirements of PRSP, 2003-2005 ............................................
4. Bank-Fund Joint Staff Assessment (JSA) of the PRSP ............................................
5. When will Senegal meet the MDGs? .11 

ii

Iil

iii
iii

iv

iv

2
5
5
7
9
9

IV. Bank Experience Under Previous CAS 

.

.

............................. 12

1. Evolution of the Bank's portfolio since 1994 .................................................. 
2. Lessons from the last CAS .................................................. 
3. Participatory process for the CAS .................................................. 

V. Proposed Program of Lending and Advisory Services ........................................... 

12
13
14

14

1. Achieving greater development effectiveness .................................................. 
14
2. Strategic elements and selectivity of CAS program .................................................. 
15
3. Consolidation of portfolio and transition to budget support .................................................. 
15
4. Wealth creation pillar .................................................. 
17
5. Role of IFC and MIGA in supporting the wealth creation pillar .............................................. 24
6. Capacity building and social services for equity .................................................. 
25
7. Improvements in living conditions among the poor and vulnerable groups ............................. 28
8. Transversal issues ..................................................... 
28
9. Lending scenarios under the CAS .
33

VI. Principal Risks and Mitigation .................................................... 

39

1. Implementation culture .......................................................... 
39
2. Risks associated with slow growth and rising inequality ......................................................... 39
3. Debt sustainability .......................................................... 
39

VII. Measuring Results .................................................... 

42

-ii-

Tables

Table 1: Senegal - PRSP "Base" Case Macroeconomic Scenario ................................................... 
7
Table 2: Senegal - Financing Needs of PRSP, Base Scenario, 2003-2005 ........................................ 10
Table 3: Senegal - PRSP Projections for Reaching the MDGs ................................................... 
11
Table 4: Senegal - Bank Group's Role in the Donor Effort (2002) .16
Table 5: Senegal - FY03-05 Lending Scenarios (US$ million) .34
Table 6: Senegal - FY03-05 Analytical and Advisory Activities .35
Table 7: Senegal - FY03-05 CAS Scenario Triggers .37
Table 8: Senegal - FY03-05 CAS Results Indicators .41

Figure 1: NPV of debt-to-export ratio ......................... 

40

Figure

Annexes

Annex 1: CAS Table Al - Key Economic and Program Indicators-Change from last CAS ............ 45
Annex 2: CAS Table A2 - Senegal at a Glance .................................................................. 
46
Annex 3: CAS Table B2 - Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management .................... 48
Annex 4: CAS Table B3 - IBRD/IDA Program Summary ................................................................. 49
Annex 5: CAS Table B3 - IFC and MIGA Program, FY 2000-2003 .................................................. 50
Annex 6: CAS Table B4 - Summary of Non Lending Services .......................................................... 51
52
Annex 7: CAS Table B5 - Social Indicators .................................................................. 
Annex 8: CAS Table B6 - Key Economic Indicators .................................................................. 
53
Annex 9: CAS Table B7 - Key Exposure Indicators .................................................................. 
55
Annex 10: CAS Table B8 - Statement of IFC's Held and Disbursed Portfolio .................................. 56
Annex 11: CAS Table B8 - IDA Operations Portfolio .................................................................. 
57
Annex 12: CAS Table B9 - Country Partnership Strategy Matrix ...................................................... 58
Annex 13: CAS Table B 10 - CAS Summary of Development Priorities ............................................ 64
65
Annex 14: IMF-World Bank Relations .................................................................. 
Annex 15: Expenditure Accountability Assessment and Action Plan (AAP) ..................................... 68
Annex 16: Debt Sustainability Analysis .................................................................. 
69

MAP (IBRD 32252)

Republic of Senegal
Country Assistance Strategy

Executive Summary

Background
Senegal is at a decisive point in its economic development. It nears the end of a
i. 
successful period of adjustment that began with the devaluation of the CFA franc in 1994. It
achieved a historically high rate of growth in that period, 2.5 percent annually in real per capita
terms.
ii. 
Despite this recent good performance, Senegal has a significant unmet reform agenda. Its
good growth after the devaluation had only a small impact on poverty, especially in rural areas.
Income inequality is high. Social indicators - primary education, infant and maternal mortality,
access to clean water - lag income indicators. The lack of infrastructure - water, electricity,
transport - handicaps development and poverty reduction. Public policies, notably in the areas of
taxation and incentives to invest, handicap growth by slowing down private sector development.
Senegal must improve its implementation culture if it is to make better use of the substantial aid
that it receives.
iii. 
The following issues are suggested for Board discussion:
* Poverty reduction: Does the proposed Bank program adequately s,upport the main pillars
of the PRSP?
* Risks: Does the CAS identify sufficient mitigating measures to address the risks
acknowledged?
* Results: Are the proposed results indicators adequate and measurable?
* MDGs: Is the relation between the CAS and the MDGs clearly defined?

Bank Strategy
The CAS derives directly from the PRSP of Senegal (JSA discussed at the Board on
iv. 
December 23, 2002). The pillars of Senegal's PRSP are: (i) wealth creation; (ii) capacity
building and social services; (iii) assistance to vulnerable groups; and (iv) implementation of the
strategy and monitoring of its outcomes.
v. 
IDA supports the achievement of the PRSP goals through its existing lending portfolio
(especially in water, education, transport, and health), the planned CAS program of lending, new
portfolio of the present CAS, advisory services, and capacity building for monitoring and
evaluation. In support of the PRSP, the CAS proposes a base case lending program of US$290
million, plus significant advisory services. Senegal is not eligible for IDA grants.

Implementation
Aid's impact in Senegal has not reached its potential because of: (i) insufficient
vi. 
emphasis on growth and poverty as explicit objectives, as aid was often viewed as an
accumulation of discrete projects; (ii) erratic macroeconomic performance, caused in part by
government intervention; (iii) lack of common sectoral reform programs among donors;
(iv) uneven government commitment to reform; (v) too little attention to human capital as a
factor of growth and social development; and (vi) poor implementation.

-iv-

vii. 
In the CAS, the Bank will work to: (i) put a greater focus on implementation;
(ii) develop better country ownership through closer policy dialogue, especially with civil
society; (iii) strengthen execution through continued decentralization of implementation support
to the Dakar Office; (iv) extend the Annual Review Approach (now used in the QEFA operation)
to more of the portfolio in order to have an overview of portfolio issues at the beginning of each
fiscal year; (v) use public expenditure reviews with a focus on impacts at the levels of the
consolidated central budget, in the main sectors, and in the decentralized government agencies,
(vi) provide support to public financial management reform through a PRSC; (vii) establish
stronger and more explicit linkages between implementation and aggregate results, notably those
of the PRSP/MDGs; and (viii) continue emphasis on investment in human capital through
lending and advisory services.

Risks
viii. 
The main risk is government's ability to implement programs effectively. The strategy
manages the risk by: (i) more intensive AAA (CEM, CFAA, CPAR, PER, Decentralization/
Civic Engagement) early in the CAS period; (ii) closer implementation support (including
continued devolution to the Dakar Office); (iii) setting higher performance triggers for new IDA
commitments; and (iv) moving to output-based aid where feasible. The planned strategy seeks to
reduce this risk by a public awareness campaign about work supported by the Bank Group, with a
significant role for WBI and other Bank learning instruments.
ix. 
A related risk is the Government's difficulty to complete policy reforms. The
Government must reform and limit its role in markets for agriculture, housing, finance, and
infrastructure. The Government must also improve governance by prosecuting against corruption
when it occurs.
x. 
While the risk of macroeconomic collapse, through unsustainable inflation or through
sustained negative growth, is not great, there is the more insidious one of stalled growth. This
risk -that growth would stall at around the rate of population growth - is serious and would
tempt the Government to try more populist forms of public spending. A related risk is increased
demands for growth and redistribution caused by rising inequality. The CAS would help the
Government manage these risks by: (i) helping promote stable macroeconomic policies, with the
goal of a sustainable deficit, price level and real exchange rate; (ii) encouraging high quality
public spending, targeted toward public goods and poverty alleviation; and (iii) facilitating a
stable flow of aid, which would have positive macro effects, and be targeted toward growth and
poverty reduction.

Measuring results
xi. 
The CAS focuses on defining and measuring results, an essential feature in a country that
has not always used its ample aid effectively. The CAS expresses results in terms of economic
growth, human capital development, infrastructure development, and poverty reduction as
declared in the PRSP for 2005 and with respect to indicators of the business climate.
xii. 
Because the PRSP targets for 2005 would show significant progress toward the MDGs in
2015 - and because the PRSP was developed in extensive national consultations - the Bank
defines the CAS measurable indicators in terms of how the PRSP targets show progress toward
the MDGs. At the mid-term of the CAS, about January 2005, IDA would organize a national
consultation on achievement of the CAS/PRSP objectives. This consultation would complement
routine monitoring of project implementation and impact.

MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENT
OF THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION
TO THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS ON A
COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
FOR THE REPUBLIC OF SENEGAL

I. 
INTRODUCTION
1. 
Senegal is a country of great potential at a decisive point in its economic
development. Its choices are among growing more rapidly and becoming less inequitable;
continuing to grow timidly while maintaining its inequities; or reverting to the historical pattern
of slow growth, high inequality, and periodic crises.

2. 
Senegal is two nations. One is approaching middle-income levels. It has access to
middle class levels of education, public services, health care, housing, financial services, social
protection, and urban amenities. The other - larger - nation exists near or below the poverty
line. It is rural or lives in urban slums and is ill fed, ill clothed, ill housed, insecure and
uneducated.

3. 
Much of Senegal is well prepared for sustained growth and poverty reduction in a
democratic polity. There is a modem, well-educated, and broadly informed elite in addition to a
sizable middle class by regional standards. The political system is generally democratic and, in
the urban areas at least, is broadly participative. Civil society organizations - trade unions,
NGOs, private schools, private medical practice, professional societies, micro-finance
organizations, farmers' groups - are strong and sometimes influential. There has been progress,
albeit disappointingly slow compared to the country's potential, in social indicators.

4. 
There has been progress with economic reform. The trade regirne has become much
more open. Trade liberalization has eliminated non-tariff barriers, lowered average rates,
reduced the highest rates and almost entirely eliminated direct discrimination against exports.
Financial sector reform has cut most of the direct government role, strengthened regulation, and
eliminated many of the contingent liabilities formerly borne by the public treasury. The advent
of private participation in infrastructure, notably telecommunications and water, has accelerated
economic growth, and extended service access.' New information technologies are widely
available in Dakar and in the larger secondary cities. Rapid growth in coverage is now common.

5. 
Some of the country is not prepared for equitable growth and social development in
a democracy. Some of the political elite is unevenly committed to modernization and economic
reform. There is a deep divide between rural and urban Senegal -
in incomne, education, health,
and access to modem services. Some public and private monopolies remain after years of
attempted reform. The legal and regulatory systems are very bureaucratic despite costly efforts
at capacity building. Factor costs remain high partly because of adversarial labor-management
relations. The tax system is economically inefficient, being based chiefly on trade and other
indirect taxes, and driving only a small share of public revenue from incorne taxes. The financial

' The Bank estimates that the privatization of the national telephone cornpany, SONATEL, and the related
introduction of two cellular phone licenses, has added one percent each year to GDP growth since 1997.

-2-

sector is uncompetitive and provides very little access to the urban poor and even less to the rural
poor.

6. 
Conflicting objectives between the two nations illustrate obstacles to the reforms needed
for sustained growth and social development.

(a) Part of the political economy depends on rents and hence obstructs trade reform, changes
in the financial sector, and withdrawal of the Government from the productive sectors,
while promoting discretionary public sector interventions in the economy;

(b) Governance is at times opaque even in a relatively open culture, and this can discourage
domestic and foreign investment alike;

(c) Efforts to reform public administration to provide better and cheaper services fail because
of patron-client relations within the administration and because citizens are uninformed
about how the Government spends its resources; and

(d) The modem system of social protection is expensive relative to average personal income.
Efforts to reduce its costs, and to improve its governance, are resisted by rent-seekers.

II. 

ECONOMIC CONTEXT

7. 
Senegal has lost much of the economic potential of its 42 independent years. The
long-term rate of real per capita income growth before the CFAF devaluation2 (1967-1993)
was -0.35 percent. Of the 37 years for which there are data, per capita growth has been negative
in 14 and in another two it was positive but less than one percent. Since 1995, for the only time
in the country's history, the average has surpassed 2 percent for a sustained period. Had Senegal
grown at that higher per capita rate since 1970, its PCI would have been 75 percent higher than it
was at the end of the past century.

8. 
Income distribution is highly unequal between literate and illiterate, urban and
rural, and Dakar and the rest of Senegal. The Gini index was recently (1999) estimated to be
41.3.3 In a national survey, the lowest income quintile had 5.2 percent of consumption and the
highest had 50.0 percent. 
In 2001, Dakar had 23 percent of the population and 38 percent of
private consumption; rural areas had 59 percent of the population and 42 percent of private
consumption. Citizens of Dakar had a daily expenditure of 7,285 CFAF while those of other
cities had 5,331 CFAF and rural people spent only 3,779 CFAF.

9. 
The distribution of durable domestic assets is skewed to households with higher incomes.
Among the top income quintile, 65 percent have a refrigerator, 91 percent have a television, and
27 percent have a car; among the members of the lowest two quintiles, none possess those assets.

2 January 11, 1994.
3 The PRSP (April 8,2002: p. 9) shows a Dakar Gini of 0.5 and a national of 0.3.
4 World Bank, Senegal - Country Economic Memorandum. Estimates for Dakar, other cities, and rural areas are
almost identical to the national estimate (idem). Older estimates may have been higher, suggesting that inequality
has at any rate not diminished.

-3-

10. 
Human development indicators are weak. Social indicators - health, education, social
protection, gender equality and environmental risk - are poor even taking into account the
country's low PCI. Public policy has distorted income distribution away from the poor, notably
with respect to access to social services.

11. 
Less than 40 percent of those 15 and older can read and write.5 Net primary school
enrollment is 60 to 65 percent. 6 School enrollment of girls lags that of boys by some 10 points at
the primary level and by more at the secondary level. Access to improved water sources is
enjoyed by 78 percent of the population, though rural areas lag urban by more than 25 points.
Some 22 percent of children under five are malnourished; only half of all children have had DPT
and measles immunizations. Qualified medical practitioners attend only half of women giving
birth. In every social indicator, within rural and urban samples, richer quintiles have better
access to services and better outcomes; comparing rural to urban across the income distribution,
rural areas have poorer access to services and worse outcomes.

12. 
There is a structural trade deficit and exports have not diversified. Senegal has a
large trade deficit unlike some rapidly growing low-income countries. Senegal's historical trade
deficit was nearly 9 percent of GDP before the devaluation (though it has improved nearly 3
points since the end of 1993). One reason is that exports are concentrated in the primary sector -
groundnut, phosphates and fisheries - and another is that manufactures have not grown past a
quarter of total exports. Despite some growth in exports of manufactures in the past few years,
they remain concentrated in a very small number of firms and have not had a large impact on
total formal sector employment.

13. 
Factor costs remain high relative to those of rapidly growing competitors, penalizing
exports and distorting income distribution against the poor. Senegal's relative unit labor costs
rose regularly, compared to its competitors', before the 1994 devaluation, fell only temporarily
after the devaluation and have continued to rise again since 1995. The reason is not that nominal
wages are high in Senegal but that unit productivity is low and the ratio of nontradable goods
prices to tradable goods prices is too high. 7

14. 
Public spending is often regressive. Senegalese spending is often oriented to the better
off classes. Incidence studies in education show, for example, that poor households having
28 percent of school-age children receive only 1 7 percent of public spending on education, while
wealthier households having fewer children receive about the same expenditure share. 8

15. 
The central state administration has a role which is too strong relative to the formal
private sector. The state consumes some 25 percent of GDP and influences economic activity
through its budget, aid management, and policy interventions. This share of GDP is not too high
compared to many other countries and the state's role in Senegal is not unusual. The unusual
importance of the central administration in Senegal is that the state is centralized, manages key
functions almost exclusively, and does not confront countervailing power.

5 PRSP: p. 11. The gender gap is 22 points.

6 Preliminary data from 2001/2002 indicate primary enrollment is now near 70 percent.
7 Mbaye and Golub, 2002.

8 PRSP: p. 1.

-4-

16. 
Public investment - between 7 and 8 percent of GDP - is larger than formal private
sector investment. Revenue generation and spending by public entities - notably the regions,
cities, and rural communities - is less than 5 percent of that of the central administration. The
state employs the great majority of teachers and health workers.

17. 
Public spending depends too much on aid. Net foreign transfers averaged 31 percent
of public spending (5 percent of GDP) in the three years beginning in 1994; even after the
exceptional period following the devaluation, they were 18 percent of government spending
(3.2 percent of GDP) from 1997 through 2001. Public investment was 6 percent of GDP just
after the devaluation and 7 percent from 1997 through 2001. Nearly 74 percent of public
investment in the earlier period was financed from foreign public sources though it was only
54 percent in the later period.

18. 
Reliance on aid tends to centralize budget preparation - because the central government
nearly monopolizes contact with donors - and to hinder budget execution, because of the
diversity and complexity of aid procedures. The heavy tradition of aid dependence has diverted
financial markets from private domestic savings mobilization.

19. 
Senegal's agriculture has a weak productive base. The characteristic problem of arid
regions is that the natural base for agriculture - land, water, temperature and insolation - is
unproductive without additional water supply through irrigation. In Senegal, this problem is
compounded by high population density in the Groundnut Basin and along the Senegal River. In
the short term, these facts mean that income per rural person in the arid areas is low. For
example, average rural incomes are lower than urban and most of the poor live in rural areas
(para 23). In the longer term, this lack of natural resources implies that rural incomes will grow
very slowly or stagnate as the limited natural capital of soil and water is spent; indeed, the
growth of real per capita income from agriculture was -1.7 percent from 1967 to 1998 while
rural population density nearly doubled.

20. 
Senegal therefore has the characteristic problem of arid regions, but has only adopted the
characteristic solutions in a passive sense. The characteristic solutions of arid and semi-arid
zones are to: (i) urbanize to shift resources out of farming into services and industry; 9 (ii) export
labor (and import remittances from it); (iii) develop industries and services and hence extract
labor out of farming; (iv) generate extensive agriculture which permits an income above the
poverty line, if only for a minority; (v) harvest transfers from the urbanized; and (vi) develop
irrigated agriculture. The first two are common in Senegal as there has been rapid urbanization
around Dakar, Kaolack, Saint-Louis, Tambacounda, Louga, and many smaller towns; and as
wage remittances are essential to much of rural Senegal. The industrial part of the third is slim;
that of the services sector is strong in terms of employment but not in productivity. The fourth
option is practically non-existent. The fifth, despite much study and some change in Senegal's
legal and fiscal framework, in fact transfers very little from urban to rural because the state
remains fiscally centralized. The high cost of additional water through irrigation limits the sixth
option.

9 The rate of rural population growth was 1.7 percent from 1980-2000 (worldbank.org/wdi2002/data/tables), the
national rate was 2.7, and the urban rate was 3.9 percent. The point estimates for 2001 are 2.48 percent (national),
4.0 percent (urban) and 1.2 percent (rural), with urban population being 48.1 percent of the total.

III. 

POVERTY REDUCTION STRATEGY OF SENEGAL

1. Poverty profile of the PRSP
21. 
The poverty results reported in the PRSP were estimated for the years 1994 and 2001.
Household budget surveys at both times gave data on household assets, income, and
consumption. The 2001 surveys further stressed the multidimensional nature of poverty. At that
time, participatory methods - focus groups, interviews, and life histories - allowed urban and
rural people to express their perception of the nature, causes, and remedies of being poor. The
results were then discussed in public meetings held at local and regional levels.

22. More than half of Senegal's population is poor. The poverty profile of 1994 showed
that some 58 percent of households were poor, using a headcount index derived from a reference
consumption standard of 2400 calories per adult equivalent per day. '0 Using the same standard,
there was a slight decrease in poverty by 2001, to about 54 percent. In the participatory surveys
of 2001, some 65 percent of households considered themselves poor in 2001, 23 percent
extremely poor, and 65 percent believed that poverty had become more severe in the five years
up to 2001 (though there was no information from 1994 about people's perceptions of their
poverty status). Despite inconsistencies in data from the early 1990s, the PRSP shows that
poverty fell slightly between 1994 and 2001.

23. 
Rural poverty is more extensive than urban. In 2001, the incidence of poverty in rural
zones varied from 72 to 88 percent of the population; it ranged from 44 to 59 percent in urban
areas. Rural people have daily expenditures of 71 percent of the national average, 43 percent of
the Dakar average and only 65 percent of the average in towns other than Dakar. Social
indicators, especially in child and maternal mortality, are worse in rural than in urban areas.

24. 
There is no pronounced gender effect on the incidence of poverty. Male heads of
households are more likely to consider themselves poor (67 percent) than female (59 percent),
though this finding may be confounded with household size for the following reasons. Larger
households are poorer than smaller. Women are less likely to head larger households.
Therefore, a comparison of poverty levels between male- and female-headed households among
small households alone, if it were possible, might show that small female-headed households are
more likely to be poor than small male-headed households.

25. 
Poverty determinants. Given the growth between 1994 and 2001 - at least 15 percent
in real per capita terms - estimated poverty incidence should have fallen by more than the 4
points observed. l The PRSP estimates the elasticity of the incidence of poverty with respect to
growth in per capita consumption to be -0.89; for each one percent increase in per capita
consumption, the incidence of poverty would decrease by 0.89 percent implying a decline of
about 13 percent in poverty incidence or roughly twice what was observed.

26. 
One reason that poverty incidence did not fall more given observed growth is that
inequality may have risen after the devaluation. This raises the question of why Senegal's post-
devaluation performance was not more pro-poor. Examining the sectoral profile both of output

0 PRSP: p.5.
'World Bank, Senegal - Country Economic Memorandum (2003), PRSP (p. 16).

-6-

growth and of employment outcomes offers some confirmation of recent trends in poverty and
indicates why poverty reduction has been limited despite Senegal's recent growth.

27. 
Lack of growth before the 1994 devaluation. Lack of growth before the devaluation
stifled Senegal's development in terms of human capital, notably in the numbers of semi-skilled
and skilled workers, and physical capital. Lack of such capital limited the supply response to the
change in relative prices with the devaluation and caused persistence of poverty after 1995 in
that many workers and sectors could not participate in the supply response.

28. 
Lack of rural growth since the devaluation. The primary sector - especially
agriculture, which accounts for about half of primary sector output - showed little real per capita
gain between 1994 and 1999. The index of agriculture production in 1999 was only 8.4 percent
higher than in 1994 and rural population growth was almost exactly the same.12 Agriculture
(primary sector) grew by 21.3 (10.6) percent in 2000 and 13.8 (7.6) percent in 2001.

29. 
Despite a recent and significant spurt in primary sector growth, both absolutely and
relative to rural population growth, rural poverty appears not to have fallen. There are several
potential explanations for this. One is that the poverty gap in the rural sector was so large that
even with growth of 30 percent, most people continued to consume below the 2400-calorie
poverty line. The World Bank (1995) poverty study supports this view, reporting a 1992 poverty
gap of 16.4 percent for rural households based on a poverty line lower than the one used in the
poverty studies cited in the PRSP. Alternatively, low rates of poverty reduction in rural areas
may be the result of how primary sector growth was distributed across households. If the
distribution was fairly unequal, only a minority of households may have benefited.

30. 
Erratic groundnut output after the devaluation. Rural households receive much of
their cash income from groundnut. It was expected that the devaluation, complemented by other
reforms, would improve rural incomes through higher prices and expanded production. Producer
prices for groundnuts, which continue to be determined administratively, improved after the
devaluation but more slowly than those of goods purchased by groundnut producers. Groundnut
production from 1994 to 2002 has not expanded consistently; the harvest varied from 723,000
thousand metric tons in 1994-1997 to 954,000 in 2000, 1,044 thousand tons in 2001, and to less
than 500,000 in 2002. The failure to expand groundnut income, or to find more productive
alternatives, explains part of the persistence of rural and national poverty.

31. 
Low employment content of growth. The PRSP argues that too little of Senegal's
growth has been in sectors of high employment, mainly agriculture, with too much growth in the
extractive sector (phosphates, cement, groundnut processing, fishing) of low employment. The
ratio of productivity in the urban sectors to the rural 13 - about 3 - is consistent with this
observation. This sectoral pattern of growth is, therefore, one of the causes of the persistent rural
poverty and of income inequality. The PRSP further identifies lack of infrastructure, notably
transport and energy, as determinants of low incomes.

12 By comparison, estimates of the contribution to GDP of the secondary and tertiary sectors show annual growth
each year since 1994. In 1999, non-primary sector GDP was one third higher than it was in 1994. By 2001 it was
almost 50 percent higher.
13 This ratio is (urban value added per urban person/rural value added per rural person).

-7-

32. 
Biased public spending. The orientation. of public spending in the social sectors
(para 14) toward more comfortable classes deprives the poor of access to services and, as a
result, stunts their growth potential. Senegal's PRSPl4 notes that public health spending has been
concentrated in-the main cities of Dakar, Thies, and Saint Louis while neglecting the poorest
central and eastern areas. In education, 20 percenit of the poorest households, who have
28 percent of school age children, receive only 17 percent of public spending. Similar
differences are observed at other academic levels. During periods of economic crisis, social
transfer mechanisms have not benefited the poorest.

33. 
Poverty is a function of low education. Nearly 90 percent of the heads of poor
households had no formal education and 8 percent had only primary education. This tragic
outcome is the result of an ineffective primary education system.

2. PRSP objectives
34. 
Table 1 summarizes the base case macroeconomic objectives of Senegal's PRSP. Annual
growth in the base scenario would rise from 5 percent to 7.1 percent from 2002 to 2005, making
it the fastest growing period in Senegal's economic history. This corresponds to an average per
capita growth of some 3.6 percent annually, again the highest, and a gain in real per capita
consumption of some 11 percent over the four years. Growth would be achieved principally by
an increase in domestic absorption, as the ratio of exports to GDP is not projected to rise in the
medium-term covered by the PRSP.

Table 1: Senegal - PRSP "Base"' Case Macroeconomic Scenario

Indicator 
Real GDP growth (percent) 

Real GDP growth per capita (per capita) 
Fiscal deficit (including grants) as percent of GDP 
Exports
Real growth, annual percentage change 
ShareofGDP,percent 

Imports 

Real growth, annual percentage change 
Share of GDP, percent 
Trade deficit (including grants) as percent of GDP 
Poverty incidence (percentage of population under 
line)

2002 

5.0 

2.5 
1.3 

6.0 
21.2 

6.0 

6.0 
29.5 
-8.4 
54%a 

2003 
5.8 

3.3 
1.4 

6.0 
21.2 

10.2 

8.6 
30.3 
-9.1 

2004 
6.5 

4.0 
1.6 

6.5 
21.2 

8.2 

4.9 
29.9 
-8.7 

2005
7.1

4.6
1.8

7.0
21.2

7.0

5.3
29.4
-8.2
45%

Source: Senegal, PRSP: derived from "base" scenario in which 50 percent of PRSP resources are available and used.
'a Data from 2001.

35. 
The PRSP is explicitly defined'5 within the vision of the New Economic Partnership for
African Development (NEPAD). The PRSP restates NEPAD's objectives as: (i) reduction of
poverty by half by 2015 by pursuing the MDGs, especially in health and education;
(ii) development of basic infrastructure; (iii) good governance, including peace building and

"4 PRSP: p. 9.

5 PRSP: p. 12.

-8-

conflict prevention; (iv) promotion of agriculture and rural development; (v) capacity building
through the use of new information technologies; (vi) promotion and defense of African culture;
and (vii) increased market access in the industrial nations.

36. 

The strategic orientations of the PRSP16 are to:

(a) Promote good governance and strengthen the rule of law;

(b) Reinforce local development by strengthening decentralization and good governance;

(c) Accelerate development of basic infrastructure in order to enlarge access to services for
all and to develop human capital;

(d) 

Increase investment and reinforce competitiveness of the productive system, notably by
investing in infrastructures that support production;

(e) Pursue regional integration and international cooperation;

(f) 

Provide information for development and encourage the use of modern research and new
information technologies;

(g) Pursue the rational management of natural resources and the environment for sustainable
development; and

(h) Reinforce measures to assist vulnerable groups and to reduce gender inequalities.

37. Within those broad orientations, the PRSP has four pillars: (i) wealth creation through
economic reform and private sector development; (ii) capacity building and development of
social services; (iii) improvements in the living conditions of the poor; and (iv) implementation
of the strategy and monitoring of its outcomes.

Wealth creation
38. 
The leading objective of the PRSP is to raise per capita incomes on average and more
importantly among the poor. The wealth creation strategy is to achieve: (i) high growth;
(ii) sustained growth; and (iii) employment-generating growth. The first sectoral focus is on
rural development because the rural people are poorest, spend most of their income on food (and
hence are vulnerable to commodity price swings caused by weather), are less educated, and
consume fewer modern services. The second sectoral focus is on small and medium enterprises
especially in agricultural processing, which is thought to have a particularly high employment
content.

Capacity building and social services
39. 
The second broad objective is to build national capacities while improving the quality of,
and access to, social services. Additional capacities would be built in: (i) education, health, and

16 Paraphrased from PRSP: p. 13. The PRSP is silent on the proposed infrastructure concessions known as "Grands
travaux du Chef de l'Etat."

-9-

water supply; (ii) development of "natural capital," including natural resources and the stock of
biodiversity; and (iii) increased "social capital" and promotion of good governance.

Improvements in living conditions among the poor and vulnerable groups
40. 
The third objective is to improve living conditions among the poor and vulnerable
groups. The instruments to realize this objective are: (i) improving the living standards of the
poor and vulnerable; (ii) easing access of the poor to social services and infrastructure;
(iii) launching income generation programs targeted at the poor, notably through microfinance;
and (iv) promoting community development.

Implementation of the Strategy and Monitoring of its Outcomes
41. 
A fourth element of the PRSP is implementation and monitoring of outcomes. This
involves: (i) simplification of procedures for program spending; (ii) an action plan to raise the
execution rate for capital spending; (iii) preparation of a plan for monitoring and evaluation of
the PRSP; (iv) making the monitoring institutions operational; (v) information, communication
and extension activities; (vi) creation of a National Statistical Institute; and (vii) capacity
building among civil society to improve project execution and monitoring.

3. Financing requirements of PRSP, 2003-2005
42. 
The aggregate and sectoral financing needs of the PRSP are shown in Table 2. The gap is
that part of the target programs for which there is not yet secure financing. The financing gap -
estimated as the difference between a fully funded PRSP and currently committed resources - is
about 8.5 percent of projected nominal GDP in 2004. IDA's contribution (counting
disbursements from new commitments in the base case lending program) would be 2.8 percent of
projected 2004 GDP. IDA would fill 31 percent of target program in the wealth creation pillar,
9 percent in capacity building and social services, and one-sixth in the vulnerable groups pillar.

4. Bank-Fund Joint Staff Assessment (JSA) of the PRSP
43. 
Senegal submitted its PRSP to the Bank and the Fund in May 2002. The Bank's Board,
in its discussion of the Joint Staff Assessment on December 23, 2002, concluded that the PRSP
was an adequate basis for concessional lending from IDA.

44. 
The JSA found that Senegal's PRSP presented a credible poverty reduction
strategy. Its strengths are: (i) public participation in the strategy; (ii) thematic working groups
to prepare the text, reconcile views and integrate public contributions to arrive at a strategic
consensus; (iii) a detailed poverty profile; and (iv) frank discussion of the need to improve the
equity and efficiency of public spending and the quality of social services.

45. 
The PRSP provides an operational framework for implementation. It outlines the
guiding principles for implementation and describes the instruments and procedures to be
employed. One major theme is better budget preparation, execution, and monitoring. In this
regard, the Government has launched expenditure tracking surveys and public expenditure
reviews in health and education, which should inform the further development of the
government's budget reform plans. In addition, government officials are participating in drafting
chapters on budget reforms and poverty monitoring for the World Bank's Senegal Country

-10-

Table 2: Senegal - Financing Needs of PRSP, Base Scenario, 2003-2005

PRSP financing 
(in percent of proiected 2004 GDP) 
Target 
Gap 

PRSP financing 
(in Percent of proiected 2004 revenue) 
Target 
Gap 

IDA
contribution
(percent of GDP)

Pillar
Wealth Creation 
Agriculture 
Infrastructure 
Energy 
Other 

Capacity Building 
and Social Sectors

Education and 

Training
Health 
Water and Sanitation 
Other 

Living Conditions of 
Vulnerable Groups

Total 

Projected GDP (billions 
of USD) in 2004 '
Projected revenue 
(billions of USD) in
2004

6.4 
2.8 
2.0 
0.9 
0.6 

5.9 

1.1 

1.2 
1.2 
2.4 

1.7 

14.0 

6.63 

3.0 
0.9 
1.2 
0.6 
0.4 

4.1 

0.5 

0.8 
0.8 
2.0 

1.4 

8.5 

6.63

35.1 
15.7 
11.1 
4.7 
3.5 

32.5 

6.2 

6.8 
6.4 
13.1 

9.4 

77.0 

1.21 

2.0

0.5

0.3

2.8

16.6 
4.7
6.5
3.4
2.0

22.4 

2.7

4.5
4.4
10.9

7.8 

46.8 

2.21

Source: PRSP, Table 5.1, p. 67.
' The CFA franc is tied to the Euro at a rate of 656 CFAF/I Euro. Assuming that the long run exchange rate of the US
dollar to the Euro is parity, the PRSP figures are converted CFAF to USD at a rate of 656 CFAF/I1$.

Economic Memorandum. These chapters will analyze problems and shortcomings of existing
systems and outline government plans for launching new approaches.

46. 
The PRSP identifies the main risks to the strategy. The impact of adverse import
price shocks on growth and poor households was examined. Endogenous policy risks were also
perceived to arise from insufficient capacity to absorb resources efficiently. The JSA considered
these risks to be substantial given the past weak reform program implementation in several
sectors. The JSA agreed that government and society can contain these risks by strengthening
both the judicial system and governance; giving civil society a greater role in policy formulation,
implementation, and control; nurturing a partnership between the State and the society; and
promoting the effective involvement of the beneficiaries of the reforms.

47. 
Further elaboration of the strategy is needed to remedy its shortcomings. The JSA
found that plans to implement the strategy were not spelled out in sufficient detail, notably on
fiscal decentralization for service delivery. The poverty diagnosis did not have a complete
analysis of recent household surveys. The quantitative impact of some measures on the poor
remains to be analyzed. Finally, the PRSP emphasizes a "high-spending-case" macroeconomic
scenario (alongside two more moderate scenarios) that is underpinred by overly optimistic
assumptions about foreign financing and absorption capacity, and projects growth and poverty
reduction that are unlikely.

5. When will Senegal meet the MDGs?

48. 
Senegal advances unevenly toward the MDGs (Table 3). Some MDGs can be attained
before 2015; this is true of access to clean water, the rate of HIV/AIDS, and the ratio of girls to
boys in primary education. Others - people living below the poverty line, infant and child
mortality, maternal mortality and numbers of attended births - require faster progress if they are
to be reached.

Table 3: Senegal - PRSP Projections for Reaching the M[DGs

MDGs 
in 
2015 

100% 

1.00 

1.00 

27% 
10% 

Eradicate extreme poverty and hunger
Population living below poverty line 
Prevalence of underweight children 
Universal primary education
Net primary enrollment 
Gender equality
Ratio of girls to boys in primary and 
secondary education
Youth literacy ratios (young women 
to men)
Reduce child mortality
Under 5 mortality (per 1000) 
Infant mortality (per 1000 live births) 
Immunization (children under 12 
months), including measles
Improve maternal health
Maternal mortality (per 100,000 births) 127.50 
Births attended by skilled staff (of total 
90% 
births)
Combat HIV, malaria, other diseases
Prevalence of HIV/AIDS 
Morbidity due to malaria 
Environmental sustainability
Access to improved water (urban 
population)
Access to improved water (rural 
population)
Source: Senegal PRSP, Annex IV, p. 65.

32 
20 
90% 

PRSP 
PRSP 
PRSP 
PRSP
Reference year Projections Projections Projections
2001 
2005 
2010 
2015

54% 
19% 

70% 

0.88 

0.57 

98 
60 
48% 

510 
44% 

1.4% 
25% 

93% 

83% 

45% 
15% 

80% 

0.90 

0.64 

85 
50 
70% 

410 
60% 

1 - 2% 
10% 

100% 

95% 

35% 
5% 

95% 

1.00 

0.77 

75 
40 
95% 

300 
75% 

1 - 2% 
5% 

100% 

100% 

25%
3%

98%

1.00

0.93

50
30
100%

200
90%

1 - 2%
1%

100%

100%

49. 
The necessary condition of Senegal reaching the MDGs is economic growth. The path to
the Goal of cutting the number of people living below the poverty line by one-half can be shown
as follows.17 Taking the "Base" growth scenario of the PRSP (Table 1), assuming that Senegal

17 Estimates of the number of people below the poverty line in 1990 are unreliable. The number below the line in
2001 is estimnated at 54 percent of the population; hence the 2015 target is 27 percent.

-12-

maintains a steady-state per capita growth rate of 2.5 percent until 2015, and further assuming
that one percent more per capita income growth induces a 0.89 percent 8 decline in the poverty
share, the projected share of the 2015 population below the poverty line is 34 percent. Assuming
a weaker relationship between growth and poverty reduction - one in which the poverty
elasticity is -0.5, not -0.89 - the share of poor people in 2015 would be 43 percent. At a
poverty-growth elasticity of -0.89, the required per capita growth rate to reach the Goal in 2015
is 3.2 percent; it is 5.1 percent if the poverty elasticity is -0.50. Senegal requires, therefore,
faster growth than its historical rate, faster growth than projected in the base PRSP scenario, and
complementary measures to achieve equity with growth.

50. 
One of the complementary measures is the amount and quality of public spending on
health, primary education, and infrastructure, especially water and sanitation. The PRSP
presents a three-year program of public spending that is by and large targeted to rural
development and the social sectors. For example, the sum of proposed spending for agriculture,
livestock and fisheries is 20 percent of the total for 2003-2005. Spending for education, health,
water and sanitation is 26 percent, while that for natural resources is 16 percent. The third pillar
- assistance to vulnerable groups - would receive another 12 percent. ' 9 The share of education
in public spending is projected to rise from 32 percent in 2002 to 40 percent in 2005; the share of
primary education in the education total will also expand. The part of the health and education
budgets allocated to the five poorest regions will increase faster than the total.

IV. 

BANK EXPERIENCE UNDER PREVIOUS CAS

51. 
Total Bank commitments to Senegal since the first IBRD loan was approved to Senegal
in 1967 are some US$2.37 billion, of which US$163 million are IBRD and US$2,210 million are
IDA. 2 0 After the mid-1980s there was a shift to adjustment credits, including sectoral adjustment
operations in energy and agriculture, and away from investment operations in rural development,
road transport, rail transport, and port services.

1. Evolution of the Bank's portfolio since 1994
52. 
The Bank's portfolio changed after the CFAF devaluation. New commitments rose from
some US$77 million annually from 1988 through 1993 to nearly US$140 million annually after
1993. Disbursements fell marginally from an average of US$82.8 million from 1988 through
1993 to US$78.8 million after 1993. Disbursements of investment credits, as a share of the
outstanding committed stock of such credits, fell from a weighted average of 13 percent in
1988/1993 to 6 percent after 1993. Portfolio quality initially improved, though it fell in 2001;
9 of 22 projects were rated Unsatisfactory on development impact or implementation
performance at the time of the May 2002 CPPR. 21 The sectoral composition shifted. The post-
devaluation era saw a sharp increase in commitments for water, education, and health and a
decline in credits for rural development and the financial sector. Adjustment credits constitute

18 This is the elasticity of poverty incidence with respect to per capita income, as shown in the PRSP (p. 16).
'9 PRSP, Annex 4, p. 65.
20 No new IBRD loans have been approved since June 23, 1981. Of the US$163 million in IBRD loans, only
US$129 million have been disbursed. All but a trivial amount of the old IBRD commitments have been repaid and
Senegal has been an IDA-only country for more than 20 years.
21 Most of the nine have since been upgraded and only three remain U on either scale.

-13-

the majority of disbursements after the devaluation, mainly because of a large energy sector
credit and another trade reform credit in 2000.

2. Lessons from the last CAS
53. 
A CAS dated December 29, 1997 was discussed with the Board in January 1998. It
stressed the turnaround following economic reforms and the related improvement in the Bank's
portfolio, while underlining the unfinished reform agenda.

54. 
The goal of the FY98 CAS was to reduce poverty and create meaningful employment.
This was to be achieved through a dual strategy: supporting policies and programs for faster and
sustained growth, and ensuring the social sustainability of the program. It proposed a base case
lending level of US$560 million (close to three times the amount recommended in the previous
CAS) for 14 projects in FY98-00. The base case was predicated on good progress in the
implementation of reforms to favor private sector initiatives, continued portfolio improvement,
and allocation of sufficient attention and resources to the development of the social sectors.

55. 
The strategy was considered as medium risk and high rewards. The risks envisaged
included drought (there had been 12 years of severe droughts during the past 30), deterioration in
the external environment, and delays or reversals of policy reforms, as the country was heading
into an election cycle. In case both the first two risks materialized, there would be a slippage in
economic reform policies and the Bank would have to determine an appropriate course of action.
As for the third risk, the CAS indicated three mitigating factors. First, the President of Senegal
had taken the leadership and held open consultations with civil society oni the need for reform.
Second, some important measures, including in the energy sector, would be taken up-front.
Finally, the authorities realized that the days of plentiful external assistarLce without domestic
effort were over, and, therefore, "muddling through" was not an option.

56. 
The CAS assessment was optimistic with respect to the risks related to the Presidential
elections in 2000 and the legislative elections in 2001. The rate of CAS execution slowed
notably in 2000 and 2001 and only began to accelerate in mid-2002, after close dialogue between
the Bank and the Government.

57. 
Volume of aid and absorptive capacity. A key lesson from the previous CAS, and
from the experience of other donors, is that more aid is a poor substitute for better aid. Senegal's
absorptive capacity was probably overestimated in the previous CAS period, and this, in
conjunction with the elections, reduced the use of IDA credits and limited their effectiveness.
The IDA base case planned in this CAS is much smaller than the previous lending program.

58. 
Financial management. Despite the temporary improvements in the Bank's portfolio
after the devaluation, serious problems emergecl in financial management and procurement. An
outdated procurement code was still in force. Financial accountability was poor. In FY97 only
half of the audit reports due were received, and the number of qualified audits increased by
80 percent, a pattern that continues today. There were many examples of poor financial
management in individual projects.

-14-

3. Participatory process for the CAS
59. 
There was extensive public consultation during the preparation of the Government's
PRSP and of the Bank Group's FY03-05 CAS. The consultations were used as inputs to the
Bank assistance strategy under the present CAS. The main findings of the CAS consultations 2 2
to elicit public views on the role of the World Bank Group were:

(a) Effective efforts to reduce poverty must have a long-term perspective;

(b) The lack of financial services is a tight constraint to growth and poverty reduction;

(c) Agricultural growth must be a key feature of a poverty reduction strategy, not only
because of direct income generation effects but also because of demand linkages that
incremental rural income creates with other sectors (trade, crafts, industry). Growth in
agriculture depends on access to land and financing services; and

(d) Employment creation is an essential trait of a growth strategy.

The new lending program responds to these concerns by including lending for private sector
development as well as LILs for rural finance and land titling.

60. 
Several current operations that receive Bank support use participatory and community
development methods to define local priorities for investment. These include the Urban
Development and Decentralization Program (Cr. 3006-SN), the National Rural Infrastructure
Program (Cr. 3315-SN), and the Social Development Fund (Cr. 3446-SN). Insights from the
extensive public consultations were applied to the CAS.

61. 
A first draft of the Senegal CAS was discussed in public meetings (November 2002) with
representatives of the Government, the civil service, the private sector, NGOs and CBOs, unions,
and other donors. Bank staff presented the strategic partnership matrix, the CAS lending and
advisory services programs, and the triggers for levels of IDA assistance. This presentation was
well received and led to changes in the content and focus of IDA's proposed program and in the
triggers.

V. 

PROPOSED PROGRAM OF LENDING AND ADVISORY SERVICES

1. Achieving greater development effectiveness
62. 
It is widely agreed that aid's impact in Senegal has not been as wide and deep as it should
have been' The reasons for this are: (i) insufficient emphasis on growth and poverty as explicit
objectives, as aid was often viewed as an uncoordinated accumulation of discrete projects;
(ii) erratic macroeconomic performance, caused in part by government intervention; (iii) lack of
common sectoral reform programs, leading to uneven implementation of reform; (iv) wavering
government commitment to reform; (v) too little attention to human capital as a factor of growth
and social development; and (vi) poor implementation, caused partly by weak incentives to use
aid more effectively.

22 Sunimarized, in Banque Mondiale. Elements pour l'elaboration de la strategie d'assistance au Senegal (2003-

2005): Points de vue des acteurs.

-15-

63. Many of the historical barriers to using aid better have been eroded. There is now much
better agreement about growth and poverty reduction as the major objective of aid within the
PRSP framework. Government intervention in markets has diminished (though it persists in
some sectors and reform is still required). Between 1995 and 2001, Senegal experienced its best
period of macro performance since independence with higher and more stable growth, price
stability, better public revenue performance, and a well managed deficit.

64. 
The previous CAS sought greater development effectiveness through sectoral operations
in which there was ex ante agreement on the main policy issues. This has proven successful in
the water sector. It has proven less successful in education, transport, and health. The main
constraints were inadequate ownership and insufficient implementation arrangements at a time of
the country's first change in executive leadership since 1960.

65. 
In the CAS, the Bank will: (i) put more focus on implementation; (ii) develop better
country ownership through policy dialogue, especially with civil society; (iii) strengthen
execution through continued decentralization of implementation support to the Dakar Office;
(iv) extend the Annual Review Approach (now used in the QEFA operation) to have an overview
of portfolio issues at the beginning of each fiscal year; (v) use public expenditure reviews with a
focus on impacts at the levels of the consolidated central budget, in the main sectors, and provide
support to public financial management through a PRSC; (vi) establish better linkages between
implementation and aggregate results, notably those of the PRSP/MDGs; and (vii) emphasize on
investment in human capital through the lending and advisory services.

2. Strategic elements and selectivity of CAS program
66. 
The Bank's CAS supports the Government's PRSP around the pillars of wealth creation
for growth and capacity building/development of social services for equity. The CAS selects the
first two because: (i) reinforcing those pillars clearly has a strong impact on the third
("Improvements in the living conditions of the poor"); (ii) IDA resources for lending and
advisory services are limited; and (iii) other partners, especially the European Union (EU),
United Nations Development Program (UNDP), and other bilaterals assist on the latter two
pillars, especially Implementation and Monitoring. Table 4 shows a matrix of donor roles in
supporting the PRSP.

67. 
Lending services seek to target new operations to those two priority pillars of the PRSP,
to consolidate progressively the existing portfolio of 20 projects into fewer sectoral operations,
and to achieve greater development effectiveness from new and on-going operations. The goal
of advisory services is to identify barriers to domestic investment and capacity building that
impede poor people from developing their skills and raising their incomes; and to define
appropriate public interventions for growth and poverty reduction.

3. Consolidation of portfolio and transition to budget support
68. 
Senegal's portfolio had 20 active projects with commitments of US$780.6 million at the
end of 2002. Under the base case (Table 5) of thie CAS, the portfolio would have 16 projects
with commitments of US$694 million at July 1, 2004. The reasons for the limited consolidation
in terms of numbers of projects and in average credit amount are that the lending program, now
and at the mid-point of the CAS period, consists of major sectoral operations, which already

-16-

consolidate sub-sectoral interventions, and of first-phase APLs23 that have recently started.
Moreover, the current portfolio is already well aligned with the PRSP objectives.

Table 4: Senegal - Bank Group's Role in the Donor Effort (2002)
Areas of 
Intervention 

Other 
UN 
Agencies 

UNDP 

Japan Canada USAID 
x 

African
Dev.
Bank 
x 
X 

Macroframework 
Rural Development 
o Urban 
Transport 

.E Energy 
5 Trade 

E 

o 

c 

a 

_o 9 

3 

.. 5 

e r 

Private sector 
Tax Reform 
Legal and Judicial 

Financial Sector 

Education 
Health 
Water 
Environment 
Good governance 
Decentralization 

'o 

Population 

E Xc HIV/AIDS 

E .

Nutrition 

Monitoring 

r 0

WB 
x 
X 
X 
X 

X 
X 

X 
X 
X 

X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 

X 

X 

X 

EU 
x 

IMF 
x 
X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 
X 

X

X 

X 

X 

X 
X 
X 

X 

X 

X 
X 
X
X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 
X 
X 

x

X 

X

X 

X 

X 

X

X 

X 

X 

x 

X 

X 
X
X 

x 

X

X 

BOAD France
x
X
X
X

X 
-

X 

X

X

X

X
x
x

x

X

X

69. 
The transition would take place in the base case with an initial PRSC in FY05. The
purpose of a PRSC would be to support the Government in coordinating its activities toward
implementing its comprehensive poverty-reduction strategy. In particular, it would support
reform in public expenditure management - improving the targeting and effectiveness of public
expenditures for basic public services. It would target interventions for decentralization of

23 The Senegal portfolio has six APLs (Adaptable Program Lending operations): the Social Development Fund
Project (US$30 million, approved on December 20, 2000); the Nutrition Enhancement Program (US$14.7 million,
approved on March 14,2002); the Urban Mobility Improvement Program (US$70 million, approved on May 25,
2000); the National Rural Infrastructure Program (US$28.5 million approved on January 27, 2000); the Quality
Education for All Program (US$50 million, approved on April 11, 2000); and the Agricultural Services and
Producer Organizations Project (US$27.4 million, approved on May 20, 1999).

-17-

service, with special emphasis on rural development, agricultural diversification, and access to
markets. If the Government were to meet the high case triggers, then the Bank would consider
channeling a larger amount of resources through the PRSC.

4. Wealth creation pillar
70. 
Growth strategy. The CAS outcomes depend on the Government's implementation of a
strategy for economic growth in support of the wealth creation pillar. Broad targets through
2010 include: (i) continued macroeconomic stability and greatly improved public expenditures,
with respect to transparency, efficiency of execution, equity, and outcomes; and (ii) steady
private sector-based growth of 6-8 percent annually and cumulative formal sector employment
increased by 50 percent above current levels.

71. 
Growth would be sustained by appropriate policies and expansion of such sectors as:
(i) construction, especially as civil works and new investments in the secondary and tertiary
sectors are implemented; (ii) extractive industries, petroleum, gold, iron ore etc.; (iii) tourism,
initially doubling from current levels (some 0.5 million annual arrivals) to I million arrivals and
subsequently reaching 1.5 million in the steady state; (iv) export-oriented nmanufacturing,
especially garments, in part stimulated by the African Growth and Opportunity Act (AGOA);
(v) trade services, in particular based on Senegal becoming a Gateway to West-Africa;
(vi) information technology and related value added services; and (vii) SMEs, especially those
involved in subcontracting, services, and agribusiness.

72. 
Key reforms to support growth, many of which are supported by the Bank, are either
under way or in preparation. Reforms are of two sorts. First is the lifting of policy and
institutional constraints that cause the economy to underperform. A second set promotes sectors
that need a better enabling environment. Many measures - for instance pension reform - are
multidimensional, encompassing direct and indirect effects. Therefore, while it would be
possible to attain the overall goals in Senegal if the implementation in one area is deficient, a
multifaceted approach is essential. Finally, failure to adequately address certain fundamental
areas, such as the investment climate and electricity reform, would undermine the program,
irrespective of how much progress is achieved elsewhere.

Infrastructure and private sector development (PSD)
73. 
A specific obstacle to wealth creation is that the per capita supply of infrastructure
services is low. Of the poorest three quintiles of the Senegalese population, only 3 percent have
electricity, 5 percent have piped drinking water at home, and 0.1 percent have a telephone; the
corresponding averages in the richest two quintiles are 80 percent, 20 percent and 78 percent. 2 4
A survey of Senegalese firms found that 83 percent considered reliable electricity supply to be a
"moderate," "major" or "very serious" element to operation and growth.2 5 Therefore, a major
objective of the CAS is to help expand the supply of infrastructure services, most
prominently among the poor, to lower service costs and to promote private sector
development. Because of the costs and multiple risks involved, the Bank will pursue this
objective in partnership with other financial institutions.

24 See Country Framework Report for use of modem water, electricity/capita, telecom density, etc.

25 Senegal - Le Parcours de l 'investisseur-Une Reevaluation. May 2002.

-18-

74. 

In lending services for infrastructure, the CAS proposes to:

(a) Support electricity sector development through a mix of IDA credits, IFC loans, and
PRGs. The proposed operations would be an Energy Sector Investment Credit and the
first phase of an APL for a Rural Electrification Project (both in FY04 - base case)
(Table 5);

(b) Continue financing two major sector operations in water and sanitation2 6 with a follow-up
operation focused mainly on rural water supply and sanitation to be prepared for the next
CAS period;

(c) Follow-up the Second Transport Sector operation 2 7 (STS) with a subsequent operation in
the next CAS period if there is better performance in the current project. Improved
performance in the current project is a condition of remaining in the base case;

(d) Another important step is the proposed concession of the Dakar-Bamako railway, which
is supported under the STS. This change, together with port reforms discussed below, is
a key step towards making Dakar a gateway for West Africa;

(e) The port of Dakar is an important node in the infrastructure supply chain. Productivity
gains in the port, associated with customs and other reforms, should lead to a significant
increase in volume. In this context, the proposed development of the container terminal,
supported by the STS, is a key investment in future economic growth;

(f) Expand small-scale urban infrastructure through a new APL that extends the urban
development agenda (FY05 - base case) currently supported by the Urban Development
and Decentralization Program;2 8

(g) 

Invest in rural infrastructure through the second phase of the APL for a National Rural
Infrastructure Program (NIRP) in the following CAS period; 2 9 and

(h) Support postal and telecommunications sector investment and reform through a proposed
Private Investment Promotion Project (PIPP; FY03).

75. 
In advisory services for infrastructure, the Bank proposes to strengthen the dialogue on
the role of the State during credit supervision of the water and transport operations. There will
be an updated analysis of regulatory issues in the macro and PSD dialogue, including an update
of the Country Framework Report (CFR) in FY05. In the area of telecommunications, Bank
technical assistance will support institutional changes with the goals of reducing the cost of

26 Water Sector (Cr. 2758-SN) approved on June 29, 1995 for US$ 100 million, closing on December 31, 2003, and
co-financed for a total cost of US$290 million; Long-Term Water (Cr. 3470-SN) approved on March 6, 2001 for
US$125 million, closing on December 31, 2007, and co-financed for a total cost of US$248.43 million.
27 Second Transport Sector (Cr. 3183-SN) approved on March 30, 1999 for US$90 million, closing on June 30,
2005, and co-financed for a total cost of US$580 million.
28 The Urban Development and Decentralization Program (Cr. 3006-SN) was approved on November 20, 1997 for
US$75 million, closes on December 31, 2004 and is co-financed for a total of US$110.6 million.
29 Phase I of the National Rural Infrastructure Program (Cr. 3315-SN) was approved on January 27, 2000 for
US$28.5 million, closes on June 30, 2005 and is co-financed for a total cost of US$41.6 million.

-19-

services through enhanced competition, developing value-added and IT services, and expanding
rural telephone access.

76. 
Improvement of the Investment Climate. International experience stresses the
importance of the national investment climate for growth. The "investment climate" consists of
rules governing the entry, exit and conduct of private firms and affecting competitiveness, such
as neutral incentives, execution of contracts, property rights enforcement, and credit discipline.

77. 
Reviews of the Senegalese investment climate shows that it does not compare favorably
with the best international comparators. 3 0 Though circumstances favor private investment
(tourism potential, agribusiness, opportunities related to AGOA), sustained reform is needed to
capture this potential. Bank support to Senegal dwuing the CAS period FY03-FY05 to improve
the investment climate would focus on advisory services in the areas of trade, tax reforrn,
investment policy reform, and the judicial sector.

78. 
Trade. Exports remain low (the five year average is less than 20 percent of GDP) and
are concentrated in a few goods. An overvalued exchange rate before 1994 made some
exportables uncompetitive. Unfavorable terms of trade have also repressed exports even after
the devaluation. Surcharges and non-tariff barriers affect key products, including edible oils,
flour, sugar, tomatoes, and other consumer goods. The deadweight loss associated with this
protection, excluding edible oils, has been estimated at around one percent of GDP.

79. 
The trade policy regime in Senegal has become more open with the reforms of the past
decade. Tariffs set at the regional level of WAEMU in theory conform to best practice. Indeed,
the most dynamic share of exports is of goods exported to the sub-region.

80. 
A Diagnostic Trade Integration Study (DT]S) was completed in December 2002. It
identified trade barriers in five sectors of high potential growth: tourism, fisheries, agriculture,
textiles, and groundnut. The DTIS presented an action plan to improve the trade regime by
eliminating those barriers; this plan was discussed with the Government, the private sector and
other partners and will be implemented in the next few years. In addition, a trade facilitation
program is being implemented to help customs procedures converge towards ISO 9000
compatibility. This program would have a favorable impact on trade and supply chains. Several
actions defined in the DTIS are to be supported under the CAS. These include reforms in
fisheries policies, to be implemented under the planned Coastal and Marine Biodiversity Project
(FY04 - base case, with GEF support). Further efforts will be made to improve food safety, as
identified in the current regional AAA on food safety, so as to meet world trade standards. The
proposed PIPP will continue promotion of tourism.

81. 
The administrative barriers that private investors face when establishing and operating
a business are several: (i) general entry approvals; (ii) access to land, site development, and
connection to utilities; and (iii) operational requirements. Reforms during the past three years
have improved the first and third areas. However, the situation in the second area has worsened,
due to the deterioration in the procedures to acquire land and to obtain building permits.
Furthermore, few legislative and administrative reforms have been implemented at the sectoral

3 0 FIAS, administrative barriers; and FIAS, taxation.

-20-

level (tourism, mining, fisheries, for example). As a result, existing enterprises and vested
interests in the public administration have benefited from de facto protection.

82. 
The government strategy to reduce administrative barriers calls for continued reforms and
general improvements in public/private interface, with the aim of improving key indicators so
that they are the best in Sub-Saharan Africa and compare favorably with the rest of the world.
A major emphasis will be put on land access, partly through better information and capacity
building, and partly through the introduction of market-based mechanisms for land allocation.
A specific pilot, involving auctioning existing land, is envisaged in Dakar. Once proven
successful, this approach could be scaled up: the success of this experience will be the key to
subsequent initiatives mentioned under the medium- to long-term strategy involving land
development for tourism and industry, including the redevelopment of the site of the present
airport. Other areas of focus would include overhaul of labor and special economic regimes, a
crosscutting issue related not only to regulations, but also to tax reform, labor, financial sector
and trade policies, etc.

83. 
Tax system. A recent diagnosis of the Senegalese tax system3 1 reveals that investment is
deterred by excessively high tax rates combined with a multitude of taxes and/or user fees. The
tax regime is one of the most complex in the sub-region. Administrative barriers and complexity
of the tax regime deter transparency and encourage rent seeking. The cost of administering small
taxes may exceed income generated. User fees are often not utilized effectively or for the
purposes for which they were intended. The Government has gradually implemented
overlapping exemption regimes to encourage investment, with weak results. These regimes
complicate the tax system and create uneven terms for business.

84. 
The Government is identifying a revenue neutral tax package encompassing income tax
reform, including the reduction of top rates and the elimination of minor taxes, together with a
corresponding elimination of exemptions. Finally, key user fees, including the wage levy and
the tourism tax, would be revised so that revenues collected are utilized for the purposes intended
(vocational training and tourism development in the aforementioned cases). Further analytic
work, and financial support would be provided under the proposed Private Sector Adjustment
Credit.

85. 
Legal and judicial framework. The last feature of the investment climate concerns the
legal and judicial framework. Government's strategy calls for a long-term capacity building
program that would be implemented through a sector expenditure program, based on qualitative
and quantitative targets, financed by the national budget. The objectives of this program would
include improved performance of commercial courts, accelerated processing of cases and
availing judgments to the general public to enhance consistency and transparency. This program
would also expand access to courts and thus greater empowerment of the poor, and thus
contribute substantially to the equity pillar of the PRSP. In the short- to medium-term, more
focused reform actions would be undertaken, including the strengthening of intellectual property
rights and encouraging arbitration. A legal reform component of the proposed PIPP would assist
the Government in these areas.

3' World Bank. Foreign Investment Advisory Service (FIAS). Senegal - Systeme d'imposition des Entreprises et
Regimes d'incitations: Analyse et Recommandations. 2002.

-21-

86. 
The financial sector. A recent Financial Sector Assessment Program (FSAP) report on
Senegal finds the financial sector relatively free of high systemic risk, and benefiting from good
regulatory and supervision arrangements. However, the financial depth remains shallow and
financial instruments lack diversity. Government expects that by improving payments systems
and mobilizing term resources, the postal and pension reforms will deepen the financial sector
within the medium-term.

87. 
As part of follow-up to the FSAP report, additional work will consist of: (i) the
investment climate (AAA in FY04); (ii) IDA adjustment support to the private pension system to
reduce its unfunded liabilities; (iii) ongoing project support to the Regional Payments System
Credit (Cr. 3424-SN) in the BCEAO; (iv) in order to reduce systemic risks caused by the
borrowing of parastatals, notably SENELEC and SONACOS, IDA is supporting the privatization
of the latter and, in collaboration with the IMF, is assisting the Government in putting SENELEC
on a sounder financial basis that will lessen its recourse to debt financing.
88. 
Lending services for private sector development follow from the priorities identified in
the PRSP, in the diagnostic work, and in the public consultations. The Government aims to
reach its growth objectives through policy and sector reforms, and related institutional capacity
building initiatives. These actions would eliminate inefficiencies and distortions that lead to
misallocation of resources and restrict Senegal's international competitiveness, and would ensure
institutional sustainability of the reforms. The Bank through an investment operation, the Private
Investment Promotion Project (PIPP; FY03), and an adjustment Credit, the Private Sector
Adjustment Credit (PSAC; FY04), will support the private sector development strategy of the
Government, as shown in its PRSP. As these projects support the alleviation of administrative
barriers and tax reform, they will help the Government meet CAS results indicators (Table 8) in
private sector development.

89. 
The PEPP will, inter alia, support the business plan of the Government's investment
promotion agency, APIX. The PIPP is a multi-sector project that seeks to stimulate private
investments and build capacity in these areas:

(a) 

Improving the investment environment, by facilitating the policy, legal and regulatory
interface, and the dialogue process between the public and private sectors. This will be
achieved through judicial reform, a better business environment (tax and administrative
barrier reforms) and trade facilitation, enhanced capacity to regulate infrastructure and
resolve post-privatization issues, and by reactivating the public/private consultative
process. The implementation of the proposed activities will facilitate and expedite
private transactions and reduce their costs.

(b) Assisting private participation in economic activities and enhancing Senegal's
competitiveness, through support for investment facilitation and other public and private
institutions, and improved access of the private sector to business advisory services.

(c) Promoting subsector reforms that would: (i) directly stimulate growth and development
in areas with untapped potential; (ii) alleviate barriers that affect the ability of the private
sector to operate effectively and competitively; and (iii) free-up public and private
resources, which would be available to fund pro-poor private initiatives and, indirectly,

-22-

finance private investment. Specific reform areas include, pensions, the
telecommunication and postal sectors, tourism and culture, and the edible oil sector.

90. 
The PSAC has two objectives. It first supports policy reforms that hinder implementation
of the private sector strategy. Second, it provides budget support to finance incremental costs of
the financial restructuring associated with reforms and foregone revenues. The project focuses
on: (i) changes in private sector taxation, including user fees, with a view to ensure an even
playing field and bringing incentives largely within the common tax regime; (ii) edible oil sector
reform, through removal of trade policy barriers, reduction of financial sector distortions and
greater agriculture diversification; (iii) pensions reform, through the completion of actions
needed to ensure financial sustainability and initiation of systemic changes to improve efficiency
and ensure good corporate governance; and (iv) postal reform, through the restructuring of postal
services and spinning-off of financial services (postal deposits and payments systems) into a
subsidiary, so as to achieve financial equilibrium and provide the rural and peri-urban population
with better access to these services.

91. 
Building on recent AAA, advisory services for PSD would be to: (i) conduct an
Investment Climate Review in FY04; (ii) update the 2002 pension study in FY05,3 2 based on
new system parameters, and demographic and economic data; (iii) update the 2002 CFR in
FY05, based on the evolution of the regulatory framework after 2002; and (iv) complete an
Urban Investment Study (FY05).

Rural development
92. 
In 2000, agriculture contributed some 21 percent of exports and 17 percent of GDP, while
employing about half of the labor force. Low soil fertility and insufficient rainfall limit
Senegal's agriculture potential. Scope for rapid growth is restricted to high value added crops
with irrigation, including horticulture, fresh fruits and some cotton. The Casamance Region has
good agriculture potential, but it is limited by the conflict there. A certain amount of agro-
processing is possible in Senegal. The development of this sector is being encouraged through
the development of the required infrastructure, and indirectly through the groundnut subsector
reform. Farmers being given greater security of lands they cultivate would provide a further
boost to rural development. While full-fledged land reform would require a political and social
consensus that is not yet attainable, pilot schemes would be conducted in areas where local
communities would be receptive to the idea. Once successful, these schemes could be
progressively scaled up.

93. 
Lessons from the previous problems in the agriculture and rural development portfolio
were used to design the present CAS. Emphasis has been placed on the creation and
strengthening of producers organizations as full partners in rural development policy, on
supporting the decentralization of the Ministry of Agriculture to provide services that are more
responsive to local needs, and on development of marketing information networks.

94. 
In addition to support provided under the PRSC, lending services for rural development
would comprise:

32 The original pension study was completed in FY02. Annual updates would involve adapting the model to revised
data on demography, return on pension system assets, and other economic and financial factors.

-23-

(a) Continued IDA support to producers' organizations, agricultural research and extension
services through the second phase of the APL for an Agricultural Services and Producer
Organizations Project 3 3 (FY05 - base case);

(b) Launch the second phase of the National Rural Infrastructure Program (NRIP) APL in the
next CAS period beginning in FY06. Two previously identified operations - small-scale
irrigation and soil fertility and water management - would be integrated into ASPOP
Phase 2 and NRIP Phase 2. A GEF window would be opened in the NRIP to finance
activities related to small-scale irrigation and soil fertility management;

(c) Use a Learning and Innovation Loan (LIL) to develop a pilot land titling program
(FY05 - high case);

(d) Support appropriate rural development activities in the Casamance Region through a
Casamance Region Post-conflict Recovery Credit (FY04 - high case);34 and

(e) A LIL to strengthen the rural financial system (FY05 - high case). This operation would
have an institutional and financial structure. The former would consist of a consortium
of existing rural banks and other banks as shareholders; microfinance institutions and
rural banks as loan retailers and holders of deposits; farmers' organizations as group
borrowers; and capacity building at all levels. The financial structure would be equity
contributions by the shareholders with a proposed MIGA guarantee for the equity of the
new institution; and some other form of guarantee for loans made by the wholesale
consortium. If successful, lessons learned from the LIL would be used to develop an
APL in the subsequent CAS period, in which IDA and IFC would provide longer-term
financial and technical support to the new institution.

95. 
Advisory activities for rural development will be undertaken during preparation of
operations financed by partners. These activities include:

(a) Preparing a Country Action Plan for Food Safety investments and related capacity
building, in partnership with the Government, FAO and French Cooperation (FY03). A
base line study leading to the action plan will be done based on cost-benefit analysis of
proposed capacity building and investments;

(b) Support Senegalese participation in a regional initiative on livestock contribution to
poverty reduction and growth, in collaboration with the FAO-CP (FY04);

(c) Completion of the ongoing Fisheries Sector Review in FY04, which will identify
technical assistance needs in this sector; and

(d) A Rural Social Protection Review in FY04. This will examine the questions of risk and
vulnerability broadly, including the identification of those risks likely to adversely affect

3 ASPOP; Cr. 3219-SN (approved May 20, 1999).

34 A Casamance Region Transition Support Strategy is under preparation and would be presented to the Board at the

same time as a Casamance Post-Conflict Recovery Credit.

-24-

various groups; analysis of the effectiveness of safety nets; and definition of priority
areas and models of intervention.

96. 
Bank support to groundnut sector reform. An important share of the Senegalese
population derives some livelihood from groundnuts. The sector liberalization that began in the
1990s, and continued in November 2001 with the liquidation of the purchasing subsidiary
(SONAGRAINES) of the public groundnut processing enterprise (SONACOS), has allowed
some efficiency gains. Nevertheless, as reflected by two failed privatization attempts in the latter
half of the 1990s, many policy sector issues are still unresolved and significant distortions
remain. The processing activity (peanut oil) is protected through a complex system of trade
barriers. The cost of this protection, a regressive tax on edible oil products that tends to affect
the poor proportionally more, has been estimated at around CFAF 25 billion (about 0.7 percent
of GDP).

97. 
There has been little upstream or downstream diversification from groundnuts, partly
because of distorted incentives. As a result, marginal farmers, including some with more
economically viable alternatives, continue producing groundnuts. The banking sector is
significantly exposed to the groundnut sector. Without a de-facto government guarantee, as well
as subsidized lines of credit, some of the local financial intermediaries may have been
significantly distressed. Given the tight fiscal constraints faced by Government, the public
financing of the sector cannot be sustained without undermining other priority expenditures and
poverty alleviation programs. To address these issues, the government strategy calls for:
(i) elimination of trade policy and other regulatory and financial distortions; (ii) divestiture of
SONACOS; (iii) complementary sector reforms, involving diversification of production in
groundnut producing areas as well as possible downstream measures to meet untapped demand;
and (iv) clearance of accumulated liabilities through a one-time financial restructuring of the
sector. The planned PSAC (FY04) would assist the Government in reaching these objectives.

5. Role of IFC and MIGA in supporting the wealth creation pillar
98. 
IFC investments during the previous CAS period included support for the first
Independent Power Producer, GTI Dakar, and the country's second cement plant. In addition,
direct SME investments were made to finance a secondary school, a microfinance institution,
and expand a fishing fleet. Prior equity investments in the financial sector in housing and leasing
are mature, and IFC is exploring other opportunities. The total portfolio thus remains small, at
$30 million plus another $9.5 million in commercial bank syndications in the GTI Dakar project.

99. 
The portfolio of IFC is now six investments totaling US$30.6 million. It includes two
projects in the financial sector; one fishery project; one leather manufacturing operation; one
cement factory project, one power project, and one for a private school. Another operation, a
small tourist hotel, was approved in FY01 and is not yet effective.

100. 
Following IFC's regional strategy to curtail direct SME investments and concentrate staff
in sub-regional hub offices, the Dakar office was downsized, but has been maintained. The
office may increase in importance pending decisions on relocation of staff from the main West
Africa office in Abidjan. IFC will remain actively involved in the power sector, supporting the
additional investmnent in generating capacity required through an independent power producer
(IPP) or other private investment, and in the dialogue on private participation in SENELEC.

-25-

IFC will continue to expand its role in financing private infrastructure in other sectors beyond
power, including the regional expansion of Senegalese companies, as in the current investment
by the Senegal national telecommunications operator (SONATEL) in Mali.

101. 
IFC will work with IDA to help implement and/or complement elements of the Private
Investment Promotion Project where appropriate, providing support for investment climate
initiatives, for example in continuing the Presidential Investors Council and expanding its
effectiveness. IFC will continue to seek an active role in the financial sector, to complement the
existing investments. This may take the form of more capacity building, establishment of non-
bank intermediaries, and expansion of microfinance and SME oriented banks and financial
institutions. IFC is exploring the use of local currency loan guarantees to finance the expansion
of private schools in Dakar.

102. 
IFC sponsored technical assistance and advisory work consisting of a series of studies on
the investment climate by FIAS, including a review of investor red tape and business taxation
which have helped set the reform agenda for PSD. PSAS advised the Government on private
participation in the Dakar water utility. In addition to the investment in GTI Dakar, IFC has
been involved in the power sector in an advisory capacity, commissioning a study on supply-
demand balance and investment requirements in the sector, and working with the Bank energy
team on the various options for private participation.

103. MIGA. In FY02, MIGA issued its first coverage for a project in Senegal. MIGA's
exposure to Senegal consists of two contracts of guarantee with a gross exposure of US$3.1
million and a net exposure of US$2.8 million. Though MIGA has no active applications for
Senegal, investors have expressed interest in coverage in mining, power, real estate, and
telecommunications. 3 5 MIGA is active in investment promotion, notably in assisting APIX with
its medium-term business plan. Senegal is one of four African countries where MIGA is
undertaking an investment facilitation program, co-funded by the Government of Switzerland.

6. Capacity building and social services for equity
104. 
Senegal ranks low on the world income scale and even lower on the Human Development
Index. To improve its social indicators, Senegal requires not only capacity building but also a
better use of capacity and better targeting of resources, both domestic and foreign. The key
sectors for strengthening are education, health, and social protection in the informal sector.

105. 
Fortunately, Senegal's capacity building program is working very closely with WBI to
maximize its impact. In FY02, for the second year in a row, Senegal led all African countries in
the number of participants in WBI programs with 1,476. Several factors account for this. First,
the Dakar GDLN center is one of the most active in the program. A large number of WBI events
are held in Dakar. Senegal is taking full advantage of its role as a regional hub. The largest WBI
program in Senegal is World Links for Development, which provides a variety of services
related -to the use of the Internet and communication technologies in education and for
community and youth development and is reaching more than 20,000 Senegalese students.
Other thriving programs include: Regulatory issues in public/private partnerships; Health;

35 MIGA has not received any portion of Senegal's contribution to the General Capital Increase. Senegal's share is

US$1,201,020, of which the cash element is US$211,980.

-26-

Investigative and Economic Journalism; and Sustainable Development. This pattern is expected
to continue in the years ahead.

106. On the equity side, the main eoal is to achieve the MDG targets in health and education
as they relate to quality and access.3 Under these quantitative goals lie output and outcome
objectives regarding the education and health of the population, which would be reflected in a
workforce capable of contributing to the wealth creation pillar.

107. Education. Despite nearly two generations of donor support, 3 7 Senegalese schools do
not supply an adequate quantity or quality of modern education services to sustain economic
growth or permit poverty reduction. The simplest outcome indicator is that efficiency of the
primary system is low. For example, the number of student-years to produce a literate and
numerate primary school graduate is currently very high. At the current rate of progress, Senegal
would not meet the MDGs in education and would fail to produce a better-educated workforce.
A generally accepted diagnosis of the reasons is as follows:

(a) The unit costs of primary and secondary education are high, mainly because teachers'
salaries and benefits are inflated with respect to GDP and because many teachers
(perhaps 25 percent of the teaching corps) are paid from the education budget but do not
teach;

(b) The budget share for public higher education is inflated for political reasons;

(c) The result of the first two factors is that student-teacher ratios are high and there is money
only for staff salaries, with the result that teaching quality is low, dropout rates are high,
and there are many repeaters because failure is common; and

(d) The public education system is too centralized and hence does not have enough input
from students, parents, and other stakeholders outside of Dakar.

108. 
The CAS would continue with the Education sector APL (phase 2, FY05) modified as
follows:

(a) Targeted approaches for attaining universal primary completion, including support to the
areas with the lowest enrollment rates; and specific incentives for improving girls'
enrollment and completion;

(b) Effective access to primary education in rural areas, addressing directly the issues of
distance to schools and multigrade teaching; demand-side incentives for the hardest to
reach populations (this would be realistically dealing with concerns regarding rural
education outcomes);

36 That Uganda, starting in 1997 about where Senegal is now, largely achieved universal primary education (UPE) in
one year is indicative of how quickly enrollment can be improved
37 IDA support alone to education, training, and capacity building in Senegal amounts to nearly US$300 million
since 1970.

-27-

(c) Strategies. to support schools that have poor internal efficiency and/or low achievement
scores (this would deal with concerns about quality and efficiency, and would also
address the problem of large class size, inadequate instructional hours and low
achievement, especially in urban areas);

(d) Realistic scenarios for accommodating increasing flows through the education system
from pre-school through university; and

(e) Disbursements tied to reallocation of expenditures within and between sub-sectors and
the effective use of teachers.

109. Despite the fact that Senegal is just completing its first five year rmulti-donor sector
program, the health sector lags seriously in progress toward the MDGs, particularly in child and
maternal mortality. The reasons are: (i) low access to primary health care, especially in rural
areas, and high user fees preventing use of health services by the poor; (ii) weak management of
human and financial resources that cut absorptive capacity and prevent improvement in service
quality; (iii) too much centralization - deconcentration is impeded by lack of resources and by
the insufficient commitment of the Ministry of Health to delegate budgetary authority; (iv) lack
of capacity in regions and health districts; and (v) insufficient collaboration with the private
sector and community organizations.

110. 
There have been some gains in recent years. The health sector has attempted to
harmonize and coordinate its many external donors through program support. There is broad
agreement on health sector policies and clear government commitment to consolidate the
program approach. Worrisome declines in certain key indicators, like vaccination rates, have
experienced some improvement and implementation has quickened.

111. A more integrated approach is still required to solve implementation problems and to
build momentum toward the MDGs. Under the CAS, therefore, at completion of the two
existing health sector projects (Integrated Health Sector Development Project, and the Endemic
Diseases Control Project), an initial phase of a consolidated health sector investment operation
(Health Sector II) would be developed with Senegal's other partners. The consolidated approach
would seek to pool donor resources and to disburse against agreed outputs. The goals of the new
operation would be to reduce child and maternal mortality, improve reproductive health care,
combat infectious disease, build capacity at the decentralized levels, and improve the efficiency
of sector spending.

112. The existing Social Development Fund, which provides safety net and micro-credit
services to poor areas of Senegal, would be refocused, as necessary, by lessons from a planned
Rural Social Protection Review (FY04).

113. Advisory services have been selected to focus on constraints to growth, to superior
public expenditure management, to more effective transfer of resources to rural areas and small
towns, and to selected sectors that are now economically important The core outputs would be:
(i) CEM (FY03); (ii) CFAA and CPAR (FY03); (iii) Decentralization and Civic Engagement
(FY03); (iv) annual PERs in FY04 and FY05; (v) Rural Social Protection Review (FY04); and
(vi) A Poverty Assessment (FY05).

-28-

7. 
Improvements in living conditions among the poor and vulnerable groups
114. On-going operations financed by IDA provide significant support to the third pillar of the
PRSP. These operations include Phase I of the Nutrition Enhancement Sector APL, 3 which
extends nutrition and growth promotion interventions into rural areas through: (i) growth
monitoring and promotion; (ii) nutrition and health group education; (iii) integrated management
of childhood illnesses; (iv) basic health services; and (v) fighting the roots of malnutrition. IDA
supports an HIV/AIDS operation 3 9 that includes services to people living with HIV/AIDS and to
people caring for those afflicted. A Social Development Fund targets vulnerable groups in the
poorest communities of Senegal for their inclusion with priority and direct management of
microprojects to improve services delivery and generate income.

8. Transversal issues
115. 
To implement Senegal's PRSP, new approaches have to be found to solve cross-cutting
problems that affect the country's ability to achieve PRSP goals across pillars and sub-sectors.
Consultations during preparation of the CAS, and dialogue with the Government about IDA
support to implementation of the PRSP, defined transversal priorities as: (i) promoting good
governance and fighting corruption; (ii) further reform in public expenditure; (iii) measures to
improve the lives of women; (iv) investing in the environment; (v) reducing the costs of the
rural-urban transition; (vi) combating HIV/AIDS; (vii) promoting regional integration; and
(viii) terrorist financing.

Promoting Good Governance and Fighting Corruption
116. 
Increasing awareness of the economic and political costs of corruption. There is a
shared understanding among Government, civil society, and the business community that better
governance, and a more dedicated fight against corruption, are needed to promote economic
development and to lessen inequalities. A recent survey of the private sector which listed
corruption as its sixth highest concern, after administrative barriers, taxation, finance, corruption,
and "unfair" competition from the informal sector.

117. Civil society demands better governance. A Forum Civil survey was conducted in
2002 in which Senegalese households described both their extensive experience of corruption
and supported new efforts to reduce it. A household survey found that corruption is common in
Senegal but that most people know little about how to fight it. For example, bribes are thought
necessary to secure public services and citizens consider such payments to be socially necessary
because "everyone does it." Households perceive corruption to have a high economic cost.
Civil society believes that corruption has definitely lessened since the political transition of April
2000. An organized public effort is needed to battle corruption, involving public information,
capacity building, punishment of the guilty, modernization of the public sector, and coalition
building against illegal practices.

118. 
The parallel Forum Civil survey of firms found that the business community believes
corruption to be one of the most serious obstacles to development in Senegal. Entrepreneurs
contend that corruption is an organized system that influences public procurement. They stated

38 Cr. 3619-SN (approved March 14, 2002).
39 Cr. 3601-SN (approved February 7, 2002).

-29-

that corruption has important effects on the operation of firms and on the business environment,
though it has diminished since the political transition.

119. The firm survey, like that of households, proposed a national effort to fight corruption.
This would involve: (i) modernizing the public sector and promoting good governance in order
to weaken the factors that promote corruption; (ii) promoting transparency in public
procurement, where the costs of corruption are highest; (iii) reducing opportunities for rent-
seeking; (iv) building capacity in the business community to battle corruption; (v) creating
coalitions against corruption within civil society; and (vi) inform public opinion about the nature
and economic cost of corruption.

120. Government's anticorruption efforts. The current Government was elected in 2000
with a mandate to battle corruption and improve governance. By most accounts, it has advanced
in those areas. The Government has also: (i) endorsed the WAEMU code of fiscal transparency;
(ii) updated its fiscal legislation; (iii) strengthened the justice system; and (iv) begun the
modernization of its information technology so as to produce more accurate and timely data,
especially related to taxation and government spending.

121. The PRSP outlines new measures against corruption, including: (i) elimination of legal
provisions that could compromise the lifetime job tenure of judges; (ii) improvement in the
living and working conditions of judges, court clerks and public prosecutors; (iii) a complete
reworking of the legal texts regulating public procurement; (iv) strengthening and enforcement
of procurement laws; and (v) continued civil service reform in the direction of greater
professionalism and efficiency, which requires that civil servants be provided with suitable
incentives.

122. Bank's support to better governance. The Bank's work is part of the effort
coordinated by UNDP, which is the lead partner in promoting good governance and combating
corruption in Senegal. The Bank's contribution is to improve public expenditure management in
an integrated program involving diagnostic work, irncluding a CFAA and CPAR in 2003;
technical assistance to expenditure tracking surveys so as to identify bottlenecks in channeling
public funds to poverty reduction and the supply of public goods; project assistance to legal and
judicial reform through the proposed Private Investment Promotion Project; and, through various
lending operations, support to decentralization, which enhances democracy in local initiatives
and grassroots control by elected leaders.

123. The pillars of the Bank's work for better governance are the high case CAS triggers in
public finance and the investment climate. The public finance trigger is that the Government
publish its monthly income and expenditure statements, as shown in the Law of Public Finance,
on the Internet. The government would also publish its quarterly balance sheet and consolidated
income and expenditure statement (the TOFE, as it is known in French) on the Internet. This
would allow Senegalese citizens and businesses, and international partners, to monitor how the
Government spends its money in a format that is directly comparable to the way in which the
National Assembly approves the budget.

-30-

Reforming Public Expenditure
124. 
The efficiency and transparency of public spending are low. The HIPC expenditure
tracking work, done jointly by the Bank and the Fund, concluded that Senegal scored low on
budget "comprehensiveness" (covering consolidated reporting, consistency between approved
and executed budget, and classification), "execution" (internal control and management
tracking), and "reporting" (internal reporting, closure and auditing of the accounts).

125. 
Senegal's PRSP recognizes the weaknesses in its fiscal management and, accordingly,
asserts public expenditure management (PEM) and governance as core elements. Improving the
ability of the Government to use public resources effectively, and to monitor their impact on
public and other outcomes, is a problem of capacity building, policy and institutional reform.
The CAS addresses these problems through (i) a joint CFAA/CPAR (FY03) to define steps to
strengthen PEM and to bolster the national system of public procurement; (ii) a PRSC which
would support the recommendations of this exercise; and (iii) public expenditure reviews (PER)
in FY04 and FY05 that will examine the allocative efficiency of public spending with respect to
the goals of growth and equity.

Improving the lives of women
126. Women have historically been the victims of discrimination in Senegal. Indicators of
women's income, education, health, and social status lag those of men. Gender inequities
prevent women from participating fully in national economic growth. To contribute to ending
discrimination and to allow women to benefit from growth, the CAS supports investments in
girls and women to better their education, to protect them against economic risks, to lower the
production costs of goods and services that they traditionally provide, and to lower the prices of
services that they consume.

127. Activities in this area include:

(a) Strategic Country Gender Assessment (FY04) will review information on the status of
women and provide diagnostic insights on improving that status;

(b) Education. The education sector APL4 0 supports achievement of the MDGs for girls'
education. A nearly completed Pilot Project for Female Literacy41 has been successful in
promoting a decentralized approach to literacy and numeracy among adult women.
Under the CAS, the second phase of the QEFA would place additional emphasis on
achieving the MDGs with respect to girls' education;

(c) Social protection. Reform of the pension system will assist retired women. A proposed
Private Sector Adjustment Credit (PSAC) would support the Government to address the
issue of unfunded liabilities of parastatals to IPRES, the private sector pension
corporation;

(d) Rural water supply. Investments in rural water supply and in poor urban neighborhoods

will lower water production costs (most of which are now borne by girls and women as

40 Quality Education for All, Cr. 3333-SN (approved April 11, 2000).

41 Cr. 2873-SN (approved June 4, 1996).

-31-

the opportunity cost of their effort). Investments made by the ongoing water sector
operations would help to achieve the MDG with respect to sustainable water supply;

(e) Urban transport. Further investments in public urban transport and related
infrastructure (bus stops, sidewalks, pedestrian crossings) benefit women in particular
because they depend disproportionately on public services for informal commercial
transport. The on-going Urban Mobility Improvement Project 4 2 already supports such
investments;

(f) Rural transport. The National Rural Infrastructure Project invests in rural roads and
other community infrastructure, thereby benefiting rural women who are among the
poorest Senegalese; and

(g) Nutrition. Phase I of the Nutrition Enhancement Sector APL 4 3 extends nutrition and
growth promotion interventions into rural areas.

Investing in the environment
128. The achievement of the objectives of Senegal's PRSP - notably in wealth creation and in
improving the lives of the poor - requires better environmental management. There are many
examples of how poor environmental management hampers economic growth or has deleterious
effects on the health and livelihood of poor people. In the Senegal River Basin, the indirect
effects of dams and irrigation include propagation of diseases, such as malaria and
schistosomiasis. Failure to control traffic and vehicular emissions causes air pollution to
increase in Dakar, with economic costs in terms of health and time lost to traffic. The inability to
manage industrial emissions - solid, liquid, and atrnospheric - damages the Baie de Hann, which
receives much of the industrial pollution from Dakar. Finally, rapid growth and lack of national
management capacities subjects Senegal's coastal and marine biodiversity to over-exploitation
while posing a serious risk to the sustainability of marine exports.

129. The CAS supports the national PRSP in the areas of managing the Senegal River basin,
fighting water pollution in the Baie de Hann (Dakar), reducing air pollution in Dakar, and in
preserving coastal and marine biodiversity. Specific activities will include:

(a) Continued implementation assistance for the Senegal River Basin Charter, through
capacity building and knowledge transmission. A joint AAA (covering Mali, Mauritania
and Senegal), would identify core measures to strengthen national and civil society
institutions so as to preserve environment resources in the Basin;

(b) Support to a Senegal River Basin GEF Grant, which will create a framework for the
environmentally sustainable development of the Senegal River Basin and launch a
cooperative program for land and water management. In addition, it promotes regional
integration by including Guinea (which is not a member of OMVS - Organisation de la
Mise en Valeur du Fleuve Senegal) in activities financed by the Grant;

42 Cr. 3354-SN (approved May 25, 2000).
43 Cr. 3619-SN (approved March 14, 2002).

-32-

(c) 

Implementation support to the on-going Urban Mobility Improvement Program and to
regional efforts to eliminate lead from gasoline;

(d) A GEF grant to protect and develop coastal and marine biodiversity; and

(e) Environmental mitigation in the Baie de Hann, financed by the Long-Term Water Sector

Project."

Lowering the costs of the rural-urban transition
130. 
Senegal's urban population is growing faster than its rural one. Because of the fast
population growth in the slums of Dakar, and in those of the smaller cities, the population with
no access to basic services - education, health, public transport, electricity, and modem water -
is expanding quickly. In addition, the PRSP growth strategy will stimulate demand for public
goods in urban areas, notably transport, leisure, open space, and infrastructure. A focus of the
Government's urban strategy is on meeting those demands, while improving living conditions of
the poor in urban slums, especially in Dakar and smaller cities.

131. Meeting these demands requires substantial public investmnent in productive and public
services. Under the new CAS, IDA would support investment in productive infrastructure, in
urban public infrastructure (roads, sidewalks, bus shelters, drainage, off-network sanitation), and
in small investments targeted to the poorest, as identified in participatory poverty diagnoses. The
instruments for these efforts would be: (i) new IDA credits for electricity and rural
electrification; (ii) continued support for water, sanitation, transport (road, rail, port); (iii) a
second phase of the Urban Development and Decentralization Program; and (iv) continuation of
the National Rural Infrastructure Program and the Social Development Fund.

Combating HIVIAIDS
132. 
Senegal is a leader among African countries in the fight against HIV/AIDS. To provide
Bank support to the national program for AIDS control, the Board approved an operation4 5 for
Senegal as part of Phase II of the MAP. This operation would continue to receive priority in
supervision during the period of the CAS; any necessary adjustments to the size and content of
the operation would be made during implementation.

Promoting regional integration
133. 
Senegal is well advanced toward greater regional integration in several respects. It is a
long-term member of the BCEAO, which has a common exchange rate and monetary policy
among the eight member nations. It is part of WAEMU, which has developed common
frameworks for macroeconomic performance and surveillance, business law (the OHADA
treaty) trade policy, agricultural price policy, and competition policy. Senegal owns and
manages bilaterally, with Mali, the Dakar-Bamako railroad.

44Cr. 3470-SN (approved March 6, 2001).
45 Cr. 3601-SN (approved February 7, 2002).

-33-

134. 

In addition to those initiatives, the Bank supports:

(a) A Regional Payments System Credit to the BCEAO4 6 that seeks to establish payment
systems adapted to the market needs of WAEMU and that are internationally acceptable.

(b) The (nearly completed) Regional Hydropower Development Project 4 7 that supports
downstream works associated with the Manantali (Mali) dam and generation plant so as
to reduce electricity costs in Mali, Mauritania, and Senegal.

(c) Long-term support to the implementation of the WAEMU Agricultural Policy (adopted in
December 2001), involving a 3-year action plan for: (i) implementation of an
institutional framework coordination in WAEMU; (ii) monitoring and evaluation;
(iii) financial instruments (agricultural window of the Regional Integration Fund and
Regional Fund for Agricultural Development); (iv) fishery subsector; (v) capacity
building in the WAEMU Commission, member states, and professional organizations.

135. 

Proposed new activities in regional integration would comprise:

(a) An Institutional and Financial Development project for the West African Development
Bank (BOAD), which would promote the development of integrated financial marketing
in West Africa.

(b) Advisory services on regional water management, in partnership with the OMVS (whose
members are Mali, Mauritania, and Senegal), which is the regional agency charged with
management of the Senegal River waters.

(c) A possible pilot project for sub-regional integration with Guinea and Mali, in partnership
with the European Union and BOAD, including improvement of road transport corridors.

Fighting Money Laundering and Terrorist Financing
136. 
Senegal, as a member of ECOWAS, respects the regional legal framework against money
laundering. This framework, adopted in 1999 created an Inter-Governmental Action Group
against Money Laundering (GIABA). Senegal coordinates the GIABA Secretariat, whose
objective is to: (i) fight money laundering; (ii) develop a harmonized regional approach to
money laundering; (iii) evaluate measures taken and progress achieved; and (iv) promote the
adhesion of African nations to the GIABA. The GIABA secretariat also manages public
information and training campaign about money laundering. The WAEMU Council of Ministers
adopted, in September 2002, directives about money laundering in WAEMU and about freezing
of funds and other financial resources derived from money laundering and terrorist financing.

9. Lending scenarios under the CAS
137. Table 5 presents the lending scenarios,4 8 and Table 6 outlines the program of advisory
services. The lending scenarios vary according to performance as defined in the triggers

4Cr. 3424-SN (approved October 19, 2000).

47 Cr. 2972-SN (approved June 26, 1997).

-34-

(Table 7). Senegal is presently in the base case, but must manage its implementation risks better
so as not to fall into the low case.

The base case
138. Lending in the base case, consistent with the IDA allocation, would be US$290 million.
In addition to the operations that would be included in the low case and are discussed below, it
would include the following operations:

(a) 

IDA financing energy sector investment (FY04), comprised of investment in electricity
production and distribution and support to hydrocarbon sector reforms.

(b) An APL for Rural Electrification, of which a first phase would be developed in FY04.

Table 5: Senegal - FY03-05 Lending Scenarios (US$ million)

Scenarios 

Low case 

Base case 

High case

-

_

-

-

46 

2 
-

FY03
Private Investment Promotion Credit 
FY04
Coastal and Marine Biodiversity (GEF/IDA) 
Energy Sector Investment Credit 
Rural Electrification 
Private Sector Adjustment Credit 
Casamance Post-Conflict Credit 
FY05
Quality Education For All (APL Phase 2) 
40 
Health Sector II 
22 
Agricultural Services and Producer Organizations (APL Phase 2) 
-
20
Urban Development and Decentralization II (APL Phase 1) 
-
40
PRSC 
-
20 
40
LIL for Land Titling 
-
-
5
LIL for Rural Financial System 
-
-
5
FY03-05 IDA commitments 
110 
180 
60
(Cumulative across cases) 
110 
290 
350
Note: The base case operations include those in the low case. Similarly, the high case includes the base and low case
operations, in addition to the four operations in the high case.

50
15
35

-

-

10

-

-
-

(c) Private Sector Adjustment credit (FY04) to: (i) Repay the unfunded liabilities of
liquidated parastatals, and other insolvent public entities, to the pension corporation,
IPRES; (ii) Support transition measures to the new liberalized groundnut marketing
system in rural areas that may be adversely affected by liberalization; (iii) Fund the
clean-up of the postal system's unfunded liabilities; and (iv) Support various tax reforms,
as identified by the FIAS tax study,4 9 so as to reduce distortions in the marginal effective
tax rate (METR) on business income.

48 Senegal is not eligible for IDA grants under the current categories: (i) exceptional debt stress; (ii) high incidence
of HIV/AIDS; (iii) natural disasters; (iv) poorest IDA-only countries; and (v) post-conflict.

49 FIAS, Senegal - Systeme d'imposition des Entreprises et Regimes d'incitations: Analyse et Recommandations.

2002.

(d) The second phase of the Agricultural Services and Producer Organizations APL (FY05).

(e) The first phase of an APL (FY05) to extend the urban development agenda, as a follow-
up to the UDDP. This phase would continue IDA support to medium and small cities,
where the rural urban transition is rapid and the demand for municipal services is
growing quickly.

Table 6: Senegal - FY03-05 Analytical and Advisory Activities

Sector/domain 
Poverty alleviation 

Public expenditure 
management 

Wealth creation
Rural development 

FY03 

CEM 
CFAA
CPAR
Decentralization and
Civic Engagement

Private sector 
development 

CFR (done FY02) 

Productive 
infrastructure 

CFR (done FY02) 

Capacity building and social services
Social protection 

Governance 

Environmental 
protection and 
natural resources 

Decentralization and
Civic Engagement

IDF Grant to OMVS 
for Senegal River
Basin
Water Resources
Management

FY04 
Strategic Country 
Gender Assessment

FY05
Ploverty assessment

PER 

PER

Fisheries sector
Rural social protection
review

Investment climate 
review 

Urban investment
study
CFR update
Pension study update

CFR update
Urban investment
study

Rural social protection Urban investment
review 
study
Pension study update

Fisheries sector

-36-

(f) A PRSC (FY05). This would be a PRSC of US$20 million in the base case and US$60
million in the high case because the Bank would feel confident about channeling a larger
amount through this instrument once the high case triggers had been met.

139. Given the long-term problem of portfolio quality in Senegal, most of the base case
triggers (Table 7) concentrate on portfolio quality in the sectors - health, education, water
supply, and transport - critical to progress toward the MDGs. Other triggers imply actions in
public expenditure management and private sector development.

140. 
The Bank would move to the low case scenario if (i) there are more than three projects,
or more than 15 percent of portfolio commitments, as unsatisfactory projects in terms of
development impact or (ii) the CFAA and CPAR, necessary for implementation of the fiscal
system reform, are not completed in 2003, and there is no satisfactory progress in the
implementation of their recommendations thereafter.

141. The low case lending program would comprise:

(a) Private Investment Promotion (FY03), in view of the need to strengthen the business
environment. The operation would support: (i) improvements in the investment climate;
(ii) regulatory and private sector capacity building; (iii) legal reforms in the public and
private pension system to create a unified system; (iv) support to a private system of
groundnut marketing, processing, and export, including transitional assistance to poor
groundnut producers; and (v) technical assistance for reforms in the postal sector, tourism
and culture, telecommunications.

(b) Coastal and Marine Biodiversity (FY04) to protect valuable biodiversity and its habitats.
Lessons from the Fisheries Sector Review (started in FY03 and to be completed in FY04)
would be incorporated into project design.

(c) QEFA (APL Phase 2; FY05) in view of the priority of investment in basic education.

(d) Health Sector Investment Project II (FY05). A new phase of IDA's support to the health
sector would be launched, with additional focus on achieving the MDG/PRSP goals in
health.

High case triggers
142. The composition of the high case lending program is more uncertain because it is not
clear at this time whether the Government intends to seek partial IDA PRG financing for major
public works5 0 . If the Government does not seek significant IDA financing for such works, then
the high case would involve a faster and larger shift to programmatic lending. The high case
triggers involve portfolio quality, public expenditure management, and wealth creation.

50 These are known as the "Grands travaux du Chef de I 'Etat. " They may include a new international airport, a toll

road from Dakar to Thies, and a new port.

Domain 

PRSP 

Portfolio 

Public expenditure 

Wealth creation
Rural development 
Private sector 
development 

-37-

Table 7: Senegal - FY03-05 CAS Scenario Triggers

To maintain
Base Case scenario 

Satisfactory implementation of the PRSP
(adequate budget allocation for PRSP
priority sectors)
No more than 15 percent of portfolio 
commitments have Unsatisfactory 
development impact 
Maintain a stable macroeconomic 
framework 
Satisfactory progress in the implementation 
of CFAA/CPAR recommendations 

High case scenario

No more than 5 percent of outstanding
IDA commitments rated U on IP or
DO
Publish monthly income and
expenditure statements as well as
quarterly accounts and balance sheets
of central government and parastatals
on Internet starting January 2004

Complete privatization of SONACOS
Maintain satisfactory performance in water Number of days for land acquisition
sector operations (Cr. 2758-SN and 
reduced by one-third
Cr. 3470-SN)
Maintain Satisfactory performance of 
Transport II (Cr. 31 83-SN) operation 

Days for general entry and operations
requirement reduced by one-third
beginning in 2004 and continuing
thereafter /a
One new IPP in electricity within new
agreed strategic plan for electricity
sector with IDA/IFC support,
including rural electrification

Capacity building/social services
Education 
HIPC triggers met and satisfactory
execution of Quality Education for All
(QEFA) (1) lb
HIPC triggers met and satisfactory
execution of National Integrated Health
Services Project /C

Health 

Note: The notation Project Name (number) refers to the phase of an APL, for example QEFA (2). PRSP targets are usually
very similar to the MDGs; meeting the rural and urban water targets of the PRSP, for example, will exceed the MDGs (see
Table 3).
/a Derived from FIAS administrative barriers study.
lbAs shown in Senegal - HIPC Decision Point Document IDA/R 2000-103: (i) Teachers will continue to be recruited at the
rate of 2,000 a year; (ii) Employment would be on a contract basis and the parallel recruitment of teachers into the civil-service
structure would be eliminated; (iii) Maintain budgetary increases for primary education as a percentage of the education
budget, which are planned to increase from 40 percent in 1998 to 44 percent in 2003.
/'As shown in Senegal - HIPC Decision Point Document IDA/R 2000-103: (i) Increase the rate of child immunization against
the three most prevalent communicable childhood diseases. The rate of inununization is planned to increase from 68 percent
in 1999 to 72 percent in 2000 and 76 percent in 2001, against the three most prevalent communicable childhood diseases; (ii)
Continue to increase the proportion of pregnant women receiving pre-natal care, which is planned to be raised from 56 percent
in 1999 to 64 percent in 2000 and 72 percent in 2001; (iii) Maintain planned increases in the utilization of primary health care
centers, from 48 percent in 1999, to 52 percent in 2000, and 56 percent in 2001.

-38-

143. - Theportfolio has been of variable quality. At the time of the most recent full CPPR
(May 2002) nine of the 22 projects then in execution were rated U on Development Impact or
on Implementation Progress. More intensive supervision, and greater implementation focus on
the part of the Government, produced an improvement. At the end of 2002, only three projects
were rated U. To link IDA allocations to portfolio quality, and to maintain a quality focus, the
trigger is that not more than 5 percent of IDA's undisbursed balances at the end of each six-
month period be rated U on either the impact or the implementation scale.

144. 
Public expenditure management. The trigger to stay in the base case is to maintain a
satisfactory macroeconomic framework. The high case trigger is to publish the complete
monthly income and expenditure statement (the TOFE), the consolidated balance sheet of the
central government, including the chief parastatals, and the monthly budget execution on the
Internet starting January 2004 and to do so each month thereafter.

145. Wealth creation. The first trigger is to complete the privatization of SONACOS. The
other three triggers concentrate on private sector development and imply the following actions:
(i) reduce the number of days for land acquisition by one third; (ii) reduce the number of days for
general entry and operations requirements by one third; and (iii) include one new IPP in
electricity within the new agreed strategic plan for the electricity sector.

146. 

In addition to the operations in the base case, the high case comprises:

(a) An increase in the size of the PRSC (FY05) should the above high case triggers be met.
It would provide additional support to decentralized social services for rural areas, as
they lag behind urban zones in coverage of most services;

(b) A LIL to develop a pilot land titling program (FY05);

(c) A LIL to strengthen rural financial institutions (FY05); and

(d) A Casamance Region Post-Conflict Recovery credit (FY04). This depends on a durable
peace agreement in the Casamance region. The Credit amount is small given the risks
involved and because other external partners have expressed strong willingness in
principle to co-finance.

147. Major infrastructure works. If the Government does seek significant IDA PRG
financing for the major infrastructure works,5 2 operations supporting such activities would be
proposed to the Board under the high case. The high case triggers would remain the same. If the
high case triggers are met, and if the Government does seek a significant shift from the planned
lending program, then a CAS update would be presented to the Board. IDA participation in
financing of such works would be subject to standard tests of economic, technical and financial
viability and would have to respect all IDA operational directives, notably those concerning the
environment and involuntary resettlement.

51 A CPPR update was held in November 2002.
52 See footnote 50.

-39-

VI. 

PRINCIPAL RISKS AND MITIGATION

1. Implementation culture
148. 
The main risk is government's ability to implement programs effectively. Implementation
has sometimes been weak in Senegal, leading to less development impact than could have been
achieved with given aid. The strategy manages the risk by: (i) more intensive AAA (CEM, CFAA,
CPAR, PER, Decentralization/Civic Engagement) early in the CAS period; (ii) closer
implementation support (including continued devolution to the Dakar Office); (iii) setting
performance triggers for new IDA commitments; and (iv) moving to output-based aid where feasible.
In addition, the CAS seeks to reduce this risk by a public awareness campaign about work supported
by the Bank Group, with a significant role for WBI and other Bank learning instruments.

149. A related risk is Government's difficulty to achieve basic policy reforms. This involves
two core questions:

(a) Will the Government not interfere in markets in agriculture, housing, finance, and
infrastructure?

(b) Will the Government improve governance by punishing corruption when it occurs?

150. A final risk is inappropriate PSD policies. The disincentives identified in the FIAS5 3
report on administrative barriers to investment carn only be removed if there is political will to do
so. If there is not such will, then PSD efforts will fail. In addition, key operations in the CAS
will fail, or will not be sustainable, if political determination is lacking.

2. Risks associated with slow growth and rising inequality
151. While the risk of macroeconomic collapse, through unsustainable inflation or through
sustained negative growth, is not great, there is the more insidious risk of stalled growth. This
risk - that growth would stall at around the rate of population growth - is serious and could
tempt the Government to try more populist forms of public spending. A related risk is political
demands for growth and re-distribution caused by rising inequality. Inequality creates the
perception that economic outcomes are a function of political influence.

152. The CAS would help the Government manage these risks by: (i) promoting stable
macroeconomic policies, toward a sustainable deficit, price level and real exchange rate;
(ii) encouraging high quality public spending, targeted toward public goods and poverty
alleviation; and (iii) facilitating a stable flow of aid, which would be targeted toward growth and
poverty reduction.

3. Debt sustainability
153. 
In June 2000, Senegal became eligible for the enhanced Heavily Indebted Poor Countries
(HIPC) Debt Initiative. The debt sustainability analysis (DSA) showed that Senegal's ratio of
the NPV to its fiscal revenue after traditional debt relief was 310 percent, making its external

53 Senegal - Le Parcours de l 'investisseur-Une Reevaluation. May 2002.

-40-

debt burden unsustainable under the terms of the enhanced initiative. Under the Enhanced HIPC
Initiative, Senegal became eligible for US$450 million in debt relief in NPV terms.

154. 
Since Decision Point in June 2000, Senegal's borrowing has remained in line with past
trends, both in terms of levels and structure. The fundamental conclusion of the current DSA is
the same as that presented at Decision Point: With HIPC debt relief, Senegal's debt is
sustainable, and it has remained sustainable since Decision Point.

155. 
The current DSA shows slightly higher debt ratios than the Decision Point Document.
This is largely because the GDP, export and government revenue values are lower than those
projected at Decision Point. The lower macroeconomic levels are due in part to slower than
expected export growth and in part to the decline in value of the CFA franc compared to the
Decision Point assumptions. The drop in real economic growth in 2002 to 2.4 percent, below the
long term trend of 5 percent, was caused by drought leading to a fall in agricultural output and
exports. Debt indicators for 2002 show the NPV of debt stocks at over 150 percent of exports
and over 250 percent of revenues in 2002. However, the ratios drop below these thresholds
under the assumption that historical growth rates are restored in 2003.

156. 
The debt indicators are measured under two different scenarios regarding the macroeconomic
variables: base case and low case. In the low case, GDP is 5 to 18 percent below the base case;
revenue is between 9 and 21 percent lower and exports are between 12 and 28 percent lower than the
base case. The recovery to sustainable debt ratios are slightly longer in the low case. However, the
debt service-to-export ratio will be lower than anticipated at the decision point, and is now projected
to fall below 10 percent of government revenues after 2002. The only exception is in 2004, due to a
spike in obligations on non-Paris Club debt, as noted in the Decision Point document.

Figure 1: NPV of debt-to-export ratio

120

-

I A k A 
o 

I 

 

-

i A

157. The DSA is based on the conservative assumption that Senegal will continue to grow at
5 percent annually, as it did between 1995 and 2001. There is the risk that Senegal would fall off
this projected growth path. It would then need to adjust its structure of new borrowing. Bank
staff, in collaboration with the Fund, will update the DSA annually, as part of the ongoing
macroeconomic dialogue to manage the debt risk. The proposed IDA lending allocation in the

Table 8: Senegal - FY03-05 CAS Results Indicators

MDGIPRSP indicators

Implied Intermediate 
step to 
2015 MDG by 2005" 

46% 

Refer- 
ence year PRSP target 
2001 
2005
54% 
45% 

No 

80%/O 

70% 

80% 

QEFA, I and 2 

Supported by any specific 
IDA operation? 

Are Indicators
measured within Monitoring or capacity
IDA operation? 
building?

Yes, through statistical
capacity building
Built into operation;
national education sector
simulation model
Built into operation;
national education sector
simulation model and
expenditure surveys
Built into operation;
expenditure surveys
Built into operation;
expenditure surveys
Built into operation;
expenditure surveys
Built into operation;
expenditure surveys
Built into operation;
expenditure surveys
Built into operation;
expenditure surveys

Built into operation;

No 

Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

No

MDGs in 
2015 
27% 

100%/0 

Population living below 
poverty line 
Net primary school enrollment 

Ratio of girls to boys in primary 
and secondary education 

1.00 

0.92 

0.88 

0.90 

QEFA, phase I and 2 

Under 5 mortality (per 1000) 

Immunization of children under 
12 months, including measles 
Maternal mortality 
(per 100,000 births) 
Births attended by skilled staff 
(of total births) 
Prevalence of HIV/AIDS 

Morbidity due to malaria 

32 

90% 

127.50 

900/0 

Stabilized 

Reduced 

Access to improved water (urban 
population) 
Access to improved water (rural 
population) 

100% 

100% 

Private sector development

75 

65% 

400 

60% 

1% 

Reduced 

95% 

87% 

98 

48% 

510 

44% 

1.4% 

25% 

93% 

83% 

85 

IHSDP (Cr. 2958-SN) 

70% 

410 

60% 

1 - 2% 

10% 

100% 

95% 

IHSDP (Cr. 2958-SN); 
Health Sector 11 
IHSDP (Cr. 2958-SN); 
Health Sector n1 
IHSDP (Cr. 2958-SN); 
Health Sector II 
HIV/AIDS operation 
(Cr. 3601-SN) 
HIV/AIDS operation (Cr. 3601-SN); 
Endemic Diseases operation 
(Cr. 2951-SN)
Water Sector (Cr. 2758-SN); 
Long-Tern Water (Cr. 3470-SN)
National Rural infrastructure Project 
(Cr. 3315-SN)

Other Indicators

Reduction of marginal effective tax rate to 35 % in 2003
Reduction of marginal effective tax rate to 25 % in 2005
Public expenditure 
Monitoring of reforrns proposed in CFA and CPAR including strengthening of expenditure
management 
control, public sector wage management, and the action plan for treasury management
The values shown in this column are rough interpolations between those shown in the column labeled "Reference Year 2001" and those shown in the column labeled 1MDGs in 2015."

-42-

base case is US$290 million for FY03-FY05, which would not call the HIPC debt sustainability
analysis into question. 5 4

158. 
Senegal has financing assurances for about 79 percent of total debt relief. Non-Paris
bilateral creditors (Algeria, China, Iraq, Kuwait, Oman, Saudi Arabia, and United Arab
Emirates), and three multilateral creditors (BCEAO, ECOWAS, IsDB) have not yet agreed to
provide debt relief to Senegal. All the remaining creditors have committed to provide debt relief
to the country. The African Development Bank group, European Union, the IMF, Paris Club
creditors, BOAD, and the World Bank have provided interim assistance.

VII. MEASURING RESULTS

159. 
The CAS focuses on defining and measuring results, an essential feature in a country that
has not always used its ample aid effectively. The CAS first expresses results in terms of
economic growth, human capital development, infrastructure development, and poverty
reduction as declared in the PRSP for 2005. Because the PRSP targets for 2005 would show
significant progress toward the MDGs in 2015 - and because the PRSP was developed in
extensive national consultations - the Bank defines the CAS measurable indicators in terms of
the PRSP and not the MDGs (Table 8 above).

160. A second group of indicators concern private sector development and public expenditure
management. IDA would monitor progress toward reducing the METR; the rate would be
reduced to 35 percent in the 2003 Supplementary Budget Law and to 25 percent in the 2005
Budget Law. In the area of public expenditure management IDA would monitor implementation
of the reforms proposed in the CFAA and CPAR.

161. 
IDA supports the achievement of the PRSP goals through its existing lending portfolio
(especially in water, education, and health), the proposed new portfolio of the present CAS,
advisory services, direct support for monitoring, and capacity building through monitoring and
evaluation. At the mid-term of the CAS, January 1, 2005, IDA would organize a national
consultation on achievement of the CAS/PRSP objectives, as shown by the indicators in Table 8.
This consultation would complement routine monitoring of project implementation and impact.

James D. Wolfensohn
President
by Shengman Zhang

Washington, D.C.
March 5, 2003

54 The incidence of the additional debt proposed in this CAS depends partly on the grants available under IDA 13.
The Bank has, for now, assumed that Senegal would receive no grants beyond the normal grant element in IDA
credits.

-43-

CAS Bibliography

Mbaye, Ahmadou Ali and Stephen Golub, 2002. Explaining Manufacturing
Competitiveness in Senegal: A Sectoral Analysis of Cost and Price Incentives.
Unpublished paper.
Republique du Senegal. Document de Strategie de Reduction de la Pauvrete. May,
2002.
Banque mondiale. Elements pour I 'elaboration de la strategie d 'assistance au Senegal
(2003-2005): Points de vue des acteurs.
Gueye, Aissatou. Senegal and The Internationally Recognized Core Labor Standards.
World Bank. 2002.
World Bank. Senegal - Casamance Region Transitional Support Strategy. Draft,
May, 2002.
World Bank. Senegal - Country Economic Memorandum. February 2003.
World Bank. Senegal - Country Framework Report. June 2002.
World Bank/IMF. Senegal - Financial Sector Assessment Program report (FSAP).
October 2001.
World Bank. Foreign Investment Advisory Service (FIAS). Senegal - Le Parcours de
l 'investisseur-Une Re'valuation. May 2002.
World Bank. Senegal: An Assessment of Livinig Conditions. World Bank Report
#12517-SE, May 1995.
World Bank. Foreign Investment Advisory Service (FIAS). Senegal - Systeme
d'imposition des Entreprises et Regimes d'incitations: Analyse et Recommandations.
2002.
World Bank. Senegal - Country Assistance Retrospective, 1987-2002. Draft, January 2003.

-45-

Annex 1
CAS Table Al - Key Economic and Program Indicators
Change from last CAS

Forecast In Last CAS 

Actual 

Current CAS Forecast

Economy (CY) 
Growth rates (%)
GDP 

1997a 1 9 9 8 b/ 19"'b/ 2 0 0 0 b/ 1 9 9 9 c 2 0 0 0C 2 0 01l 1 2002a; 2003k' 2 0 04 b/ 2005

4.7 

4.8 

4.8 

4.8 

5.1 

5.5 

5.6 

2.4 

5.8 

6.5 

7.1

Exports 

1.5 

5.0 

4.5 

4.5 

6.0 

10.5 

11.6 

6.0 

6.0 

6.5 

7.0

Imports 

0.6 

4.8 

5.3 

5.1 

4.4 

5.4 

13.7 

6.0 

8.6 

4.9 

5.3

Inflation(%) 

2.5 

2.5 

2.5 

2.5 

0.8 

.07 

2.8 

2.3 

1.8 

1.8 

1.8

National accounts
(%GDP)

Current account balance 4.1 

-5.8 

-5.9 

-6.0 

-7.5 

-8.7 

-6.5 

-6.3 

-8.6 

-8.8 

-8.9

Gross investment 

16.5 

17.3 

18.3 

19.0 

19.0 

18.5 

18.1 

20.0 

20.0 

21.0 

21.0

Public finance (%GDP)

Fiscal balanced/ 

-1.3 

-1.9 

-2.0 

-1.7 

1.7 / 

1.3 

-0.6 

1.3 

1.4 

1.6 

1.8

Foreign financing 

1.7 

2.3 

2.8 

1.5 

2.7 

2.2 

3.7 

2.0 

1.3 

1.6 

1.2

Intemational reserves 

na 

na 

na 

na 

3.3 

3.3 

3.5 

4.0 

3.9 

3.5 

3.5

(as months of inports) 

.

Program (Bank's FY) 

1997a/ 1998 b/ 19"b/ 2000 b 

1 9 9 9C/ 2 0 0 0C1 2001 / 2002 

2003 / 2 0 0 4 b/ 2005 b

Lending(US$million)f/ 

39 

280 

165 

115 

117.4 

160.8 

255 

44.7 

140 

110 

20

Grossdisbursements 
(US$ million)

43.9 

32.6 

80.1 

55.3 

115.5 

97.8 

150 

150 

150

a/ Estimated year
b/ Projected year
c/ Actual outcome
d/ Govemment deficit excluding all grants
e/ Deficit including all grants
Vf Base case

-46-

Annex 2
Senegal at a Glance

Sub- 
Saharan 
Africa 

-!__ 

_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _

POVERTY and SOCIAL 

Low-
income 

Senegal 

Dewelopment diamond

2001
Population. mid-ous 1r nsm./ 
GM perf capit 
ji,mptAe Ld4/ 
G'N fAdAwnran 18t5btV* 
Average annual growth. 3S95-0r
Poputation 
tj 
Labor force 
Most recent estimate (latest gear available. 1SS5-01) 
Povertm ,. e 
Urban population J2n&Vwrffrtt 
Life expctancg at bUith Iwkr 
Infartmortalitg OWIIWAVMt&5t 
Chid maninutrition fWntWAt 
rSvJ. 
Access to an Improved wate soure 
Iltteraqc 
da abtw ratp / 
Gross primag enrollment 
Mite 
Female 

9.8 
480 
4.7 

674 
470 
317 

2.5tt 
430
1DSS.

LUPe mpectmncg

2.7 

2.5 
S 
8 

l9
2.3 

Gross

capita 

enrollmmt

iw Mtvnrwd jnw *s 

.

.

45 
52 
so 
22 
78 
S7 
Essn 
71 
57 

f2 
47 
51 

31
59
76

-

-

Access to improved watert sourwc

e 

d 

55 
37 
79 

76
37

ppSb 

6 

9S 
192 

-

-PWJ
iewaw geupor

95 

-

72 

Be

KEY ECONOMIC RATIOS and LONG-TERM TRENDS
ISSI 
tSS3 
G12P /Whar-Ir/ 
128 
1t9 
3tD 
24.7 
-5.1 
5.9 
-13.3 
2.9 

2000 
15 
4.4 
191. 
20.S 
10.8 
1t.3 

2001
4.6 
20.0 
29.8
120
1412

8 5 

Economic eatios'
Trart

Gross domestic inwestmentfGtP 
Expots of goods and serwicesfGfP 
Gross domestic savingsGtlP 
Gross national savingsflP 

Current account balancGtDP 
tnterestpagmrentsGtJP 
Total debtiGOP 
Total debt servicetifports 
Present value at detbtdGDP 
Present talue at debt eiports 

-25.1 
2.0 
67.4 
t7.8 

-8.3 
1.7 
84.6 
19.8 

4.5 

-958 
t6 
77.4 
15.4
4S..5
122.1

o s

to 
922 
18.0 
47.5 
129.9 

nDomtc 
nwstment

sngs

.. 
.. 

-
-

Indebtedness

198141 

tSSI-01 

2000 

2001 2N-050-

.GOP 
GOP per capita 
Euports of goods and services 

2 8 
0.D 
3.1 

4.3 
La 
4A3 

5.6 
LS 
t0.5 

5.6 
iS 
6.5 

5.3 
ES 
S.7

.q-st
2#-j._iCvY 

p 

STRUCTURE of the ECONOMY 

|

1391 

1991 

2000 

2001 

Growth of hIwestmuent and GOP (xj

Agriculture 
Industr9 
Manufacturing 
,Services 

19.5 
17.3 

ZU 
20.5 
139 
68.8 

20.2 
29.9 
19. 
612 

19t2 
29.0 
19.0 
59.4

sj
to
u f 

ItS 

N 7

72t7 

Private consumption 
General governmet consumption 
Imports of goods and services 

98.7 
20.4 
52. 

90.5 
13.5 
321. 

79.8 
1.4 
39.7 

781 
tD.t
37.1 

of 

f 

Ga 

- GOP

1981-H 193141 

2000 

2001 

Growth of emporFs and imports (XJ

Agriculture 
tndustrg 
ManufacturIng 
Services 

Z3 
3.8 
3.9 
L7 

t8 
5.4 
4 7 
4.4 

10.6 
5.2 
592 
4.4 

7.6 
6.8
5.1
4.6

1s

Priwte consunption 
General governmert consumptlon 
Gross domestic hwestment 
Imports of goods and servIces 

t8 
2.9 
48 
13 

4.2 
0.4 
9.9 
2.9 

LI 
0.1 
4.4 
5.4 

5.9
15 tv gi 
4.7 
5.2 

vs 

a. 

n

_ 

n___
o * 

ir

Note 2001 data are prellminarg estimates.
'Thec diamonds show four Ike indicators In the countrg [in bold] compared with its Income-group average. 0 data are rnissing the dfiamond wIlt
be incomplete.

(continued...)

-47-

Annex 2

Senegal - At a Glance (continued)

Senegal

PRICES and GOVERNMENT FINANCE

1981 

1991 

2000 

2001 

Inflation (X

Omes Us pJMSs

A"AM%f.P,/ 

10

Consumer prices 
Implicit GOP dellator 

5.9 
.0 

-1.9 
0.4 

0.7 
0.7 

3.0
3.0

Current revenue 
Current budget balance 
' Overall surplusldeflcit 

1SS 
-6.4 
-12.1 

20.2 
4.0 
1.1 

19.5 
4.9 
-1.3 

17.9 
Z5 
.39 

ii n 

a 

i 

00 @i

;

-GEP 

delltor 

-

CPI

TRADE

1981 

1991 

2000 

2001 

Export and import levels (US$ mill.)

Total eaports (Fob) 

561 
34 
eS 
196 
1,159 
270 
297 
120 

904 
110 
67 
213 
1,347 
362 
148 
197 

959 
112 
33 
241 
1,500 
305 
280 
246 

992 
112
35 
250 
1,679 
359
2d3 
293

o

Groundnut 

Fish 
Manufactures 
Total imports (ciF) 

t,SeQ

* 

* 

* *

1.000

, Food 

Fuel and enerug 
Capital goods 

s*

$ ENiport price indem (L-R,.71 
Import price indem flW-A2 

92 

B1 

77 
s9 

79 
93 

S9 91 97 

li 

so 

oI

91 

98 

* Etporta 

* I0mpons

I Terms of trade (AQ,7J1 

113 

92 

07 

95

BALANCE of PAYMENTS

goods and 
Eaports of goods and services 
Imports of goods and services 

1991 

2000 

2001 

Current account balance to GOP (x)
a

994 
1,513 
-519 

1.490 
1.771 
-291 

1.339 
1.734 
-395 

1.375 
1,747 
-372 

-1
* 

Resource balance 

*

Net income 
Net current transfers 

-109 
6 

-195 
31 

-86 
1S 

-79 
lei 

-)

.4

Current account balance 

*623 

-455 

-284 

-270

Financing items (net) 
Changes in net reserves 

452 
172 

471 
-16 

262 
22 

325
-55

Reserwes Including gold /ZSmi0ewl, 
Conversion rate ( 
;- JUsr , 

20 
Z7t7 

23 

527 
712.0 

596
733.0

202.1 

EXTERNAL 3EBT and RESOURCE FLOVS
13a1 

1991 

2000 

2001

Composition of 2001 debt (US$ mill.)

Total debt outstanding and disbursed 
IBRD 
IDA 
Total debt service 
IBDR 
IDA 

1.670 
76 
147 
193 
6 
I 

3.554 
76 
60o 
315 
25 
S 

3,595 
1 
1.370 
289 
4 
29 

3,576
0 
t430 
251
2
30 

G210
F 23

8B1.430

Composition oF net resource Flows 
Official grants
Official creditors 
Private creditors 
Foreign direct investment 

E: 1.224

241 
-19 
78 

60 
-34 
-4 

45 
0 
94 

74
0
40 

-

Portfolio equity 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0:4 

0. C14

World Bank program
Commitments 

94 
69 
2 

107 
59 
20 
30 
14 
24 

0 
100 

0 
129 
21 
109 
11
97

A lBRO 

E -Bilateral
0 -Olther multilateral F -Private
G - short-term

Disbursements 

8 -IDA 
C - IMF 

Principal repagments 
Net flows 
Interest pagrnents 
Net transfers 

21 
79 
11 
69 

67 
5 
62 

i

Oevelopment Economics 

313103

-48-

Annex 3
CAS Table B2
Selected Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management

(As of 01/24/2003)

Indicator 
Portfolio Assessment
Number of Projects Under Implementationa 
Average Implementation Period (years) b 

Percent of Problem Projects by Number a, c 
Percent of Problem Projects by Amount a C 
Percent of Projects at Risk by Number a, d 
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount a, d 

Disbursement Ratio (%) e 
Portfolio Management
CPPR during the year (yes/no) 
Supervision Resources (total US$ million) 
Average Supervision (US$ '000/project) 

* follow-up

2000 

2001 

2002 

2003

20 
2.5 

0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 

14.4 

No 
1.2 
62.2 

21 
3.1 

19.0 
19.0 
19.0 
19.0 

9.0 

21 
3.6 

28.6 
32.0 
28.6 
32.0 

9.7 

20
4.3

15.0
19.2
25.0
34.8

7.3

Yes * 
1.6 
76.1 

Yes 
1.579 
75.2 

Yes *
1.604
76.4

Memorandum Item 
Proj Eval by OED by Number 
Proj Eval by OED by Amt (US$ millions) 
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Number 
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt 

Since 
FY 80 
63 
1,326.8 
30.2 
22.9 

Last Five
FYs

6
154.1
16.7
9.5

a. As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY).
b. Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio.
c. Percent of projects rated U or H{U on development objectives (DO) and/or implementation progress (IP).
d. As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
e. Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the
beginning of the year: Investment projects only.

Note: All indicators are for projects active in the Portfolio, with the exception of Disbursement Ratio,
which includes all active projects as well as projects which exited during the fiscal year.

-49-

Annex 4
CAS Table B3
IBRD/IDA Program Summary
(As of 03/03/2003)

Proposed IBRD/IDA Base-Case Lending Program
Fiscal 
year 

Project ID 

US$ 
Strategic 
millions Rewards /a 
(H/M/L) 

2003 

2004 

2005 

Private Investment Promotion 
Sub-total 

Energy Sector Investment Credit 
Rural electrification 
Private Sector Adjustment Credit 
Coastal and Marine Biodiversity 
(GEF/IDA) 
Sub-total 

Quality Education for All (2) 
Health Sector II 
Ag.l Services and Prod. Org (2) 
Urban Dev. & Decent. Program II 
PRSC 
Sub-total 

Total 

H 

H 
H 
H 
M

H 
H 
M 
M 
H 

46.0 
46.0

50.0 
15.0 
35.0 
2.0 

102.0

40.0 
22.0 
20.0 
40.0 
20.0 
142.0

290.0

Implementation /a
Risks
(H/M/L)

M

H
H
M

M

M
H
M
M
H

a/ For each project, the strategic and implementation risks are indicated according to expectations:
high (H), moderate (M), or low (L).

-50-

Annex 5
CAS Table B3
IFC and MIGA Program, FY 2000-2003

1 

20001 

20011 

20021 

IFC approvds (QJS$mJ 

10.97 

1.00 

0.00 

2003

0.oml

Sector (%)

Finance 
'Tounsm 

Total 

Investment instrument(%)

:Loans 

quity

'Guarantee 

Total 

MIGA guarantees (US$n4 

10.97

10.97 

10.97

10.97 

0.00 

1.00

1.00 

1.00

1.00 

0.00

0.00 

0.00 

0.00 

0.00i

-51-

Annex 6
CAS Table B4
Summary of Non-lending Services

(As of 2/26/03)

Com-
pletion Cost 

FY 

(US$
'000)

Audiencea 

Objectiveb

2002 
2002 
2002 

annual 
annual 
2003 
2003 
2003 
2003 
annual 
2003 
2003 
2003 
2003 

annual 
2004 
2004 
annual 
annual 
annual 
2004 
2004 
2004 

annual 
annual 
2005 
annual 
2005 
2005 
2005 
annual 

Bank, Govemment 
Bank, Govemment 
Bank, Govemment 

knowledge generation, problem solving
knowledge generation, problem solving
knowledge generation, problem solving

Bank 
Bank 
Bank, Govemment 
Bank, Govemment, donors 
Bank, Govemment, donors 
Bank, Govemment, donors 
Bank, Govemment 
Bank, Govemment, donors 
Bank, Govemment 
Bank, Govemment 
Bank, Govemment 

knowledge generation, problem solving
knowledge generation, problem solving
knowledge generaton, problem solving
knowledge generaton, problem solving
knowledge generation, problem solving
knowledge generation, problem solving
knowledge generation, problem solving
knowledge generation, problem solving
knowledge generation, problem solving
knowledge generation, problem solving
knowledge generation, problem solving

Bank 
Bank, Govemment 
Bank, Govemment 
Bank, Govemment 
Bank, Govemment, donors 
Bank, Govemment 
Bank, Govemment, donors 
Bank, Govemment 
Bank, Government 

knowledge generation, problem solving
knowledge generation, problem solving
knovwledge generation, problem solving
knowledge generation, problem solving
knowledge generation, problem solving
knowiedge generaton, problem solving
knovwedge generation, problem solving
knowledge generation, problem solving
knowledge generation, problem solving

Bank 
Bank, Govemment 
Bank, Govemment 
Bank, Govemment 
Bank, Govemment 
Bank, Govemment 
Bank, Govemment 
Bank, Government, donors 

knowledge generation, problem solving
knowledge generation, problem solving
knowledge generaUon, problem solving
knowledge generaton, problem solving
knowledge generation, problem solving
knowledge generation, problem solving
knowledge generation, problem solving
knowledge generation, problem solving

Product 

Completions In FY02

Financial Sector Assessment 
Pension Study 
Country Framework Report 

Under way In FY03

General Economic Work 
HIPC Monitoring 
Country Economic Memorandum 
Country Assistance Strategy 
Country Financial Accountab. Assess. 
Country Procurement Assess. Report 
Country Portfolio Performance Review 
Decentralization and Civic Engagement 
IDF Grant to OMVS for Senegal RB ID 
Water Resource Management 
Country Assistance Retrospective 

Planned In FY04

General Economic Work 
HIPC Progress Report 
Strategic Country Gender Assessment 
PRSP Progress Report 
Public Expenditure Review 
Country Portfolio Performance Review 
Fisheries Sector 
Rural Social Protection Review 
Investment Climate Review 

Planned In FY05

General Economic Work 
PRSP Progress Report 
Poverty Assessment 
Country Portfolio Performance Review 
Country Framework Report Update 
Urban Investment Study 
Pension Study Update 
Public Expenditure Review 

a. Govemment, donor, Bank, public disseminaton.
b. Knowledge generation, public debate, problem-solving.

-52-

Annex 7
CAS Table B5
Social Indicators

Latest single year 

Same regionfincome group
Sub-
Saharan 
Africa 

Low-
income

1970-75 

1980-86 

1994-48 

,POPULATION
'Total population, mid-year (miDions) 
Growth rate (% annual average for period) 
Urban population (% of population) 
Total erility rate (births per women) 
'POVERTY
,6 of popuietion)
National headcount Index 

4.8 
2.9 
34.2 
7.0 

6.4 
2.8 
37.5 
6.6 

9S 
2.8 
47.4 
5.1 

E58 9 
26 
34.4 
5.2 

2,459 8
2 0
31.9
3.6

.. 
.

..
..

Urban headcount index 
Rural headcount index 

.. 

..

jINCOME
OGNI per capae (US$) 
ConsumerpriceIndex(1995-100) 
Food price Index (1995=100) 
INCOMEICONSUMPTION DISTRIBUTION
Gml index 

380 
29 

370 
71 
71 

490 
107 
105

470 
133 

410
140

.. 

.

-

41.3 

.. 

.

Lowest qudntie (% of income or consumption) 
Highest quintile (% of income or consumption) 

.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 

6.4
4e2

SOCIAL INDICATORS
Pubilt expenditure

Health (% of GDP) 

.. 

.. 
.. 

2.6 

2.4 

1.2

Education (% of GDP) 
Social security and welfare (9k of GDP) 
Nat prlmnary school enrolLnent rate
(9k of age goup)

3.7 
0.9 

3.5 

3.6 

3.4

1 .6

Total 

.. 
.. 
-

48 
57 
39 

59

Male 

64

Femade 

54

Access to an Improved water source
if6 of populaton)

Total 

.

78 
92 

55 

76
88
70

Urban 

.. 
.. 

.. 

82 

Rural 

-

65 

41 

ImmunizatIon rate
(!f under 12 months)

Measles 

.

.
.

60 

53 
46 

57
57

OPT 

.

60 
13

Chtld malnutrlion (9k under 5 years) 

.. 

.. 

Life expectancy at birth
tyears)
Total 
Male 
Female 
Mortaeity
Infart (per 1,800 Ive b8ths) 
Under 5 (per 1,000 live births) 
Adutt (15-59)
Male (per 1,000 populatin) 
Female (per 1,000 population) 

43 
41 
46 

47 
46 
50 

52 
51 
54 

47 
46 
47 

59
58
60

143 
239 

98 
173 

60 
129 

91 
162 

76
115

572 
489 

586 
516 

401 
303 
1200

504 
459 

294
261

Maternal (per 100,000 Ove bIrths) 
Bts attended by skilled heath staff (56) 

.. 

.
.. 

,. 

47

Note. 0 or 0.0 means zero or less than halt the unt shown. Net enrogment ratios exceeding 1 00 indicete discrepancies
between the estimates of school-age population and reported enroment date.

,2002 Warld Development Indicators CD-ROM, World Bank

-53-

Annex 8
CAS Table B6
Key Economic Indicators

Indicator 
National accounts (as % of GDP)
Gross domestic producte 
Agriculture 
Industry 
Services 
Total Consumption 
Gross domestic fixed investment 
Government investment 
Private investment 
Exports (GNFS)b 
Imports (GNFS) 
Gross domestic savings 
Gross national savingsc 
Memorandum items
Gross domestic product 
(US$ million at current prices)
GNP per capita (US$, Atlas method) 

Real annual growth rates
(%, calculated from 1987 prices)
Grossdomesticproductatmarketprices 
Gross Domestic Income 
Real annual per capita growth rates
(%, calculated from 1987 prices)
Gross domestic product at market prices 
Total consumption 
Private consumption 
Balance of Payments (US$ millions)
Exports (GNFS)b 
Merchandise FOB 
Imports (GNFS)b 
Merchandise FOB 
Resource balance 
Net current transfers 
Current account balance 
Net private foreign direct investment 
Long-term loans (net) 
Official 
Private 
Other capital (net, incl. errors & omissions) 
Change in reservesd 
Memorandum items
Resource balance (% of GDP) 
Real annual growth rates (YR87 prices)
Merchandise exports (FOB) 
Primary 
Manufactures 
Merchandise imports (CIF) 

1996 

1997 

Actual 
1998 
1999 

2000 

2001 

Est. 
2002 

Proiected
2003 
2004

100 
23 
25 
51 
87 
16 
6 
10 
34 
40 
13 
12 

100 
21 
26 

53 

88 
18 
6 
12 
34 
40 
12 
15 

100 
20 
27 
53 
87 
18 
6 
12 
33 
39 
13 
15 

100 
20 
29 
51 
89 
19 
7 
12 
30 
38 
11 
13 

100 
20 
30 
50 
89 
20 
7 
13 
31 
40 
11 
13 

100 
19 
29 
52 
88 
20 
7 
13 
30 
38 
12 
14 

100 
20 
31 
49 
87 
20 
6 
14 
29 
36 
13 
15 

100 
21 
31 
48 
87 
20 
6 
14 
29 
36 
13 
16 

100
21
31
48
87
21
6
14
28
36
13
15

4,651 4,387 4,646 4,752 4,370 4,618 

5,079 

5,456 5,903

530 

530 

510 

500 

520 

500 

480 

520 

550

5.1 
5.4 

5.2 
5.4 

5.7 
6.7 

5.0 
3.2 

5.6 
3.6 

5.6 
5.7 

2.4 
2.4 

6.6 
7.6 

5.6
5.7

2.3 
1.4 
1.9 

2.3 
2.6 
2.8 

2.8 
1.8 
2.3 

2.2 
2.9 
3.4 

2.9 
1.8 
2.4 

2.9 
2.7 
3.1 

1,588 1,276 1,401 
1,445 1,339 1,375 
986 
905 
973 1,028 
959 
992 
1,896 1,568 1,733 
1,806 1,734 1,747 
1,268 1,176 1,288 1,375 1,342 1,356 
-308 
-291 
-332 
-361 
-395 
-372 
58 
179 
172 
159 
198 
181 
-336 
-185 
-216 
-292 
-284 
-270 
-5 
107 
53 
126 
36 
1 
339 
182 
229 
252 
223 
291 
76 
109 
66 
-22 
45 
74 
263 
73 
163 
274 
178 
217 
57 
42 
-4 
0 
4 
33 
-55 
-147 
-61 
-86 
22 
-55 

-0.2 
-0.7 
-0.8 

1,448 
1,046 
1,833 
1,422 
-385 
205 
-253 
70 
197 
84 
113 
34 
-47 

3.9 
5.3 
6.0 

2.9
3.5
3.9

1,555 1,666
1,134 1,224
1,952 2,102
1,517 1,639
-397 
-435
202 
195
-266 
-308
75 
81
180 
177
76 
90
104 
87
77 
74
-67 
-25

-6.6 

-6.6 

-7.1 

-7.6 

-9.0 

-8.1 

-7.6 

-7.3 

-7.4

7.0 
5.2 
10.0 
5.9 

-1.1 
-1.8 
4.8 
-0.2 

7.9 
2.3 
2.2 
10.2 

10.4 
6.3 
4.0 
5.2 

1.3 -11.5 
13.3 -17.0 
5.0 
-9.7 
-0.3 
6.4 

6.6 
32.3 
-5.8 
6.5 

5.8 
4.2 
-2.1 
3.9 

5.6
4.1
-2.0
4.9

(Continued ... )

a. GDP at factor cost.
b. "GNFS" denotes "goods and nonfactor services."
c. Includes net unrequited transfers excluding official capital grants.
d. Includes use of IMF resources.

-54-

Annex 8
CAS Table B6
Key Economic Indicators (continued)

Indicator 

1996 1997 

Actual 
1998 1999 

2000 

2001 

Est. 
2002 

Proiected
2003 
2004

Public finance (as % of GDP at market prices)t
Current revenues 
Current expenditures 
Currentaccountsurplus(+)ordeficit(-) 
Capital expenditure 
* 
Foreign financing 

17.3 
13.5 
3.8 
7.5 
6.3 

17.3 
12.7 
4.7 
6.2 
3.8 

17.5 
11.6 
5.9 
8.5 
3.8 

17.5 
12.4 
5.1 
4.9 
2.7 

18.5 
13.7 
4.9 
6.2 
137 

17.8 
15.3 
2.5 
6.4 
3.7 

18.8 
12.6 
6.1 
7.4 
3.8 

19.1 
12.1 
7.0 
7.9 
1.8 

18.6
11.9
6.7
7.1
1.6

Monetary indicators
M2/GDP 
24.1 
22.9 
GrowthofM2(%) 
11.3 
2.4 
Private sector credit growth / total credit growth(%) 150.1 213.9 

23.1 
8.1 
26.5 

24.4 
25.4 
12.7 
10.7 
83.8 125.6 

25.4 
8.8 
57.2 

25.6 
8.8 
381.7 

25.6 
25.7
7.0 
8.0
314.2 122.6

Price indices (YR87 = 100)
Merchandiseexportpriceindex 
Merchandise import price index 
Merchandise terms of trade index 
Real exchange rate (US$/LCU)f 

Real interest rates
Consumer price index (%change) 
GDP deflator(% change) 

109.7 101.7 101.4 
97.0 
136.3 128.8 120.8 119.0 
80.5 
78.9 
83.9 
81.5 
58.0 
54.1 
55.3 
54.0 

89.3 104.3 
123.1 
129.4 
72.5 
80.6 
50.8 
50.5 

103.2 
133.7 
77.2 
50.2 

105.7 108.2
137.4 142.1
76.9 
76.1
50.0 
49.7

2.8 
1.3 

1.8 
2.3 

1.1 
1.3 

0.8 
1.7 

0.7 
0.7 

3.0 
3.0 

2.2 
5.3 

2.0 
0.3 

2.0
2.1

e. Consolidated central government.
f. "LCU" denotes "local currency units." An increase in US$/LCU denotes appreciation.

-55-

Annex 9
CAS Table B7
Key Exposure Indicators

Indicator 

Total debt outstanding and 
disbursed (TDO) (US$m)a

1996 

3,662 

1997 

Actual 
1998 
1999 

2000 

2001 

Est. 
2002 

Proiected
2003 
2004

3,661 

3,847 3,725 

3,595 

3,576 

3,559 

3,534 

3,457

Net disbursements (US$m)a 

45 

105 

29 

-48 

30 

87 

71 

42 

47

Tota 
1 debt service (TDS)
(US$m)a

296 

247 

316 

225 

288 

251 

224 

226 

254

Debt and debt service indicators (%)
TDO/XGSb 
TDO/GDP 
TDS/XGS 
ConcessionaVTDO 

211.2 
78.7 
17.1 
0.0 

252.6 242.7 
83.5 
82.8 
17.0 
20.0 
63.7 
64.1 

222.9 
78.4 
13.5 
71.5 

224.8 
82.3 
18.0 
79.7 

219.8 
77.4 
15.4 
79.7 

207.5 
70.1 
13.0 
84.8 

192.5 
64.8 
12.3 
89.3 

176.3
58.6
13.0
0.0

IBRD exposure indicators (%)
IBRD DS/public DS 
Preferred creditor DS/public 
DS (%)C
IBRD DS/XGS 
IBRD TDO (US$m)d 
Of which present value of
guarantees (US$m)
Share of IBRD portfolio (%) 
IDA TDO (US$m)d 

4.3 
56.4 

0.7 
23 

3.8 
58.3 

2.1 
58.6 

2.3 
65.6 

1.4 
50.2 

0.8 
50.8 

0.9 
53.9 

0.9 
55.8 

0.4
61.8

0.6 
15 

0.4 
9 

0.3 
5 

0.3 
1 

0.1 
0 

0.1 
0 

0.1 
0 

0.1
0

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

..

1,194 

1,187 

1,301 

1,310 

1,370 

1,430 

1,490 

1,550 

1,610

a. Includes public and publicly guaranteed debt, private nonguaranteed, use of IMF credits and net short-term
capital.
b. "XGS" denotes exports of goods and services, including workers' remittances.
c. Preferred creditors are defined as IBRD, IDA, the regional multilateral development banks, the IMF, and the
Bank for International Settlements.
d. Includes present value of guarantees.

-56-

Annex 10
CAS Table B8
Statement of IFC's Held and Disbursed Portfolio

(As of 11/30/02)

In US$ Millions

FY Approval 

Held 
Institution Name Loan Equity Quasi All 

IFC 
IFC 
IFC 
Part. 
Held Held Held Held 

1996/97/98 
1980 
1999 
1997/98 
1998 
2001 

AEF SERT 
BHS 
Ciments du Sahel 
GTI Dakar 
SEF Fanaicha 
SEF Royal Saly 

0 
0 
13.89 
7.86 
0.30 
1.11 

0.43 
0.46 
2.26 
1.61 
0 
0 

0 
0 
2.43 
0 
0 
0 

0 
0 
0 
9.48 
0 
0 

Disbursed
Loan Equity Quasi All
IFC 
IFC 
IFC Part.
Disb 
Disb Disb Disb

0 
0 
10.42 
7.86 
0.30 
0.40 

0.43 
0.46 
2.26 
1.27 
0 
0 

0 
0
0 
0
2.43 
0
0 9.48
0 
0
0 
0

Total Portfolio: 

23.16 

4.77 

2.43 

9.48 

18.97 

4.43 

2.43 9.48

AEF SERT = Africa Enterprise Fund - Societe d 'exploitation des ressources thonneres (fisheries)
BHS = Banque Habitat du Senegal (financial)

Ciments du Sahel (cement factory)
GTI Dakar = Power project
SEF Fanaicha = Smnall Enterprise Fund - (private school)
SEF Royal Saly = Small Enterprise Fund (small tourist hotel)

Annex 11
CAS Table B8
IDA Operations Portfolio
(as of 02/27/2003)

Difference between
Expected and Actual
Original Amount in US$ Millions 
Disbursements a/
IBRD 
IDA 
Cancel Grant Undisb. Original 
Formally
Revised

2.1 
14.9 
26.5 
50 
125 
28.5 
14.7 
12.6 
10.2 
50 
10.5 
5.2 
30 
8 
27.4 
90 
75 
70 
100 
30 
780.6 

1.45 

1.45 

0.6 
9.7 
5.0 
23.0 
127.2 
23.4 
14.5 
0.1 
6.9 
30.5 
2.6 
2.1 
27.5 
4.0 
17.9 
76.6 
35.9 
67.4 
26.3 
30.0 
631.2 

0.4
10.0 
8.0
24.9
20.3
20.6 
2.1
1.0
6.9 
-18.8
2.9 
2.2 
15.9
3.9 
18.0 
41.0
36.2 
40.8
41.1 
0.0
277.4 

10.0

0.2

3.9

0.7
1.5

3.4
-3.0

5.0

15.1

36.8

Closed Loans and Credits: 104 
Active Credits 20 
Project Name 

Project ID 

P069198 
P041567 
P002373 
P002369 
P041528 
P057996 
P070541 
P035621 
P067498 
P047319 
P046648 
P046768 
P041566 
P051610 
P002367 
P002366 
P002365 
P055472 
P002346 
P074059 
Total 

Distance Leaming Center 
Endemic Diseases 
Higher Education I 
Integrated Health Sector Development 
Long Term Water Sector 
National Rural Infrastructure 
Nutrition Enhancement 
Pilot Female Literacy 
Public Services Info-Systems Modemization 
Quality Education for All Program 
Sn Regional Power 
Sn Sustainable Participatory Energy Mgmt. 
Social Development Fund Program 
Agr. Export Promotion 
Agr. Service & Producers Organizations 
Transport II 
Urban Devt. & Decentralization Program 
Urban Mobility Improvement Program 
WaterSector 
HIV/AIDS Prevention & Control (Map II) 

Last PSR 
Supervision Rating 
Develop- 
Implemen- 
ment 
tation 
Objectives 
Progress
S 
S 
S 
S 
U 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
HS 
S 
S 
S 
U 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
U 
U 
S 
S 
-

-

FY 

2000 
1997 
1996 
1998 
2001 
2000 
2002 
1996 
2000 
2000 
1997 
1997 
2001 
1998 
1999 
1999 
1998 
2000 
1995 
2002 

IBRDIIDA t

Total Disbursed (Active) 
215.1
of which has been repaid 
0.0
Total Disbursed (Closed) 
1,600.4
of which has been repaid 
293.4
Total Disbursed (Active+Closed) 
1,815.5
of which has been repaid 
293.4
Total Undisbursed (Active) 
531.2
Total Undisbursed (Closed) 
0.0
Total Undisbursed (Active+Closed) 
531.2
a. 
Intended disbursements to date minus actual disbursements to date as projected at appraisal.
b. Following the FY94 Annual Review of Portfolio performance (ARPP), a letter-based system was introduced (HS = highly satisfactory, S = satisfactory, U = unsatisfactory, HU =
highly unsatisfactory): see proposed Improvements in Project and Portfolio Performance Rating Methodology (SecM94-901), August 23, 1994.

PRSP 

Sector/Domain 

Government Strategy 

Annex 12
CAS Table B9
Country Partnership Strategy Matrix
Selected Government and WBG 
Progress Benchmarks 

PRSP Pillar No. 1: Wealth Creation

WBG Instruments and Timing 
(*denotes High Case) 

Partner
Programs

Primary 
Sector 

* 

* 

Promote agricultural development 
Promote generation of non- 
agricultural rural income 
* Raise livestock production 

a Ensre 
sutainale maagemet of 

fishery resources 

Successful implementation of PNIR program 
(including construction of rural roads) 
Successful implementation of Ag Services and Ag 
export programs (Increase research output, 
diversity output, lower costs of knowledge transfer 

to producers, increase knowledge base on soil 

fertility, etc.) 

, 

Increase rural electrification 
Improve functioning of rural markets 

Non-lending
Action Plan for Food Safety investments (FY03) 
(with FAO and French Coop) 
Livestock contribution to poverty reduction 
(FY04) (with FAO-CP)

FseisSco eiw(Y4

Fisheries Sector Review (FY04)

~~~~~~~~~~Rural 

Social Protection Review (FY04)

French,
FAO-CP,
Canada

Lending
Casamance Post-Conflict Recovery (FY04)*
PRSC I (FY04)
Ag Services & Producer Org. (APL) (FY05)
Rural Financial System (LIL) (FY05)*
Land Titling (LIL) (FY05)*
Portfolio
PNIR 
Ag Services & Prod Org 

(cl 6/30/05)
(cl 6/30/03)
(cl 12/31/03)

Ag Export Promotion 

PRSP 

Sector/Domain 

Private Sector 
Development 

* 

* Develop competition in financial 
sector 
Foster incentive framework for 
private sector 
* Improve economy's attactiveness to 
foreign and domestic investment 

* Develop small and medium 
enterpises:
Promote craft activities

* 

* Develop the energy sector 

Productive 
Infrastructure 

* Develop the mining sector 
* Develop tertiary-sector activities, in
particular commerce and tourism

Govemment Strategy 

Selected Government and WBG 
Progress Benchmarks 

WBG Instruments and Timing 
(*denotes High Case) 

Partner
Programs

AFD, BOAD

Japan,
BOAD,

France

-

Support business plan of Govermnent's 
Non-lending 
investment promotion agency 
Investment Climate Review (FY04)
Strengthen private pension systeni, ease groundnut Pension Study Update (FY05)
sector transition, promote telecom and postal 
CFR Update (FY05)
reform 
UbnIvsietSuy(Y5
Strengthen rural financial system 
Urban Investment Study (FY05)
improve tax policy and rationalize the tax system 
Lending
Improve legal and regulatory framework 
Private Investment Promotion (FY03)
Reduce cost of doing business and foster private 
Private Sector Adjustment (FY04).
participation in aUl sectors 
Rural Financial System (LIL) (FY05) *
Promote exports 
Regional Institutional and Financial
Establish opportunities offered by regional 
Development (BOAD)
integration 
Portfolio o
Facilitate SME access to advisory services 
Regional Payment System (cl 7/31/05)
Improve access to financial services among SMEs

Develop energy infrastructures and services 
Lower electricity costs 
Raise electricity coverage 
Extend rural electrification 
Lower utility costs of private households 

Non-lending 
CFR update (FY05) 

Regional Water Management 
Urban Investment Study
Lending
Energy Sector Investment (FY04)
Rural Electrification (FY04)
Private Investment Promotion (FY03)
UDDP II (FY05)
Portfolio
Regional Power 
Sustainable Participatory 
Energy Management

(cl 6/30/03)
(cl 12/31/04)

Government Strategy 

Selected Government and WBG 
Progress Benchmarks 

WBG Instruments and Timing 
(*denotes High Case) 

Partner
Programs

* Maintain macroeconomic stability for Maintain stable macro framework 
growth, by means of prudent fiscal and 
Ensure fiscal and external position 
monetary policies 
Satisfactory implementation of PRSP 

Develop MTEF 

Non-lending 
GEM (FY03) 
PER (FY04) & (FY05) 

PRSP monitoring (FY03-04-05)
CFAA/CPAR (FY03)
Lending
PRSC I (FY04)
PRSC II (FY05)*

IMF, EU,
AfDB,
UrSaceD

UN Agencies,
AIDB,
Japan,
Canada,
France

PRSP 
Sector/Domain 

Sound Macro 
Framework 

PRSP Pillar No. 2: Capacity-building and Promotion of Basic Social Services

Education and 
Training 

* Raise access, equity, and both 
internal and external efficiency, and 
quality of education 

Satisfactory implementation of the Ten-Year 
Lending 
Education and Training Program/Educaton for QEFA (APL II) (FY05) 
All Program 
Portfolio 
95 % of universal primary education by year 2010 
QEFA (APL I) 
Allocation of 49% of national education budget to Higher Education 
primary education

Pilot Literacy 
Distance Lea.ming Center 

(cl 12/31/03) 
(cl 6/30/03) 

(cl 2/28/03)
(cl 4/30/04)

Improve access to education for girls and lengthen
time they spend in formal education
Greater access to middle and secondary education
Improve quality of university education and
research
Continue to utilize private sector and non-formal
education
Improve literacy rates, particularly among women
Reduce disparities among regions and between
rural and urban areas

PRSP 

Sector/Domain 

Healtn 

* 

Drinking Water 
and Sanitation 

* 

Govemment Strategy 

Selected Govemment and WBG 
Progress Benchmarks 

WBG Instruments and Timing 
(*denotes High Case) 

(cl 6/30/03)
(cl 12/31/02)
9307
(ci 9/30/07)
(cl 1/15/06)

Partner
Programs

EU,
UN Agencies,
USAID,
France

EU,
UN Agencies,
AIDB,
France

Non Lending 
PER (FY04+FY05) 
Lending 
Health Sector II 
PRSC 1 (FY05)*
Portfolio
Integr. Health Sect. Dev. 
Endemic Disease 

Improve health status, promote access Satisfactory nimplementation of the National 
of the poor to health services, reduce 
Health Development Plan. 
burden of health expenditures on poor 
Focus on reducing mortality and morbidity, 
especially child and maternal mortality 
Improve access and service quality 
Develop community-based health services 
Emphasize prevention 
Strengthen campaign against HIV/AIDS and 
malariaHIAISc 
Strengthen control of endemic disease and 
epideniiological surveillance 
Enhance reproductive health programs
Ensure institutional support for regional and
district levels
Satisfactory irnplementation of L-T Water 
Portfolio 
Prograrn 
Water Sector 
(cl 6/30/03) 
Increase quality and accessibility of drinking water Long-Term Water Sector (cl 12/31/07) 
to I 00%o by 20 1 0 
Raise investment in water and sanitation
Ensure effective outreach through IEC programs
Assume responsibilities by the communities

HIV/AIDS 
Nutrition 

Ensure easy and permanent access to 
drinking water 

Improve sanitary 
conditions 

Transportation 
and Mobility 

* 

Improve rural and urban transport 

Satisfactory inplementation of Transport Sector 
Program. 
Satisfactory irplementation of Urban Mobility 

Inprovement Progranm

Portfolio 
Transport nI 
Urban Mobility 

(cl 6/30/05) 
(cl 12/31/05)

EU,
France

PRSP 

Sector/Domain 

Government Strategy 

Natural 
Resources 

* 

Improve management of natural 
resources and the environment 

Selected Government and WBG 
Progress Benchmarks 

WBG Instruments and Timing 
(*denotes High Case) 

Implement Senegal River Basin Charter 
Non-lending 
Implement support to a Senegal River Basin 
GEF Senegal River Basin (FY03) 
Eliminate lead from gasoline 
Water Resources Management
Protect and develop coastal and marine 
Fisheries Sector Review (FY04)
biodiversity 
Lending
Improve sanitation systems and garbage collection GEF Coastal and Marine Biodiversity (FY04)
and processing 
Portfolio
Reduce environmental costs of traffic congestion 
Regional Power 
in major cities

(cl 6/30/03)

Urban Mobility 
Long-Term Water Sector 

(cl 12/31/05)
(cl 12/31/02)

Partner
Programs

EU, UN,
USAID

Social Capital 
and Good 
Govemance 

* 
* 

Promote anti-corruption efforts 
Strengthen the judiciary system 

a 

Improve management of public
resources and accountability 
* Reform civil service 

Continue judicial reform 

Assess impact of poverty-related public 
expenditures 

* Modemize the administration 
* Decentralize public administration 
* 
Promote local development 

Complete introduction of public information 
systems 
Decentralize delivery of public services 
Execute a greater share of the budget at the 
decentralized level 

EU, UN,
Canada,
France,

USAID

Non-lending 
CFAA (FY03) 
CPAR (FY03) 

PER (FY04) & (FY05) 
Decentralization and Civic Engagement (FY03)
Lending
PRSC (FY04)
PRSC (FY05)*
Portfolio
PMSIA 
UDDP 
U

(cl 12/31/03)
(cl 12/31/04)

PRSP 

Sector/Domain I 

I 

Government Strategy 

Selected Government and WBG 
Progress Benchmarks 

WBG Instruments and Timing 
(*denotes High Case) 

Partner
Programs

PRSP Pillar No. 3: Improving the Living Conditions of Vulnerable Groups

Assistance to 
Vulnerable 
Groups 

* 

* 

Improve social status of vulnerable 
and marginalized groups 
Ease access of the poor to social 
services, especially for women 
* Launch income-generating programs 
* 
Promote community development 
Lower cost of rural-urban transition 

* 

Consolidate and reinforce social investment 
programs 
Strengthen capacities of communities to identify, 
prioritize and implement projects 
Implement Nutrition program 
Promote micro-finance 

Non-lending 
Strategic Country Gender Assessment (FY04) 
Rural Social Protection Review (FY04) 
Poverty Assessment (FY05) 
Pension Study Update (FY05)
Urban Investment Study (FY05)
Lending

UN Agencies,
Canada,
USAID,

France

PRSC I (FY04)
PRSC 11 (FY05)*
Portfolio
Social Development Fund 
Nutrition 

UDDP 

PRSP 
I ;i.)1ementation 

* 

Ensure satisfactory PRSP 
implementation 

PRSP Pillar No. 4: Implementation of the Strategy

Integrate PRSP funds into budgeting process 
Improve information systems for proper 
monitoring 

Support M & E in projects 

Non-lending 
PRSP monitoring
Lending

PRSC I (FY04)
PRSC 11 (FY05)*

Portfolio
All sector programs
Source: World Bank. Elements pour I'elaboration de la stratdgie d'assistance au Senegal (2003-2005): Points de vue des acteurs: p. 12-14.

(cl 12/31/04)
(cl 1/15/06) 

(cl 12/31/04) 

6

_ 

_ 

_

EU, UN

-64-

Annex 13
CAS Summary of Development Priorities

(January 2003)

Country 
Network 
performance 
Poverty Reduction & Economic Management

Major issue 

Poverty reduction 
Economic policy 
Public sector 
Gender 

Poor 
Good 
Fair 
Fair 

Rural growth and poverty 
Tax reform 
Civil service reform 
Inequality 

Human Development Department

Education 
Education 
Health and nutrition 
Social protection 

Fair 
Fair 
Fair 
Fair 

Quality 
Access 
Primary care 
Vulnerable groups 

Environmentally & Socially Sustainable Development
Rural development 
Poor 
Crop diversification 
Rural development 
Fair 
Marketing development 
Coastal 
Fair 
Coastal/marine areas 
environment
Riverine 
environment
Social development 

Senegal River Basin 

Inequality 

Fair 

Fair 

Finance, Private Sector & Infrastructure
Financial sector 
Good 
Promote financial intermediation 
Private sector 
Fair 
Eliminate remaining admin. 
barriers
Private investment 
Water and sanitation supply in 
main cities
Electricity supply 

Energy/mining 
Infrastructure 

Infrastructure 

Fair 

Fair 

Country 
priority 

Bank
priority

High 
Moderate 
Moderate 
Moderate 

High
High
Low
High

High 
High
High 
High
High 
High
Moderate Moderate

High 
Moderate
Moderate Moderate
Moderate Moderate

Moderate Moderate

High 

High

Moderate Moderate
Moderate 
High

High/low 
High 

High/low
High

High 

High

-65-

Annex 14
IMF-World Bank Relations
(March 2003)

PARTNERSHIP IN SENEGAL'S DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY

1. 
In May 2002 the Government of Senegal outlined its development strategy in a Poverty
Reduction Strategy Paper (PRSP). The Bank and Fund Boards accepted the PRSP as the basis
for concessional assistance in December 2002. The Government intends to fully update the
PRSP next year. The PRSP sets out the following pillars of the Government's strategy:
(i) creation of wealth within a healthy macroeconomic framework, (ii) capacity-building and
promotion of basic social services, (iii) improving the living conditions of vulnerable groups, and
(iv) implementation and monitoring/evaluation.

2. 
In April 2002, the IMF completed the second review of the third arrangement under the
Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility (PRGF), but did not conclude the third review of the
arrangement, which ended April 20, 2002. A joint Bank-Fund mission visited Senegal in
November 2002. The Fund held discussions to prepare for negotiations on a new arrangement to
be supported under the PRGF. A follow-up IMF Mission took place in January 2003 which
completed negotiations. Board presentation of a new program is planned for April 2003. The
Fund takes the lead in the policy dialogue on macroeconomic policies and monitors
macroeconomic performance by way of quantitative performance criteria. In addition, structural
conditionalities in their program may cover areas such as electricity, groundnut or pension
reform if they have a direct and significant bearing on fiscal balances.

3. 
The PRSP and its comprehensive poverty analysis will provide the framework for the
Bank's country assistance strategy currently under implementation (Board planned for early
April 2003). The Bank is currently supporting the implementation of the PRSP in the areas of
health/nutrition, education, HIV/AIDS, rural development, transport, water, and urban
development through the implementation of a portfolio of specific projects, as outlined more
fully below. -

BANK GROUP STRATEGY AND BANK PORTFOLIO

Lending
4. 
The first IDA lending to Senegal was made in 1966. The main objective of the Bank's
assistance strategy for Senegal has been to reduce the incidence of poverty and create gainful
employment. The approved lending program for the period fiscal-year (FY) 1998-2000 under
the Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) was implemented satisfactorily. To achieve the objective
of the CAS, Bank support was a two-pronged strategy: (i) supporting policies and programs for
more rapid and sustained growth; and (ii) ensuring the social sustainability of programs. The
strategy was implemented through a combination of structural adjustment lending, sector
investment programs (SIPs), specific investment lending, and appropriate non-lending
operations.

5. 
As of February 2003, the World Bank had approved 124 loans and credits for Senegal for
a total amount of about US$2.4 billion. Past projects had supported agricultural diversification,

-66-

irrigation, human resources development, institutional development, and expansion of the
country's infrastructure, particularly its transport system. In recent years, the emphasis had
shifted to better utilizing and maintaining existing facilities and to helping the Government
resolve some of the key issues related to long-term development prospects. The current active
portfolio represents a commitment value of about US$781 million equivalent, with an
undisbursed balance of about US$531 million. The portfolio is composed of 20 credits in
various sectors (agriculture, human resources, population/health/nutrition/education, HIV/AIDS,
infrastructure/urban development, energy/water, industry, and private sector development) and
one GEF grant for sustainable participatory energy management.

Sector Issues
6. 
The implementation of the Health SIP has experienced delays in making the information
management system operational and weak financial programming and monitoring capacities at
the decentralized level. The Government is discussing corrective measures to address these

issues.

7. 
Public expenditures, which are unduly skewed towards higher education, hamper the
development and the quality of education in Senegal, particularly at the primary level. As a
result of reversals in policy leading to, inter alia, intra-sectoral allocation of resources that favor
universities, the Bank had suspended the Higher Education project in July 2001. The
Government of Senegal has started to take corrective action to overcome these and other
(management and technical) problems that were impeding the implementation of the project.
IDA lifted the suspension in November 2002 and the Government agreed to a partial cancellation
of the credit. In pre-university education, the Government adopted a ten-year education program
(PDEF) in 1999 with the ultimate objective of reaching universal primary education by the year
2008 (up from 60 percent of gross primary enrollment in 1999), while improving learning levels.
A Quality Education For All Project (QEFA- Education SIP) covers the first three years of the
ten-year program. Under the QEFA Project, the Government committed itself to hiring 2000
elementary school teachers annually for at least the next three years. The Government has also
shifted to hiring teachers on a contract basis at more affordable salaries, and also hires
"volunteer" teachers who are paid a nominal sum. Much of the responsibility for school
construction and school management, including teacher hiring, would be decentralized to the
regions and to the local authorities, an evolving process which is already under way.

8. 
Up until 1996, the urban water sector was facing two major issues: (i) a medium-term
shortage of water production and distribution capacity in the Dakar area requiring substantial
immediate investments, (ii) low management efficiency with no financial viability of the sector.
To deal with these issues, the Government adopted two Water Sector Projects in 1996 and 2001
supported by seven donors including the World Bank as lead agency. The projects include a
large physical investment program and an institutional reform component that have increased
access to potable water in the Dakar area and improved overall management of the sector.

9. 
The transport sector is addressing capacity constraints with a program of new
investments, especially in rehabilitating rail links between Senegal and Mali, in building and
rehabilitating Senegal's road network, and with institutional reforms. The Transport SIP was
launched in 1999 with support from several donors including the World Bank. Chief among the
structural reforms are plans for privatizing international rail services, container terrninal port

-67-

services, and airport management. Pilot operations have begun to decentralize management of
rural transport infrastructure to the local level.

10. 
Due to global difficulties in the energy sector, the privatization of SENELEC has been
put on hold for the near future. The Bank is supporting the Government in improving
management at SENELEC and advising a national energy task force in plarming for private
investments in new production.

11. 
Petroleum prices were frozen between February 2000 and June 2001, with one-time
increase of 15 percent in September 2000. Since then they have been adjusted in accordance
with the law of 1998 on a monthly basis but prices remain regulated by ministerial arrete based
on import parity calculations and are not liberalized in the true sense of the word.

12. 
As of September 30, 2002, the portfolio of the International Finance Corporation (IFC)
totaled US$30.6 million and included two projects in the financial sector, one fishery project,
one leather manufacturing operation, one cement factory project, one power project (the first
independent power project in Senegal), and one for a private school. Another operation, a small
tourist hotel, was approved in FY01 and is not yet effective.

Current and medium-term initiatives
13. 
A new Country Assistance Strategy (FY03.-06) is under preparation. The proposed CAS
will support the Government's PRSP around the pillars of wealth creation and capacity
building/development of social services. In terms of infrastructure, the CAS would propose new
lending services to support electricity sector development and expand small-scale urban
infrastructure. With regard to private sector development, the CAS would support new lending
for a private investment promotion operation, a private sector adjustment credit and possibly an
operation to strengthen the rural financial system. New lending services for rural development
would include the preparation of the second phase of the Agricultural Services and Producer
Organizations project, in addition to support provicled under the PRSC, a program to support
appropriate rural development in the Casamance Region, and possibly an operation to develop a
pilot land titling program. In terms of social services, new lending services would include the
preparation of the second phase of the Quality Education for All project, and an initial phase of a

consolidated health sector investment operation (Health II) will be developed with Senegal's

other partners.

BANK-FUND COLLABORATION IN SPECIFIC AREAS

14. 
The IMEF and the World Bank staff maintain a close working relationship, especially with
respect to (i) implementation of the Poverty Reduction Strategy, (ii) implementation of measures
toward the HIPC completion point, (iii) analyses and reforms in public finance management,
(iv) other structural measures in specific sectors such as electricity or groundnut where the Banlc
does not currently have a lending program.

15. 
The conditionality for the groundnut and electricity sectors in the new PRGF-supported
program has been developed in close collaboration with World Bank staff, and the Bank takes
the lead role in working out the technical details of the envisaged reforms. The Fund and the
Bank also coordinate their activities and conditionalities in the area of public expenditure reform,
an area in which both institutions have an interest.

-68-

Annex 15
Expenditure Accountability Assessment and Action Plan (AAP)
Action Plan Update Table

Indicator 
BUDGET FORMULATION

j 

_ Actions with time horizon

(S/Ma) 

|Statusb 

Progress to Date

I 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

Composition of budget 
entity 

Expand definition of 
lgovernment activities to meet
MSFP standards
Limitations to use of off- Benchmark met at first 
budget transactions 
review
Reliability of budget as 
Benchmark met at first 
guide to outturn-level 
review
Data on donor financing Record donor financing and 
related expenditures in the 

regular budget 

Benchmark met at first 

review

Introduce new coding system 
in 2003 budget 

Introduce MTEF 

Classification of budget 

ftrasactions 

Identification of poverty 
reducing expenditures 

___ 

Quality of multi-year 
expenditure projections 

BUDGET EXECUTION

8 

9 

Level of payment arrears Benchmark met at first 
review
Quality of internal audit Recruit and train new auditors 

10 Use of tracking surveys 

Implement tracking surveys in 
Health and Education 
11 Quality of fiscallbanldng Reconcile the scope of 
data reconciliation 
government activities between
above and below the line
accounts

NS Not all required data is available

N/A

N/A

-

I Donor financed capital spending is now fully
included in the budget law as of the 2003

budget.

N/A

Fl 

Poverty spending budget lines were identified
and a new coding system to track this spending

was implemented in the 2003 budget.

II Work will begin this year, but implementation
of a full MTEF including current spending is
not envisaged before 2005

_ N/A

II Recruitment and training under way; equipment
and appropriate space still needed. Difficulties
with documentation and nomenclature have
contributed to long delays
Tracking surveys were completed in Health and
Education (1-31-03)
NS Difficulties on point I above hinder progress

FI 

BUDGET REPORTING

12 Timeliness of intemal 
budget reports 

Install new budget computer 
system in to allow for more 
timely reporting 

1I 

New software in Directions du Budget allows
Balances des Comptes to be produced monthly,
but the TOFE are produced quarterly. The lag
between reports and the reference period needs
to be shortened. However, new software only
covers commitment phase and does not yet

13 

Functional classification Extend program budgets 
used for in-year budget 
beyond Health and Education
reports 
and report execution according
to programs

14 Timeliness of accounts 
closure 
15 Timeliness of final audited Complete and vote on Loi de 

fully track the payment phase.

Planned for 2004

NS 

II 

Accounts are closed within the WAEMU
directive deadline, but not within 2 months.
NS Loi de Reglement for 1998-2001 are still

accounts 
Reglement for 1998-2000 
a. S = short term, i.e. action that is expected to be completed in one year.
M = medium term, i.e. action that is expected to be completed in 2-3 years.
b. Progress to date should include: short description of progress and improvements; note degree of implementation, i.e. whether implementation
has been initiated (11), is not yet started (NS), or is complete (FI, for fully implemented). If Fl, please state date of completion.

pending

-69-
Aniiex 16
Debt Sustainability Analysis
After HIPC Debt Relief

208~2 200 

20041 200S 

2006 

2007 

2008: 

2009 

2010 

2011 

2012 

2013 

2014 

2015 

2016 

2017 

2018

'N'V of de,t US M illion
Tolaldebt 
M-,Exiosdebt 
.Newdislursnentnl 

-

,292 2,271 2.163I12,143 
2.114 
2.004 2,061 2,044 
1.90 
3,094 1,712 1,621 1,537 1.458 1,38911,320 
306 
378 
453 
522 
277 
626 
672 
716 

2,026 
1.267 
759 

2.011 
1,209 
802 

2,000 
1.161 
848 

2.005 
1,112 
893 

1.999 
1.062 
938 

0.993 
10.000 
984 

1,097 
035 
1.032 

I,001l 
902 
1.079 

1.973
847
1.127

DP LOlA Docooood
Tb0oldb1 
Mia4olodbf 
'AL- ohomonnbo 

2Z410 2,4)4 2,333 
2,342 
1,986 
4,894 J.,712 1,621 
424 
521 
621 
721 

,3.38 2.368.2,384 246 
1,337 
1,458 
1,389 
1.328 
821 
910,996. 1,078 

2,436 
1,267 
1.170 

2.475 
1.209 
1.266 

2.529 
1,161 
1.368 

2,580 
1,112 
1,468 

Z.627 
1,062 
1,562 

2,669 
1,009 
1,660 

Z 707 
033 
1, 752 

2,741 
902 
1,839 

2, 768
847
1. 921

N17V fdebt.to.nqirts -
Boseeme 
LO, MCo 

168.9 158.9 341.7 129.3 117.1 105.9 93.5 87.6 00.3 73.7 60 1 
168.0 166.9 
156.4 140.2 
136 7 120 
30164 107.9 
99.9 02 7 
66 

6209 50I0 5335 49 3 
00o7 75 2 
7031 653 

4533 4109
6000 56 6

D~DPSAL1o:o,d 

129 119.8 1080 

1013 

96 1 

908 

86.2 

821 J 

784 

73.1 

72 3 

69 3 

60, 3 

632; 

6a1 

37 1 

54 0

NPV of ddt.tto-revno.o -%
Bsoecme 
262,6 217.9 197 0 102.4 066.4 051 7 1386 1273 31167 17 1 973 000 91 4 
8403 77 7 
Lowcose 
262.6 243.2' 2163512004 104.8 1703 137.4 3.45.9 33351 1253 3117.0 3093 101.7 040 

71.6 66 1 
9883 
82 3 

60 9
7866

DUDPD4Sc=,wol 223 9 2086' 183.9' 174 8 1648 

J1330 146.1 108 

130.9 

124 6 

119.2 

113 8 

10606 

103.3 

981 

939 

9.80

NiOV of dgbtlo-(3DP 
-06
Bosecoee 
Lo~w case 

47.3 
47.3 

41.6 
43.8 

36 6 
39,0 

33 7 
36 1 

30 8 
333 3 

28 1 
30 6 

25 7 
21.3 

36 
06.3 

.216 
24 3 

00.8 
22.6 

183 
21.1 

16.9 
19.6 

15.6 
08.3 

14.4 
17.1 

13 3 
15.9 

12.2 
14.8 

1133
13.8

DIP DMS D)uve nf 

40,0 

36.9 

32.9 

309 

292 

27.4 

2359 

044 

23.2 

22,0 

2J.1 

20,2 

192 

383 

17.4 

10,5 

136

Debt bnvon -1U33 -Iliorisl
T!o odcbe 

050 151 
1 45 
143 
Newisbuooentnus 6 
8 

2.53 153 065 170. 160. 163 
223 
134 142 138 3i22 121 
9 
1 37 
24 33 
38, 43 

178 
332 
46 

173 
123 
48 

160 
113 
47 

061 
III 
30 

162 
110 
52 

162 
109 
53 

161 
100 
54 

361 
103 
36 

162
103
59

~Eaitul;debt 

VP DM4 Docme00 1
lbW di*b3 
MAoLodn8ebt 
Mk.cilib,,ooenli 

134 
145 
9 

134 
143 
11 

239' 
223 
33 

149 
134 
15' 

139 
142 
17 

137 
138' 
J19 

143 
122 
21 

143 
121 
23 

137 
132 
25 

131 
123 
26 

141 
113 
28 

140 
III 
29 

1.4 
110 
.11 

141 
109 
32 

141 
108 
33 

139 
103 
33 

139
103
36

Debt go-Ace-o4o.xlptsl 
Basecme 
C,Mne 

I01 9 .7 14.1 8 6 
8.3 7.9 6, 9 
30.1 
112 
136.3' 9.8' 10.0 
9.6 
8.3' 

6.3 
0. I 

6.3 
82 

5.9 
7.3 

5 0 
6 4 

4.7 
6.3 

4 4 
3 7 

4 0 
5 3 

3.7 
3 0 

3 4 
4 6 

3 2
4 3

D~DMPDS4Tco~0J/ 

76 

7 1, 

31 61, 

61 

35.7 

4 9' 

4.6 

4.8 

43 

3.6 

3.5 

3 3 

3)1 

2,9 

2 7 

235

Debt 
tsnieo~eae-%
Bosecne 
Lo wco -- 

37.3 
37.3 

14.5 
2104 12.8 
36.2' 253 
1 01 

13.0 
143 

12_.4 30.0 
13 9 
132 2 

1 0.2 
11.7 

00.2 
010 9 

9.2 
10 8 

7.9 
9 3 

7.3 
8 7 

60 
8.2 

6.3 
7.7 

5-.0 
7 2 

3.4 
6.7 

5.0
6.3

.DP D 

um),oo,, 

14.4, 

13 90, 312 

31.1 

10 3 

&88 

82 

84 

7.6 

6.6 

6.2 

3 8 

3.3 

36 J 

47 

4.4

fiwsecu 
Low Eoe 

3.1 
2.0 
4.0 
2.4 
2-4 
3.1 2.9 4.2 2.3 2 6 

2.3 
23 

2.0 
0.9 
2.2 I 21 

0,9 
1 7 
20 1 19 

1.3 
1 7 

1 4 
3 6 

1.3 
1 3 

1.2 
1 4 

1.1 
53 

1.0 
1 2 

0.9
31 

DP DMZ.S..0oos 

2,6 

2.4' 

3.4. 

2 0' 

20 

J18 

J 

1.3 

I 15 

1I3 

1.2 

3.1 

I10 

1 0 

0,9 

08 

08

Aoso csso 
Lopwcse 

13.38 
3!,333 13606g I .?60 k ,02 2,335j 2,52 1 2,307 
2,722 
2.943 
3,182 
3.440 
3,700 
4,023 
I, IS-1 ,349 
0,443 
I,54 
I0,53 
1.768 , 92,02 2,024 2.166 2.318 24890 2,653 2.839 3,038 

4,348 
3.251 

471 
2,470 

5.083
3,722

Bott cawe 

2.014 2,139' 3 2. 

433os 2,603 Z 763 

2,928 3,103 

3,291 

34 9 

3,736 

3,956 

6,213 

4,496 

4,7.95 

5,120 

3,471

Bake cms 
Low cole 

I 0337 3I429 1i326 
i 660' 1800 
10960 23358 12.133 
1,337' 1,360 0,3 14416 1,0547 1653 
71 

2.522 
2,2 

2.727 
_,3 
,169 

2.949 
2,321 

3.188 
2.480 

3.44? 
2.158 

3,727 
2,8!44 

4.029 
4.357 
3,0413 3,236 

4.710
343

VPi V.4 bocooun
Base caee 

3870 2,013 

21J60 2,306 2.433 2.607 2766' 21932 

3.107 

3,296 

3,500O 3.722 

3.9.62 

4.221 

4,301] 4,8031 3,128

'R4en,e.03 m SSillions
Bosecme 
Loecmo 

873 1,042 13098 1 1751 1.271 t.374 
873 
934' 
990 
10091 0344 
1,224 

1,482 13606 
0.310 1.401 

1.736 
1.00 

1.877 
1.605 

2,030 
1.717 

2,194 
1.837 

2.373 
1.94 

2.565 
2.103 

2,774 
2.230 

2.999 
3.242
2,4_00 2.577

"aecam 

! ,067' 1.13 1 123 

140 1,431 1,328' 1,632 I 

,743 

48961 

1,987 

2,122 

2,266 

240 

234 

270 

.4 

,4

ODP -0S3 millions 
Basocos, 
Los e o 

1 4.849 5.456 
3,903 6,332 
6.868 
4,049 
3,180S 5.3331 5.940' 6,356 

7.425 
6,800 

8.028 18.680 
7,277. 7.786 

9,385 
8.331 

10,147 
8,914 

10,973 11.862 
32.825 13,867 14,992 16,210 17,326
9.538 
100206 10.920 
01,684 12,502 33,378 34,314

DP V.94 Bao,,vn

4027' 6,5336 7,091 

7,7572 8,08 

4634 9,220 9,8143 104333 11.227 

11,988 

12,802 

13,670 

14,398 

13.360 

164646 17.776

.01 The decisim on r 9010IPC documutd cmloul thies re1o based ondesing debt end Lot on toLd dobL,

A 

Fi o S esh ' 

ALGERIA 

160 

15 

14- 

13 

12

oxonxohorc! | s-s 

/LGERI 

M A U R'l T A N I A 

SENEG 

~' 

et,ore! 

K 

MAURITANIASENEGAL

MAURITANIA 
Nn* 

To Nouakchott 

or 

PRIMARY ROADS
SECONDARY ROADS

N.v.koh 

ML 

*Tombouciou * 

Mogana 

A 

L-I--- 

RAILROADS

SENEGAL' 

,-T 

NIGER 

0ao 

 

SELECTED TOWNS
REGION CAPITALS

BEode 

GU[ 

=1 GUINEA 

0e. S 

A 

I 

N 

AIRPORTS

- Saint 

T 

*.rK 

A 

-

PORTS

_ 

17O 

Louis; 

-al -- -

r 

-- 

_. 

Ihi ogn e\ 

-

-

REGION BOUNDARIES

Ndi6b&n 

OLagbar 

L 0 U I S ~~~~~~~- 
L O U I SBOUNDARIES
Our S2 u 7 

INTERNATIONAL

Gandiol 

du 

Ja 

> 

 

Lo 

or 

M6eu 

euk 

-15' 

o si11

CAP-VE RT 

" 

Ndidi0Gi6 

F6t 

,NI 

ind

DAKA 

i 

E a 

ourb 

e 

d

140~~~~~~~~olFdiuai1'

\ 

loul 

F 

a 

d 

i 

o 

d 

e 

$ 

X 

Koussunss 

S 

i 

-

Gon 

u pentoum

Mamb 

sown o 

pto 

onLI t part o T

<4-. 

.,~~~~~~~~J 

,_ ymCUn 

Dalf 

AticXntic 
J~~~~~~~~~~~~I 

O G a m o n >

13 Ocean 

DiouQu;2 

I' 

@ 

/ 

K\O 

L 

W Simenk 

O~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ouKhossonto 

o 

T e ptaun cares of orsuc beou 
or acc0 

indariens. adayohrifro 

n 

1

-1~ ~ ~ IOEES~> 

Of 

f 

~ 

{2} 

n ugeto h 

3ea 

status of any tertoy 

OM Ss 

ed 

rseen 

13

Di

(~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~5~~~~~od

I

ImKGTNG

Report No.: 
Type: 

CAS

25498 SE

