Document of 

The World Bank 

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 

Report No. 26555 

MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENT 

OF THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION 

AND 

THE INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION 

TO THE 

EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS 

ON A 

COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY 

FOR 

THE REPUBLIC OF CAMEROON 

August 14,2003 

Cameroon Country Office / Country Department 7 
Africa Region 

The International Finance Corporation 
Sub-Saharan Africa Department 

s this document has a restricted disftibution and may be used by recipients only in the performance of their official 
~du t ies . Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without World Bank authorization. 

P

b
u

i
l

c

D

i

c
s

l

o

s

u

r

e

A

u

t

o
h

r

i

z

d
e

P

b
u

i
l

c

D

i

c
s

l

o

s

u

r

e

A

u

t

o
h

r

i

z

d
e

P

b
u

i
l

c

D

i

c
s

l

o

s

u

r

e

A

u

t

o
h

r

i

z

d
e

P

b
u

i
l

c

D

i

c
s

l

o

s

u

r

e

A

u

t

o
h

r

i

z

d
e

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CURRENCY EOUIVALENTS 
Currency Unit = CFA Franc (CFAF) 
US$l.OO = 
572 CFAF (July 31 ,2003 ) 

GOVERNMENT FISCAL YEAR 

January 1- December 3 1 

ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS 

AAA 
AFD 
AfDB 
BEAC 
BICEC 

CAMTEL 
CDD 
CAPECE 
CEMAC 

CENAINVEST 
CFA 
CFAF 
CFAA 
CICC 

. 

COBAC 

CPAR 
CPPR 
DfID 
ECAM 
ESS 
ESW 
FIAS 
FSAP 
GDP 
GICAM 
HIPC 
IDA 
IFAD 
IFC 
IGR 
IMF 
JSA 
LIL 
M&E 
MAP 
MIGA 
MINEDUC 

Analytical and Advisory Activities 
Agence Frangaise de De'veloppement (French Development Agency) 
African Development Bank 
Banque des Etats d %p ique Centrale (Central Bank of Central African States) 
Banque Internationale du Cameroun pour 1 'Epargne et le Cre'dit (International 
Bank of Cameroon for Savings and Credit) 
Cameroon Telecommunications 
Community-Driven Development 
Cameroon Petroleum Environment Capacity Enhancement 
Communaute' Economique et Mone'taire d 'Afiique Centrale (Economic and 
Monetary Community of Central Africa) 
Central Africa Investment SA 
Communaute' Financizre Apicaine 
CFA Franc 
Country Financial Accountability Assessment 
Comite' Interprofessionnel pour 
le Cafe' et le Cacao (Inter-pro fessional 
Committee for Coffee and Cocoa) 
Commission Bancaire de 1 %p ique Centrale 
Commission) 
Country Procurement Assessment Review 
Country Portfolio Performance Review 
Department for International Development (UK) 
Cameroon Household Survey 
Education Sector Strategy 
Economic and Sector Work 
Foreign Investment Advisory Service 
Financial Sector Assessment Program 
Gross Domestic Product 
Groupement Inter-patronal du Cameroun (Cameroon Employers' Union) 
Heavily Indebted Poor Countries 
International Development Association 
International Fund for Agricultural Development 
International Finance Corporation 
Institutional and Governance Review 
International Monetary Fund 
Joint Staff Assessment 
Learning and Innovation Loan 
Monitoring and Evaluation 
Multi-country HIV/AIDS Program 
Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency 
Ministry of Education 

(Central Africa Banking 

MINEPAT 
MINESUP 
MDGs 
MTEF 
NGO 
OED 
PEM 
PER 
PNDP 

PRGF 
PRSP 
PSD 
PSFE 
RDPC 
RIAS 
SAC111 
SECAL 
SME 
SNH 
SONEL 
UNAIDS 
UNDP 
WHO 

Ministry of Economic Affairs, Programming and Regional Development 
Ministry of Higher Education 
Millennium Development Goals 
Medium-Term Expenditure Framework 
Nongovernmental Organization 
Operations Evaluation Department 
Public Expenditure Management 
Public Expenditure Review 
Programme National de De'veloppement Participatif (National Community 
Driven Development Program) 
Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility 
Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper 
Private Sector Development 
Programme Sectoriel For&t-Environnement (Forestry and Environment Program) 
Cameroonian People's Democratic Rally 
Regional Integration Assistance Strategy 
Third Structural Adjustment Credit 
Sector Adjustment Loan 
Small and Medium Enterprise 
Socie'te' Nationale des Hydrocarbures (National Oil Company) 
Socie'te' Nationale d 'Electricite' (National Electricity Company) 
Joint United Nations Program on HIV/AIDS 
United Nations Development Program 
World Health Organization 

Vice President: 
Director: 
Task Team Leader: 

IDA 
Callisto E . Madavo 
Ali M. Khadr 
Madani M. Tall 

IFC 
Assaad J. Jabre 
Haydee Celaya 
James J . Emery 

THE REPUBLIC OF CAMEROON 
COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY 

Table of Contents 

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY .............................................................................................................................. i 
I . INTRODUCTION .................................................................................................................................... 
11 . COUNTRY CONTEXT ........................................................................................................................... 

( i ) Political and social context ............................................................................................................. 1 
(ii) A turnaround in macroeconomic performance .............................................................................. 2 
(iii) Cameroon in the subregion ........................................................................................................... 3 

1 
1 

111 . POVERTY PROFILE IN CAh4EROON ..................................................................................................... 
. NATIONAL PRIORITIES FOR POVERTY REDUCTION-PRSP ............................................................... 

( i ) National priorities ........................................................................................................................... 
(ii) Medium-term macroeconomicJi.amework ..................................................................................... 

v . CAMEROON’S MAIN DEVELOPMENT CHALLENGE: BETTER GOVERNANCE AND PUBLIC SERVICE 
DELIVERY TO FOSTER ECONOMIC GROWTH AND POVERTY REDUCTION .................................................. 

(9 Greater accountability and transparency in the use ofpublic resources ....................................... 
(ii) Improved investment climate for private sector development and competitiveness of 

3 
6 
6 
6 

7 
8 

VI . THE WORLD BANK GROUP ASSISTANCE STRATEGY ....................................................................... 10 

(ii) Regional dimension of World Bank Group assistance ................................................................. 22 

Cameroonian businesses ...................................................................................................................... 
( i ) The World Bank Group results-based assistance strategy ........................................................... 
(iv) Lending scenarios and triggers ................................................................................................... 
(v) Partners and participation ........................................................................................................... 
(vi) LessonsJi.om the previous CAS ................................................................................................... 26 
(vii) Lessons of IDA’S and IFC ’s portfolios ....................................................................................... 

VI1 . RESULTS-BASED MONITORING & EVALUATION .............................................................................. 
VI11 . MANAGING R ISKS ........................................................................................................................ 
IX . CONCLUDING REMARKS .................................................................................................................. 

27 
28 
29 
30 

25 
26 

I O 

9 

List of Tables 

Table 1 : Cameroon and the Millennium Development Goals ...................................................................... 4 
Table 2: Regional disparities in poverty indicators ...................................................................................... 
Table 3: CAS results-based framework ...................................................................................................... 

Table 4: Proposed World Bank Group program FY04-06 (base case: US$ 125 m) .................................. 
Table 5: Triggers and main assumptions for base case lending scenario ................................................... 
Annex 1 . Framework for a results-based country program 
Annex 2 . Macroeconomic framework 
Annex 3 . 1996 CAS completion report 
Annex 4 . Debt sustainability analysis 
Annex 5 . Donors’ interventions and PRSP priorities 
Standard CAS Annexes 

5 
11 
24 
25 

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 
1. 
Since the last full CAS was presented to the Board in 1996 (progress reports followed in 1998 
and 2000), Cameroon has begun experiencing faster growth and declining income poverty, underpinned 
by a stable macroeconomic framework and far-reaching structural and institutional reforms. Driven 
mainly by renewed growth (averaging over 4 percent annually), income poverty declined by an estimated 
13 points-to 
about 40 percent of the population-between 
1996 and 2001. The protracted terms-of- 
trade-induced depression that dominated the decade up to the mid-1 990s has now been substantially 
reversed. But the recent pace of reform implementation has sometimes been uneven, as reflected in the 
lag between the decision point under the enhanced HIPC initiative (October 2000) and the completion 
point (which the authorities now aim to reach in the spring of 2004). And despite the decline in income 
poverty, other social indicators-including HIV/AIDS prevalence, which now touches almost 12 percent 
of the adult population-have not kept pace. 
2. 
This Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) for Cameroon sets out planned lending and non-lending 
support to the country from the World Bank Group over the period FY04-06, including base-case IDA 
lending of US$125 million over the three years. Bank Group assistance is explicitly rooted in a results 
framework, and is aligned with the agenda detailed in the country’s recently-completed PRSP, which was 
presented to the Board in July 2003. The main challenge underlying PRSP implementation is one of 
strengthening governance in order to help Cameroon meet the MDGs through better delivery of basic 
public services and private-sector-led growth. 
3 . 
The following issues are suggested for Board discussion: 
Does the Board agree with the CAS’S emphasis on governance, specifically on the need to 
strengthen the institutional framework for pro-poor economic management and service delivery, 
as well as to improve the environment for the private sector, in order to best support PRSP 
implementation? 
Does the Board concur with the approach proposed in the CAS of gradual transition to 
consolidated programmatic lending through PRSCs by FY06? 
4. 
Cameroon’s PRSP, which was based on extensive consultations and a thorough poverty analysis, 
identifies the development challenges, notably that of improving governance. Recognizing that economic 
growth needs to be raised above the level in recent years in order to reach the MDGs, the PRSP sets the 
following priorities: (i) promoting a stable macroeconomic framework; (ii) strengthening growth through 
economic diversification; (iii) empowering the private sector as the main engine of growth and as a 
partner in social service delivery; (iv) developing basic infrastructure and natural resources in an 
environmentalIy sustainable manner; (v) accelerating regional integration within the CEMAC framework; 
(vi) strengthening human resources, bolstering the social sectors, and promoting th e integration of 
vulnerable groups in the economy; and (vii) improving the institutionai framework, administrative 
management, and governance. 
5 . 
The World Bank Group’s strategy has been aligned with the PRSP goal of poverty reduction 
through 
improved basic service delivery and private-sector-led growth, underpinned by better 
governance. The CAS is founded on two main pillars: (i) strengthening the institutional framework for 
pro-poor economic management and service delivery; and (ii) reducing selected constraints to, and 
directly supporting, private sector development. The following measurable improvements are expected 
by the end of the CAS period: 
Transparency and accountability in the mobilization and use of public resources-and 
management of resources in education, health, and forestry-will have improved. 
Rural communities in at least three of the country’s ten provinces will benefit from better service 
delivery, and farmers will have begun increasing their productivity through improved extension 
services and new technologies. 

the 

0 

0 

0 

.. 

-11- 

7 . 

Models for improving service delivery in urban municipalities will have been tested, and selected 
urban communities will have better access to water. 
Vulnerable groups in more than 2,000 communities will have improved their response to the 
threat of HrV/AIDS through preventative, curative, or mitigating measures, while the national 
capacity to respond to the epidemic will have been strengthened. 
Private sector companies will enjoy a reduced burden from regulatory, administrative, and 
infrastructure constraints. 
6 . 
The current portfolio-which 
includes operations supporting transport, HIV/AIDS, agriculture, 
public-private partnerships, and the environment (notably in relation to the Chad-Cameroon pipeline)- 
will contribute to th e attainment of CAS results. New IDA lending-a 
total of US$125 million for FY04- 
06 in the base case-will 
complement on-going operations to achieve these results, and help build the 
associated capacity, as well as preparing the transition to programmatic lending. Lending would include: 
(i) a community-driven development project to channel funds to rural communities and assist 
decentralization; (ii) a forestry and environment operation to build on the significant reforms o f recent 
years and strengthen capacity in forest-related institutions; (iii) an education sector reform project to 
strengthen the institutional framework; (iv) a Learning and Innovation Loan (LIL) to begin testing 
institutional approaches to address urban poverty; (v) an energy sector support project to help address 
recent power shortages; and (vi) a public sector capacity-building project to support the overall 
institution-building and governance agenda. Support through a PRSC focusing on health, rural 
development, and private sector development would be initiated in FY06. Base case lending will be 
conditional on satisfactory implementation of the PRSP, on governance measures, and on IDA portfolio 
quality, and a high-case lending scenario triggered by stronger performance, notably on governance. 
The Bank’s non-lending program will focus on: (i) overall PRSP and reform implementation, 
sources of growth, and monitoring MDG action plans in health and education; (ii) public expenditure and 
institutional/governance analysis in health, education, infrastructure, and agriculture; (iii) key reforms in 
procurement and public finance through a CPAR and monitoring the CFAA action plan; and (iv) building 
the PSD reform agenda with an Investment Climate Assessment. A Poverty Assessment will measure 
progress, while a gender assessment and support for strategy formulation will help mainstream gender 
issues in Cameroon’s development agenda. Core diagnostic ESW requirements will be provided for. 
8 . 
IFC’s program will complement IDA’S to strengthen public-private dialogue on the investment 
climate and assist with the implementation of key reforms. Previous advisory support for the privatization 
of electricity will be complemented with joint IDA-IFC financing for additional generation capacity. 
And options for further private participation in infrastructure will be developed. IFC will expand 
financing and technical assistance to SMEs, help build competitive financial institutions, and complement 
Bank-assisted reforms in the forestry sector with financing for sustainable forestry projects. 
9. 
Implementation of this CAS is subject to three broad-and 
inter-related-types of risk. One is 
that of political turmoil, either domestically-induced (e.g., as elections take place in 2004), o r regional 
(but impacting Cameroon owing to the country’s prominence in the Central African Economic and 
Monetary Community). A second is that of poor implementation progress in both the PRSP and donor- 
assisted programs, possibly driven by faltering political will to implement governance-related reform. A 
third is that of external shocks (e.g., in the terms o f trade or foreign resource inflows). While political 
risks cannot be directly influenced, World Bank Group support for PRSP implementation, including 
capacity-building needs, in concert with development partners, will help mitigate some of these risks. In 
particular, the focus on improving transparency and accountability in public financial management and 
service delivery will help keep the governance agenda at center stage. The close macroeconomic 
dialogue with the IMF under the PRGF will help mitigate risks associated with external shocks. 

I. INTRODUCTION 

1. 
Th is Country Assistance Strategy (CAS), which sets out planned lending and non-lending World 
Bank Group support to Cameroon over the period FY04-06, is rooted in a results-based framework and 
aligned with the agenda detailed in the country’s recently-completed PRSP, discussed by the Board in 
July 2003. The central challenge for Cameroon is to build on the reform momentum and poverty 
reduction gains of recent years by broadening and deepening improvements in governance. On th is basis, 
the CAS is articulated around two main objectives: (i) strengthening the institutional framework for pro- 
poor economic management and service delivery; and (ii) reducing selected constraints to, and directly 
supporting, private sector development. 
2 . 
Together with the on-going portfolio, planned new IDA lending-a 
total of US$125 million over 
FY04-06 in the base case-relates 
directly to the CAS objectives and to the specific outcomes identified 
in the results-based framework. New lending will mainly consist of project-specific credits, with a 
transition to more consolidated programmatic lending by FY06, inter alia through program support for 
forestry- and environment-related reforms in FY04. Remaining in the base case will be subject to 
satisfactory implementation of the PRSP, selected governance measures, and the IDA portfolio, failing 
which Board presentation of any new operations-including notably the planned PRSC in FYO6-would 
be deferred until corrective measures are taken. A high-case lending scenario, which would provide for 
some US$35 million over the base case, delivered in the form of a larger PRSC, would be triggered by 
specific achievements in “scaling up” the implementation of strategies in key poverty-reducing sectors, as 
well as of specific govemance-related reforms. 
3. 
IFC’s program will focus on improving the investment climate, supporting private participation in 
infrastructure, expanding financing and technical assistance to SMEs, helping to build competitive 
financial institutions, and complementing Bank-assisted reforms in the forestry sector with direct support 
for sustainable projects. The Bank’s non-lending program will help monitor PRSP and reform 
implementation, as well as complete the core diagnostic requirements (notably through a CEM/DPR, 
P E M G R , and a Poverty Assessment, as well as a new CPAR and monitoring the CFAA action plan), and 
address key issues related to the investment climate and gender. Capacity-building will be a n integral 
part of both lending and non-lending tasks, focusing notably on PRSP implementation. 

11. COUNTRY CONTEXT 

(i) Political and social context 

4. 
Cultural and social diversity. Cameroon became independent in 196 1, inheriting Francophone 
and Anglophone systems, and both languages officially co-exist. The Anglophone part of th e country 
covers the Northwest and Southwest provinces and represents about 25 percent of the population, the 
Francophone part, the rest. The National Day (May 20) celebrates the joining o f the country’s two parts. 
Cameroon has more than 200 ethnic and linguistic groups, with the Beti, Douala, and Bassa dominant in 
the South and the center, the Bamilkkk and Bamoun in the West, and the Foulbe, Borroros, Matakam, and 
Toupouri in the North. Poverty and income inequality are still very high, with more than 40 percent of the 
people below the poverty threshold. 
5. 
The challenge of maintaining political stability. In recent years, President Paul Biya, who has 
been in office since 1982, has sent conciliatory signals by loosening the grip on political parties, 
establishing a National Election Observatory, encouraging a freer press, and balancing appointments at 
the senior levels, including that of an Anglophone Prime Minister. Biya’s Party, the RDPC, is still very 
much in control, strengthening its position in the last legislative elections (July 2002). Presidential 
elections are expected in 2004. Continuing improvements in political openness and overall security, 
coupled with strong signals on corruption and governance, can reassure the private sector and the 

-2- 

international community. Long considered a safer haven than its turbulent neighbors, Cameroon is 
expected to remain politically stable. 

(ii) A turnaround in macroeconomic performance 

6 . 
The origins of macroeconomic instability. Cameroon experienced commendable growth during 
most of the 1970s and up through the mid-1980s. Boosted by exports of agricultural products (coffee, 
cocoa, cotton) and crude oil, its GDP grew at 7 percent a year, sustained by investment of 25 percent of 
GDP. By the mid-l980s, however, imbalances began to appear. Inflation was high (10 percent), and the 
lack of adjustment of the nominal exchange rate resulted in a significant real exchange rate appreciation. 
Fiscal and trade imbalances climbed rapidly as the terms o f trade deteriorated and exports fell, external 
debt began to swell, and domestic savings and investment contracted (the investment rate fell as low as 14 
percent of GDP in 1992). 
7. 
The depression and its consequences. From 1986 to 1993, Cameroon experienced serious 
economic difficulties, with per capita income falling 50 percent. The contraction was also reflected in a 
severe fiscal crisis, leading to a large cut in nominal wages,' drastic cuts in education, health, and 
infrastructure spending, and the accumulation of external and internal arrears. 
8 . 
The 1994 devaluation and the initiation of reforms. In 1994 the 50 percent nominal 
devaluation of the CFA Franc (30 percent real depreciation) and the trade and fiscal reforms within the 
CEMAC marked a turning point in restoring macroeconomic stability. Although there was a return to 
growth after the devaluation, Cameroon did not capitalize fully on the opportunity from 1994 to mid- 
1996. The two IMF stand-bys and the IDA second structural adjustment credit went off track after one 
quarter of implementation. In mid-1996 a new policy and economic management team showed clearer 
resolve to tackle the structural problems in the economy. An Enhanced Structural Adjustment Facility 
was worked out and approved by the IMF in August 1997. After the successful completion of the three- 
year ESAF (1 997-2000), 
the Government developed a growth-oriented macroeconomic program for 
2000-03, supported by the IMF with the PRGF. 
9. 
The success of the two programs-and more generally of government reforms (forestry, 
transportation, banking system, and privatization of public utilities)-translated 
into better economic 
performance. Real GDP growth was sustained around 4.7 percent during 1997-2000 and inflation 
remained at around 3.5 percent. More recently, growth has remained strong, although recent targets have 
been revised downwards as a result of power shortages. Growth in 2002 is estimated at 4.2 percent, and 
4.5 percent growth is projected in 2003. Inflation stabilized around the 3 percent mark in late 2002. 
10. With better revenue mobilization and prudent expenditure policies, the fiscal position was 
significantly strengthened. Non-oil fiscal revenues rose during 1996-200 1, gaining two points of GDP, 
the result of better tax administration and implementing the value added tax (VAT). The overall fiscal 
balance (commitment basis, excluding grants) has recently stabilized in the range of 1-2 percent of GDP. 
1 1. 
An unfinished reform agenda. Nevertheless, the stronger macroeconomic performance masked 
serious problems o f governance and inadequate attention to poverty and the investment climate. As a 
result, growth has not resulted in tangible gains in job creation, poverty reduction, and living standards. 
On a positive note, the incidence o f poverty did fall considerably from 53 percent to 40 percent, durin 
1996-2001. But growth has not especially benefited the core poor, and inequality has remained high. 
High inequality and volatility in the economy remain important obstacles to poverty reduction. Volatility 
has also meant fluctuations in budgetary resources, often hindering poverty-related interventions. 

5 

1 
2 

The cut by about half in the wage bill brought it 4 .4 percent of GDP in FY95, one of the lowest in the CFA franc zone, 
Inequality in Cameroon, measured by the Gini coefficient, is 0.41, around the average for Sub-Saharan Africa. 

-3 - 

12. 
Revenue prospects challenging. The oil sector, only a few years ago a key source of growth 
(roughly 8 percent of GDP, 50 percent of export receipts and 50 percent of government revenues), has 
declined considerably since 1999/00, and its medium-term prospects do not look favorable. As the 
downward trend in oil revenue continuesY3 the authorities will need to step up efforts to improve domestic 
tax administration and tax collection, while also improving public resource management. 

(iii) Cameroon in the subregion 

13. 
Cameroon plays a major role in the Central Africa subregion. It is part of CEMAC4 (Communaute‘ 
Economique et Mone‘taire d i l fr ique Centrule), which also includes the Central African Republic, Chad, 
the Republic o f Congo, Gabon, and Equatorial Guinea. Cameroon accounts for half the region’s 
population, 45 percent of its GDP, and 60 percent of its money supply. The CEMAC countries share a 
common central bank (BEAC) and currency (CFAF). 
14. 
Cameroon spans more than 10 degrees of latitude, from Equatorial to Sahelian climate, and thus 
benefits from the most diverse ecosystems in the area. Its access to the sea, particularly the port of 
Douala, is important for its neighboring landlocked countries, such as Chad and the Central African 
Republic. The Douala-Bangui corridor is already an important axis, and links to Chad are being 
facilitated with the infrastructure developed along the 1070-kilometer-long oil pipeline. 
15. 
Cameroon’s relationships with its neighbors outside CEMAC are not very substantial. For 
historical reasons, its relationship with Nigeria has been very weak and is now even more sensitive 
because o f the long-standing dispute over the Bakassi peninsula, on which a ruling was recently handed 
down in favor of Cameroon by the International Court of Justice in the Hague. Still, with the more than 
1,500 kilometer frontier, it is likely that informal trade between the two countries will remain significant. 
16. 
The most serious obstacles to regional integration are political. Cameroon and Gabon, the most 
stable countries for many years and economically more developed, seem to be competing for leadership in 
the region. Rivalries over the location of the regional stock exchange (Douala or Libreville) have 
contributed to delays in capital market development, a constraint for local business. 

111. POVERTY PROFILE IN CAMEROON 

17. 
Average annual GDP growth of 4 .4 percent during 1995-2000 contributed to the partial recovery 
from the crisis of the early 1990s and translated into some poverty reduction. The incidence of income 
poverty in Cameroon (defined as the percentage of population with annual spending below what is 
necessary to meet minimal food and non-food needs)5 fell by 13 points (from 53.3 to 40.2 percent) over 
1996-2001. Nevertheless, this gain must be considered with caution, given the difficulty o f comparing the 
results o f the two surveys in 1996 and 2001. Most of the gain can be traced to faster growth rather than 
income redistribution benefiting the poor. And despite the gains, absolute poverty remains very high: 
more than six million Cameroonians remain poor, and Cameroon is still far from achieving the MDGs 
(Table 1). 

3 

4 

1999). 

5 

Over 2003-2007, oil production is projected to drop by 5 percent a year, and oil revenue by 14 percent a year. 
CEMAC evolved from a loose customs un ion to a full-fledged economic and monetary union in 1994 (treaty ratified in 

This level, based on the essential need approach, corresponds to annual consumption of CFAF232,457. 

-4- 

Table 1: Cameroon and the Millennium Development Goals 

MDG Goals 

World Situation 

1. Halve between 1990 
and 20 15 the proportion 
of people in extreme 
poverty and who suffer 
from hunger 

disparities in primary 
and secondary education 
by 2005 and for all 

From 1990 to 1999 the 
proportion of the 
world’s people living 
on less than US$1 a 
day fell from 29 
percent to 23 percent, 
but progress was 
uneven 
90 percent of the 
world’s elementary- 
school-age children 
(6-14) are enrolled 

There is a gender gap 
of 7.6 percent in the 
primary education 
gross enrollment ratio 

in 

Sub-Saharan 1 Current Situation in Cameroon 
Situation 
Africa 
1 An estimated 40 percent of the 
From 1990 to 1999 the 
proportion of people in extreme 
population still lives on less than 
poverty slightly decreased from 
US$1 a day 
47.7 percent to 46.7 percent, 
much too small to reach the 23.9 
percent target by 20 15 

14 countries are considered off 
track and 19 seriously off track 

25 percent of countries are 
likely to achieve the goal 

Primary completion rate increased 
from 43 percent in 2000, to 56 percent 
in 200 1, and 60 percent in 2003. On 
current trends, Cameroon is on track 
to meet this MDG. 
The ratio of girls to boys in primary 
and secondary education has fallen 
from 82.2 percent to 80 .7 percent 
while ratio of young literate females to 

4. Reduce infant and 

The infant mortality 
rate is 54.2 per 1,000 
live births 

~ 5. Reduce maternal 
mortality rate by three- 
quarters between 1990 

rhe re are 400 maternal 
jeaths per 100,000 live 
births 

20 15 the spread of 
HIV/AIDS, malaria, and 

[n 1999 the prevalence 
*ate of HIV/AIDS 
among adults aged 15- 
$9 was 1.07 percent 
7. Ensure environmental 
[n 2000 about 80 
sustainability and access 
3ercent of the 
1 to an improved water 
3opulation had access 
1 source 
:o water 
Source: World Development Indicators. 

WHO estimates that there were 
2.3 million AIDS-related deaths 
in 200 1 and that the prevalence 
rate has reached 8.4 percent 
Access to an improved water 
source rose from 48.7 percent in 
1990 to 55.4 percent in 2000 

Official prevalence in Cameroon was 
11 percent in 2001, and there are no 
concrete signs yet of decline 

Access to an improved water source 
rose from 52 percent in 1990 to 62 
percent in 2000, slightly above the 

18. 
Income distribution remains skewed, despite apparent recent improvements. 
Inequality, as 
measured by the Gini coefficient, declined from 44 percent to 41 percent, around the average for Sub- 
Saharan Africa, over the period 1996-2001. Still, the wealthiest 20 percent of the population spend eight 
times more than the bottom 20 percent. The high income inequality in Cameroon is a major concern 
because income inequality diminishes considerably the impact of growth-oriented policies on poverty 
reduction. Inequalities also have a regional dimension: Northern regions (Far North, North, Northwest, 
Adamaoua and Central provinces) have a poverty incidence around 50 percent, far higher than the 
average (Table 2). Bank interventions will target some of these areas, notably through community-driven 
development programs. The poverty incidence in urban areas is much lower than in rural areas (17.9 
percent compared with 52.1 percent). It has also declined more sharply (1 8 points, compared with 1 1). 

-5- 

Poverty 

Incidence 

Table 2: Regional disparities in poverty indicators 
Depth 
Severity 
Regional 
distribution 

0.7 
0.9 
6.4 
6.6 
6.7 
8.2 
4.2 
6.4 
10.7 
4.2 
2.4 
4.5 

2.6 
2.9 
5.4 
9.4 
5.3 
24.9 
4.3 
9 
15 
12.1 
2.7 
6.3 

Ratio of richest 
quintile to 
poorest 
15 
13.2 
7 
7.4 
7.2 
6 
6.9 
8.1 
11.8 
6.2 
5.6 
9.5 

2.1 
2.7 
15.4 
15 
15.4 
18.8 
10.1 
15.5 
20.9 
11.1 
7.4 
10.5 

Douala 
10.9 
Yaounde 
13.3 
Adamaoua 
48.4 
Central 
48.2 
East 
44 
Far North 
56.3 
Coastal 
35.5 
North 
50.1 
Northwest 
52.5 
West 
40.3 
South 
31.5 
Southwest 
33.8 
Source: ECAMII. 
19. 
Rapid urban growth (more than 6 percent a year) and the lack of investment in urban 
infrastructure have contributed to the spread of illegal settlements, with little o r no access to basic 
services. Such settlements represent 50 to 60 percent of the area of Douala and Yaounde and two-thirds of 
their population. Urban poverty has its own characteristics and so is difficult to compare with rural 
poverty. The large share of urban population in Cameroon (50 percent) means that urban poverty has to 
be taken seriously. Still, income-gap analysis indicates that the cash transfer necessary to pull a poor 
person out o f poverty is four times higher in a rural area than in an urban area (43,500 FCFA o r US$88 
compared with 10,000 FCFA or US$22). 
Education, sector of activity, and regions are the three main determinants of poverty. 
20 , 
@Education appears to be especially important: for every 10 households, more than 4 live in poverty 
when the head of family has no education, compared with 0.5 when the head of family is college- 
educated. 
@The incidence of poverty is highest for households headed by farmers (57 percent) and agricultural 
wage earners (50 percent), who also make up the largest shares of the nationwide poor population 
(70 percent for farmers and 11 percent for agricultural wage earners). 
@Households in the rural hauts plateaux are twice as likely to be poor as households living in an urban 
area (other than Douala and Yaounde). 
21. 
The participatory consultations on the poor’s perceptions of poverty (April 2000 and January 
2002) reveal important differences across regions. Key factors that “account” for poverty are the: (i) lack 
of employment opportunities; (ii) relative isolation due to the lack o f physical infrastructure (mainly 
roads); (iii) corruption and poor management of public resources and (iv) lack of access to social services 
(health and education, especially in rural areas). Poor people in rural areas also attribute their situation to 
higher input prices, unfair prices for agricultural products, and a lack o f access to credit and training-all 
from agricultural liberalization. In the North drought and the lack of access to water were the main 
concerns. The lack o f security is also seen as a serious concern. 
22. 
Cameroon could meet the key income poverty MDG target of halving the poverty rate by 2015. 
But deeper analysis would be needed to confirm the sustainability of this trend which is based on the 
PRSP base-case scenario assumptions for growth and demographic change. The PRSP also provides 
quantified targets related to the MDGs, especially in the health and education sector, and indicates the 

-6- 

resource gap that will need to be filled in education and health for the country to remain on target with the 
MDGs . Bu t more than resources, reaching the target requires efficient policies, a higher absorption rate, 
and stronger institutions (Box 1). 

Box 1. Education illustrates the MDG challenges 

The opinion is widely shared that weak governance is the main constraint to sustaining economic growth and 
reducing poverty in Cameroon. Education illustrates the links between governance, poverty, and growth. The 
quality of Cameroon’s education system, high in the 1980s, deteriorated in the 1990s. The economic crisis 
resulted in a dramatic salary erosion (more than 50 percent). This fostered widespread corruption among 
teachers and in the administration, where the “evaporation ratio” of public resources has been estimated at 70 
percent. 
Failure to allocate adequate resources to the sector and lack of investment, contributed to deteriorating 
infrastructure. This situation jeopardizes Cameroon’s ability to reach the Millennium Development Goal: the last 
available figures (1999) show that the primary gross enrollment rate has declined to around 76 percent, having 
reached 91 percent in 1990. More important, poor quality and inefficiencies result in a completion rate of 43 
percent (percentage of students starting the first grade who reach the sixth grade). To illustrate how worrisome 
these declining trends are, if they were projected forward, by 2015 only 1 child in 5 would complete primary 
education, putting Cameroon seriously off track for the Millennium Development Goal of 95 percent 
completion. 

Iv. NATIONAL PRIORITIES FOR POVERTY REDUCTION-PRSP 

(i) National priorities 

23. 
Cameroon’s PRSP, completed and adopted by the Government on April 8, 2003, was discussed 
by the Bank and Fund Boards, along with a Joint Staff Assessment (JSA), in late July 2003. T h e JSA 
found the document’s main strengths to be a comprehensive and genuine consultation process, a candid 
assessment of the root causes of economic and social problems, a solid poverty diagnosis, detailed 
strategic orientations for the future, and a commendable effort to cost out the implications of the strategy. 
Areas requiring greater attention 
included 
the 
institutional framework for monitoring PRSP 
implementation, and how PRSP priorities and the related medium-term expenditure framework would 
form the basis for future budgetary allocations. 
24. 
In the PRSP the Government outlines its vision and medium-term objectives. Promoting growth 
and reducing poverty by half by 2015 call for a twofold approach: a diversification of the economy to 
significantly increase the real growth rate, together with proactive and targeted measures t o better 
distribute the benefits of growth. 
25. 
Th e Government’s strategy for economic growth and poverty reduction is articulated t h o u g h 
seven priorities: (i) promoting a stable macroeconomic framework; (ii) strengthening growth through 
economic diversification; (iii) empowering the private sector as the main engine of growth and a partner 
in social service delivery; (iv) developing basic infrastructure and natural resources in an environmentally 
sustainable manner; (v) accelerating regional integration within the CEMAC framework; (vi) 
strengthening human resources, bolstering the social sectors, and promoting inclusion of vulnerable 
groups in economic activity; and (vii) improving the institutional framework, administrative management, 
and governance. 

(ii) Medium-term macroeconomic framework 

26. Medium-term growth prospects. Reaching the MDGs, as indicated in the PRSP, would require 
sustained annual GDP growth of around 6 percent. To achieve this, the Government intends to redouble 

-7- 

its efforts to implement a new generation of economic and social reforms-to 
improve competitiveness, 
create a business-friendly environment for investment, and accelerate private-sector-led growth. In the 
meantime, the Government is determined to make every effort to anchor growth in the activities of the 
poor, to maximize the employment creation effect and the poverty and social impact. 
27. 
Sources of growth. The PRSP has developed in detail an ambitious medium-term strategy for 
diversifying the economy and accelerating growth. The central scenario targets a growth rate that would 
rise steadily from an estimated 4.2 percent in 2002 and a projected 4.5 percent in 2003 to reach 6 percent 
in 2007 and 7 percent by 2010 and beyond. Overall, GDP growth would average 6 percent over the next 
decade, roughly one percentage point above the performance in 1997-2002. Although shrinking slightly 
as a percentage of GDP, the primary sector would remain an important contributor to growth, owing 
largely to buoyant food and forestry sectors. And surging agro-industrial, textile, and wood product 
sectors would more than offset the decline of the oil sector, accounting for the steady rise of the industrial 
sector relative to GDP. Stronger non-oil exports would improve the current account. And boosted by 
public sector capital spending in priority sectors, the investment ratio would gain 1.4 points over the 
period, reaching 19.7 percent of GDP by 2007. Private investment would also increase as a percentage of 
GDP, supported by higher private savings, the result of strong income growth and slighter lower private 
consumption growth (See Annex 2 for more details on the central macroeconomic scenario). 
28. Welfare implications. Per capita consumption would remain strong, with a steady rise of 3 
percent a year, bringing sustained improvements in household welfare. With the foregoing growth 
profile and taking into account the sectoral decomposition of growth and related differences in the 
elasticities of poverty t o growth, the projected decrease in the poverty rate is 18 points, close to the MDG 
target. But deeper analysis would need to confirm the robustness of the elasticities (roughly two 
percentage points a year in poverty reduction for each two points of growth in annual per capita income). 
29. 
Public finances, the medium-term expenditure framework, and debt sustainability. The 
Government’s fiscal policy is built on lower oil revenues, higher non-oil revenues, rationalized public 
expenditures and better targeting of spending to priority sectors. The overall fiscal balance (excluding 
grants) is projected to stabilize at around a surplus of 1 percent of GDP. Total revenues are expected to 
decline slightly from 19.4 percent in 2003 to 18.8 percent of GDP by the end o f 2007, a result of the 
expected decline in oil revenue from 4.8 percent of GDP in 2003 to 2 percent in 2007. The projected 
shortfall in oil revenue would be partially offset by increase in nonoil revenue, projected to reach 16.8 
percent of GDP in 2007. Public expenditures are projected to stabilize around 17.5 percent of GDP, which 
would allow the Government to meet sectoral objectives while maintaining financial prudence. To 
confirm its commitment to human resource development, the Government aims to have public 
expenditures on education and health steadily rise to reach 4 percent and 1.5 percent of GDP respectively 
in 2007. The MTEF also indicates that the Government is determined to commit a significant share of 
resources (15 percent of total internal budget and 2.7 percent of GDP) to infrastructure. Finally, a 
detailed debt sustainability analysis has been carried ou t (see Annex 4), and shows a sustainable long- 
term evolution of the country’s debt ind ica tors-cons is ten t with IDA lending scenarios-that 
is robust to 
reasonable parameter variations (e.g., on export growth). 

v. CAMEROON’S MAIN DEVELOPMENT CHALLENGE: BETTER GOVERNANCE AND PUBLIC 
SERVICE DELIVERY TO FOSTER ECONOMIC GROWTH AND POVERTY REDUCTION 

30. 
Cameroon faces two key challenges in reducing poverty: (i) accountability and transparency in 
the use of public resources are insufficient, with scarce public resources poorly targeted to priority 
sectors; and (ii) the regulatory framework and investment climate are not conducive to private sector 
development. The planned program of the World Bank Group is designed to address these challenges. 

-8- 

(i) Greater accountability and transparency in the use of public resources 

3 1. 
Pro-poor resource allocation will not be effective unless there is a marked improvement in the 
transparency and accountability of mobilizing and using public resources. Government intends to achieve 
this through structural reforms dealing with the effectiveness of spending, procurement reform, and civil 
service reform. Given the amount of HIPC resources that will be made available at completion, it is not so 
much finding financial resources that is critical for Cameroon-it 
is the way resources are actually used 
and accounted for. 
32. 
Effectiveness of expenditures. A Country Financial Accountability Assessment (CFAA), 
undertaken in June 2002, highlighted important shortcomings in monitoring of public expenditures. A 
priority action plan agreed on with the authorities focuses on strengthening the reliability o f the loi de 
r6glement o f public spending surveillance by: (i) ensuring the independence of the Chamber of Accounts; 
(ii) giving responsibility to sector ministries to certify satisfactory completion of works and acquisition of 
goods and services; and (iii) setting up a General Inspection service, with a full-fledged mandate to audit 
any beneficiary of public funds. 
33. 
Procurement reform. As provided for in the last CAS, a Country Procurement Assessment 
Review (CPAR), completed in FYO1, found the procurement environment in need of improvement in 
several areas. Although the procurement reform has suffered delays in its implementation, the 
Govemment has put in place concrete measures to achieve some of its objectives. Systematic monitoring 
at two levels+x 
ante monitoring by specialized commissions with independent observers and ex post 
monitoring by independent auditors-has been initiated and is now fully in place. Two other features of 
the proposed reform have been initiated: the regulation and systematic monitoring of public procurement 
through the creation of the regulation agency-Agence 
d e Regulation des March& Publics-and 
the 
broadening of the responsibilities of the contracting authorities. But Cameroon now needs to speed up 
implementation of the agreed framework by adopting a new procurement code and the application of 
sanctions. This will contribute to private-sector-led growth by reducing transaction costs and increasing 
the access of the private sector to public contracts. Sanctions will help dissipate the impression of 
impunity and build confidence within the private sector. 
Civil service reform. In response to the economic crisis of the late 1980s and early 1990s, the 
34. 
Government had to take drastic measures to reduce its expenditures to a level consistent with the available 
resources. Wages in the administration were reduced by 50 percent in 1993, and the CFA Franc was 
devalued by 50 percent in January 1994. Among other effects, the associated reduction o f purchasing 
power, provoked absenteeism and an overall demobilization of civil servants, and spread corruption 
throughout the administration. 
35. 
The Government has initiated a reorganization of the administration along several lines. A 
downsizing program financed by French Cooperation and the European Union (US$25 million) has 
allowed for a reduction of about 6,000 staff, including redundancy and voluntary resignation. At the same 
time, a civil servant census identified 4,500 ghost staff. Restructuring and privatization of public 
enterprises, particularly public utilities (electricity, telephone), has entailed further streamlining. In 
education and health, the private sector operates alongside the administration to deliver services-3 0 
percent of children are attending private schools, and more than 40 percent o f the population receives 
medical care from the private sector. Such partnerships between private and public sectors, a t the center 
o f t h e reforms outlined in the social sector strategies, need to be broadened. 
36. 
Allocation of public resources to priority sectors, previously inadequate, has recently improved, 
as reflected in the medium-term expenditure framework o f the PRSP. In health during 1990-98 
Cameroon spent 5 percent of GDP on health care, 1 percent public and the remainder private. This public 
spending on health care was lower than the Sub-Saharan average of 1.7 percent of GDP. In education, 

-9- 

public expenditure averaged 2.7 percent in 2000, again below the average for African HIPC countries (4 
percent). One challenge for Cameroon is to improve the budgetary allocation process, by integrating the 
annual budget cycle into the medium-term expenditure framework and possibly moving to a medium- 
term budget planning process, consistent with the timeframe of PRSP policies. A second is to implement 
the decentralization process and local participatory planning as mechanisms for improving accountability 
and public service delivery to local communities. 

(ii) Improved investment climate for private sector development and competitiveness of 
Cameroonian businesses 

3 7 . 
Private sector development in Cameroon is critical because public resources will be inadequate to 
attain the investment needed to sustain growth and create employment. Competitiveness needs to improve 
significantly merely to maintain Cameroon’s small market share in world trade. Efforts in this regard have 
focused on the ongoing public enterprise divestiture program complemented by reforms in the financial 
sector. But they need to be shored up rapidly by measures improving the investment climate, attracting 
foreign investment in the nonoil sector, and enhancing the potential of the national private sector. Three 
key areas need attention. 
3 8 . 
Regulatory environment including administrative barriers. There is an unfinished agenda for 
state disengagement and the creation of a regulatory environment that sets out clear rules for competition 
and reduces uncertainty for the private sector. A case in point concerns agriculture. The cocoa and coffee 
office is subsidized through a levy on coffee and cocoa exports (thus paid by the producers), but its value 
added is unclear, particularly as a committee for coffee and cocoa (the CICC) mandated to oversee 
compliance with deontological practices and fair competition is already operating and in need of 
strengthening. Several poorly performing rural development agencies carry out commercial activities that 
impede private sector development. Much progress has been achieved in privatizing agro-industries, but 
remaining work awaits completion. 
39. 
Throughout all sectors, owing to an overly bureaucratic regulatory environment, administrative 
barriers and rent-extracting practices are widespread. They range from simple red tape issues, which can 
discourage many smaller businesses from expanding and joining the formal sector, to time-consuming 
and clearly rent-seeking administrative practices, which seriously impair the competitiveness of 
Cameroonian firms. Relations with the customs, tax, and labor administrations are quoted most 
frequently. 
40. 
Legal system and functioning of the judiciary. A well-functioning legal and judicial system 
able to enforce contracts and guarantee property and creditors rights, is indispensable for encouraging 
investment. Cameroon has adopted a set of modern business laws, which came into effect between 1998 
and 2000 and replaced existing national legislation. But enforcement of the new business laws by the 
judiciary still poses problems that need to be addressed by the Ministry of Justice through training 
magistrates and eventually imposing appropriate sanctions for noncompliance. Nor does the existence of 
modern business laws do anything about pervasive corruption in the judiciary and the lack o f enforcement 
o f court decisions. 
41. 
Access to, and cost of, infrastructure. The third important set of measures is ensuring adequate 
access to infrastructure (transport, electricity, telecommunications) at competitive costs. The privatization 
of the railway and the Douala Port (through a concession) as well as o f the electricity and telecom 
companies are important milestones. But beyond the completion of the transactions themselves, the 
regulators need t o ensure that efficiency gains by private operators are partially passed through to users 
(including businesses) and contribute to increased competitiveness. In particular, the electricity sector, 
which remains one of the most binding constraints, will be an area of attention. 

-10- 

42. 
In addition to improving the investment climate, experience in other African countries has 
demonstrated that the supply response capacity of small producers in the agricultural and industrial 
sectors is constrained by limited access to resources and business know-how. These two issues need to be 
addressed. 
*Access to affordable financing for SMEs. The provision of innovative and appropriate instruments 
for SME financing is currently being implemented in a number of pilot countries. 
*Lack of capacity at the producer or f i rm level. Firms need support to develop the technical, 
managerial, marketing and other business skills needed to be competitive in Cameroon, but also on 
the global market. There is a need for provision of business development services and training as well 
as increasing the effectiveness of agricultural extension services. In the agricultural sector, pilot 
operations for contracting out such services to non-governmental entities need to be tested urgently to 
help diversify service delivery. 
43. 
Agriculture shows all the shortcomings: unsatisfactory regulatory framework, insufficient access 
to farm inputs (particularly improved seeds and planting materials), insufficient infrastructure (rural road 
network, high-cost port operations for agricultural exports, and lack of access to market price 
information). Small wonder that Cameroonian coffee producers receive only 70 percent of the FOB price 
at best (compared with more than 90 percent in Vietnam). Removing such impediments in the private 
sector environment and increasing capacity are essential for reducing poverty. 

VI. THE WORLD BANK GROUP ASSISTANCE STRATEGY 

(i) The World Bank Group results-based assistance strategy 

44. 
The World Bank Group strategy for FY04-06 is aligned with the Government’s medium- to long- 
term objective of poverty reduction through two main pillars: (i) strengthening the institutional 
framework for improved pro-poor economic management and service delivery and (ii) supporting private 
sector development to diversify the economy and accelerate growth. The strategy cuts across and 
contributes to the PRSP, focusing on key areas where the Bank Group has a comparative advantage (e.g. 
proven expertise, global knowledge, long track record in support of reforms, strong field presence, 
diversified instruments to support private investment). The CAS seeks continuity in the ongoing reform 
program, while moving gradually towards a more programmatic approach, for which it prepares the 
ground. It uses new instruments to support critical second-generation reforms in order to maximize the 
impact of development programs for communities and to promote private sector development. Although 
modest in amount, Bank Group support aims to catalyze other donors and build partnerships around the 
two main pillars of this CAS. 
45. 
Table 3 shows the measures to track progress toward targeted outcomes and to help align the 
ongoing and planned program with results. Additional detail is in Annex 1, which describes the results 
framework. 

-1 1- 

Table 3: CAS results-based framework 

Longer Term/Higher Order 
Country Outcomes 

Expected CAS Outcomes 
in Three Years 

CAS Link to 
PRSP Priorities 
(numbers refer to 

Improving 
governance 

, 

I 

, 

*

I

I 

I 

I 

Forestry 
(paragraph 3.3.1.3.) 

Average real GDP growth rate of 
5 .2 percent from 2003-06 (average 
4.8 percent 1994-2002) 

Sustainable management of forests 
and effective protection of national 
parks and biodiversity reserves 

Improve absolute and relative 
standing o f Cameroon’s corruption 
indicator (e.g. composite index 
compiled by WBI) 

Improved transparency and accountability in the 
mobilization and use of public resources 
. Decisions at the cabinet level are well-informed, reflecting - 
tradeoffs and priorities in resource allocation (evaluation 
through budget tracking and PEWIGR) 
Improved management and resource flows in key line 
ministries 
. Forestry tax collection rates maintained above 90 percent 
Forestry: 
. At least 60 percent concessions awarded begin 
implementation of forest management plans 
from 60 percent in 2003 to 100 
Increase primary school completion 
percent in 2015 
Education 
.Increase access indicator from 94 percent in 2003 with a 
. Increase primary school completion rate from 60 percent in 
L Longer Term/Higher Order 
target of 100 percent in 2007 
2003 to 70 percent in 2007 
Reduce student-teacher ratio in primary education from 56 in ~ 
school year 2003 to 50 in 2007 
Expected CAS Outcomes 
Country Outcomes 
in Three Years 
. Percent of rural communities in 3 regions using basic socio- 
Reduce the incidence of poverty 
Improved delivery of basic services 
(In rural areas from 49 .9 percent in 
2001; in urban areas from 45 
. Percent increase in productive yields for main agricultural 
percent in 200 1) 
economic services such as clean water, health clinics, etc. 
products as a direct result of using new technologies offered by Strengthening 
. Percent of urban residents in selected areas with access to 
extension services 
human resources 
. Percent of city neighborhoods with access to efficiently 
and social sector 
water and sanitation 
(paragraph 3.7) 
functioning roads and drainage 

~ 

C A S L i n k t o 
PRSP Priorities 
(numbers refer to 
PRSP pa rag raph s ) 
1 Urban poverty 
reduction 
(paragraph 3.7.3) 

Education 
(paragraph 3.7.1) 

 
-12- 

I 

I 

I 

Longer Termm igher Order 
Country Outcomes 

Expected CAS Outcomes 
in Three Years 

1 

CA S L i n k t o 
(numbers refer to I 
PRSP Priorities 
Health 

1 Reduce national HIV prevalence Targeted communities will improve their response to the 
1 (1 5 -49 yrs old) from 1 1.8 percent 
among sexually active population 
threat of HIV/AIDS through preventive, curative, or 
in 2002 to 9 percent in 201 5 
to the epidemic is strengthened. 
Less than 400,000 additional HIV 
. Antiretroviral (ARV) treatments are properly administered to 
Results achieved in 2,000 communities by December 3 1, 
2005 
positive cases and less than 40,000 
additional AIDS orphans (currently 
160,000 AIDS orphans) by 2006 
15,000 Cameroonians by December 3 1 , 2 0 0 5 
I 
PILLAR 2: SUPPORTING PRIVATE SECTOR DEVELOPMENT TO DIVERSIFY THE ECONOMY AND 
ACCELERATE GROWTH 

1 

~ 

diversifying the 
economy 
(paragraph 3.3) 

A. Reduce the percentage of private firms rating the selected 
. Percent of severe ratings on Customs and Trade Regulations 
administrative and custom constraints as severe 
and their implementation 
Percent of severe ratings on Business Licensing and 
Operating Permits, and other measures such as reduction in: the 

Boost long-term average growth to 
6 .8 percent, with annual growth 
rising from 4 percent to 6 percent ir 
the medium term 
Increase the role of manufacturing 
from 6.4 percent of GDP in 2001 to 
10 percent 
Progressively increase in the high 
business from 56 days; and costs of starting a business from 
value-added service sector (tourism 
transport, telecom) with projected 
196.5 percent of GNI per capita (figures from “Doing 
annual growth rate of 7.5 percent 
Business”). 
Increase overall private investment 
B . Reduce constraints in energy, transport, and telecom: 
from 15.2 percent in 2003 to 16.2 
Reduce loss of production time due to power outages 
Accelerating 
percent in 2006 
regional 
Reduce delays in payment clearing and process significantly: 
integration within 
Increase revenue at the village level 
CEMAC 
from trade 
-Less than three days for bank-to-bank transactions by 2006 
(paragraph 3.6) 
-Less than seven days client-to-client transaction by 2005 
m: In most cases, these indicators are quantified with expected target ranges. Where there are gaps in information, the 
Bank will work with the Government in identifying specific measurements of outcomes during the first year of CAS . 

environment 
(paragraph 3.5) 

Infrastructure, 
natural resource 

Pillar 1: Strengthening the institutional framework for improved pro-poor economic management 
and service delivery 
46. 
The World Bank Group will contribute to Cameroon’s progress in achieving two main 
development goals: ( i ) accelerated growth based on greater diversification (agriculture, industry, and 
services); and (ii) reaching the poor in rural and urban areas through improved basic services. A common 
thread will be a focus on governance issues. 
47. 
These ambitious development goals expected to be reached only in the medium term. During this 
CAS period, the World Bank Group will focus on improved effectiveness and efficiency in public 
resource management a t the central and local levels, a cross-cutting theme of the PRSP. By the end of the 
CAS period, it is expected that there will be measurable improvements in the transparency and 
accountability o f the mobilization and use of public resources and the way resources are managed in 
education, health, and forestry. 

-13 - 

Improving the transparency and accountability of mobilizing and using public resources 
48 . 
There are several constraints to achieving this improved use of resources that will be addressed 
by the CAS period. The World Bank Group will support the removal of these constraints through lending 
support and Analytical and Advisory Activities in key areas, in partnership with the Government, civil 
society, and donors. The constraints and related Bank support are described below. 
49. 
Improving coordination between ministries. The PRSP process has been instrumental in 
enhancing coordination across ministries. Such coordination will continue to be a key factor in aligning 
the use of public resources to the objectives of the PRSP, and our policy dialogue will aim at 
mainstreaming this management change. The instruments used under this CAS will promote such 
coordination, already the case with ongoing projects, such as the MAP and the Petroleum Environment 
Capacity Enhancement project. In addition, a community-driven development project will enhance 
multisectoral approaches at a local level. The World Bank will continue to assist sectoral ministries in 
establishing detailed MTEFs and including them in the overall macroeconomic framework. The Bank will 
also provide assistance to the Government to implement an investment module that will be disaggregated 
by region to ensure that investment in priority sectors is targeted to the poorest areas. The gradual move 
towards a programmatic approach should also enhance the coordination across sectors, initiated under 
SACIII. 
50. 
Aligning the budget process to the PRSP objectives will be a priority. The Bank will provide 
support to the Government to gradually establish a full-fledged medium-term expenditure framework 
(MTEF). During the PRSP process, support has focused on two priority ministries (Health and 
Education). During th e CAS period, assistance will be extended first to the rural sector, then to other 
sectoral ministries (telecom, gender, justice, social affairs) once they finalize their strategies. In addition, 
in line with the findings and recommendations of the CFAA dated June 2002, the Bank will monitor the 
implementation of a priority action plan to improve the efficiency and effectiveness of public expenditure. 
This priority action will be coordinated with the broader long-term reform of Cameroon’s public finances, 
supported by the IMF, the European Union, and French Cooperation. 
5 1. 
Improving transparency in procurement. Procurement reform, including putting in place a 
new procurement code, is part of the overall governance agenda to reach the HIPC completion point. 
Implementation of the reform will be strengthened early in the CAS period, targeting more transparent 
processes for improved competition and more efficient use of public resources. Audits that, by law, need 
to be conducted will help measure progress. Bank support will focus on monitoring the implementation of 
this reform and providing ad hoc support to improve the regulatory framework for procurement, to 
strengthen public procurement institutions, and to build borrower capacity in procurement. 
52. 
Strengthening the involvement and capacity of civil society. The overall objective is to help 
civil society play an active and independent role in the identification, planning, execution, follow-up, and 
evaluation of projects, thus contributing to an improved management of resources. This process has 
already started under the HIPC initiative. But given the weakness and diversity of civil society in 
Cameroon, its involvement will require intensive capacity building to help the civil society organize itself 
and strengthen its ability to produce and process relevant information, while respecting its independence 
as a development stakeholder. The World Bank office in Cameroon, in collaboration with UNDP, has 
launched a capacity-building program for the 50 largest NGOs in the country. This is the first step in 
making NGO s more effective in the implementation of PRSP objectives and more credible with the 
Government and donor community. World Bank support during the CAS period, especially in th e course 
of project preparation and implementation, will seek to extend active partnerships with the civil society 
(including NGOs, faith-based institutions, the media, and trade unions). The decentralization program to 
be encouraged in the proposed community-driven development operation will also call for a larger role 
for civil society, providing a platform for further capacity-building. 

-14- 

53. 
Add r e s s ing d a t a capac i ty a n d d issem ina t ion issues. A critical element in aligning the use of 
public resources to PRSP objectives is the monitoring mechanism. Despite recent improvements in the 
production and use of data, coverage and quality issues remain, restricting the scope for detailed impact 
assessments of recent structural reforms. It is also important to improve the coordination of statistical 
activities among Government institutions and to expedite the launching of the National Institute of 
Statistics. 
54. 
Developing statistical capacity to improve governance and accountability needs t o aim at: (i) 
eradicating inconsistencies and discrepancies in macroeconomic data; (ii) meeting the fu l l needs of 
authorities in charge of macroeconomic management; (iii) building the capacity o f the administration and 
the private sector in data collection and analysis, especially in agriculture, social sectors, infrastructure, 
and environmental issues; and (iv) improving the quality of analysis. The Bank and other donors will 
actively support this agenda, with Bank support concentrating specifically on data collection and 
processing for monitoring the PRSP. 
Improving the use of public resources in education, health, and forestry 
55. 
Overall reforms in public administration will be complemented by specific support to the 
education, health, and forestry ministries. Support to other key ministries-agriculture, public works, and 
transport, already provided for in ongoing operations-will 
continue. 
56. 
Pub l i c adm in i s t r a t ion r e fo rm . New statutes have been adopted introducing greater flexibility 
for managing the civil serivce, including the right to dismiss for economic reasons. Further reforms 
should focus on: (i) improving the quality of services to beneficiaries; (ii) facilitating decentralization and 
staff management; (iii) fostering public-private partnerships; (iv) reforming and harmonizing salary scales 
as a starting point for eliminating corruption in the public service, and (v) developing systematic 
evaluation of the public service and civil servants. 
57. 
The Bank will support this agenda through a public sector reform operation. It will help 
modernize the administration through capacity-building activities such as training in situ and distance 
learning. Through the distance learning program envisaged in the Education operation, the Bank will 
facilitate learning on poverty reduction strategies and best practices in trade, financial sector 
development, regulatory reform, the legal environment, and the business climate. In addition, Bank 
interventions will focus on improving management and resource flows in key line ministries (health, 
education and agriculture), as well as in sectors where reforms need to be consolidated (forestry and 
transport). 
58. 
Edu c a t ion . The PRSP identifies education as a key determinant of poverty in Cameroon, which 
is part of the Education for All initiative. Implementation of the Education Sector Strategy (ESS) started 
in 2001 and will be strengthened during this CAS period, with a country status report completed in the 
coming months. On this basis, the World Bank-in 
addition to helping consolidate the current ESS into a 
long-term strategy, which will include a comprehensive policy framework and detailed action plans to 
achieve the Millennium Development Goals-will 
support an Education Capacity BuiIding Project. The 
objectives will be to reinforce the management capacity of the MINEDUC and MINESUP, improve 
governance, and accelerate the implementation of reforms through a decentralized and more efficient 
administration. An institutionaVgovernance review and PER covering the education sector, among others, 
will serve as an instrument to monitor improvements in the flow of resources. 
59. 
H e a l t h . The track record of Bank involvement in Cameroon’s health sector calls for caution, 
notably in light of the unsatisfactory implementation experience of the Health, Fertility and Nutrition 
Project, which closed on June 30, 2001. A critical test will be the satisfactory implementation of the MAP 
project, with the Ministry of Public Health in a leadership role. As in the education sector, th e World 
Bank Group will provide support to prepare a realistic action plan to reach the MDGs, and t o improve the 
use of public resources, including those fiom the HIPC debt relief. A public expenditure and institutional 

-15- 

rev iew w i l l s e rv e a s a monitoring tool. Finally, a n ope ra t ion t o p rov ide institutional suppo r t w i l l be 
p repa red b y t h e end of the CAS period, so no direct ou tcome s will be expec ted du r ing th i s CAS. IDA 
a s s i s tance w i l l p rov ide sector-wide support t o the health sector a s a w ay o f redefining the role of th e s ta te 
to p rov ide pub l i c good s and services more efficiently and t o en su re a mo r e equ i tab le distribution o f 
benefits. S t rong empha s i s w i l l b e placed on : (i) promoting equity in health outcomes, w i th a spec ia l fo cu s 
on d i sea se s tha t mo s t a f fec t the poor; (ii) enhancing efficiency 
in service de l ive ry (through 
decentralization, pe r fo rmance monitoring, and beneficiary assessment o f access, use, a n d satisfaction); 
(iii) en su r ing su s ta inab le f inanc ing arrangements that protect th e poor, increasing pub l ic funding, and 
imp rov ing pub l i c re sou rce allocation; and (iv) managing and s t reng then ing links w i th t h e private sector 

and NGOs. 

Box 2. Past reforms in forestry 
While a lot remains to be done, some evidence of the Government’s political will and capacity to implement 
difficult sector reforms and governance can be found in forestry, where the legacy of links between vested 
interests and political elites was strong and known for its resilience to all reforms efforts. In a few years, using 
the SAC111 forest sector agenda as a framework, a strong interdisciplinary team of reformers within the 
government began transforming a sector that not long ago was opaque and dysfunctional. Though still recent and 
fragile, the reforms introduced during the past few years in Cameroon have helped test approaches and 
Government effectiveness in areas that are key to the success o f the proposed CAS, particularly good 
governance, economic reform, and poverty alleviation. 
Examples of reforms 
Competitive award of concessions with participation of an independent observer. A new system o f competitive 
bidding that includes the involvement of an independent observer has been in place since June 1999. In addition 
to increased transparency, the new system has increased area-based forest royalties by 40 times the pre-reform 
level. Half of these revenues accrue to local governing bodies in rural areas. 
National strategy for the allocation of logging rights. Adopted in 1999, this strategy guided the expansion of 
areas under legal, competitively awarded forest concessions and the withdrawal of logging rights of various 
types that had been obtained under unclear or questionable conditions. Part of the strategy involved the 
enactment of more stringent controls in the field. 
Law enforcement against well-established vested interests. More than US$15 million in penalties is being 
levied against well-documented cases of illegal logging. Noteworthy is the enforcement a penalty exceeding 
US$10 million on a very large company known to operate with impunity until only two or three years ago, 
Implementation of the Forestry Tax Revenue Enhancement Program. A Forestry Tax Revenue Enhancement 
Program has been under way since June 1999, under the joint responsibility of the ministries in charge of Forests 
and Finance. Under the program, the Ministry o f Finance recorded a significant growth of forest fiscal revenues, 
over a period in which recorded logging actually went down. 
Establishment of a guarantee system to ensure compliance with fiscal and environmental obligations. The 
system was adopted as part of the Finance Law of June 30,2000, and a Decree dated November 27 ,2001 , under 
which private companies must deposit a bond that can be cashed by the government if the company fails to 
fulfill its environmental and fiscal obligations. FCFA 15 billion in guarantees had been secured by 2001. 
Supervision of fo re s t management and reinforcement of the Ministry’s capacity in this area. Supervision of 
management plans is now ensured by the Government through two partnerships: 
.World Resources Institute-Global Forest Watch will ensure annual monitoring of all logging activities in 
Cameroon and will detect illegal forest harvesting through modern remote-sensing techniques. 
.Global Witness will participate as an independent observer in field control missions conducted throughout the 
year by the Forest Department’s Special Control Unit to check compliance with management plans and the 
quality of record-keeping. It will also assist compliance with penalties to be enforced by ministries in charge 
of forests, finance, and justice, testifying that fines are actually paid, and criminal penalties or sentences 
enforced. 

-16- 

60. 
Forestry. Implementation of the SAC111 reforms has improved the policy environment and 
incentive framework for forest development (Box 2). Cameroon has created a functional body of policy, 
legislation, regulations, and partnerships on which forest management and conservation can be safely 
grounded. Looking forward, however, Cameroon may not be able to ensure continued implementation of 
these new policies without further support from the World Bank Group and other partners. Strengthening 
government and non-government institutions for implementation and oversight of the new policies and 
regulations will be essential. Difficult decisions and the implementation of new programs will have to be 
sustained and assisted by long-term capacity building. 
6 1. 
Environment. Efforts to develop a national capacity for environmental management in 
Cameroon are under way, particularly in monitoring the Environment Management Plan of the Petroleum 
Development and Pipeline Project. Capacity building has been slow to start, partly due to the nature of the 
cross-sectoral task, which involves the Ministry of Environment and Forest, the Ministry of Public 
Works, the Ministry of Mines and Water, and the Ministry of Public Health, among others, under the 
coordination of the Pipeline Steering and Monitoring Committee, hosted by SNH (National Petroleum 
Company). Th e Petroleum Environment Capacity Enhancement Project that supports this effort will 
continue to require active supervision. As the Pipeline Project moves into the operations phase, the focus 
will be on capitalizing on this experience so that future public investments benefit from the same 
environmental standards and from the skills acquired by staff. The second phase of the multidonor 
Regional Environment Information Management Program, supported under the World Bank Regional 
integration assistance strategy for CEMAC, will also be instrumental in sharing and applying th is 
knowledge and experience regionally. 
Improved service delivery in key sectors 
62. Measures to be supported through the planned lending and AAA programs are expected to 
improve the delivery of critical services. Work on community-driven development, decentralization, 
gender mainstreaming, and rural development will be the focus of Bank Group interventions. Better 
management in key line ministries will contribute to improving access to critical basic services. In 
particular, expenditure tracking and beneficiary assessments will be conducted in the health and education 
sectors. This approach needs to be complemented by more decentralization in the management o f 
resources to finance these services and more involvement of beneficiaries in the decisions related to the 
delivery of basic services. 
63. 
Rural communities in a t least three provinces will benefit from improved service delivery. 
Many local development initiatives6 have contributed to (i) involving local communities in th e 
development process; (ii) preparing local development plans;7 (iii) financing demand-driven community 
infrastructure (schools, health centers, wells); (iv) strengthening capacity of local service providers in 
community development and participatory approaches; and (v) putting in place a community roads 
program. Based on these experiences, three main challenges for community-driven development have 
been identified, First, the initiatives lack coordination among donors and regions-they 
now need to be 
harmonized and integrated to take into account the multisectoral nature of rural development. Second, 
these initiatives need to be scaled up. Most of them remain at a pilot stage, not reaching most of the 
country, and many local development plans have yet to be financed. Third, the technical and financial 
weakness of the Communes limits their involvement in local development. 
64. With the donor community, including AFD, AfDB , IFAD, German Cooperation, and Netherlands 
Cooperation, the World Bank Group will support the Community Development Program tha t is expected 
to be one of the key instruments to give concrete content to the second pillar of the PRSP. Active 

6 
7 

Projects financed by IDA (PNVRA), French Cooperation, the European Economic Commission, IFAD, and AfDB. 
Under the PNVRA, 300 villages have appraised their needs and prepared Plans detailing their priorities. 

-17- 

involvement in this program would foster decentralization, with NGOs, associations, and local 
governments playing an important role. 
65. While decentralization has been slow in Cameroon, experience from other countries shows that it 
is key to ensuring that decisions are taken close to the primary beneficiaries and thus contribute to a better 
allocation and use of public resources. The 1996 constitution called for the Government to transfer some 
responsibilities to regions in health, education, water, secondary and tertiary roads, markets, and 
community development. Until now, the relevant laws have not yet been finalized, and specific texts 
required to complete the legal framework have been in preparation for more than five years. The awaited 
texts are expected to lay down: (i) general rules applicable to municipalities; (ii) specific provisions 
applicable to regions; (iii) specific provisions applicable to local councils; and (iv) conditions for electing 
regional council members. The CAS will thus focus on providing inputs for the finalization of a legal 
framework that would facilitate community development as a means to initiate active decentralization 
from the bottom up. 
66. 
Farmers will begin to improve their agricultural productivity through better extension 
services and new technologies. The Government’s rural development strategy has the following 
objectives: (i) modernizing production systems; (ii) improving the incentive framework; (iii) restructuring 
the institutional setup; and (iv) sustainably managing natural resources. Turning th is strategy into a 
concrete action plan with a sound monitoring and evaluation system will require resources and a lot of 
capacity-building. The key institution for this task is a technical secretariat tha t includes several 
ministries, chaired by the Minister of Agriculture. World Bank support to the technical secretariat will 
involve, in addition to close collaboration and dialogue in the formulation and implementation of the rural 
development component o f the PRSP, workshops and training on policy formulation and monitoring and 
evaluation. 
67. 
The Government‘s rural development strategy emphasizes a role for producer organizations: their 
capacity needs to be enhanced, and their representation at provincial and national levels needs to be 
supported to build their institutional base, improving their management and the transparency of their 
activities. Grant resources could also be mobilized. Innovative delivery of extension services, contract 
farming, and productivity-related activities will be promoted. The ongoing Agricultural Extension and 
Adaptive Research Project will be used to test pilot activities, over a two-year period, to establish the 
basis for follow-on support. In addition, the Rural Development Unit is launching a tree-crop 
development initiative to formulate operational mechanisms to promote perennial agriculture. Cameroon 
i s well-suited as a pilot country to test this initiative. 
68. 
Groundwork for improving service delivery by urban municipalities will be tested, and 
selected urban communities will gain improved access to water. The challenge is t o reconcile the two 
objectives of maximizing the contribution of cities to sustain the development of th e country while 
vigorously attacking the roots of poverty in and around the urban areas. A very large consensus is 
emerging among the various stakeholders and donors on the concept of “City Development Contracts” 
(contrats de v i l le ) . The objective would be to make municipalities responsible for the choice and 
financing of actions within the framework of a project by contracting interventions. T h e focus is on two 
priorities: ( i) building up a database (now lacking) on demographic, physical, fiscal, financial, and 
socioeconomic conditions, including analyses of the contribution o f cities to the economy and the 
immediate hinterland,8 and (ii) improving the scope of secondary infrastructure (such as access roads t o 
unserviced neighborhoods) because such investments-now 
largely ignored by the donor community- 
have a direct impact on the poor while contributing directly to the local economy and efficiency o f the 

8 

Geographic Information Systems (GIS), as well as UN/World Bank sponsored City Development Studies (CDS) and 
“ECOLOC” (Economies locules) studies developed by OECD/Shale Club and the Municipal Development Program (MDP) 
would be useful tools. 

-1 8 - 

city. Bank support will take the form of a pilot project for preparing and implementing such city 
development contracts, with the objective of anchoring improved governance at the local level, promoting 
decentralization, and targeting poverty and local economic development. 
69 . 
Gender issues. As in most developing countries, gender issues in Cameroon have not received 
the attention and support they deserve. Recent attempts by the Government, through its Ministry in charge 
of Women’s Affairs, to put together a National Strategy for the Promotion of Women still needs further 
work and translation into concrete action. In fact, the proposed strategy needs strengthening and support 
for gender issues during the PRSP implementation process. The strategy also needs to ensure that in 
building the capacity of civil society, special attention is paid to the needs of women groups-to 
ensure 
their integration into decision-making at all levels, from grassroots-based activities to national 
policymaking. 
70. 
In addition t o proposals destined to improve the social and judicial status of women in th e legal 
and governance agenda, proposals for the economic empowerment of women in agriculture and the 
private sector need to be supported. The Bank Group will provide support in this area through analytical 
work that looks at gender rights, economic empowerment of women, current laws and regulations, and 
capacity building initiatives for gender mainstreaming that will encourage all ministries, not ju s t the one 
in charge o f Women’s Affairs, to tackle gender issues as part of their core business. Such analytical work 
will contribute to th e Bank Group’s analysis of risks and vulnerability to poverty. For investment support, 
particularly in agriculture and in the fight against HIV/AIDS, a strong gender focus is essential if 
operations such as the MAP and the National Program for Participatory Development are to succeed on 
the ground. 
Targeted communities will improve their response to the threat of HIV/AIDS through preventive, 
curative, or mitigating measures, while the national capacity to respond to the epidemic is 
strengthened. 
71. 
In the fight against HIV/AIDS, the World Bank Group will act on four major fronts. First, the 
ongoing Multisectoral HIV/AIDS Project being deployed in all 10 provinces supports action plans 
prepared by public and private organizations. It focuses on a few major issues: behavioral change, 
voluntary testing and counseling, support to community and civil society responses, antiretroviral (ARV) 
therapy pilots, and monitoring and evaluation of the pandemic and the efforts to fight it. Further World 
Bank involvement will focus on fostering implementation of these activities, ensuring that the National 
Committee, with a majority of civil society representatives, is effective and that funds are transferred to 
around 4,000 targeted communities. Second, World Bank support to the Global Fund aims at facilitating 
access to ARV and opportunistic infections treatment. The Multisectoral HIV/AIDS Project will begin 
testing ways to select who really needs financial support to gain access to these treatments. Third, other 
projects would be called on to contribute to the fight against HIV/AIDS through impact assessments in 
their sectors and the implementation of sector-specific strategies. Fourth, the Country Office in Yaounde 
will pursue its successful partnership with associations of people living with the HIV virus, faith-based 
institutions, orphanages, and NGOs in order to keep HIV/AIDS at the center of the national debate. The 
Country Office outreach program on HIV/AIDS carried out in 2002 and 2003 in major schools in 
Yaounde will now be expanded to other main cities (Douala, Bafoussam, Bertoua, Foumban, 
Ngaounderk, and Garoua). The Government will take steps to speed up implementation of the MA P and 
get all sector ministries to finalize their action glans. Synergies will be sought with a planned regional 
HIV/AIDS operation for the Lake Chad Countries. 
Pillar 2: Support private sector development to diversify the economy and accelerate growth 
72. World Bank Group interventions will contribute to Cameroon’s efforts to raise annual growth 
from 4.5 percent to 6 percent in the medium term. Investment will increase in industry and agribusiness, 

-19- 

75. 

as outlined in the second pillar of the PRSP. And villages will be better integrated into the economy, as 
proposed under the second and fourth pillars of the PRSP. 
73. 
A s a tangible step towards achieving these medium-term development goals, the Bank Group will 
focus on addressing constraints encountered in the business environment: (i) regulatory and 
administrative barriers; (ii) high costs, inadequate access, poor reliability of infrastructure, and 
insufficient electricity production capacity; (iii) limited access to financing; and (iv) business 
development services, especially for SMEs. The CAS also recognizes the regional dimension of 
Cameroon’s development, especially as it affects private-sector-led growth. In addition, IFC will seek to 
complement the Bank’s support on governance and sector reform with private investments in forestry. 
Private sector will face reduced burdens (cost, time) associated with regulatory, administrative and 
infrastructure constraints 
74. 
Regulatory and administrative constraints. The CAS will seek to address Cameroon’s 
investment climate and competitiveness through a comprehensive investment climate assessment, as the 
basis for a reform agenda and action plan. To set priorities and galvanize consensus on implementation, 
IFC and the Bank will support a redesigned forum for public-private dialogue on investment climate 
issues to succeed the Competitiveness Committee. IFC will support the functioning of this body, and the 
Bank will make resources available through the on-going Public-Private Sector Partnership for Growth 
and Poverty Reduction Project. This approach will ensure active involvement by the private sector and 
thus help address residual complaints that the private sector is not consulted before measures affecting the 
profitability of businesses are taken by the administration. Bank Group support is expected to focus on 
regulatory and administrative barriers. FIAS and MIGA are expected to provide assistance to a newly- 
established Investment Promotion Agency and to help implement a new Investment Charter. 
The retrenchment of the Government from direct commercial activities, and the reduction of its 
presence in financial markets, have been facilitated by past adjustment programs (SAC11 and SACIII) and 
IFC advisory services and investments (SONEL privatization and BICEC investment). This process will 
require continuing support and monitoring by the Bank Group in the medium term and technical support 
as needed. This will be especially critical for the remaining parastatals in agribusiness. The next stage will 
be to improve competitiveness. 
76 . 
Legal and judicial system reform. Bank support for legal and judicial reform during th is CAS 
period will be knowledge-based. An ongoing audit of the judicial system will provide the basis for a 
broader plan concerning legal and judicial reform. Preliminary conclusions indicate that poor capacity, 
corruption, and undue delays have prevented the judicial system from effective contract enforcement and 
dispute settlement, clouding the investment climate. Reforms will need to focus on three main 
components. First is strengthening procedure for developing new legislation, by establishing a central 
legislative policy development group, as a jo in t group of the Presidency, the General Secretariat of the 
Prime Ministry, and the Ministry of Justice. Second is strengthening judicial and law-making institutions 
involved in drafting, developing, implementing, and enforcing laws and regulations. The objective is to 
reinforce the judiciary, improve the organization of the courts, and enhance the access to legal 
information and legal aid. Third is advancing legal education by increasing the funding for law faculties 
and the national school dedicated to training civil servants and by developing regular training programs 
for lawyers, judges, and other legal practitioners. When this diagnostic is complete, steps will be taken to 
enhance the content of learning and training programs, modernize academic premises, improve access to 
legal publications, introduce information technology, and develop exchange programs w i th other 
countries, The proposed FY06 Public Sector Reform Project will be one of the vehicles for supporting 
these activities. 
77. 
Infrastructure constraints and support to the energy sector. SONEL, the integrated electric 
utility, was successfully privatized in 200 1 with advisory assistance from the Bank Group. Immediately 

-20- 

following privatization, however, the company experienced difficulties which have undermined support 
for further infrastructure privatization and threatened the success of this key private venture. For the past 
two years, Cameroon has faced a severe electricity crisis, with recurrent power cuts during the dry 
seasons. The main reasons are insufficient generation capacity to respond to increasing needs as the 
country industrializes and vulnerability to climatic conditions as 95 percent o f capacity is hydro-electric, 
concentrated on one river basin. 
7 8 . 
One o f the options contemplated by the Government, the Lom Pangar dam, has raised some 
concerns for the World Bank Group because of potential negative social and environmental impacts 
related to long-term and cumulative changes in the Sanaga river system flow regime. The flooding of a 
large dam catchment area would affect a portion of the Deng Deng forest, a biodiversity hotspot explicitly 
protected under current arrangements in the context of the Chad-Cameroon Pipeline project. A costly 
adjustment was made to the pipeline route to avoid going through the central Deng Deng forest area and 
avoid other dense forest areas. In response to Government concerns about reliable and affordable 
electricity, a more comprehensive examination to explore various scenarios to address short, medium, and 
long term needs, explicitly incorporating social and environmental concerns, is being undertaken. The 
Bank Group will continue to play a catalytic role in this process, to ensure that an investment plan to 
address the short-, medium-, and long-term need is agreed upon, complying with World Bank Group 
safeguard policies and government commitments under the current portfolio, and is properly financed. 
79. 
The new investment requirements in the sector for the next four to five years are substantial (up 
to US$400 million). They will need to be funded through a blend of concessional and private financing to 
ensure that electricity is affordable while access is extended. To this end, IFC and IDA are working with 
other donors to finance short-term capacity needs to be met through new thermal generation capacity, 
while helping define and build consensus on appropriate long-term options. A US$10 million Energy 
Sector Support operation has been included in the lending program, along with planned IFC financing, as 
a potential vehicle to play this catalytic role in a sector critical for economic and private sector 
development. Cameroon may also be able to identify alternative sources of power generation in a regional 
context. (CEMAC envisages a study on the potential sources of power generation and related 
interconnections within the region.) 
80. 
The Transport Sector Project, soon to be closed (December 2003), has achieved important results 
in the management of roads. A t the end of the project, the agenda for sector reform will be pursued, 
alongside sustainable financing for the sector through the Road Fund, to include building capacity for 
planning and setting priorities, strengthening transport sector SMEs, and completing the port sector 
reform agenda begun under SACIII. The CEMAC regional integration agenda will be advanced by 
formulating a transport facilitation policy, preparing corridor-based action plans, and implementing the 
rural transport strategy. 
81. 
The Bank has supported the planned privatization of CAMTEL; IFC will seek to finance the 
private concessionaire and other private operators in specific sub-sectors, such as data transmission. IFC 
is conducting a sector study of communications and information technology to identify key investment 
projects for development and financing. In other infrastructure sectors, where outright privatization or 
concession is not feasible or likely, the Bank Group will seek to structure opportunities for private 
participation, as in the transport sector. 
82. 
Financial services. Means of payments are essential for trade and commerce and for 
macroeconomic stability. In the PRSP, the Government has identified increased savings mobilization as a 
key element in a strategy to support economic growth. Since 1996, Cameroon’s financial sector has been 
undergoing a major restructuring. Most of the banks were fully rehabilitated. Some were liquidated. 
Others were split into a healthy bank and a liquidation structure. And a few were recapitalized. IFC has 

-21- 

invested in one of the fully privatized banks, BICEC. Today, almost all large commercial banks are 
privately owned, solvent, liquid, and profitable.' Several new banks have entered the m a r k e t - o n e U .S . , 
one West African, and two Cameroonian. The insurance sector was also restructured, with several 
companies liquidated and others recapitalized. The restructuring of the sector has improved governance, 
as delinquent borrowers are no longer allowed to obtain further bank credit and participate in bids for 
public procurement and privatization. They are also prevented from holding management positions in a 
microfinance institution. 
8 3 . 
A jo in t Bank-IMF FSAP, conducted in 2000, outlined the need to vigorously pursue the ongoing 
reforms of th e microfinance sector, to undertake reforms of the payments systems, to rehabilitate the 
postal savings and the housing banks, and to complete the reform of the social security system. With the 
exception of the housing bank, reform is under way in all these areas. For microfinance, new regional 
regulations were adopted in the first quarter of 2002, a flexible regime recognizing the specific nature of 
microfinance institutions. Support is now needed for COBAC to fulfill its mandate of supervising these 
institutions. To fulfill this role, its staff needs to be reinforced. Assistance is also needed to bring the 
financial cooperatives in conformity with prudential standards." The Government has also launched a 
reform of the postal savings bank. With the help of consultants funded under the on-going Public-Private 
Sector Partnership for Growth and Poverty Reduction Project, it will proceed with a financial and 
organizational restructuring of this institution. But the quality of services offered by th e postal savings 
bank depends on the post office itself, which needs restructuring. In 1998, the Government launched a 
major two-pronged reform of the pension system. The cleanup of rosters at the CNPS" have started. And 
the Head of State approved a far-reaching reform of the social security system, including the privatization 
of its management. But the reform is lagging, and renewed commitment is needed to implement it. 
84. 
Looking forward, the Bank Group will closely monitor the implementation of these reforms. N ew 
actions will b e taken, such as developing instruments for long-term financing and for SMEs and 
refocusing the recovery corporation (SRC) on providing services to banks and other enterprises. IFC will 
seek to develop CFAF bond markets through guarantees and credit enhancements for quality issuers, and 
technical assistance services to the new capital markets authority. IFC expects to implement key 
investments in leasing stemming from recently completed technical assistance. And it will pursue other 
SME financing vehicles, including microfinance banks, credit ratings agencies, and local currency 
guarantee mechanisms. IFC will support the continuing development of the banking sector with selected 
investments and institution-building technical assistance. The restructuring and privatization o f the 
housing bank, as discussed in the FSAP, will require the authorities to first elaborate a housing 
development strategy. 
8 5 . 
Support to SMEs. During the CAS period, the Bank Group will significantly expand business 
development services to SMEs-to 
complement 
the financing 
initiatives and help build 
th e 
competitiveness of the private sector. The IFC Africa Project Development Facility recently opened an 
office in Douala and will be expanding its activities to: 
.Build the credit analysis capacity of financial institutions through a loan officers' training 
program, developing and offering new training modules. Mentoring and coaching programs are 
under discussion with various financial institutions (BICEC, CENAINVEST). 
.Build the capacity of local consultants to service SME needs, through training and th e 
development and implementation of an accreditation program. 

9 

10 

Only one small bank presents some difficulty and is under close watch from the regional banking commission 
(COBAC). 
Cameroon was the first of the six CEMAC countries to complete the licensing of existing financial cooperatives: 324 
institutions received a license and 388 unsuitable institutions were removed from the registry at the Ministry of Agriculture. 
CNPS is the social security institution serving private sector workers. 

11 

-22- 

.Strengthen the capacity of business associations and schools to deliver services to SMEs. Several 
agreements are already under discussion, notably with GICAM, the leading business association 
in Cameroon. 
.Working with the power and water utilities to develop standards and procedures for their 
subcontractors. The linkage programs will include training and technical assistance to the SMEs 
to enable them to meet the standards. 
8 6 . 
Other initiatives will use intermediaries and demand-driven mechanisms, such as matching grant 
funds or voucher schemes, to make access to local training institutions affordable while promoting a 
market for private business development services. The approach could include support to local SMEs in 
construction (preparing bids for small construction or civil works contracts, cost calculation, project 
supervision). Cameroon is not currently included in the initial round of countries establishing an 
integrated program of SME support and financing implemented by IFC with IDA support. But such a 
program will be discussed with the Government, and it could be formalized in the current CAS period 
with funding from the private sector component of the planned PRSC. Such a program would expand the 
scale of initiatives discussed above and offer a more comprehensive approach. 
8 7 . 
IFC support to sustainable forestry projects. Cameroon has made important headway in 
implementing transparent, environmentally sustainable forestry management policies. And it has the 
biggest wood-cutting and processing capacity in Sub-Saharan Africa. Within the framework of the 
recently-revised policies that permit appropriate tropical forestry projects, IFC will pursue investment 
opportunities that will showcase these policies and introduce best practices in environmentally sustainable 
forestry and downstream wood products manufacturing. 
88 . 
In light of its limited involvement in forestry in the past, IFC will seek, as an initial step, to 
improve its knowledge of the industry and with a view to developing key investments. A review of the 
industry to identify opportunities, to be undertaken in FY04, should provide the basis for follow-up 
investment activities. 

(ii) Regional dimension of World Bank Group assistance 

8 9 . 
The World Bank’s Board discussed a Regional Integration Assistance Strategy (RIAS) for the 
CEMAC countries on February 6 , 2003 . This strategy is based on the premise that regional integration 
can contribute to poverty reduction by strengthening the links between the poor landlocked countries 
(Central African Republic, Chad) and their more prosperous coastal neighbors (Cameroon, Congo 
(Brazzaville), Equatorial Guinea, and G a b o n F a n d more generally by helping establish the basis for 
faster economic growth. The CAS recognizes the role that Cameroon already plays-in 
infrastructure 
development, transport facilitation, natural resource management, banking and financial management 
systems, and agricultural production. Improving the serviceability of multi-country transit corridors 
toward Chad and the Central African Republic serves the landlocked CEMAC countries and benefits 
internal trade. 
90. 
Several operations in the current p o r t f o l i d h a d - c a m e r o o n pipeline, Douala Infrastructure, 
CAMRAIL railways concession-are 
fully supportive of the strategy. In addition t o these operations, 
efforts will be pursued during the CAS period in support of reforms and activities destined to complement 
the regional program. These include: ( i ) implementing the customs union (a recent report highlighted 
deficiencies to be corrected in each CEMAC country); (ii) improving clearing procedures a t the port of 
Douala; and (iii) facilitating transport along the corridors through the progressive removal of 
administrative and “bogus” barriers. The emphasis of this CAS on governance will help Cameroon 
address generic issues in both public sector reform and private sector development so tha t Cameroon can 
establish substantive leadership in the CEMAC region. To be explored during the CAS period, mainly in 

-23- 

the analytical program, are the formal and informal flows between Cameroon and Nigeria, a basis for 
stronger ties between the two countries. 
91. 
Regional payment system. With the financial assistance of the first regional IDA credit in the 
central Africa region, the central bank, BEAC, has launched a major reform of the payments system. It 
was well-documented (FSAP) that the long manual clearing systems presented definite risks for the 
newly-restructured banks and hampered the growth of the banking system and the private sector. This 
project will introduce real-time settlement for large or urgent transactions, an electronic clearing system 
for mass payments, and a modern card system. Delays in payment clearing and settlement will be 
significantly reduced to a maximum of three days for bank-to-bank transactions and seven days for client- 
to-client transactions. As a by-product, a prepaid card system will be developed for electricity and water 
consumption, contributing to better access to these services for more consumers. 
92. 
The Bank plans to supervise this project actively as a key vehicle under the RIAS for the 
CEMAC Region. A regional microfinance project, complemented by potential IFC investments in 
commercial microfinance banks, is also envisaged under the RIAS to support the implementation of the 
recently-adopted regional regulations. Cameroon, which hosts more than half of the microfinance 
institutions, is expected to play a leading role. 
(iii) World Bank Group country program and vehicles for assistance 
93. 
In the base case, the IDA lending program in FY04 will include: a community development 
project, cofinanced by AFD, IFAD, KfW, and Netherlands Cooperation that will channel funds t o rural 
communities and accompany the decentralization process in Cameroon (Table 4). A Forestry and 
Environment SECAL will be launched to further strengthen the reform process in this strategic sector and 
build capacity in forestry institutions. The preparation of an Energy Sector Support project will also be 
initiated, to be delivered in FY05. 
94. 
In FY05 an Education Sector Reform Project will be launched, and a Learning and Innovation 
Loan (LIL) will start testing institutional approaches to address urban poverty. The lending program for 
FY04 and FY05, coupled with the completion of some of the building blocks for PRSCs (such as the 
P E M G R exercise) through the Bank’s Analytical and Advisory Activities, will set the stage for a PRSC 
in FY06, focusing on health, rural development, and private sector development. Also in FY06 a Public 
Sector Capacity Building Project will also be launched in support of the overall governance agenda. For 
all these operations and to the extent that all major donors are in favor of supporting Cameroon’s poverty 
reduction strategy, cofinancing will be sought systematically. 
95. 
Under the non-lending program, informal work will monitor the macroeconomic environment, 
including the HIPC process, PRSP implementation, trade prospects (especially with Nigeria), and the 
monitoring of action plans developed for MDGs in health and education (FY04-06). Formal work will 
focus on completing o r updating core diagnostic ESW. A Development Policy Review focused on 
sources of growth analysis will be prepared in FY04. To advance the governance and public resource 
management agenda, a PER and institutionaVgovernance review exercise will be undertaken in key 
sectors (health, education, infrastructure, agriculture, and possibly the judiciary) in FY05. A gender 
assessment and strategy support exercise (FY05) will help mainstream gender in the country’s 
development. A Poverty Assessment (FY06) will measure progress in PRSP implementation. Under this 
program core diagnostic ESW would be completed and/or updated. Key reforms in procurement and 
public finance will be supported through a new CPAR (FY06), and there will be follow-up action on the 
CFAA. IFC advisory projects and investments will be initiated in FY04, and realized throughout th e CAS 
period. Th e comprehensive SME program will also be put in place in FY06 with support of the PRSC . 

-24- 

FY04 

FY05 

FY06 

(*) these instrumen 

will pilot programmatic approach in Cameroon. 

I Operations 

Energy Sector 
Support Project 

(US$ m) 

Lending 

Operations 

PNDP 
(community 
development) 

(US$ m) 
$20 

PSFE 
(Forestry/Environ- 
ment) (SECAL) 

$ 1 5 

Education 
Sector Reform 
Project 

Pilot 
Secondary 
Infrastructure 
Urban project 
(LIL) 

Total 
US$35 m 
Total 
Non-lending (AAA: New and ongoing) 

Operations 

PRSC (Health, 
Rural, PSD) 

Public sector 
Reform project 
(TA) 

(US% m) 
$ 5 0 

$10 

$10 

$ 1 5 

$ 5 

US$30 m 

Total 

U S 6 0 m 

Development Policy Review 
(Sources of growth) 
Urban sector review 
Economic monitoring (HIPC, PRSP, 
MDGs) 
Health sector reform note 

PEWIGR 
Economic monitoring (HIPC, 
PRSP, MDGs) 
Private Sector/Investment climate 
assessment 
Gender assessment and strategy 
(IDF) 

Poverty assessment 
Economic monitoring (HIPC, 
PRSP, MDGs) 
CPAR 

IDA-IFC MSME comprehensive 
program 

Power sector investment plan 
Continued SME and financial 
sector focus 
Forestry/wood products 
investments 

Power Generation investments 
Expanded SME programs 
Financial sector investments 
Forestry/wood products review 
Business Forum/Competitiveness 
Committee 
96. 
IDA portfolio management and performance. The current p o r t f o l i e i n c l u d i n g operations in 
transport, HIV/AIDS, agriculture, public-private partnership, and environment-will 
contribute to the 
attainment of CAS objectives (Annex 1). Eight of nine operations in the current portfolio are rated 
satisfactory. During this CAS period, emphasis will be put on project supervision to improve quality of 
portfolio and the timely completion of activities, to ensure better use of committed IDA resources. Work 
initiated in this area in March 2002, and re-emphasized in a CPPR in December 2002, will be pursued in 
close collaboration with the Government through bimonthly portfolio review meetings with MINEPAT, 
project units, and the World Bank office in Cameroon. Particular attention will b e paid to project M&E 
systems to make sure they are fully operational and fit the overall framework of PRSP monitoring. In line 
with the overall goal of addressing governance issues, this effort should help build the capacity of the 
administration to monitor and evaluate and thus to improve accountability. 
97 . 
IFC portfolio management and performance. IFC's portfolio has increased significantly to 
about US$141.5 million'* as of June 30, 2003, largely due to the Chad-Cameroon pipeline project, with 

12 

The held balance of US$141.5 million does not include guarantees amounting to US$9 .8 million. The held balance for 
SC Mobiles excludes US$7.l million for guarantees. 

-25- 

US$86 million allocated to Cameroon. Portfolio performance is substantially above the IFC average in 
loan performance, given the dominance of this one project and two other large projects-Orange 
Cameroon (US$5 million) and Pecten (US$44 million)-all 
performing well. Measured by the ratio of 
reserves against losses to disbursed balances, Cameroon’s 3.4 percent compares favorably with 15.5 
percent for IFC overall and 15.3 percent for the Africa region. The dominance of these large projects 
masks the poor performance of IFC‘s smaller investments. The country’s total loss reserves of US$3.4 
million are concentrated in only six projects with an outstanding disbursed balance amounting to US$4.15 
million (4.1 percent of the total outstanding disbursed balance), reflecting a loss reserve ratio of more than 
80 percent. 

(iv) L e n d i n g scenar io s and triggers 

98. 
The base case lending scenario will be subject to satisfactory implementation of the PRSP, 
selected governance measures, and the IDA portfolio. Failure to meet the base-case criteria in Table 5 
would result in Board presentation of any new operations-including 
notably the planned PRSC in 
FY06-being deferred until corrective measures are taken. A high-case lending scenario, which would 
provide for some US$35 million over the base case, delivered in the form of a larger PRSC, would be 
triggered by specific achievements in “scaling up’’ the implementation of strategies in key poverty- 
reducing sectors, as well as of specific governance-related reforms. While IFC investments and technical 
assistance activity will not be explicitly tied to the IDA lending triggers, the level of IFC activity can be 
expected to be closely correlated, as it will depend on overall levels of private investments, themselves 
affected by government performance in the areas noted. 

Table 5: Triggers and main assumptions for base case lending scenario 

- 

Governance r 
Satisfactory overall implementation of the 
PRSP 
Measures to reduce uncertainty and banking 
sector costs associated with asset seizures (saisie- 
attribution) continue to be effective 
Steady progress in overhauling the 
institutional framework for uublic urocurement 
Stable IDA portfolio performance with no 
more than 2 5 uercent uroblem uroiects 
To move to the high case 
Successful scaling up of policy and service 
delivery initiatives in key sectors (e.g., education, 
health/HIV/AIDS, and rural development activities) 
Successful implementation and scaling up of 
I Governance 
the communitv-driven develoument urogram 
Further steps to improve the legal security of 
private sector assets (beyond effective continued 
implementation of recent measures to reduce the 
impact of saisie-attribution) 
Timely enactment of the new procurement 
code and accompanying regulations and prompt 
imulementation of all kev urovisions 
Improved absorptive capacity for public h n d s 
in key sectors (e.g., use of HIPC funds) 
Quality improvements in public service 
delivery as a result of improved resource management 

expenditure 
management 

. _ I

n s of 
Annual PRSP progress report and 
associated JSA 
Regular Bank progress reviews 

Regular Bank progress reviews 

Bank project supervision reports 
Bi-monthly portfolio review 
Me 
Regular Bank progress reviews; 
Bank supervision reports, and 
regular portfolio reviews by the 
Country Office 

Regular Bank progress reviews; 
IDA project audits and supervision 
reports 

PEWIGR 

Budget tracking survey, beneficiary 
assessments. PEWIGR 

 
-26- 

99. 
The completion point under HIPC initiative is scheduled for April 2004, albeit with some 
uncertainty as to whether it will be actually reached on time. By that time, Cameroon could be in a 
situation where the completion point is reached, and HIPC funds are made available to finance activities 
in priority sectors (as described in HIPC documents, and refined in PRSP documents). Given the volume 
of HIPC resources (US$1.26 billion, of which Bank share is less than 15 percent) and since IDA 
resources for FY04-06 amount to US$125 million, (in addition to US$179 million to be released under 
HIPC) the Bank would have only modest leverage in financial terms. But it would use these resources to 
complement other donors and HIPC resources to finance PRSP activities. 
100. Alternatively, Cameroon could be in a situation where the completion point is delayed by 6 
months, 12 months, or more. Under such circumstances, the dialogue with Government would likely be 
rather difficult, and IDA resources would fit in a less consensual strategic framework towards poverty 
reduction, In a sense, then, the HIPC initiative is an excellent test of the will of the Government t o work 
in partnership with the community of donors and the World Bank Group. 

(v) Partners and participation 

101. The difficult policy dialogue in the past makes it even more critical to improve coordination 
among donors, to ensure that a consistent message is conveyed on governance reforms and ways to 
reduce poverty-and 
that an assessment of Cameroon’s overall performance is cooperative and 
consensual. 
102. As shown in the results-based matrix in Annex 1, and in the matrix in Annex 5 on donor 
coordination, there are many synergies between other donors’ interventions and Bank Group assistance. 
More specifically, the governance agenda is broadly shared by the community of donors, with support 
from (among others) UNDP, the European Union, and French Cooperation. Public finance reform and 
capacity-building are key elements of donor support that will be complemented by the Bank’s focus on 
public sector reform. The strong collaboration with the IMF on monitoring the HIPC initiative and PRSP 
implementation will continue. Currently, there is active multi-donor coordination on the community 
development program. The same can be said of the education and health sectors, where the Bank Group is 
working closely with Japanese Cooperation, WHO, and French Cooperation. Forestry and environment is 
also an area where there is close collaboration between the Bank Group and key donors (DFID, French 
Cooperation, German Development Cooperation, and the European Union). Finally, Bank Group 
upstream support to remove selected constraints to private sector development will complement others 
donors’ direct support to investments (on the road program, for instance) and to private companies. 
103. 
The CAS, prepared in close collaboration with the donor community, will be complemented by a 
renewed effort on donor coordination through: (i) sharing information on sector strategies, with jo in t 
funding of programs and projects; (ii) providing feedback on implementation and generic portfolio issues 
for ongoing operations; and (iii) undertaking joint coordinated efforts in communicating with the 
Government and other stakeholders. 
104. Participation. On May 5-7, 2003, national consultations were held for the CAS in Yaoundk. 
These consultations were attended by: (i) no less than 19 cabinet members; (ii) civil society, including 
about 30 NGOs, faith-based institutions, and the media; and (iii) donors. At the end o f these 
consultations, there was broad agreement on CAS objectives, outcomes, and its conformity with the 
PRSP. The results-based format was particularly appreciated. 

(vi) Lessons from the previous CAS 

105. A self-evaluation report (CAS Completion Report) has been produced for 1996-2003, confirming 
some o f the lessons leamed in past CAS completion and progress reports and an OED evaluation and 
providing guidance for the development of the current CAS. The three objectives of the previous CAS 

-27- 

were to (i) consolidate the benefits of the devaluation, (ii) alleviate poverty, and (iii) create a climate 
favorable for private sector deve10pment.l~ The OED country assistance evaluation for Cameroon, dated 
January 2001, noted substantial progress toward the first and third objectives, but less so toward poverty 
alleviation. The CAS Completion Report confirmed the lack of progress on poverty reduction, with even 
less enthusiasm for progress on private sector development. 
106. Growth performance in Cameroon should be enhanced and sustained by support to private 
sector development. During the last five years, Cameroon’s GDP growth rate averaged 4.4 percent. 
While a positive achievement, this is still far from sufficient to significantly improve living conditions of 
the poor, both quantitatively and qualitatively. Indeed, the economic recovery after 1994 had raised per 
capita GDP from 58 percent of its pre-depression 1986 peak level in 1994 to only 63 percent in 1999. And 
the economic outlook with declining oil revenues calls for a rapid and deep diversification of the 
economy. 
107. 
Improved governance and sustained reform will affect private investments and the level of 
IFC activity. IFC investments and advisory services expanded significantly in the last CAS period, 
although the aggregate amounts are biased by the pipeline project. IFC was able to support privatization 
private infrastructure through the SONEL privatization and the 
through investments in banking-and 
Orange Cameroon cellular telephone operator. But overall investment levels have been low relative to the 
size of the economy, reflecting low private investment levels (except where major new sectors are 
opened, as in power and telecom.) IFC’s ability to increase its activity will depend on sustained progress 
in implementing reforms, addressing long-standing issues to improve the investment climate, and seeking 
innovative means of structuring private participation in infrastructure. All will be key t o achieving higher 
GDP growth rates and more broad-based growth. 
108. Growth needs to be anchored on the poor. As mentioned above, GDP growth will affect the 
poor only if income redistribution mechanisms are in place and poor households are part of the growth 
process. The agricultural sector has potential for higher productivity, while encompassing the poorest. 
109. The World Bank program needs to complement conditionality with investment operations. 
Current success in transport reform, though fragile, is in part due to the combined structural conditionality 
and investment lending, giving substance to the reforms. . 
110. A consistent and sustained country dialogue is important in getting results. Substantive and 
sustainable improvements in governance are possible even in sectors previously corrupt, such as forestry. 
World Bank Group advice on delicate reforms must focus on simple, but important, objectives to engage 
authorities for the long term, reaching consensus over time. Sustained communication on difficult issues 
is critical in building confidence and trust, especially when firm messages need to b e delivered. It is also 
essential to escalate complex, delicate issues to the highest level of Government, even when political and 
economic power are involved. The World Bank Group needs to engage the Government and civil society 
(including private business) in a collegial way, and gather commitment from many levels in the country, 
supplementing dialogue at the top with support, outreach, and communication. The interactive processes 
that accompanied the forest reform in Cameroon helped convey that complex sector reforms require 
national reformers, deep Bank Group knowledge of the issues, a clear understanding of associated 
political and economic dimensions, and a strategy to involve other constituencies. 

(vii) Lessons of IDA’S and IFC’s portfolios 

11 1 , 
IDA’S portfolio in Cameroon is in major transition. With 9 active projects, the current portfolio is 
rather small. The average implementation period is 3.5 years, but this average hides som e bunching tha t is 

13 
There was little change in the revised interim strategy, whose objectives were to complete the previous program and 
support second-generation reforms. 

-28- 

difficult to manage. Five projects accounting for 60 percent of the total portfolio (including SACIII, 
instrumental in moving the reform agenda forward) are expected to close before the end of FY04. This 
CAS aims a t consolidating the first-generation reforms while promoting a governance reform agenda for 
the long term, so building a stronger portfolio, better spread out, becomes critical. 
112. A CPPR, undertaken in December 2002, highlighted the problems with project implementation: 
mainly delays in procurement and disbursement, inadequate capacity in project implementation units, and 
shortcomings in project supervision. A bi-monthly meeting between the MINEPAT and the project teams 
on th e Government side, and the Country Manager with relevant field staff on the World Bank side, 
makes it possible to address problems in the portfolio in a timely manner-and 
to identify and address 
recurrent issues, such as bottlenecks in procurement. This effort, initiated in early 2002, will be 
intensified as part o f the followup to the recommendations of the CPPR. In July 2002, a financial 
specialist jo ined the procurement specialist in the YaoundC Country Office. 
113. 
IFC investments have experienced some of the administrative burden and red tape that all 
investors are exposed to. Disbursements on the BICEC investment have been delayed for two years, 
pending Government approval of the individual Cameroonian shareholders. Delays on disbursement of up 
to s ix months were experienced in the Orange Cameroon project, pending receipt of a simple comfort 
letter from the relevant ministry on the continuity of government policy. Liquidation and disposition of 
troubled investments, typically the smaller direct investments financed under the African Enterprise Fund, 
has been time-consuming and frustrating to IFC lawyers and workout teams, leading them to accept 
unsatisfactory outcomes simply to avoid the high transaction costs and delays. 

VII. RESULTS-BASED MONITORING & EVALUATION 

1 14. Country capacity in results-based M&E. Information management and decision-making are 
focused on the administrative process of expenditures and activities rather than on outcomes, impacts, and 
goals. A major challenge for Cameroon is ensuring that policies and budget allocations are informed by a 
sustainable M&E system that promotes public accountability. Specific issues include: 
*Policy formulation, work planning, and budgeting are undertaken as separate exercises at th e sector 
and subnational levels. 
*The link between spending and outcomes is insufficient. 
*A wide range of institutions is involved in inspection and audit, but there is no institutional capacity 
to link public spending to service delivery outcomes and results. 
*Reporting is fragmented, and the large volume of reporting has little outcome-oriented information, 
such as the effectiveness of actually public spending. 
*It is unclear from the PRSP what the institutional arrangements for participatory monitoring will be 
and how communities will participate directly in the assessment of needs, the definition of 
actions, and th e evaluation of impacts. 
*The links between central data collection and analysis need to be addressed, and the monitoring of 
inputs, outputs, and outcomes needs to be done a t the local level. 
*Data collection needs to be strengthened to ensure a timely and frequent publication. 
*The selected PRSP monitoring indicators need to refined to reflect urban-rural and regional 
dimensions, and indicators for monitoring security, women’s rights, and gender equality need 
more emphasis. 
1 15. 
The Bank Group is planning to continue support for improvements in Cameroon’s M&E capacity 
through its Public Sector Reform Agenda, IDF grants, AAA in economic monitoring, and as a cross- 

-29- 

cutting element o f various operations. This will include support for statistical capacity -building (see 
paragraph 5 1). 
116. Monitoring CAS implementation. The results framework establishes the results chain for the 
Bank’s program and augments the traditional monitoring of progress on inputs and deliveries with a focus 
on outputs and outcomes, linked to longer-term country outcomes. The CAS has identified a set of 
outcome and output indicators to measure progress (column 3 and 4 of the matrices in Annex 1). In most 
cases, these indicators are quantified with expected target ranges-and 
in some cases, more qualitative 
information needs to be derived. Where there are gaps in information, the Bank will work with the 
Government in identifying specific measurements of outcomes during the first year of CAS. 
117. 
The Bank’s CPPR will be aligned with the results framework, assessing progress in achieving the 
main CAS outcomes and outputs, dealing with risks and problems that might hinder achievement of the 
outcomes, and identiQing systemic issues that may affect the portfolio. At mid term, the CAS progress 
report will draw on an in-depth examination of the CAS outcomes and assess whether they remain 
relevant to the longer term objectives, given country conditions. A completion report, similar to the one 
provided in Annex 3, will be completed to feed into the next CAS cycle. 
11 8 . Data link to the PRSP. Table 3 shows the links to the main areas of the PRSP and the results 
framework. Where possible, the CAS will use data collection mechanisms already in use in monitoring 
the PRSP (chapter 5 of the PRSP), mainly for higher order outcomes. For other more detailed or 
aggregated indicators, the PRSP does not provide all the necessary information. In many instances, this 
information will be provided either through administrative data in the line ministries, o r within the 
management of projects. For instance, the CDD operation will provide information on improvements in 
service delivery of local communities in the four regions of Bank Group involvement. 
119. Managing for results. While specific operations are planned against the outcomes defined in the 
results matrix, the CAS will remain dynamic, responding to changes in the country and th e need to 
redirect resources. If Cameroon should move to the high-case or low-case scenario, the Bank Group will 
adjust the monitoring framework to take into account the potential impact of moving from the base case. 
The Bank Group will also support the Government in improving its management towards results. Pillar 1 
directly supports improving capacity in government for expenditure management and through other 
operations. 

VIII. MANAGING R ISKS 

120. Political turmoil, either national or regional. Cameroon is considered a safer haven than many 
of its more turbulent neighbors, but political stability and security remain priorities in the leadership’s 
agenda. Recent tensions in the Central African Republic, and to a lesser extent in Nigeria and Chad, can 
affect Cameroon, on the economic front and on the political front. And persistent poverty, with high 
ethnic diversity, can be a threat to internal stability. More generally, Cameroon is still a country under 
democratic transition, with the attendant risks. 
121. Lukewarm implementation. The central PRSP scenario assumes tha t the Government 
implements the reform programs as described in the PRSP. A risk to the strategy is lukewarm 
implementation. If this were to materialize, the macroeconomic scenario would essentially continue the 
growth trends of the past five years (1997-2001), where the reform program has been implemented rather 
slowly and structural problems have persisted. On the supply side, oil production will continue t o decline. 
On the demand side, stimulus is expected from increased public expenditure in the context o f HIPC and 
the implementation of the first years of the PRSP. On the basis of those assumptions, the annual GDP 
growth rates would average 5 percent over the next three years. Once the multiplier effects of government 
spending have dissipated, growth is projected to regress back to its core rate of 4.5 percent after 2006. 
Overall, GDP per capita would increase on average by 1.5 percent per year over the next decade. 

-30- 

Sensitivity analysis on key projection parameters (elasticity, variance of the mean growth rate) indicate 
that under the current growth scenario, Cameroon would not meet the MDG of halving poverty by 2015. 
122. 
Important assumptions. The PRSP and the related MTEF rest on important assumptions. If 
these do not materialize, successful implementation of the PRSP could be compromised. For example, 
external shocks (terms of trade, low foreign resources inflow) or internal factors (persistent structural 
problems, energy shortages) that would adversely impact GDP would also reduce domestic and external 
resource availability and compromise the priority spending program. The PRSP assesses the adverse 
effects of these factors on the sustainability of the strategy (Annex 2). The close macroeconomic 

dialogue with the IMF under the PRGF will help mitigate some of these risks, notably those 
associated with external shocks. 

123. Lack of political will. The political commitment of the Cameroonian Govemment for reforms 
will be tested in achieving the HIPC completion point. Once the HIPC completion point is achieved, 
there is risk o f losing political momentum for further reform. It is expected that sustained focus on 
governance issues, and further deepening the partnership, not ju s t with the Government but also with civil 
society and the donor community, will mitigate some of the risks. While political risks cannot be directly 
influenced, World Bank Group support for PRSP implementation, including capacity-building needs, in 
concert with development 'partners, will help mitigate some of these risks. In particular, the focus on 
improving transparency and accountability in public financial management and service delivery will help 
keep the governance agenda at center stage. 

Ix. CONCLUDING REMARKS 

124. The next three years will be critical for Cameroon. The country has made significant progress in 
the implementation of its first-generation macro and structural reforms. It now needs to accelerate 
implementation of the governance agenda and take full advantage of the HIPC initiative to promote 
economic growth and improve the quality of life of its people. The World Bank Group will continue to 
provide full support for Cameroon's efforts to this end. 

James D. Wolfensohn 
President 

Peter L. Woicke 

By: 
Shengman Zhang 

Washington, D.C. 
August 14, 2003 

0 

I

-

a, V e m W v1 

v1 .- < 

z Y 

I 

I 

m 

I c: 

I - 

 
a 

a 

a 

.. 

I 

I 

B 0 e 

a 8 

a A I 

I 

0 c, 

M e 

I 5 

" g I 

a2 c) m 

.t 

L a 

t: 0 a a 3 m .. 

i k 

a 
E a 

.I 

c .- * 8 

$ 

.- 

e, 
D 

"i 

E s 

3 

s 

a, 

ru 

0 
-0 

5 

a, 

.5 

x D 

Y 

id 

5 

B 

Y 

0 0 a X a, 

v) .- 

* e 

5 -s * 

m -0 

v) 

v) a, 

v) .- s M 

C .e ; 

a, 

L s 
e 

m 

0 t: 

C .- 

B ir 

0 a, - - s 

8 B 

e, 

% 

s 

v) 

2 a 

E 

e: 
0 8 

4 s 

m Y 

4 

l a , s 
rc 

I r; 

m 

0 
0 
N 
a e, 

x 

ANNEX 2 - MACROECONOMIC FRAMEWORK 

I - A DETAILED DESCRIPTION OF THE CENTRAL MACROECONOMIC SCENARIO OF THE PRSP 

1. 

Sources of growth. The PRSP has developed in great detail an ambitious medium-term strategy 
for diversifying the economy and accelerating growth in order to fight poverty. The thrust of the strategy 
is to enhance competitiveness and promote a supporting environment for export-oriented and private 
sector-led economic diversification and growth. Agriculture will continue to drive the economy and 
specifically support a broader rural development. Progressively though, diversification will intensify in 
favor of a more dynamic industrial sector (fruit and vegetable processing, wood transformation, textile 
etc.) and high value service activities (tourism, 
transport and telecommunication). Improved 
competitiveness will be the result of structural reform policies, but also aggressive policies in favor of 
infrastructure service development (particularly transport and water) and human resources development 
and valorization (education, health, employment, etc.). 
Table 1 - Sources of growth (annual growth rate in percent) 

GDP (average annual growth) 
Non oil GDP 

Primary sector 

Food agriculture 
Industrial and export 
Livestock farming, hunting 
Fishing 
Forestry and forest products 

Secondary sector 

Mining 
Manufacturing industries 
Electricity, gas and water 
Housing and Public Works 

Tertiary sector 

Of which: Noncommercial services 
Source : PRSP - DP/MINFI 

1997-2001 
4 .6 
4.8 
5.7 
5.6 
6.2 
7.0 
2.0 
4.5 
6 .0 
0.7 
6.4 
5.3 
11.9 

3 .0 

2002 
4 .2 
4.6 
2 .2 
3.9 
2.0 
4.1 
1.4 
-4.2 
2 .9 
-6.4 
3.7 
-4.6 
13.0 

2003 
4.5 
4.8 
3.0 
3.4 
2.8 
3.3 
2.0 
2.2 
4.0 
-2.9 
4.6 
6.2 
7.0 

2004-2007 2008-2011 2012-2015 
5.5 
6 .7 
7 .0 
5.8 
6 .9 
7.1 
3.7 
4 .0 
4 .3 
3.9 
4.2 
4.8 
2.8 
3.1 
4.2 
3.8 
3.9 
3.8 
2.0 
2.5 
4.4 
5.0 
5 .2 
8.2 
-5.6 
-5.0 
6.6 
10.1 
5.5 
7.5 
7.3 
7.7 

3.4 
9 .2 
-5.0 
10.8 
7.0 
7.5 

3 .O 

6 .7 
6.9 

6.0 
5.5 

7 .0 
5.7 

7 .6 
5 .7 

7 .4 
5.4 

2 . 
Aariculture: Cameroon’s agricultural potential is substantial and can provide a much higher 
standard of living to both its rural and urban populations. This would be achieved through improved 
productivity as well as area expansion and intensification. The supply-enhancing policies, coupled with 
favourable demand conditions, would boost agricultural production. In particular, Cameroon enjoys a 
vigorous and increasing demand for food products from its rapidly expanding urban population, 
neighbouring Nigeria as well as from oil-rich/arable-land-scarce countries of the region (Chad, Equatorial 
Guinea, Gabon, Angola, etc.). Consequently, the authorities have projected medium-term growth in the 
food sector around 4 percent per year by 2010 (Le. roughly 2 point above the performance of the past 
decade). With cash crops growth rate remaining around the trend of the past five years or so 
(approximately 3 percent per year), and development of new export products (peppers, ginger, onions, 
watermelon, etc.), overall agricultural GDP is expected to grow at an average annual rate of 4 percent in 
the medium run. 

Annex 2 - Macroeconomic Framework 

-2- 

3 . 

Forestrv Sector: The forestry sector is the largest non-public sector employer and the most 
important non-oil export sector. Cameroon exports the highest volume and value of wood among African 
countries. It also possesses the greatest wood processing capacity in Africa, 3 million cubic meters, the 
second being South Africa. In addition to a large estate of forests set aside for biodiversity conservation, 
Cameroon still has significant forest resources suitable for long term timber production. From timber- 
based, the forests’ contribution to economic growth is likely to gradually shift towards a broader range of 
forestry products and environmental services. Thanks to recent reforms (including competitive award of 
concessions, introduction of mandatory management plans and strengthening of forest revenue collection 
and management capability), the contribution of the forestry sector to the rural and national economy is 
expected to continue to increase over the next decade. While log production is expected to remain 
constant or decrease, overall sector growth is estimated at 4 percent per year over the 2006-1 5 period. The 
wood processing industry is expected to expand towards secondary processing thanks to improvements in 
the overall investment climate and a continued emphasis on incentives to local processing. Given the 
direct links on local and national revenues and on employment, overall sector growth is expected to result 
in marked improvements in the contribution of forestry to both local and central revenues. 
4. 
Industry: With improved competitiveness, Cameroon has the potential to become a sub-regional 
industrial base, especially in the context of the CEMAC and with growing demand from neighbouring 
Nigeria. The GOC is determined to foster industrialization as means for expanding export, raising mean 
growth rate and reducing its variance and thus the extent of income fluctuation and economic 
vulnerability. Government studies on the sources of growth indicate that Cameroon does have 
comparative advantage in a number of branches including wood transformation and agro-industry (such 
as textile, beverages, poultry), and that this could be enhanced by competitive policies (lowering factor, 
infrastructure services and general transaction costs). Future growth will revolve around small and 
medium enterprises (SMEs), which appear to be the most vibrant agents of pro-poor growth. The GOC 
intends to support its industrial strategy with a number of specific cross-cutting and sectoral policies. One 
is the acceleration of regional integration with a revitalized CEMAC Custom Union (see section on 
regional integration). Other GOC policies in support of industrial development are: (i) the development 
of physical infrastructure, especially transport and energy, (ii) promotion of a business friendly climate 
that is attractive to foreign investment (including combating fraud, promoting competition and fighting 
corruption), and (iii) improving the legal and the regulatory framework for private businesses. The above 
reform programs, coupled with increased public investment in the priority sectors (health, education and 
the rural sector), are expected to raise average growth rate in manufacturing to around 10 percent by 
20 10, thus increasing the contribution of industry to 8 percent of overall GDP. 

Box 1 - A multisector macroeconometr ic model 

The GOC has projected a medium-term growth profile using a detailed multisector and macro econometric 
endogenous growth model. The model was developed by GOC, with technical assistance from the World Bank and 
UNDP as part of a capacity building project. Sectoral GDPs are projected as function of long-term determinants 
(human capital, infrastructure and foreign direct investments), short-term determinants of aggregate demand 
(relative prices, terms of trade and income), and exogenous factors (such as specific sectoral policies and programs, 
business plans of recently privatised companies). The econometric projections were revised in some cases in order 
to take into account additional information derived from the study on the sources of growth. The sectoral growth 
profiles were then reviewed in a participatory manner through a series of technical meetings between the macro unit 
and the priority sector teams, especially education, health, infrastructure and the rural sector. The objective was to 
assure consistency between the sectoral strategies and the macroeconomic framework. 
Combining the above tools and process, the GOC has provided a detailed macroeconomic and medium-term 
expenditure framework for the PRSP. The GOC acknowledges that achieving such a sustained growth performance 
will entail speeding up the implementation of structural reforms, intensifying investment in human resources and 
physical infrastructures, and significantly improving governance. This would lower factor cost, raise productivity 
and create a business-friendly environment, which would attract foreign investment and accelerate private sector-led 
diversification and growth. 

Annex 2 - Macroeconomic Framework 

-3 - 

5 . 
Services: The service sector will accompany growth in the primary and secondary sectors (trade, 
transport, telecom). Additional stimulus is expected from strong public expenditure in the priority sectors 
(with released HIPC expenditure), renewed investment in the telecom sector following the expected 
privatisation of CAMTEL, and increased dynamism of the financial sector with the opening of the Douala 
stock market. These factors account for an expected strong sector growth of 7 percent per year for the 
next decade. 

Table 2 - GDP, demand s ide 

I n P e r c e n t a g e o fGD P (% ) 

Estimates 
2000 2001 2002 

Proiections 
2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 

Domestic Demand 
96.8 
Final consumption 
79.6 
68 .9 
Private 
10 .7 
Public 
Investment 
17.1 
Gross fixed investment 
17.1 
Pr iva te 
14 .2 
Pub l ic 
2 .9 
Change in stocks 
0 
Foreign balance. net 
3.2 
Expor ts o f g o o d s a n dN F S 31 .3 
Imports o f g o o d s a n dN F S 28 .0 

99.1 
81.0 
69 .7 
1 1 . 3 
18.1 
18.1 
15 .2 
2 . 9 
0 
0.9 
29 .5 
28 .6 

101.5 101.4 102.1 102.7 102.7 102.0 
83 .4 
83.1 
83.7 
83.8 83.4 82.3 
71 .7 
71 .2 
7 1 . 7 71 .6 71 .1 70 .0 
11.8 
11.9 
12 .0 
12.1 
12 .2 12.2 
18.5 
18.9 19.3 19.7 
18.1 
18.3 
18.1 
18.3 
18.5 
18 .9 19 .3 19 .7 
15.3 
15.2 
15 .4 
15.8 
16 .2 16 .6 
2 . 7 
3 . 1 
3 . 0 
3 .1 
3 .1 
3 .2 
0 
0 
0
0
0
0
-1.5 
-1.4 
-2.1 
-2.7 
-2.7 
-2.0 
28 .0 
27 .5 
26 .1 
25 .1 24 .6 24 .7 
29 .5 
28 .9 
2 8 . 3 27 .8 27 .3 26 .7 

GDP at market price 
100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 
Sources: FMI (1995/1996-2001) 
MINFUDP (Projections 2003-201 5) 

6 . 
Welfare implications. Per-capita consumption remains strong, with a steady rise by 3 percent per 
year, which means sustained improvement in household welfare. With the above growth profile, and 
taking into account the sectoral decomposition of growth and related differences in the elasticities of 
poverty to growth, the projected decrease in the poverty rate is 18 points, which indicates that Cameroon 
could meet the MDG target. 
7. 
Public finances and the medium-term expenditure framework (MTEF). GOC fiscal policy is 
built on expected decline in oil revenue, increased non-oil revenues, rationalization of public expenditures 
and a better targeting o f spending toward priority sectors. Total revenues are expected to decline slightly 
in the coming years from 19.4 percent in 2003 to 18.8 percent of GDP by the end of 2007 as a result of 
expected decline in oil revenue from 4 .8 percent in 2003 to 2 percent in 2007. The projected shortfall in 
oil revenue will be partially offset by increase in non-oil revenue, which is projected to reach 16.8 percent 
of GDP in 2007. The overall fiscal balance (excluding grants) will stabilize around +1 percent of GDP . 

 
Annex 2 - Macroeconomic Framework 

-4- 

Table 3 - Public Finance 

Revenue (excluding grants) 
Oil 
Non oil 
Expenditure 
Current 
Capital 
Non interest exuenditure 
Overall balance (commitment basis, excl 
grants) 
Overall balance (cash basis, excluding grant) 
Overall balance (cash basis, including 
grants) 
Primary balance 

Source : PRSP - DP/MINFI 

21.6 
19.3 19. 
7 .2 
5 .2 
5. 
14 .4 14.1 14 
17 .0 18.4 
17. 
13.2 14.8 14. 
3 .6 
3 .6 
2. 
15.0 14.9 14. 

0.0 
2.4 

2.5 
8.1 

0.9 
-1.2 

-0 .7 
6 .0 

2. 
-3. 

-3. 
5. 

18.9 18.7 
3.7 
2.6 
15.3 16.1 
17.3 17.2 
13.9 13.7 
3 .5 
3.5 
15.3 15.7 

18.8 18.8 
2 .3 
2 .0 
1 6 5 16.8 
17.3 17.3 
13.6 13.5 
3.6 
3 .8 
1 5 9 16.2 

18 .4 
18 .4 
1.3 
0.7 
1 7 1 17.7 
17 .6 
17.2 
12.7 
11.9 
4.9 
5.3 
17.0 
16.9 

1 .6 
0 . 9 

1 .6 
4 . 7 

1 .4 
0 .8 

1 .4 
4.1 

1.5 
1.5 

2.0 
3 . 9 

1 .4 
1 .4 

1 .9 
3 .6 

0 .9 
0 .9 

1.2 
2.2 

1.2 
1.2 

1 .5 
1.9 

8 . 
Non-oil revenue mobilization. The increase in non-oil revenue is mostly based on a broadening 
of the tax base and improved efficiency of the tax and customs systems as a result of the ongoing 
structural reform program. With regards to the domestic tax system, measures to broaden the tax base 
include: (i) expansion of the tax payer master file and the establishment of a large tax payers’ unit; (ii) 
reduction of the number of exempted items under the VAT system and the special tax system for 
petroleum products and a stricter enforcement of the exemption system; (iii) introduction of a n ew income 
tax law for individual taxpayers as of January l S t 2004; (iv) the new property tax system in YaoundC and 
Douala based on a land survey that should be implemented as of 2005; and (v) the securization of specific 
taxes (forestry, mines etc). The tax Directorate is also taking some administrative measure to reinforce the 
fight against tax fraud. In the customs area, measures will be taken to: (i) further strengthen the single 
processing window for external trade; (ii) improve the physical and documentary controls for the release 
of goods and enhance the control system for exemptions and special status traffic; and (iii) facilitate the 
exchange of information between the tax and customs administrations (establishing a computer link and 
strengthening the cellule impbts douanes). 
9 . 
Public expenditures are projected to stabilize around 17.5 percent of GDP, which would allow the 
GOC to meet sectoral objectives while maintaining financial prudence. Table 4 on medium-term 
expenditure allocation shows a steady increase in spending on PRSP priority areas, especially education, 
health, social welfare, infrastructure and the rural sector. 
10 . 
Indicating government commitment to human resource development, public expenditure on 
education and health will steadily rise to reach 4 and 1 .5 percent of GDP in 2007. Developing basic 
infrastructure is also an important PRSP goal for improving competitiveness as well as for enhancing 
access for the poor. The MTEF indicates that the GOC is determined to commit a significant share of 
resources (1 5 percent of total internal budget and 2 .7 percent of GDP) to the infrastructure sector. 

Annex 2 - Macroeconomic Framework 

- 5 - 

Tab le 4 - MTEF 

Tota l current and cap ita l 
expend itures f inanced on internal Historical 
and externa l resources 

Estimates 

Project ions 

Education 
Health 
Social Development and employment 
Productive Infrastructure 
Rural Sector 
Defence and Security 
Other ministries and institutions 
Total ministerial chapters 

Education 
Health 
Social Development and employment 
Productive Infrastructure 
Rural Sector 
Defence and Security 
Other ministries and institutions 
Total ministerial chapters 

2002* 

2000" 2001* 
In percent of total GDP 
2.7 
3.2 
3.6 
0.8 
0.9 
1.1 
0.1 
0.1 
0.2 
1.5 
1.5 
1.7 
0.6 
0.6 
0.6 
2.1 
2.1 
2.3 
2.3 
2.4 
2.4 
10.0 
10.8 
11.9 
In percent of primary expend iture 
17.8 
21.3 
24.0 
5.3 
6.1 
7.1 
0.9 
0.9 
1.2 
9.8 
10.2 
11.6 
3.8 
3.9 
4.1 
13.8 
13.8 
15.5 
15.6 
16.2 
16.5 
66.9 
72.3 
80.1 

2003 

2007 

2010 

2015 

3.4 
1.1 
0.2 
2.2 

1 .o 

2.2 
2.9 
12.9 

22.4 
7.1 
1.1 
14.1 
6.3 
14.0 
18.9 
83.9 

4.0 
1.5 
0.3 
2.5 
1.1 
1.9 
2.6 
14.0 

23.8 
7.5 
1.5 
15.0 
6.7 
12.1 
17.7 
84.3 

4.3 
1.9 
0.4 
2.7 
1.2 
1.9 
2 .7 
15.1 

24.2 
8.1 
1.5 
15.0 
6.7 
12.2 
17.1 
84.8 

4.3 
2.1 
0.4 
2.9 
1.3 
2.0 
2.9 
15.8 

24.7 
8.8 
1.7 
15.1 
6.8 
12.3 
16.2 
85.5 

* : Expenditures financed on external resources are excluded 
Source : PRSP - DPMINFI 

11. 
As indicated before, the main priority sector ministries have also prepared detailed MTEFs, 
which have been aligned on the macro framework through the above budget envelope. In particular, the 
Education and Health Ministries have prepared detailed medium-term expenditure framework which 
spelled-out the main programs and related activities and financing needs over the 2003/07 period. A 
similar work is underway for Public Works as well as for the Rural Sector. 

11 - R ISK ANALYSIS 

12. 
The PRSP scenario and related MTEF also rest on a number of important assumptions, which if 
not realized, could jeopardize successful implementation of the PRSP. For example, external shocks 
(terms of trade, low foreign resources inflow, etc.) or internal factors (persisting structural problems, 
energy shortage, etc.) that would adversely impact GDP would also reduce domestic and external 
resource availability and compromise the priority spending program. The PRSP provides an assessment 
of the adverse effects of the above factors on the sustainability of the strategy (Cf . table 5). The Poverty 
impact analysis was done by linking the 123PRSP model to the macroeconometric model of the Direction 
de la Prevision. Th is has allowed to assess the impact of various shocks and policies on the income 
distribution of the poorest and richest households. 
13. 
Adverse terms of trade shocks. As noted before, the Cameroonian economy has remained 
largely dependant on few exported commodities, mainly oil, wood and cocoa. These commodities have 
experienced important price volatility over the past two decades, as indicated by relatively large 
coefficients of variation (175 percent for cotton, 42 percent for wood, 20 percent for oil and cocoa). The 
central scenario of the PRSP was based on a modest annual increase in the term of trade over the next 3 
years. The GOC has estimated that, other things being equal, a drop in the oil price of 20 percent in 2003, 
10 percent in 2004 and 5 percent until 2007 would result in an annual -0.6 point decrease in GDP growth 

Annex 2 - Macroeconomic Framework 

-6- 

rate relative to the reference scenario over the 2003-07 period. This would translate into a substantial 
shortfall in revenue and force the government to curtail annual spending by as much as 37 billions CFAF 
over the period, including in priority areas, thus compromising PRSP objectives. Household income 
would also be adversely affected, declining by a total of 2.8 points in 2007 relative to the baseline. 
However, the impact is more severe on the 20 percent poorest households whose income suffers a sharper 
decline (3.1 points) relative to the richest quintile (2.3 points). 
14. 
Foreign assistance hold-up or low-absorption capacity. Cameroon would also depend on the 
assistance of donor countries and agencies in supporting its effort to reduce poverty during the next 
decade. The government has identified the financing needs associated to the central scenario of the DSRP. 
In the event that anticipated additional donor support does not materialize, the government would need to 
revise the sectoral objectives and spending allocation as well as the overall growth profile. Simulations 
indicate that a 50 percent reduction of external resources would reduce annual GDP growth by 0.6 
percent, so that real GDP would stabilize around 5 percent instead of 6 percent. Also, assuming that 
external resources are available, failure to absorb them will reduce growth and adversely impact the social 
sectors. Simulations results indicated that if the rate of absorption of current and capital expenditure were 
only 94 percent and 66 percent percent, growth will average 4.4 percent instead of 5 percent in the 
previous scenario over the 2002-2007 period. 
15. 
Persistent problems in energy supply. Were ongoing electricity shortages to persist, the 
competitiveness of the industrial sector and the expected diversification of the economy would fail to 
materialize, condemning the country to a low and volatile primary-commodity dependent growth profile. 
Simulations results indicated that a “timid” implementation of the investment plan in the energy sector 
based on a 50 percent reduction in programmed investment in the sector would lead to a 0.5 point lower 
annual growth rate over the 2004-07 period. 

Annex 2 - Macroeconomic Framework 

-7- 

Tab le 5 - Risk analysis 

2001 

2002 

2003 

2004 

2005 

2006 

2007 

Centra l Scenario of the PRSP 

Real GDP (growth rate) 
Poverty Incidence 

Scenar io 1: Adverse Term of trade shock 2003 
Export price 
Including oil price 
Change in export price 1/ 

Change in real GDP growth 1/ 
GDP growth 
Poverty Incidence 

Cumulative income gap with respect to the baseline 
20% poorest households 
20% richest households 
Average 

4.8% 
40.2% 

4.2% 

4.5% 

4 .9% 

5.4% 
37 .0% 

5 . 8% 

6 .0% 
34.6% 

-11.8% 
-20.0% 
-11.0% 

-0.6% 
3.9% 

-3.9% 
-10.0% 
0.0% 

-1.4% 
3 .5% 

4.2% 

40,2 

-1 .1% 
-5.0% 
-0 .3% 

-0 .3% 
5 . 5% 

-1,o% 
4,8% 

-1 .5% 
-5.0% 
-1.6% 

-0 .6% 
4 .8% 
38 .1% 

-2 .7% 
-2 .0% 
-2 .4% 

-0,7?'0 
4,7% 
37,4% 

-0,9% 
-0,7% 
-O,8% 

-1.3% 
-5 .0% 
-2.8% 

-0.2% 
5 .8% 
35 .8% 

-3.1% 
-2.3% 
-2.8% 

-1,2% 
4,8% 
35,8% 

-3,1% 
-2,3% 
-2,8% 

Scenar io 2 : A 50% reduction in external resources 
Change in real GDP growth11 
GDP growth 
Poverty Incidence 

o,o% 
O,O% 

40,2% 

o,o% 

4,2% 

o,o% 

4,5% 

-0,2% 
4,7% 

Cumulative income gap with respect to the baseline 
20% poorest households 
20% richest households 
Average 

Scenar io 3 : A Reduct ion in the absorption capacity 
Absorption rate on current expenditure 
Absorption rate on capital expenditure 

96 ,9% 
68,8% 

95 ,3% 
67,1% 

94,0% 
65 ,5% 

93 ,0% 
63,1% 

Change in real GDP growth 1/ 
GDP growth 
Poverty Incidence 

O,O% 

4,2% 

O,o% 
4,5% 

-0,7% 
4,2% 

40,2% 

Cumulative income gap with respect to the baseline 
20% poorest households 
20% richest households 
Average 

Scenar io 4 Persistence of electricity shortages 
Investment in the electricity sector 
Reduction in public expenditure: MINMEE (in billions FCFA) 

Change in real GDP growth 1 / 
GDP growth 
Poverty Incidence 

Cumulative income gap with respect to the baseline 
20% poorest households 
20% richest households 
Average 
1 / Change with respect to to the baseline 

40,2% 

3 yo 

3 yo 

5 

O,O% 

4,2% 

O,O% 

4 ,5% 

-0,4% 
4,5% 

-1,3% 
4,5% 

3 yo 
5 

-O,6% 
5,2% 

- l , 6% 
3,8% 
37 ,9% 

-2,4% 
-1,8% 
-2,1% 

3 y o 

5 

-0 ,4% 
5,0% 
37,3% 

-0,8% 
-0,6% 
-0,7% 

-1,o% 
5,0% 
36,4% 

-4,6% 
-3,4% 
-4,1% 

3 yo 
5 

-O,7% 
5,3% 
35,4% 

-2,1% 
-1,6% 
-1,9% 

ANNEX 3 

REPUBLIC OF CAMEROON 

1996 CAS COMPLETION REPORT 

Country: Cameroon 

Date of CAS: January 12, 1996 
Date of First Progress Report: February 18, 1998 
Date of Second Progress Report: May 25 ,2000 

Period Covered by the CAS Completion Report: FY96 - FY02 

CAS Completion Report 
Completed by: 

Cynthia Cook, Consultant 
Madani M . Tall, Country Manager 
Date: May 27, 2003 

1 . 
This CAS Completion Report evaluates the effectiveness of the Bank’s Country Assistance 
Strategy for Cameroon (January 1996). Since 1996, two CAS Progress Reports have been presented to 
the Board. Lessons learned from the early phases of CAS implementation and consequent adjustments in 
the Country Assistance Strategy are reflected in these two reports. Progress in achieving the goals of the 
1996 CAS is summarized in Annex A. Annexes B and C compare the planned and actual deliveries of 
lending and non-lending support during the three CAS periods under review. Annex D details progress in 
achieving CAS outcomes over the CAS period, and Annex E gives some indicators concerning progress 
toward Cameroon’s long-term goals. 

2. 
In the twenty-five years following independence (1960- 1985), Cameroon showed strong 
economic growth. However, from 1985 on, the world oil crisis and declining world prices for Cameroon’s 
major export crops caused a dramatic drop in government revenues, while public expenditures and public 
debt continued t o grow. In 1988 the Government launched an economic reform program supported by an 
IMF Stand-by and a Structural Adjustment Loan from the Bank. However, it proved impossible to 
restore Cameroon’s competitive position through internal adjustment and trade liberalization. In 1993 the 
Government cut wages in the civil service in half, and in January 1994, all the CFA franc countries 
devalued their currency by 50 percent. An Economic Recovery Credit (ERC) was approved by the Board 
in June 1994. Although the ERC reform agenda was mainly implemented, it became clear that sectoral 
reforms could achieve little in a macroeconomic environment still marked by poor management of public 
finances and large internal and external debts. 

3 . 
The 1996 CAS aimed at supporting the unfinished adjustment agenda for Cameroon and 
returning the country to a growth path. It recognized that additional debt relief would be needed t o 
sustain growth in the long run. In the meantime, the CAS stated that Cameroon should aim at restoring its 
creditworthiness through vigorous export promotion, fiscal revenue mobilization, and restructuring of the 
financial sector. The CAS highlighted findings of the 1994 Poverty Assessment and suggested what 
might be the main components of a poverty reduction strategy. In addition to financial sector reforms, it 
recognized the importance of regulatory and judicial reforms to create an enabling environment for 
private sector development. 

4 . 
The CAS Completion Report concludes that the Bank’s assistance program was relevant to short 
term country objectives which were seen by both the Bank and the Government as prerequisites t o 
achieve longer term goals of poverty reduction and sustainable development. It assisted the Government 
to make and implement politically difficult decisions in a challenging economic and social climate. 
Significant progress was achieved on the macro front; since 1996, there have now been nearly seven 

Annex 3 - CAS Completion Report 

-2 - 

years of uninterrupted good performance on the macro and structural front (annual growth of 4.0 percent 
to 5.5 percent). However, progress in the different development sectors was uneven. In some areas, 
notably the “social” sectors, little progress was made during the period under review. However, the 
dialogue on poverty reduction was initiated, broadened and deepened over this period. 

A. 

Long-Term Strategic Goals 

5 . 
The 1996 CAS described the Government’s long-term objectives as (1) to create a democratic 
society within an ethnically diverse context, in which per capita income would at least double within 
twenty years,’ and (2) food securityS2 The Government recognized the need to restore fiscal balance and 
confidence in political and financial institutions in order to regain the momentum o f growth based on 
private sector investment. The CAS mentions the results of the Poverty Assessment conducted by the 
Bank in 1994 but does not indicate any intention of the Government to address the issues raised in this 
assessment. 

6. 
The Government’s short-term strategy is described in the CAS as (1) keeping the government 
current on its interest payment obligations, and ( 2 ) implementing a comprehensive privatization and 
financial sector reform program. The logic of these short-term objectives was that sustained international 
debt service, divestiture of the State from public enterprises, and restructuring of the financial sector, were 
all prerequisites to the return of foreign capital inflows, which were expected to restore the momentum of 
growth and eventually to create conditions under which poverty reduction would become financially 
feasible. The logic was that of growth eventually “trickling down” to lift ever-larger segments of the 
population out o f poverty. The Millenium Development Goals were not yet a part of the Bank’s dialogue 
with its borrowers. 

7. 
The CAS recognized the political and social tensions inherent in Cameroon’s situation and the 
risks that these posed for the successful execution of a reform program. It acknowledged that key reforms 
needed to restore confidence in the private sector had not yet been accomplished. It also mentioned 
“long-entrenched corruption” as a potential problem, both in itself and as a factor tending to undermine 
donor support and the prospects for foreign direct investment. Over the CAS period, the governance 
factor became ever more visible as an obstacle to growth and poverty reduction, and increasing attention 
was devoted to it by the Government and by the Bank team. 

8 . 
In retrospect, the Bank made a significant contribution towards achieving the Government’s long- 
term growth goal through its analytical work, which helped to establish clear intermediate targets and 
action plans, and through its policy dialogue, which helped to expand the constituency for reform in the 
country. The Bank provided extensive implementation support, both technical and financial, which 
helped the Government to achieve most of its short-term goals. The goal of civil service reform was 
partially achieved through a significant reduction of the wage bill. However, th e efficiency and 
effectiveness o f the civil service was not notably improved. The Bank also engaged the Government in 
broadening the planning process to include the private sector and civil society, and to improve the focus 
on poverty reduction. 

1 

2 

The baseline for this target is not specified in the CAS. According to the “African Development Indicators” of 2002, 
GNI per capita in 1996 was U s $ 6 2 0 . 
It seems that the term “food security,” as used in Cameroon, may be interpreted as a proxy for “poverty reduction,” Le. 
the idea that everyone ought to have enough to eat. It does not mean food self-sufficiency; 
it is recognized that Cameroon’s 
early economic success derived from its ability to move from smallholder food crop production to market-oriented export crop 
production. 

Annex 3 - CAS Completion Report 

B. 

CAS Outcomes 

-3 - 

9 . 
CAS Objectives. The Bank’s goal, as expressed in the 1996 CAS, was to help Cameroon recover 
lost ground in economic and social development as quickly as possible, while further restructuring its 
economy to remain competitive in a rapidly changing world. The three pillars of the Bank’s strategy were 
(i) consolidating the benefits of devaluation through improved public resource management, (ii) 
alleviating poverty, and (iii) creating a climate favorable for private sector development. The CAS 
envisaged a gradual shift from adjustment to investment lending, with more policy discussion than in the 
past, and with reduced IDA lending complemented by greater efforts in mobilizing and coordinating 
support from other donors. The Bank would work closely with the IMF in helping to stabilize 
Cameroon’s public finances, and with IFC and MIGA in helping to mobilize private investment. Another 
important feature of the CAS was strengthening the staffing of the Resident Mission (now Country 
Office) to broaden consensus around the reform agenda. 

10. 
The CAS identified a number of “actions required” to achieve its objectives. These could be 
viewed as the intended outcomes of Bank assistance. Some performance indicators were also suggested, 
although these were no t systematically related to the proposed actions. No target dates were established, 
and only a few indicators were expressed in objectively measurable terms. This matrix, which was used in 
the 1998 and 2000 Progress Reports to track progress on the CAS action program, is reproduced in Annex 
D. 

11. 
Consolidating the benefits of devaluation. The first “pillar” had as an overarching goal the 
improvement o f macroeconomic stability and public finance, through increasing resource mobilization, 
improving the quality of public expenditure, reforming procurement practices, settling domestic debt 
arrears, divesting the State of productive activities, and deepening the civil service reform program 
initiated under the ERC . Macroeconomic stability and more efficient and transparent management of 
public finance were seen as prerequisites for generating public savings and attracting private capital to put 
Cameroon back on a growth path. The proposed performance indicators included the revenue to GDP 
ratio, the share of priority sectors in public expenditure, and completion of staffing plans (part o f the 
unfinished agenda for civil service reform). 

12. 
The 1998 CAS Update reported “substantial progress” on increasing resource mobilization, 
reduction of the public wage bill, and privatization of public enterprises. Tax revenues and transfers from 
public enterprises had increased, and external debt arrears had been eliminated. The budget surplus 
reached 5 .8 percent of GDP in FY97. However, tax administration remained weak and the budget was 
still too dependent on oil revenues. The privatization program was proceeding well. A substantial 
reduction had been accomplished in the civil service and the corresponding wage bill. In contrast, only 
partial progress had been made in settling domestic arrears, and little progress in improving the 
management of public expenditure. 

13. 
Th e 2000 CAS Update reported continued substantial progress on resource mobilization, with 
fiscal revenues projected to be 19.1 percent of GDP in FYOO, compared to 15 .1 percent in FY97 and 10.1 
percent in FY94. The share of non-oil revenues had also increased. Substantial progress was a lso 
reported with the privatization program. The settlement of domestic arrears was ongoing. Little further 
progress had been made on the civil service reform program; a new civil service reform strategy was to 
be prepared. Also, little progress had been made on improving public expenditure management, 
procurement, public financial information, or governance. 

14. 
Cameroon reached the HIPC Decision Point in September 2000 and became eligible for interim 
HIPC funding. Excluding HIPC spending, in recent years the govemment has maintained a surplus in the 
primary fiscal balance, despite declining oil revenues. Inflation has been contained at an average of 3.5 

Annex 3 - CAS Completion Report 

-4- 

percent per year from 1997 to 2000, but now shows signs of rising in response to high food prices. No 
further progress has been made on civil service reform. 

15. 
The instruments foreseen to help the Government consolidate the benefits of devaluation included 
two adjustment credits originally programmed for FY96 and FY97. The first would support budgetary 
and financial reforms; 
the second would focus on privatization of parastatals and private sector 
development. On the non-lending front, a CEM was planned in FY97, and PERs would be completed on 
an annual basis. The underlying logic of this strategy was that the financial and technical support 
provided by adjustment credits, with disbursements linked to specific policy reforms, together with 
intensive policy dialogue, would be sufficient to bring about significant improvements in public financial 
management and the incentive framework for private investment, which in turn would engender growth 
and generate resources for poverty alleviation. 

16. 
SAC I1 was delivered as planned in FY96, followed by two Fifth Dimension credits in FY96 and 
FY97. The major macroeconomic objectives supported by SAC I1 were eventually achieved. However, 
the civil service reforms had a serious negative impact on morale, motivation, and integrity in the civil 
service. Progress in the reorganization of ministries was slower than anticipated. Government arrears to 
banks were securitized, but the settlement of other domestic arrears did not make much progress. 
Although the objective of completing the privatization program was not achieved, good progress was 
made. Disbursements on SAC I1 were suspended in mid-1996 when the fourth IMF Standby 
Arrangement went off track. However, SAC I1 was disbursed in full in August 1997 (compared with an 
original closing date of March 1997), upon approval of the IMF PRGF, following successful completion 
of a one-year staff monitored IMF Program. 

17. 
SAC 111 was approved in June 1998. Its design was more complex than that of SAC 11. The 
macroeconomic program included two tranches focused on continued improvements in revenue 
mobilization, controlling inflation, reforming social security, and completing the settlement of domestic 
arrears. In addition, there were four “floating tranches” related to reforms in the transport and forestry 
sectors and actions needed to advance the privatization program. This design was intended t o maintain 
flexibility in financing while remaining firm on the need to fully satisfy the conditionality for each 
tranche. Only four tranches have been released, with considerable delays. The first macro tranche was 
released on effectiveness in September 1998, and the second macro tranche in June 2000. The forestry 
sector tranche and the first privatization tranche have been released, but the second privatization tranche 
and the transport sector tranche remain outstanding. The former is expected to be released by June 2003, 
and the latter by September 2003. Delays can be explained by the technical and political complexity of 
the reforms, the continuing reluctance of the Cameroon authorities, and the advent of the HIPC Initiative, 
which consumed much of the energy of the Government and the World Bank Team after September 1999. 

18. 
The agenda of non-lending activities in support of this pillar was not carried out as planned. A 
series of short “Issues Notes” were prepared in FY99 for internal Bank discussion, but were never 
discussed with Government. Instead, increasing concern about governance and corruption led th e Bank to 
conduct an unplanned Country Procurement and Audit Review and a Country Financial Accountability 
Assessment, as well as a Governance Overview, in the years covered by the 2000 CAS Update. These 
activities were intended to underpin a continuing dialogue with Government in an attempt to improve the 
management of public expenditures and thereby enhance the environment for growth. The Governance 
Overview assisted the Government in completing its own Governance Strategy as part of th e PRSP 
preparation process. However, the planned Civil Service Strategy and Judicial Reform Strategy were not 
budgeted for or completed. 

Annex 3 - CAS Completion Report 

- 5 - 

19. 
In retrospect, the program’s reliance on structural adjustment lending combined with technical 
assistance was reasonably successful in supporting the macroeconomic management pillar of the CAS. 
Some of the desired outcomes, such as increasing resource mobilization and privatization of public 
enterprises, were substantially achieved. Others, such as eliminating internal arrears, took longer to 
accomplish than initially expected. Civil service reform stalled after the initial reduction in force. 
Extensive dialogue took place on improving public expenditure management and procurement, but little 
real progress could be observed over the CAS period. 
In summary, the strategy of support for 
Cameroon’s structural adjustment program worked where the Government was firmly committed to 
implementing the program, but failed where Government did not really want to change. 

20. 
Borrower performance in re-establishing macroeconomic stability was generally satisfactory. 
Quantitative targets were achieved, international debt obligations were met, and a number of structural 
reforms were made, especially in the area of divestiture of state enterprises. The small group of reformers 
in the Ministry of Finance gained credibility and clout, and the political regime was strengthened by 
economic success. However, Borrower performance in the area of public expenditure management 
continued to be disappointing, and civil service reforms were not fully implemented. The area of 
governance came to be the main focus of policy dialogue and Bank non-lending support, in parallel with 
an increasing emphasis on poverty alleviation. 

21. 
Poverty alleviation. The second “pillar” of the 1996 CAS was poverty alleviation. The CAS 
objective was to put poverty alleviation at the center of the Government’s development strategy. This 
goal was not aligned with the Government’s own priorities. Rather, it aimed to alter the Government’s 
priorities. Poverty alleviation was present in the Government’s agenda but as a secondary objective, 
which would be accomplished as a result of the return to growth. 

22. 
The CAS identified four poverty-related objectives which it hoped would be achieved in the 
“sustained adjustment scenario.” These included providing (a) adequate education and (b) appropriate 
health services (to the poor), and generating employment through (c) private sector-led growth and (d) 
labor intensive (public) works. To accomplish these objectives, eight outcomes were identified, which 
the Government was expected to achieve under the sustained adjustment scenario. These outcomes, 
drawn from the 1994 Poverty Assessment, include: 

promote sustainable and employment-generating growth; 
reallocate budgetary resources towards priority sectors; 
improve access to primary education and health services; 
promote employment generating programs with a special focus on rural areas; 
increase availability of financial services for the poor; 
promote food production, processing and marketing; 
reduce inter-regional income disparities; 
monitor evolution of poverty. 

23. 
Two performance indicators for progress in poverty reduction were mentioned in the 1996 CAS: 
(i) an increase of at least 3.5 percent per year in nominal terms in budgets for the education and health 
sectors; and (ii) establishment of an efficient mechanism to reach local communities. No indicators were 
proposed to measure progress toward the other outcomes. The first indicator, while measurable, proved 
not to be a meaningful indicator of performance on poverty-oriented expenditure, let alone on poverty 
reduction. “Budgetary reallocation” was achieved, but it proved impossible to determine if this was 
translated into increased poverty-oriented expenditure. The second indicator was too vague to be 

Annex 3 - CAS Completion Report 

-6- 

monitored over time, was not clearly linked to any of the desired outcomes, and was certainly not 
accomplished during the CAS p e r i ~ d . ~ 

24. 
Poverty in Cameroon increased from 40 percent in 1984 to 51 percent in 1994, as a result of the 
economic crisis. The 1994 Poverty Assessment anticipated that poverty would increase further in the 
short run as a result of recent cuts in civil service wages and the devaluation. The 1996 Household 
Budget Survey confirmed a peak level of poverty at 53 percent. The restoration of macroeconomic 
stability and renewed growth led to a gradual reduction of income poverty over the latter part of the CAS 
period. A second Household Budget Survey in 200 1 showed that poverty had dropped substantially in the 
1996-2001 period, from 53 percent to 40 percent. However, the same survey confirmed that growth has 
not brought significant benefits to the “core poor,” regional disparities remain, and inequality remains 
high, especially in rural areas. Other social indicators (not included in the CAS) have declined over time, 
indicating a failure to achieve almost all of the CAS objectives on poverty alleviation, except for the one 
on poverty monitoring. (See Annex E) 

2 5 . 
The 1998 and 2000 CAS Updates reported little progress on the poverty alleviation agenda. As 
one of the up-front actions required for SAC 11, budgets were reallocated to place greater emphasis on the 
priority sectors for poverty. However, by 2000 it was noted that budget data were inadequate for 
monitoring actual expenditures, much less their regional distribution or poverty incidence. A s for 
promoting sustainable, employment-generating growth, the growth of per capita GDP had not been fast 
enough to generate substantial additional employment, nor had there been any particular effort to ensure 
that this growth would be “pro-poor”. A slight increase in agricultural productivity was noted, but no 
progress had been made on employment creation through public works, on delivering financial services 
to the poor, or on reducing inter-regional income disparities. One area where good progress was made 
was in poverty monitoring, as a result of the 1996-97 Household Budget Survey and the 1998 
Demographic and Health Survey. 

2 6 . 
The Bank strategy for supporting Government’s efforts in poverty alleviation initially relied on 
increasing economic growth combined with targeted interventions in the social sectors. In addition to the 
growth expected to be generated by the structural adjustment process, the 1996 CAS included the already 
approved Health Project (FY95), a planned Education Project in FY97, and a Social Development Project 
in FY98. The logic o f this strategy assumed that Government was ready to adopt significant programs of 
poverty-oriented public expenditure and to seek IDA financing for such programs. The implementation 
of these programs was expected to improve education and health service delivery and consequently to 
improve living conditions for the poor. As it turned out, however, the Government was not ready to adopt 
and implement such programs. The Health Project performed poorly throughout its lifetime, and the 
other projects were postponed or dropped until a satisfactory agreement could be reached with 
Government on poverty oriented service delivery strategies and programs. 

27. 
Also under the heading of poverty alleviation were included a future Agricultural Extension and 
Research project, the ongoing GEF project for biodiversity conservation, and assistance to the 
Government in preparing its National Environmental Management Plan. The logic here was that 
agricultural extension would help improve the productivity of poor farmers, and that improved 
environmental management would help protect public assets and improve the living conditions of the 
poor in both urban and rural areas. However, the small increase in agricultural production reported in 
2000 (2-3 percent) was viewed mainly as a response to trade liberalization and macroeconomic 

4 

A componen t o f the Agricultural Extension and Research Project, approved in FY99, tested a mechan ism for 
Governmen t f ie ld-based services to assist rural communities in identifying and pursuing their own deve lopmen t priorities. 
Lessons learned from th i s component will be reflected in the forthcoming Community Driven Deve lopmen t Pro jec t . 

Annex 3 - CAS Completion Report 

-7- 

stabilization, rather than increased effectiveness of the extension services.’ The Biodiversity Project 
performed poorly in the early CAS years, but by the end of the CAS period it was being implemented in a 
satisfactory manner. 

28. 
On the non-lending front, sector strategy work would be focused on poverty alleviation, with 
Strategy Notes originally programmed in education, rural water supply, rural infrastructure, and rural 
finance. In fact, none o f these planned non-lending activities was carried out. The 1998 CAS Update 
recognized that the Government was not ready to implement real reforms in the priority sectors for 
poverty alleviation and that further policy dialogue would be needed before lending in those sectors could 
be expected to succeed. I t also recognized the need for the Government to develop its own poverty 
reduction strategy, rather than simply adopting the strategy proposed by the Bank. A series of short, 
analytic notes was then planned to support the dialogue in priority sectors. However, no activity was 
foreseen in the key areas of employment generation, rural finance, or gender analysis. 

29. 
The 2000 CAS Update focused on the Government’s desire to benefit from the enhanced HIPC 
Initiative. In response to the 1994 Poverty Assessment, the Government issued a “Poverty Strategy 
Declaration” in December 1998, and by 2000 was in the process of preparing a Poverty Reduction 
Strategy Paper (PRSP). The serious and seemingly intractable constraints in the public sector suggested 
that the Government should seek to involve the private sector to a greater extent in the delivery of health 
and education services. Regional and gender targeting would also be needed to correct historical 
disparities in service delivery. The implementation of these reforms would, however, depend on securing 
debt relief through the enhanced HIPC initiative. 

30. 
In September 2000, an Interim PRSP, based on a first round o f participatory consultations, was 
presented to the Bank’s Board together with the HIPC Document. The Interim PRSP (I-PRSP) stressed 
the need for “pro-poor” growth to focus on income-generating, labor-intensive activities, microfinance, 
and gender equity. In particular, the I-PRSP consultations raised the focus on rural development as the 
key to sustainable poverty reduction. The I-PRSP also highlighted popular concern about HIV/AIDS and 
spurred the development of a national strategy involving all sectors to address this issue. 

3 1. 
The Cameroonian authorities were both challenged and intrigued by Bank proposals to prepare 
the PRSP through a broad participatory process. They understood that poverty and exclusion were 
detrimental to social cohesion and national unity, which were important though hitherto unspoken pillars 
in the national development strategy. A t the same time, they realized that “raising the lid” on popular 
perceptions could result in rising expectations, confrontation, and potentially open conflict. Participation 
methods were therefore carefully chosen to emphasize solidarity rather than social differences. 

32. 
The planned shift from adjustment to investment lending in support of poverty alleviation was not 
accomplished during the CAS period. The poorly performing Health, Fertility and Nutrition Project was 
restructured in 1999 and half of the credit was cancelled. The Social Development Project was dropped 
from the CAS lending program. The Education Sector Project was first forwarded to FY99 and then 
dropped.6 Th e Agricultural Extension and Research Project was forwarded to FY99. A Forestry and 
Environment Project (FY02) was added to the lending program in the 2000 CAS Update. 
It is currently 
scheduled for Board presentation in FY03. Consequently, the Bank was unable to provide the lending 

5 

The Agricultural Ex tens ion and Research Project was approved only in FY99, so it was perhaps prema ture to expec t a 
measurable increase in farmer productivity due to the project by the year 2000. 
In its place, a H igher Education Technical Training LIL was approved in FY98 . 
Th is pro jec t contained a pilot component for community-driven development. 

6 

I 

Annex 3 - CAS Completion Report 

-8 - 

support originally envisaged for activities aimed at poverty alleviation in Cameroon during th e CAS 
period. 

33 . 
On the non-lending front, activities originally planned to produce Bank sector strategy notes were 
transformed into support for the Government to prepare an Interim PRSP and to initiate the participatory 
preparation of sector strategies and expenditure programs for the PRSP itself. Ultimately, Government 
strategies were produced with Bank support for Health, Education, Rural Development, and Governance. 
The Bank continued to provide informal support to improve forestry management, as well as to improve 
social and economic statistics. Finally, the Country Office administered in the period from 1997 to 2000 
a Small Grants Fund to support local civil society initiatives. 

34. 
In fact, the Government has made rather remarkable progress in income poverty reduction over 
the CAS period. Poverty levels are basically back to where they were before the depression years. 
However, the Government’s capacity to deliver services related to poverty alleviation has declined 
dramatically. Continued progress in poverty reduction will be much more difficult to accomplish. It will 
require addressing structural deficiencies in the delivery of services and the obstacles faced by th e poor in 
securing access to assets and employment. It will almost certainly require greater involvement by the 
private sector and civil society. 
In that sense, the accomplishments of the CAS period may not be 
sustainable unless the Government seriously embarks upon the “second generation” of reforms identified 
in the PRSP, while at the same time increasing the pace of growth and improving the management of 
public resources. 

3 5 . 
Private Sector Development. The third “pillar” of the 1996 CAS was creating an environment 
attractive to private sector investment. The CAS established five outcomes it aimed to accomplish in this 
area: 
( i) improving the incentive and regulatory framework; 
(ii) improving the functioning of the 
judiciary system; (iii) reforming the financial sector; (iv) maintaining and developing basic [transport] 
infrastructure; and (v) completing the privatization program already started under SAL I and t h e ERC. 
An ambitious list of performance indicators was also established: elimination of monopolies in the 
petroleum sector, liberalization of marine transport, phasing out of export taxes, privatization of all large 
public enterprises and banks, recovery of loan assets, and maintenance of the road network. Although not 
defined in quantitative terms, these were operationally defined, measurable targets, which served as 
effective benchmarks for Bank and Government performance. 

36. 
As a result of this clear definition, and possibly also as a result of the fact that many o f these 
objectives had already been the subject of extensive policy dialogue with Government over t h e years 
preceding the CAS, substantial progress was achieved in this area, with one exception: little progress was 
achieved on judicial reform, The petroleum monopoly was eliminated; 
international shipping was 
liberalized; export taxes were removed; the privatization agenda was largely accomplished, although a 
few difficult cases remain to be completed; liquidity was restored to the banking sector; a priority road 
network was defined, a Road Fund involving public and private stakeholders was created to finance and 
manage road maintenance, and the priority road network has been successfully maintained with 
increasing involvement by local contractors. 

37. 
The policy agenda was well articulated in and strongly supported by the two structural adjustment 
credits (SAC I1 and SAC 111) which were the key features of Bank lending over the CAS period. In 
addition, the implementation of reforms was supported by a Transport Sector Technical Assistance 
Project (FY95), a Privatization Technical Assistance Project (FY96), and a Pub l idpr iva te Partnerships 
TA Project (FYOO). The implementation of reforms in the financial sector was also supported by a senior 
Bank financial specialist assigned to the Resident Mission for the duration. 

Annex 3 - CAS Completion Report 

-9- 

38. 
The implementation of the SAC I1 reform program was slower than expected. Consequently, the 
delivery date for SAC I11 was shifted from FY97 to FY98. The policy agenda for SAC I11 was also 
broadened over th is period. Its objective became to support the implementation of the entire program 
outlined in the Government 's Policy Framework Paper (1997-1999). The policy agenda for SAC I11 
included the actions which Government had found it most difficult to undertake, and the logic was that 
significant financial flows would be sufficient to induce Government to take the final steps needed to 
establish a healthy environment for private sector development. In fact, SAC I11 experienced even more 
delays than SAC 11, and its reform agenda is still not entirely implemented.' Completion of the SAC I11 
program is a key condition for Cameroon to reach the HIPC Completion Point and gain unrestricted 
access to HIPC resources. 

39. 
A Transport Sector Project was planned and delivered in FY96 to support privatization of state- 
owned transport companies, ensure the rehabilitation and maintenance of a priority road network, and 
implement other sector reforms. The 1998 CAS Update introduced a new project to provide 
implementation support for the privatization of the Cameroon Railway, which was finally delivered in 
FY03. The logic of these investment operations was that sector lending could improve resource 
management, encourage private entrepreneurship, and generate additional revenues which could be used 
for poverty alleviation. This approach seems to have succeeded through effective collaboration between 
Bank sector staff and Government colleagues. 

40. 
In collaboration with IFC, the Bank also foresaw lending to Cameroon for its share of equity in 
the future Chad/Cameroon Pipeline (FY97). This project ran into difficulties because its first 
Environmental Assessment was not acceptable to the Bank and IFC. In particular, the Bank assessed that 
neither Cameroon nor Chad had the capacity in place to play the role foreseen for them in the EA in terms 
of monitoring the implementation of the Pipeline Project. Consequently, a Capacity Enhancement for 
Petroleum Development and Environment (CAPECE) project was added to the Cameroon lending 
program in the FY98 CAS Update.' Extensive consultations with civil society on the revised 
environmental documentation further delayed these projects, which were finally delivered in FYOO. 

41 . 
The 2000 CAS Progress Report introduced additional capacity building projects to support the 
implementation of reforms, including one to promote publidprivate partnerships (FYOO), one to support 
commercial bank debt restructuring (FYO I) , and one to provide technical assistance to the social sectors 
(FYO 1 ) . The publidprivate partnerships project was approved as planned, while the other two projects 
were dropped." The Commercial Bank Debt Restructuring Project was replaced with a regional credit to 
the Central African Economic and Monetary Community (CEMAC). The $50 million originally 
allocated to the two dropped projects was reallocated to an unprogrammed Multisectoral HIV/AIDS 
project approved in FYO 1. 

42. 
Non-lending activities related to private sector development over the CAS period were less 
extensive than for the other two pillars, perhaps because the policy dialogue in this area was already well 
underway. The Government may also have been more readily convinced and committed to change in this 
area, although there was significant resistance to privatization by key stakeholders both inside and outside 

8 

9 

I t seems that port privatization has been the element which caused the grea tes t delays. 
In th is case, the 
Bank may have underestimated both the reluctance of the Government to take action in th is area, and the complexity o f the new 
institutional arrangements which would b e needed, in view o f new international agreements that came into force in the meantime. 
A similar project was prepared for Chad. 
The Pub l icP r iva te Par tnersh ips Project was basically a vehicle to provide technical ass is tance in a w ide variety of areas 
to Government to suppor t implementation of the SAC 111 agenda. While it largely supported privatization, it a lso provided 
support for poverty monitoring, development of a new regulatory framework for micro-finance institutions, and soc ia l security 
reform. 

10 

Annex 3 - CAS Completion Report 

-10- 

the Government. 
Informal advice on judicial reform was planned in the 1998 CAS Update, and a 
Judiciary Reform Strategy, together with work on Core Labor Standards, was planned in the 2000 CAS 
Upda te . However, these activities were not carried out, and little measurable progress has yet been 
achieved in this area. 

43 . 
In retrospect, the mix of lending and non-lending activities for this area was appropriate and 
successful in achieving most of the desired outcomes. (See Annex D.) Policy dialogue and financial 
incentives through adjustment operations were important in generating government commitment in the 
early stages. Successful implementation of key initial reforms created the momentum for further 
progress. The policy dialogue was strongly supported by technical assistance and, when appropriate, 
investment operations. The only area where little progress was achieved was judicial reform." 

44. 
Borrower performance on the private sector pillar of the CAS was generally good, although there 
were, as always, delays both in the implementation of reforms and in the execution of investment 
projects. The reform program placed heavy demands on the Government in terms of institutional capacity 
and changing institutional mandates. The provision of informal Bank advice as well as project technical 
assistance helped to build capacity and transform good intentions into effective action on the ground. 
Combining clearly defined and time-bound action programs with investment support once reforms had 
been achieved proved to be a successful strategy for achieving change. 

45. 
It appears likely that the progress achieved over the CAS period in building a favorable 
environment for private sector development will be sustained. The restoration of growth and the 
reduction of poverty which have been achieved over this period can only strengthen the hand of reformers 
who promoted private sector development and weaken those who opposed it. Though reforms have 
challenged some key constituencies which benefited from the old way of doing things, they have spread 
the benefits of growth beyond the political elite and significantly strengthened the role of the commercial 
and industrial middle classes. Because of the limited investment response, however, these reforms have 
yet to benefit the poor in a significant way. 

46. 
Additional CAS Objectives. During the extended CAS implementation period, two additional 
issues gained prominence as potential obstacles to the achievement of Cameroon 's long-term goals. 
These were (i) governance, and (ii) HIV/AIDS. These issues cross-cut the pillars of the CAS, as they 
have major implications for macroeconomic stability, poverty reduction, and private sector development. 
The 1998 CAS Progress Report brought forward the governance issue, and the concern about HIV/AIDS 
was introduced in the 2000 CAS Progress Report. 

47. 
Governance. Although it was implied by the objective of improving public resource 
management, governance was not explicitly identified as an issue in the 1996 CAS. However, the 1998 
CAS Progress Report presented an extensive discussion of the governance issue in Cameroon. This 
followed a public recognition of the problem by the Government, partly precipitated by its classification 
by Transparency International as the most corrupt country in the world. Government understanding of the 
links between its governance problems and the reluctance of the international community to invest in 
Cameroon had matured since 1996, partly as a result of IDA policy dialogue. The 2000 CAS Update 
planned for a Governance Overview to assist the Government in the preparation of a Governance and 
Anti-Corruption Strategy for the PRSP. This review was carried out, and an operation to support 
Government actions in this area is planned for the next CAS. 

11 

A componen t to support jud ic ia l reforms was included in the Privatization TA Project, bu t could not be imp lemen ted . 

Annex 3 - CAS Completion Report 

-1 1- 

48. 
HIV/AIDS. An extraordinary effort was made by the Bank team during the period following the 
1998 CAS Progress Report to get the Government of Cameroon to recognize the potential magnitude of 
th e HIV/AIDS threat and to undertake preventive action before the epidemic reached crisis proportions. 
Like poverty, HIV/AIDS was a problem that proved difficult for the Government to acknowledge and 
address. A national strategy and program were supposedly in place, but little progress had been achieved 
on the ground. The Bank made a point of raising the issue in high level policy dialogue, retrofitting its 
ongoing operations to improve the focus on HIV/AIDS, and including HIV/AIDS components in projects 
under preparation. A consultant to the Agricultural Extension Project, which had piloted the 
incorporation of HIV/AIDS concerns, was assigned to assist the Government in implementing its 
program. However, there was a fundamental difference between the Bank’s view of HIV/AIDS as a 
threat to a country’s development prospects, and the Government’s view of it as primarily a health 
problem. Consequently, by 1990 little had been accomplished relative to the Bank’s ambitious agenda for 
HIV/AIDS. Subsequently, however, with support through the Multisectoral HIV/AIDS Project (FYOl), 
the quality of the dialogue has improved and the Government of Cameroon has begun to take action on 
HIV/AIDS . 
49 . 
Summary Assessment. A majority of the CAS’S planned outcomes were achieved, including 
those most relevant to the country’s own goals. As a result, Cameroon has returned to a growth path and 
has become eligible for international debt relief, an important prerequisite for shifting the focus of public 
expenditures to poverty reduction. Despite a failure to achieve many actions believed to be essential for 
poverty reduction, in fact, income poverty, which had increased substantially due to the economic crisis, 
returned to pre-depression levels over the CAS period. This suggests that macroeconomic adjustment 
complemented by improved performance in key sectors such as finance and infrastructure can help a 
country overcome the poverty-inducing consequences of a severe depression. However, such actions are 
not likely to be sufficient to address persistent structural poverty problems. These remain to be addressed 
in a second generation program which will likely take another ten years to implement. 

50. 
The pillar of improvedpub l ic resource management has been substantially achieved in terms of 
the original CAS objectives of enhancing revenue, controlling inflation, managing debt, and controlling 
public expenditure. Settlement of domestic debt arrears is still ongoing. Budgetary reallocation in favor 
of priority sectors and regions became meaningless when it proved impossible to verify actual 
expenditures. Civil service reforms were planned and programmed but rarely implemented. Public 
expenditure management received a good deal of attention during the CAS period, as it was closely 
related to governance issues; many reports were prepared and discussed, but performance in this area, 
though part of the structural adjustment agenda, has not yet substantially improved. l 2 The rehabilitation of 
Cameroon’s public finances was further slowed by the Asian financial crisis, by declining output from its 
domestic oilfields, and by the reluctance of donors other than the Bank to come forward with new 
investment. In retrospect, the strategy of support for Cameroon’s structural adjustment program worked 
where the Government was firmly committed to implementing the program, but failed where the 
Government did not really want to change. 

51. 
On the poverty reduction pillar, the challenge to the World Bank Team was to convince the 
Government that poverty should be addressed along with, rather than after, restoring economic growth. 
Needed actions were identified in the CAS, but these did not correspond to Government priorities, and 
consequently little was achieved in terms of measurable change in outcome indicators. Instead, the CAS 
period was largely spent in conducting intensive policy dialogue and involving stakeholders to convince 
the Government of the need for fundamental change. The one attempt to bring about change through 

12 

Improved performance in public expenditure and resource management is expected t o materialize w i th the introduction 
of the integrated information and financial management system of government revenue and expenditure, imp lemen ta t ion o f 
which started in late 2001 (as a prior action for the second PRGF review), and is to be completed by end-Sep tember 2003. 

Annex 3 - CAS Completion Report 

-12- 

investment lending in advance of Government commitment proved a failure (the Health, Population and 
Nutrition Project). Wisely, other planned projects in Education and Social Development were postponed 
or dropped. 

52. 
The Agricultural Research and Extension Project did go forward, aimed at achieving institutional 
and cultural change, and including a pilot program in community-based development. This successful 
pilot became the basis for preparing a national community-based development program which is expected 
to go forward, with Bank support, during the next CAS period. In Education, a LIL was used to test the 
Government’s willingness to experiment and learn from experience. While the LIL did not succeed in 
getting Government to adopt needed management changes, it stimulated a dialogue which contributed 
toward the preparation of the Government’s Education Sector Strategy for the PRSP. Clearly, the lending 
strategy envisaged under the CAS to support poverty alleviation evolved in response to a recognition that 
change in Cameroon would not come easily and would require a shared learning approach to be 
sustainable. 

53. 
Exogenous factors affecting the achievement of poverty alleviation objectives during the CAS 
period were mainly the same factors as those that slowed the pace of growth: the Asian financial crisis, 
declining oil production, and the reluctance of donors and the private sector to re-engage in Cameroon. 
The difference between the substantial achievement of growth objectives and the minimal progress 
towards poverty alleviation objectives over the CAS period was mainly due to endogenous factors; first, 
lack of information, then weak political commitment, and finally the lack of Government capacity to 
deliver the needed services. Bank efforts during this period were aimed at, first, filling the information 
gap, and second, raising consciousness, generating commitment, and bringing civil society into the 
dialogue on poverty. Joint work with Government and civil society on poverty-oriented sector strategies 
set the stage for directing future HIPC resources towards poverty alleviation. Shared learning experiences 
were key to generating the necessary understanding and commitment, and may have done much to 
reactivate latent capacity in Government as well. 

54. 
On private sector development, substantial progress was achieved in financial sector reform, 
privatization of parastatals, and creation of regulatory capacity in the public sector. In infrastructure, a 
priority road network was defined and new institutions put in place to plan and carry out road 
maintenance in a sustainable manner. However, these changes failed to elicit a strong response from 
investors, apparently due to concern over governance and corruption issues. Because of the limited 
investment response, there was limited opportunity to ensure that growth would be employment- 
generating and pro-poor. Though privatization was successfully accomplished, it took longer than 
expected, and the consequences for growth were not as impressive as they might have been. Social and 
environmental constraints on private sector development were not fully anticipated by the Government, 
and entered the Bank (and IFC) dialogue only at a late stage. The main issues impeding investment, 
however, were those related to governance. 

5 5 . 
Sustainability. The PRSP preparation process and the impending release of HIPC resources have 
created a momentum for change that augurs well for the sustainability of the reforms achieved so far and 
the chances of achieving “second generation” reforms in the near future. Nevertheless, there are still 
significant risks associated with the magnitude of investments needed to achieve growth targets and the 
management of social tensions, including threats to security. Continued economic growth and a visible 
increase in the commitment of Government to resolve governance and poverty issues should help to 
mitigate these risks in the coming years. Finally, the spread of HIV/AIDS remains a serious threat to the 
country’s development prospects. 

5 6 . 
Institutional Impact. The CAS agenda was largely one of policy reform, and this agenda has been 
nearly completed. Institutional change has taken place at the top levels o f Government. It is difficult to 

Annex 3 - CAS Completion Report 

-13- 

assess at this point how far these changes have penetrated the culture of Government institutions and 
changed the behavior of civil servants. Institutions serving the private sector have been significantly 
transformed, and there is no possibility of going back on these reforms. Regional trade and regional 
institutions have been successfully promoted. Good work has been started on developing publidprivate 
partnerships for service provision. The Bank has played an important role in widening the space for 
public participation in decision making and in mobilizing capacity in the private sector. However, the 
Government has still not fully implemented civil service reforms, improved its performance in public 
expenditure management, or addressed the judicial reform agenda. 

C. 

Bank Performance 

57. 
Portfolio performance, The 1996 CAS described the problems which had plagued the earlier 
generation of IBRD-financed projects: absence of counterpart funds, failure to comply with audit 
requirements, mismanagement of special accounts, and failure to observe Bank procurement  procedure^.'^ 
However, it expressed confidence that the new portfolio of IDA-financed operations would operate under 
substantially improved conditions, due to intensified supervision and closer monitoring by staff in the 
Resident Mission, as well as by required hiring of financial managers and independent auditors by the 
implementing agencies. In 1998, despite these measures, portfolio performance remained very weak. A 
1997 CPPR produced action plans to improve disbursements under the two ongoing investment 
operations, and responsibility for managing these projects was transferred to the Resident Mission. 
Another CPPR and Portfolio Action Plan were scheduled for FY98. 

58. 
Through intensive efforts by the Bank, the quality of the portfolio improved significantly between 
1998 and 2000. A procurement specialist was hired in the Country Office, and a financial specialist was 
added in FY02. Six ongoing IDA operations and the GEF project were rated satisfactory in FYOO. 
However, the Health, Fertility and Nutrition Project (FY95) continued to perform poorly until its closure 
in FYO1. The portfolio has now increased to eleven active projects. A CPPR undertaken in December 
2002 highlighted continuing problems: procurement and disbursement delays, inadequate implementation 
capacity, and shortcomings in project supervision. Recently, the Country Office has taken on additional 
responsibility for managing the quality of the portfolio. 

59. 
Despite the fact that all projects carry two “risk” flags for country risk and country 
macroeconomic management, the number of potential problem projects has remained low, indicating tha t 
project execution is generally satisfactory. Furthermore, there are different potential problem projects in 
each year, indicating that identified problems are being solved on a case-by-case basis. There are no 
longer significant problems with counterpart funding or project management, indicating tha t Government 
is now more supportive of the Bank’s program. Eight projects have been subjected to a Quality of 
Supervision Analysis by the Bank’s Quality Assurance Group (QAG); six have been rated Satisfactory 
and two Marginal.14 A Quality at Entry review of the Agricultural Extension and Research Support 
project rated this project as Marginal, apparently for macro rather than project-related reasons (failure of 
the Government to proceed on civil service reform more generally). Finally, a QAG review of the 
Cameroon CPAR rated this piece of Fiduciary ESW as Satisfactory. 

6 0 . 
Aid Coordination. A t the beginning of the CAS period, the Bank was almost alone in providing 
donor support to Cameroon. The country was seen as a reluctant reformer, and other donors waited to see 

13 

Furthermore, most of the projects approved from 1982 to 1994 had unsatisfactory outcomes, uncertain sustainability, 
and modest to negligible institutional impact. Thus, they were not really good investments for the Government of Cameroon. 
One o f the Marginal projects (Food Security) is now closed; the other (Pub l icPr iva te Partnerships) is be ing given 
increased management attention. 

14 

Annex 3 - CAS Completion Report 

-14- 

real evidence of its commitment to improved governance and poverty alleviation before re-engaging with 
Cameroon in a significant way. Those donors who maintained a presence in the country accompanied the 
PRSP process with interest. An awareness that the international community saw poverty alleviation as 
the key justification for debt relief undoubtedly helped strengthen the Government’s commitment to the 
process. 

61. 
The 1996 CAS expected the Bank to play a catalytic role in assisting the Government to obtain 
the financing it needed to achieve its short-term objectives. A Consultative Group meeting was carried out 
in FY97, under IDA leadership. However, aid flows continued to be low, and by 2000 donor coordination 
was viewed as unsatisfactory because of inadequate leadership by Government. The PRSP process has 
proved to be a good mechanism for involving other donors, together with Cameroon civil society, in 
building a firm consensus on the programs to be supported under the PRSP with HIPC funds. UNDP has 
been helpful on governance and poverty issues, and UNAIDS plays a key role in the Bank assistance 
strategy on HIV/AIDS. 

62 . 
Consultation and Coordination with Development Partners. The 1996 CAS was based primarily 
on consultation with a f ew key leaders in Cameroon. The private sector agenda was quickly broadened to 
include consultation with private sector groups in Cameroon and outside. However, public sector reforms 
were often blocked by government officials who had not been involved in developing the CAS strategy. 
Realization of this result led the Country Team to initiate more dialogue with sector decision makers. 
Over the CAS period, this process was gradually broadened to include more civil servants and 
representatives of civil society. The culmination of this process was the preparation of a PRSP in a truly 
participatory manner. 

63. 
A client feedback survey conducted in 1999 showed a perceived disconnect between the Bank’s 
rhetoric on poverty reduction and the priority given to poverty reduction in its program in Cameroon. 
Respondents felt that the Bank relied too heavily on technical assistance and not enough on building local 
capacity. They wished for more communication, sharing of Bank documents, and solicitation of 
beneficiary input in the design as well as the implementation and evaluation of projects. The Country 
Team interpreted these findings as reflecting a lack of communication. The Country Office has now 
implemented a dynamic outreach strategy. 

D. 

Lessons Learned 

64. 
This assessment confirms the continuing validity of OED’s 2000 evaluation of the Cameroon 
country assistance program. OED suggested that the future challenge for the Bank would be to assist 
Cameroon to design and implement measures which would lead to an efficient use of the savings to be 
generated through the HIPC process. Given the shrinking administrative budget and small prospective 
lending program, the report urged the Bank to be selective in the next CAS, concentrating on a smaller 
number o f reforms tha t could be closely monitored and would be likely to produce tangible results. 

Annex 3 - CAS Completion Report 

-15- 

65. 

The following lessons can be learned from implementation of the 1996 CAS: 

e 

e 

b 

e 

e 

e 

A consistent and sustained country dialogue is needed to get results. 
Adjustment lending needs to be followed up with investment operations to build capacity and 
consolidate commitment to reforms. 
Growth performance in Cameroon must be sustained through continuing support to private sector 
development. 
Future growth needs to be made more pro-poor through a focus on improving agriculture and 
other income-generating activities, as well as improving service delivery to the poor. 
Participation and a “learning approach” are key to building commitment and capacity both in 
Government and in the private sector. 
Governance issues must be addressed as an integral part of a comprehensive development 
framework. 

66. 
The experience of the 1996 CAS shows that reforms can be carried out even under the most 
difficult conditfons, but they will probably take longer than expected. Government may be the best judge 
of the pace at which policy reform can be implemented without straining the social fabric of a country. 
However, even extensive policy reform will not generate much economic growth if investor confidence is 
not restored. Therefore, governance issues should receive a high priority in order to speed up the pace of 
investment. 

67. 
Before policy reform can be achieved, Government must be convinced that a problem is serious 
and must be committed to its solution. Policy reforms pushed through by a macroeconomic team can be 
blocked at the sectoral level. Even with high level commitment in sector ministries, implementation may 
be delayed if middle level civil servants have not developed ownership for the reforms and a client 
orientation. Thus, institutional analysis, stakeholder analysis, and beneficiary participation are needed to 
design and implement successful sector strategies. Given the reduced capacity of Government to provide 
public services, there is a need to place greater reliance on the private sector and civil society to 
complement Government initiatives. 

68. 
The adjustment agenda is now largely completed and with full HIPC resources in sight, 
Cameroon no longer risks net negative transfers. Structural or sectoral adjustmenthnvestment operations 
(SECALs, SILs o r hybrids) could usefully combine remaining reforms with investment support focused 
on capacity building. N ew approaches should be piloted through LILs or pilot components in ongoing 
projects. “Scaling-up” successful programs should be based on extensive institutional and stakeholder 
analysis and should b e prepared and implemented in a participatory manner. Analytic work under the next 
CAS should address issues which are important for poverty reduction but have been neglected so far, 
including rural f inan c e , natural resource management, and gender issues. It will be important to follow 
through on civil service reforms through decentralization and shared decision-making. Finally, the 
unfinished agenda for public expenditure management and judicial reform should be incorporated in 
future work on governance. 

a 

0

.

a 

0 

a 

0 

a 

0 

a 

a 

a 

0 

a 

a 

a 

0 

a 

o

m

a 

o m 

2 u I 

m 

X 2 4 

 
 
0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0

0

0 

0

0

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0

.

0 

0 

0 

 
 
 
. 

0 

. 

. 0 

0 

0 

0

.

. . . . 

m 

8 4- a 

U 3 m 
-t 
U 

0 

0 d 

3 W a 2 

. 0

.

0

 
 
c! ln 

P 

d 

r 

I 

m 

2 -

 w w 8 

c - 

n d el W 

E 0 

.- c, 

cd 

0 =r 

W 

W 

o

I

n

0 - 

0 

0

- N 

c 

w

0 E 0 Y 

9 8 

0 

8 b 

Y 

+ 

9 0 

I n - 

 
v i 0 

hl 9 

i 
3 

7 m 

vi 

? a \ ? 

m o - m - 

9 

0 

vi 9 

3 

'c! m 

3 

I 

? 

I 

Annex 3 - CAS completion report 

7 

CAS PLANS (01/17/96) 

PROGRESS REPORT (02/18/98) 

FY 

Product 

96 Policy Framework Paper FY96-98 
Public Expenditure Review 
Education Sector Issues Paper 

97 

National Economic Forum 
Public Expenditure Review 
Information and education campaigns on the reform 
agenda 
Country Economic Memorandum 
Household Budget Survey 

98 

Public Expenditure Review 

PROGRESS REPORT PLANS (01/18/98)'* 
IConsolidate work on public investment and expenditure 
98 analysis 
Collaborate with other donors on rebuilding public 
financial management 
Informal advice on forestry management 
Informal advice on judicial reform 

Status 

Actual (never budgeted) 
Dropped (never budgeted) 
Dropped (never budgeted) 
Dropped (never budgeted) 
Actual (not budgeted; not a Bank product) 
Never budgeted 
Never budgeted 
Never budgeted 
Additional Actual Products 

Never budgeted 
Dropped 

Ad-hoc press conferences and reports 
Dropped 
Actual (not budgeted) 
Additional Actual Products 
Consultative Group Meeting 

Dropped 
Additional Actual Products 
CAS Update 
Country Portfolio Performance Review 

PROGRESS REPORT (05/25/00) 
Internal Issues Notes prepared (FY99) 

ctual (not budgeted) 
(never budgeted) 

18 

A detailed description of these products is not provided in the Progress Report; specifically, no target fiscal 
years are established. 

Annex 3 - CAS completion report 

8 

nformal advice on forestry management 
gealth Sector Strategy Note? 
:ducation Sector Strategy Note? 
h a 1 Water and Sanitation Strategy Note 

ever budgeted 
ever budgeted 
ropped 

(not a Bank product) 

PROGRESS REPORT PLANS ‘9(05/25/00) 

COMPLETION REPORT (04/15/03) 

I 

00 

0 1 

Updated Poverty Profile 
Initiating PRSP Process 
BanWIMF Financial Sector Assessment 
Public Expenditure Review 

Actual 
Actual 
Not yet completed 
Dropped 
Additional Actual Products 
PFP 
CAS Update 
Agriculture Sector Strategy 

Support for PRSP Process 
Governance Overview 
Country Financial Accountability Assessment 
Country Procurement and Audit Review 
Health Sector Strategy 
Education Sector Strategy 
Support for Social and Economic Statistics 

Ongoing 
Actual 
Completed in FY02 
Actual 
PRSP Health and Nutrition Workshop FY02 
PRSP Education Workshop FYOl 
Ongoing 

Additional Actual Products 

02 

Support for PRSP Process 
Civil Service Reform Strategy 
Judiciary Reform Strategy 
Review of Core Labor Standards 
Governance and Anti-Corruption Strategy 
Agriculture and Rural Development Strategy 

Ongoing 
Dropped 
Dropped 
Dropped 
Support for Government strategy process 
Actual2’ 

Additional Actual Products: 
CPPR in FY03 

19 

In most cases the fiscal years for these products are not specified in the Progress Report. 
Product title changed to “Rural Sector Review: Selected Issues,” based on the Government’s own Rural 
Development Declaration and forthcoming Strategy. 

20 

m 

0 
0 

hl 

x e 

7 5 3 
d 
b e 

a 

e, 

m m 

- 

0 
0 
0 

hl 

x e B 5 

.- c 
e, b e a 

Y 

m m 

0 

n 

>.I 

4 

N 8 

0 u 

0 5 

3 

.d 

I 

m 9 

0 
3 

k 

4 

9 n 2 

Y 0

:

m 

0 

0 

c.l 

x e 

-8 5 
.- 

5 

< 

cn cn & e a 

0 

3 

0 

0 
0 

c.l 

x e 

-8 5 g 
cn cn & e a 

- 

0 

c ) . 

01 m 

2 

x e 

-8 
.- 5 

cn 

2 c 
e a 

9 
?\ 

>I 
4 

E 

8 

2 .e U 

 
m 

0 

0 hl 

x e z 5 

d m m & El a 

- 

0 

0 

0 hl x e 

-0 a, 5 

* - 

3 

4 

m Le & El a 

3 
3 

c 0 

1- Y 4 

__ 

a, 8 

Z - 

" 3 

W E z 

L I 

> 0 a 

U 

0 

0 - 

5 
c 0 

s L 

3 z 

c) e 

i 

a 0 

- 

Q) r 

a" 

L 0 u c) 

r% 

c) e 

i 

Q) 

m c) 

.t 

k 

e L 

c .3 

e 
> e 

a4 

w 

z E 

0 

2 

Lr 

Q) m c) 

2 

U 

3 3 3 . h 
I 

Y 

4 

x 0 z - 

3 z - . n Y 
9 * 
n 

L 

4 

m 

0 
0 
PI 

-0 

x D 
W > W 3 

d v1 v1 

ki 

e a 

E 3 

0 
0 
0 

C.l x 9 

2 

% 3 

d v1 tn 

ki 

e a 

2 

0 

4-l 

W 

5 c 

Annex 3 - CAS completion report 

13 

Annex E. Evolution of Economic and Social Indicators over the CAS Period 

Child malnutrition 

Access to safe water 

Adult illiteracy 

Primary school enrollment 

AIDS prevalence 

13.6 

n.a. 

46 

101 

n.a. 

14 

41 

37 

89 

n.a. 

29 

44 

26 

78 

7% 

22 

62 

23 

91 

12% 

ANNEX 4 - CAMEROON: IDA LENDING AND DEBT SUSTAINABILITY 

I. 
Introduction 
1 . 
The provision of assistance under the Enhanced HIPC Initiative would reduce substantially 
Cameroon's external debt burden. Cameroon reached the Decision Point under the Enhanced HIPC 
Initiative in October 2000. At end-June 1999, Cameroon's disbursed and outstanding debt amounted to 
US$7,802 million in nominal terms. The net present value (NPV) of this debt, after assuming the full use 
o f traditional debt relief mechanisms' (US$4,691 million), was equivalent to 205 percent of exports. The 
Enhanced HIPC assistance to be provided to Cameroon would amount to US$1,260 million in NPV 
terms. As can be seen in Chart 1, this reduction would bring down the ratio to 150 percent at end-June 
1999 and, under the assumptions made at the Decision Point2, the ratio would decline steadily during the 
complete period of analysis (FY99/00 - FY 18/19). The delivery of bilateral assistance beyond HIPC3 at 
the Completion Point would further reduce the ratio. 

Chart 1. Cameroon: NPV of debt-to-exports ratio 
projections 

(based on the Decision Point figures) 

-After 
Traditional Debt Relief 
..m.. After Enhanced HIPC Assistance 
After Additional Bilateral Assistance 

210 

190 

170 

110 

90 

70 

2. 
The World Bank assistance under the Enhanced HIPC Initiative would amount to US$179 
million in NPV terms. Following the Decision Point Document, this assistance was to be delivered 
through: (i) the provision of IDA supplemental HIPC debt relief grants during the interim period4 to cover 
45 percent of IBRD debt-service due (equivalent to US$60 million in NPV terms o r one third of the total 
assistance to be provided by the Bank), (ii) a supplemental HIPC debt relief credit from IDA of US$118 
million at the Completion Point to repay outstanding IBRD debt; and (iii) a reduction of 51 percent in 
IDA debt service falling due after completion point and through May 2009. The mechanisms described 
above would have reduced the debt service payments by about US$266 million. However, since the 

1 

2 

Stock o f deb t operation on Nap les terms on official bilateral and commercial debt. 
The main assump t ions were the following: (i) a real GDP growth rate rising from 5 percent to 7 percent, with a low 
inflation (2 percent); (ii) a growth o f expor t volumes of 6 .2 percent in average; (iii) an increase of the revenue to GDP ra t io f rom 
16 percent to 21 percent; and (iv) highly concessional new financing. 
For the purpose o f th is exercise, this scenario was prepared based on preliminary estimates on the amoun t o f the 
bilateral assistance beyond HIPC. The final figures may change significantly in terms of the level o f the assistance and the profile 
of its delivery. 
Other ma jor multilateral creditors and the Paris C lub are also providing interim assistance. 

3 

4 

- 2 - 

Annex 4 - Cameroon: IDA lending and debt sustainability 
Completion Point would be reached after the date that was assumed at the Decision Point', the nominal 
amount and the schedule of assistance to be provided by the Bank after the Completion Point will need to 
be adjusted. 

11. 

The NPV of debt-to-exports ratio under the CAS lending scenarios 

(i) The evolution of the ratio until the end of the CAS period 
3. 
During the period July 1999 - June 2006, the NPV of debt-to exports ratio6 would remain 
below 150 percent and would be broadly in line compared to the Decision Point projections. As at 
end-June 2002 the NPV of debt-to-exports ratio would have reached 137 percent, compared to 134 
percent projected at the Decision Point (see Chart 2). Additionally, the results of the simulations for the 
CAS baseline indicate that the NPV of debt-to-exports ratio at the end of the CAS period would reach 88 
percent, three percentage points above the level projected at Decision Point7. 

Chart 2. Cameroon: NPV of debt-to-exports ratio 
projections 

8 
8 

..A.. Decision Point 
..A.. Decision Point 

130 - 
p 120 - 
p 120 - 
4 110 - 
4 110 - 
100 - 
100 . - * . .U p d a t e d exports 
Updated exports 
90 - - Updated exports & CAS baseline 
new borrowing 
80 ' 

9 9 / 0 0 

00/01 

98 /99 

01/02 

CAS period 

i ........... "" 
i ........... "" 

I 

I 

02/03 

03/04 

04/05 

05/06 

4 . 
The proximity of the decision point figures with the updated projections is, nonetheless, the result 
of two major changes that would off-set each other until the end of the CAS period: 
0 Cameroon's lower actuaVprojected exports performance compared to the Decision 
Point projections. Actual exports for the period July 1999 - June 2002 have been lower 
by about seven percent in average than projected at the Decision Point (see Table 1). 
Also, for the rest of the period of analysis the updated exports projections are well below 
the Decision Point projections (about 20 percent lower in average for the CAS period and 
about 29 percent lower in average beyond the CAS period). 
Lower levels of new borrowing compared to the Decision Point projections. Given 
the lower exports, had the new borrowing been as high as in the Decision Point 
Document, the NPV of debt-to-exports ratio would have been ten percentage points 

0 

5 

6 

At the Decision Point it was assumed that the Completion Point would be reached by March 2003. The current 
expectation is that it would be reached by end-April 2004, once the one-year Progress Report on the PRSP is presented to the 
Bank and Fund Boards. This delay is due to a slower than expected progress in the preparation of the PRSP and on the 
implementation of other completion point triggers. 
All the simulations presented in this CAS are updates of the Decision Point debt sustainability analysis. For the period 
July 1999 - June 2002 the Decision Point figures were updated by the actual new borrowing and expor ts and beyond th is period 
by the corresponding figures (new borrowing and exports) under the different CAS scenarios. However, th is s imu la t ions do not 
take into account the evolution of exchange rates and discount rates. Given the sensitivity of the NPV of debt-to-exports ratio to 
th is factors, the results of the full DSA that will be conducted for the Completion Point may be significantly different. 
' Under the CAS high-case and the CAS low-case lending scenarios, the NPV of debt-to-exports ratio wou ld reach 88 and 86 
percent, respectively. 

-3 - 
Annex 4 - Cameroon: IDA lending and debt sustainability 
higher than projected at the Decision Point. However, actual disbursements for the period 
July 1999 - June 2002 would have been about 39 percent lower than projected at the 
Decision Point (Table l) , and during the CAS period, they are expected to be about 27 
percent lower. Consequently, by the end of the CAS period, the stock of total debt would 
be about 18 percent lower than projected at the Decision Point. 
I - Table 1. Cameroon: decision point and CAS baseline exports 
(US$ million unless otherwise indicated) 

99/00 00/01 01/02 Aver. 

02/03 

03/04 04/05 05/06 Aver. 

99/02 

Actual/Proiections 
Exports of goods and services 

CAS period 
Proiections 

CAS 

Aver. 

06 /19 

Decision Point 
CAS baseline 
% change 

2,743 
2,721 
-0.8 

2,766 2,868 2,792 
2,707 2,377 2,602 
-2.1 
-17.1 
-6.8 

3,051 
2,770 
-9.2 

3,286 3,538 
2,880 2,804 
-12.4 
-20.7 

3,768 
2,823 
-25.1 

3,53 1 
2,836 
-19.7 

6,139 
4,365 
-28.9 

Decision Point 
CAS baseline 1/ 
% change 

175 
162 
-7.8 

265 

188 

-29.3 

Nominal disbursements 

363 
142 
-60.9 

268 
164 
-38.9 

361 
24 1 
-33.1 

407 
365 
-10.3 

443 
312 
-29.6 

48 1 
297 
-38.2 

444 
325 
-26.8 

612 
122 
-80.0 

Stock of total debt in NPV terms 21 

3,485 
3,420 
-1.9 

Decision Point 
CAS baseline 
% change 
1/ Consistent with the PRSP projections. 
21 After additional bilateral assistance 

3,558 3,753 3,599 
3,483 3,553 3,485 
-2.1 
-5.3 
-3.2 

3,358 
3,061 
-8 .8 

2,709 2,852 
2,372 2,436 
-12.4 
-14.6 

3,013 
2,484 
-17.6 

2,858 
2,43 1 
-15.0 

4,46 1 
2,575 
-42.3 

(ii) The evolution of the ratio beyond the CAS period 

5 . 

Th e results of the simulations suggest that under the three scenarios proposed in the CAS , 
the NPV of debt-to-exports ratio would remain below 150 percent during the complete period of 
analysis (see Chart 3). Due to the material reduction in new borrowing figures under the CAS baseline, 
at end June-20 19 the NPV of debt to exports ratio would reach 4 1 percent, 3 1 percentage point lower than 
projected a t the Decision Point. At the same date, the NPV of debt-to exports ratio under the CAS 
highcase and lowcase scenarios would reach 4 4 and 39 percent, respectively. 

Annex 4 - Cameroon: IDA lending and debt sustainability 

-4- 

Chart 3. Cameroon: NPV of debt-to-exports ratio 
projections 

6 . 
Debt sustainability prospects for Cameroon seems robust under the CAS scenarios. Two 
alternative scenarios have been prepared: i) lower exports growth starting in 2006/07 ( 3 percentage points 
lower than projected under the CAS baseline), and ii) higher levels of new borrowing starting in 2010- 
20118. The impact of lower exports in the NPV of debt-to-exports ratio would be an increase of 11 
percentage points in average beyond the CAS period (see Chart 4). Similarly, the ratio would be raised by 
about 5 percentage points if higher levels of new borrowing are assumed. However, in both casesg the 
ratio would remain below 100 percent. A s shown in Chart 4, similar results are obtained for the CAS high 
case scenario. 

Chart 4. Cameroon: NPV of debt-to-exports ratio 
projections 

100 

8 0 - 
! ' O - 

- z 

60 ~ 

50 - 

-CAS 

hasecave 

. . . . . . 

CAS barecave (high new 
ho r ron ing ) 11 
. . t. ' CAS havecase ( lower exports) 
- . I - . CAS basecase (high new 
bo r row ing& lower exports) 11 
h i g h c u e (high new 
borrowing & lower exporta) 11 

*CAS 

'1. 

'.. .,, 

"1.. 

'.. 

".. 

., 

'.., 

. . 

'.., 

'. ..., '.. 
. .. 
.. 

... 

I... 

\ 

7 . 
Notwithstanding these results, Cameroon remains vulnerable to shocks beyond its control and , 
to increased levels of new borrowing. For this reason, it will be important to monitor closely the evolution 
of the external debt indicators and ensure that a prudent borrowing policy is maintained". Th is would 
include the linkage of the Bank's assistance program during this CAS and beyond to debt sustainability 
indicators, limiting the commitments consistently with the sustainability of the external debt. 

8 

Starting at this year, the PRSP new borrowing projections start to decline dramatically. In the alternative scenario, it is 
assumed tha t new borrowing would follow the latest IMF projections. 
An even considering the combined effect. 
As shown in the simulations, the favorable evolution of the NPV of debt-to-exports ratio is driven mainly by the new 
borrowing projections, which have been significantly revised downwards compared to the Decision Point projections. 

9 
10 

ANNEX 5 - DONORS’ INTERVENTIONS AND PRSP PRIORITIES 

Pr ior ity 6 : 
Streng- 
thening 
human 
resources 

Priority 7 : 
Governance 

LO 

0 t 

m a 

Q " z 

0 6 

9 a z 

CD 0 t 
9 " 2 

0 6 

B t 
0 t 

kc9 

m r-* 

m r - w 

0 

2 

r 

0 

r 

0 

ANNEX A2 

Page 1 of 2 

Cameroon at a d a n c e 

5120103 

POVERTY and SOCIAL 

Cameroon 

2001 
Population, mid-year (millions) 
GNI per capita (Atlas method, US$) 
GNI (Atlas method, US$ billions) 
Ave rage annual growth, 1995-01 
Population (“A) 
Labor force (%) 
M o s t recen t estimate ( la tes t year available, 1995-01) 
Poverty (% o f population below national poverty line) 
Urban population (% of fofal population) 
Life expectancy at birth (years) 
Infant mortality (per 1,000 live births) 
Child malnutrition (% of children under 5 ) 
Access to an improved water source (% of population) 
Illiteracy (“A ofpopulation age 7%) 
Gross primary enrollment (% o f school-age population) 
Male 
Female 
KEY ECONOMIC RATIOS and LONG-TERM TRENDS 
1981 
7 .6 
27.2 
25.3 
19.6 
10.4 
-11.5 

GDP (US$ billions) 
Gross domestic investmenffGDP 
Exports of goods and serviceslGDP 
Gross domestic savingslGDP 
Gross national savingslGDP 
Current account balance/GDP 
Interest paymentslGDP 
Total debffGDP 
Total debt servicelexports 
Present value of debffGDP 
Present value of debffexports 

(average annual growth) 
GDP 
GDP per capita 
Exports of goods and services 

1 .a 

33.4 
17.7 

1981-91 

1991-01 

1.3 
-1.4 
3.9 

2.8 
-0.1 
4.3 

15.2 
550 
8.7 

2.3 
2 .4 

40 
50 
59 
76 
22 
62 
23 
91 
98 
84 

1991 
12.4 
16.7 
20.0 
22.0 
16.3 
-0.4 
1.4 
56.6 
16.8 

2000 

4.8 
2.6 
-5.0 

Sub- 
Saharan 
A f r ica 

674 
470 
317 

2.5 
2.6 

32 
47 
91 

5 5 
37 
78 
85 
72 

2000 
9.2 
17.0 
31.0 
20.0 
15.0 
-1.7 

73.0 
30.8 
70.6 
228.4 

2001 

5 . 3 
2.4 
1.9 

Low - 
income 

2 3 1 1 
430 
1,069 

1.9 
2.3 

31 
59 
76 

76 
37 
96 
103 
88 

2001 
8.5 
17.8 
31.9 
20.5 
16.1 
-1.7 
2.9 
77.3 
24.2 

2001 -05 

4.8 
2.0 
1.9 

Development diamond* 

Life expectancy 

7 

GNI 
Per 
capita 

I I 

Access to improved water source 

-Cameroon 
Low-income group 

~ 

Economic ratios’ 

, 

Trade 

I 

I 

Indebtedness 

-Cameroon 
Low-income group 

~ 

STRUCTURE o f the ECONOMY 

(% of GDP) 
Agriculture 
Industry 
Manufacturing 
Services 
Private consumption 
General government consumption 
Imports of goods and services 

(average annual growth) 
Agriculture 
Industry 
Manufacturing 
Services 
Private consumption 
General government consumption 
Gross domestic investment 
Imports of goods and services 

1981 

29 .4 
29.9 
10.5 
40.7 
71.5 
8 .9 
32.8 

1981 -91 

1 . 1 
2 .5 
2 .2 
-3.5 
1 . 4 
6 . 2 
-6 .2 
1.7 

1991 

2000 

2001 

24.8 
29.5 
14.5 
45.7 
64.7 
13.3 
14 .6 

44.0 
20.0 
10.9 
36.0 

44.0 
18.0 
10.9 
38.0 
81.0 
11.3 
29.0 

79.6 

10.7 
28.0 

1991-01 

2000 

2001 

6.1 

7.2 
6 .6 

4.3 
6.5 
8.6 
5 .3 
6 .0 
12.9 
10.9 
8.5 

1 .o 

2.6 
0.9 
3.8 
2.7 
2.6 
7.3 

6.8 

1.6 
12.9 
7.3 
-1.0 
16.0 

I 

1 Growth of investment and GDP (%) 

20 T 
I 1 0 1 

/

I

!/ 

96 

97 

98 

99 

00 

01 

I 

-GDI 

-GDP 

I 

I 

Growth of exports and imports (Oh) 

20 

*:- 

I 

-10 1 

-Expor& 

-Imports 

Note: 2001 data are preliminary estimates 
The diamonds show four key indicators in the country (in bold) compared with its income-group average. If data are missing, the diamond will 
be incomplete. 

 
ANNEX A2 

Page 2 o f 2 

Cameroon 

PRICES and GOVERNMENT FINANCE 

Domestic prices 
(% change) 
Consumer prices 
Implicit GDP deflator 
Government finance 
(% of GDP, includes current grants) 
Current revenue 
Current budget balance 
Overall surdus/deficit 

TRADE 

( U S millions) 
Total exports (fob) 
Fuel 
Cocoa 
Manufactures 
Total imports (ci9 
Food 
Fuel and energy 
Capital goods 
Export price index (1995=100) 
Import price index (1995=100) 
Terms of trade (1995=100) 

BALANCE of PAYMENTS 

(US$ millions) 
Exports of goods and services 
Imports of goods and services 
Resource balance 
Net income 
Net current transfers 
Current account balance 
Financing items (net) 
Changes in net reserves 
Memo: 
Reserves including gold ( U S millions) 
Conversion rate (DEC, local/US$) 

EXTERNAL DEBT and RESOURCE FLOWS 

(US$ millions) 
Total debt outstanding and disbursed 
IBRD 
IDA 
Total debt service 
IBRD 

IDA 

Composition of net resource flows 
Official grants 
Official creditors 
Private creditors 
Foreign direct investment 
Portfolio equity 
World Bank program 
Commitments 
Disbursements 
Principal repayments 
Net flows 
Interest payments 
Net transfers 

1981 

10.7 
8.8 

20.9 
8.4 
-0.2 

1981 

1,534 
795 
210 
77 
1,611 
65 
198 
388 
88 
41 
213 

1981 

1,670 
2,170 
-500 
-442 
63 
-880 
789 
91 

235.3 

1981 

2,551 

167 173 

304 
16 
6 

233 
137 

0 
51 
9 
42 
13 
29 

1991 

0.1 
3 .6 

15.2 
-2.8 
-8.2 

1991 

2,159 
1,055 
121 
268 
1,251 
199 
9 
392 
54 
48 
112 

1991 

2,487 
1,820 
666 
-775 
58 

-50 

91 
-41 

46 
268.6 

1991 

7,041 
724 
235 
427 
127 
6 

209 
10 

0 
123 
67 
56 
66 
-9 

2000 

-1.0 
3.2 

21.7 
4.2 
1 .4 

2000 

2,125 
989 
119 
381 
1,538 
162 
24 
412 
100 
101 
99 

2000 

2,719 
2,376 
343 
-594 
97 
-153 
395 
-242 

212 
658.2 

2000 

7,037 
225 

769 

851 
75 
12 

0 
-217 
0 
70 
0 

91 
55 
60 
-5 
27 
-32 

2001 

1 .3 
1.7 

19.8 
5.7 
2 .2 

2001 

2,129 

469 

372 
351 

1,617 

181 
63 
416 
1 03 
107 
96 

2001 

2,704 
2,478 
225 
-492 
119 
-148 
317 
-169 

334 
743.5 

2001 

6,575 
188 
758 
659 
67 
13 

26 
-222 
0 
102 
0 

58 
31 
57 
-26 
23 
-49 

O1 I 

I 1 

86 

87 

QE 

00 

00 

I 

-GDP 

deflator &cP I 

I 

Export and import levels (US$ mill.) 

2,500 

2,000 

1,500 

1 ,000 

500 

0 

85 

Q6 

97 

BE 

QQ 

00 

01 

er Exports 

a Imports 

I 

Current account balance to GDP (%) 

Composition of 2001 debt (US$ mill.) 

100.8 

188 

4100 

A - IBRD 
B - IDA 
C - IMF 

D - Other multilateral 

E - Bilateral 
F - Private 
G - Short-term 

Development Economics 

5/20/03 

Cameroon - Selected Indicators* of 
Bank Portfolio Performance and Management 

As Of June 30,2003 

2000 

2001 

2002 

indicator 
Portfolio Assessment 

Number of Projects Under Implementation a 
Average Implementation Period (years) 
Percent of Problem Projects by Number a, 
Percent of Problem Projects by Amount a, 
Percent of Projects at Risk by Number a , d 
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount 
Disbursement Ratio (%) e 

Portfolio Management 

CPPR during the year (yedno) 
Supervision Resources (total US$OOO) 
Average Supervision (US$OOO/project) 

ANNEX 82 
Page 1 of 1 

2003 

9 
3.4 
11.1 
1.1 
33.3 
49.1 
39.5 

9 
3.6 
33.3 
56.2 
55.6 
81.7 
17.1 

9 
1.7 
11.1 
5.7 
11.1 
5.7 
22.3 

no 
1083.6 
98.5 

9 
2.6 
11.1 
1.3 
22.2 
6.2 
14.4 

no 
1160 
105.4 

no 
1.475 (*) 
164 

Yes 
1.246 (*) 
114 

(*) Includes supervision of Cameroon portion of Chad Cameroon Pipeline (USrS460K) 

Memorandum Item 

Proj Eva1 by OED by Number 
Proj Eva1 by OED by Amt (US$ millions) 
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Number 
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt 

Since FY 80 Last Five FYs 

50 
1,547.1 
52.0 
48.8 

5 
68.4 
60.0 
72.1 

a. As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY). 
b. Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio. 
c . Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) and/or implementation progress (IP). 
d. As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program. 
e. Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the 
beginning of the year: Investment projects only. 
* All indicators are for projects active in the Portfolio, with the exception of Disbursement Ratio, 
which includes all active projects as well as projects which exited during the fiscal year. 

Cameroon - IBRDADA Program Summary 
Proposed IBRDADA Base-Case Lending Program a 

Fiscal 
year 
2004 

2005 

2006 

proj ID 

~ 

Forestry/Environment (SECAL) 
Community Development Program 

TOTAL 

Pilot Secondary Infrastructure (LIL) 
Education Sector Reform 
Energy Sector Support (standby) 

TOTAL 

PRSC 
Public Sector Reform 

TOTAL 

TOTAL (2004-2006) 

Strategic 
Rewards 
(HIMIL) 
H 
H 

M 
M 
M 

H 
H 

U S W ) 

15 
20 

35 

5 
15 
10 

30 

50 
10 

60 

125 

ANNEX B3 
Page 1 of 2 

Implementation 
Risks b (H/M/L) 

H 
M 

M 
M 
M 

M 
M 

a. This table presents the proposed program for the next three fiscal years. 
b . For each project, indicate whether the strategic rewards and implementation risks are expected to b e high (H), moderate 
(M), or low (L). 

Cameroon - IFC and MIGA Program, FY 2000-2003 

2000 2001 2002 2003 

ANNEX B3 
Page 2 of 2 

IFC approvals (US$m) 

Sector (YO) 

AGRICULTURE & FORESTRY 
CHEMICALS 
EDUCATION SERVICES 
FINANCE & INSURANCE 
INFORMATION 
OIL, GAS AND MINING 
WHOLES. & RETAIL TRADE 
TEXTILES, LEATHER & APPAREL 
TRANSPORTATION & WAREHOUSE 

TOTAL 

Investment instrument(%) 

Loans 
Equity 
Quasi-Equity 
Gurantees 

TOTAL 

MIGA guarantees (US$m) 

83 .81 0.00 15.87 20.65 

3.89 

0.20 
0 .83 

89 .5 

4 .44 
1 .38 

100 

98 .4 
1 .10 
0 .50 

1.96 

83 .80 
- 96.85 
14.23 

3 .15 

100 

100 

31 .8 

100 

18.9 
49.3 

100 

100 

100 

0.00 0.00 0.00 

0.00 

Cameroon - Summary of Nonlending Services 

As Of June 30,2003 

ANNEX B4 
Page 1 of 1 

Product 

Recent completions 

CPAR 
CFAA 

Underway 

Agriculture Sector Strategy 
Health Country Status Report 

Planned 

Economic monitoring 

Urban Sector Review 
Sources of GrowthIDPR 
Health Sector Note 

PERAGR 
Private sector review 

Povertv Assessment 
CPAR ’ 

Completion FY 

Cost (US$OOO) 

Audience a 

Objective 

2001 
2003 

2003 
2004 

182 
120 .9 

Govern men t 
Government 

Knowledge 
Knowledge 

8 .8 

Bank 
Ban WGvt 

Economic 
Knowledge 

on-going 

90 per year 

Bank 

Economic 

2004 
2004 
2004 

2005 
2005 

2006 
2006 

70 
120 
80 

180 
150 

180 
100 

Bank 
Ban WGvt 
Ban WGvt 

BanWGvt 
Ban WGvt 

Ban WGvt 
Ban WGvt 

Economic 
Knowledge 
Knowledge 

Problem-solving 
Problem-solving 

Knowledge 
Pro blem-solving 

a. Government, donor, Bank, public dissemination. 
b. Knowledge generation, public debate, problem-solving. 

Same regionlincome group - 

ANNEX B5 
Page 1 of 1 

2,505.9 
1 .9 
30.8 
3.5 

L ow - 
i n c om e 

1 

I 

Sub - 
Saharan 
A f r ica 

673.9 
2.5 
32.3 
5.1 

460 

430 

2.5 
3.4 

52 

58 
83 
46 

58 
53 

46 
45 
47 

105 
171 

520 
46 1 

1.1 
2.8 

76 
90 
70 

60 
61 

59 
58 
60 

80 
121 

312 
256 

Cameroon Social Indicators 

Latest single year 

1970-75 

1980-85 

1995-2001 

POPULATION 
Total population, mid-year (millions) 
Growth rate (% annual average for period) 
Urban population (YO of population) 
Total fertility rate (births per woman) 
POVERTY 
(“A of population) 
National headcount index 
Urban headcount index 
Rural headcount index 
INCOME 
GNI per capita (US$) 
Consumer price index (1 9 9 5 4 00) 
Food price index (1 995=100) 
INCOMEKONSUMPT ION DISTRIBUTION 
Gini index 
Lowest quintile (% of income or consumption) 
Highest quintile (% of income or consumption) 
SOCIAL INDICATORS 
Pub l ic expend i tu re 
Health (% of GDP) 
Education (% of GDP) 
Social security and welfare (% o f GDP) 
Net p r ima ry s c h o o l e n r o l lm e n t ra te 
(“A of age group) 
Total 
Male 
Female 
Access t o a n im p r o v e d wa te r s o u r c e 
(% of population) 
Total 
Urban 
Rural 
Immun iza t ion ra te 
(“A under 12 months) 
Measles 
DPT 
Child malnutrition (% under 5 years) 
L i fe expec tancy a t birth 
(years) 
Total 
Male 
Female 
Mor ta l i ty 
Infant (per 1,000 live births) 
Under 5 (per 1,000 live births) 
A d u l t (15-59) 
Male (per 1,000 population) 
Female (per 1,000 population) 
Maternal (modeled, per 100,000 live births) 
3irths attended by skilled health staff (%) 

7.5 
2.6 
26.9 
6.4 

350 
19 

3.6 

67 
74 
61 

47 
46 
49 

116 
194 

544 
452 

52 

10.0 
2.8 
35.7 
6.4 

40.0 
44.4 
32.4 

810 
57 

15.2 
2.3 
49.7 
4.7 

40.2 
49.9 
22.1 

580 
117 
126 

40 .8 
4.6 
53.0 

2.9 
0.9 

1 .I 
3.2 
0.1 

79 
81 
76 

58 
78 
39 

62 
43 
22 

49 
48 
50 

96 
155 

488 
440 
720 
56 

39 
33 

52 
51 
54 

95 
156 

489 
41 5 

10 

Vote: 0 or 0.0 means zero or less than half the unit shown. Net enrollment rate: break in series between 1997 and 1998 due to 
:hange from ISCED76 to ISCED97; ratios exceeding 100 indicate discrepancies between the estimates of school-age population 
and reported enrollment data. 
2003 World Development Indicators CD-ROM, World Bank 

ANNEX B6 
Page 1 of 2 

Cameroon - Key Economic Indicators - Cameroon 

As Of 05/20/2003 

Actual 
1997 

Estimate 
2000 

Projected 
2002 
2003 

Indicator 
National accounts (as YO o f GDP) 
Gross domestic producta 
Agriculture 
Industry 
Services 
Total Consumption 
Gross domestic fixed investment 
Government investment 
Private investment 

1996 

1998 

1999 

2001 

2004 

E X P O ~ ~ S (GN F S ) ~ 
Imports (GNFS) 
Gross domestic savings 
Gross national savings’ 
Memorandum items 
Gross domestic product 
(US$ million at current prices) 
GNP per capita (US$, Atlas method) 
620 
Real annual growth rates (“XI, calculated from 1990 prices) 
Gross domestic product at market prices 
5.0 
5 .1 
Gross Domestic Income 
1.9 
7 .3 
Real annual per capita growth rates (%, calculated from 1990 prices) 
Gross domestic product at market prices 
2.6 
2.7 
Total consumption 
3.3 
2.8 
Private consumption 
1.4 
6.4 
Balance of Payments (US$ millions) 
E X P O ~ ~ S ( G N F S ) ~ 
Merchandise FOB 
Imports (GN F S ) ~ 
Merchandise FOB 
Resource balance 
Net current transfers 
Current account balance 
Ne t private foreign direct investment 
Long-term loans (net) 
Official 
Private 

100 
41 
23 
36 
83 
15 
1 
15 

100 
42 
22 
36 
81 
16 
1 
15 

22 
20 
17 
11 

25 
22 
19 
13 

9109 

9115 

620 

Other capital (net, incI. emors & ommissions) 

Change in reservesd 
Memorandum items 
Resource balance (“XI of GDP) 
Real annual growth rates ( YR90 prices) 
Merchandise exports (FOB) 
Oil 
Non-oil 
Merchandise imports (CIF) 

2048 
1605 
1867 
1200 
181 
34 
-375 
92 

-18 

-8 1 

2 .0 

7 .4 
-8.2 
18.7 
13.2 

2306 
1816 
2041 
1347 
265 
86 
-258 
100 

-182 

-142 

2 .9 

13.8 
10.9 
15.4 
19.5 

100 
41 
21 
38 
81 
18 
2 
15 

26 
25 
19 
15 

8703 

610 

5 .0 
3 .6 

2 . 1 
2 .5 
0.9 

2306 
1800 
2176 
1452 
130 
105 
-235 
-50 

184 

39 

1.5 

11.1 
1.2 
16.5 
13.5 

100 
42 
20 
38 
82 
18 
2 
16 

24 
24 
18 
14 

9398 

610 

4.4 
-2.7 

2.1 
-2.7 
-4.3 

2241 
1682 
2268 
1483 
-27 
117 
-377 
7 

32 

-4 

-0.3 

8.2 
13.2 
5.8 
0.8 

100 
44 
20 
36 
80 
17 
2 
15 

31 
28 
20 
15 

9228 

590 

4.8 
20 .4 

2.6 
-1.0 
-1.4 

2719 
2125 
2376 
1538 
343 
97 
-153 
280 

19 

-242 

3.2 

-0.7 
-4.5 
1.2 
14.9 

100 
44 
18 
38 
81 
18 
2 
16 

30 
29 
19 
16 

8707 

580 

4.8 
7.0 

2.6 
1.3 
1.6 

2708 
2129 
2479 
1617 
229 
119 
-147 
170 

-76 

-169 

0.9 

2 .5 
-0.7 
4 .1 
12.5 

100 
44 
17 
39 
83 
18 
2 
16 

28 
30 
17 
15 

9374 

560 

4.2 
-0.1 

2.0 
2.8 
2.8 

2377 
1795 
2757 
1833 
-380 
127 
-650 
755 

-128 

-198 

-1.5 

-7.1 
-5.2 
-7.9 
14.5 

100 
44 
17 
40 
83 
18 
2 
16 

28 
29 
17 
15 

11659 

560 

4.5 
5.1 

2.3 
2 .8 
2 .8 

2789 
2142 
3453 
2174 
-664 
182 
-907 
575 

-127 

47 

-1.4 

1.2 
-6 .0 
4 .5 
10.0 

100 
44 
16 
41 
84 
19 
3 
16 

26 
28 
16 
15 

13093 

560 

4 .9 
2 .5 

2.7 
2.6 
2.6 

2795 
2095 
3562 
2354 
-767 
217 
-970 
536 

-138 

33 

-2 .1 

2.4 
-5.4 
5.6 
3 .3 

(Continued) 

Cameroon - Key Economic Indicators 
(Continued) 

ANNEX B6 
Page 2 of 2 

Indicator 

1996 

Actual 
1997 

1998 

1999 

Estimate 
2000 

2001 

Projected 
2002 
2003 

2004 

Public finance (as 'YO of GDP at market prices)' 
Current revenues 
Current expenditures 
Current account surplus (+) or deficit (-) 
Capital expenditure 
Foreign financing 

14.3 
15.0 
-0.7 
0 .9 
8.2 

Monetary indicators 
M2IGDP 
Growth of M2 (%) 
Private sector credit growth / 
total credit growth (%) 

Price indices( YR90 = loo ) 
Merchandise export price index 
Merchandise import price index 
Merchandise terms of trade index 
Real exchange rate (US$iLCU)f 

Real interest rates 
Consumer price index (% change) 
GDP deflator (% change) 

15.4 
-5 .1 
68.7 

85.5 
89.4 
81.0 
67.3 

3 .6 
5 .4 

15.1 
14.3 
0.8 
1.8 
-4 .0 

16.3 
13.8 
31.0 

16.2 
14.9 
1 .3 
3 .0 
9 .0 

16.5 
7 .8 
89 .1 

15.3 
14.9 
0 .4 
3.6 
3.3 

21.7 
13.2 
8 .6 
3 .6 
-0.8 

15.7 
0.4 
98.0 

17.2 
20.5 
-239.5 

19 .8 
14.8 
5 .0 
3 .6 
1.9 

17.5 
8.2 
46 .8 

20.1 
14.7 
5 . 5 
2.8 
5 .9 

20 .0 
14 .3 
5.7 
3.5 
1.1 

19.6 
13.9 
5.7 
3.4 
1 .5 

19.5 
9.5 
105.1 

19.6 
-0 .4 
100.0 

19.9 
5.3 
100.0 

97.2 
106.9 
85.1 
66.1 

108.0 
121.4 
81.3 
65.7 

116.9 
122.4 
68.6 
71.3 

116.0 
140.6 
97.0 
68.3 

119.0 
158.2 
101.4 
68 .3 

110.6 
181.0 
92.8 
68 .3 

111.9 
199.2 
101.7 
68.3 

114.6 
205.7 
92.6 
68 .3 

4 .1 
2.7 

3 .9 
1 .1 

2.9 
1.1 

-1.0 
3.2 

1 .3 
1 .7 

2 .8 
1 .8 

2.8 
2.9 

2 .6 
1.8 

a. GDP at factor cost 
b. "GNFS" denotes "goods and nonfactor services." 
c . Includes net unrequited transfers excluding official capital grants. 
d. Includes use of IMF resources. 
e . Consolidated central government. 
f . "LCU" denotes "local currency units." An increase in US$/LCU denotes appreciation. 

Cameroon - Key Exposure Indicators 

As Of 05/2012003 

ANNEX B7 
Page 1 of 1 

Indicator 

Actual 
1997 

1996 

1998 

1999 

Estimate 
2000 

2001 

Projected 
2002 
2003 

2004 

Total debt outstanding and 
disbursed (TDO) (US$m)a 

8282 

7973 

8430 

7856 

6517 

63 14 

5483 

5480 

5229 

Net disbursements (US$m)a 

-7 

5 

-52 

207 

-150 

538 

527 

510 

386 

Total debt service (TDS) 
( u S $m ) a 

Debt and debt service indicators 

TDO /XG S ~ 
TDO/GDP 
TDS/XGS 
Concessional/TDO 

IBRD exposure indicators (YO) 
IBRD DS/total DS 
Preferred creditor DSIpublic 
DS (%)" 
IBRD DS /XGS 
IBRD TDO ( U S $ ~ I ) ~ 
Of which present value of 
guarantees (US$m) 
Share of IBRD portfolio (YO) 
IDA TDO (U s$m Id 

IFC (US$m) 
Loans 
Equity and quasi-equity / c 

1215 

1045 

474 

569 

837 

717 

717 

795 

748 

404.0 
91.0 
59.3 

346.0 
87.0 
45.3 

.. 

366.0 
97 .0 
20.5 
51.0 

341.0 
84.0 
25.4 
52.0 

239.7 
73.0 
30.8 
58.0 

233.2 
73.2 
26.5 
52.6 

234.1 
58.5 
30.2 
49.6 

196.6 
46 .4 
28 .5 
46 .2 

204.8 
42.8 
26 .7 
42.9 

11.2 
54.0 

6 .6 
520 

11.3 
62.0 

5.1 
410 

19.5 
44.0 

4 .0 
350 

12.9 
48.0 

3.3 
276 

9 .7 
21.0 

3.0 
218 

9 .9 
37.1 

2 .6 
179 

8 . 9 
39 .6 

2.7 
142 

5.5 
38 .1 

1.6 
105 

39 .8 

1 .7 
67 

0 
513 

0 
609 

0 
70 1 

0 
749 

0 
769 

0 
758 

0 
846 

0 
1101 

0 
1117 

32.6 
3 .3 

34.5 
1.4 

26.2 
0.9 

17.9 
0 .2 

11 .1 
0 .3 

47 .1 
4 . 0 

MIGA 
MIGA guarantees gross outstanding (US$m4 

0.37 

0.00 

0.00 

0.00 

0 .00 

0.00 

0.00 

0.00 

0.00 

a. Includes public and publicly guaranteed debt, private nonguaranteed, use of IMF credits and net short- 
term capital. 
b. "XGS" denotes exports o f goods and services, including workers' remittances. 
c . Preferred creditors are defined as IBRD, IDA, the regional multilateral development banks, the IMF, and the 
Bank for International Settlements. 

a - m o c o m o o l D 
o o o o 4 ) o o o o ) 

~ 0 0 0 t n 0 0 0 4 ) 

r N N N - " N r 

(D W 

- 

m v) .- e n 

P m w m 

v) m a, m U 

c 

0 

c 

p .- e P 

U - El 

0 

ANNEX B8 
Page 2 of 2 

~~ 

Cameroon 
Statement of IFC's 
Held and Disbursed Portfolio 
As of 6/30/2003 
(In US Dollars Millions) 

1994196 

FY Approval Company 
1995 AEF Comp Avicole 
2002 AEF FME-GAZ 
2000 AEF Hobec 
1996 AEF Notacam 
AEF Proleg 
2003 AEF SODETRAN-C. 
1999 AEF Saicam 
2000 BICEC 
1986 CICAM 
2000 COTCO 
1992194197l98 Pecten Cameroon 
2002 SC MOBILES 

Loan 
0.3 1 
0 
0.42 
0.79 
0 
0.79 
0 
0 
2.19 
86.10 
44.00 
1.58 

Held 

Disbursed 

Equity Quasi Partic Loan Equity Quasi 
0 
0 
0 0.31 
0 
0 
0 0.37 
0 
0 
0 0.37 
0 
0 
0 0.17 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 0.79 
0 
0 
0.36 
0
0
0
0.36 
0 

Partic 

0 
0 
0 
0 
0 

0 0.34 
0 
0 
0.85 
0
0
0
0 
0 
0 2.19 
0 
0 86.10 72.69 
0 
0 87.40 10.2 
0 3.44 
0 
0 

0 0.34 
0 
0 

0 

0 

0 
0 
0 
0 
0 3.44 

0 

0 

0 
72.69 
32.3 

0 

Total Portfolio: 

136.18 

1.21 4.15 173.5 86.35 

0.36 4.15 104.99 

Amrova l s Pending Commitment 

L L 

- 

2000 AEF Complexe I1 

Loan 
0 

Equity Quasi Partic 
0.17 

0

0

Total Pending Commitment: 

0 

0.17 

0

0

 
 
 
 
Cameroon - CAS Summary of Development Priorities 

ANNEX B10 
Page 1 of 1 

Network area 

Country 
performance * 

Major issueb Country 
priority" 

Bank 
priority' 

Reconciliation of 
country and Bank 

Pover ty Reduc t ion 8 Econom ic 
Management 
Poverty reduction 

Economic policy 

Public sector 

Gender 

Human Deve lopmen t Depar tmen t 
Education 
Health, nutrition & population 

Social protection 

Env i ronmen ta l ly 8 Soc ia l ly 
Sus ta inab le Development 
Rural development 

Environment 
Social development 

Finance, Pr iva te Sec to r 8 
In f ras t ruc tu re 
Financial sector 

Private sector 

Energy & mining 

Infrastructure 

G 

G 

P 

P 

G 
G 

P 

G 

G 
F 

G 

G 

F 

G 

Important 
regional 
inequalities I 
Structural 
poverty not yet 
addressed 
Growth 
insufficiently 
pro-poor 
Incentives and 
accountability 
Not given 
sufficient 
attention 

Delivery of 
services 
Government 
programs do 
not target the 
poorest 

Private sector 
involvement 
Capacity 
Dialogue 
between civil 
society and 
government 

Access to 
credit, 
particularly in 
rural areas 
Business 
environment 
Electricity 
production 
capacity 
Missing links 
between main 
roads and 
rurai roads 

H 

H 

H 

H 

M 

H 
H 

M 

H 

M 
M 

M 

H 

H 

H 

H 

H 

H 

H 
H 

H 

H 

M 
M 

M 

H 

H 

M 

Gender issues will given 
specific attention in AAA 
and be mainstreamed in 
Bank operations 

A trigger for the high 
case scenario relates to 
implementation of social 
protection programs, 
and of the CDD projet in 
particular 

Other donors (EU, AFD) 
are expected to finance 
investments in 
infrastructure 

a. Use "excellent," "good,'" "fair," or '"poor." 
b . Indicate principal country-specific problems ( e a for poverty reduction, "rural poverty;" for education. '"female secondary completion;" for environment, 
c. To indicate priority, use "low,'' "moderate," or "high." 

d. Give explanation, if priorities do not agree: for example, another MDB may have the lead on the issue, or there may be ongoing dialogue 

