d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

Document of

The World Bank

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Report No. 25328

MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENT

OF THE

INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION

TO THE

EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS

ONA

REGIONAL INTEGRATION ASSISTANCE STRATEGY

FOR

CENTRAL AFRICA

JANUARY 10, 2003

Africa Region

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance of
their official duties. Its contents may.not otherwise be disclosed without World Bank authorization.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS

CEMAC
Currency Unit = CFA Franc
US$1=639.32 CFA
(as of Dec. 18, 2002)

WEIGHTS AND MEASURES
Metric System

FISCAL YEAR

January 1- December 31

AAA 
AfDB 
AGOA 
BCEAO 

BDEAC 

BEAC 

CAS 
CEMAC 

CESAG 

CET 
CFA 
COBAC 
COMIFAC 

DRC 
ECA 
ECCAS 

ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS

Analytical and Advisory Activities
African Development Bank
Africa Growth Opportunity Act
Banque Centrale des Etats de l'Afrique de l'Ouest (Central Bank of West African
States)
Banque de Developpement des Etats de l'Afrique Centrale (Development Bank of
Central Africa)
Banque Centrale des Etats de lAfnque Centrale (Central Bank of Central
African States)
Country Assistance Strategy
Communaute Economique et Monetaire de l'Afrique Centrale (Economic and
Monetary Community of Central Africa)
Centre Africain d'Etudes Superieures en Gestion (African Center of Advanced
Management Studies)
Common External Tariff
Communaute Financiere Africaine (African Financial Community)
Commission Bancaire dAfrique Centrale (Banking Conmmission of Central Africa)
Conference des Ministres des Forets d'Afrique (Conference of Ministers of
Forestry of Central Africa)
Democratic Republic of Congo
Economic Commission for Africa
Economic Community of Central African States

Vice President: 
Program Manager: 

Callisto Madavo
Marie Fran,oise Marie-Nelly

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ECOWAS 
ESMAP 
ESW 
EU 
GEF 
HIV/AIDS 
ICAO 
IDA 
IDF 
IFC 
IMF 
ITU 
NEPAD 
NGO 
OHADA 

PPLAF 
PRSP 
REIMP 
RFD 
RPED 
RIAS 
UEMOA 

UDEAC 

UEAC 
UNDP 
UNIPACE 

WHO 
WTO 

Economnic Community of West African States
Energy Sector Management Assistance Programme
Economic Sector Work
European Union
Global Environmental Fund
Human Immuno-deficiency Virus/Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome
International Civil Aviation Organization
International Development Association
Institutional Development Fund
International Finance Corporation
Inernational Monetary Fund
International Telecommunications Union
New Partnership for Africa's Development
Non-governmental Organization
Organisation pour l'Harmonisation du Droit des Affaires en Afrique (Organization to
Harmonize Business Law in Africa)
Public-Private Infrastructure Advisory Facility
Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper
Regional Environmental Information Management Project
Reforme Fiscalo-DouaniMre (Tax and Customs Reform)
Regional Program on Enterprise Development
Regional Integration Assistance Strategy
Union Economique et Monetaire Ouest Africaine (West African Economnic and
Monetary Union or WAEMIJ)
Union Douaniere et Economique de I 'Afrique Centrale (Customs and Monetary
Union of Central Africa)
Union Economique de IlAfrique Centrale (Central African Economic Union)
United Nations Development Program
Union des Patronats d 'Afrique Centrale (Union of Central Africa
Employers 'Associations)
World Health Organization
World Trade Organization

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in
the performance of their official duties. Its contents may not be otherwise disclosed
without World Bank authorization.

MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENT
OF THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION
TO THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS ON A
REGIONAL INTEGRATION ASSISTANCE STRATEGY FOR CENTRAL AFRICA

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Executive Summary ................................
Introduction ................................
I. Historical and Economic Background ................................

A. GEOGRAPHY, POPULATION, NATURAL REsOURCES .1
B. HISTORY OF REGIONAL INTEGRATION IN CENTRAL AFRICA 
C. OVERALL ECONOMIC PERFORMANCE SINCE THE 1994 DEVALUATION. 

.2

.7

.8

D. 

II. 
A. 

SOCIAL DEVELOPMENTS AND POVERTY 
The Current Environment for Regional Integration 
FORCES FOR INTEGRATION ..............................

B. OBSTACLES TO REGIONAL INTEGRATON .10
C. NATURAL RESOURCES: ASSETS AND CHALLENGES .11

III. CEMAC's Agenda and Strategic Issues .13

A. 
INTEGRATION POLICIES: CEMAC CoRE FUNCTIONS .14
B. AREAS FOR REGIONAL COOPERATION .22

IV. World Bank Assistance Strategy and Program .24

i
1
1

4

8

A. RATIONALE, GOALS, PRINCIPLES .24
B. 
PRIORITY AREAS AND PROPOSED WORK PROGRAM FOR WORLD BANK ASSISTANCE

27

C. COOPERATION WITH OTHER DEVELOPMENT PARTNERS .37

V. Risks ...... 
Conclusion ....... 

38
40

ATTACEMENTS

1. Status of Poverty Reduction Strategy Papers and Country Assistance Strategies
2. Contingent Activities: Long Run Issues Studies
3. Monitoring Progress in Regional Integration

ANNEXES

1. CEMAC At-a-Glance
2. CEMAC Selected Economic and Financial Indicators
3. CEMAC Social Indicators
4. Note on Aggregation Methods
5. World Bank Group Lending in CEMAC Countries
6. Composition of IDA and IBRD Portfolio for CEMAC Countries
7. World Bank Multicountry Activities in Central Africa
8. EU Multicountry Lending to Central Africa

Map

MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENT

OF THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION

TO THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS ON A

REGIONAL INTEGRATION ASSISTANCE STRATEGY FOR
CENTRAL AFRICA

ExECUTIVE SUMMARY

Main Issues for Board Consideration

* Does the strategy properly address the integration versus cooperation issues?
* Are the priorities adequate between core and non-core activities?
* 
Is the balance between lending activities and advisory services appropriate?

Background for Regional Integration

1. 
This Regional Integration Assistance Strategy (RIAS) for Central Africa is the
second formal expression of the World Bank's enhanced priority to regional integration in
Africa and a response to a request by the African Governors at the 2000 Annual Meetings.
It follows the RIAS for West Africa presented to the Board on August 2, 2001. Central

Africa refers to CEMAC -- Communaute Economique et Monetaire de l'Afrique Centrale--

comprised of Cameroon, Central African Republic, Chad, Republic of Congo, Equatorial
Guinea and Gabon. This RIAS has been prepared 
in consultation with the regional
institutions, governments and representatives of civil society.

2. 
CEMAC, one of the oldest regional arrangements in Africa, is also the smallest (31
million inhabitants). It evolved from a loose customs union to a full-fledged economic and
monetary union in 1994 (treaty ratified in 1999). The region's long term economic
performance has been disappointing: GDP per capita increased by slightly more than 1%
per annum between 1960 and 2000 despite a marked increase -
to 4.2% p.c.p.a. since the
50% devaluation of the CFA franc in 1994. 
Income levels vary widely, from close to
$4,000 in Gabon to less than $300 in CAR and Chad. Poverty incidence is high in all
countries with more than 50% of the population living on less than one dollar a day.
Incidence of HIV/AIDS varies between 4 and 13 percent.

3. 
Factors favorable to integration include: (a) an institutional framework with a well
functioning monetary union characterized by a fixed exchange rate pegged to the Euro and
a strong regional central bank (BEAC); (b) a Customs Union reinforced by the 1994 treaty,
and (c) the presence regional projects, such as the of IDA supported Chad-Cameroon oil
pipeline and the regional payments projects. Moreover, the recent New Partnership for
Africa's Development (NEPAD) initiative could act as a catalyst for regional integration.

4. 
Obstacles to integration are poor transport infrastructure, limited intraregional
trade and economic complementarity, 
lack of a strong growth pole, rivalries between
member countries, and a lack of visible leadership. The presence of oil in five of the six
countries present difficult management challenges.

CEMAC's Agenda and Strategic Issues

5. 
CEMAC policy directions are: (a) to deepen regional integration by making the
customs union effective; enforcing macro-economic policy convergence; pursuing
financial sector integration; and (b) to promote cooperation on sector policies and projects.
Integration proper involves activities 
that require a varying degree of transfer of
responsibility by member countries to regional bodies. Regional cooperation involves only
agreements between two or more countries. The challenge is to develop an institutional
architecture 
that best combines integration and cooperation activities. At this point,
institutions other than the central bank (BEAC) are still weak.

6. 
Despite progress on several fronts, CEMAC's policy agenda is still a tall order. A
major tax and customs reform in 1994, with a common external tariff schedule with a
maximum rate of 30%, represents a great improvement over the previous inward-looking
regime. However, there is a need for both short-term action to correct dysfunctional
aspects of the customs union, and long term action to prepare a new round of trade
liberalization reform.

7. 
Thanks to the prudent and increasingly market-based monetary policy of BEAC
and with more rigorous 
fiscal management, macroeconomic policy stability and
convergence have improved. The margin of "competitiveness" of the real exchange rate
gained from the 1994 devaluation has been substantially protected. But macroeconomic
management in the face of export volatility needs strengthening.

8. 
The rehabilitation of the banking sector is virtually complete and banks are allowed
to open branches in other member countries, but the sector remains vulnerable and highly
concentrated; a regional comrnmission handles banking supervision, but is understaffed; a
new regional legislation for microfinance institutions remains to be implemented; the
dormant regional development bank is being restructured but its viability is still uncertain;
a regulatory framework is being prepared for the newly created regional stock exchange
but the fate of this institution is still unclear; and preparatory work to create a regional
bonds market has just begun.

9. 
Transport is a priority sector and CEMAC has developed a coherent regional
surface transport master plan to the 2010 horizon. Of the 10,000 km of roads about 80%
will have been completed by 2006, including all-season links between four of the five
inland capital cities. There is still a need to finance the remaining 2000kms, including
links to Nigeria and DRC, and to improve the maintenance of the network.

World Bank Assistance Strategy and Program

10. 
The Bank's strategy is based on the premise that regional integration can contribute
to poverty reduction by strengthening the links between the poorer landlocked countries
and their more prosperous coastal neighbors and more generally by helping establish the
basis for faster economic growth. It will be guided by the principles of open regionalism,
subsidiarity, and participation of private sector and civil society.

- 111 -

11. 
The proposed Bank assistance five-year program is designed to support CEMAC in
the two domains of integration and cooperation, and with two degrees of Bank
involvement: core activities where the Bank foresees a leadership role for itself and non-
core activities, where it would act an associate when another development partner is leader
(IMF, EU, France, AfDB notably). The Bank will also provide support to institutional
strengthening which straddles the two domains. The program summarized in the matrix
below includes a contingent category for studies of long term issues.

Core Activities 

Non-Core Activities 

Summary of Bank Program

Integration 
Trade Policies - Customs Union 
- Phase I: Corrective action plan 
- Phase 11 Customs union reform 

Financial Sector 
- Banking sector monitoring 
- Microfinance development
- Bills and bonds market

Cooperation
Infrastructure
- Transport and trade facilitation
- Regional road links
- Air safety and regulation
Human Resources
- Regional HIV-AIDS

Macroeconomic 
- Monitonng policy convergence and 
surveillance units work 
- Export volatility study 

Institutional Strengthening
Support to the Executive Secretariat
Morntonng of programs
Infrastructure
-Telecommunications 
Harmonization
- Energy (Power) strategy

policy

Business Environment 
- Legal and regulatory framework 
- Competitiveness observatory 
Financial Sector 
- BDEAC 
- Regional stock exchange

Forestry/Water
- Support to COMIFAC/REIMP-11
- Lake Chad Basin
Human Resources
- Higher education and traimng

Continent Activities 

Long Term Issues Studies (see attachment I)

12. 
The program would require IDA financing of US$140 million for five technical
assistance operations and one US$100 million road investment project. The latter will help
complete the regional surface transport network, subject to the outcome of feasibility
studies. It is planned for the outer years because of the lead time needed for preparation.

Risks

13. 
Main risks to regional integration are: (a) an intensification of political turmoil in
one or more countries leading to conflict between countries, civil disorder or increased
insecurity in parts of the region; (b) a serious deterioration of economic management
whether fiscal profligacy or poor management of external shocks (e.g. from oil prices); (c)
a half-hearted implementation of policy decisions, for instance by perpetuating high
protection of inefficient industries. These nsks could be reduced by a stronger and more
vigilant Executive Secretariat acting jointly with 
the Central Bank, and stronger
commitments by member governments.

MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENT
OF THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION
TO THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS ON A
REGIONAL INTEGRATION ASSISTANCE STRATEGY FOR
CENTRAL AFRICA

Introduction

1. 
This Regional Assistance Strategy - RIAS-is the second formal expression of
the World Bank's enhanced priority to support the efforts toward regional integration in
Africa. 
It addresses an explicit demand by the African Governors at the 2000 Annual
Meetings in Prague. 
It follows the RIAS for West Africa presented to the Board on
August 2, 2001. Central Africa is here understood as the geographical area designated as

the Communaute Economique et Monetaire de l'Afrique Centrale (CEMAC) and

comprising Cameroon, the Central African Republic, Chad, the Republic of Congo,
Equatorial Guinea, and Gabon. 
It has been prepared 
in consultation with 
the
governments, the donors and the representatives of civil society of the countries
concerned, including a workshop held in Yaound6 on October 16-18, 2002.

2. 
The strategy presented here is similar to the West Africa RIAS, although with
notable differences 
reflecting 
the different geographic, political, economic and
institutional background between the two sub-regions. As in the case of West Afnca, the
focus of this RIAS is on the process and issues of regional integration and not on each or
the sum of the development issues of individual countries. 
It reflects also the Bank's
experience with the regional assistance strategy for West Africa and work on integration
issues in Southern and Eastern Africa.

3. 
The paper is in five parts: 
the first summarizes the historical, geo-political and
economic background; leading to the second part, which sets out the current environment
for regional integration; strategic issues facing CEMAC are discussed in part three; part
four describes the rationale, objectives and guiding principles for Bank assistance and
delineates the proposed work program for Bank support; and part five assesses risks.

I. 

Historical and Economic Background

A. Geography, Population, Natural Resources

4. 
The Central African Economic and Monetary Community (CEMAC) is one of the
oldest regional blocs in Africa. Its six countries are linked partly by economic ties and
more so by history. While covering a vast geographic area of roughly 3 million square
kilometers, 
the sub-region 
is also 
the smallest of the current African regional
arrangements with a population of about 31 million 
inhabitants. 
The grouping
encompasses both more prosperous coastal economies and two poorer landlocked
countries: Chad and the Central African Republic. Chad runs far to the north of the other

members, encompassing the Sahara desert, the Sahelian and Sudanian regions, while the
other five countries are tropical. Although the countries are contiguous, deep forests
make it difficult to travel within this area. Nor are these countries served well by natural
trade routes, except for the Congo River on their Southern flank. The existing road
network is also incomplete and does not satisfy the region's growing needs.

5. 
Population density varies enormously, from near zero in the vast Saharan portions
of the North to high concentrations in Cameroon (33.2 inhabitants per sq kin), versus 5.9
in CAR and 4.9 in Gabon. Of the six countries, Cameroon with its 14.7 million
inhabitants is by far the most populous, while Equatorial Guinea is the smallest with only
0.5 million people. Population growth is estimated to be approximately 2.5 percent per
year in the region. It is lowest in CAR (1.9 percent).

6. 
The peoples of the CEMAC region are ethnically diverse, with no single group
clearly dominant numerically. "Commercial" Diaspora of particular ethnic groups are not
as common in this region as they are in West Africa, which may partly explain the
weaker tendencies for integration in CEMAC. The common French languagel and
French culture, which link political and commercial elites within the area, also tend to
separate them from their large Anglophone neighbor, Nigeria.

7. 
Central Africa is well endowed with natural resources: petroleum (in five of the
six countries) as well as deposits of other minerals and metals, including gold, tin,
bauxite, uranium and iron ore. Its densely forested area represents together with DRC the
second 
largest 
tropical forest 
in 
the world after the Amazon. 
However, one
counterweight to this rich variety of natural resources is the prevalence of water-borne
diseases, while low and erratic rainfall in much of the Sudan-Sahelian zones creates
occasional episodes of food scarcity.

B. 

listory 

of Regional Integration in Central Africa

8. 
Regional integration in Central Africa has a long history, dating back to the
colonial era when the countries other than Cameroon and Equatorial Guinea formed the
federation of Afrique Equatoriale FranVaise (with its capital in Brazzaville). The
grouping of central African countries had as one of its main economic characteristics
maintaining a fixed exchange rate against 
the French franc. During the post-

independence period (1963-1993), the two - West and Central Africa - CFA Franc

zones' monetary arrangements remained largely unchanged, whereas most of the other
newly independent states had severed their monetary relationships with the former
colonial power by the late 1960's. Regional monetary and trade integration in the Central
African Zone was anchored on two principal institutions, BEAC and UDEAC.

9. 
The predominant regional institution in Central Africa was the Banque des Etats
d'Afrique Centrale (BEAC), established in 1972 as the sole currency-issuing institution
that served a loose monetary association. The most important role of BEAC (like

X Except for Equatorial Guinea, where Spanish is spoken, and South West Cameroon (formerly part of
Nigerna), where English is also spoken and where British common law applies

- 3 -

BCEAO, the central bank of eight West African francophone states), was to maintain a
fixed exchange rate with the French Franc and manage monetary policy, which then
consisted mainly of credit controls, while currency convertibility was (and still is)
guaranteed through an "operations account" with the French Treasury. At the board of
BEAC, France, Gabon, and Cameroon exercised a preponderant role in determining
regional initiatives, although, after 1994, the role of France was reduced. The central
bank has indicated, however, that unanimity has been the rule most of the time in
decision making.

10. 

The regime governing 

trade policy, 

(Union Douaniere et

Economique de l'Afrique Centrale) was formed 

the UDEAC 
in Brazzaville, Congo 
in 1964.
Reflecting an inward-looking regionalism of the 1960's, UDEAC resulted in the creation
of a highly distorted, fragmented, and ad hoc, import-substituting trade policy under the
guise of regional integration. However, intra-regional trade in manufactured products of
Union origin was taxed like external trade unless the manufacturer had obtained special
tax status and was often subjected to non-tariff barriers. The high official tariff rates did
not raise substantial revenues but encouraged behavior that had the opposite effect,
including widespread tariff and tax exemptions, smuggling, and customs fraud. In
addition to a protectionist common external tariff and, ostensibly, intra-regional free
trade, 
the UDEAC agreement provided for a regional 
investment code, regular
consultations on project location, and coordination of industrial policies - which resulted
in duplication rather than coordination. By 1994, three decades after its creation, the
entire UDEAC tariff and indirect tax and industrial policy required overhauling.

11. 
In the 1980's, external shocks (especially an oil price collapse) and acute
macroeconomic imbalances pushed the CEMAC economies into a severe prolonged
depression. Per capita GDP fell by 3.7% annually between 1985 and 1993, and total
output of the region declined by more than 30%. During this period, large bad debts were
accumulated in the currency area because of lax fiscal management, excessive public
sector borrowing, poorly conceived credit and interest rate policies, and weak bank
supervision and management. A combination of banking sector insolvency and fiscal
crisis compounded the problem. In response, the CEMAC countries adopted an "internal
adjustment strategy," with the objective of restoring competitiveness and to resume
growth. However, the strategy failed and, in January 1994, there was a 50% devaluation
of the CFA franc, and accompanying programs of economic adjustment and structural
reforms were adopted in order to achieve those same objectives.

12. 
In 1994, UDEAC was restructured substantially 
to address 
the problems
associated with excessive protection, low customs revenue, intra-regional distortions in
production, and the low level of trade with the rest of the world. It was also renamed the

Central African Economic Union (Union Economique de l'Afrique Centrale - UEAC).

UEAC together with the Union Monetaire de l'Afrique Centrale became the CEMAC
under a treaty signed in 1994. The treaty was not fully ratified by all parties until 1999.
Meanwhile, after the 1994 reform the region officially had a more open, 
less
protectionist, and less distorted trade regime than most countries in sub-Saharan Africa.

- 4 -

C. Overall Economic Performance Since the 1994 Devaluation

13. 
The economic performance of CEMAC countries improved following 
the
devaluation of 1994, although there were some difficult episodes: Gabon's fiscal crisis
during the 1998 election year; Congo's civil war of (1997-99), several army mutinies in
the Central African Republic in the 1990's (and again in 2002), and the impact of oil
price volatility. Between 1994 and 2001, total output expanded at an annual rate of more
than 4% (although there was considerable country variation) and per capita income (GDP
weighted average) grew at a rate of 1.2%, rebounding from an annual decline of 3.7%
during the 1986-93 depression. Non-oil GDP grew at about 3.5% over the same period
(Figurel).

FIGURE 1: ANNUAL GROWTH RATES: 1993-2000 (%)

percent
80

6.0 -ra 

4.0 

2.0

0.0

population

D

-2.0 

19994 

,1995 

1996 

1997 

1998 

1,999' 

2000

-4 0 -

-6.0

a 

per capita real GDP

Source: IMF(1999, 2001)

14. 
The trade performance of the region has been dominated by oil exports -60-
70% of total - mainly under the effect of oil prices. Thus the cumulative rise in the
terms of trade for CEMAC as a whole between 1994 and 2001 was by about 35% (with
2000 alone registering a 34% year-on-year improvement after a drop of 12% in 1998).
They have declined by about 20% between 2000 and 2002. Total exports (in dollar
terms) have increased over the 20-year period to 2000 by some 50%. Despite large
swings in some years, total exports show a perceptible upward trend. The ratio of exports
to GDP has thus reached 45% in 2000 up from 31% in 1994 (but it was 40% in 1980).
The impact of the 1994 devaluation is not visible as far as US dollar values are
concerned, which indicates a small effect on volumes, but, again this is because of the
dominance of oil. Measured in CFA Francs the impact is immediate from 1994, and
striking, but there is a leveling off after 2-3 years. Meanwhile, the real effective exchange
rate stabilized at roughly 25% below its 1993 level and has remained at approximately
that level, with some appreciation since 1999. Intra-regional trade, as already noted, has
remained very small (maximum officially recorded exports of less than 5% of total
exports) without any clear trend. These numbers, however, do not cover "informal
trade"-which may be as large as the official one - and they show evidence of significant
misreporting. Cameroon is by far the largest exporter to the rest of the region. In all, the
structure of the regional balance of payments remains typical of commodity-based

- 5 -

economies: a very large external sector (not necessarily indicative of an open trade
regime), large and continuing trade surpluses, and continued though moderate deficits on
current account (before official grants) because of net income transfers (from oil
industry) and interest payments.

15. 
The fiscal and monetary performance of CEMAC, as a whole, has improved in
the last several years. Average government revenue has been on an increasing trend,
rising from 14.5% of GDP in 1994 to 22.2% (excluding grants) in 2001, although the oil
exporters tended to suffer in 1998-1999 due to low\oil prices. Meanwhile, due to stricter
fiscal management (cuts in real govemment sector wages and some cuts in social
expenditures), government expenditures of CEMAC as a whole have settled at about 20%
of GDP after 1993, with the exception of 1998 when there was a temporary spike
(Gabon).

16. 
Inflation has been under control since the 1994 devaluation. After experiencing
deflation during 1986-93 depression, the CEMAC economy saw average consumer prices
surge by around 20% in 1994 and 1995, when the 50% nominal devaluation was being
passed through via the prices of traded goods. 
Inflation (consumer prices) hovered
between 6-7% in 1996- 97, dropped to less than 2% in 1999-2000 and rose to 4.4% in
2001.

17. 
Cameroon and Chad currently have arrangements in place under the DIF's
Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility (PRGF). Program implementation is generally
satisfactory. In CAR, an arrangement under the PRGF was suspended in 2001 owing to
off-track performance. Following broadly satisfactory implementation of an IMF Staff
Monitored Program (SMP) through March 2002, a new three-year arrangement under the
PRGF for the period October 2002 - September 2005 was negotiated. However, an
attempted coup d'6tat in late October prevented Board presentation of the PRGF in
November as planned. The IMF and the authorities are currently assessing the conditions
for a new program. The Republic of Congo has not had a program with the IMF since
1996 due to civil strife. The government is implementing a self-initiated post-conflict
structural adjustment, a satisfactory progress of which could open doors to negotiations
for a PRGF agreement. 
In Gabon, a Standby Agreement lapsed in April 2002, but
discussions have recently taken place with the Gabonese authorities on measures critical
to initiating discussions on a new Fund-supported program. Agreement has been reached
on a budget for 2003 and on a set of prior actions which, once completed, will trigger
program negotiations possibly on an arrangement under the Extended Fund Facility
(EFF). There is no IMF-supported program in Equatorial Guinea.

18. 
The World Bank has active lending programs in all of the CEMAC countries,
with the exception of Equatorial Guinea. The largest portfolio is in Cameroon, where
there are currently 11 active operations with associated commitments of some US$512
million. 
In particular, a third Structural Adjustment Loan, approved in 1998, is
supporting reform efforts on a broad front. In Chad, the portfolio presently consists of 8
active projects for a total commitment of about US$274 million. In CAR, the portfolio
contains three operations for a net commitment of US$45 million, including a US$20
million Fiscal Consolidation Credit of which the last tranche remains undisbursed.

- 6 -

However, the country is in arrears to IDA, and the portfolio has been under suspension of
disbursements since early 2002. An arrears clearance plan is being put together and will
be implemented once a new RAF program is in place. Gabon's modest IBRD portfolio
contains two projects for a total commitment of US$15 million. The Bank approved a
US$40 million post-conflict and reconstruction loan for the Republic of Congo in 2002.

19. 
In spite of significant policy reform influenced by donor assistance, economic
performance remains weak in several respects (Figure 2). Growth still barely outpaces
population growth. From 1994-2000,
per capita income grew by 1.5% 
in 
Cameroon and 1% in Chad and Central 
African Republic, while Gabon and
Chad 
stagnated 
around 0%, 
and 
Congo's contracted by 3.5% annually. 
Notably, Equatorial Guinea registered a 
20% increase (because of the advent of 

RGURE2: POPULATIONTA GHTER ANNUAL
~~~~~~AVERAGE P51CAPITA GROWTH RATE IN
CEMAC: 1960-2000 (%)

__ _ _ _____ __________-

_- __-_- ___-_

32-l , 

-2I- _ 

MM

2 

-- 

-

* 

-

° 

t 

4

.

oil). Second, volatility and fragility in 

-4 _-__---__-______- 

----- 

-__-_-

6

-8

-6 ______ _ 

-__-_-__-___-__

various aspects of the economy persist. 
Third, 
trade diversification has not 
progressed markedly since the 1994 
devaluation; except 
for Cameroon.
Each CEMAC country has one or two
dominant export commodities whose share in total exports is 70% or more. 
Intra-
regional trade has remained minimal (less than 5% of the total). Fourthly, fiscal
performance in CEMAC countries requires further strengthening in light of the fact that
the oil-importing countries (Central African Republic and Chad) were running basic
fiscal deficits of -1.0% and -3.6% of GDP in 2001, respectively, and in view of the large
public debt that all member countries except Equatorial Guinea have accumulated over
the years.

- 7 -

D. 

Social Developments and Poverty

20. 
Poverty 
incidence 
in 
the
Central African sub-region is high. 
The 2001 household consumption 
survey 
in Cameroon 
found 
that 

40.2% of the population fell under 

the poverty threshold, defined as a 
minimal 
consumption 
basket. 

-

BOX i 
'-SOCIAL INDICATORS IN CENTRAL AFRICA.

-

(Latest year available (1993-1999)

.

-

Population wveighted averages 

- CEMAC ECOWAS -

Evidence 

from Chad 

' rare (%) 
Republic of Congo suggests 
that 
mortality rate (per 1000) 
Life expectancy at,birth (years) 
three-fourths of the population 
is Gross primary school enroll (%) 
below the poverty line. Due to the 
Access to safe water (%) 

and 

the 

64 
89 
50 
81 
52 

55
: 
91 
, 52, 52
81
60

.

ac
' L 

presence of petroleum 

in 

countries, 

average 

per 

some 

capita 

incomes vary widely -

from a little

Source: World Bank database ;

-

-

-

over $4000 in Gabon, close to $1000 in Equatorial Guinea, 2 and $200 in Chad. However,
highly skewed income distribution means that the bulk of the population in every
country, whether statistically middle or low income, is poor by any standards. More
revealing perhaps than income figures, the social and social indicators (Box 1) are very
low, with an average life expectancy at birth of 50 years and an infant mortality rate of 89
per 1000. Remarkably, social indicators in the oil-exporting countries, notably Gabon,
are not significantly different from those of other countries in the region or from Sub-
Saharan African averages. 
From 1985-1994, 
the CEMAC countries 
faced an
exacerbation of poverty during the economic and financial crisis preceding the 1994
devaluation. Since the devaluation, household survey data from 1996 and 1997 showed
no real improvement in living standards, however more recent indications are that the
deteriorating trend has halted or been reversed.
21. 
The prevalence of HIV/AIDS among adults (ages 15-49) varies from close to 13%
in the Central African Republic to 

FRGLRE3:

12% in Cameroon, 7% in Congo, 

and 4% 
in Chad and Gabon 
(Figure 3). While the incidence 
of 1HV/AIDS in Central Africa is 
currently 
lower 
than 
the 
pandemic 
levels 
in Southern 
Africa, there is ample cause for 
concern as AIDS has already 
reached epidemic proportions in 
the 
sub-region. Meanwhile, 
empirical work, mostly drawn 
from Southern Africa, shows that 

HV AIDS PREVALENCEINCCENRAL AFqCA:

END 2001 (%)

14
12

10 

8-
6.
4

2

0

Cameroon 

CAR 

Source: UNAIDS (2002)

Chad 

Congo;Rep. 

Gabon

2 GDP per capita is $1900 but GNP per capita (WB Atlas method) is $1000

- 8 -

as HIV prevalence rates rise to 20% or more, GDP growth may decline by as much as 2%
a year due to a reduction in labor supply and increased production costs. Both in terms of
the human consequences and of the micro effects on household income and production
and macro impacts on savings and investment levels, AIDS threatens to diminish the
positive effects of any meaningful program of economic reform and regional integration.

II. 

The Current Environment for Regional Integration

22. 
As has been said for Europe, "regional integration does not come naturally."
Indeed, in the context of central Africa, while there are some positive forces for
integration, very serious impediments render the effort more difficult and underscore the
need for stronger political determination, as regional integration is, in the first place, a
political undertaking.

A. Forces for Integration

23. 
Despite many obstacles, a number of real positive factors for integration and
cooperation exist. First, the institutional architecture of CEMAC has been put into place
gradually since the CEMAC Treaty was signed in March 1994 and was ratified in
December 1999 (Box 2). Organic texts provide a blueprint of the objectives of the
economic union -
the creation of a common market for goods, services, capital and
eventual free movement of people, and a concomitant change of strategy from inward
looking import-substitution to more open regionalism. The Union's objectives are to be
achieved through the customs union and the monetary union and special attention to
macroeconomic policy convergence and coordinated sector policies. The common market
is to be completed at the end of three 5-year phases.

BOX,2
-CEMIAC INSTITUTIONS

.

-

The Central African Economic Union (Union Econonmique, de L4Afrique CentraIle

J' 

,tEAC) -which replaced 'the customs union, ULTEAC; and hasgah Executive Secretariat
b,ased n Ban ui (CAR)2 

The Central African Monetar) Union (Union Monetaire de. 'Afrique Centrale), which

comprises the common central bank. BEAC,"and the Central-Afican Banking
Commission, COBAC;

' The Court of Justice of the community,:which includes a judicial chamber (chambre

judiciaire) and nauditig cha_.ber (chamibre des comples) was iistalled-in
Ndja.mena. Chad (2000); 

- -

-An Inrer-parliamentarv Comimission of five appointed epresentatives from each
country established in 2000; until reeional parliamentarv elections take place (at a

---fu-ture unspecified date).-to prfnoceregional integration at the political level.

dae) 

.

fitr 

.e 

u.sei 
.

- 9 -

24. 
CEMAC's Executive Secretariat, in Bangui, is the operational branch of the
Community and is under the authority of the executive organs, the Conference of the
Heads of State, which meets at least once a year, and the Council of Ministers, which
decides all major policies. The Executive Secretariat is different from the UEMOA
Commission 
in that it does not include Commissioners appointed by the member states
(a la European Union) and is therefore closer to the ECOWAS Executive Secretariat
model.

25. 
Another institutional force for integration, and indirectly for facilitating links with
UEMOA, is the implementation of the unified, and modernized, business law under the
OHADA program which has been adopted by 16 francophone countries of Africa,
including all CEMAC countries. OHADA is described as "a legal instrument conceived
and realized by Africa to serve African integration and growth". With its Permanent
Secretariat in Yaounde, it is still, however, in its implementation stage.

26. 
Secondly, there exist a number of specific cooperative initiatives and projects
which can contribute to strengthening regional integration. Most recent and of great
potential economic 
impact, 
the US$3.7 billion Cameroon-Chad pipeline project
supported by the Bank, is one of the largest of its kind, and will create a strong link -
both physical and as a cooperative framework-for integration between one of the poorer
landlocked countries and the richer coastal neighbor. In a different sphere, a project for
modernization of the banking payments system (approved by the Board of IDA in July
2002) will be the first truly regional Bank-supported project in that it involves all of the
six countries, all the banks and, of course, the central bank. Finally, the sharing of
environmental information under the multi-year Regional Environmental Information
Management Project (REIMP) started in 1998, and the recently-established Conseil des
Ministres des F6rets d'Afrique Centrale (COMIFAC), which includes the Democratic
Republic of Congo, has created a framework for regional cooperation for natural resource
management.

27. 
Third, the countries of Central Africa share a number of commonalities (both
positive and negative external economies) that by their very nature raise trans-border
issues and are therefore best managed in cooperation. The tropical forest and river system
are the most common public goods. Among the common "bads", the HIV/AIDS
pandemic has a specific dimension in the transmission of the disease along the transport
corridors -
roads and rivers -
that link the coast and the hinterland. Two regional
health organizations exist: the World Health Organization (WHO) Regional Office based
in Brazzaville and the (now revamped) Organisation de Lutte Contre les Grandes
Ende'mies, formally a specialized agency of CEMAC.

28. 
Fourth, a unified, or at least coordinated, Central Africa region would be a
stronger voice in "post Doha" and other important, international trade negotiations in the
coming years. Acting in concert may improve returns; for example, CEMAC has been
able to join forces with ECOWAS to help put the issue of cotton prices on the
international agenda. Last and not least, the New Partnership for Africa's Development
(NEPAD) should be an added stimulus for CEMAC to accelerate the pace of integration

- 10-

inasmuch as regional integration arrangements are expected to be the pillars of this
initiative.

B. Obstacles to Regional Integration

29. 
The main economic factors -
low growth, poor infrastructure, vulnerability to
volatile oil prices, and disparities between coastal and landlocked countries -
have
created serious baffiers to economic integration. Because of the absence of a strong
growth pole, CEMAC has not generated sufficient dynamism to pull the regional
economies and encourage integration. As noted, historically, growth has been sluggish,
with Chad and CAR being the worst performers and Gabon the best. But Gabon is still
small in the regional context and its skewed structure dominated by commodity exports
provides few backward or forward linkages with the neighboring countries. Furthermore,
the regional non-oil economy, including Cameroon, has fared poorly. Non-oil GDP has
increased by a very modest annual rate of 0.5 percent from 1960 to 2000 and therefore
declined on a per capita basis.

30. 
A severe constraint continues to be poor transport infrastructure. Due to a
combination of dense forests and insufficient maintenance, 
the road network 
is
inadequate, and there is not a well-developed network connecting the capital cities. The
transport network still consists of a little less than 7,000 km of water, rail, and road
linkages, with 1,575 km of river, 2,000 km of rail, and 3,300 km of paved roads. The
landlocked countries depend on overland transport to obtain energy and other imports,
and thus their vulnerability to disruptions in supply lines is heightened. The Douala-
Bangui corridor and the Pointe Noire-Brazzaville-Bangui corridors are weak with both
physical and informal road blocks increasing the transactions costs of doing business.

31. 
A lack of econoniic complementarity resulting from the dominance of primary
exports, undeveloped 
industries (except 
to a limited extent in Cameroon), poor
communications and the rivalries observed between the countries, translates into a very
low level of intra-regional trade, labor and capital linkages despite the customs and
monetary union. Intra-regional trade is currently estimated at about 5% of total trade in
the region, even lower than that of CEMAC's regional counterpart UEMOA (historically
around 10%, and 14% 
in 2000), as well as SADC (13%) and Mercosur (22%).
Particularly notable and damaging are the restrictions limiting labor mobility (including
the difficulties of business travel) between the CEMAC countries, despite the wage
differentials between the poorer and richer countries. Fundamental factors are the very
small populations in oil-producing countries and, consequently, their fear that any
sizeable immigration would create dangerous imbalances and social tensions in local
communities. Harassment by customs officials, unemployment and discrimination against
foreigners in recipient countries have acted as unofficial but powerful deterrents to
immigration.

32. 
A third obstacle to regional integration is the economic asymmetries between
the richer coastal economies and the poorer landlocked economies. Cameroon,
CEMAC's largest economy, constitutes close to 50 percent of regional GDP, while

-11 -

Gabon makes up close to another 25 percent, leaving the four remaining countries with
only 25 percent. In terms of population, the story is similar, except that Gabon's share of
CEMAC's population is less than 4 percent while Chad's share is close to 25 percent.
Large income disparities, combined with large differences in economic dynamism, have
unavoidably created fears of further and perhaps accelerated 
inequalities between
countries, and a situation of rivalry rather than a sense of shared and increased prosperity.

33. 
The most serious obstacles to regional integration, however, are in the realm of
politics and security. First there have been open conflicts within countries. Chad, the
CAR and Congo have had bloody civil wars, coups d'etat, and violent ethnic conflicts
over the last twenty years. Chad has seen recurring armed clashes in the Northern and
Eastem parts of the country, as well as at the border with CAR. The Central African
Republic has been plagued by uncertain oscillations between authoritarian and pseudo-
democratic rule due to chronic military unrest. The recent battle for Bangui (October
2002) is but one manifestation of a continuing profound political crisis. The attempted
military takeover has been repelled by government forces and armed groups from other
countries. 
Such foreign interventions, reportedly, are not without links to illegal
trafficking in gold or diamonds, among others. In the Republic of Congo, armed ethnic
conflict in 1998 and 1999, mostly around the capital of Brazzaville, resulted in over
50,000 deaths. There are still reports of armed rebel groups active in the lower Congo, as
well as border incidents at the border with the Angolan enclave of Cabinda. Also, as in
many other African countries these days, numerous legal or illegal roadblocks, and in
cases sheer banditry, represent costly impediments to travel and trade.

34. 
In addition to their own internal problems, Central African economies have faced
contagious effects from conflicts in Nigeria, DRC, Sudan and Angola. Also, it is not
clear whether Nigeria has accepted or rejected (October 2002) the recent decision by the
U.N. International Court of the Hague to declare Cameroon the legitimate owner of the
supposedly oil rich border island of Bakassi. Finally, the two countries, Cameroon and
Gabon, which have had stable regimes for many years, which furthermore are
economically more developed and which therefore should have been champions for
regional integration, have not yet played the leadership role that might have been
expected from them. In short, important aspects of the regional political and security
context are at odds with the underlying forces for integration.

C. Natural Resources: Assets and Challenges

35. 
Both 
(primarily 

renewable 
forests) 
and 

non-renewable (primarily 

100%

FIGURE4: ROLE OF OIL IN CEMAC ECONOMIES (OIL GDP/
REAL GDP): 2001

resources 

offer 

oil) 

but 

immense 

opportunities, 

also 

management 

difficult 
challenges. 
Oil is a key asset in the 
sub-region, accounting for 

80% 0/ 
60%- -------------------------- 
40%--.-i----

X 

-

--- ------

20%- 

0%

Camroon 

CAR 

Source: BEAC (2002)

-

-

Chad 

Gabon 

Gunea 

Congo 

CEMAC

- 12-

close to 25% of CEMAC's total GDP and 70% percent of CEMAC's exports (Figure 4).
Although oil's total share varies depending on the international price, it plays a
fundamental role in many of the economies. While oil could greatly contribute to lifting
the people of the sub-region out of poverty, actual practice tells a story of improperly
allocated revenues due to fiscal mismanagement. Two major consequences of the high
dependence on oil have been a great volatility in the terms of trade in the sub-region and
constant threat of Dutch disease (in which the oil boom results in the appreciation of the
real exchange rate and a contraction of the non-oil tradable sector ), and the fiscal
indiscipline that results from oil booms. Figure 5 illustrates the fluctuations in the terms
of trade for the region as a whole since 1997.

36. 
The 
problem 
of
"managing oil", however, has 
a very different meaning from 
one country to another. 
In 
Cameroon 
and 
Gabon, 
although with different time 

and structural profiles, 

the 

RGURE5: CE AC TEMS OF TRADEAND OIL PRJCES:
1997-2001 (%)

80
60 -
40
20

_ 

_ 

_

0 

-

-20

-40

Source MF (2001)

2000 
2001
a OL PRICE

1997 
1998 
1999 
--- *caACTB:MOFTRADE 

issue 
is managing 
the 
transition 
to 
a 
post-oil 
economy. This 
is 
being 
achieved with 
reasonable 
success 
in Cameroon while
the outlook is more uncertain 
in Gabon, where oil output
may decline sharply in a matter of 4-5 years. In contrast, tiny Equatorial Guinea is faced
with an influx of oil revenue which makes it one of the fastest growing economies in the
world statistically, but is out of proportion to the country's absorptive capacity, which is
resulting in symptoms of Dutch disease3 . Chad, one of the poorest economies in the
world, will soon be joining the other oil-based economies in the region with the
construction of the US$3.7 billion Cameroon-Chad pipeline and also faces issues of
management of the new wealth. The Republic of Congo continues to struggle with
macroeconomic difficulties -
budget and debt -
despite oil (gross) revenues that still
represent 50% of GDP. It is all too evident, therefore, that the economics and politics of
oil is a challenge to any regional integration strategy.

37. 
Covering 190 million hectares, the dense forests in the CEMAC countries
(including the DRC) represent the second largest eco-forest zone on the planet after the
Amazon. For the countries of CEMAC, the forests represent the second source of fiscal
receipts after oil, the first source of animal proteins, and the largest source of employment
apart from public administration. In fact, for several countries (Congo, CAR, Cameroon,
and Gabon), forest contributions to GDP, measured in terms of the value of industrial
wood production and the value of fuel wood and charcoal, exceed 5%. As opposed to the
mining or petroleum sectors, the forestry sector is also important because it constitutes a

3 Between 1994 and (1999) money supply increased 4.7 times in Equatorial Guinea, against 1.5 times in
Cameroon or Gabon.

- 13 -

renewable resource. The performance of the sector in the CEMAC countries has been
strong over 
the 
last decade,
with 
the production of 
the 
industrial bark 
increasing by 
more than 40% in Cameroon 

FIGURE 6: VALUE OF FORSTRY EXPORTS/
TOTAL EXPORTS (1997)

25 -

30- 

--

-------

--------

I

---- 

----

Congo 

Gabon 

Equitoral

and Gabon (Figure 6). While 

historically 
the 
timber 
of 
Central Africa was exported 
mainly towards Europe, about 

one half of timber exports since 

the mnid 1990's go towards East 

20---

s- 
10 

° 

0

Asia. The next decade could 
an 
even 
greater

witness 
expansion of wood and wood
fuel exports to both the developing and industrial world.

Cameroon 
CAR 
Source:VF(2000)ea

III. CEMAC's Agenda and Strategic Issues

38. 
The objectives assigned to CEMAC by the Treaty and other basic texts are broad
and ambitious. Thus, the Treaty states that "the time has come (1998) to move from
cooperation" to "integration". The regional integration program is appropriately couched
in a long-term framework of three phases of five years each (in theory, therefore. up to
2014). The main policy directions for the Community, as reflected in the basic texts and
various public declarations and policy documents, can be summarized under four
headings: 
(a) 
the customs union; (b) macro-economic stability and convergence;
(c) financial sector integration; and (d) other sector policies -
and around one principal
objective: creating a common market for goods, capital, services and labor.

39. 
Subsequent to the Treaty, the Executive Secretariat, in consultation with BEAC,
prepared a Program of Actions for 2001 (approved by the Council of Ministers in
December 2000). This includes a list of some twenty priority actions needed to
accelerate the process of integration. The Program, in effect, delineates the broad
medium-term work program for the Secretariat, the monetary authorities, and the member
countries in policy areas relating to regional integration. While undoubtedly a valuable
guide, the Program is not a fully structured set of priorities or a detailed work program.
In fact, one of the measures it proposes is preparation of a medium-term development
program for regional integration to be undertaken jointly by the regional and national
authorities. Such a program has not materialized as yet.

40. 
At the same time, as an independent central bank, BEAC continues to develop its
programs and instruments of monetary policy, financial sector integration and capital
markets institutions. Furthermore, a number of cross-cutting as well as sectoral policies
relevant to the process of regional integration are being pursued under separate regional
initiatives. This is the case, for example, of the new business laws being implemented
under the OHADA program in 16 African countries or inter-governmental arrangements,
including DRC, for the rational exploitation and protection of the equatorial forest.

- 14-

41. 
The following section briefly reviews progress under both the areas pertaining to
regional integration and those pertaining to regional cooperation. Regional integration
proper refers to activities involving a varying degree of transfer of sovereignty or
responsibility for economic policies by member countries to regional bodies. Regional
cooperation refers to other arrangements where two or more countries agree to carry out
jointly a specific policy, activity or project. The particular combination of "integrating"
and "cooperative" activities thus constitutes regional integration in its broad sense. One
issue is therefore what particular institutional architecture is likely to maximize the
impact of the integration/cooperation mix in terms of speed, scope and ultimately welfare
impact. This is a long-term, complex and political process - as illustrated by the fact that
the European Union is still debating them after fifty years - and will only be touched
upon in this strategy.

A. 

Integration Policies: CEMAC Core Functions

42. 
Core economic functions include those areas that form the essence of integration
and specifically the establishment of a common market for goods and services, capital
and labor. Progress not unexpectedly has been uneven: unquestionably real regarding
monetary policy; less so concerning macroeconomic convergence; substantially effective
in terms of integration of the financial sector, though with important elements still
missing; in place, but in need of corrective action, in terms of the customs union; and still
a distant target as far as the intra-regional movement of labor is concerned.

1. 

Macroeconomiic Policy Convergence and Surveillance

43. 
CEMAC's macroeconomic policy mix seeks primarily to maintain the nominal
peg and protect the real exchange rate under the regime of a fixed nominal rate with the
Euro, and furthermore to achieve the objective of price stability (the central bank
statutory objective). The tension between monetary and fiscal policy common to most
countries is obviously complicated by the fact that monetary policy is entirely in the
hands of the common central bank whereas the six different member governments are
still in control of fiscal policies. Hence the need for a regional "convergence pact", a set
of four main criteria (see Box 3), and the establishment of a system of multilateral
surveillance.

is,....,- 
BOX 3:
CENIAC CONVERGENCE CRITERIA

4. Basic budget balance: to be zero or positive by 2004;
;. 
Total public debt not to exceed 70% of.GDP by 2004; 
'Accurnulated payments arrears: not to increase, and to be elminated by 2004;
'. Annual rate of inflation: not to exceed 3.-;

-

-

-

-l) 

Basic bu-dget balance excludes-grants and foreign financed investment.
-Total public debt is the sum of external and domestic sbort-term and long-term.
T2)- 
government debt.- 
'3) ' Ac;cumnulated payment arrears is the sum of net-domestic and-external payment
arrears.
-4) Rate of inflatio'n.is the CPI averageLincrease. 

-

-

-

- 15 -

44. 
Since 1994, BEAC's monetary policy has been moving from direct controls to
market based instruments. 
It is set in the framework of periodic (bi-annual) "monetary
programs" 
taking account of all relevant domestic and external macroeconomic
parameters with a view to ensuring sufficient liquidity in the economies by re-financing
banks through a combination of purchase/repurchase of central bank paper and
compulsory reserves. At the same time, direct advances to governments by BEAC will
be phased out over a ten-year period starting in 2004, when the first treasury bill issue (by
one or more governments) is scheduled to take place. A central bank-intermediated
money market has developed though still on a modest scale. Interest rates are set by the
central bank for its own interventions (currently up to 8.35% with 15% penalty rates
beyond a certain point) and freely by banks (with an authorized upper limit of 18% for
loans and a minimum of 5% for term deposits). Monetary policy has been effective in
keeping inflation low in the sub-region. As an extension to the modernization of the
financial sector, preparatory steps are being taken by the central bank, commercial banks
and governments to establish a market for government paper (see the section on financial
sector integration below).

45. While 
the essential 
rationale for seeking macroeconomic convergence 
is
protection of the fixed exchange rate, the predominance of fiscal criteria can also be
traced to the serious mismanagement of public sector finances in the 1980s and early
1990s in both CFAF zones which contributed toward the CFA franc devaluation of 1994,
as well more recent deviations in some of the member countries. The fiscal discipline
that observance of the convergence criteria implies is thus directly complementary to the
strict rules for monetary policy embedded in the Convention of the Monetary Union for

Central Africa (Union Monetaire d'Afrique Centrale - UMAC).

46. 
Not surprisingly, performance under the convergence criteria has been mixed.
Over the five years from 1997-2002, there was a pattern of overall progress, but
deviations were the rule rather than the exception in every year for at least one criterion
in at least one country (Box 4). Each member country has now been requested by the
regional authorities to prepare a three-year convergence plan for 2002-2004. CEMAC's
ability to enforce the convergence criteria is limited to the publicity that may accompany
the bi-annual "surveillance reports" and other forms of peer pressure. These are
considered by the monetary authorities the only practical sanctions with which to
penalize diverging nations in the current political context (see also below COBAC's
role). However, there is the danger of slippage with regard to the fiscal balance because
of the volatility of oil revenues in the sub-region. There is thus the risk that in times of
depressed oil prices, slippages would be accepted as being the result of exceptional
circumstances, while in times of high oil prices, tendencies towards fiscal profligacy
would not be constrained (IMF, 2002 4). A downturn in the oil market in the near term
could result in growing fiscal deficits if public spending were to continue at the previous
rate.

4 IMF Staff Report, "CEMAC: Recent Developments and Regional Policy Issues in 2001," May 2002.

-16-

L`EMC 

BOX4 
CONVERGENCE CRITERIA AND PERFORMANCE,.

.'

r: -- 

v 

-

\ 

.

-

.

; .

Total countries in non-compliance,, 
_22002

..... ....... 
2000 
2001 

. o. 
1999 

-,

s;rE>~ r 

s-; 

-**. 

< 

; * N9onnegative basic.,

fi calbalance 

-

-

, 1, Inflation below 3% 
* Public external and dom.i:

4 

2--- 3 

2 

" 

2 

3 

2

4

debt less than 70% of GDP 

4'- 

' 

4 

4. 

' 

3

. Non-accumulafion of' 
arrears' 
, 

.-. 

r0 

-,.i 

-

aoCal 

country criteria> (n/24) 

13 

' 

10, 

9 

"r-not' 

obsery6d t.-t 

;*,-> 

0_ -

9

2. 

Financial Sector Integration

47. 
The agenda for establishing a strong and integrated regional financial system has
six main parts: completing the rehabilitation of the banking systems; implementing new
regional financial integration measures for the payments system and cross-country
branching; strengthening supervision; strengthening micro-finance; developing long-term
financing institutions; and, importantly, assisting in developing a market for government
paper.

48. 
Rehabilitation of the banks and other parts of the financial sector has been part of
various adjustment programs undertaken by member countries since the devaluation. The
restructuring and privatization has been completed in five of the six countries. Most
banks are now solvent, liquid and profitable, although Congo has been lagging. One bank
(out of three) is still to be restructured but this is expected to be achieved in the first half
of 2003. The rehabilitation effort has rested with the individual governments under the

supervision of the Commission Bancaire d'Afrique Centrale (COBAC) and the support of
the World Bank and the Agence Fran aise de Developpememt (AFD).

49. Modernization of the payments system in the BEAC zone is being supported by
an IDA project (approved in July 2002), the first of a truly regional dimension, prepared
in collaboration with the member governments, the central bank, all the commercial
banks and the IMF. The project will help develop electronic payment clearing systems for
both bulk and high-value transactions, an inter-bank card system and a payment risk
management system. Another initiative of regional import is the so-called "Agrement
unique" (2002), whereby a bank licensed in one of the member countries may open
branches in any other member country. It would appear, however, that the system is all
but automatic. Capital requirements and administrative procedures for so doing still
constitute serious obstacles. No case has materialized yet (October 2002). This is

- 17 -

unfortunate as entry into the banking sector remains restricted, the system remains
fragmented between member countries, competition is stifled and opportunities for
diversification of banks' portfolios are limited.

50. 
Supervision of the banking sector is entrusted to the Commission Bancaire d'
Afrique Centrale (COBAC) created in 1990. While COBAC is a professional entity that
rigorously complies with 
international 
rules on supervision, 
it 
is nevertheless
understaffed and does not have specific control over market and foreign exchange risks.
In the framework of the multilateral macroeconomic surveillance system, COBAC has
adopted new solvency norms for banks whereby the calculation of the solvency ratio
takes the four convergence criteria into account for credits to governments, so that any
government which is a bank client and is in non-compliance with one or more criteria
could thus be sanctioned by the market. This would add weight to other "sanctions"
noted earlier, i.e., publicity and peer pressure.

51. 
Regarding micro-finance, Central Africa is in urgent need of financial resources
for the poor households that are bypassed by the conventional banking system. In April
2002, a new regional regulation was adopted, together with supervision rules by COBAC.
COBAC's capacity, including specific training to improve its supervision capabilities for
microfinance institutions and operations, will have to be strengthened through increases
in staff and specific training. Since the major bottleneck to microfinance expansion in
developing countries is generally not a shortage of funds but rather the paucity of well-
designed and sustainable organizations, there will be a need to disseminate the new
regulations, strengthen existing micro-finance institutions themselves and bring them up
to par with the new regulations. Appropriate institutional design will be needed to ensure
that microfinance institutions will eventually be financially self-sufficient.

52. 
For long-term finance and capital markets, the picture is an evolving one. The
financial position of the regional development bank (BDEAC) had deteriorated over the
years as a result of governments' failing to pay in their share in the capital, non-
repayment of loans to the public and private sector, overstaffing and repeated political
interference. Under new leadership, however, the BDEAC has engaged in a process of
rehabilitation, restructuring and planning for the future. It has produced a new business
plan based on raising funds in the regional market in local currency and refinancing long-
term loans to the private sector extended by the region's commercial banks. It still has to
complete its restructuring, including staff training and reallocation. 
In order to attract
new capital, it will subsequently have to demonstrate its effectiveness and viability over a
few years, notably as an instrument for refinancing the long end of commercial banks'
lending.

53. 
Lacking timely agreement between Cameroon and Gabon, a regional stock
exchange project has suffered delays. It has finally been agreed that the new institution
will be established in Libreville (Gabon), but without the participation of Cameroon, the
largest regional economy. The regional stock exchange will be a private institution and
vanous contnbutors, commercial banks in the first place, are being solicited. As of mid-
2002 indications of intent amount 
to about 80% of the proposed initial capital.
Preparation of the legal statutes and regulatory framework continues. Meanwhile, the

- 18 -

establishment of a national (private) stock exchange in Douala (Cameroon) is also under
active preparation.

54. 
A relatively new but important undertaking linked to the evolution of monetary
policy is the establishment of a regional market for government paper - bills and bonds -
which will allow government to finance its expenditures and conduct monetary policy
more efficiently by permitting it to develop open market operations and thus complete the
shift from controls or direct central bank lending to market-based instruments. At the
same time a government paper market will offer new outlets for domestic savings, greater
diversification of portfolios, greater capital mobility within the regions and ultimately
better management of governments' debt. A government bond market can serve as a
stepping stone to developing a corporate debt market by helping boost investor
confidence in the overall bond market. However, the feasibility of a government debt
market will hinge critically on the credibility of each member government's fiscal policy
and debt management record. 
In Central Africa, given the low savings rates, weak
investor base and thin capital markets, bond market development will face critical
constraints. It is also important to note that a government bond market should be seen as
an instrument for fiscal discipline and should not crowd out financial resources for the
private sector. Meanwhile, the central bank in consultation with external experts is
actively pursuing preparation of the institutional basis for an effective government debt
market, and thereafter a corporate bond market. A few years will probably be required to
establish the minimal set of needed conditions.

55. 
Finally, although not a financial 
institution 
in 
the banking sense, 
the
Compensation and Development Fund (Fonds de Compensation et de Developpement),
formally established by CEMAC, is intended as a financial instrument of the Community,
with two principal functions. One is to compensate countries for loss of revenue as a
result of elimination of internal tariffs. The other is to finance "integrating projects". A
decision to collect a 1% fee on all imports from third countries to finance the CEMAC
institutions and capitalize the Fund was finally approved by the heads of state at the
Yaound6 meeting of December, 2001. The proceeds are to be allocated as follows: 30%
for the operating costs of the CEMAC institutions (Executive Secretariat, Court of
Justice, etc.) and 70% for the Fonds de Compensation et de Developpement. The 70% in
turn is to be allocated as 40% for compensation and 60% for "integrating projects".
However, only two of the six countries appear to have so far agreed to collect the 1% fee,
and Gabon and Cameroon have not yet complied, thus adversely affecting CEMAC's
budget. Furthermore, the exact modus operandi of the fund has not yet been determined.

3. 

Establishing a Common Market: The Customs Union

56. 
The "common market" to be established refers to the following three markets:
goods and services, capital and 
labor. Clearly each "market" 
involves different
requirements and will proceed along a different calendar. The free movement of capital
is inherent in the monetary union and linked to the effective integration of the financial
sector discussed above. Issues related to the free movement of people are noted later.
The first focus here is on the goods market, i.e., the customs union.

- 19 -

57. 
The implementation of a functioning customs union can be characterized as a
program to move forward from the 1994 tax and customs reform, the so-called "Reforne
Fiscalo-Douaniere", or RFD in short 5 . The principal thrust of the reforms was to
liberalizing and simplifying the system by introducing a common external tariff,
eliminating country-specific temporary surtaxes, removing all intra-zone tariffs by 2000
and non-tariff barriers for locally produced products, and replacing the fragmented
indirect tax system with a uniform value-added tax (VAT) by 1999. The reforms may
have contributed to the 6.8% yearly increase of intra-regional trade over the 8 years to
2001(IMIF trade statistics). Unfortunately, there are no numbers for non-official trade.

58. 
The RFD was a major improvement over the previous regime. However, a late
1999 review found that although governments did confirm their commitment to the
reform, they were, in varying degree, in breach of one or more provisions regarding
customs duties and indirect taxes. The most frequent deviations were: (a) the persistence
of ad hoc duty and/or 
tax exonerations; 
(b) misclassification of products; 
(c)
disagreements on the definition of products of (local) origin, and general dissatisfaction
with the rules of origin; (d) non-elimination or incomplete reduction of intra-regional
tariffs (which were supposed to have been eliminated at the end of 1998); (e) the
persistence of, or even introduction of, miscellaneous surcharges; and (f) double taxation
of products in transit from the port of entry (mainly Douala) and the landlocked
countries. These difficulties refer only to the tax-customs reform, not to the multiplicity
of other "behind the border" impediments to trade. These are a separate and more
problematic agenda, one of which the CEMAC authorities are well aware but ill-
equipped to tackle. The Secretariat also noted problems with the qualifications and
behavior of customs officials and the lack of sanctions for non-observance of the new
rules, whether automatic (for which there were no provisions in the reform) or case-by-
case (when complaints were filed from economic operators).

59. 
The existing trade regime and transit system has two ramifications. First, it raises
the transactions costs of doing business in the sub-region and acts as a major tax on
importers in Chad and Central African Republic. Second, the combination of a protected
trade regime and high administrative hurdles and delays has an inherent anti-export bias
and worsens the economic competitiveness of the industries in the sub-region.

60. 
This state of affairs seems to persist, despite some improvements, particularly
with Douala port operations. One contributing reason for this may partly be the
insufficient, or poorly qualified and poorly motivated, personnel 
in charge of
implementing the RFD. The pattern of deficiencies, however, suggests that one reason is
also the desire to maintain high levels of protection for so-called sensitive activities,
particularly in the more industrialized countries (Cameroon, Gabon and Congo). To a
lesser extent, the concern with loss of revenue has been present in the poorer landlocked
countries. This is understandable, as measures to compensate for revenue losses resulting
from tariff and tax reductions have not yet been applied.

5 The 1994 RFD is described in detail in an annex to the IMF Staff Report on Chad (No. 99/45), May 1999

- 20 -

61. 
In view of this unsatisfactory situation, the Executive Secretariat (with support
from the EU, the World Bank and France) has commissioned independent customs
experts to do a full assessment of the state of implementation of the 1994 reform,
including all aspects of the Common External Tariff (CET), as well as remaining tariff
and non-tariff barriers to intra-regional and transit trade. The forthcoming report
(expected in December 2002) should provide the basis for corrective action as well as for
longer term reforms. Meanwhile, the Executive Secretariat has obtained assistance from
the African Capacity Building Foundation (ACBF) to strengthen CEMAC's negotiation
capacities within the WTO framework. It is also important to note that CEMAC has an
advisory status at WTO and participates regularly in the various meetings of the Trade
and Development Committee.

4. 

Establishing a Common Market: Free Movement of People

62. 
The free movement of people is provided for in the CEMAC treaty but is to be
completed only as part of the last 5-year phase of implementation of the common market.
This problem has several distinct dimensions. 
Free travel within 
the region by
individuals for business or other reasons would no longer be a problem in the future if
and when the proposed "CEMAC Passport" is issued, available to all citizens, and the
need for visas is eliminated by all CEMAC countries. These basic requirements may not
be easily satisfied, since reportedly only four of the six countries have agreed to the
principle. Second is the question of rights for non-nationals to take residence, work or
open a business. This is also provided for in the CEMAC Treaty but reportedly would
not be implemented without problems. The last aspect has to do with the unification of
the regional labor market and the movement of significant numbers of workers from one
country to another, more specifically from the less to the more developed areas within the
sub-region. As already noted, there is severe formal and informal resistance to such
movements in countries of potential immigration because of their small populations. The
regional 
labor market may, therefore, be a desirable objective but is unlikely to
materialize for a long time to come. 6

5. 

Improving the Business Environment in the Common Market

63. 
The business environment, understood here to mean the legal and regulatory
environment only,7 can be seen as falling under the generic category of "integration
policies" inasmuch as it involves the sub-region as a whole, is indeed a key dimension of
the common market objective, and is to a large extent under the purview of regional
authorities. This characterization applies specifically to the general business law, the
investment laws, and the rules of competition. Only issues pertaining to these general
legal instruments are noted below. Sectoral regulations (e.g., for public utilities) are still
national, but may become regional; for example, if telecommunication regulations were
to be established. In such cases, cooperation agreements limited to the countries directly
involved may be the appropriate instrument. 
Importantly, the judicial systems are also

6 It may be noted in this respect that in Gabon, for example, there are more foreign workers from West
Africa than from other countries of the sub-region.
7 It excludes other factors, such as taxation, infrastructure services, labor costs, etc.

- 21 -

national, although they share many common features inherited from their common
history.

64. 
Regarding the legal system, as indicated earlier, the OHADA8 business law is
now in place but is not fully implemented in fact, among other reasons because the courts
and the legal professions in general are not yet conversant with this new, more modem
legislation. Also, business circles are concerned with some of its provisions. This refers
specifically to the so-called procedure of "saisie-attribution", whereby judges may order
seizure of debtors' assets in banks. This has created difficulties for banks which are third
parties to debtor-creditor relations. It would appear, however, that the problem lies in the
erroneous (or arbitrary) interpretation of the law by some courts (especially in Cameroon)
rather than in the law itself.

65. 
CEMAC has its own regional Investment Charter (a "R'glement" issued in
December 1999) which provides a general framework in the form of a code of good
conduct for the governments as well as private investors with respect to licensing,
guaranties, legal protection against seizure by the state, freedom of repatriation of profits
(within the monetary zone regulations) and so on. It offers the possibility of a limited
number of tax advantages: exemption of profit tax for three years (probably an
unnecessary measure in any case), the possibility of accelerated depreciation, carry-
forward of losses, and tax exonerations for technological research or training expenses.
However, member countries maintain their own investment codes and/or a large number
of country-specific exemptions 
in order to attract 
investors under "special" 
tax
"incentives" not in line with the spirit of the charter. The charter does not cover the
petroleum, mining, and forestry sectors. These require specific regulations, which exist
at country level, but are not being "regionalized" for the time being with the exception of
the forestry sector (to a certain degree) with respect to the trans-border protected areas.

66. 
CEMAC has also issued "Rules of Competition" (2000) generally along the lines
of the EU legislation (and thereby similar to those of WAEMU) but implementation is
still not effective. Businesses are concerned by the possible conflict between the regional
and, as the case may be, the existing national rules of competition if these are not
effectively discarded. The situation could be further complicated if OHADA, as has been
reported, were to issue new legislation on this matter. The CEMAC and OHADA
Secretariats need to coordinate their actions in this respect.

67. 
Finally, while governance is not strictly a legal issue and is essentially a national
rather than regional concern, 
it is highly relevant to the quality of the business
environment. 
In this respect the international stature of the central bank must be noted.
The Executive Secretariat on the other hand would benefit from both higher visibility and
greater operational transparency. CEMAC has justifiably decided to tackle one of the
regional dimensions of governance by establishing formal cooperation with Interpol to
try and prevent money laundering in the sub-region.

8 OHADA Organisation pour I 'Harmonisation du Droit des Affaires en Afrique (Organization for the
Harmonization of Business Law in Africa) is a French-sponsored initiative for the modernization and
harmonization of business laws in 16 francophone countries in Africa. It was established in 1993 but the
actual implementation began in 1998

- 22 -

B. Areas for Regional Cooperation

1. 

Sectoral Policies

68. 
CEMAC's mandate and program of actions include the coordination and/or
design of common sectoral policies in agriculture, forestry, water, environment, energy,
telecommunications, commerce, industry, tourism, education and training. Preparatory
work has been commissioned by the Secretariat on these sectors. One has been completed
(with FAO assistance) in a "Regional Food Security Policy" paper.

69. 
Notwithstanding this broad mandate, CEMAC's main sectoral priority at this time
is transport. CEMAC, with support from the EU, is therefore in the process of updating a
regional inland transport master plan designed to guide completion and upgrading of the
regional trunk road and river network of over 10,000 km. In particular, the plan envisions
a road system connecting all the Central African capitals with paved roads by 2010.
Other actions in transport include issuing a new Code Communautaire de la Route, a
Code de la Marine Marchande, Code de la Navigation, and Code de l'Aviation Civile as
well as seeking to "harmonize" standards and rules for road maintenance across
countries, and promoting other measures to "protect the road network patrimony" through
installing weighing stations; "encouraging" use and coordination of multi-modal
transport (road/rail/river); adopting a common maintenance regime for river transport;
and the revival of river transport by supporting the International Commission of the
Congo-Bangui-Sanghai Basin.

70. 
Currently, air travel between countries of the sub-region is expensive, unreliable,
and unresponsive to local demands, in part because of a rigid regulatory framework
hindering competition. There are also indications of some member governments
obstructing a national airline's plans to increase its flights frequency. There is room
therefore for better intra-regional air service. The Executive Secretariat has therefore
been mandated by the heads of state to prepare a feasibility study for the creation of a
private regional air company. An issue, however, is that the very visible sponsorship of
govemments makes this initiative somewhat ambiguous.

71. Meanwhile technical work is proceeding on implementation of the Yamoussoukro
Decision (1999) on liberalization of air transport in West and Central Africa (of which
the CEMAC member countries are signatories). This program notably includes measures
to improve air transport security and passenger protection, better observance of ICAO
rules, and harmonization of rules of entry.

2. 

Cooperation on Common "'Goods" and "Bads"

72. 
Although otherwise unrelated, transmissible diseases and forestry 
have in
common their inherent regional dimension through "external diseconomies", which are
particularly serious for HIV/AIDS, or "external economies" in the case of the eco-forest
through its influence on the climate of the region and beyond.

- 23 -

73. 
The seriousness of the HIV/AIDS pandemic in the region has been noted. The
CEMAC Executive Secretariat, however, does not have responsibility or competency in
health matters. These are entrusted to the former Organisation pour la Lutte contre les
Grandes Endemies, which has now become a specialized agency of CEMAC. The WHO
regional office for Central Africa is located in Brazzaville. While HIV-AIDS remains
primarily a national responsibility, just as in other parts of the Continent, UN-AIDS has
identified the channels of contamination of the disease in the cross-country transport
corridors as particularly active. The Congo-Oubangui River Axis and the area around
Lake Chad are cases 
in point. Various donor agencies, 
including 
the African
Development Bank, are reviewing the possibility of assistance.

74. 
The problem of deforestation (Cameroon, Congo, Gabon), though obviously
different, also requires prompt and determined action because it threatens the livelihood
of local populations, adversely affects rainfall in the Sudanian-Sahelien zone, and
represents a poorly exploited valuable economic resource. Indeed, in spite of the
considerable potential and apparent good performance (in terms of timber exports), the
development of the sector has historically been constrained by the absence of a proper
regulatory framework for many years. However, in March 1999, following a Summit of
Heads of State in Yaound6, an operational framework was created in the form of the

Conference des Ministres des Forets d'Afrique Centrale (COMIFAC), which includes the

DRC), with an Executive Secretariat to promote regional cooperation with regard to
forestry management. In fact, the 1990's were characterized by significant forestry sector
reforms in some of the CEMAC countries, most notably Cameroon, to improve the fiscal
and taxation system governing the sector. The success of the sector will depend critically
on sustaining the pace of reforms and the member countries' capacity to implement them.

- 24 -

IV. World Bank Assistance Strategy and Program

75. 
The following sections present the general strategic considerations surrounding
the proposed Bank assistance and delineate the proposed work program for the next 3-4
years. However, though self-evident, it may be recalled at the outset that no measure of
extemal assistance, including from the World Bank, will produce meaningful results
unless some basic preconditions prevail: civil peace, no conflict between countries, and a
minimum degree of democratic environment9 . Section A presents the principal rationale
and general approach; Section B describes the proposed program and its components; and
section C discusses cooperation with other development partners.

A. Rationale, Goals, Principles

1. 

Rationale for Bank Assistance

76. 
Despite several policy constraints and weaknesses, there is a strong rationale for
the Bank to assist CEMAC in its efforts toward regional integration, consistent with the
Bank's overarching objective of poverty reduction. While integration in the sub-region is
still in its infancy, there are two main reasons for supporting the process. First, a strong
historical and institutional base exists through which integration can also lock the
member countries into policy reform. Integration's main pillars, which are also the
essential conditions for growth, are in place, even though they need considerable
strengthening in places. These pillars are a working monetary union; an agreed system for
macroeconomic policy convergence and surveillance; an established customs union; a
reasonably sound financial sector which is being gradually integrated; and a new, more
favorable 
legal and regulatory framework for private business. Second, regional
integration -
in its broadest sense -
is essential for the economies and, indeed, the
survival of the two landlocked countries (Chad and the Central African Republic), which
have among the lowest per capita income in the world. In fact, the need for cooperation
between them and their richer coastal neighbors is fully recognized in the CEMAC treaty
itself.

77. 
Extemal assistance can also further strengthen the "forces for integration" noted
earlier. Thus, a more cohesive CEMAC can be a much needed factor of peace within the
Community and in the broader central African region. Mutually beneficial bilateral or
multilateral projects, such as the Cameroon-Chad pipeline, are more likely to materialize
within a broader, structured regional arrangement. As a united group, the CEMAC
countries are likely to be a louder (if still small) voice in intemational negotiations,
whether in the WTO framework or in the context of the Cotonou agreement with the
European Union. Finally, as indicated above, strong regional arrangements, of which

9 This does not refer to a particular constitutional form of government but to a situation where civil society
has a voice and can participate in the political processes.

- 25 -

CEMAC is expected to be one, are being encouraged by NEPAD. This conjunction of
factors creates a potential for more effective regional integration, and the Bank, together
with other development partners can help make this potential a reality.

2. 

Goals and Poverty Reduction

78. While the ultimate goal of poverty reduction remains primarily a national
responsibility, regional integration can conceivably contribute to it through four main
channels: by accelerating overall regional growth; through movements of people from the
less to the more prosperous areas; by relocating and developing new activities where the
poor live; by re-distribution of regional resources to the poor; and, more generally, by
strengthening solidarity between member countries, which would curtail the temptation
of using retaliatory measures - akin to "beggar-thy-neighbor" policies - against each
other. All these factors can contribute to poverty reduction but those that will permit
accelerating overall growth are likely to be the most effective in CEMAC. Some of the
things that will be critical in that respect are: macroeconomic stability and convergence;
the maintenance of a competitive exchange rate; an increasingly liberalized trade regime
with the rest of the world to stimulate competition; improved access to inputs at world
prices; export promotion; free intra-regional 
trade (including "informal" 
trade); an
effectively integrated financial sector to help improved allocation of resources; and a
modem legal, regulatory and judiciary environment.

79. 
The free movement of people within the region is imbedded in the constitutional
texts of the Community. Intra-regional migration, however, will remain a marginal
contributor to poverty reduction in the medium-term for the political and social reasons
noted earlier. Developing new, non location-specific activities in the two landlocked
countries will depend on greatly improving the availability of skilled manpower in those
countries, which will 
take 
time 
to develop. Finally, while some 
intra-regional
redistribution of real income in one form or other is usually provided for in regional
arrangements, such policies have not been successful worldwide (the EU is to some
degree an exception), and they do not feature ostensibly into the mandates of the regional
Compensation and Development fund, the regional development bank, or other CEMAC
policies.

80. 
The contribution of regional integration to poverty reduction therefore will be its
improved environment for macroeconomic stabilization, greater openness, and a more
credible business environment. In other words, it will help create the conditions for
accelerated growth, which is the backbone of poverty reduction. It follows that the
policies undertaken by CEMAC should create or consolidate 
the conditions for
accelerated growth. In summary, the creation of a common open market must form the
immediate objective of Bank assistance. This goal translates into support for policies that
advance the process of deeper integration as well as support for actions that permit
cooperation on specific sectoral issues. In this regard, it will be important for the
Executive Secretariat to ensure that in the formulation of their PRSPs, the member
countnes incorporate fully the regional dimension, including regional opportunities and
programs (Attachment 1)

- 26 -

3. 

Guiding Principles

81. 
As in the case of the West Africa Regional Integration Assistance Strategy, a few
principles (which are equally valid for the regional authorities) will guide the Bank in
designing and delivering its regional assistance. The main principle is, of course, that an
open and outward looking posture -in other words open regionalism 
-is as essential as
in any other trade arrangement in Africa, perhaps even more so given the very small
economic size of the sub-region, and for the same efficiency reasons. This is well
understood and clearly expressed in CEMAC's basic texts. The problems lie in the
implementation of policies consistent with the principle.

82. 
Only private enterprises will be able to capture the benefits of openness and
translate them into competitive and more diversified production, exports and lower prices
to the consumers; in other words, into greater welfare for the region. While governments
are clearly the initiators of the process of integration, the private sector should be its
moving force.

83. 
Participation of the people, and not only of private business, is essential for the
sustainability of regional arrangements. Regional integration must be seen to be in the
interest of the citizens as consumers, as producers, and as participants in decisions that
affect civil society at large. As often remarked, the "culture of integration has not taken
root in the region". To increase interest and participation, NGO's and other civil
associations, such as trade unions, must be invited to debate the issues and more
generally to freely pursue their activities. Also a deliberate effort to disseminate
information is necessary. The Executive Secretariat has plans to that effect in its program
of actions. With respect to both dissemination of information and participation, the
widely attended joint CEMAC-World Bank workshop held in Yaounde (October 2002)
was a success.

84. 
The subsidiarity principle should guide the division of labor and responsibilities
between the regional institutions and the national governments. It means simply that
while gradual relinquishment of elements of sovereignty from governments to regional
institutions is inherent in the process of integration, the regional institutions should only
assume responsibility for those policies and actions that cannot be carried out as well or
better by the national authorities. In the central African context, the regional institutions
(other than the central bank) are still weak relative to national governments. Over time,
they should assert themselves more and more effectively over a larger area of regional
policy.

85. 
Finally, pragmatism and gradualism rather than grandiose blueprints will
ensure progress. This implies a combination of a strategic approach 
in order to
concentrate the limited institutional and human resources available on those priority areas

tO Open regionalism here also implies, as per the CEMAC treaty, acceptance of new member countries
fulfilling set conditions.

- 27 -

leading 
to deeper integration with an opportunistic approach seeking 
opportunities for inter-country cooperation as they occur.

to exploit

86. 
Besides observing these general guidelines, the Bank will be attentive to ensure
consistency and cross fertilization between Country Assistance Strategies (CAS) for
CEMAC members and the Regional Integration Assistance Strategy (RIAS).

B. Priority Areas and Proposed Work Program for World Bank Assistance

87. 
The foregoing review has identified a large number of issues and the unfinished
agenda. Macroeconomic policies, 
trade policies, financial sector reform, business
environment and competitiveness form the domain of integration. Infrastructure services,
forestry, water, environment, health-HIV/AIDS, and human resources are all in the
domain of regional cooperation, while institutional issues straddle both categories. This
section first presents an overview of the program and then reviews all proposed activities
for Bank assistance for the period FY04-FY08.

88. 
As in the case of West Africa, policy dialogue, policy advice and technical
assistance will be relatively important. Consequently, a higher level of flexible grant
resources will be necessary than in the past. Moreover, a few key lending operations are
programmed as well.

1. 

Overview of the Program

89. 
The program's structure is divided into two dimensions: the domain of assistance
and the degree of priority. As defined earlier, the targeted domains are Integration and
Cooperation. The degree of priority indicates whether the Bank foresees a leadership role
for itself in the relevant activity. Core activities would have first claim on Bank
resources. In non-core activities, the Bank would act as an associate, a convener or
simply as an observer where another development partner takes the lead. However, some
form of collaboration with other external agencies is likely to be the rule in most, if not
all activities. These activities would have second rank in the use of scarce Bank
resources. 
Importantly, 
the Bank will continue to provide support to institutional
strengthening and capacity building, which, as indicated above, concern the two domains
of integration and cooperation. It should be noted that "non-core" does not imply low
priority in the process of regional integration; it simply means that the activity in question
does not match the Bank's comparative advantage given the level of resources and
expertise available to the Institution. Non-core also refers to an area where the Bank
would like to take a cautious approach because the policy options taken by the Region
(e.g., regional stock exchange or BDEAC) are still uncertain, and/or the operation
requires long lead-time for preparation 
(energy). Thus, macroeconomic policies -
although non-core in this program - are clearly essential but the IMF is, in this case, the
principal organization in a position to monitor, analyze and advise. The Bank will
nonetheless monitor developments in this area since it has to form its own judgments on
aspects relevant to its operations (the exchange rate is one of those aspects but the bulk of
the analytical work on macroeconomic issues will be by c6untry, not regional).

- 28 -

90. 
To these two dimensions is added a "contingent" category, which is comprised of
a number of studies in areas important for the process of regional integration in the long
run. To simplify, this category is in the table as one single item "long term issues
studies". These studies are contingent because of the uncertainty surrounding their
execution, notably as to interest on the part of the client, availability of resources,
possible intervention by another agency, or the general country environment is too great
to permit firm commitment by the Bank at this time. The themes envisioned for these
studies are mentioned in various places in the main text, (including in the section on
"Risks" and briefly described in Attachment 2.

Core Activities 

Non-Core Activities 

Sum=ary of Bank ActivtRies

Integration 
Trade Policies - Customs Union 
- Phase I: Corrective action plan 
- Phase II: Customs union reform 

Financial Sector 
- Banking sector monitoring 
- Microfinance development
- Bills and bonds market

Cooperation
Infrastructure
- Transport and Trade facilitation
- Regional road links
- Air safety and regulation
Human Resources
- Regional HIV-AIDS

Institutional Strengthening
Support to the Executive Secretariat
Monitoring of programs
infrastructure
- Telecommunications Policy
Harmonization
- Energy (Power) strategy

Macroecononiic 
- Monitoring policy convergence and 
surveillance units work 
- Export volatility study 

Business Environment 
- Legal and regulatory framework 
- Competitiveness observatory 
Financial Sector 
- BDEAC 
- Regional stock exchange

Forestry/Water
- Support to COMIFAC/REIMP-II
- Lake Chad Basin
Human Resources
- Higher education and training

Contingent Activities 

Long Term Issues Studies

91. 
As shown in the table below, the assistance program will require IDA financing of
$140 million. The five technical assistance operations amount to $40 million (not
including the ongoing regional payments project). The sole investment project is $100
million for regional road links. Because it is inherently capital intensive and the rest of
the program is not, this creates an apparent imbalance in the program in financial terms.
As noted, this project (or projects) is subject to its economic feasibility being established
and will carry sector conditionality (e.g., regarding maintenance). It is proposed at this
time for FY07 because of the lead time involved in preparation, and of the fact that the
financing of the regional network is fully available until 2006.

- 29 -

Table 1: Tentative Central Africa Multicountry Lending Program, FY 04-08 ($US Millions)
Area 
Task 
IDA 
Financial Year
Investment Tech Asst

Trade

Financial Sector
(a) Banking sector 

(b) Microfinance 

Trade facilitation (reform of 
customs union) /1

5.0 

FY05

BEAC Payment systems 

((15)) 

FY02 

/2

Implementation of new 
microfinance legislation

10.0 

FY04

(c) Long-term financing Capital market development 

FY06 

/3

Infrastructure
(a) Transport 

Road infrastructure 
Transport facilitation /1 
Air transport 

100.0 

Forestry and Environment
Forestry 
Regional Environmental Information 
Management Project (REIMP II)

5.0 
5.0 

5.o 

FY07
FY05
FY04

FY04

Human Resources
Regional HIV-AIDS /4 
Regional Lake Chad Basin Initiative 
TOTAL 
100.0 
1) Trade and transport facilitation will be one $10 million operation.
2) BEAC payments project approved in July, 2002. Number is in Parentheses only for the record.
3) Status of bond market project do be decided after midyear review
4) Financed under MAP II grant

10.0 
40.0

FY04

- 30 -

92. 
Administrative resources needed to carry out the analytical and advisory activities
(monitoring of developments, economic and sector work, special studies, policy dialogue,
workshops, liaison with other agencies, mid-term review of progress, preparing requests
for IDFs, etc.), as well as the preparation and supervision of lending operations over the
program period, will be allocated approximately as follows:

Table 2: Budget Allocations for Bank Assistance Program - FY04-08

Integration 
Macroeconomic Policies 
Trade Policies 
Financial Sector Integration 
Business Environment 
Infrastructure Services 
Forestry/Water 
Human Resources 
Institutional Strengthening 
Total 

Percenlage
4
10
18
13
31
9
10
5
100

93. 
The program will be monitored under each relevant category of Bank activity:
supervision where either IDA lending for projects or technical assistance/institution
building operations with IDA financing or Trust fund financing is involved. In cases
where ESW and policy dialogue are the vehicles for Bank assistance, review of progress
will naturally be integral part of the activity. In coordination with other donors, a periodic
overview of the program will take place annually while an in-depth progress report on the
integration process will be prepared after three years, i.e. in late FY05 or early FY06.
Monitoring of the regional strategy will be coordinated with monitoring of country
programs. The main components to be monitored relate both to progress in the regional
integration process and to execution of the work program and are summarized in
Attachment 3.

2. 

Program Activities

94. 
The following sections briefly describe the program's activities in the functional
order in which they have been discussed in the text, from those essentially related to
integration to those pertaining to sector and sub-sector cooperation. For each activity the
order of "priority" are indicated as core or non-core).

Institutional Issues (Core Activities)

95. 
There are two main sorts of institutional issues in CEMAC One is the question of
whether the existing institutional architecture is the most appropriate in light of the
region's long term objectives. At the core is the issue of distribution of sovereignty
between states and regional institutions. To simplify, is the ultimate goal a federation of
states or is the objective more simply to provide a favorable framework for intensified
cooperation between countries - even though the preamble to the Treaty states that the
.time has come to "move from cooperation to integration"? Or is the consensus toward
some viable mid-point? This is, of course, a highly political, complex, long-term issue.
After almost 50 years, the European Union is still debating it. The Bank together with

- 31 -

other development partners could in due course contribute to the discussion as it relates to
economic aspects, if so desired.

96. 
On the other hand, the need to strengthen the Executive Secretariat, including
ensuring permanent and predictable financial resources, is generally recognized as a
pressing issue. Indeed, the process of deepening integration, as well as fostering regional
cooperation, is not feasible without strong regional institutions, particularly with respect
to the permanent executive bodies, i.e., the Secretariat. However, serious limitations to
the Secretariat's effectiveness, as well as to the willingness of external partners to provide
assistance, exist because of its location in Bangui where a state of insecunty persists.
Assuming a more normal environment, the Bank would be willing to consider an IDF
grant to strengthen the institution's capacity in some of its key responsibilities, including
the monitoring of trade, preparing customs reform, or macroeconomic surveillance. The
Bank, in tandem with the EU, will promote a coordinated approach to capacity building,
as was done in the case of West Africa, in order to harmonize instruments and procedures
in providing assistance resources to the Secretariat.

Macroeconomic Policies (Non-Core Activities)

97. 
Although these activities will be primarily led by the IMiF, the Bank teamrwill be
involved both in the country dialogue and its consultation with the Secretariat.

98. 
Three activities of quite different scopes would feature as Economic and Sector
Work (ESW) or Analytical and Advisory Activities (AAA) in the work program:

* Monitoring macroeconomic policies for convergence around the four main (and,
as needed, secondary) criteria: this would be part of normal country economic
monitoring and would include participating, (as an observer) in the periodic
"Article IV" CEMAC surveillance missions of the IMF (as done in West Africa
for UEMOA). Monitoring of the evolution of the real exchange rate will be part
of regular monitoring.

* Reviewing the efficiency of the surveillance system itself, with respect to both the
national and the Executive Secretariat units in charge and offer technical
assistance if needed, possibly to build capacity in the national surveillance units;

* 

In view of the particular issues associated with the volatility of oil prices and
revenues, 
the Bank will review 
the adequacy of the convergence criteria
themselves, and will follow the work at the IMF on the management of oil
volatility through, for example, a system of variable reserves. As needed, the
Bank may undertake specific analytical work on the issue.

Trade Policies (Core Activities)

99. 
CEMAC's trade policy will be one of the central areas of policy dialogue, as this
is a domain where the Bank has considerable expertise and experience. Several aspects of

- 32 -

how the customs union is currently working and preparation for further reforms will be
considered a priority, namely:

* A review of the findings of phase one of the (earlier mentioned) study
commissioned by the Executive Secretariat jointly with other sponsors (EU,
France) is planned for February 2003. This should lead to an action plan aiming at
correcting at least the more egregious dysfunctional aspects of the union noted
earlier, whether they relate to the common external tariff or to impediments to
intra-regional trade, including better dissemination and explanation of the trade
regime 
to customs officers, computerization of customs processes, and
simplification of procedures.

o A simultaneous preparation of phase two of the study will be launched with EU
financing. This will seek to estimate the impact of possible alternative reforms of
the trade regime on public finance, the productive sectors, and volume, structure,
and direction of trade. The main objective will be to move towards average lower
and less dispersed external tariffs. Adopting the UEMOA common external tariff
(0-5-10-20%) will be an option. The long-term objective would be to join the 15-
country ECOWAS customs union, when and 
if 
this becomes 
reality.
Harmonization with the Economic Community for Central Africa (ECCAS)
would be considered as well. The implementation of corrective (phase one) or
reform measures (phase two) by the member countries, and the capacity of the
Executive Secretariat to monitor/enforce them may require provision of some
technical assistance (although probably not before 2004).

o Technical assistance may be required 
to assist CEMAC 
in preparing for
international trade negotiations to improve its bargaining position in the post-
Doha round (to end by December 2004), the Cotonou Agreement with the
European Union (to be held in 2002-2004 and 2004-2007), and with the United
States under the AGOA initiative. The EU assistance strategy provides for such
technical assistance, though the Bank will include relevant topics in its policy
dialogue. It is assumed that CEMAC will enter such negotiations as a group.

o Finally, policies for export promotion and diversification, while conceptually
an important component of trade policy, cannot by their very nature be the subject
of only one type of action or be one item of external assistance (and certainly not
in the form of an "export promotion bureau"). It is rather the result of a
combination of measures, most importantly removing the elements of anti-export
bias in the exchange and trade regime, and improving those factors directly
affecting the competitiveness of firms in the section the "Business Environment").

Financial Sector

100. The Bank's long standing involvement in the region's financial sector includes,
among other activities, carrying out two Financial Sector Assessments (Cameroon and
Gabon) and the recently approved Regional Payments Project (IDA US$14.5 million).
The sector has known difficult times. Besides continuous monitoring of developments,

- 33 -

including possibly light Financial Sector Assessments in Chad, RCA, Congo, Equatorial
Guinea, four groups of activities are programmed for the medium term, relating to the
banking sector, microfinance, long tern finance and bond market:

* In the banking sub-sector supervision of the regional payments project is a self-
evident priority: Conditions of effectiveness are expected to be met in early 2003
and the project is expected to be completed by the end of 2006. Secondly, as part
of the policy dialogue, the Bank will impress on the regional authorities the need
to make the "Agrement Unique" truly operational by relaxing the financial and
administrative requirements in order to lessen the constraints to integration of the
banking sector under the present set of rules; (Core Activity)

* Recent regulation has been passed regarding the operations and supervision of
microfinance: the Bank has been requested to assist in disseminating the relevant
information and supporting the microfinance institutions by providing training
and equipment as needed: a small project to that effect will be prepared (FY04);
(Core Activity)

101. 
Past assessments and recent discussions have confirmed the gap that exists in the
system regarding the provision of long term finance. This has three dimensions noted
earlier: the development bank, bills and bond market, and stock exchange. None of these
has matured to the point of offering opportunity for one or more full-fledged projects.
Meanwhile, the Bank proposes to assist as described below.

* Bills and bonds market (Core Activity): The Bank (together with IFC and IMF)
will provide advice in support to the preparatory work initiated by the central
bank to establish a regional bills and bonds market for government and possibly
corporate paper (as there is room for long-term borrowing in local currency). This
is doubly important to permit the continued move of monetary policy toward
market-based 
instruments and away from central bank advances, 
thereby
imposing more fiscal discipline, and also as an outlet for private investors.

* Regional development bank (Non-Core Activity): The World Bank will take a
cautious, low cost, low risk approach to assisting BDEAC. This institution needs
to carry out a major restructuring (after about ten years of inactivity), which
includes conducting an audit of its staffing needs (number, qualifications,
training); and restarting operations according to a business plan developed
recently. In this effort, it would greatly benefit from one or more high-level
advisers or "wise people" for an initial period of two years or so. The Bank could
intermediate this technical assistance. Lending to the BDEAC, on the other hand,
will not be considered until the institution has demonstrated its viability;

* Regional stock exchange (Non-Core Activity), the Bank will provide advice if
requested on the regulatory framework for such an institution; although, as
indicated earlier, this initiative is still surrounded by uncertainty.

- 34 -

Business Environment and Competitiveness (Non-Core Activities)

102. A variety of factors affect competitiveness, such as the legal and regulatory
framework, quality of infrastructure services, and human resources and economic
policies. Besides assistance in the latter two categories, two advisory activities are
programmed: advising on the legal framework and establishing a competitiveness
observatory.

103. The elements of regional legal framework most relevant for the private sector
include the OHADA Business Law, the Regional Investment Charter, national investment
codes, the rules of Competition and the public procurement regulations. At several points
in the past, the Bank has advised on these legal matters. The Bank plans to engage the
national governments in a dialogue on the disparities between regional and national rules
and try to help eliminate unilateral decisions by governments in contravention of
regional norms, especially when these could undermine the customs union (e.g., through
import duty exemptions); coordinate policy advice with the EU on the implementation of
regional legislation affecting competition and government procurement with a view to
preventing some provisions from becoming disguised "behind the border" impediments
to trade (the Bank is already advising Chad and Cameroon regarding their proposed
legislation for public procurement).

104. As noted earlier, some provisions of the OHADA business laws have created
difficulties for the private sector and, specifically, banks. These would appear to stem
from erroneous interpretation of the laws by the courts, particularly in Cameroon. It is
also an indication of the frequently poor functioning of the judiciary system. In view of
the comparative advantage of other donors in this area, the issue will be kept under
review by the Bank, but no specific intervention is planned at this time. The Bank is also
planning to support an initiative aimed at assessing the impact of OHADA in all
signatory members though an IDF instrument.

105. Given the central role of trade in the regional economies, the capacity of firms to
be competitive in order to export or efficiently substitute for imports is a critical
dimension of integration in the world economy. Increased competitiveness and export
diversification are interrelated and indeed explicit objectives of CEMAC. Monitoring the
factors that affect competitiveness of enterprises and the efficiency of the supply chains
could benefit from a systematic observation. The evolution of the real effective exchange
rate is the key macroeconomic factor. Another set of factors is the legal/regulatory
environment, as discussed above. The "competitiveness assets" surrounding private firms
are a third set: infrastructure services, finance, technology, and human capital. A fourth
set has to do with the internal organization and performance of the firms themselves.

106. A "competitiveness observatory" would consist of the systematic monitoring by
one organization of appropriate indicators relating to the four sets of factors noted above,
either drawing directly from existing sources (e.g.,. the central bank for exchange rates,
statistics offices, etc.), constructing from basic data (the cost of electricity or time needed
to clear imported goods etc.), or using existing analyses (e.g., in Cameroon) Since
competitiveness is in the first place a concern for private enterprises, the proposed

- 35 -

"observatory" would be best located under the aegis of a private business organization.
UNIPACE, the regional employers' organization, has indicated an interest, and the
modalities of setting up the observatory will be discussed with this entity. It is important
that the work of the observatory be done in collaboration with all segments of the
business community and its findings widely disseminated. The Bank will assist with
methodological aspects and by continuing its program of "Investment Climate" surveys
worldwide and Regional Program on Enterprise Development (RPED) in Africa. This
would permit comparisons between central Africa and other countriesI

Infrastructure Services

107. 
Infrastructure is an area offering a wide scope for regional cooperation. Within
this, Transport (as noted earlier) comes first. The intended focus of Bank assistance is on
"services", i.e., the output from infrastructure, whether transport, telecommunications or
energy. Clearly, however, there is ample room for infrastructure investment, especially in
transport. While the focus of Bank action is "regional" transport, this is not readily
separable from "national" - which raises issues of allocation of costs and benefit.
Transport will be a core activity, whereas telecommunications and energy will be non-
core, given the limited scope of foreseeable activity.

108. As a direct complement to the establishment of the customs union, a structural
adjustment credit for Cameroon under implementation since 1998 has a component for
the improvement of operations at the port of Douala. This is progressing well (e.g., the
"single window" office, where all port clearing operations can be settled, is operational).
However, there remains an array of impediments, including roadblocks, to the proper
functioning of the trade and transport logistics chain across the region, particularly with
respect to the transit corridors for imports and exports from ports (mainly Douala) to the
hinterland. This involves high transaction costs for operators in Chad and CAR. In
discussions of these issues with the regional and country authorities a possible project has
been identified with components as summarized below:

* Trade and Transport Facilitation Project (Core Activity): The project would
include: (a) in association with transporters, other operators and users, making an

inventory of "abnormal" practices by degree of seriousness and proposing
appropriate actions to modify, simplify, streamline or discard rules that give rise
to such practices; 
(b) helping to streamline all customs and port operations
relating to transit trade (to be informed by the ongoing customs study mentioned
above); (c) examining alternative systems in use as guarantees for duty payment
by importers; (d) reviewing the rules and requirements regarding the trucking
industry; (e) assessing different road maintenance systems in the region, including
second generation road funds (as exist in Cameroon and Chad); (f) reviewing
regulations regarding axle 
load with a view 
to generalizing Cameroon's
experience, including the use of weighing stations and penalties; (g) verifying the
state of implementation of the recently issued regional "Code de la Route"; and

X This is being done by several institutions. One is the World Economic Forum through its annual
publications. Their competitiveness indices cover 24 African counties (including North Africa).

- 36 -

(h) studying the feasibility of back- to-back customs and police border posts. A
tentative technical assistance project is included in the program.

* 

Inland transport infrastructure (Core Activity): The regional road network
designed by CEMAC with assistance from the EU has partly materialized over the
years with financing from the 8h European Development Fund (8 projects), and
from France, AfDB, Arab funds, Japan, and Spain (7 projects). It is expected that
all projects under way will be completed by 2006 (close to 8,500 km cumulated)
linking four of the five inland capital cities. CEMAC's master plan includes an
additional 11 segments (fewer than 2,000 km, including dredging of the Ubangi
River) that would permit completion of the plan by 2010. It is proposed that that
the Bank reviews the economic feasibility of this program with CEMAC to
determine the appropriate investment consistent with our country investment
programs. An indicative amount of US$100 million (IDA) has therefore been
allocated for FY07. Parallel or co-financing would be sought from development
partners and no 
infrastructural 
investment would be considered without
assurances regarding security along the transport corridors, as well as satisfactory
arrangements for maintenance.

* Telecommunications (Non-Core Activity): The Bank would sponsor a Public-
Private Investment Advisory Facility (PPIAF) study to: assess the status of
implementation of sector reforms in each of the countries; identify bottlenecks to
regional integration of telecommunications; and explore options for further action.
Workshops would be organized to launch, disseminate and review the study's
findings with the relevant authorities. The Economic Commission for Africa
(ECA) and the International Telecommunications Union (ITU), which both have
representations in Yaounde, have agreed to support this process as well.

* Energy (Non-Core Activity): Similar considerations apply regarding power in
the energy sector (oil is a separate set of issues). Although there is general belief
that the region has ample though unevenly distributed potential for hydro-
electricity and natural gas development, there are no regional activities in the
matter. A regional market would take several years to conceive and develop. A
necessary first step is a detailed assessment of the potential as well as the
constraints. The Bank is ready to search financing (for example through ESMAP)
and manage such a study.

Forestry and Water (Non-Core Activities)

109. The regional authorities seek assistance from development partners. The Bank

will:

* For forestry, where the EU will be the leading partner, the Bank will continue its
support in consolidating the ongoing process of policy design and monitoring
initiated by the COMIFAC through policy advice and some technical assistance
(via trust funds), and continue to provide support to the Regional Environmental
Information Management Project (REIMP) jointly with other bilateral and

- 37 -

multilateral agencies. Of particular regional importance is the monitoring and
protection of the designated trans-border protected forest areas. At this time, this
task is essentially performed by NGO's.

* For water resources, together with UNDP, the Bank is supporting the Lake Chad
riparian countries through a GEF project on reversing land and water degradation
in the Lake Chad Basin. The total grant of this project is estimated at US$10
million of which the Bank is managing US$3 million. While this project is
expected to strengthen cooperation among riparian countries, the Bank will
provide technical assistance to individual countries to improve their water
resources management. This support will also relate to sector work that identifies
priorities for the basin as a whole and for each country and thus permits future
sound management and development of water resources in the area. The Niger
basin cooperation project, in the preparation of which Chad and Cameroon are
participating, will also contribute 
to promoting 
improved water resources
management in Central Africa.

Human Resources

110. As already noted, while evidently recognized as national priority areas, health and
education remain essentially country concerns, with some regional dimensions.

* The HIV/AIDS (Core Activity) pandemic propagates itself along the regional
transport corridors and zones of transit. The AfDB is expected to finance a project
to cover the Congo-Ubangi River corridor which carries numerous passengers,
although fewer since insecurity or open hostilities set in during the 1990s. It is
proposed that the Bank, under the MAP II program, assesses the possibility of
providing support to the other basin, namely the Lake Chad area which involves
Cameroon, Chad, Niger and Nigeria.

* Regarding higher education and technical training (Non-Core Activity) there
is scope for having both regional schools under the authority of a regional or
multinational body and national 
institutions effectively open to all regional
students. A number of them, both public and private already exist. An inventory
of such institutions and their current status, capacity and needs (some are
operational, others not) would provide a first indication of the "regional supply"
of education; Estimating the "demand" for regional education would be more
difficult, but feasible. It is expected that the AfDB will take the lead in carrying
out this exercise with the Bank playing an advisory role.

C. Cooperation with Other Development Partners

111. The main development partners for the CEMAC region are the EU, France, and
the MvF. Cooperation with them on regional issues has always been active and effective.
It has been given new impetus since the initial stages in the preparation of this assistance
strategy. Besides frequent, informal consultations on issues and programs, the Bank has

- 38 -

been consulted by the EU on their own proposed assistance strategy and participated in
the forum organized by the EU in Libreville to present and discuss their assistance
program (2002-2007) with the regional authorities (April 2002). Conversely, the draft
Bank strategy has been reviewed by the EU and their representatives participated in the
workshop sponsored by the Bank and CEMAC in Yaounde (October 2002). As noted
earlier, the Bank expects to participate as an observer in the IMIF consultations missions
to regional organizations (as it has done in West Africa). Several other organizations have
participated in the discussions and exchanges during preparation of this strategy,
including AfDB and the United Nations Economic Commission for Africa (ECA).

112. Division of labor under the assistance programs has not raised serious difficulties
in the past, although one reason has been the scarcity of regional operations in recent
years. Regarding the future, one area where close coordination is under discussion is
transport, especially the allocation of tasks between infrastructure construction and
infrastructure services, inasmuch as both the Bank and EU plan assistance in both
aspects. Another is trade. The plan of action for both improving the working of the
customs union and reforming it will have to be agreed between the three main donors and
the Executive Secretariat, and not all parties may share the same views (for example, as
to the desirable levels of protection) and compromises will be necessary. Another still
concerns the prospects for the regional development bank and the advisability of assisting
it at this difficult stage. In general, all partners, including the regional authorities, have
no basic differences as to the seriousness of the issues, the limited progress so far, the
obstacles to overcome and the need for a revival of effort to quicken the pace of
integration.

V. Risks

113. The greatest risk in its consequences, if not in its probability, stems from the
possibility of political tensions degenerating into internal civil strife or conflict between
countries. Obviously, the security situation in the Central African Republic and at its
border with Chad is a matter for concern. Manifestations of poor law and order are
numerous and a continuing serious obstacle to doing business in parts of the region.

114. More directly problematic for the process is insufficiently visible political
leadership in favor of regional integration and an apparent lack of involvement of civil
societies, what observers in several countries have called the "absence of a culture of
integration". Better information and the development of participative institutions are the
best directions to develop support for the regional integration process from the people.

115. A more specifically economic risk of disturbance is the potential for fiscal
mismanagement in the face of oil revenue volatility. While fiscal policies have improved,
oil windfalls in Chad and Equatorial Guinea, and also declining oil revenues in Gabon,
present serious challenges for macroeconomic stabilization and convergence policies.
While historical experience in the region and elsewhere may indicate what not to do in
similar circumstances, there are no clear examples of "good" policy in such cases. Thus,

- 39 -

there is a need for fiscal transparency and for strict mutual macroeconomic surveillance,
including solidarity as well as strong peer pressure on deviant governments when needed.

116. 
In parallel to West Africa, risks more directly associated with the process of
integration itself are slow or non-implementation of agreed reforms aimed at strengthen-
ing the common market as demonstrated, for example, by the unsatisfactory functioning
of the customs union. Had the impressive corpus of regional laws, edicts and regulations
already been translated into action, the central African community would be a model of
regional integration. It is instead in its infancy. Subject to political stability and security
being restored throughout the region, the encouraging signs of a renewed commitment to
the process of integration now visible could mean the beginning of a new course in the
history of Central African integration.

117. Each of these risks and challenges, whether immediate or more distant, has
institutional, economic and social dimensions. None has yet been satisfactorily resolved,
which can be explained by their inherent complexity and the complicated history of
integration in the region.

118. There is also a risk of the Bank program not being fully implemented or not
implemented in a timely manner for lack of adequate instruments or shortage of IDA
resources. The need for flexible grant instruments is felt in areas where technical
assistance is involved. When the specific requirement is large, for example for institution
building over a number of years, an IDA credit or IDF grant may be appropriate.
However, 
this may not be 
the case where punctual assistance on a precisely
circumscribed issue, for example a draft piece of legislation or directive from the
Executive Secretariat, is required and expertise may not immediately be available at the
Bank. 
In addition, to reduce the uncertainty of available resources for regional
integration, 
the involved countries would need to integrate such strategies in their
development approach, and agree to allow some of their performance-based IDA
resources to be used for this purpose.

- 40 -

Conclusion

119. At this point in the checkered history of Central African integration and despite
persistent weaknesses, a favorable conjunction of factors exists. Notably, there are an
increasingly strong set of institutions, a growing sense of the need for more openness
together with greater intra-African solidarity and a renewed willingness among the donor
community to support regional initiatives. Surely, regional leaders will want to fully seize
the opportunity. The Bank together with other development partners will then stand ready
to assist along the lines of the strategy presented here.

James D. Wolfensohn
President

By: Shengman Zhang

Attachments

Washington, D.C.
January 10, 2003

- 41 -

Attachment 1

CEMAC
Status of Poverty Reduction Strategy Papers and Country Assistance Strategies

Country 
Cameroon 

CAS 
* CAS 01/1996 
* Progress report 

02/1998 

* Next CAS 
planned board 
date is 05/2003 

I-PRSP 
Completed 08/2000 
(see HIPC Web site) 

PRSP
* HIPC Decision
point 10/2000

* PRSP

Preparation
Status Report
01/2002

* No progress

* HIPC decision
point 05/2001
* PRSP
Preparation
Status Report
12/2001

Central African 
Republic 

* None current 
* Suspended 

Completed 12/2000 
(see HIPC Web site)

Chad 

* CAS 01/2001 
* Next CAS 
planned for Ql 
FY04 

Completed 07/2000 
(see HIPC Web site) 

Republic of 
Congo 

* TSS 11/2000 
* No update or
CAS planned.

In draft 

None

Gabon 

* CAS 09/1998 
* No new CAS
planned.

N/A 

N/A

Equatorial 
Guinea 

* No activities, 
except 1 IDF
Grant.

N/A 

N/A

- 42 -

Attachment 2

Contingent Activities: Long Run lIssues Studies

1. 
The long run presents challenges for regional integration in Central Africa beyond
the issues and risks highlighted in the main text. These are a complex interplay of
institutional and policy issues and of underlying trends, some barely discernible, others
already manifest. Although beyond the time frame and geographic scope of this
assistance strategy, it is important that regional authorities and external partners alike
incorporate these aspects in their long term vision. With that objective in mind, this note
identifies a number of topics that could be the subject of studies to be initiated soon or
planned for a more distant future. The concept and organization of these exercises are
contingent because these studies will have to be discussed first with the regional
authorities, the availability of resources to carry them out is not assured, and it has to be
determined if the topics are not being properly covered by other stakeholders. Indeed,
there is no implication here that all or any of the proposed studies should be undertaken
by the Bank. One objective of this tentative proposal is precisely to help determine who
does what and when to engage in a dialogue with development partners on the various
topics. Collaboration with African partners in undertaking any of these exercises would
be highly desirable. The topics are presented here, in no particular order, as little more
than titles, simply to elicit indications of interest. Obviously, detailed terms of reference
or concept papers would have to be prepared for each study.

Topic 1. Long Term Economic and Social Impact of HI VIA IDS

2. 
The pandemic has reached critical levels in several parts of the CEMAC region.
While fighting the spread of the disease and attenuating the human suffering is the
absolute priority, trying to assess the economic and social consequences for the long term
development of the region should also be considered. Different scenarios would be
examined with their likely impact on production, on public revenue and expenditure. The
main objective would be to design a strategy on how to best meet the social cost of the
epidemic and estimate the external assistance required. Studies so far indicate that while
it is methodologically difficult to demonstrate a direct impact between the disease and
GDP, other important linkages are evident. One is the financial cost of treating those
affected on any large scale. No public budget or national health system in the region is
likely to approach national coverage, although it is obvious that conditions and fiscal
capacity differ widely. One corollary is the distributional impact since only the rich or
very rich can afford effective preventive or palliative treatment. The study would focus,
to the extent possible on the overall economic impact, and more particularly on the fiscal
implications, the impact on households welfare, and effects on poverty. It would not seek
to discuss the medical aspects. These are left to the specialized institutions.

- 43 -

Attachment 2

Topic 2. Long Term Income Trends

3. 
For several reasons, the long term prospects of the region -- in terms of real
income per capita -- are even less amenable to mechanical projections than is usually the
case. Any reasonable approximation, or better any plausible scenarios, would have to
take account of the interplay of widely different factors which furthermore can act in
opposite directions. Main factors to consider would include:

* The demographic trends as they are affected by the HEV/AIDS incidence (see
topic 1);
* The differential 
impact of developments in the oil sector between countries:
Cameroon where the place of oil has been declining over several years and
adjustment to the post-oil situation appears to be taking place; Gabon where the
place of oil is declining but the prospects for the needed major adjustment are still
uncertain; Congo where oil production is expected to continue but serious
macroeconomic adjustments are still needed notably because of accumulated
debt; Chad where the management of the new wealth is a serious challenge;
Equatorial Guinea which faces a similar challenge but on a far greater scale; CAR
where oil discoveries still offer uncertain prospects;
* The usually observed trend toward polarization of economic activities in already
better developed areas - meaning in this case the urban centers along or close to
the ports;
* The impact of new technologies that might affect the location of activities
especially services in the future.

4. The study would explore these and other trends within a twenty year horizon.

Topic 3. Economic Relations with ECOWAS and ECCAS

5. 
Three interrelated policy areas of significance for the long term future of the
region relate to CEMAC long term relations with its neighbors to the West .- ECOWAS
and to the South -ECCAS. First, is trade policy: While continuing to move toward
greater liberalization vis-a-vis the rest of the world the possible extension of the customs
union to include the (future) West African customs union and also the ECCAS customs
union have to be considered. The compelling rationale for this is that CEMAC very small
economic size and its geographical position make it the "natural" partner to the two
neighboring ensembles. Only political circumstances have constrained the development
of much stronger commercial links to Nigeria and other countries in ECOWAS, and to
DRC and other ECCAS countries.

6. 
Second is sectoral cooperation. Thus, the lack of transport infrastructure to permit
commercial links to develop is not a given but a result of history. Arguably, in a physical
sense, communications should not be more difficult to develop between CEMAC and its
large neighbors than between its own member countries. In short, there is a vast domain

- 44 -

Attachment 2

or sectoral cooperation - on transport and telecommunications, possibly on energy, and
certainly on the common management of natural resources - between the three adjacent
regional entities, as presumably is envisioned by NEPAD.

7. 
On the other hand, integration in the sense of common regional institutions with
decision power would come later. Indeed, it would be efficient (maximum result with
minimum use of administrative resources) to not try and start with complex institutional
architecture but rather with limited, enforceable sector by sector agreements (it may be
remembered in this respect that both UEMOA and CEMAC inherited the monetary
institutions that are the foundation on which the two arrangements have been built.

8. 

The purpose of the study would be to investigate:

* The issues related to the possible extension of the customs union to the
West and/or to the South: options, constraints, potential benefits and
approach (e.g. starting with effective implementation of a free trade area);

o Priority sectors or, more likely, priority projects suitable for cooperation
agreements.

9. 
Conceptually, this study could be undertaken without delay. However, it is in the
"contingent" category because, among other reasons, the ECOWAS customs union does
not exist yet; the UEMOA customs union, within ECOWAS, will remain in jeopardy as
long as the situation in C6te d'Ivoire does not return to normalcy; and ECCAS is still all
but an effective arrangement (it must be noted that its Secretariat has however already
initiated serious work on the question of a customs union with CEMAC).

Topic 4. Maintaining the Region's Competitiveness

10. 
As discussed in the text, the array of factors that affect the competitiveness of
regional enterprises would be monitored by the proposed Competitiveness Observatory.
These factors fall into four main categories: (1) macroeconomic where the real exchange
rate is the key variable; (2) 
the regulatory environment, 
including business law,
competition rules and investment codes; (3) the cost of tradable (imported) and non-
tradable (electricity etc) inputs, the transactions costs of doing business (such as customs
procedures and port operations), and the availability and cost of finance, and (4) the
availability and quality of human resources (i.e. the real cost of labor).

11. 
How each of these factors would be affected by establishing closer relations with
neighboring arrangements over the long run could be the subject of a study or more likely
several coordinated studies. The range of issues is large and given the widely different
country circumstances between the various regional groupings, highly complex. However
not all subjects would have to be covered at the same time. To take one central
macroeconomic issue of potential wide consequences, a question is how fast ECOWAS
will evolve into a new monetary zone. This, in turn, leads to the broader question of what
could or should be the contours of an "optimal currency area" for the two regions of West
and Central Africa": all countries combined in a single zone, two, three, more?

- 45 -

Attachment 2

12. 
These issues would merit careful consideration even though 
in the current
circumstances it is clear that the realization of a "second monetary zone" made up of a
few countries within ECOWAS, let alone a monetary zone for the entire ECOWAS, is not

a realistic near term prospect. But the lead time to prepare - or be prepared for -- such

major undertakings is indeed very long. Meanwhile, as the CEMAC authorities are well
aware, work in that direction has been underway for over two years or so in West Africa.
Whatever the outcomes of such efforts, they cannot be without consequences for
CEMAC and therefore merit serious reflection, at par with reflection on to the possible
extension of the customs union.

- 46 -

Attachment 3

Monitoring Progress in Regional Integration

1. 
Given the breadth and complexity of the integration process, including its political
and security dimensions, a comprehensive review of progress in the process of regional
integration is the appropriate approach. Such an assessment will be undertaken after two
or three years, probably in early FY06. Meanwhile, a number of discrete components of
the assistance program will be monitored throughout the period FY04-08.

2 
The Regional Institutions, chiefly the Executive Secretariat and the Central Bank
(BEAC) 
together with 
the member governments, are 
the principal actors and
stakeholders, will be in charge of the program, and will therefore be involved in
monitoring according to each institution's own procedures. The Bank, in turn, will have
to assess the effectiveness of such monitoring.

3. 
Where either IDA lending for projects (2-3) or technical assistance/institution
building operations with IDA financing or Trust fund financing is involved, periodic
supervision will be the normal instrument for assessing progress (noted as SPN in the list
below). Where Economic and Sector Work (ESW) or Analytical and Advisory Activities
(AAA) are the vehicles for Bank assistance, review of progress will naturally be an
integral part of the activity itself. As noted in the text, it is expected also that Bank staff
will participate as observed in IMF Article XIV consultation missions to CEMAC.
Monitoring of the regional strategy will be coordinated with monitoring of country
assistance programs.

4. 

The main areas of attention will be as follows:

Macroeconomic Environment

o Country performance with respect to convergence criteria; revision of the
convergence criteria to account for the volatility of oil and its effect on country
fiscal balances (in consultation with the IMF): continuous, from the start;

o Strengthening of national and regional macroeconomic surveillance units,
especially with regard to statistical capacity: in FY03-06 (also under the T&TF
Project)

Customs Union and Trade Facilitation

o Preparation and implementation of a plan of action aimed at correcting main
dysfunctions of the customs union, including proper dissemination of rules and
legislation , retraining of customs officials and computerization: FY03-06

- Preparation of plan FY03
- Adoption and implementation FY04-05

- 47 -

Attachment 3

* Satisfactory TORs for part 2 of customs study (with EU, France, IMF) in
preparation for customs union reform:FY03; review study recommendations and
advise on proposed reform; FY04-05 with focus on new lower tariff structure; and
future harmonization with ECOWAS1WAEMU and ECCAS: FY06-07

* Choice by the member states of a transit good regime (FY 04), implementation of
this new regime (SPN of T&TF Project FY05-08);

* Significant reduction in goods transit time in the international corridors (monitor
throughout FY03 to FY08) especially along Douala-Bangui and Douala-
N'Djamena corridors; (SPN of T&TF Project)FY05-08

* Development of facilities for transit trade at the port of Douala and of inland dry
ports (also part of SPN of T&TF Project, FY05-08).

Financial Sector

* 

Improvement in security and speed of cross-border payments (SPN of Regional
payments project indicators: FY03-07 );

* Assessment of banking sector compliance with prudential ratios and of financial
soundness of commercial banks in light of findings of country Financial Sector
Assessments (already carried out in Cameroon, Gabon) FY04-06;

* Opening entry in banking sector by effective Implementation of 
"Agrement
Unique" as measured by bank branch openings in neighboring countries and
establishment of new banks: periodic surveys during FY03-08;

* Measurable increase in volume and geographical spread of inter-bank money
market (with IMF): periodic: FY03-08

* Development of a regional government and corporate bond market: preparatory
work FY04-05; implementation of institutional and regulatory framework: FY 06-
07; issue of (one or more) government and/or corporate bonds: from FY07;

* 

Implementation of BDEAC restructuring plan FY03-04; assessment of lending
activities FY05; decision on future of the institution in light of performance
FY06;

* Microfinance: assess dissemination (official gazette and through the media) of
new legislation; establishment of microfinance surveillance units in ministries of
finance and increase in volume of operations and effectiveness and dedicated
supervision unit in COBAC FY04; measurable increase in access rates and
volume of operations: FY06 (proposed IDA project: FY07)

- 48 -

Attachment 3

Business Environment

o Harmonization between national and regional investment codes and elimination
of unilateral decisions by national governments at variance with the regional
Investment Charter or the Customs Union: continuous from FY04 to FY08;

o Establishment of regional Competition Commission; issuance of instructions on
procedures and modalities of application of rules of competition: FY04-05;

o Setting up a "Competitiveness Observatory" under the aegis of a private entity
(e.g. UNIPACE) to monitor key country macroeconomic and microeconomnic
parameters affecting private firms productivity 
(real exchange rate, taxes,
infrastructure services, finance, imported inputs, technology, and labor costs etc):
FY04-05;

e 

Issuing of a common CEMAC passport accepted by all member countries: FY04.

Infrastructure

o 

Implementation of proposed Transport and Trade Facilitation Project - T&TFP-
FY05 (SPN FY05+)

o Advancement of surface transport infrastructure works as per CEMAC master
plan and achievement of permanent road links between capital cities: continuous
with FY 06 and FY10 benchmarks; (proposed road investment project :FY08)

o 

Implementation of road transport regulations including "Code de la Route" (2002)
as evidence by random checks: continuous from FY04;

o Air transport:
- Establishment of a regional regulatory structure and effective
liberalization of national air space and compliance with Yamoussoukro
Decision (1999): FY04-05;
- Assessment of compliance with safety ICAO standards by countries
FY06-08; potential operation TBD in March 2003;

o Telecommunications: Assessment of degree implementation of sector
reform in each country completed: FY05 ; proposals for regional
regulatory framework: FY06;

o Energy: Completion of preliminary study of regional market for
electricity and potential for interconnections: FY04; decision on potential
investment project in FY05;

- 49 -

Attachment 3

Natural Resources

* Consolidation of process of regional consultation and coordination mechanism
established through COMIFAC; continued exchange of environmental
information. (SPN REIMPII FY05-08)

Human Resources

* AfDB to take the lead: Bank to follow developments and ready to advise if
needed to do the inventory of institutions and estimation of demand for regional
education/training: FY04-05;

* SPN of FY05 project, if any, to fight HIV/AIDS along key corridors, track AIDS
indicators and coordinate with national programs; FY05-08

Institutions

* Reorganization and staffing of the Executive Secretariat (jointly with EU): FY03-
04;
* and initiation of review of overall institutional architecture toward long term deep
integration : if requested by client

- 50 -

Annex 1

Economic and Monetary Community of Central Africa at a glance

Economic and 
Low &
Monetary Community middle
Cetnral Africa 
Income 

POVERTY and SOCIAL 

Developmnent dlamond'

2000
Population, mid-year (millions) 
GNI per capita (Atlas method, US$) 
GNI (Atlas method. US$ billions) 

31.0 
560 
172 

5160 
1230
6315

Life expectancy

Average annual growth, 1994-00

Population (%) 
Labor force (%) 

2 3 
2 3 

15 
18 

GNI 

Gross

NIpper 

pnmary

Moat recent est3mate (latest year available, 1994-00) 
Poverty (% of population below nat/onal poverty line)
Urban population (% of total population) 
Life expectancyatbirth (years) 
Infant mortality (per 1,000 live births) 
Child malnutntion (% of children under 5) 
Access to an improved water source (% of populaton)' 
Illiteracy (% of populabton age 15+) 
Gross pnmary enrollment (% of school-age population) 
Male 
Female 

capita 

'\ 

s 

enrollment

45 
50 
89 

41
64
58

Access to improved water source
-
Economic and Monetary
Community of Cetnral Afnca
(CMC)
Low middle income group

52 
36 
81 
91 
70 

79 
24 
104 
107 
100

KEY ECONOMIC RATIOS and LONG-TERM TRENDS
1980 

1990 

1999 

2000

Economic ratlof

GDP (US$ billions) 
Gross domestic imvestmentVGDP 
Exports of goods and services/GDP 
Gross domestic savings/GDP 
Gross national savings/GDP 

146 
23 4 
39 4 
31 7 

233 
18 0 
29.1 
21 5 
14 8 

194 
21 8 
35 5 
27 4 
14 9 

20.7
20 4
45 9 
37 6
15 4

Trade

Current account balance/GDP 
Interest payments/GDP 
Total debt/GDP 
Total debt servicelexports 
Present value of debtGODP
Present value of debt/exports

-1 4 
1 9 
42 3 
13 7 

-2 8 
1 8 
73 4 
17 8 

-3 9 
2 3 
1021 
14 8 

-15 
2 0 
89 0 
11 1

D5 mesbc
Oomest 
savings

-i 

_ 

nvestment

Indebtedness

1980S-O 1990400 

1999 

2000

(average annual growth)

GOP 

28 

21 

03 

30

GDP per capita 
Exports of goods and services 

0 0 
4 7 

-0 6 
3 9 

-1.3 
2 6 

1.7
0 9

STRUCTURE of the ECONOMY

1980 

19S0 

1999 

2000 

Growth of lnvestment and GDP (%)

(% of GDP) 
Agnculture 
Industry 
Manufacturing 
Services 

33

24 9 
347 
7 8 
40 4 

21 4 
321 
114 
46 5 

31 0 
29 5 

30 6
33 6

89 

84 

a 

_

39 4 

35 8 

9D 

97 

£e

Pnvate consumpton 
General govemment consumption 
Imports of goods and services 

56 3 
120 
32 8 

65 3 
13 2 
25 7 

64 8 
122 
30 8 

66 0
101 
301

-

GDI 

O GDP

(average annual growth) 

1980-90 1990-00 

1999 

2000 

Growth of exports and Imports (%)
5 -
15-

Agriculture 
Industry 
Manufactunng 
Services 

2.1 
41 
46 
2 0 

4 5 
2 0 
11 
0 5 

4 9 
6 0 
74 
-53 

5 5 
5 5 
11.8
38 sao|

Private consumpton 
General govemment consumption 
Gross domestic investment 
Imports of goods and services 

2 8 
4 0 
-6 2 
0 1 

2 3 
0 6 
3.2 
4 4 

0 7 
0 2 
-9 9 
-5 0 

9 9 
4 5 
6 1 
11 0

-
se 
|10

go 

97 

0o

-Exports 

iiq,orts

Note This table was produced from the Development Economics central database
Economic and Monetary Community Central Afnca includes Cameroon, Central Atncan Republic, Chad. Congo, Rep, Equatonal Guinea,
and Gabon
'The diamonds show four key indicators in the country (in bold) compared with its income-group average If data are missing,
the diamond wil be incomplete

- 51 -

Economic and Monetary Community of Central Africa

PRICES and GOVERNMENT FINANCE

1980 

1990 

1999 

2000 

Inflation (%)
5
so

Domestic prices 

(% change) 
Consumerprices 
Implicit GDP deflator 

84 
16 3 

02 
2 0 

1 9 
1 3 

3 0 
3 5 

40

z0

20

Govremment finance 
(% of GDP, includes current grants) 
Current revenue 
Current budget balance 
Overall surplus/deficit 

10
o 

165 
-1 6 
-7 3 

191 
0 2 
-2 4 

22.4 
5 8 
3.5

-10 

95 

96 

97 

98 

99 

0

-GDP 

deflator 

- 0-CPI

TRADE

(US$ mlIhons) 

1980 

1990 

1999 

2000 

Export and Import levels (USS mill.)

Total exports (fob) 
Manufactures 
Total imports (cif) 
Food 
Fuel and energy 

4,219 
96 
2,577 
82 
187 

6,118 
396 
3,490 
414 
223 

6,511 
440 
4,077 
355 
445 

8,449
393 
4,367 
345 
487 

90

o o000

4,000

z,o

Capital gJoods 

388 

1,210 

1,460 

1,454 

o 0_ 

Export pnce index (1995--100) 
Import pnce index (1995=100) 
Terms of trade (1995--100)

04 
95 
go 
U Exports 

97 

a8 
Irroorts

99 

OD

BALANCE of PAYMENTS

(UJS$ mil ions) 

1980 
6,069 
5,085 

199 
7,062 
6,051 

1999 
7,856 
6,910 

2000 
9,981 
7,196 

Current account balance to GDP (%)

Exports of goods and services 
Imports of goods and services 

0 -
*2 --

Resource balance 

7

Net income 
Net current transfers 

-1,216 
158 

-1,614 
-47 

-2,141 
12 

-3,075 
5

-e

Current account balance 

-206 

-651 

-1,183 

-285 

-io-

Financing items (net) 
Changes in net reserves 

512 
-306 

758 
-107 

1,181 
2 

912
-627 

i4_

Memo:

Reserves including gold (US$ millions)
Conversion rate (DEC, locaW/S$)

EXTERNAL DEBT and RESOURCE FLOWS

1980 

1990 

1999 

2000

(US$ millions) 
Total debt outstanding and disbursed 
IBRD 
IDA 

ComposMtton of 2000 debt (USS mill.)

6,183 
210 
233 

17,070 
885 
802 

20,777 
413 
1,895 

20,359
347 
1,882 

G 2,928 

347 

,882
c 470

-

Totaldebtservlce 
IBRD 
IDA 

839 
28 
2 

1,275 
114 
9 

1,168 
106 
27 

1,118
971,
31 

-

Composition of net resource flows
Official grants 
Ofhcial creditors 
Pnvate creditors 
Foreign direct investment 
Portfolio equity 

131 
367 
558 
207 
0 

669 
874 
-84 
-27 
0 

510 
-105 
-46 
36 
0 

377
-150

-61

335
0

E 1 1.44

World Bank program
Commitments 
Disbursements 
Principal repayments 
Net flows 
Interest payments 
Net transfers 

A - IBRD 
B-IDA 
r - IMF 

E - Bilateral
F-Pnvate
r - ShnritAi

61 
11 
50 
20 
31 

207 
53 
154 
71 
83 

126 
90 
36 
44 
-8 

105 
86 
9
41
-33

D- Othermulilateral 

Note This table was produced from the Development Economics central database
Inflation figures are median values Balance of payments items excluding exports and imports are simple sums and may not reconcile
Economic and Monetary Community Cetnral Africa Includes Cameroon, Central Afncan Republic, Chad, Congo, Rep, Equatorial Guinea,
and Gabon

- 52 -

CEMAC: COUNTRY SIIZE AND POPULATEON RELATIVE TO TOTAL (2000)

CEMAC: MEMBIER COUNTRY RELATOVE

ECONOWC SME (% OF TOTAL CEMAC DP)
(2000)

50 -

---- ------ 

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

35 -- 

-

---------- -

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

2 0 - - -- 

- -

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

- -

105 

, 

--- -

--- 

---
-

-

-

--- 

Cam 

CAR 

Chad 

Congo 

Eq Guin 

Gabon

CEMAC: MEMBER COUNTIRY RELAIDVE
POPULATllOO 
(% OF TOTAL CEMUAC
POPULATlOO) 
(2000)

5 0 
45 - -- -

- -
-

- -
-

-
-

-
-

-
-

-
-

-
-

-
-

-
-

-
-

-
-

-
-

-
-

-
-

-
-

-
-
-
-
-
-
- ------- -

-

20 

/ 

5 

------------ 

,----------------------------

10 

' -

- --- X 

- - -

-

- - -

-

-- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -

Cam 

CAR 

Chad 

Congo 

Eq Guin 

Gabon

Source: IMIF and World Bank databases, 2000

- 53 -

SUB-SAHARAN AFRICA: CROSS GROUP COMPARISONS: 1996-2001

CHART 1: REAL GDP GROWTH IN REGIONAL 
GROUPS (/): 1996-2001 

CHART 2: INFLATION IN REtONAL GROUPS
(PERIODAVERAGE): 1996-2001

6.0

590 

20 

4.0 
3.0 - -
-
2 0-10.0 
1.0--- 

-15.0 

------- 

S 
------ 
u b- 

-------

-

-

- -

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-5.0 

-

-

-

-

-

-

1997 

1998 

1999 

2000- 2001 

2002 

0 .0

1997 
1998 
1999 
--- CEMAC --- WAEMU 

2000 
2001 
2002
, Sub-Saharan Africa

-t---BaAc -*7--WAEWI 

Sub-Saharan Africa 

CHART 3: CHANGESINTERMSOFTRADEIN 
REGIONAL GROUPS (%/6) :1996-2001 

CHART 4: GROSS DOMESTIC INVESTMENT
IN RBEONAL GROUPS(% OF GDP):
1996-2001

60.0 -

30.0

40.0- 

_ 

_- 

_-25.0 
---

_ 

_

20.0- 

--- 

-_-20.0 

-

-

-

00 

-, 

----.. 

-- 

~~~~15.0 

------ 

-.--- 

-200 

' 

.

10.0-

-40 0 

00

1997 

1998 

1999 

2000 

2001 

2002 

1997 

1998 

1999 2000 

2001 

2002

|- CBAAC -

WAEBJ <.1 Sub-Saharan Africa 

-4-- CEMAC 

WABvtJ 

.. Sub-Saharan Africa

CHART 5: OVERALL FISCAL BALANCE(INCL. 
GRANTS) IN REGIONAL GROUPS (% OF GDP): 
1996-2001 

CHART 6: EXTERNAL DET IN REBIONAL
GROUPS (% OFGDP): 1996-2001

120.0

100.0 

-

46.0o___ 
6.0 

80 0-_
800--- 

-- - - - -- 

-

2.0 
0.0 - .
-2 0 
-4.0 -
-6.0- 
-8.0 -

_- 

_- 

-- 

60 0 
40.0 
20 
20.0-- 
0.0

_-_-_-_-_-_
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -

-

-

-

-
-
-
-__
-- ___----__---- 
.
, 
.

_ 

S 

, 

1997 1998 

1999 2000 2001 

2002

1997 

1998 

1999 

2000 
2001 
2002
Sub-Saharan Africa 

Fo--CEMAC -m-WABMUJ 

.

1-+-CEMAC -4-WAEMU 

Sub-SaharanAfnrca

Source: 
IMF estimates, 2002
Note: WAEMU- West African Monetary Union (UEMOA)
Sub-Saharan Africa, excluding Eritrea, Liberia, and Somalia

- 54 -

Annex 2

CEMAC: Selected Economic and Financial Indicators, 1997-2002

1997 

1998 

1999 

2000 

2001 
Est. 

2002
Proj.

(Annual Percentage Change)
-2.0 
8.4 
4.9 
0.3 
2.6 
0.3 
5.4 
0.3 
0.8 
1.9 
1.1 
1.7 
-17.8 
19.5 
1.8 
0.0 
4.2 
-2.8 

21.0 
3.0 
-3.3 
4.2 
3.0 
0.6 
47.2 
-4.2 
-5.1 

8.4 
5.1 
8.0 
4.5 
5.9 
7.1 
-1.1 
-3.1 
-0.8 

(Percent of GDP)
23.4 
25.3 

27.4 
21.8 

30.4 
22.1 

(Percent of GDP)
20.4 
28.1 
4.3 
-2.1 
-7.7 
-6.4 

20.9 
23.2 
8.4 
2.1 
-2.3 
-1.4 

19.1 
22.6 
5.9 
0.2 
-3.5 
-2.4 

(Percent of GDP)
32.4 
34.3 
-2.0 
-18.7 
103.4 

35.5 
29.8 
5.6 
-3.9 
102.1 

38.3 
30.0 
8.3 
-0.4 
100.5 

876.3 
583.7 
19.3 

National Income and prices 
GDP at current prices 
GDP at constant prices 
Oil GDP 
Non-oil GDP 
Consumer prices (average) 
Consumer pnces (end of penod) 
Terms of trade 
Nominal effective exchange rate 
Real effective exchange rate 

National accounts 
Gross domestic savings 
Gross domestic investment 

Government financial operations 
Total revenue, excluding grants 
Government expenditure 
Primary fiscal balance 1/ 
Basic fiscal balance 2 
Overall fiscal balance, excluding grants 
Overall fiscal balance, including grants 

External sector 
Exports of goods and services 
Imports of goods and services 
Trade balance 
Current account, including grants 
External public debt 
Gross official reserves (end of period,
in millions of US dollars) 
CFAfrancs perU.S. dollar, average 
Oil prices (in U.S. dollars per barrel) 

4.3 
5.4 
5.4 
5.4 
3.9 
6.3 
-2.2 
1.5 
5.9 

36.1 
25.4 

24.0 
21.2 
11.0 
6.3 
2.8 
3.6 

44.3 
33.5 
10.7 
-7.2 
84.8 

1.4
5.4
3.8
5.6
4.4
5.4
-22.1
...
...

33.2
24.6

22.3
21.0
8.5
5.2
1.3
2.8

40.3
31.7
8.5
-8.8
70.1

37.6 
20.4 

22.4 
19.6 
10.3 
5.8 
2.8 
3.5 

45.9 
28.7 
17.1 
-1.5 
89.0 

552.0 
590.0 
13.1 

595.2 
615.7 
18.0 

1,318.9 
712.0 
28.2 

1,157.6 
732.5 
24.3 

...
717.6
20.0

Money and credit 
(Annual Percentage Change)
Net foreign assets 
2.2 
-11.8 
4.5 
38.4 
-11.3 
4.8 
-15.4 
18.6 
Net domestic assets 
8.5 
11.5 
Broad money 
10.6 
-0.3 
9.3 
23.0 
7.2 
Sources: IMF, World Economic Outlook database, January 2002; and staff estimates and projections.
1/ Excluding grants and foreign financed investment and interest payments.
2/ Excluding grants and foreign financed investment.

...
...
...

- 55 -

Annex 3

CEMAC Social Indicators

Latest single year In period 

Latest period comparison

POPULATION

Total population, mid-year (millions) 
Growth rate (% annual average for penod) 
Urban population (% of population) 
Total fertility rate (births per woman) 
POVERTY
(% of population)
National headcount index
Urban headcount index
Rural headcount index
INCOME
GNI per capita (US$) 
Consumer pnce ndex (1995=100) 
Food price index (1995=100)
INCOME/CONSUMPTION DISTRIBUTION
Gini index
Lowest quinble (% of income or consumption)
Highest quintile (% of income or consumption)
SOCIAL INDICATORS
Public expenditure
Health (% of GDP) 
Education (% of GDP) 
Social secunty and welfare (% of GDP)
Net primary school enrollment rate
(% of age group)
Total 
Male
Female 
Access to an Improved water source
(% of population)
Total 
Urban 
Rural 
Immunization rate
(% under 12 months)
Measles 
DPT 
Child malnutntion (% under 5 years)
Life expectancy at birth
(years)
Total 
Male 
Female 

Mortality

Infant (per 1,000 irve births) 
Under 5 (per 1,000 live births) 
Adult (15-59)
Male (per 1,000 population) 
Female (per 1,000 population) 
Matemal (per 100,000 live births)
Births aKtended by skilled health staff (%)

1970-75 

1980-85 

1995-01 

15 9 
2 3 
26 1 
6 2 

20 8 
28 
34 0 
6 5 

31 7 
2 4 
45 0 
5 3 

Sub- 
Saharan 
Africa 

Low- and
middle-
income

673 9 
2 5 
32 3 
5 2 

5,177 8
1 5
41 6
2 8

410 

730 
69 

560 
130 

470 
133 

1,160
149

48 

25 

32 
26 

49 
48 
51 

97 
171 

505 
413 

45 
43 
47 

123 
225 

547 
455 

16 
26 

52 
72 
36 

46 
37 

50 
49 
50 

89 
157 

485 
431 

24 
34 

54

51

55 
81 
43 

53 
46 

47 
46 
47 

91 
162 

505 
459 

26
42

79
92
70

71
70

64
63
66

58
85

243
188

Note 0 or 0.0 means zero or less than halt the unit shown Economic and Monetary Community of Central Afnca (CEMAC)
includes Cameroon, Central Afncan Republic, Chad, Congo (Rep), Equatonal Guinea, and Gabon

World Development Indicators database, World Bank (11 December 2002)

- 56 -

Annex 4

Note on Aggregation Method (for Annexes 1-3)

1.Weighted/1995 Method:
For group totals, missing data are imputed based on the relationship of the sum of
available data to the total in the year of the previous estimate. The imputation process
works forward and backward from 1995. Missing values in 1995 are imputed using one
of several proxy variables for which complete data are available in that year. The imputed
value is calculated so that it (or its proxy) bears the same relationship to the total of
available data. Imputed values are usually not calculated if missing data account for more
than a third of the total in the benchmark year. The variables used as proxies are GNI in
U.S. dollars, total population, exports and imports of goods and services in U.S. dollars,
and value added in agriculture, industry, manufacturing, and services in U.S. dollars.

Simple Total:
Aggregates are sums of available data. Missing values are not imputed. Sums are not
computed if more than a third of the observations in the series or a proxy for the series
are missing in a given year.

Ratios:
Aggregates of ratios are generally calculated as weighted averages of the ratios using the
value of the denominator or, in some cases, another indicator as a weight. The aggregate
ratios are based on available data. Missing values are assumed to have the same average
value as the available data. No aggregate is calculated if missing data account for more
than a third of the value of weights in the benchmark year. In a few cases the aggregate
ratio may be computed as the ratio of group totals after imputing values for missing data
according to the above rules for computing totals.

Growth Rates:
Aggregate growth rates are generally calculated as a weighted average of growth rates. In
a few cases growth rates may be computed from time series of group totals. Growth rates
are not calculated if more than half the observations in a period are missing.

Median:
Aggregates are medians of the values. No value is shown if more than half the
observations for countries with a population of more than 1 million are missing.
Depending on the judgment of World Bank analysts, the aggregates may be based on as
little as 50 percent of the available data. In other cases, where missing or excluded values
are judged to be small or irrelevant, aggregates are based only on the data shown in the
tables.

Source: World Development Indicators (WDI) aggregation methodologies

- 57 -

Annex 5

World Bank Group Lending in CEMAC Countries * (US $ million)

IDA Commitments 
IDA Net Disbursements 

IFC Approvals 

FY0O 
148.4 
62.4 

100.3 

FY01 
188.7 
35.6 

7.0 

FY02
176.8

99.8

16.0

* These values are computed from the Loan Department database, and may not
correspond to the same value shown in the At A Glance Table generated from the
central database.
Note: Cameroon, CAR, Chad, Congo (Rep) and Eq Guinea are MIGA members, while Gabon is
fulfilling membership requirements.

- 58 -

Annex 6

Composition of IDA and IBRD Portfolio for CEMAC Countries
(as of December 4, 2002)

Agriculture and Environment 
Policy, Public Sector, and Trade 
Finance and Private Sector 
Infrastructure 
Social Sector 

Credits and Loans 
13 
9 
3 
12 
11 

Total Disbursed and 
Outstanding ($m) 
90 
290 
25 
299 
101.0 

Total Undisbursed
Balance ($m)
27
61
18
180
75

Notes: Discrepancies between original commitments and disbursed amounts are due to fluctuations in US$-SDR
exchange rates in the period of disbursement. Credit denominated in SDRs are shown in US dollar equivalents.
Agriculture and Environment includes:
Agriculture, Environment, Agro-Industry, Research, Irrigation, Drainage and Natural Resource Management
Policy, Public Sector, and Trade includes:
Economic policy, Public Sector, Macro/Non-tradeJTrade/ Public Financial Managemnent
Finance and Private Sector includes:
Business environment, Mining, Financial Sector, and Privatization
Infrastructure Sector includes:
Highways, Urban Sector, Transportation, Power, Energy, Telecommunications
Social Sector includes:
Education, Social Protection, Training, Community Development, Nutrition, HIV AIDS

-59- 

Annex 7

World Bank Multicountrv Activities in Central Africa: (1992-2002)

Amount (MIL S) 

lIstrument 

Year

1992

ESW 

Transport 

Trade and Taxation

Taxafion 

SECTOR/PROJECT 
Regional Policy Reform Program
Transport Component:(UDEAC) 

Regional Cooperation for Adjustment: A
Program of Trade and Indirect Tax Policy
Reforms for UDEAC Countries 

Central African Republic: IDF Grant for
Assessment of Impact of Devaluation &
Tax & Tariff Reform on the UDEAC
Countries 

Private Sector 

Cameroon: IDF Grant for Assessment of
Devaluation on Enterprises 

Business Environment 

Gabon and Chad: IDF Grant for
Assessment of Code of Investment 

Environment

Regional Environmental Information
Management Program (REIMP) 

Banldng 

Payments System 

TA 

TA 

$0.20 

$0.17 

S0.28 

$0.11 

$14.50 

ESW 

1992

IDF 

IDF 

IDF 

Trust Fund 

IDA 

1995

1995

1995

1997

2002

Oil and Gas 
Source: World Bank

Cameroon-Chad Pipeline 

$53 .40 

IBRD (Fixed Spread Loan) 

2001

- 60 -

Annex 8

EU Multicountry Lending to Central Africa (2002-2007)

SECTOR 
Infrastructure 

PROJECT 
DETAILS 
Cameroon- CAR Itinerary- Route Bertoua- Regional interconnections and 
Garoua-Boulai 
rehabilitation of pnonty network,
institutional support 

Cameroon- Chad Itinerary Route 
Ngaoundere-Toubourou-Moundou 
Cameroon- Gabon- Equatorial Guinea 
Itinerary Project Ntem 
Feasibility Study Garoua Boulai- 
Meiganga-Ngaoundere 

Regional Transport Development 

Forestry and 
Environment 

Forest and Environment Expert for 
Central Afnca 

Preparatory study and evaluation of 
possibility of fadditional road
between Cameroon and Chad 

Tecinical assistance for 
consolidanon of forestry reform and
convergence of national policies
with regional goals 

ECOFAC Phase III 

Education and 
Culture 

Regional Cultural Program in Central 
Afnca 
Catholic University in Central Afnca 

Institutional support 

Institutional Support Assistance for CEMAC Secretanat 

Reinforcement of programming 
capacity and analaysis, support for
national adminstration application
of community direcuves; support for
pnvate sector, statistical program;
support for preparation for WTO
and APE

Mill. Euros 
12 50

Date

2003-2005

2003-2005

2003-2005

2004
2004

2004-2006
2004-2006

2003-2007
2003-2007

44 50

2 88

1.70

1.90 

1.10

16.00 

1.90

1.00 

1 90

2003-2007

85 38

Source EU Project for Central Afnca Regional Cooperation and Regional Program for 2002-2007
Note: The 85 million includes regional allocation of 55 mllion euros under the 9th FED and national allocations

36' 

20' 

10 

0' 

040' 

MOROCCQ3 

/ MOROCCQ_. 

ALGERIA

FORhlER r-:-Y-~ v 

SmS 

r\ 

, j ) 

Moediterraneon 
IlNA 

Sea o

6 

,) 

tz£ 

~ 

< 

LIBYA 

j 

ARAB

REP OF
EGYPTr 

IBRD 32189
0

500 

1,000 

1,500KILOMETERS

500 

l,00 MILES

30D
-~)t~2, 

i_ 

0 0 

°0 

,\ 

5 MAURITANIA 

j MALI 

L

oCAPE 

)jML 

VERDE 

'42 

I 

NIGER 

CHAD 

SUDANTRE

TH 

EEGAA 

'-T-

GUIN5>EAA% GUINEA "',,, 

- (* , g 70

slRRL;N/),;P)7DC007ERE jGH 

(Ct!i 

r (cid:6)~ 

vCENTRIRA 

ETHIOPIA 

SOMALA

LISE A 

OGRE| 

\ 

CgAMEROON' 

~ / 

AFRICAN REUBUC 

'

-

_r ]_.'

EQUATORLALGUNE 
SfTOMt < 

IAPONClPE<; 

3 
[<? N7 
S OEINCIE U TCONGO 
HRWAND_ 

f 

LUGANDA 

0 

KENYA 

KENYA 

j JoGo

-30 

20' 

.01 

Report No.: 
Type: 

CAS

25328 AFR

