Document of

The World Bank

Report No. 25077-TH

MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENT

OF THE

INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT

AND THE

INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION

TO THE

EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS

ONA

COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY

OF THE

WORLD BANK GROUP

FOR

THE KINGDOM OF THAILAND

January 22, 2003

Southeast Asia and Mongolia Country Unit
East Asia and the Pacific Region

P

b
u

i
l

c

D

i

c
s

l

o

s

u

r

e

A

u

t

o
h

r

i

z

d
e

P

b
u

i
l

c

D

i

c
s

l

o

s

u

r

e

A

u

t

o
h

r

i

z

d
e

P

b
u

i
l

c

D

i

c
s

l

o

s

u

r

e

A

u

t

o
h

r

i

z

d
e

P

b
u

i
l

c

D

i

c
s

l

o

s

u

r

e

A

u

t

o
h

r

i

z

d
e

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS
(Exchange Rate Effective 11/08/2002)

Currency unit = baht (THB)
I baht = US$0.02

US$1 = THB 43.32
GOVERNMENT FISCAL YEAR

October 1 - September 30

ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS

ADB 
AFTA 
AusAID 

ASEM 
ASEAN 
BOI 
CAS 
CDP 
CEM 

Asian Development Bank 
ASEAN free trade agreement 
Australian Agency for International 
Development
Asia-Europe Meeting 
Association of Southeast Asian Nations 
Board of Investment 
Country Assistance Strategy 
Country Development Partnership 
Country Economic Memorandum 

JICA 
JBIC 
KPI 

M&E 
MDGs 
MIGA 
MRC 
NCCC 
NESC 

CFAA 

Country Financial Accountability Assessment 

NESDB 

CPAR 
CSO 
DO 
DPR 
EXIM 
ESCAP 

FDI 
FSAP 
GDLN 

Country Procurement Assessment Report 
Civil Society Organizations 
Development Objective 
Development Policy Review 
Export-Import Bank 
Economic and Social Commission for Asia and 
the Pacific
Foreign Direct Investnient 
Financial Sector Assessment Program 
Global Distance Learming Network 

GDP 
Gross Domestic Product 
GEF 
Global Environment Facility 
GMS 
Greater Mekong Subregion 
GTZ 
German Technical Cooperation 
HIV/AIDS Human Immunodeficiency Virus/Acquired 

IBRD 

ICR 
ICT 
IFC 
IMT 
IP 
ILO 

Immune Deficiency Syndrome

Intenational Bank for Reconstruction and 
Development 
Implementation Completion Report 
Information and Communications Technology 
International Finance Corporation 
International Monetary Fund 
Implementation Progress 
International Labor Organization

Japan Intemational Cooperation Agency
Japan Bank for International Cooperation
King Prajadhipok's Institute

Monitoring and Evaluation
Millenmum Development Goals
Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency
Mekong River Commission
National Counter-Corruption Commission
National Economic and Social Advisory

Council

National Economic and Social Development
Board
Non-Govemmental Organization
Non-Performing Loans
Operations Evaluation Department
Policy and Human Resource Development
Pnvate Participation in Infrastructure
Purchasing Power Panty

Public Sector Reform Loan
Quality Assurance Group
Reports on the Observance of Standards and
Codes
Social Investment Fund
Social Investment Project
Small and Medium Size Enterpnse
Technical Assistance
United Nations

NGO 
NPL 
OED 
PHRD 
PPI 
PPP 

PSRL 
QAG 
ROSC 

SIF 
SIP 
SME 
TA 
UN 

UNDAF 

UNDP 
UNICEF 
UNIFEM 
WBI 
WTO 

United Nations Development Assistance
Framework
United Nations Development Program
United Nations Children's Fund
United Nations Development Fund for Women
World Bank Institute
World Trade Organization

Vice President. 
Country Director/ 
Task Manager 
Team Members 

World Bank Group Team

IBRD 
Jemal-ud-din Kassum 

]an C Porter 
Thailand Country Team 

Vice President,
Investment Operations 
Director, EAP. 
Country Manager. 

IFC

Assaad Jabre
Javed Hamid
Michael Higgins

THAILAND - WORLD BANK GROUP
PARTNERSHIP FOR DEVELOPMENT

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY ....................

I. 

II. 

III. 

IV. 

INTRODUCTION .1

COUNTRY CONTEXT 
A. 
Recent Political Developments 
.1
B. 
Recent Economic Developments 
.2
C. 
Key Poverty and Inequality Trends 
.3
D. 
Thailand's Development Challenges 
.4
E. 
Medium-Term Economic Prospects and External Developments .12

..

PROGRESS SINCE THIE FY98-02 COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY .. 
A. 
World Bank Retrospective .14
B. 
The International Finance Corporation Retrospective .17

THE THAILAND - WORLD BANK GROUP PARTNERSEIIP FY03-05 
A. 
Thailand and the World Bank Group - an Evolving Partnership .18
B. 
Achieving Greater Selectivity in the Thailand Country Program .19
C. 
The Bank's Country Program FY03-05 .20
D. 
IFC and MIGA Programs FY03-05 .27
E. 
Partnerships .28
F. 
Results Focus and Country Program Monitonng .29
G. 
Bank Group Risk Management .30

..

V. 

CONCLUDING REMARKS .31

ANNEXES

i

1

14

18

Annex A2: 
Annex B2: 
Annex B3(a): 
Annex B3(b): 
Annex B4: 
Annex B5: 
Annex B6: 
Annex B7: 
Annex B8(a): 
Annex B8(b): 
Annex B9: 
Annex B IO: 
Annex B 11: 
Annex B12: 
Annex B 13: 
Annex B14: 
Annex B 15: 
Annex B 16: 

Country at a Glance
Selected Indicators of Bank Portfolio
IBRD/IDA Program Summary
IFC & MIGA Program
Summary of Non-Lending Services
Poverty, Social Development, and Environment Indicators
Key Economic Indicators
Key Exposure Indicators
Statement of IFC's Held and Disbursed Portfolio
IBRD/IDA and Grants in the Operations Portfolio
Country Program Matrix
Summary of Development Priorities
Private Sector Development
World Bank Institute
Participation and Consultation in the Thailand-World Bank Group Partnership
OED Evaluation, QAG Assessment, and Client Survey
Country Development Partnership for Thailand
Results Measurement and Management

THAILAND - WORLD BANK GROUP

PARTNERSHIP FOR DEVELOPMENT

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

i. 
This document provides a framework for a new and innovative partnership between Thailand and
the World Bank Group for FY03-05.' 
In recent years, the relationship between Thailand and the Bank
Group has progressed from primarily a borrower-lender relationship toward a true development
partnership. Financial support remains an important part of the partnership, especially for IFC and MIGA
transactions, but the Bank's role has evolved more toward facilitating knowledge sharnng and providing
policy advice on medium-term structural issues. Building on this evolving approach, the new Thailand-
Bank Group partnership focuses on diagnostic and monitoring work and a limited amount of
implementation support for selected critical issues in Thailand's overall national development agenda.

Economic and Poverty Dynamics

ii. 
Thailand has made significant progress since the economic and financial crisis in 1997-98.
Macroeconomic stability has been restored, access to international capital markets has been reestablished,
inflation remains low, and real GDP growth is projected to be about 4 percent this year, up from 1.8
percent in 2001. The recovery is driven mainly by consumption growth, prompted by rising consumer
confidence, low interest rates, and fiscal measures to stimulate consumption. However, due in part to
uncertainties in private investment, public debt, and global economic prospects, the recovery remains
fragile. Thailand's medium-term prospects now depend on its ability to address underlying structural
reforms-such as completing financial and corporate sector reforms and improving the country's
competitiveness. Thailand must also address the paramount challenges of poverty and inequality. Income
inequality is among the highest in Southeast Asia, and although poverty has declined from its crisis peak
of 15.9 percent in 1999 to 13.0 percent in 2001, it still remains above the 1996 level of 11.4 percent.
Poverty continues to be predominantly a rural problem, with nine of ten poor people living in rural areas,
two-thirds in the Northeast.

Thtailand's National Development Agenda

iii. 
Thailand's new Constitution in 1997 was a landmark in the country's history. Widely accepted as
a "People's Constitution," it sets out an ambitious vision for Thailand's future, driving fundamental
changes in the country's political, economic, and social fabric. To realize this vision, Thailand has
formulated a national development agenda-built around four pillars.

* Human and social capital, particularly education reform, has been highlighted as a top prionty.
While Thailand has made impressive gains in primary education, the quality of schooling and
enrollment rates in higher education remain major challenges.

* Competitiveness has emerged as a key concern after the crisis. This challenge goes beyond
restructuring the financial and corporate sectors and building infrastructure; it includes strengthening
innovation 
systems, moving 
to a knowledge-based economy, and 
improving 
the business
environment, especially for small and medium-size enterprises.

In the light of feedback from the Thai Government and other stakeholdcrs, this document is called the "Thailand-World Bank
Group Partnership for Development" instead of "Country Assistance Strategy" to reflect the changing nature of the Bank Group's
engagement in Thailand

-ii-

* Poverty and inequality worsened during the crisis. Because economic growth alone will not be
enough to address this challenge, more balanced development and better targeted support are needed
to address persistent urban-rural disparties.

* Natural resources and the environment have come under stress due to Thailand's rapid economic
development. Their management was overlooked in the high-growth years, but natural resources and
the environment have now emerged as key policy priorities.

Iv. 
Across these four pillars, governance is the underlying theme-the foundation for sustained
progress in the other areas of the national agenda. Progress on govemance is required for the public and
private sectors, as well as civil society, and encompasses greater transparency, accountability, and
decentralization. In addition, given Thailand's central role in Southeast Asia and the Mekong sub-region,
in particular, Thailand also needs to continue deepening its regional cooperation and integration.

Previous CAS for Tlhailand - Key Lessons

v. 
Feedback received through stakeholder consultations-including with the Govemment, civil
society, private sector, Parliament, and other donors-a recent client survey, and OED and QAG
assessments point to a number of important lessons. When well-designed and integrated, the Bank's
policy advice and knowledge sharing can be a viable standalone form of development assistance.
However, this assistance must be focused, selective, client-owned, and adequately resourced, with clear
progress benchmarks and monitoring. Through its policy advice, the Bank has also been effective in
raising awareness of and advancing the debate on key development issues. However, the Bank needs to
help facilitate greater participation of all stakeholders in the design and implementation of actual reform
programs and place greater emphasis on making the work it supports widely accessible.

Highlighlts of the Partnership for 2003-05 and Risks

vi. 
Thailand and the Bank Group have developed a real partnership, with the Govemment setting the
agenda and the Bank Group focusing its interventions on areas where it can play a catalytic role. The
Bank Group's engagement will be limited and selective and comprised of two complementary levels:

* Monitoring and diagnostic overview of Thailand's key development challenges across all areas of the
national agenda. This diagnostic and monitoring work will cover the key economic and social
developments and fulfill the Bank's due diligence responsibilities. It will include a regular sernes of
economic, social, environment, and country dialogue monitors as well as support for further in-depth
work on issues of competitiveness and their links with poverty reduction in the rural areas of
northeast Thailand. It will also give the Govemment and Bank Group a basis for identifying areas in
which deeper support could be beneficial-in line with the recommendations of the Bank's Middle-
Income Countries Task Force.

* 

In-depth implementation support in a few critical areas, as identified through the comprehensive
diagnostic overview and agreed with the Govemment. This implementation support will be provided
through:

- Country Development Partnerships (CDPs). The CDPs are knowledge-based partnerships which
set out medium-term integrated frameworks for reform programs. The CDPs are led by the
Govemment, with the Bank and other partners supporting the development of the overall reform
framework, analytical work, capacity building, and provision of technical assistance. The
Govemment and Bank will engage in CDPs very selectively and in only a few specific areas.

-111-

Given the emphasis on knowledge sharing, the World Bank Institute (WBI) will play a key
complementary role.

-

IFC and MIGA transactions and IBRD lending. The CDP objectives can also be supported by
IFC and MIGA transactions, particularly for the competitiveness pillar in the national agenda. In
addition, the Bank will use its existing portfolio-and limited new lending if requested by the
Government-in a few strategically important areas.

vii. 

During FY03-05, the Bank Group will provide implementation support by:

• 

Completing its work in ongoing partnerships with the Government. The Bank will complete its
support to the current CDPs for Governance and Public Sector Reform, Social Protection, Financial
and Corporate Competitiveness, and Poverty Analysis and Monitoring by FY04-05. Over this period,
the Bank's support to each CDP will become more focused on a progressively narrower set of issues.
IFC will continue to concentrate on financial markets and corporate restructuring, and MIGA will
help build capacity for investment promotion services.

* Selectively engaging in new partnerships, including financial support. As the Bank phases out its
engagement in the current CDPs, it may engage in a limited number of new CDPs, possibly for
education, knowledge economy, environment, or infrastructure. The Government has also requested
one IBRD loan in FY03 for Highways Management and has indicated that it may ask the Bank for
more investment lending in infrastructure in view of the backlog of investments, the need for reform,
and the importance of infrastructure development for growth and poverty reduction. Decisions on
where the Bank should focus its limited resources will be based on diagnostic work and an explicit set
of cntena for selectivity. These cnteria include an outcomes-focused program, strong government
commitment, and linkages with the most critical policy reform areas-particularly poverty reduction.
Specific directions for Bank Group support will be discussed in the regular, twice-yearly Country
Programming and Review Discussions with the Government and other development partners. 
IFC
will complement its current strategic focus with greater emphasis on infrastructure and ICT
investments. 
It will also help catalyze private investments in health, education, agribusiness, and
SMEs, investments that are expected to benefit from Bank-supported policy and advisory work.
MIGA will strengthen its capacity building efforts and explore guarantee opportunities. To enhance
overall effectiveness and impact, the Bank Group is adopting a results-oriented approach for its
program in Thailand. Specifically, progress on the CDPs will be measured by outcome benchmarks
and impacts, complementing the traditional monitonng of outputs and inputs. However, it should be
noted that measuring the results of the Bank's engagement in a CDP is particularly difficult given the
complementary contributions of numerous partners.

* Complementing this development partnership at the country level with work on regional and global
public goods. The Bank is already actively involved m a number of regional initiatives, such as the
Mekong River Commission and the Greater Mekong Sub-region Program and will strengthen its
support for these programs in the coming years. The Bank will also help share Thailand's
development expenence through trilateral cooperation with other countries in the region, especially
with Cambodia and Lao PDR. Disseminating lessons from Thailand's highly successful social
investment fund and land titling programs are two examples of such cooperation. WBI will play a
central role in facilitating this knowledge sharing.

Vill. 
In the context of modest country political and economic risks, the financial risks to the Bank are
limited and expected to decrease further as a result of the limited new borrowing envisaged over the
country program cycle. There are a set of Bank institutional risks which relate to: strategic effectiveness
and whether the Bank program is focused on the highest-return interventions; the CDP approach and the

-iv-

reputational risk to the Bank of insufficient progress on one or more CDPs; and operational effectiveness,
including the need for appropriate staff skills and incentives and sufficient human and financial resources.
These risks will be closely monitored 
in the context of the Country Programming and Review
Discussions, and the Bank will consider disengaging from specific partnerships if key progress
benchmarks are not being met or resources are inadequate. The Bank's decentralized country office in
Bangkok will also help facilitate close monitoring of overall country developments and management of
the CDP program as well as help to ensure knowledge sharng across countries in the region.

Issues for Board Discussion

IX. 
The Bank Group's engagement with Thailand stands at a crossroads. 
In the 1994 country
assistance strategy, the Bank opted for a phased scale-down of its involvement and consequently was not
well-prepared for the economic and financial cnsis. For the FY03-05 period, the Bank Group could adopt
a strategy that avoids this obvious shortcoming by focusing predominantly on the diagnostic aspect of the
Bank's work. Alternatively, the Bank Group could use the opportunity-responding to client demand for
specific implementation assistance and building on established relationships-to continue to provide
selective support for Government reform programs in the context of the CDP approach and help share
Thailand's development expernence with other countnes in the region. In that context, the Executive
Directors may want to consider:

* 

Is the design and scope of the proposed Thailand-Bank Group partnership appropriate and
sufficiently selective considerng the country's stage of development?

* Are the lessons learned from the implementation of the previous CAS and the feedback from
stakeholders adequately reflected in the proposed partnership?

* 

Is the proposed pilot approach to enhanced results management for non-lending activities

appropriate?

* 

Is the emphasis of the partnership on support for development of the Greater Mekong Subregion
and knowledge sharing across countries appropriate?

THAILAND - WORLD BANK GROUP
PARTNERSHIP FOR DEVELOPMENT

I. 

INTRODUCTION

I. 
This document' provides a framework for a new and innovative Thailand-World Bank Group
Partnership for FY03-05. Since the previous Country Assistance Strategy (CAS), formulated at the height
of the economic and financial crisis in 1997-98, the relationship between Thailand and the World Bank
Group has progressed from a borrower-lender relationship toward a true development partnership.
Financial support does remain part of the relationship, especially for EFC and MIGA transactions, but the
Bank's role has evolved more toward facilitating knowledge sharing and providing policy advice on
medium-term structural issues. Building on this evolving approach, the Partnership proposed for FY03-05
focuses on diagnostic and monitoring work and a limited amount of implementation support for selected
critical issues in Thailand's overall national development agenda.

A. 

RECENT POLITICAL DEVELOPMENTS

H. 

COUNTRY CONTEXT

2. 
At the heiglht of the economic and financial crisis in 1997, Thailand adopted a new
Constitution, a landmark in thte country's political history. Participatory and inclusive, the new
Constitution is widely accepted as a "People's Constitution." It reflects the nse of civil society-a vocal
middle class, a vigorous NGO community, and vibrant business interests-and it sets out a bold vision of
Thailand's future, laying the foundation for a more open democratic society and serving as the impetus
for major reforms. For the first time in Thai history, the Constitution establishes a judicial review process
independent of executive branch control, enhancing the accountability of government and the protection
of civil liberties. It provides a legal basis for broader public participation. It establishes constitutional
mechanisms to promote accountability and transparency. 
It is also very specific about the rights, liberties,
and welfare of the people-including gender equality, access to information, education and health, and
environmental protection.

3. 
A new Government formed in 1997 made significant progress in advancing the constitutional
agenda and restoring macroeconomic stability. Under the leadership of Democratic Party head Chuan
Leekpai, governance reforms progressed with the establishment of independent watchdog institutions,
including the National Counter-Corruption Commission, the National Election Commission, the State
Audit Commission, the Administrative Court, and the Office of the Ombudsman. Furthering the
constitutional goal on access to education, an Education Act granted all citizens the right to 12 years of
free education. The Government also helped restore macroeconomic stability and embarked on a
comprehensive structural reform program focused on the financial, corporate, and social sectors.

4. 
In the 2001 elections, the first under the provisions of the 1997 Constitutioll, the Thlai Rak
Thai Party, led by Thiaksin Shiinawatra, won a landslide victory. Thai Rak Thai won the election on a
pro-poor, pro-rural, and pro-Thailand platform and formed a coalition government with 325 out of 500
seats in Parliament. The Government spent its first year in office putting into place its signature election
programs, including more affordable healthcare, support for village funds to finance local projects, and a

l In light of feedback received from the Thai Government and other stakeholders, this document will be called the "Thailand-
World Bank Group Partnership for Development" instead of "Country Assistance Strategy" to reflect the changing nature of the
Bank Group's engagement in Thailand.

-2-

debt moratonum for farmers. The Government has also moved on the governance and public sector
reform agenda, with a major restructunng of central government ministries in October 2002. It is now
placing more emphasis on some of the other difficult structural reforms.

B. 

RECENT ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENTS

5. 
Thlailand has made commendableprogress since thie crisis. Real GDP grew by an average of 3.6
percent a year during 1999-2001, and poverty came down to 13 percent in 2001, from a peak of 15.9
percent in 1999 (Box 1). Thailand has been highly effective in restoring macroeconomic stability,
achieving low inflation, and reducing external vulnerability. Growth rebounded strongly in the first half
of 2002. Estimated to reach about 4 percent for 2002, it is more than twice the 1.8 percent registered in
2001 and will return real GDP to its level before the cnsis.

Box 1. Summary of Recent Economic Developments

I Growth recovery is strengthening 

2 

dnven mainly by consumption

100% 

5 0% 

00% 

-5 0% 

70-

60 
5

40
30-
20-

-io 0% -

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~10 

-1510% 

9 
1996 

1997 

1998 

1999 

2000 

2001 

2002

| 

GDP at marvet pnces -

Consumer pnce index 

0 -

1997 

1998 
1999 
2000 
2001 
-4 Pnvate consumption (% of GDP)
--W| Pnvate investmeni (% of GD P)

2002

3 Extemal debt is falling 

4 

. but public debt is nsing.

60% 

50% 

30%

100

40% 

450~~~~~~~~~~~0

20~~~~~~~~~~~~0

70%

60%

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~50%

1997 

1998 

1999 

2000 

2001 

1997 

1998 

1999 

2000 

2001

_ |OTotal extemal debt net of foreign exchange reserves/GP 

_OPubtic 

Debt/GDP

6. 
Domestic consumption has been the main driver of growth. A significant fiscal stimulus
program amounting to about 2 percent of GDP and rising consumer confidence have supported rural
incomes and raised pnvate consumption to over 58 percent of GDP. Pnvate investment, after hitting a low
of 11 percent of GDP in 1998, has risen gradually to reach 16 percent this year, but it remains below the
average of about 20 percent for 1975-90. Further corporate and financial sector restructuring is still
required, and capacity use, though improving in several sectors, remains low. Public investment as a share
of GDP has been falling since 1996-97, as recurrent spending on social safety nets and financial
restructuring increased.

7. 
Thiailand has reduced external vulnerability by preserving 
its export market share and
lowering its external debt. In sharp contrast to 2000, export volumes and export and tourism receipts
grew in 2001, and total export receipts in 2002 are expected to be more than 20 percent higher than in
1998. Thailand has also generated annual current account surpluses of around 6 percent of GDP to repay

-3-

debt and accumulate foreign reserves. External debt net of reserves, having come down from 50 percent
of GDP in 1998 to 30 percent in 2001, is expected to decline further to around 20 percent of GDP by end-
2002, outperforming other countries in the region.

8. 
However, public debt has increased, and the Government has initiated fiscal consolidation.
The cumulative buildup of public spending and fiscal deficits boosted total public debt-mainly domestic
debt-to 60 percent of GDP in 2002. Nearly 
two-thirds of the increase in spending stemmed from
financial sector restructuring, with the rest from the costs of social safety nets, the deficits of non-
financial state enterprises, and the fiscal stimulus package. As the Government's plans for fiscal
consolidation are implemented, public debt is expected to stabilize but debt dynamics remain vulnerable
to lower-than-expected growth, future fiscal policy, and state-owned enterprises' performance.

9. 
Corporate indebtedness has fallen but still remains high relative to other countries in the
region. Corporate profitability remains weak, and the result is a nse in new and reentry non-performing
loans at an annual rate of around 8 percent this year. Large banks are able to generate profits and fully
provision, but others continue to be under-provisioned and under-capitalized.

10. 
Total factor productivity growth has begun to recover since the crisis. Although there is a
cyclical component in this recovery, structural factors also account for this turnaround in productivity
growth. Recent improvements in regulatory institutions and in the business environment contnbuted to it;
this is evident from the fact that Thailand's global ranking on competitiveness rose in 2001 relative to
2000 and also from firm-level information, which suggests that the recovery is led by the more efficient
outward-oriented manufacturing sector.

C. 

KEY POVERTY AND INEQUALITY TRENDS

11. 

Thailand made impressive gains in poverty reduction from the 1980s to the mid-1990s, but
poverty increased with the crisis. Although high economic growth rates pulled the income poverty
incidence down from 32.6 percent (17.9 million people) in 1988 to 11.4 percent in 1996 (6.8 million), the
incidence of poverty increased sharply to 15.9 percent in 1999 (9.9 million people). Economic recovery
since the crisis has reversed some of this increase, with income poverty declining to 13.0 percent (8.2
million people) in 2001. However, poverty incidence remains above pre-crisis levels, and a large share of
the population is clustered around the official poverty line (Box 2).

12. 
Thailand's poor are concentrated in rural areas. Nine of every ten poor people reside in rural
areas, and the rural Northeast region is home to two-thirds of Thailand's poor, with a poverty headcount
of 28.1 percent in 2000. This severe regional bias is a product of Thailand's unequal growth pattern in the
past. During 1987-96, Bangkok accounted for more than 52 percent of the rise in GDP, but only 11
percent of the increase in population. By contrast, the Northeast region accounted for only 11 percent of
the increase in GDP but 32 percent of the increase in population.

13. 
Althtough income poverty declined over the last two decades, income inequality increased.
Income inequality in Thailand rose between 1981 and 1999, with the share of income of the poorest
quintile dropping from 5.4 percent to 3.9 percent, while the share of the nchest quintile increased from
51.5 percent to 58.3 percent. The Gini coefficient of income inequality rose from 45.3 in 1981 to 52.5 in
2000. In the region, only Papua New Guinea, the Philippines, and Malaysia show higher inequality.

14. 
Poverty and inequality take on many shapes in Thiailand. Lack of income is only one dimension
of poverty and inequality, with lack of opportunity, empowerment, access to social services, and
vulnerability being other equally important aspects. The continued degradation of the environment and
inadequate natural resource management deprive some of their sustainable livelihood. As described in the

-4-

next section, these multi-dimensional aspects of poverty and inequality and measures to address them are
a priority for Thailand's national agenda. They are also the focus of the Millennium Development Goals
(MDGs), agreed on by the members of the United Nations (UN) "to create an environment-at the
national and global levels alike-which is conducive to development and the elimination of poverty," and
which Thailand intends to utilize to enhance outcomes- and impact-based management (Box 3).

Box 2. Poverty Measurement and Vulnerability

Thailand's poverty is measured on an income basis The 

official poverty line in 2000 amounted to 882 Baht, or 
US$1 60 in 1993 Purchasing Power Parity (PPP) The 
income-based poverty headcount is 14.2 percent, while 
the altemative consumption-based 
indicator 
is 12 2 
percent. 

Poverty line for 
2000 

PPP$I ada 

P 

aday 

PPP$1 60 a day 

PPP$2 a day 

Consumption-based 

headcount (%) 

Population below

poverty line (millions)

_ 

_2 

_3_2

5 2 

12 2 

35 6 

3 2

8 9
22 2

A large share of the population is clustered around the official poverty line Raising the poverty line from PPP$l 60 a day to
PPP$2 a day increases the poverty headcount from 12.2 percent to 35.6 percent and the number of poor from 8 9 to 22 2
million No matter how the poverty line is set, poverty in Thailand remains predominantly rural, concentrated in the Northeast

Rcgions 

PPP$1 a day (%) 

PPP$1 6 a day (%) 

PPP$2 a day (%)

Bangkok 
Central 

North 

Norheast 
South 

Headcount 
01 
2 
5 
14 

6 

Share of poor 
0 
6 
13 
69 

Headcount 
03 
5 
12 
28 

II ii 

Share of poor 
0 
7 
15 
67 
10 

Headcount 
12 
12 
30 
50 
26 

Share of poor
0
10
19
59
12

D. 

THAILAND'S DEVELOPMENT CHALLENGES

15. 
To address the challenges of growth and poverty reduction, a comprehensive national
development agenda is being developed around four pillars: Human and Social Capital,
Competitiveness, Poverty and Inequality, and Natural Resources and Environment. Anchored in the
1997 Constitution, this national development agenda is in line with the broad objectives of the Ninth
Economic and Social Development Plan (2002-06) and the national Poverty Reduction Strategy drafted in
2002. Consultations with the Government and other stakeholders reveal that sustained progress on these
four pillars will also require improvements in governance, as clearly embodied in the Constitution, and
that effective implementation of this agenda should help ensure that Thailand continues to reduce poverty,
including in the Northeast.

Thailand's National Agenda

i) 

Human and Social Capital

16. 
The Human and Social Capital pillar is critical to realizing faster growth, better quality of life,
and greater social cohesion and achieving the targets of the Ninth Plan and the MDGs. The
Constitution contains explicit provisions for access to education and health services, as well as social
protection for the vulnerable.

* Education. Thailand is likely to achieve universal access to pnmary education as targeted in the
MDGs. However, enrollment rates in higher education remain low at only 71 percent for secondary
education and 25 percent for tertiary. The equity, efficiency, and quality of education also remain
major issues. In 2001, Thailand was ranked 44h of 49 countries for its competitiveness in education,

-5-

lower than other Asian countries such as Korea, Malaysia, and the Philippines.2 Failure to address
these issues could result in further deterioration in Thailand's competitive position over time, as well
as increased tension as disparities grow. The Constitution and the 1999 Education Act are sweeping
in their scope with respect to education. Their intent is to focus accountability at the local level
(through the establishment of local education authorities and school boards), 
introduce more
creativity and locally-driven innovation in curricula; move to a learner-centnc 
teaching model;
upgrade the quality of teachers; establish effective quality assurance; and enhance the use of
technology. However, the envisaged administrative reforms have proven difficult to implement, and
overall progress to date has been limited. Special emphasis should be placed on achieving universal
secondary education; improving educational outcomes, including on such critical subjects as science
and technology; enhancing educational standards; and establishing a quality assurance system. It will
also be important to review carefully the balance between public and private provision of services, the
adequacy and mix of public expenditures, financing issues, and other constraints to achieve higher
enrollment.

* Health. Over the past 30 years, Thailand has achieved remarkable progress in basic healthcare, with
significant declines in infant and maternal mortality, and is projected to meet the MDG goal of further
reducing these mortality rates. Health financing reform remains a key priority. The public sector
finances about half of all health expenditures, and about 75 percent of Thais have access to some
form of health benefits. To help provide coverage for the quarter without access, the Government
introduced the "30 baht per visit" health scheme in 2001, boosting utilization rates, but at a significant
burden to the budget. 3 HIV/AIDS constitutes an imnportant challenge. Although infection rates in
brothel-based sex workers fell from 31 percent in 1994 to 18 percent by the end of the decade, the
rate of infections among women is increasing faster than among men, indicating that HIV/AIDS will
be a health problem for adults and children outside the traditional higher-nsk groups. Particular
emphasis needs to be placed on sustaining condom use and launching an initiative to prevent infection
by injecting drug users. Ensuring access to cost-effective treatment also remains a priority.

* Social protectiont. Thailand's long-trusted mechanism of community and family-based social
protection was tested during the economic and financial cnsis, and many Thais at the fringes of the
economy were left without resources to sustain themselves. The main challenge is to put in place
formal social protection mechanisms without displacing these informal mechanisms that underpin
social cohesion. The main components of Thailand's social protection strategy include labor market
policies and programs, social insurance, and social assistance. The first two are onented toward those
in the formal sector, and coverage has been expanded significantly. For example, the old-age pension
system introduced in 1998 now covers an estimated 5.7 million workers, and a formal unemployment
benefits scheme is planned. Social assistance schemes are targeted toward only the vulnerable-
women, children, the elderly poor, and the handicapped. However, implementation has been difficult,
with wide gaps in coverage and equity. For example, enterprises with fewer than 10 employees
account for more than 40 percent of non-government wage employment but are not covered by any
occupational safety and health legislation. Unpaid family workers and informal sector workers are
especially vulnerable, as protection under current laws is limited-this is a gender issue, as 75 percent

2 Source World Cotnpetitiveness Yearbook 2001, Intemational Institute for Management Development. The criteria for
competitiveness 
in education are comprised of i) total public expenditure on education, n) pupil-teacher ratio (primary
education), in) pupil-teacher ratio (secondary education), iv) secondary school enrollment, v) higher education achievement, vi)
education assessment, vii) educational system, viii) university education, ix) illiteracy of adult over 15 years, x) economic
literacy, xi) education in finance, xii) qualified engineers, and xiii) knowledge transfer between companies and universities

3Under the 30-baht health policy, all Thais are entitled to receive doctors visits at 30 baht per visit, including any medication
prescribed The policy does not covcr procedures such as cosmetic surgery, fertility treatments, organ transplants, or treatmcnt for
HIV/AIDS (with the exception of treatment for opportunistic infections associated with HIV/AIDS).

-6-

of the unpaid workers and 80 percent of the informal workers are women. Less than 15 percent of the
elderly poor receive social assistance benefits targeted at the elderly, and only half the recipients of
the student loan program come from the bottom three income quintiles. Overall public spending
favors richer over poorer provinces, and the efficiency of many programs remains problematic, with
significant overlaps.

ii) 

Competitiveness

17. 
Competitiventess, critical to sustaining higher growth in Thailand, is a highs priority for the
current administration. The Government has established a National Competitiveness Committee, and its
competitiveness strategy seeks to balance the successful East Asian formula of fiscal discipline, openness
to trade and investment, and export orientation with a renewed focus on domestic capacity and linkages
with domestic firms, including small and medium size and rural enterpnses.

* Economic management. In addition to maintaining sound macroeconomic management, Thailand
needs a busmess environment conducive to innovation, entrepreneurship, and competition on a level
playing field. This requires improvements in its trade, competition, and investment regimes. While
Thailand is a relatively open economy, it intends to further 
liberalize its trade regime under
commitments to the ASEAN Free Trade Agreement (AFTA) and its numerous bilateral preferential
trade agreements. Improving the transparency and efficiency of customs administration as part of the
Master Plan for Administrative Reform of the Customs Department is also important. While the new
Competition Law improves the overall competition regime, the institutional capacity to enforce the
law needs to be strengthened along with public awareness of the rights provided to consumers by the
law. Thailand has been successful in attracting foreign direct investment (FDI) in some sectors,
particularly electronics and automotive, but efforts now need to be focused on maximizing the
linkages between those investments and the domestic economy and integrating FDI more clearly into
the overall competitiveness strategy. In large part, this means shifting the strategy of the Board of
Investment from attracting fixed capital investment through granting discretionary tax incentives to
focusing on the enabling environment, 
including the quality of local suppliers, human capital,
infrastructure, and services.

* Financial and corporate sector development and legal reform. The 1997 crnsis caused an enormous
loss for the Thai economy-with non-performing loans (NPLs) peaking at 48 percent of total loans
and total costs to taxpayers estimated at over US$33 billion, or 27 percent of 2001 GDP. There has
been a gradual shift toward greater market discipline of banks and firms and toward a more balanced
financial system, with capital markets, institutional investors, and non-bank financial institutions
playing a more equal role, reducing the concentration of risk in banks and loans. These gradual
changes will spread risks, reduce the likelihood of asset bubbles, and better allocate funding to the
most productive uses. Although the direction for reform is clear, the speed of implementation has
been mixed, in part due to concerns about re-pricing and reallocatmg assets while the economy is still
recovenng from the crnsis. Further structural reforms should provide competitive incentives which
reward restructurng, re-capitalization, disclosure, good corporate governance, and risk-based prcing.
A stronger legal regime, especially in terms of economic laws and streamlined judicial procedures,
would build confidence that disputes will be resolved expeditiously. Full implementation of
international accounting standards and prudential regulations would attract capital into banks and
firms, while tax changes would promote mergers and better allocation of risk through securitization
and derivatives transactions. Finally, a measured transition to a limited deposit insurance program
would reduce the moral hazard from a bank-dominated system with a high proportion of non-
performing loans and blanket deposit insurance.

-7-

Infrastructure. Although the private sector has a sizable involvement 
in infrastructure, state
investments dominate. Markets are not yet open for effective pnvate participation and competition,
and inadequate economic regulations continue to hinder pnvate participation. In addition, poor
infrastructure 
in remote regions-particularly 
for transport-has 
raised 
logistical costs and
constrained rural business opportunities. The Government has begun to address these structural
weaknesses. A master plan adopted in 1999 aims to separate the policy, regulatory, management, and
operating functions of the infrastructure sub-sectors (mcluding transport, telecommunications, energy,
and utilities). The reform effort culminated in major realignments of state agencies in 2002. The
Government also intends to establish an independent regulatory regime in each sub-sector. The goals
are to improve governance, promote private participation 
in telecommunications and utilities,
strengthen multi-modal transport linkages, and improve road and waterway accessibility in remote
regions. Thailand must continue to implement this ambitious agenda, as well as focus on state
enterpnse reform and capacity building for regulatory agencies and new line ministries.

Knowledge economy and innovation. While Thailand's rapid economic growth in the years
preceding the crisis was dnven largely by capital accumulation, policymakers understand that future
growth will depend largely on productivity gains-increasing the capabilities of firms to innovate and
the skills of Thailand's workforce to produce higher value products. While Thailand enjoys important
assets, such as economic openness, relatively flexible labor policies, a substantial presence of
multinationals, and rich local wisdom and culture, the challenges are substantial. Thai firms face a
bureaucratic public service and a system of public institutions and research universities that are seen
as unresponsive to market needs. In addition, Thailand produces a small number of engineers and
scientists relative to regional competitors. This contnbuted to research and development spending of
just 0.13 percent of GDP in 1997, half the level of Malaysia, and just one-twentieth the level of
Korea. Corporate governance practices have been slow to evolve, with minonty shareholders not
empowered to play a strategic oversight role. Perhaps more importantly, a lack of inter-firm
collaboration, alliances, mergers and knowledge sharing has prevented an effective response to the
pressing quality and cost standards that charactenze high-value opportunities. The Thai Government,
like Korea, Singapore, Malaysia, and several others, sees ICT as an entryway to a vision of a
knowledge-based society, and substantial research supports this view. However, without rapid
progress in building core skills and improving the business environment, firms will have neither the
capabilities nor 
the 
incentive 
to actually 
leverage 
ICT. Without parallel 
reforms 
in
telecommunications policy, large gaps in information access between rural and urban Thais, larger
and smaller firms, is likely to persist. Given the complex, cross-cutting agenda which by its nature
requires public-private partnership to be successful, the immediate challenge is to establish the
leadership and governance framework that can help prioritize reforms and facilitate partnerships
across government, civil society, and the pnvate sector.

Strategic thrustsfor the real sectors. The Government's competitiveness strategy emphasizes sectors
inm which the country is perceived to have a comparative advantage: agriculture and agro-processing,
textiles and fashion, tounsm, software, and automotive. The Government 
is also stressing the
importance of shifting the competitive paradigm in agriculture, industry, and services toward value
creation, product differentiation, customization, market positioning, and cluster development. Greater
understanding of sectoral conditions and opportunities-including 
supply 
chain 
linkages,
technological capabilities, and clusters-can enhance Thailand's competitiveness, but it will also be
important that the Government avoid the temptation of "picking winners" and continue to maintain a
"level playing field" for all enterpnses, domestic and foreign. Successful promotion of small and
medium size enterprises (SMEs)-which account for more than 94 percent of firms, half of industnal
employment, and the majonty of service employment-will also require that the underlying structural
weaknesses facing SMEs, 
including human capital, 
technological, and regulatory 
issues, be
effectively addressed along with their financing constraints.

iii) 

Poverty and Inequality

18. 
Reducing poverty and inequality remains central to the Government's national agenda.
Poverty and inequality feature prominently in the Ninth Plan and the national Poverty Reduction Strategy,
which recognize that improvements in human and social capital, enhanced competitiveness and growth,
and progress on the environment are all critical to poverty reduction, as captured by the MDGs.

* Understanding poverty. In the post-crisis environment, the problem of poverty has taken on new
characteristics, and better understanding of poverty dynamics and the changing profile of the poor is
needed to strengthen the foundation for anti-poverty strategies in Thailand. The Government has been
enhancing the poverty database, which can greatly assist in analyzing poverty and the impact of
public programs and policies. Important initiatives are developing a national poverty map, improving
the socio-economic survey, and establishing a poverty monitoring system. Further work is needed to
improve the gender disaggregation of poverty data and to develop an understanding of the links
between gender equality and poverty reduction. It will also be important to look more broadly at the
range and quality of data currently collected and at its adequacy in relation to the overall growth and
poverty reduction challenge.

* Balanced development. Thailand has not made progress in lowenng inequality. Income inequality is
increasing, and regional inequality remains high. The mean per capita income in Bangkok is more
than four times that of the Northeast. To address these issues, the Ninth Plan emphasizes sustainable
and balanced rural and urban development. It focuses on empowering community organizations and
civil society, decentralizing decision-making power and resources, promoting gender equality,
developing border provinces as economic gateways, and providing greater access to sources of
information and knowledge for outlying regions. Such measures will need to be accompanied by a
significant reallocation and improved targeting of government expenditures. Because education has
the highest explanatory power in accounting for interpersonal and regional variations in income and
inequality, lowering inequality will require addressing educational access and quality.

* Targeted programs. Thailand has a large number of anti-poverty programs in place, and the
Government recently introduced additional programs, such as the three-year debt moratonum for
farmers and the village fund program. If well-targeted and effectively implemented, these programs
can be an important supplement to broader strategies for growth and poverty reduction. However,
better data, monitonng, and evaluation will be needed.

iv) 

Natural Resources and the Environment

19. 
Management of natural resources and the environment, overlooked during the high growth
years, will need to become a higher priority. Consultations with stakeholders have consistently identified
natural resources and the environment as requinng urgent attention. Continuing environmental
degradation, likely to aggravate conflicts over the use of natural resources, could undermine Thailand's
social cohesion.

* 

Improving environmental quality. Thailand's economic expansion has been accompanied by
significant environmental costs. Rapid expansion of industry and increasing population, especially in
urban areas, has rapidly increased the levels of pollution (solid and hazardous waste, air, noise, and
water). Fine particles in Bangkok's air exceed standards by 2.5 times, and nver water in the central,
southern, and eastern regions is of poor quality. The resulting risks to human health are high.
Thailand needs to focus on more effective enforcement of environmental laws; stronger institutional
capacity, both national and local; and increased investments in pollution prevention and control, with
private sector participation.

-9-

Sustaining natural resources. Land conversion, slash-and-bum agriculture, and intense exploitation
of water have led to rapid deterioration of natural resources. Forest cover fell drastically from 53
percent in 1961 to 25 percent in 1998, and over-harvesting of marine fisheries has reduced fishing
yields by 90 percent. Of particular concern is water scarcity, which occurs against a backdrop of low
availability, high pollution, and increasing per capita consumption. Thailand ranks the lowest in Asia
for annual per capita water availability, but it ranks 14'h in the world in industrial organic water
pollution. To better balance conservation and exploitation of natural resources, the Government
recently established a new Ministry of Natural Resources and Environment. The Ministry's
immediate challenges are to ensure an integrated approach to sustainable resource management,
eliminate harmful subsidies (such as excessive use of pesticides and over-fishing), and assist in the
capacity building of local institutions and communities. As the Constitution grants local ownership of
environment and natural resources and promotes community involvement in their management,
appropriate incentives (such as land tenure, water rights, village forest management) and capacity
building are needed to create opportunities for communities to partner with local governments to find

solutions.

* Environmental commons. Thailand is a signatory to many international and regional treaties, such as
the Montreal and Kyoto Protocols and the Regional Haze Action Plan. It also shares the biologically
rich Mekong River with Cambodia, China, Lao PDR, Myanmar, and Vietnam. It therefore has an
intrinsic interest in participating in regional and global initiatives. Going forward, the challenge will
be to deepen regional cooperation and to partner with neighboring countries on initiatives such as the
integrated management of the Mekong River.

v) 

Governance

20. 
Progress on governance is recognized as critical for achieving sustained progress under the
fourpillars of the development agenda. Progress on governance is required at all levels: the public and

private sectors, and civil society.

* Effectiveness of national public sector institutions. The crisis highlighted concerns about the
performance of the public sector, whose role, organization, and processes need an overhaul. The Thai
civil service has been overstaffed and underpaid, and the organizational culture has not rewarded
performance or service. Expenditure management has been characterized by weak linkages among
planning, budgeting, and sectoral policy; lack of medium-term fiscal planning; and weak monitonng
and evaluation of expenditures. To address these issues, Thailand developed a Public Sector
Management Reform Plan in 1999. Government commitment in this area is high, as witnessed by the
recent passage of two public sector reform laws-the Public Administration Act and the Ministerial
Restructurng Act-and the impending passage of the Budget Procedures Act, Financial Management
and Accounting Act, and Public Debt Management Act. Together, these laws provide a significant
opportunity to improve public sector performance. The success of reforms will hinge upon the details
of their implementation, particularly on the careful coordination of expenditures and decentralization.

* Local government and decentralization. Thailand is a highly centralized country. In 2001, the central
government spent 91 percent of total expenditures and collected 97 percent of taxes, and only 3
percent of local government revenues were locally collected and retained. The central government has
also appointed most local officials, determined local government salaries, and approved local budgets.
The new Constitution emphasizes decentralization, with the Decentralization Act (1999), 
the
Decentralization Master Plan (2000), and the Decentralization Action Plan (2002) providing the
impetus. Some functions have begun to be devolved to local governments, and the share of local
government revenue is slated to increase from 20 percent in FYOI to 35 percent in FY06. However,
many issues remain to be resolved. Fiscal transfers are not based on transparent formulas and hence

-10-

are unpredictable. The devolution of revenues, functions, and personnel has not been integrated, and
very few personnel have been transferred to the local level. Furthermore, local government capacity is
extremely limited and many local governments are of insufficient scale, which could affect service
delivery. Without a clear framework for addressing these issues, the move to decentralization poses
substantial fiscal and other risks.

* Transparency and anti-corruption. Corruption remains problematic. According to a corruption
perception survey in 2000, about 80 percent of Thai firms surveyed pay for services from government
agencies that handle transactions. 4 The Constitution and the Official Information Act (1997) aim to
improve transparency and accountability by empowering the public to monitor public policies and
public actions and by establishing independent oversight bodies. These new bodies will require
sufficient financial and technical resources and independence to carry out their mandated functions
effectively. Sustained commitment at the highest levels is needed to achieve substantial progress.

* Public participation Traditionally, public participation has been limited. Through vanous articles,
the Constitution has improved the environment for public participation and granted greater roles and
responsibilities for citizens in public policy design and implementation. As a result, greater civic
participation has slowly been accepted as common in many government agencies, and civil society
has become much stronger and active in that process. Despite this positive development, the public's
ability to participate is limited by a lack of understanding of the respective duties, rights, and
responsibilities of government agencies and the public and by poor access to information. In addition,
some agencies do not yet recognize why participation is beneficial and how it can be camed out
meaningfully. Capacity building 
for civic groups and other stakeholders-including 
some
government agencies-and 
formal mechanisms for public participation 
in policy formulation,
program implementation, and monitonng are needed.

* Gender equality. Inequality of participation and representation of women is evident in a variety of
areas beyond economic participation. 
In the latest parliamentary election, women accounted for only
9 percent of the representatives elected in 2001 and for only 21 of the 200 elected Senators. The
representation of women in the civil service is also low, at about 18 percent in the upper ranks and
only 4 percent at the highest level. Gender equality is one of the main tenets of the Constitution, and
the Government has endorsed a new Women's Development Plan (2002-2006) as a framework for
action. Additional measures needed include developing a gender-disaggregated database to facilitate
policymaking, increasing awareness and understanding of gender issues among officials and the
public, and enforcing equal rights and opportunities.

Thailand's Development Challenges in a Regional Context

21. 
Tlailand actively supports and contributes 
to regional initiatives aimed at economic
cooperation, including the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) Forum, the Association of South-
East Asian Nations (ASEAN), and "ASEAN Plus Three" (ASEAN plus China, Japan, and Korea). The
Initiative for ASEAN Integration, for example, seeks to adopt common policies on trade and investment
and meet the requirements for AFTA. Thailand also participates in the Greater Mekong Subregion (GMS)
Program and the Mekong River Commission (MRC), initiatives which are now being strongly supported
by the concerned governments and are contnbuting significantly to the development of the GMS.
Thailand is in a good position to contribute to and benefit from such regional public goods. Given the
myriad, ongoing reform efforts in the region, there is also substantial scope for trilateral cooperation to
share lessons and experiences.

4 Survey results presented in Poapongsakorn, Nipon et al , Anti-Corruption Strategy in Thailand in the Year 2000, November
2000. This publication was prepared for the Thailand Development Research Institute 2000 Year-End Conference

Box 3. Millennium Development Goals: Summary of Thailand's Progress

Goal 1: Eradicate extreme poverty and hunger

T'arget I Halve the proportion of people whose income is less than one dollar a day between 1990 and 2015
Target 2 Halve the proportion of people who suffer from hunger between 1990 and 2015
1990 
27 2 

Headcount poverty ratio (%l) 

Percentage share of income/consuniption held by poorest 20% 

4 2 

The number of poor is declining, but Thailand's poverty rate of 14 2% in 2000 is 3 percentage points above the pre-crisis level. It is
very likely that all regions will halve poverty by 2015, but some localities may not be able to achieve this goal Inequality is also
problematic as the percentage share of income accruing to the poorest quintile decreased from 4 2% in 1990 to 3 9% in 2000

Goal 2: Achieve universal primart education

Target 3 Ensure that by 2015, children everywhere-boys and girls alike-will be able to complete a full course of primary schooling

Gross primary enrollment ratio 
Youth lteracy rate (0% ages 15-24) 

1990 

| 

1005 
981 

2000
14 2

3 9

2000

103 6
98 9

Universal gross primary enrollment has been achieved, while net universal primary rate is also likely to be achieved Enrollment in
both secondary and tertiary education is anticipated to pick up as the reform program, which aims to achieve universal secondary
enrollment, progresses Universal primary enrollment at the regional level should be achieved by 2015. However, hill tribes may not be
able to attain this goal.

Goal 3: Promote gender equality and empower women

Target 4 Eliminate gender dispanty in primary and secondary education preferably by 2005, and to all levels of education no later than 2015
1990 
2000

Ratio of girls to boys in primary and secondary education 
Ratio of young literatefemales to males 
Share of wonien employed in the nonagricultural sector (%O,) 
Proportion of seats held by wonien in national parliament 

94 1 
99 0 
45.4 
2 8 (1988) 

96 1
99 0
47 3
9 2 (2001)

Good overall progress is being made at all levels The literacy rate of elderly women remains low and informal education opportunities
could bridge this gap. Although women's participation in politics has been quite limited, the number of women in the Parliament is
increasing

Goal 4: Reduce child mortality

Target 5 Reduce by two-thirds the under five-mortality rate between 1990 and 2015

Under 5 mortality rate (per 1,000) 
Infant mortality rate (per 1,000 ihve births) 
Imunization, nieasles 

1990 

41 0 
37 0 
80 0 

2000
33 2

27 9
96 0

Good progress has been made at the national level, but attention needs to be given to hill tribes and adolescent mothers for whom
access to social services is a major issue. To achieve the MDG target, the rate will have to be lowered to 27 per 1,000

Goal 5: Improve maternal health

Target 6 Reduce by three-quarters the matemal mortality ratio between 1990 and 2015

Maternal mortality ratio (per 100,000 live births) 

1 

1990 

24 8 

1 

2000

13 2

Maternal mortality continues to decline, but hill tribes and adolescent mothers are likely to be vulnerable as access to social services is
limited and greater awareness raising is needed

Goal 6: Combat HIVIAIDS, malaria and othler diseases

Prevalence of If lyV among pregnant womien (% ages 15-24) 

Target 7 Have halted and begun to reverse the spread of HIV/AIDS by 2015
Target 8 Have halted and begun to reverse the incidence of malana and other major disease by 2015
1990 
2000
021 
078
The number of HIV-infected women is on the rise, resulting in an increase in mother-to-child transmission. The existing prevention
programs are only stabilizing the transmission but not slowing it down The vulnerable groups include fishermen, youth and
adolescents, hill tribes, injecting drug users and construction workers. Deaths due to tuberculosis have fallen by nearly 30 percent
between 1985 and 1997, while information on malaria remains sketchy.

Goal 7: Ensure environmental sustainability

Target 9 Integrate the pnnciples of sustainable development into cou try policies and programs and reverse the losses of environmental resources
1990 
2000

Forest area (% of total land area) 
Nationally protected areas (% of total land area) 
Access to improved water source (% of population) 
Access to improved sanitation (% of population) 

28 0 
12 4 
71.0 
73 8 

28 9
15.8
92 7
97 7

The access to water source indicator is likely to be achieved, but rising water pollution levels continue to threaten the viability of
freshwater sources and could setback the achievements. Air quality in Bangkok, water quality in major rivers, and deforestation are
major environmental problems

Note Only MDG indicators with datafor both 1990 and 2000 are included herefor illustrative purpose

Source Based on the National Workshop on the Relevance and Application of MDGs in Thailand, August 2002, convened by the National Economic
and Social DeveloDnient Board. UNDP and the World Bank

Thailand and the Millennium Development Goals

-12-

22. 
The Government has traditionally used the five-yearly national economic and social
development plans to establish broad targets for achieving its priorities. However, these targets have
mostly been reflected in input and output indicators, with little attention paid to results measurement.
Prompted by a more outcomes-focused design of the Ninth Plan, the Government is now shifting to a
more outcomes- and impact-based system for allocating resources and assessmg progress, and in this
context, is carefully reviewing how best to utilize the MDGs.

23. 
On an aggregate basis, Thailand is likely to meet most of the MDGs and inideed has already
met several 
(Box 3). However, 
for some 
indicators-including maternal and child mortality,
communicable diseases, and environment-the MDGs may not be achieved, especially for specific
regions and subpopulations. To better track developments at the disaggregated level, the Government is
now developing an enhanced "MDG+" approach which will disaggregate the MDGs by regional and
subpopulation groups and which will be integrated into its national planning, monitonng, and evaluation

framework.

E. 

MEDIUM-TERM ECONOMIC PROSPECTS AND EXTERNAL DEVELOPMENTS

24. 
Thailand is expected to grow at around 4 percent a year and attain its poverty reduction targets
(Table 1). Thailand's medium-term prospects for growth and poverty reduction depend on the speed and
depth of structural reform and 
fiscal 
Table 1. Medium-Term Base Case
consolidation. Annual growth rates of
around 4 percent are the likely "base 

2002 

2004 

2003 

2001 

2005

case" over the next three years, given the 

country's national development agenda 
and 
the 
expected 
global 
economic 
recovery. Under the base case scenario, 
export growth is projected 
to increase,
and private investment to rise gradually, 
but still remain significantly lower than 
durng 
1975-90. However, 
if 
an 
acceleration 
in reforms boosts pnvate 

investment and total factor productivity, 

growth could reach 5.0-5.5 percent a year.

Poverty (% living 
on less than
US$1 60 per day)
GDP growth (%) 

Current account 

(% of GDP) 

Public sector 
balance (% of
GDP)
Inflation (%) 

(actual) 

13.0 

(est.) 

12 7 

(proj ) 

12.4 

(proj ) 

I I9 

(pro,)

11.4

1.8 

3.8 

4 0 

4 0 

5.4 

5 

-3 5 

4.0 

5 

-5 4 

2 8 

-0 

-4.0 

1 7 

28 

-2 8 

4 0

0 0

I

-l 8

1 7 

I 0 

2 2 

2.5 

2 5

25. 
The Ninth Plait target of poverty reduction for end-2005 is expected to be achieved, provided
the degree of income inequality in the country remains stable over this period. The target could be
exceeded if growth is higher. However, this projection is contingent on policies that not only support
sustained growth but also ensure a more vigorous participation of the poorer Northeast in that growth so
overall income inequality does not rise.

26. 
The projected global recovery will enable export growth rates of around 6 percent a year.
Although most analysts have recently revised their 2003 growth forecasts downward for high-income
economies, all forecasts show significant recovery in global growth, trade volumes, and commodity
prices. With domestic policies becoming more favorable for improved competitiveness, it will be possible
for Thailand's export growth rates to increase and be sustained over the next three years.

27. 
China's WTO accession provides export opportunities to Thailand, even as it poses new
challentges in third-country markets. There is considerable scope for increasing exports to a more open

-13-

China, as evidenced by the very large increases in exports-from the Philippines, Malaysia, Singapore,
Korea, Thailand, Indonesia, and Vietnam-to China in the first half of 2002. These exports include not
only land-intensive products like sugar, oil seeds, and wood products but also high-tech products as inputs
into Chinese high-tech exports. In third-country markets, 
there is strong Chinese competition-
particularly in garments and textiles-although the impact has been limited so far.

28. 
The recently initiated fiscal consolidation will reduce fiscal risks but also reduce public
investment. The Government plans to reduce the public sector deficit to about 2 percent of GDP by 2005
and to zero by 2008, in line with the aim of capping public debt at 65 percent of GDP and debt servicing
at 16 percent of government expenditures. As this will involve fiscal consolidation as well as a focus on
revenue measures, the challenge is to ensure that roads, education, and health-all suffering significant
cuts in public investment after the crisis-receive a larger share of the investments to maintain and
improve them.

29. Most of the deficit can be financed domestically, but some externalfinancing is likely. In 2001,
the public sector deficit and current account surplus were funded by an excess of private savings over
private investment of around 9 percent of GDP. As private consumption and investment grow, this excess
of private savings will decline over the next three years, and external financing of some of the public
sector deficit might then be needed.

30. 

Thailand's medium-term economic prospects face risks in three areas:

* Fiscal consolidation may not progress as planned, and public debt dynamics could become
unfavorable. The Government is making every effort to consolidate the fiscal situation and to manage
debt judiciously. However, 
if revenue measures generate 
less collection 
than expected and
expenditure reduction turns out to be more difficult because of higher state enterpnse deficits or
higher local government spending due to decentralization, the public sector deficit could be higher
than currently projected. In addition, unfunded contingent liabilities could turn out to be higher than
estimated, and growth could slow due to slow implementation of the development agenda or a
precipitous deterioration in the external environment. All these factors could worsen the public debt
dynamics. Mitigation of these risks will require a pace of decentralization consistent with
improvements 
in local administrative capacity, close monitonng of fiscal developments, and a
willingness to react quickly to the possibility of significant deterioration in fiscal and public debt

variables.

* The external economic environment could worsen sharply on several fronts. Business and consumer
confidence in high-income economies could worsen more than currently projected, reducing export
demand. Further incidents of terrorism in the region could sharply lower tounsm receipts. The rising
tensions in the Middle East could also push oil prices to new heights over a sustained period,
generating a major terms of trade shock. Any of these three external factors alone would not
significantly affect the base case growth scenario, but if they occur together, growth in Thailand could
be significantly lower than now projected.

* Structural reforms to unprove the business environment and restructure the financial and corporate
sectors could slow. Given the Government's growing commitment to medium-term reforms and to
sustained growth and poverty reduction, this risk is seen as low. However, the risk of a more gradual
pace of some key reforms cannot be eliminated.

-14-

III. 

PROGRESS SINCE THE FY98-02 COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY

A. 

WORLD BANK RETROSPECTIVE 5

The Bank's Contribution to Thailand's Development Results

31. 
Thailand had reduced its reliance on Bank assistance before the 1997 crisis. In 1989-96, the
Bank accounted for only 2 percent of Thailand's total external financing, compared with 86 percent from
private creditors. IBRD commitments in FY88-97 averaged $216 million a year, and principal repayments
were twice as large as project disbursements. In the decade preceding the crisis, the Bank's lending
portfolio was heavily focused on infrastructure (80 percent), and these projects helped contribute-in
particular by providing financial transfers-to alleviating the infrastructure bottlenecks unavoidable with
Thailand's double-digit growth. However, few Bank resources were dedicated to analytical work, and the
Government and Bank engaged in only minimal policy discussions. As a consequence, an opportunity
was missed to help tackle some key policy reforms. In particular, the under-investment in analytical work
left the Bank ill-prepared for the economic and financial cnsis.

32. 
Bank engagement increased sharply during the crisis. With Thailand and the rest of East Asia
facing uncertain economic prospects, the Bank Group focused its program on helping to revive growth
and ease the adverse social impact of the cnsis-particularly by helping to address some of the structural
reforms left dormant before the crisis in 1997. The last CAS for Thailand, developed at the height of the
crisis, was built around three cntical elements: renewing the country's competitiveness, improving
governance, and ensuring a more equitable distnbution of the benefits of growth. As part of a larger
assistance package agreed with other donors and the IMF in 1997, IBRD lending helped Thailand rebuild
its reserves and finance its fiscal stimulus and social programs. The Social Investment Project (SIP), in
particular, helped the Government strengthen social safety net services through an innovative community-
based approach in which resource and program management responsibilities were devolved to the local
level. The Bank also provided four structural adjustment loans totaling $1.75 billion, including a Public
Sector Reform Loan (PSRL). The PSRL, the Bank's first programmatic loan, was recognized by
counterparts as particularly helpful in creating acceptance of reforms by mobilizing high-quality global
expertise. In addition, the Bank supported a large technical assistance program for financial sector
restructuring, which was designed with the Government and coordinated with other partners, including
the lIMF, ADB, and bilaterals. The financial sector program, particularly through capacity building,
helped to stabilize the financial sector, improve the supervisory regime, develop the bond market, manage
the public debt, and liquidate failed finance companies.

6

33. 
As Thailand has emergedfrom the crisis, the Bank's mode of engagement has evolved. In the
1998 CAS, the planned level of Bank lending to Thailand for FY98-00 was US$3.4 billion for 12
projects. However, actual lending-while significantly greater than in previous years-amounted to
US$2.1 billion for seven projects, less than anticipated in the base case scenano. No new Bank projects
have been delivered since the PSRL was discussed by the Board in October 1999. This decline in demand
for Bank lending was due largely to the Government's emphasis on managing public debt and reducing
external financing. At the same time, the Bank's role has evolved to place greater emphasis on supporting
Thailand with analytical and advisory services, particularly through the Monitor series. The Bank's four

5 Thailand only joined the Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA) in 2000, hence MIGA is not included in the

Retrospective.

6 The programmatic feature of the PSRL was never triggered. As the PSRL ICR noted, the program structure was appropriate, but
leverage from financing was limited. The Government's financing needs diminished as the economic recovery gained strength,
and subsequent lending for the reform program did not materialize However, the Government's commitment to reform was
maintained, and the Bank's support continued through the CDP-Governance and Public Sector Reform.

-15-

Monitor senes-Economic, Social, Environment, and Country Dialogue-have helped stimulate public
debate on major development issues such as poverty and HIV/AIDS and provided a better analytical basis
for the Bank's engagement. In addition, Thailand and the Bank have developed the Country Development
Partnership (CDP) as a tool to deepen the policy dialogue (Box 4 and Annex B16). This shift toward
analytical services and policy dialogue represents a major shift in the Bank's role since before the crisis.

Box 4. The Country Development Partnership (CDP)

The Country Development Partnership (CDP), launched in 2000, is a knowledge-based partnership The CDP is a three-year
integrated framework for actions in key areas of the country's development agenda Each CDP is led by the Government with
support from other stakeholders, including the Bank and other donors The CDP also serves as a vehicle for engaging civil
society, the private sector, and other partners in the policy design, implementation, and monitoring process

What is the CDP?

Depending on where support is needed, the Bank's engagement in a CDP can take the form of analytical and advisory activities,
technical assistance, donor coordination, and/or partnerships In addition, as appropriate, investment projects can selectively

support implementation

How does the CDP work ?

.
The Government selects key priority areas for the CDP
* An outcomes-oriented action plan with a clear timeline, milestones, and accountabilities is formulated, based on strong
analytic work-as laid out in a Development Matrix which describes the CDP objectives, output benchmarks, and capacity

building inputs

* Division of labor and suppon from other partners is agreed-as laid out in a Partnership Matrix which details the inputs of
partners and identifies potential resources to be tapped as well as any funding gap
Arrangements for specific AAA, TA, and capacity building support are determined

.

Step I

Step 11

.
* 
* 

.

Step Ill

Progress is monitored through public workshops with stakeholders annually or biannually
Specific action plans are fine-tuned and adjusted based on the progress review meeting
Interim implementation reports are completed and disseminated to stakeholders

CDP progress is integrated in a comprehensive progress review on the national agenda

Measuring Bank performance - OED and QAG assessments, ICRs

34. 
Thte Bank's assistance program 
in Thailand was reviewed by 
thle Bank's Operations
Evaluation Department (OED) in 2000. The OED Country Assistance Evaluation highlighted three main
lessons for the Bank (Annex B14). First, continuous policy dialogue is needed to ensure that the Bank is
in a position to deliver timely and effective assistance if a crisis should occur. Second, to be more
effective, the Bank should concentrate its efforts in a few critical areas in which country ownership is
strong and engagement would have maximum impact. Third, more effective coordination with other
development partners is needed to avoid duplication.

35. 
Thte Bank's knowledge and advisory services in Thtailand were evaluated in a pilot review by
tlhe Bank's internal Quality Assurance Group (QAG) in 2002. The QAG review, covering the last CAS
period, rated the overall effectiveness of the analytical and advisory program as satisfactory (Annex B14).
The QAG report points to some important systemic lessons for future engagement, particularly for the
Bank's support to the CDPs. Specifically, the QAG evaluation recognized that analytical and advisory
work is a viable standalone instrument even in the absence of lending, but it must be planned and
adequately resourced from the beginning. The analytical and advisory program must be selective, well-
focused, and dnven by client ownership, with medium-term engagement in mind. Having monitorable
progress benchmarks is also essential.

-16-

36. 

The Bank's lending program can

be assessed through a review of project

Implementation Completion Reports and 
the status of the ongoing portfolio. Of the 
seven lending operations delivered as part 
of the crisis assistance package, four have 
closed: 
the 
Finance 
Companies 
Restructuring Loan, 
two Economic and 
Financial Adjustment Loans, and 
the 
PSRL. 
In 
the Bank's final reports on 
implementation, 
projects were 
rated 
as 
satisfactory. 
Institutional 
development 
impact was 
evaluated as substantial 
in three projects 

and partial in one (the Finance Companies 

Performance of the Bank's portfolio has improved dramatically since
the economic and financial crisis. After a reasonable track record in the

early and mid 1990s, the Thailand portfolio deteriorated significantly
from FY97 to FY99 due in large part to the budgetary impact of the
the inexperience of the implementing agencies 
in new

crisis and 
sectors In response, the Govemment's Oversight Support Unit was

established in the Public Debt Management Office with support from
the Asia-Europe Meeting trust fund for its externally-funded 
loan
portfolio. The Bank's Bangkok office also strengthened its Portfolio
the outcomes of all four Management Cluster to provide support to task managers in the

fiduciary aspects of procurement and financial management as well as
training for both Bank and implementing agency staff. Decentralization

of Bank project supervision has also contributed to better portfolio
performance

In FY03, the Thailand portfolio-comprising seven projects totaling
approximately US$800 muilion and one guarantee-is now one of the

strongest in the East Asia and Pacific region Almost all projects have
had satisfactory DO and IP ratings in the past few years 
In FYOO-02,

disbursements averaged 29 percent a year, compared to 13 percent a
year in FY97-99, and consistently exceeded regional targets in recent
years. However, project implementation has in some cases been slow,

Restructuring Loan). Sustainability was 
judged to be likely for all four projects. 
Systemic 
lessons highlighted from these 
lending operations include the following: 
reform programs 
should not overtax 
implementation 
capacity. A 
tradeoff 
sometimes exists between client ownership 
versus urgency and program ambitiousness. 
Broader participation in the reform design 
process might slow implementation in the 
short run but pays off in the long run. Thai 
counterparts value 
the Bank's global
knowledge services, even in lending programs. In addition, the programmatic approach to assistance, as
adopted in three of the four operations, can help sustain momentum for integrated reforms and provide a
platform for dialogue on implementation progress. The Thailand portfolio of ongoing projects is now one
of the strongest in the Bank's East Asia and Pacific region (Box 5), suggesting that completed projects
overall are likely to continue to be rated satisfactory.

agreed action plan is now in place and should improve implementation
and disbursements, enabling the rating to be upgraded shortly The
when there is no further need for these resources To date, US$112 9
million has been canceled from five of the existing loans

unsatisfactory in May 2002 due largely to slow disbursements. An

Government has also been requesting cancellation of parts of loans

and 

the 

implementation of one project was downgraded 

to

Feedback from client survey and consultations

37. 
The Bank conducted an anonymous client survey of 500 stakeholders in 2002. The paper
survey was conducted with Government, NGOs, private sector, academia, and donors (Annex B13). The
list of those surveyed was broad and included a wide range of opinions-including NGOs opposed to
development-in order to ensure a representative sample and to gather feedback on a specific set of
issues, particularly on the perceptions of the Bank's role in Thailand's development. In general, the
feedback was quite positive. The notable exception was feedback from NGOs who were particularly
harsh in their cntique of the Bank's effectiveness. The survey respondents identified Thailand's major
development challenges to be education and economic recovery, as well as corruption. Accordingly,
respondents felt that the role of the World Bank should focus on strengthening the education sector and
encouraging greater transparency in government. On the Bank's effectiveness, the views of stakeholders
varned significantly, with NGOs being most consistently negative, and local government employees and
Bank of Thailand officials the most positive. In particular, many respondents said that the World Bank
was not as effective as it could have been dunng the crisis and that it had minimal impact on Government
efforts to renew competitiveness, 
improve governance, and ease 
the social 
impacts. Respondents
perceived that financial transfers had been the greatest value added of the Bank, closely followed by
knowledge services, particularly in identifying and conceptualizing development programs. While the

-17-

Bank was assessed to have been quite effective in producing useful knowledge, studies, and advice, it was
viewed as less successful in making knowledge available.

38. 
Workshops and discussions held withl a wide range of stakeholders in 2001 and 2002
reinforced the messages from the client survey, although the feedback from civil society was more
positive. That was partly due to interactions with groups and individuals who knew the Bank better and
also because the consultation workshops and discussions allowed for real dialogue beyond what a paper
survey could achieve. The Bank consulted in depth with Govemment counterparts at the working and
political levels, civil society from various regions in the country, civic leaders, parliamentarians, the
private sector, and donor community. These discussions included people who know the Bank well as well
as groups with little or no interaction with-or sometimes knowledge of-the Bank. Feedback indicated
that Thailand's most pressing development challenges are governance, particularly decentralization;
education; competitiveness, especially in the rural sector; social welfare; and natural resources and the
envirounent. The multi-dimensional aspect of poverty was also emphasized, in particular the linkages
between social, natural resource, and environmental issues. Consultation participants suggested that the
Bank and Thailand need to engage in a true partnership and that the most important role of the World
Bank is 
in providing knowledge and
advisory 
services. 
In 
this context, 
participants 
suggested 
that 
the Bank 
disseminate 
information more widely, 
particularly 
in the local language, and 
support 
other 
information 
shanng 
activities. Civil 
society 
stressed 
the 
Bank's 
role 
in 
enabling 
greater 
participation of all stakeholders In policy 
design, program 
implementation, and 
monitoring. They and other participants 
saw 
the Bank as a potential bridge 
between 
the Government and 
civil 
society or 
the private sector and even 
society or 

Where tihe Bank has beena less
effective
* Responding quickly to client
needs changing country
circumstances, oftentimes
hindered by cumbersome
lending processes and
procedures
focusing on the most critical
development areas, ensuring
that none of its activities are
supply driven

Whlere tfje Bank has been 
effective 
Raising awareness of and 
advancing the debate on key 
development issues, and 
elevating the importance of 
medium-term structural 

quality TA 
Assisting the Government in 
coordinating and integrating 

Table 2. Summary of Feedback

p Helping Thailand to access 

international experience and 
global best practice, in 

particular by bringing in high- 

.

Achieving selectivity and

* Disseminating Bank

reforms 

key reform efforts, in 

information, especially its

analytical work, and making it

sometimes 

between 

different 

Government 
agencies. 
Government 
counterparts also highlighted the Bank's 
role as an integrator of reform assistance. 

However, they noted that the Bank's 

processes and procedures (particularly 
for lendmg) are at times cumbersome, 
limiting its ability to respond swiftly to 
client demand and changing country 
circumstances (Table 2). 

.

reform efforts and 

particular through the CDPs, 
widely accessible, ensuring
it has also helped build 
that the Bank's work is
consensus around these 
translated into the Thai
constituencies for change 
audience
A decentrahzed country office * More intensively engaging
has facilitated a continuous 
stakeholders beyond the
and ongoing dialogue with 
Government and integrating
Government counterparts 
them into program design and
implementation

language to broaden the

B. 

THE INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION RETROSPECTIVE

39. 
Before, during, and after thte crisis. In the nine years preceding the cnsis, IFC supported pnvate
sector growth with around US$1.8 billion of investment in petrochemicals, oil refining, financial services,
infrastructure, and agribusiness. Immediately after the cnsis, restructunng its portfolio of investments
became a priority for rFC, with restructured projects covering aggregate liabilities of more than US$1
billion. In its restructuring efforts, IFC has focused on model transactions that combine financial and
operational restructuring with strengthening corporate governance practices, as well as mobilizing funds
to assist in the disposal of distressed assets. In FY02, IFC investments have resumed gradually, with new

-18-

project commitments reaching about US$185 million. At the end of FY02, IFC's Thailand portfolio stood
at just under US$1.01 billion.

40. 
Key lessons. Client feedback and IFC's own assessment suggest that IFC has been effective in:
restructuring 
its portfolio; improving governance, disclosure, accounting standards; and supporting
bankruptcy reform, including the implementation of bankruptcy laws. However, the visibility of some of
its high profile restructuring cases has meant that IFC was less effective in maintaining a positive profile
in the country; engaging with the Govemnment, especially on speeding up corporate restructuring and
developing solutions for disposal of distressed assets; and being a counter-cyclical investor in a volatile
environment. IFC's experience dunng the crisis also highlights the importance of IFC's local presence in
providing responsive client service in a rapidly changing environment. IFC has recently located more
investment officers m Thailand, providing a better platform for more responsive client service.

IV. 

THE THAILAND - WORLD BANK GROUP PARTNERSHIP FYO3-05

A. 

THAILAND AND THE WORLD BANK GROUP - AN EVOLVING PARTNERSHIP

41. 
The Bank Group's role as a development partner is valued by stakeholders, who emphasize
strongly that thze Banik Group should remain engaged in Thlailand. There is, however, a clear consensus
that the relationship needs to evolve from primarily a borrower-lender relationship toward a real
development partnership. In that context, Thailand has clearly indicated its preference for a Thailand-
World Bank Group Partnership in support of its development rather than a World Bank Group "assistance
strategy." Accordingly, the Bank will engage as a development partner in a limited number of areas and
mainly through policy advice, knowledge sharing both internally and externally, and support for
participatory processes, complemented by IFC and MIGA transactions and very limited Bank lending.
Such a partnership is seen by all stakeholders in Thailand as the most effective means for the Bank Group
to help accelerate growth and reduce poverty. Thailand is also lookling to the Bank Group to be more
engaged in supporting region-wide initiatives for economic development, particularly for the Greater
Mekong Subregion, and to help facilitate the shanng of Thailand's development expenence with other
countries in the region and beyond. Going forward, therefore, the Bank Group's engagement in Thailand
will be limited and selective and comprised of two complementary levels:

• Monitoring and diagnostic overview of Thailand's key development challenges across all areas of the
national agenda. The purpose of this work is to stay abreast of economic and social developments,
fulfill the Bank's due diligence responsibilities, and engage with the Govemment and other
stakeholders analytically on the national agenda, including the broad range of competitiveness and
governance issues as well as the structural nature of poverty. This work will also provide the
Govemnment and Bank Group with a basis for identifying areas in which deeper support could be
beneficial-m line with the recommendations of the Bank's Middle-Income Countnes Task Force. 7

* 

In-depth implementation support in a few critical areas, as identified through the comprehensive
diagnostic overview and agreed with the Government. This implementation support (which will also
be a very valuable input into the broader monitoring and diagnostic work) will be provided through:

- Country Development Partnerships. These partnerships-with costs financed by the Government,
the Bank, and other donors (Box 6)-will be the cornerstone of the Bank's implementation
support to Thailand. Because of Bank resource constraints, there will be no more than 4-5 CDPs
ongoing in any one year, and these CDPs will be selected according to the selectivity critena

7 Middle Income Countries Task Force Report, SECM2001-204

-19-

outlined in para 43. It is important to have the flexibility to engage in up to 4-5 CDPs each year in
order to be able to initiate new CDPs in response to Government requests as existing CDPs are
coming to an end. In line with the Government's change in focus, the CDP program is evolving
from a primary focus on responding to the economic and financial crisis to addressing medium-
term structural issues that are part of the national agenda and cntical to sustainable poverty
reduction.

-

IFC and MIGA transactions and IBRD lending. CDP objectives will also be supported by IFC
and MIGA transactions, particularly for competitiveness. In addition, the Bank will use its
ongoing portfolio, and a limited amount of new lending that may be requested by the Government
in a few strategically important areas, to support the national agenda.

Box 6. Cost Sharing in the CDPs

The Bank's diagnostic and monitoring work does not involve financial contributions by the Govemment (some of the Monitors
benefit from trust fund support), but cost sharing with the Govemment is an integral part of the CDP approach This cost
sharing docs not involve direct financial contributions from the Government to the Bank Instead, each of the partners in a
CDP-the Government, Bank, and other donors-finances its own contributions to the partnership

Cost sharing measurement The Govemment's financial contnbution is measured by the direct costs related to the CDPs
Specifically, these costs capture the time of staff working on the CDPs-for example, the time of the counterparts working on
the CDP matrices and monitoring implementation progress-and other costs, such as the organization of workshops and
overhead The substantial costs of actual reform implementation, e.g. financing the cost of decentralizing government functions,
will be financed by the Government and are not included in this measurement methodology Using this approach, the
Government's own financial contribution to the current CDPs over the next two to three years is estimated to be US$4 8
million, or about one-quarter of the total partnership costs This constitutes over three times as much as the Bank's own
contributions to the CDPs, totaling US$1 5 million over the same period These contributions will be complemented by about
US$7 7 million from ASEM and other trust funds, as well as by significant financial support from other donors

B. 

ACHIEVING GREATER SELECTIVITY IN THE THAILAND COUNTRY PROGRAM

42. 
The Bank's program is becoming more focused and selective in a number of ways. First, the
Bank has decided not to engage in any stand-alone, ad hoc analytical and advisory work outside the
monitoring and diagnostic work and the implementation support through the CDPs. Second, the Bank's
support to CDPs will also become more focused on specific subcomponents. Third, new Bank lending is
expected to be limited to very few operations, and the existing portfolio of loan projects is expected to
decline to one project by FY05.

43. 
A set of explicit criteria will determine the areas in which thle Bank will provide
implementation support. These critena will guide country programming choices and determine exit from
current engagements as well as entry into new ones. The first set of criteria, which cover the necessary
conditions for Bank engagement, include:

* A link to critical policy reform areas. In the light of declining resource availability from the Bank,
linking Bank support to the country's key development pnorities is critical. Particular importance will
be given to ensuring a strong link with poverty reduction, especially in the Northeast, for any
intervention.

* Explhcit government ownership. The Bank will engage only in areas where there is an explicit request
and upfront agreement with the Government-both at the political and technical levels-as evidenced
by an exchange of letters of support and the scale of resources committed. To the general public,

-20-

Government commitment 
stakeholders.

is demonstrated by the CDP 

launches, which 

include all major

Bank Group's comparative advantage. Both across and within CDPs, the Bank will provide
implementation support only if it has a particular comparative advantage in technical skills, resources,
convening power, or ability to mobilize international expertise.

If these necessary conditions are met, the Bank will examine possible engagement through a second set of
criteria focusing on the potential impact of Bank involvement, which include:

• 

Existence of an outcomes-focused program. The Bank will engage in a particular area only if the
Government has developed a clear and specific program 
linked 
to outcomes. A detailed
implementation plan with clear accountabilities, with a particular 
focus on addressing 
the
Government's interagency coordination constraints, will help improve program results.

* Scale of development impact. Engagement will
be focused on areas in which it is possible to 
achieve significant development impact. The 
likelihood of impact will be determined by the 

realism of the implementation plan and partner 

commitment.

* Global and regional linkages. Positive
regiodthe 
regional 
spillovers and 
the connectlon 
to 
regional and global public goods will be 
important critena for Bank engagement. 

connection 

to 

44. 
Decisions on areas of involvement will be 
based on regular dialogue witht key counterparts. 
A number of decisions to increase the selectivity of 
the Bank's engagement in Thailand have recently 
been made (Box 7), and the Government, Bank 
Group, and other partners will hold six-monthly 
Country Review and Programming Discussions to 
review program progress and determine 
the 
prionty areas for Bank Group support in the light 
of the foregoing criteria.

Electvit 
in the 
i 
ExamplesofChoices

r 

a

The Bank has made 

several decisions 

to 

increase 

the

selectivity of its engagement

.

.

The Bank will engage only in up to 4-5 CDPs and up to
two new lending operations per year.

The Bank has refocused its engagement in the CDP for

Competitiveness because its scope was too broad and is

now focusing 
in a CDP context only on 
financial and corporate sector competitiveness

issues of

.

. With two current partnerships nearing completion (CDP-
Social Protcction and CDP-Financial and Corporate
Competitiveness), the Bank will phase out of these CDPs
by the end of FY04.
Some cross-cutting objectives are being addressed across
CDPs rather than through separate CDPs For example,
gender issues are being given particular attention in the
context of the CDPs on governance and public sector
reform, poverty analysis and monitoring, and social
protection rather than being considered for inclusion in a
separate CDP.

C. 

THE BANK'S COUNTRY PROGRAM FYO3-05

45. 
Thie Bank's country program for FY03-05 is summarized in Table 3 and includes diagnostic and
monitoring work, support through up to 4-5 CDPs, a limited amount of possible new lending, and
supervision of the ongoing portfolio. It will be complemented by selected IFC and MIGA transactions as
well as support from other partners.

-21-

Table 3. Country Program
FY04 

CEM/DPR
Monitor- Economic 
Monitor - Social 

Monitor- Environment
Monitor - Country Dialogue 
ROSC / CPAR / CFAA 
CDP-Financial & Corporate

Competitiveness

FY05

Monitor- Economic
Monitor - Social

Monitor - Country Dialogue
ROSC*

FY03 

CEM/DPR 

Monitor- Economic 

Monitor- Environment 
-Monitor - Country Dialogue 

CDP-Financial & Corporate 

Competitiveness 

CDP-Governance & Public Sector 
Reform 
X CDP-Poverty Analysis & 
a Monitoring 

CDP-Govemance & Public Sector 
Reform 
CDP-Poverty Analysis & 
Monitoring 

CDP-Governance & Public Sector
Reform
CDP-Poverty Analysis &
Monitoring

CDP-Social Protection 

CDP-Social Protection

____________________________ CDP-Other4 

Highways Management Project
(US$100 million)

E 

E rQ 

i; 
0 

Infrastructure-other (up to US$200
million)

CDP-Other#
CDP-Other#

Infrastructure-other (up to US$200
million)
Supervision of 3 ongoing loan
projects and 2 GEF/ODS projects

C 

t 
c0. 

e 

_ 

; 

v 

Supervision of 7 ongoing loan 
projects, I guarantee project, and 2 
projects
* The Government is also in the process of considenng a possible FSAP
# Other CDPs could include. Education, Knowledge Economy, Environment, or Infrastructure

Supervision of 5 ongoing loan 
projects and 2 GEF/ODS projects 

IGEF/ODS 

The Bank's Diagnostic Work

46. 
The Bank's monitoring and diagnostic role will be filled by the Monitor Series and by
occasional in-depth analytical reports, all done in collaboration with Thai counterparts. This work will
review progress in implementation of reforms and achievement of results across various development
areas, provide an analytical understanding of the coherence and consistency of the Government's ongoing
program and the Bank's existing implementation support, as well as identify gaps and potential areas for
future implementation support. Specifically, 
the Bank will prepare and publish several types of
"Monitors"-economic, social, environment, and country dialogue-to review progress in the relevant
area and to provide analytical and advisory services on a special topic often covering a core diagnostic
area. The content of the Monitors, including the special topics, will be based on close consultations with
Thai counterparts, and the work will be carned out in close collaboration with them. The Economic
Monitors, timed to match the Bank's biannual "Regional Briefs," will continue to focus on progress with
respect to growth, structural reform, and public sector reform and governance. Trade, decentralization,
logistics and pnvate provision of services could be among the special topics for this Monitor. Future
Social Monitors are expected to cover education, vulnerability, and gender. The Environment Monitor
will address solid and hazardous wastes, forestry, and biodiversity. The Bank will also publish the
Country Dialogue Monitor to review progress on the Thailand-Bank Group Partnership.

47. 
An in-depth CEM-type report plannedfor FY04 is expected to assess how Thailand can sustain
higher growth and ensure that the poor and the near-poor in rural areas, especially in the Northeast,
benefit more from that growth. In that context, it will examine ways of improving competitiveness

-22-

(building on past work) in order to sustain higher private investment, to benefit from the rapidly
expanding Chinese market and to compete with Chinese exports in the global marketplace. Analysis of
the factors contnbuting to rural poverty in general and to poverty in the Northeast, in particular, and
policies to overcome them are also expected to be part and parcel of this work.

48. 
Financial sector and corporate governance issues are also planned to be covered. Given the
importance of financial sector issues in Thailand, the Govemment has established a steering committee to
guide the work on a Financial Sector Assessment Program (FSAP) and Review of Standard and Codes
(ROSC). In preparation for the FSAP, the committee is planning ROSCs on corporate govemance,
supported by the Bank, and on data and on monetary and financial policy, supported by the IMF.

49. 
The Bank's program also focuses on "core diagnostic" requirements. A poverty assessment
was prepared and issued as a Social Monitor in 2001, and further analysis of poverty is being undertaken
in the context of the CDP for Poverty Analysis and Monitoring. A Public Expenditure Review was
undertaken in 1999, and its findings have been followed up on continually, most recently in the context of
the CDP for Govemance and Public Sector Reform. The latest Operational Procurement Review in 1999
concluded that the Govemment's procurement procedures were generally acceptable. Procurement
responsibilities have recently been transferred as part of the major restructuring of the Thai Govemment,
and the Bank is discussing with the Ministry of Finance what support might be needed and the
appropriate timing of both a Country Procurement Assessment Report and a Country Financial
Accountability Assessment. The work needed for a Country Environment Analysis is being undertaken as
part of the Environment Monitor series. Finally, with respect to gender mainstreaming, further analytical
work will be focused and undertaken only when it adds value to work being done by others and will be
included in the Social Monitor senes.

The Bank Group's Implementation Support-at the Country Level

50. 
Implementation support will be limited and selective and will build on the Bank's diagnostic
and monitoring work. It will be based on specific requests from the Govemment for support in areas
where the Bank can add value. As ongoing activities are completed and resources are freed up for new
programs, implementation support will evolve gradually toward an increased focus on medium-term
structural reform issues.

i) 

Human and Social Capital

51. 
The Bank has supported the Human and Social Capital agenda primarily in social protection but
is exploring options for deeper engagement in education in the light of its importance in the national
agenda. The Bank has not been asked for in-depth support in health, a critical area for achievement of the
MDGs, but it will undertake regional work on HIV/A1DS (para 57).

The Bank will complete its current partnership on social protection. To help reduce gaps in equity,
coverage, and efficiency in the Govemment's social protection programs, the Bank has supported the
CDP for Social Protection since 2001. The Bank is providing assistance in the overall coordination of
CDP activities, as well as technical assistance in selected areas of comparative advantage, including
pension reform modeling, financial sustainability of unemployment insurance, and social assistance
through enhanced program targeting and a risk and vulnerability assessment. Because the country's
progress on social protection reforms is advanced and the next phase of reform would require
considerable financial resources, the Bank's support to this CDP will phase out after FY04, but some
of the work on issues of risk and vulnerability may be continued as part of the CDP for Poverty
Analysis and Monitoring. The CDP is currently supported by ASEM trust funds, and its principal
donor partners are the Intemational Labor Organization and the Japan Intemational Cooperation

-23-

Agency (JICA). The Asian Development Bank (ADB), AusAID (Australia), UN Children's Fund
(UNICEF), and German Technical Cooperation (GTZ) also play important roles in providing
technical assistance and capacity building on specific components.

Education may become a priorityfor future implementation support. The Bank has been engaged in
the education sector primarily through lending operations, but there is significant scope for enhancing
the Bank's policy dialogue with the Government on broader sector reform issues. To advance that
dialogue, the Bank will also make greater use of supervision of its two active education projects. The
Government and Bank are currently exploring collaboration through a CDP for education, but a
decision on whether to proceed will be made only when the specific objectives and agenda are further
clarified. Thailand should also benefit from regional work the Bank will be undertaking on quality
assurance and accreditation in higher education. No future Bank lending has been requested by the
Government, but IFC has identified education (as well as health) as a priority area for investment.

ii) 

Competitiveness

52. 
In addition to addressing issues of competitiveness as part of its overall monitoring and diagnostic
work, the Bank will continue to provide implementation support to the Competitiveness pillar. However,
this support will become more focused on a few pnority areas to be identified with the Government and
based on the diagnostic work. While the Bank's support to financial and corporate sector competitiveness
will wind down in FY04, the Government has requested more support for infrastructure and for
ICT/knowledge economy.

* 

ThJe Bank will complete its current partnership for financial and corporate competitiveness. The
Bank is supporting the Government through two ongoing technical assistance loans and the CDP for
Financial and Corporate Competitiveness. Specifically, the Bank is helping to coordinate reform
efforts-including support from other partners-and is providing extensive technical assistance for:
setting a medium-term financial sector strategy with a focus on bank and non-bank services in urban
and rural areas; resolving non-performing loans through the Thai Asset Management Corporation and
through 
improvements to both in-court and out-of-court resolution regimes; promoting sound
intermediation and investment on a nsk-adjusted basis; enhancing the regulation and supervision of
financial 
institutions; enhancing market discipline, 
financial accountability, 
and corporate
governance; and improving the architecture and infrastructure of debt, equity, and derivative markets
to support the growth of banks and firms. In addition, the Bank will continue its dialogue and work
with the Office of Anti-Money Laundering. Work under this CDP is expected to be completed in its
current form in FY04. IFC will continue to focus on financial markets and corporate restructunng and
will also provide technical assistance on capital market development as well as investments in the
banking sector and corporate restructunng. The IMF is assisting the Bank of Thailand with monetary
and banking supervision matters. This CDP is currently supported by PEHRD (Miyazawa program)
and ASEM trust funds. Other active partners are the ADB, AusAid, GTZ, and Kenan Institute Asia.

* Thle Bank will furthier consolidate its support for infrastructure development. The Government has
requested continuing Bank support through a new Highways Management Project focused on road
sector commercialization through private participation in infrastructure management, modermization
of the Department of Highways operations, preservation of road assets, and improvement of
competition and transparency in the awarding of contracts through the use of e-procurement The
project will help address the backlog of investment requirements in the sector and places particular
emphasis on underdeveloped geographic areas such as the Northeast as well as on roads that will help
to facilitate GMS and broader regional integration. The Government has also indicated that given the
investment-intensiveness of infrastructure development, it may consider additional IBRD lending on
a selective case-by-case basis and would welcome IFC and MIGA support for viable private sector

-24-

investments 
in infrastructure. 
In addition, 
the Government is considering complementing 
the
investment lending support with a CDP-either for the transport sector or infrastructure development
more broadly-focused on modermizing the regulatory regime, enhancing private sector participation,
building 
institutional capacity, and strengthening 
the network from a regional development
perspective. ADB and the Japanese Bank for International Cooperation (JBIC) have substantial
ongoing infrastructure projects, and JBIC plans to provide further support in the coming years. In
addition, AusAid and the French government are supporting regulatory reform in the aviation and
water sectors, respectively.

The Government has requested Bank support for ICT. The Bank has supported a number of
innovative activities in support of rural access to ICT as well as a national ICT assessment, and in the
coming year, will be assisting with improvement of governance for ICT. Should this be successful, a
CDP may be developed which would focus on deepening the impact of ICT on other core areas of the
knowledge economy-education and the business environment. WBI will contribute by building
peer-to-peer exchange of expenence between Thailand and countries that have been successful in
leveraging ICT for development. Building on telecommunications sector reform, aimed at further
promoting the private provision of services, IFC plans to focus on direct investments in information
technology and telecommunications.

iii) 

Poverty and Inequality

53. 
The Government has requested very targeted Bank support to strengthen the analytical basis
for implementing ant effective national poverty reduction strategy. The CDP for Poverty Analysis and
Monitoring, launched in May 2002, focuses on: developing a poverty database and national poverty map;
improving measurement and analysis of poverty and vulnerability; fine-tuning Thailand's poverty
reduction strategy for selective public actions with high poverty reduction impact; and strengthening
monitoring and evaluation. This CDP will help Thailand translate the broad goals of its existing poverty
reduction strategy into specific, quantifiable, gender-sensitive, and time-bound targets, including MDG+
targets; improve the targeting of interventions; and enhance the overall understanding of the dynamics of
poverty and inequality in Thailand. It is also expected to support initiatives for the development of poorer
border provinces in Thailand and some of its neighbors. Major partners in this CDP, supported by an
ASEM trust fund, are the ADB, which is contnbuting through a participatory poverty assessment, and the
UN Development Program (UNDP), which is helping to track progress on the MDGs. Other donors
include UNICEF and the UN Development Fund for Women (UJNIFEM). The Bank's involvement in this
CDP is expected to continue through FY05.

54. 
The Bank will continue to provide some support for promoting balanced regional development
in Thailand. Through the SIP, the Bank will continue to provide support for the Regional Urban
Development Fund which aims to improve basic infrastructure facilities and services and create
employment in strategically important urban centers outside Bangkok, while at the same time enhancing
municipality capabilities relating to administration, investment planning, project implementation, and
financing. The Bank will also be assessing with the Government the expenence of the very successful
Social Investment Fund in supporting community initiatives in both rural and urban areas and how that
expenence can be of benefit to other programs in Thailand and shared with other countnes. The
Government has not requested any further lending for urban or rural development, but rural development,
especially in the Northeast, will be a key focus of future diagnostic work (para 47).

iv) 

Environment and Natural Resources

55. 
The Bank may deepen its engagement on the environiment. The Bank has been engaged with the
Government on environment and natural resources issues predominantly through the Monitor series and

-25-

two ongoing Global Environment Facility and Montreal Protocol operations. With the emergence of
environment and natural resources as a key pillar of the national agenda and the recent creation of a new
Ministry of Natural Resources and Environment, an opportunity exists to deepen the Bank's policy
dialogue with the Government, including on issues that affect the GMS as a whole. The Government and
Bank are exploring possibilities for deeper collaboration, including a CDP for the Environment for FY04.
The U.S. Asia Environmental Partnership and JBIC have also expressed interest in working together in
this area, and the former has entered into a memorandum of understanding with the Bank through the U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency.

v) 

Governance

56. 
The Bank will continue to support governance reform given its critical importance to all pillars
of the national agenda. Building on the PSRL of 1999, the Bank has continued its partnership with the
Government through the CDP for Governance and Public Sector Reform, launched in 2002. This
partnership currently covers five areas-expenditure management; revenue management; civil service
reform; decentralization; and accountability and transparency. Given the significant progress in the first
three areas, the Bank's engagement is expected to shift to the latter two by FY04. The Bank's engagement
will comprise policy dialogue and mobilization of technical assistance for capacity building for local
governments and formulation of anti-corruption strategies for national and local agencies as well as
support to the Government and other organizations in buildmg their capacity to monitor and evaluate
public service delivery. Governance is a WBI priority in Thailand, and WBI will provide tailored support
on accountability, transparency, and decentralization issues by strengthening parliamentary oversight and
fostenng information flow to rural areas and stakeholders outside government through innovative
approaches such as development of ICT kiosks and community radio networks. This CDP is supported by
an ASEM trust fund, and its other prncipal donors include: AusAID, which is actively involved in
expenditure management; the ADB, which is supporting the National Counter-Corruption Commission;
and UNDP, which has been active in the areas of decentralization and accountability and transparency,
including promotion of civil society participation. The Bank has no lending operations in this area and
does not have plans for new lending over the next few years.

The Bank Group's Implementation Support-at the Regional Level

57. 
The Bank will complement its development partnership with Thailand with work on regional
issues that will be of benefit to Thailand as well as other countries in the region. The Bank is already
involved with the Mekong River Commission (MRC) in supporting the Water Utilization Program through
a GEF grant and is considering deepening its support for this program as well as for the MRC's Basin
Development Program. The Bank is also considering support for a number of activities under the GMS
Program, including: supporting Flood Control and Water Resources Programs, encouraging power trade
through implementation of the power trade agreement, supporting infrastructure development of benefit
to the GMS as a whole, and promoting private sector development. The Bank will also support the GMS
human development program, including contributions to work on the major cross-border problem of
HIV/AIDS. In this context, the Bank's continued direct engagement with Thailand through monitorng
and diagnostic work as well as selective implementation support will help make the Bank a more effective
supporter of regional initiatives.

58. 
The Bank will also help share Thailand's development experience with others in the region. To
promote further trilateral cooperation, the Bank will facilitate knowledge sharng and learming across
countries, especially with Cambodia and Lao PDR, which face serious capacity constraints. For example,
the Bank will help disseminate lessons from Thailand's very successful social investment fund and land
titling programs (both supported by the Bank, the latter for more than 20 years) and arrange for Thai
experts on these programs to provide advice for similar programs in Cambodia and Lao PDR. WBI will

-26-

play a central role in facilitating this knowledge shanng, which will also be of broader benefit to the Bank
as a knowledge creating and sharng institution.

WBI's Approach and Engagement

59. 
Given that the Bank's support to Thailand is principally a knowledge-sharing partnership with
a strong capacity building element, the role of WBI is very important. Within the context of WBI's
institutional strategy to focus on one middle-income and one low-income country per region, Thailand
will be a priority country for WBI over the next few years. WBI's principal role will be to provide access
to international best practice and to facilitate knowledge sharng and dialogue on cntical development
issues, both within Thailand and with other countries (Annex B 12). Support will be delivered through two
channels: first, tailored knowledge and information sharing on key development priorities and second,
existing programs and courses, including those of the Global Development Learning Network (GDLN).
Emphasis will go to providing tailored support, through innovative approaches, in partnership with local
institutions. These interventions will be targeted at two thematic areas: governance and the knowledge
economy/ICT (paras 52 and 56).

60. 
To complement thte Bank's implementation support for thze other pillars of the national agenda,
WBI will contribute its existing program and course offerings. GDLN will play an increasing role in the
delivery of these programs, and in light of the local capacity challenge, establishment of distance learming
networks within Thailand will be explored. The specifics of the WBI program will be discussed and fine-
tuned in the context of the Country Review and Programming Discussions. In these programming
discussions, WBI will also further explore options for enhancing facilitating knowledge sharing of
Thailand's development experiences with other countnes in the region.

Summary of Bank Program FY03-05

61. 
The current proposal for the Thiailand-Bank Group Partnership presents thle base case for
engagement. The base case balances Government demand for Bank services with what the Bank is able
to provide in terms of its own resources (Table 3). It is based on a Bank administrative budget for FY03
that is 35 percent less than in FY00 and involves a further decline of 15 percent for FY04 and FY05. In
the case of the CDPs, these resources are complemented by the Government's own resources (cash and
in-kind) as well as other trust fund support (and a small amount of support from the Small Grants
Program), as descnbed in Box 6. As stated earlier, the Bank program will be comprised of up to 4-5
CDPs a year as well as diagnostic and monitoring work. In addition, one new project totaling $100
million for Highways Management is being proposed for FY03. In FY04 and FY05, Bank lending will
not exceed two projects and $200 million each year, and these projects are also expected to focus on
infrastructure development. There is only a base case scenario for the Bank's partnership with Thailand.
If the Government does not sustain its commitment to the CDPs in terms of reform ownership and
resource contributions, the Bank's engagement would be scaled down to only diagnostic and monitoring
work and supervision of the remaining project portfolio. If circumstances change and the Government
requests additional financial support beyond the numbers indicated in the base case scenario, the Bank
would consider such a request in the context of a revised country strategy.

62. 
Much of the Bank's program will continue to be managed out of the decentralized country
office in Bangkok. Going forward, the office will enhance its information sharing activities, including
more dissemination of reports and other information in Thai and the development of a Thai-language
website. The office now also acts as a regional hub supporting Bank programs in Cambodia, Lao PDR,
Malaysia, and Mongolia. This should enable it to provide enhanced support for regional activities,
particularly those associated with the Greater Mekong Subregion.

-27-

D. 

IFC AND MIGA PROGRAMS FYO3-05

IFC's Approach and Engagement

63. 
IFC's country strategy and priorities in Thailand will complement the Bank's assistance
program, particularly in supporting the competitiveness pillar of the national agenda. In the near term,
IFC will focus predominantly on financial markets and support the corporate restructuring process. IFC's
comparative advantage lies in its wide range of corporate finance capabilities and may be unique in
Thailand in its ability to offer debt, equity and AAA-rated credit enhancement in both baht and local
currency. IFC can deploy these capabilities either on its own account or in concert with local or
international financial institutions. In capital markets, IFC intends to provide assistance through advisory
work on developing bond markets and derivatives and on the use of credit enhancement for local bond
issues. In the banking sector, IFC intends to invest in tier 1 & 2 capital of selected banks and provide
partial guarantees and structured products to strengthen their balance sheets and improve 
their
profitability. These investments in the banking sector clearly complement Bank sector reform objectives
as spelled out 
in the CDP-Financial and Corporate Competitiveness. 
Investments 
in corporate
restructuring will also benefit from and contribute to improved bankruptcy and corporate law reform.

64. 
Over the medium term, IFC intends to support competitive, restructured companies by
providing equity support and consolidating their long term liabilities. For example, IFC recently worked
closely with the local affiliate of an international investment bank to guarantee partially a long-term local
currency bond issued by a large Thai telecoms company. This facilitated the financial restructuring of the
company's debt while also setting a new matunty standard for the local currency bond market. Deepening
the equity market is a particular concern for investors in smaller, privately-held companies because taking
the company public can provide a market for the investors to sell their shares. In the long term, IFC
intends to focus on direct investment in areas of competitiveness in infrastructure and information
technology. A key prionty for IFC will be private investment in health, education, agribusiness and
SMEs, some of which is expected to benefit from the diagnostic work of the Bank and related CDPs.

65. 
IFC has increased its local presence. The IFC now has more investment officers in Bangkok
with expertise in its priority sectors, such as financial markets, infrastructure, power, health, education,
and investment restructuring. The regional familiarity of IFC's staff should permit successful investment
approaches used in neighboring markets to be adapted to the Thai context, and make rFC a valuable
partner for intra-regional investments. IFC's client responsiveness will also be enhanced by an expanded
Bangkok-based legal team as well as greater specialization in transaction processing. The local IFC team
will focus more on needs identification and initial investment structurng, which should enhance client
satisfaction and, ultimately, sustainability.

MIGA's Approach and Engagement

66. 
In the near term, MIGA expects demand for guarantees within Thailand to remain low, with
some potential opportunities to help independent power producers, where sponsors may be interested in
Breach of Contract coverage. MIGA will therefore emphasize technical and advisory services to the
Board of Investments and the Thai Export-Import Bank, with a focus on attracting foreign investments
into Thailand, and assisting Thai investors looking to invest in the region. MIGA will also continue to
provide advisory services to Thai EXIM to help create and launch their own political risk insurance (PRI)
product, and MIGA hopes to co-insure or re-insure Thai EXIM once its product is launched. MIGA will
also continue its advisory work with BOI and its training of BOI staff on on-line resources as well as co-
marketing of MIGA and BOI services to Thai investors looking to invest abroad.

E. 

PARTNERSHIPS

-28-

67. 

Donor activity is declining and increasintgly selective. Donors are now focusing on providing

policy advice, technical assistance, and capacity building, with financial resource transfers playing much
less of a role. They are also becoming more selective, and their activities are better coordinated, more
complementary, and aligned around a set of common goals. The CDPs are recognized by Thailand and
the donor community as providing a good platform for coordinating reform efforts among all partners. In
support of the CDP objectives, donors are lead partners with the Govemment in some specific CDP
components (Box 8).

Box 8. Summary of Donor Activities and Support to CDPs

United Nations
The United Nations (UN) is finalizing the United Nations Development Assistance Framework (UNDAF) for 2002-2006,
due to be published in late 2002 The UNDAF, which adheres to the Ninth Plan, focuses activities for the UN family and
other donors around six central themes: (i) poverty reduction, (n) social protection and social development, (Iii) governance,
(iv) international competitiveness, (v) human security, (vi) environmental management The Bank has been actively involved
in the UNDAF preparation, the Bank's program in Thailand is very supportive of the UNDAF, and several UN agencies are
partners in the CDPs ILO, for example, is a major partner in the CDP for Social Protection, working on unemployment
insurance and occupational safety and health. UNDP is one of the leading donors on the CDP for Poverty Analysis and
Monitoring, focusing specifically on tracking Thailand's progress on the Millennium Development Goals and in the CDPfor
Governance and Public Sector Reforni, working on decentralization and promoting good governance.

Asian Development Bank (ADB)
The ADB issued its Country Strategy and Program Update for 2002-2004 
in July 2001 
Its program focuses on seven
thematic priorities 
economic growth, human development, gender development, good governance, private sector
development, environmental protection, and regional cooperation. The ADB is ainvolved in the CDP for Financial and
Corporate Conipetitiveness, where it is the lead donor partner on governance of specialized financial institutions and pension
reform The ADB is also one of the main partners in the CDP for Governance/Public Sector Reform, supporting anti-
corruption efforts particularly by providing continuing assistance to the National Counter-Corruption Commission The ADB
participates in the CDP-Poverty Analysis and Monitoring through the participatory poverty assessment Going forward ADB
expects its program in Thailand to focus primarily on nonlending activities, complemented by support for private sector
transactions

Thailand completed its 34-month stand-by arrangement with the Fund in June 2000 and began scheduled repayments in late
2000 The Fund continues to be engaged in the CDP for Financial anid Corporate Competitiveness on supervision and
monetary policy issues.

IMF

Bilateral donors
Japan JBIC is placing greater importance on knowledge assistance, including capacity building and policy and institutional
improvements as a complement to its lending program which is expected to continue to focus primarily on infrastructure and
total about $400 million per year. JICA, which is focusing on human resource development, capacity building, and ICT in
Thailand, is an active partner in several CDPs including the CDPfor Social Protection where it is working on occupational
safety and health and unemployment insurance

Australia. AusAID's focus in Thailand is on governance, economic and financial reform, and social impacts of the crisis
AusAID is a major partner in the CDP-Governance/Public Sector Reform, supporting expenditure management reforms,
especially those undertaken at the Bureau of the Budget In the CDPfor Fiancial and Corporate Conipetitiveness, AusAid
and the World Bank have a joint venture in support of the Mimstry of Financc to reform state-owned financial institutions
Australia also provides technical assistance and capacity building within the CDPfor Social Protection

Germany. GTZ is actively involved in the CDPfor Social Protection, funding technical assistance for vocational guidance
and employment services. In the CDPfor Financial Corporate Competitiveness, GTZ is assisting the Bank for Agriculture
and Agriculture Cooperatives Going forward, GTZ will focus its work on two key focal areas of economic reform: the
competitiveness of SMEs and industrial environmental management

U.S. The Kenan Institute is working on technology and industrial issues, including industrial networks and clusters and
science and technology as well as capacity building in social protection In support of the CDPfor Financial and Corporate
Competitiveness, the Kenan Institute conducts programs in bank training, consulting services for SMEs, and leadership
development, and the American Bankruptcy Institute is supporting the Bankruptcy Court Thc US AEP is also supporting a
number of environmental initiatives

-29-

F. 

RESULTS Focus AND COUNTRY PROGRAM MONITORING

68. 
To enhance the overall effectiveness of the country program, the Bank will pilot a more
results-focused approach for the CDPs. This approach, detailed in Annex B16, has three overall
objectives: 
(a) to shift monitoring of progress from inputs and outputs to outcomes and impacts,
accounting for Government contnbutions as well as those of the Bank and other partners; (b) to improve
the existing CDP Development and Partnership Matrnces so that they can be used as a tool for enhanced
results-based management; and (c) to aggregate outcomes and impact across the different CDPs so as to
evaluate overall program results in light of the national agenda, specific goals established by the Ninth
Plan, and the MDGs/MDG+ goals. A preliminary "country scorecard" which summarizes how partner
inputs and jointly prepared outputs contribute to country outcomes and impact across the CDPs is shown
below (Table 4). This scorecard and the individual CDP results summarnes in Annex B16 are initial
attempts to sharpen the country program's results focus and will be further developed as the country
program progresses.

Table 4. Thailand Country Scorecard

CDP-FC

CDP-SP 
I 
CDP-PAM 
MDG+ - Achieving at the National-level (aggregate)
Achieving in Northeast provinces and among vulnerable population sub-groups
Intermediate - Reducing poverty inc dence to less than 12 percent by 2006
Desired 
Desired 
Desired Enhancing the
Enhancing social insurance 
Enhancing opportunities for 
competitiveness of financial
for all age groups 
the poor 
institutions and firms
Intermediate Enhancing 
Intermediate. Implementing 
Intermediate
coverage and efficiency of 
the poverty reduction 
Strengthening the financial
social assistance programs, 
strategy, Targeting 
sector strategy and
Broadening employment 
interventions to reduce 
structure, Enhancing
services, Institutionalizing 
regional inequality, 
market discipline,
the unemployment 
Standardizing techniques 
supervision and regulation,
insurance scheme, 
for analyzing poverty, 
Developing capital markets,
Improving safety in work 
inequality and 
Improving the speed and
places, and 
vulnerability, and a 
quality of corporate
Institutionalizing a viable 
Functioning monitoring and 
restructuring, enhancing
pension system 
evaluation system 
legal framework

Preparing policy notes on 
relevant topics, Developing 
implementation mechanism 
for intermediate outcomes, 
Over 200 staff trained in 
new skills, Publishing 
annual monitoring note 

Prepanng analytical
reports, Conducting
capacity building
workshops, Implementing
over fifty discrete activities
with ten different line
agencies, Consulting with
the pnvate sector

Preparing poverty map and 
panel socio-economic 
survey, Developing 
guidelines for poverty 
measurement, Establishing 
poverty monitoring and 
evaluation system, and 
Building capacity and 
training over 100 staff,
Publish annual monitoring
note
Bank 
= 0 25 
Govemment = 0 95 
Trust Funds = 2 3 

Impacts (by 
2015) 

Outcomes (by 
2006, based on 
National 
Agenda) 

Outputs (joint 
products of 
partners) 

CDP-GPS 

Desired 
A responsive public sector 
that is efficient and 
accountable 
Intermediate 
Enacting new laws to 
reform public 
administration and finance, 
Operating fiscal 
decentralization 
mechanism, Adding skills 
in central and local 
agencies, and Improving 
Monitonng and Evaluation 
system
Prepanng policy notes on 
relevant topics, Developing 
public service agreements, 
Building local capacity and 
training over 200 staff in 
new skills, Publishing 
monitoring note; 
Developing pubiic sector 
monitoring and evaluation 
system 

= 05 

Inputs (FY03- 
05) 
US$ million 

Bank 
Govemment = 1 2 
Trust Funds = 1 5 

Bank 
= 0 24 
Government = 0 55 
Trust Funds = 1 5 

Bank 
= 0 5
Govemment
Cash = 1 05
In Kind = 1 0
Others
Trust Funds = 2 4
Loan 
= 3 0
GPS - Govemance and Public Sector Reform, SP-Social Protection, PAM - Poverty Analysis and Monitonng, FC - Financial and
Corporate Competitiveness

69. 
The Government, Bank, and other stakeholders will hold regular twice-yearly Country
Programming and Review Meetings to discuss progress on thte national agenda. The meeting will
review progress on the Bank's overall program in Thailand, identify the key gaps and areas where further
work is needed, and help the Bank decide on where to redirect its efforts and resources. An enhanced

-30-

Country Dialogue Monitor will serve as the basis of discussion. Specifically, the Monitor will give a brief
assessment of country progress on the national agenda-based on the Bank's overall diagnostic work-
and summarize the progress achieved through the CDPs (based on the enhanced results summaries of
each of the CDPs and the overall country scorecard) and ongoing lending activities.

G. 

BANK GROUP RISK MANAGEMENT

70. 
Country risks. The country risk factors in Thailand are common to many Bank Group programs
and pertain in particular to political and economic risks. The key political risk is that the Government will
not remain committed to difficult reforms, although it has made progress in migrating from its short-term
post-election reform program to a medium-term structural reform program. Another nsk is that after
October 2002-the five-year anniversary of the Constitution, marking the first opportunity for
constitutional amendments-potential amendments could weaken the important role of the Constitution
as a catalyst of the reform process, although this risk is viewed as relatively small. The key economic
risks, highlighted in Section V, include slow progress on fiscal consolidation, financial and corporate
sector restructuring, and further destabilization of the global economic environment.

71. 
Financial risks. In the context of modest country political and economic risk, the financial risks
to the Bank are limited. In addition, Thailand is currently in the process of prepaying Bank and other
multilateral debt and total Bank exposure has declined from $3.2 billion in 2001 to an estimated $2.6
billion by the end of calendar year 2002. Overall, with modest country risk, pre-payment of Bank loans,
and limited new borrowing envisaged over the country program cycle, the financial risk Thailand poses to
the Bank is anticipated to further decrease significantly.

72. 
Bantk institutional risk. In the context of these country and financial risks, the Bank must manage
a set of specific institutional risks, which in particular include:

* Strategic effectiveness. With declining Bank resource availability for Thailand, there are risks that the
Bank's program is insufficiently focused on the highest return interventions or that the Bank would
miss opportunities to support key reform efforts and/or would exit from its engagements prematurely.
These risks will be mitigated in the following ways: 
first, the Bank will channel its support through
the CDPs, which are designed to focus on the highest prionties. Second, the Government and Bank
will regularly review the strategic effectiveness of the Bank's support in the twice-yearly Country
Programming and Review Discussions. Third, through investing in its diagnostic and monitonng work
and selectively supporting the Government through CDPs, the Bank will be prepared to respond to any
potential new crisis in a timely and cost-effective way.

* The CDP approach and reputational risk. As the CDPs depend on the contributions of all partners, the
Bank has little direct leverage over final outcomes. Therefore, if progress under a CDP is insufficient
the Bank's reputation might be put at risk. While the CDP approach may be riskier than a traditional
analytical and advisory approach, it also has significantly higher potential returns. To mitigate these
reputational risks, the Bank will conduct upfront due-diligence on choosing the appropriate partners
for a CDP; it will closely monitor and review progress of the CDPs-in the context of its results
management framework; and, if key progress benchmarks are not met, the Bank will consider
disengaging from a partnership.

* Operational effectiveness. The Bank's successful engagement in its new business model in Thailand
requires appropriate staff skills and incentives and sufficient human and financial resources from the
Government, Bank, and other partners. Adequate trust fund resources are also critical for success.
Finally, the country program's effectiveness depends on a decentralized country office, to enable close

-31-

monitoring and management of the partnerships and ensure knowledge shanng across countnes in the
region. The Bank's risk mitigation includes in particular its commitment not to engage in in-depth
implementation support unless the right financial and human resources preconditions at the Bank and
all its partners are met. In addition, the role of the Bank's Bangkok office as a regional hub places it
in a very good position to enable knowledge sharing and learnig across projects and countries in the
region-a key objective of the overall Thailand-Bank Group partnership.

V. 

CONCLUDING REMARKS

73. 
Thailand has made signifcant progress since the economic andfinancial crisis of 1997-98.
However, 
the recovery remains fragile, and medium-term prospects for accelerating growth and
addressing Thailand's paramount challenges of poverty and inequality will depend on Thailand's ability
to successfully address underlying structural reforms. 
In this context, the Government and other
stakeholders would like the Bank Group to remain engaged in Thailand. However, there is a clear
consensus that the relationship needs to evolve further from a borrower-lender relationship to a real
development partnership. Thus, the Thailand-World Bank Group Partnership for Development reflects a
continuing but limited and selective engagement between Thailand and the Bank Group for the penod
FY03-05 through knowledge sharing and policy advice, complemented by IFC and MIGA transactions
and very limited Bank lending. Through this engagement, the Bank can also help share Thailand's
development experience with other countries and provide more effective support to development in the
Greater Mekong Subregion as a whole.

Washington DC
January 22, 2003

Thailand at a glance

11/11/2002

East 
Lower-
Asia & middle-
Pacific 
income 

POVERTY and SOCIAL 

Thailand 

Development dlamond'

2001
Populabon, mid-year (millions) 
GNI per capita (Atlas method, US$) 
GNI (Atlas method, USS billions) 

61 2 
1,930 
118 4 

1,826 
900 
1,649 

2,164 
1,240
2,677

Life expectancy

Average annual arowth, 1995-01

Populabon (%) 
Labor force (%) 

0 7 
1 2 

1 1 
1 3 

10 
12 

N 
GNi 

G
Gross

pe 

pnmary

Most recent estimate (latest year available. 1995-01) 

capita 

enrollment

Poverty (% of population below national poverty line) 
Urban populabon (% of total population) 
Life expectancy at birth (years) 
Infant mortality (per 1,000 lve births) 
Child malnutntion (% of children under 5) 
Access to an improved water source (% of population) 
Illiteracy (% ofpopulation age 15+) 
Gross pnmary enrollment (%of school-age population)# 
Male # 
Female# 

13
20 
69 
28 
18 
80 
4 
104 
105 
103 

37 
69 
36 
12 
74 
14 
107 
106 
108 

46
69
33
11 
80
15
107 
107 
107

Access to improved water source

-

haland
Lower-middle-income group

-- 

.

KEY ECONOMIC RATIOS and LONG-TERM TRENDS
1981 

1991 

2000 

2001

Economic ratlos*

GDP (USS billions) 

34 8 
29 7 
23 8 
23 4 
22 3 

98 2 
42 8 
36 0 
36 3 
35 1 

120 7 
22 7 
67 1 
31 4 
30 1 

114 7
23 0 
66 3
301
28 7

Gross domestc investment/GDP 
Exports of goods and services/GDP 
Gross domestc savings/GDP 
Gross nabonal savings/GDP 

Trade

Current account balance/GDP 
Interest payments/GDP 
Total debt/GDP 
Total debt servicelexports 
Present value of debt/GDP 
Present value of debt/exports 

-7 4 
2=0 
31 1 
20 3 

-7 7 
18 
384 
13 0 

7 7 
31 
660 
15 5 
63 4
89 0

4 
30X
588 
20 8

Domestc 

Investment

savigs 

Indebtedness

1981-91 

1991-01 

2000 

2001 

2001-05

(average annual growth)
GDP 
GDP per capita 
Exports of goods and services 

8 2 
6 5 
15 5 

3 2 
2 4 
8 5 

4 6 
3 8 
17 6 

18 
0 9 
-4 2 

35 
1 8 
3 0

Thailand
Lower-middle-incorne group

STRUCTURE of the ECONOMY

1981 

1991 

2000 

2001 

Growth of Investment and GDP (%)
20

(% of GDP) 
Agriculture 
Industry 
Manufactunng 
Services 

214 
301 
22 6 
48 5 

12 6 
38 7 
28 2 
48 7 

10 3 
40 5 
32 0 
49 3 

10 2
40 0
321 
49 4 

1-20+ 

53 

/ so 

00 

a1

[40

Pnvate consumption 
General govemment consumption 
Imports of goods and services 

63 8 
128 
301 

54 5 
92 
42 5 

57 1 
114 
58 4 

58 3 
116 
60 2

.0o

- GDI 

OGDP

1981-91 

1991-01 

2000 

2001 

Growth of exports and imports (%)

(average annual growth)
Agnculture 
Industry 
Manutfactunng 
Services 

3 9 
10 9 
10 7 
7 9 

19 
4 5 
5 8 
3 1 

49 
5 2
6 0
4 ° 

309A

o/ 00 

I

Private consumpton 
General govemment consumption 
Gross domestc investment 
Imports of goods and services 

6 9 
3 8 
116 
14 1 

3 5 
4 6 
-60 
31 

6 1 
2 6 
109 
27 3 

0 3
1 6 
06 
-8 3

-30

-Exports 

Z 

Iniports

Note 2001 data are preliminary eshmates

The diamonds show four key indicators in the country (in bold) compared vwth its income-group average if data are missing, the diamond will
be incomplete
# Education figures subject to revision when updated data available in 2003

Thailand

PRICES and GOVERNMENT FINANCE

1981 

1991 

2000 

2001 

Inflation (%)

Domestlc prices
(% change) 
Consumer pnces 
Implicit GDP deflator 

10

126 
84 

57 
5 7 

1 6 
1 2 

17 7
2 2

Government rinance 
(% of GOP, includes current grants) 
Current revenue 
Current budget balance 
Overall surplus/deficit 

0 

o 

m 

0

go 

97 

Oa V 

00 

01

14 9 
0 6 
-3 5 

18 7 
7 8 
4 5 

15 5 
1 6 
-2 9 

15 2 
1 3 

s

-

GDP deflator 

^ CPI

-4 8

TRADE

1981 

1991 

2000 

2001 

Export and Import levels (USS mill)

(US$ mtlllons)

Total exports (fob) 
Rice 
Rubber 

6,902 
1,208 
497 

28,330 
1,199 
983 

67,889 
1,642 
1,525 

63,190 
1.585 
1,325 

so,ooo

70000.
50.5* 

Manufactures 

21,040 

59,673 

55,532 x 

,0* 

Total imports (cif) 
Food 
Fuel and energy 
Capital goods 

9,933 
338 
2,984 

37,576 
1,863 
3,435 
15,107 

62,181 
2,003 
6,834 
28,991 

61.847 
2,067 
7,130 
29,457

40.000
20 DOO
10iO.O

bi 

93 

G7 

93 

D0 

00 

0

Export pnce index (1988=100) 
Import pnce index (1988=100) 
Terms of trade (1988=100) 

100 0 
92 8 
107 8 

94 5
901 
104 7

aExports 

* Imports

BALANCE of PAYMENTS

1981 

1991 

2000 

2001 

Current account balance to GDP (%)

(US$ mllions)

Exports of goods and services 
Imports of goods and services 
Resource balance 

8,513 
10,750 
-2,236 

35,504 
42,261 
-6,757 

81,758 
71,642 
10,116 

76,215 
69,216
6,999 

15

10

Net income 
Net current transfers 

-503 
169 

-1,076 
261 

-1,373 
585 

-1,357 
600

5

Current account balance 

-2,569 

-7,572 

9,328 

6,242 

1 

99 

00 

01

Financing items (net) 
Changes in net reserves 

2,613 
-43 

12,190 
4,618 

-10,945 
1,617 

-4,925
-1,317 

-10

Memo:
Reserves including gold (USS millions) 
Conversion rate (DEC, local/US$) 

2,726 
21 8 

18,416 
255 

32,661 
40 6 

33,048
44 5

EXTERNAL DEBT and RESOURCE FLOWS

1981 

1991 

2000 

2001 

Composiaton of 2001 debt (USS mill)

(USS mllions)

Total debtoutstanding and disbursed 
IBRD 
IDA 

10,852 
936 
51 

37,703 
2,420 
108 

79,695 
2,940 
90 

67,133 
2,998 
86 

A 

B 
C
20s8 se 1681

G 

13223 

D

Total debt service 
IBRD 
IDA 

1,875 
89 
3 

4,898 
395 
2 

14,015 
360 
4 

20,720
449
4 

__ 

870 E

Composition of net resource flows
Official grants 
Official creditors 
Pnvate creditors 
Foreign direct investment 
Portfolio equity 

77 
645 
951 
291 
0 

154 
159 
2,939 
2,014 
41 

38
491 
-5,436 
3,366 
1,044 

-283
-7,179

F

32925

World Bank program
Commitments 
Disbursements 
Pnncipal repayments 
Net flows 
Interest payments 
Net transfers 

0 
314 
31 
283 
61 
222 

40 
162 
210 
-48 
187 
-235 

0 
456 
185 
272 
179 
93 

0 
365 
263 
102
190
-88

A -IBRD 
-IDA 
C-IMF 

E - ilateralri
F -Pnvate
0- Short-term

DG-Ohermuiateral 

Development Economics

Annex B2 - Thailand
Selected Indicators* of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management

As of 11/04/2002

Indicator 

Portfolio Assessment
Number of Projects Under Implementation a 
Average Implementation Period (years) b 

Percent of Problem Projects by Number a, c 

Percent of Problem Projects by Amount a, c 
Percent of Projects at Risk by Number a, d 
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount a, d 
Disbursement Ratio ( percent) e 
Portfolio Management
CPPR during the year (yes/no) 
Supervision Resources (total US$) 
Average Supervision (US$/project)' 

2000 

13 
3.6 

0.0 

0 0 
0.0 
0.0 
25.4 

2001 

13 
4.3 

0.0 

0.0 
7 1 
9.7 
26.2 

2002 

12 
4 8 

9.1 

1.8 
9.1 
1.8 
36.9 

2003

8
4.8

10.0

1.9
10.0
1.9
12 8

no 
935,000 
71,923 

no 
582,000 
44,769 

no 
445,000 
37,083 

no
384,000 9
48,000

Memorandum Item 
Proj Eval by OED by Number 
Proj Eval by OED by Amt (US$ millions) 
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Number 
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt 

Since FY 80 

Last Five FYs

88 
5,993.7 
11.4 
5.9 

10
1,865.9
0.0
0.0

a. As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY), plus one
guarantee project.
b. Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio.
c. Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) and/or implementation progress (IP).
d. As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
e. Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the
beginning of the year: Investment projects only. FY03 figure is disbursement ratio as of 9/30/2002.
f. The supervision intensity has included the regular lending plus the guarantee project (excluding GEF and MP
projects). It has also excluded the resources spent on portfolio management.
g. Includes resources for ICRs for projects recently completed plus resources for proposed Highway
Management Project
* All indicators are for projects active in the Portfolio, with the exception of Disbursement Ratio,
which includes all active projects as well as projects which exited during the fiscal year.

Annex B3 - IBRD/IDA Program Summary - Thailand

As Of Date 10/22/2002

Proposed IBRD/IDA Base-Case Lending Program

Fiscal year 

Proj ID 

US$(M) 

Strategic 
Implementation
Rewards (HIM/L) Risks (HIMIL)

2003 

2004 

2005 

TH-Highways Management Project 
Result 
IBRD Loans - other 

Result 

IBRD Loans - other 

Overall result 

Result 

Result 

100 0 
100.0
100.0 - 200 0
100 0 - 200 0

100 0 - 200.0

100.0 - 200 0

300.0- 500.0

H 

M

Annex B3 (IFC & MIGA) for Thailand
Thailand - IFC and MIGA Program, FY 2000-2003

2000 2001 

2002 2003

IFC approvals (US$m) 

0 00 0.12 197.60 87.00

Sector (%)

CHEMICALS 
COLLECTIVE INV VEHICLE
FINANCE & INSURANCE 
HEALTH CARE
TELECOMMUNICATION/INFORMATION 
PRIMARY METALS
TRANSPORTATION & UTILITIES

Total 

Investment instrument(%)

Loans
Equity 
Quasi-Equity 
Other 

Total 

100 

5

45

50

0 100 

100

100 

0 100 

19
13
68

100

MIGA guarantees (US$m) 

0 00 0.00 

0.00 0.00

Annex B4 - Summary of Nonlending Services -Thailand

As Of Date 11/0112002

Product 

Completion FY 

Cost (US$000)Audience' Objectiveb

Recent completions
Social Monitor 
Economic Monitor 
CDP - Competitiveness 
Environment Monitor 

Underway
CDP - Poverty 
CDP - Financial/Corporate 
CDP - Social Protection 
CDP - Governance 

Planned
ROSC/FSAP * 
CDP - Other 
Economic Monitors 
Social Monitors 
Environment Monitors 
Country Dialogue Monitors 
DPRs (CEM) 

2002 
2002 
2002 
2002 

2005 
2004 
2004 
2005 

2004, 2005 
2007, 2008 
2003, 2004, 2005 
2004, 2005 
2003, 2004 
2003, 2004, 2005 
2004 

18 
50 
160 
18 

237 
500 
240 
550 

All 
All 
All 
All 

All 
All 
All 
All 

Knowledge
Knowledge
Knowledge/Strategy
Knowledge

Knowledge/Strategy
Knowledge/Strategy
Knowledge/Strategy
Knowledge/Strategy

700 Gov 
400 
All 
300 
All 
100 
All 
100 
All 
90 
All 
240 
All 

Knowledge
Knowledge/Strategy
Knowledge
Knowledge
Knowledge
Knowledge
All

a. Government, donor, Bank, public dissemination.
b. Knowledge generation, public debate, problem-solving.
* FSAP and ROSC costs in FY04 will be funded from the Center and have been included in the totals.

Annex B5 - Poverty, Social Development, and Environment Indicators

Latest single year 

1970-75 

1980-85 

1994-00 

Same region/income group
East 
Lower-
Asia & 
middle-
Pacific 
income

1,060 
135 

2 0 
2 9 

14 2

188

41 4
6 4
48 4

3 5 
0 7 

83 
86 
79 

23 0 

273 

810 
65 
59 

31 0 

350 

390 
32 

2,000 
123 
124

41 4 
2 9 
15 1 
4 5 

60 7 
0 7 
21 6 
1 9 

51 1 
1 8 
179 
2 8 

1,855 2 
1 1 
35 2 
2 1 

POPULATION
Total population, mid-year (millions) 
Growth rate (% annual average for penod) 
Urban population (% of populationi) 
Total fertility rate (births per woman) 
POVERTY (% of population)
National headcount iiidex 
Urban headcount index
Rural headcouit index 
INCOME
GNlpercapita(US$) 
Consumerppnce index (1995=100) 
Food pnce index (1995=100) 
INCOME/CONSUMPTION DISTRIBUTION
Share of income or consumption
Gini index 
Lowest quintile (%/. of income or consumption) 
Highest quintle (% of income or consumption) 
SOCIAL INDICATORS
Public expenditure
Health (% of GDP) 
Education (% of GDP) 
Social secunty and welfare (% of GDP) 
Net primary school enroliment rate
(% of age group)
Total * 
Male' 
Female' 
Access to an improved water source (% of pop)
Total 
Urban 
Rural 
Immunization rate (% uiider 12 imionths)
Measles 
DPT 
Child malnutntion (% under 5 years) 
Life expectancy at birth
Total 
Male 
Female 
Mortality
Infant (per 1,000 live births) 
Under S (per 1,000 live births) 
Adult (15-59)
Male (per 1,000 populaton) 
Female (per 1,000 population) 
Matemal (per 100,000 live births) 
Births atteisded by skilled health staff(%) 
ENVIRONMENT INDICATORS
Forest Area (% of total land area) 
Nationally protected area (% land area) 
Share ofelectncity generated by coal (%) 
Note 0 or 0 0 means zero or less than half the unit shown
* Net enrollment ratios exceeding 100 indicate discrepancies between the estimates of school-age population and reported eiirollment
data Educahon figures subject to revision when updated data available in 2003
2002 World Developnicist Indicators CD-ROM, World Bank

85 
85 
10 

69 
67 
71 

35 
45 

91 
91 
91 

75 
93 
66 

60 
102 

327 
259 

66 
63 
68 

42 
58 

69 
67 
71 

28 
33 

229 
144 
44
95

280 
210 

52 

80 
89 
77 

96 
97 
18 

3 7 
0 6 

98 
100 
97 

1 9 
4 7 
1 1

103 
104 
102 

183 
132 

27 2 
7 0 
619 

26 
62 

61 
59 
63 

28 9 
13 9 
183 

2,047 6
1 1
42 0
2 1

1,130
146

2 3
4 6

91
91
91

80
95
69

89
89
11

69
67
72

33
41

192
125

31 8
4 9
429

Annex B6 - Key Economic Indicators - Thailand

As Of Date 11/08/2002

Actual 
1998 
1999 

Estimate 
2001 

Projected
2003 
2004 

Indicator 

1997 

2000 

2002 

2005 1

National accounts (as % of GDP)
Gross domestic producta 
Agriculture 
Industry 
Services 

100 
11 
39 
50 

100 
12 
38 
50 

100 
11 
40 
50 

100 
10 
40 
49 

100 
10 
40 
49 

100 
10 
39 
51 

100 
9 
39 
52 

100 
9 
39 
52 

100
8
39
53

Total Consumption 
Gross domestic fixed investment 
Public sector investment 
Private investment 

65 
34 
12 
22 

64 
22 
11 
11 

67 
21 
10 
11 

69 
22 
8 
14 

70 
23 
7 
16 

70 
23 
7 
16 

71 
24 
7 
17 

73 
24 
7 
17 

74
24
7
17

Exports (GNFS)b 
Imports (GNFS) 

48 
47 

59 
43 

58 
46 

67 
58 

66 
60 

65 
59 

65 
60 

65 
62 

65
63

Gross domestic savings 
Gross national savingsc 

35 
33 

36 
33 

33 
31 

31 
30 

30 
29 

30 
28 

29 
27 

27 
26 

26
24

Memorandum items

Gross domestic product 
(US$ billion at current prices)
GNI per capita (US$, Atlas method) 

140.4 

115.8 

122.2 

120.7 

114.2 

124.6 

133.4 

143.0 

153.1

2700 

2080 

1980 

2020 

1900 

1910 

1990 

2130 

2260

Real annual growth rates (%, calculated from 1988 prices)
Gross domestic product at marketprices 
-1.4 
Gross Domestic Income 
-1.9 

-10.5 
-12.4 

4.4 
1.0 

4.6 
2.3 

1.8 
-2.6 

3.8 
6.5 

4.0 
4.9 

4.0 
4.3 

4.0
4.8

Real annual per capita growth rates (%, calculated from 1988 prices)
Gross domestic product at market prices 
-2.0 
-11.1 
Total consumption 
-1.4 
-10.7 
Private consumption 
-1.1 
-12.7 

3.6 
2.1 
2.1 

3.8 
4.8 
5.3 

0.9 
-1.9 
-1.3 

2.8 
5.7 
6.6 

3.0 
6.3 
6.8 

3.0 
5.3 
5.2 

3.0
6.1
6.5

Balance of Payments (US$ millions)
Exports (GNFS)b 
Merchandise FOB 
Imports (GNFS)b 
Merchandise FOB 
Resourcebalance 
Net current transfers 
Current account balance 

72504 
56725 
72635 
61349 
-131 
475 
-3110 

66092 
71453 81758 76215 80257 86121 
52878 
56801 
67889 63190 64900 69500 
48623 
56367 71642 69216 72900 80045 
40643 47529 62423 60665 63200 69500 
17469 
15086 
10116 
6999 
7358 
6076 
415 
353 
585 
600 
998 
993 
14291 
12466 
9328 
6242 
4933 
3734 

91775 97426
74003 78749
87116 95003
75638 82532
4659 
2424
988 
983
2428 
427

Net private foreign direct investment 
Long-term loans (net) 
Official 
Private 
Other capital (net, incl. errors & ommissions) 
Change in reservesd 

3298 
1602 
5930 
-4328 
-12439 
10649 

7360 
-10117 
1094 
-11211 
-9800 
-1734 

5742 
-11928 
2262 
-14190 
-1696 
-4584 

3372 
-9232 
820 
-10052 
-5085 
1617 

3652 
-7872 
1379 
-9251 
-705 
-1317 

2700 
-4786 
31 
-4817 
-950 
-1897 

2700 
-5558 
-1681 
-3877 
250 
-1126 

2700 
-4425 
-2985 
-1440 
270 
-973 

2700
-1646
-3153
1507
276
-1757

(Continued)

Annex B7 - Key Exposure Indicators - Thailand

As Of Date 11/11/2002

Indicator 

Actual 
1998 

1997 

1999 

2000 

Estimate 
2001 

2002 

Proj ected
2003 
2004 

2005

Total debt outstanding and 
disbursed (TDO) (USSbln) /a

Net disbursements (US$bIn)/a 

Total debt service (TDS) 
(US$bln) /a

Debt and debt service indicators

(%)

TDO/XGS /b 
TDO/GDP 
TDS/XGS 
Concessional/TDO 

IBRD exposure indicators (%)
IBRD DS/public DS /c 
Preferred creditor DS/public 
DS (%) /d
IBRD DS/XGS 
IBRD TDO (US$bIn) /e 
Of which present value of 
guarantees (US$bln)
Share ofIBRD portfolio (%) 
IDATDO(US$bln)/c 

IFC (US$bln)
Loan 
Equity and quasi-equity /f 

109.7 

104.9 

96.8 

79.7 

67.4 

59.5 

54.3 

50.4 

48.6

0.0 

5.6 

-17.4 

-13.5 

-12.9 

-7.5 

-7.2 

4.9 

6.8 

13.3 

16.8 

11.3 

-4.9 

11.5 

-3.6 

8.8 

151.3 
78.1 

.. 

6.0 

155.7 
90.6 
7.4 
7.2 

135.5 
79.2 
9.5 
9.8 

14.7 
23.2 

0.4 
1.7 

12.5 
26.3 

0.4 
2.3 
0.2 

8.4 
18.2 

0.4 
2.9 
0.2 

1.6 
0.10 

2.0 
0.10 

2.4 
0.09 

97.4 
66.0 
16.3 
11.9 

7.2 
29.5 

0.4 
3.2 
0.2 

2.6 
0.09 

88.4 
58.8 
22.0 
15.4 

5.2 
37.6 

0.5 
3.2 
0.2 

2.6 
0.09 

74.1 
48.0 
14.0 
16.1 

7.1 
39.0 

1.2 
2.6 
0.2 

2.1 
0.08 

63.3 
40.7 
13.3 
16.2 

6.5 
23.7 

0.4 
2.6 
0.3 

2.0 
0.08 

54.9 
35.2 
9.6 
15.7 

6.7 
17.5 

0.4 
2.4 
0.3 

1.9 
0.08 

0.44 
0.10 

0.45 
0.11 

0.46 
0.11 

0.40 
0.98 

0.35 
0.97 

0.30 
0.77 

n/a 
n/a 

n/a 
n/a 

-1.9

7.8

49.8
31.7
8.0
15.0

7.8
16.6

0.4
2.1
0.3

1.8
0.07

n/a
n/a

a. Includes public and publicly guaranteed debt, private nonguaranteed, use of IMF credits and net short-
term capital.
b. "XGS" denotes exports of goods and services, including workers' remittances.
c. Figure for 2002 excludes prepayments.
d. Preferred creditors are defined as IBRD, IDA, the regional multilateral development banks, the IMF, and the
Bank for International Settlements.
e. Includes present value of guarantees.
f. Includes equity and quasi-equity types of both loan and equity instruments.

Thailand - Key Economic Indicators
(Continued)

Indicator 

Actual 
1998 
1999 

Estimate 
2001 

2002 

Projected
2003 
2004 

2000 

2005

1997 

Public finance (as % of GDP at market prices)'
Central Gov -Total revenues 
Central Gov-Total expenditures 
Central Gov surplus (+) or deficit (-) 
Extra-budgetary balance 
Non-financial public enterprise balance 
Comprehensive public sector balance 

18.0 
19.7 
-1.7 

16.2 
18.7 
-2.5 
-2.6 
-1.4 
-6.5 

15.5 
19.0 
-3.5 
-0.5 
-2.0 
-6.0 

15.5 
18.4 
-2.9 
-0.3 
-0.9 
-4.1 

15.2 
18.0 
-2.9 
-0.4 
-0.1 
-3.5 

15.5 
19.5 
-4.0 
-0.8 
-0.6 
-5.4 

14.6 
17.7 
-3.1 
-0.2 
-0.8 
-4.0 

15.5 
17.7 
-2.2 
0.3 
-0.8 
-2.8 

15.5
16.8
-2.2
0.3
-0.8
-1.8

Price indices( YR88 =100)
Merchandise export price index 
Merchandise import price index 
Merchandise terms of trade index 
Real exchange rate (US$/LCU)r 

Real interest rates
Consumer price index (% change) 
GDP deflator (% change) 

.. 

110.2 

.. 

70.6 

.. 

96.5 

.. 

68.8 

.. 

92.2 

.. 

62.8 

100.0 
92.8 
107.8 
63.3 

94.5 
90.2 
104.7 
69.4 

97.9 
89.2 
109.8 
68.0 

101.6 
90.4 
112.4 
68.0 

105.1 
92.5 
113.6 
68.0 

108.7
94.2
115.4
68.0

5.6 
4.1 

8.1 
9.2 

0.3 
-4.1 

1.6 
1.2 

1.7 
2.2 

2.1 
2.2 

2.5 
3.0 

2.5 
3.0 

2.5
3.0

a. GDP at market prices
b. "GNFS" denotes "goods and nonfactor services."
c. Includes net unrequited transfers excluding official capital grants.
d. Includes use of IMF resources.
e. Consolidated central government.
f. "LCU" denotes "local currency units." An increase in US$/LCU denotes appreciation.

Annex B8 (IFC) for Thailand

Thailand
Statement of IFC's
Held and Disbursed Portfolio
As of 6/30/2002
(In US Dollars Millions)

Held 

Disbursed

FY Approval Company 
1991/93/96/98 Ayudhya Leasing 
1995/96/98 
BTSC 
1993/00 
Bumrungrad 
1993 
Central Hotel 
1994 
Dhana Siam 
2001 
Fitch Thailand 
1987/96/98 
HMC Polymers 
1992 
Krung Thai IBJ 
1988/93 
Peroxythai 
1995 
Saha Farms 
1984/91 
SEAVI Thailand 
1990 
Siam Asahi 
1993/94 
Star Petroleum 
2001 
Telecom Asia 
1989 
TFB-Ladprao 
2000 
Thai Equity Fund 
1996/02 
Thai Petrochem 
1993/94/95/96 TUNTEX 
1987 
UPOIC 

-

-
-
-
-
-
10 
-

Loan Equity Quasi Partic 
5.45 
2.4 
-
-
80 
9.83 
9.83 
-
23.11 
1.14 
- 26.84 
-
13.95 
-
10.74 
-
-
-
0.11 
-
-
3.92 
-
-
0.35 
-
1 
-
-
18.02 
9.9 
18 02 
-
1.46 
-
-
6.37 
-
64.03 
-
- 139.45 
-
-
27.01 
-
0.33 
-
-
-
37.5 
-
-
-
97 51 
-
- 383.33 97.51 
-
4.92 
-
-
-
-
1.08 
-
-
-

-

-

-

-

-

26.84

9.83 
-

Loan Equity Quasi Partic
5.45 
2.4 
80 
9.83 
23.11 
1.14 
-
13.95 
10.74 
-
-
-
1 
18 02 
-
-
64.03 

9.9 
1.46 
6.37 
-

0.11 
3.92 
0.35 

10 18.02

- 139.45

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

0.33
1.13 
-
4.92 
1.08 

-

-

- 383.33

-

-

-

-

Total Portfolio: 

299.86 93.26 46.85 567.64 299.86 

56.9 19.83 567 64

Approvals Pending Commitment

Loan 

Equity Quasi Partic
-

-

FY Approval Project Name 
2002 
TPI WC Facility 
2002 
Fabrinet 
2000 
TEF Mgmt. Co. 
2001 
West Bangkok 
2001 
Alusiam 

-
12 
-
39 65 
7.25 

Total Pending Commitment: 

58.9 

-

-

10

-

10 

0.2 
-
1.5 

1.7 

10

-

-

10

Annex B8 - Thailand
Operations Portfolio (IBRD/IDA and Grants)

As Of Date 09/02/2002

618 44
23 49
6,458 06
5,019 05
7,076 50
5,042 54
160 50
0 00
160 50

Closed Projects 

116

IBRD/IDA '
Total Disbursed (Active) 
of which has been repaid 
Total Disbursed (Closed) 
of which has been repaid 
Total Disbursed (Active + Closed) 
of which has been repaid 
Total Undisbursed (Active) 
Total Undisbursed (Closed) 
Total Undisbursed (Active + Closed) 

Active Proiects 

Project ID 

Project Name 

P042268 
P053616 
P004803 
P037086 
P004649 
P069028 
P069027 
P004791 
P056269 
P004805 
P054799 
Overall result 

DISTR AUTOM & RELIA 
FIN SEC IMPL ASST 
LAND TITLING III 
METROPOL'N DIST REIN 
OZONE DEPLETING SUBS 
TH-BUILDING CHILLER REPLACEMENT - MT 
TH-BUILDING CHILLER REPLACEMENT PROJECT 
TH-SEC EDUC QUALITY IMPROV 
TH-SOCIAL INVESTMENT PROJ I 
TH-UNIVERSITY SCIENCE & ENG EDUC 
THAILAND-ECO MGT IMPLE ASSIST 

Last PSR 
Supervision Rating 

Development 
Obiectives 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 

ImPlementation 
Progress
S 
U 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 

Original Amount in US$ Millions 

Differ
Expec
Disb

Fiscal Year 

IBRD 

IDA GRANT 

Cancel 

Undisb Ong

1997 
1998 
1995 
1997 
1995 
2001 
2001 
1996 
1999 
1997 
1998 
Result 

100 
15 
1181 
145 

81 9 
300 
1434 
15 
918 4 

40 
2 475 
2 5 

2546806441 
57 677 

1888 
23 92472 
11 

44 975 

136 9497844 

3826816362 
383
6 27656238 
6 3
234976779 278
8 0499312 
61 1
19 31320462 
193
2 475 
2 5
1 81352697 
1 7
26 03456922 449
28 98390913 
52 9
45 21969253 
559
5 3193349 
53
184 1036624 
316

a/ Intended disbursements to date minus actual disbursements to date as projected at appraisal
Note Project ID #s P069027 and P069028 are one project The above table does not include one guarantee project

Annex B9
Country Program Matrix

This Annex has been replaced by Annex B 16: Results Measurement and Management

Annex BIO -

Summary of Development Priorities

Network area 

Country 
pefformance3

Poverty Reduction & Economic Management

As Of Date 11/08/2002
Major issueb 

Good 

rural poverty, near poverty, inequality 

Excellent 

compebtiveness, maintaining macro stability 

Good 

decentralization, transparency, accountability 

Country 
priontyj

High 

High 

High 

Bank pnontyc Reconciliation of country and Bank pnont,esd

High

Moderate 

High

being well addressed by govemment; no
specaal need for Bank involvement

Poverty reduction 

Economic policy 

Public sector 

Gender 

Human Development Department
Education 

Health, nutntion & population 

Social protection 

Good 

low economic and politcal participabon of women 

Moderate 

Moderate

Fair 

Good 

Good 

universal secondary enrollment, education quality across all 
levels, equity, decentralization, effecfive management and 
monitoring of education reform, teacher development
financing of healthcare reform, equity, HIV-AIDS 

strengthening social protection through formal mechanisms 

High 

Moderate 

ongoing dialogue on potential Country
Development Partnership program

High 

High 

Low 

High

no request for direct Bank support

Environmentally & Socially Sustainable Development

Rural development 

Good 

poverty, esp in Northeast 

High 

Low 

Environment 

Fair 

urban polluton, and natural resource degradation 

Moderate 

Moderate

Social development 
Finance, Private Sector & Infrastructure
Financial sector 

Private sector 

Energy & mining 

Infrastructure 

Good 

high income inequality 

Moderate 

Moderate

Good 

Good 

Good 

Fair 

resolution of NPLs, regulabon and supervision, financial 
sector development
corporate restructuring, corporate governance, SME 

pnvate partcApation, ICT infrastructure, cross border 
transport network

High 

High 

Moderate 

High 

High

High

Low 

High

no request for direct Bank support, butwill be
reviewed as part of the monitoring/diagnostic
work

No request for direct Bank support beyond
assistng with complebon of ongoing projects

a Use 'excellent," 'good," 'fair," or"poor "
b. Indicate pnncipal country-specific problems (e g., for poverty reducton, 'rural poverty," for education, 'female secondary completion," for environment, 'urban air pollution')
c To indicate priority, use "low," "moderate," or 'high."
d Give explanation, if priorities do not agree, for example, another MDB may have the lead on the issue, or there may be ongoing dialogue

Annex Bll
Page 1 of 5

Thailand - Private Sector Development

1. 
The Thai pnvate sector faces three challenges: to continue to improve balance sheets and address
substantial overcapacity, to strengthen its capacity to compete globally in an increasingly knowledge-
based economy, and to strengthen and integrate smaller, domestic and rural firms to help stimulate
productive job creation. This will require continued focus on financial sector reform and corporate
restructurng, competitiveness, and the domestic business environment.

Post-Crisis Performance

Success in tackling the econontic andfinancial crisis has improved growthl prospects.

2. 
Tte financial sector has undergone sigtificant restructuring. NPLs have declined from around
45 percent of outstanding loans at end 1998 to around 11 percent at end March 2002. More than 60
financial institutions have been closed or merged. Competition has increased along with foreign bank

participation.

3. 
Corporate debt has been restructured. As at end March 2002, about 2.5 trillion Baht worth of
corporate debt (500,000 cases) had been restructured including headline restructuring cases. The external
debt of the private sector declined by about US$18bn between 1997 and October 2001. However, the
quality of domestic debt restructuring has been uneven. The Thai Asset Management Company has been
established to accelerate restructuring of loans in state-owned banks.

* A strong export performance supported corporate recovery and is now bolstered by increased
domestic demand. Robust export growth in 1999 and 2000 dampened financial distress. After
contracting in 2001, export growth is expected to pick up again in 2002. In the past year and for
the rest of 2002, corporate profitability in property, construction materials and retail sectors
improved primarily on the back of increased domestic private consumption.
* Private investment is picking up but remains below pre-crisis levels. After touching a low of 10
percent of GDP in 1998, private investment increased to 15 percent in 2001. Because of the need
to complete restructuring and because of excess capacity, fixed investment growth remains
muted.
* Thailand's attractiveness to portfolio investors declined significantly during the crisis, but has
gained ground. Thailand's share of regional investment indexes, such as MSCI, decreased from
15 percent pre-crisis to 3 percent, and several large investment funds, including California Public
Employees Retirement Savings Fund delayed investments, indicating a lack of confidence in
Thailand's corporate sector prospects and/or governance. In 2002 Thailand was among the better
performing emerging markets for equity investors, but most foreign inflows were concentrated in
finance and property, reflecting a crisis recovery rather than enhanced competitiveness of the real
sector.
* Regional integration is becoming a reality. Border trade, which has long been a source of growth
for a limited number of Thai firms, is emerging as a significant component of the corporate
landscape. With Cambodia and Laos pursuing WTO membership, regional 
transportation
corrdors opening, and export processing zones being developed, the Greater Mekong Subregion
is emerging as an economic entity.
* FDI is recovering slowly. After declining in 1998 and 1999, FDI is showing signs of sustained
recovery and the Board of Investments expects to reach the 2002 target of US$4.5bn. Large
investments are strengthening Thailand's position as the leading regional center for automotive
production, and the country is beginning to make inroads in long-stay tournsm, film production
and other service industrnes.

Annex Bll
Page 2 of 5

The Country's Private Sector Development Strategy

4. 
Thailand's private sector has evolved rapidly throughl distinct stages -
import substitution to
create economic diversification in the 1970s, export oriented, labor-intensive manufacturing in the late
70s and 80s, and restructuring during the crisis. Current economic policy, as reflected in the Ninth Plan
and the recent Cabinet decision to establish a National Competitiveness Committee, is focused on
building domestic competitiveness and the foundations of a knowledge-based economy. This reflects a
desire for a development strategy that builds on a more sustainable foundation, causing less damage to the
natural environment and social fabric, and strengthening local knowledge and social capital. In executing
this strategy, the Government will take a two-track approach: retaining the competitiveness of its export-
oriented manufactunng base, while focusing renewed energy on domestic entrepreneurs and rural
enterpnses. The 9th Economic and Social Development Plan (2002-2006) has three goals:
* Enhance competitiveness of Thai firms in global markets;
* Increase the skill and knowledge intensity of operations; and
* Promote balanced growth by expanding opportunities for small and medium enterprises.

5. 
Moving from restructuring to growth and competitiveness will require business to respond to a
radically different environment. As a result of the internationalization of production, advances 
in
communication and transportation technology, rapid reform in China, Vietnam, India and other large
developing countnes, and trade liberalization which has taken place over the last four years, the Thai
private sector emerges from the crisis facing a much more competitive playing field than it faced in
1996/97. Barriers which have protected domestic firms from global competition have eroded and will
continue to be removed. The extent to which the private sector is prepared for full liberalization is
unclear. Globally, firms have responded to competition through reorganizing management, specializing,
innovating, creating new forms of alliances, mergers, acquisitions, and integrating into production
networks which seek to source globally those resources required to retain competitive advantage. For the
Thai private sector, engaged intensively in financial restructuring over the past few years, the operational
response has been gradual. Apart from sectors such as banking, retail, cement and telecommunications,
in which some degree of market liberalization and entry of foreign firms has forced a competitive
response, most sectors emerge from the crisis with similar organizations, strategies, product lines,
technologies and management teams. In part this is related to family ownership, one of the highest in the
region: 62 percent of corporations are controlled by families, and in about 60 percent of the companies,
the presidents and the chairmen of the boards are from the same family as the largest shareholder. Little
consolidation has taken place which would have removed excess capacity, total quality management
systems have been slow to deploy, venture capitalists are not investing, and a large number of firms
continue to operate, undercapitalized and unable to attract capital with outdated strategies.

6. 

Othier nmajor challenges remain:
* Financial and corporate restructuring is incomplete. One of the most salient charactenstics of the
crisis was the breakdown of trust and discipline, the foundation for financial intermediation. The
capacity of the financial system to provide risk and long-term loan capital is limited by
incomplete reforms in supervision, monitorng, enforcement of secunty interests and corporate
governance. The lack of breadth and depth in non-bank capital markets - equity markets in
particular - raises the cost of capital, limits opportunities to intermediate nsk, and constrains the
ability of Thai firms to fund acquisitions. This, in part, is due to weak protection provided to
minonty shareholders relative to insiders, the subject of reforms to the Public Company Act that
have been delayed for several years.
* The international competitiveness of Thaifirms has been declining. Corporate cash flows are still
not adequate to finance a rapid ramp up of investments in technology and skills modermization.
For the past four years, Thailand's global competitiveness ranking has slipped. Competition from
China has intensified. At the same time, as revealed through a senes of detailed studies sponsored

Annex Bit
Page 3 of 5

by the Bank, the capacity to transit to a knowledge-based economy is hampered by policy and
institutional constraints in terhary and vocational education, ICT policy and in the R&D and
innovation systems While core literacy at 93 percent is high, Thailand produces less than half the
engineers per capita as China, and 10 percent of Singapore. As a result, Thai firms continue to
rank extremely low relative to competitors in research spending, innovation and ICT utilization.
* Second generation regulatory reforms are required to improve the investment environment.
Thailand has traditionally been very open to investment, but regulatory and administrative
bamers are considerable. A recent McKinsey analysis estimated that GDP could be increased by
1-3 percent without additional public investment by removing regulatory and administrative
barriers to the private sector. Private sector participation in infrastructure sectors is also
welcome, but 
regulatory 
frameworks have 
limited 
the 
role of 
the private 
sector.
Telecommunications firms operate under limited concessions provided by the state duopoly, and
in the case of internet service providers, are required to provide a state firm a 35 percent
ownership stake. The challenge now is to establish independent regulatory bodies and an explicit
PPI framework that will allow state enterprises to transition to more commercial entities
operating in fair competition with the private sector. Transition to a knowledge economy will
also require opening the services sector to greater competition, since services are critical to

manufacturing competitiveness.

* The government is targeting its efforts to specific sectors in which it feels Thailand has a
comparative advantage. Aware of limited public sector capacity and influenced by growing
international attention on the role of clusters in development, the government is focusing effort on
subsets of automotive, fashion, tourism, software, and agribusiness. The challenge will be to
understand in greater depth the regulatory bamers to integration of domestic producers in the
regional and global economy. The BOI recently relaxed zoning cnteria that tended to prevent
market-based location decisions, clustering and other economies of location to emerge.

The Bank Group PSD Strategy

7. 
To support the Government's strategies of strength ening comnpetitiveness, integrating the
economy and building a knowledge-based economy, the Bank willfocus its efforts on the critical areas
of: financial and corporate competitiveness, investment clinate and infrastructure, and ICT and
knowledge economy. The Bank Group's work entails core diagnostics; knowledge sharing; selective
implementation support and investment financing from IFC. Operational flexibility and exit is an integral
part of the strategy. The strategic goals, implementation, monitoring and exit arrangements are
articulated in the Country Development Partnerships (CDP) for Financial and Corporate Competitiveness
and the possible future CDP on ICT. The strategy envisages limited lending by the World Bank. The
CDP approach is demand driven, and has been prepared in partnership with the private sector,
government, financial institutions and civic groups. Pnontles have been established through a bottom-up
consultative process. It is flexible and permits shifting from policy advice to support for implementation
in response to developments in the economy and at the request of the government. The CDP approach
envisages annual reviews of progress and needs within an overall three-year framework. At the time of
these reviews, specific support activities will be dropped or replaced. The time-bound nature of the CDP
also permits the Bank to significantly reduce support once the goals articulated under the CDP are met.
For example, the CDP on Financial and Corporate Competitiveness envisages a transition from short-term
restructuring to financial sector development and a reduced engagement in FY04.

8. 
The CDP for Financial and Corporate Competitiveness supports both strategy and
implementation of structural reforms which will enhance the competitiveness of Thlai financial
institutions andfirms. The key elements are:

Annex Bll
Page 4 of 5

* Strengthen the financial sector structure: 
set a medium-term strategy for the financial sector,
including microfinance and non-bank financial institutions in both urban and rural areas.
* Enhance market discipline: 
transition from the current blanket guarantee to limited deposit
insurance.
* Enhance supervision and regulation of financial institutions: capacity building for regulators of
banks and non-bank financial institutions.
* Develop capital markets: 
improve the architecture and infrastructure for government bond
markets, corporate debt and equity instruments and derivatives.
Improve the speed and quality of corporate and debt restructunng: policy and implementation
support to the Thai Asset Management Company and the Office of Mediation in the Courts of

* 

Justice.

* Economic law reform: 
capacity building for the Council of State to enhance the quality of
economic law in Thailand, with a focus on secured lending and the regimes for problem loan
resolution and corporate reorganization.
* Enhance intermediation on a risk adjusted basis: 
improve risk management methods in
government controlled financial institutions and improve credit information.
* Enhance corporate governance: 
implement 
international accounting standards, 
shareholder rights, and train directors.

improve

* 

9. 
The business environment will be strengthened through support for regulatory reforms in
infrastructure, removal of impediments to business and markets, and capacity building for investment
promotion. The key elements of the PSD strategy are:
* Conduct a Investment Climate Assessment mcluding a detailed analysis of specific regulatory,
tax and administrative barriers to competitiveness and to the enabling environment for the
domestic private sector and rural enterprises.
Improve the regulatory framework for private sector participation and nsk shanng in road
construction and maintenance.
* Promote independent sector regulation of infrastructure.
* Continue MIGA's support to the Thai Board of Investment in building capacity for investment
promotion, investor support services and analysis of investment environment.
In addition, while the Bank will not engage directly in specific cluster-level interventions, as part of the
forthcoming CEM/DPR, the Bank will conduct a business environment assessment which will help
identify sector-specific regulatory bamers which limit competitiveness and raise the cost of doing
business.

10. 
The transition to a knowledge economy will be supported through support for ICT as a pillar of
innovation and knowledge sharing, policy and institutional reforms to strengthen skills, encourage
investments in R&D and establish private-public partnerships for innovation. The Bank has completed
detailed diagnostics relating to skills development, R&D policies and deployment of ICT, including a
detailed National ICT Assessment. These have been discussed with the government and the pnvate sector.
Progress in ICT in the past has been held back by a lack of clear governance and leadership, which
weakened the Government' ability to address and implement a robust knowledge-economy agenda. The
PSD strategy will assist the government to implement the recommendations of the studies through:
* A partnership with the newly established Ministry of ICT to build policy capacity,
* 
Policy advice on telecommunications sector reform,
* 
E-government and rural ICT strategy, and
* 
Strengthening the ability of the private sector to leverage ICT to improve business operations.
In this respect, the PSD work will integrate closely with public sector reform efforts. Over time, the
PSD perspective will be applied to other aspects of the knowledge economy, including helping align
education sector outcomes to workforce needs.

Annex BlI
Page 5 of 5

11. 

Current IFC priorities 
include 
investments 
in financial sector 
institutions, private
infrastructure projects, the Information Technology sector and the Small and Medium Enterprise
Sector. In FY02, IFC expects to commit approximately US$200 million. US$ 97.5 million have already
been committed. In collaboration with foreign joint venture bank, IFC has established a partial risk
guarantee to support lending to middle market clients. The Thailand Equity Fund has been established to
increase supply of equity capital. IFC is assisting a private telecom company improve its debt profile by
partially guaranteeing the issuance of local currency bonds by the telecom company. IFC is also exploring
the possibility of establishing a special purpose vehicle to invest in NPLs in the property sector. IFC's
advisory activities include support for a study on derivatives, sponsorship of business roundtables on
competitiveness and FDI.

Annex B12
Page 1 of 3

World Bank Institute (WBI) Annex

Overall approach of WBI in Thailand FY03-05

1 .
WBI will include Thailand as one of two focus countries for the East Asia Region. This reflects
WBI's overall strategy, developed in consultation with the regions, to choose one low-income and one
middle-income focus country per region. WBI will support the overall priority development objectives in
these countries, as identified 
in the Thailand-World Bank Group Partnership 
for Development,
emphasizing capacity enhancement and knowledge sharing-the core of WBI's institutional mandate.

2. 
In Thailand, WBI will support the World Bank Group program in three distinct ways: first, by
enhancing the capacity of specific institutions and stakeholder groups to access knowledge from multiple
sources, both local and global; second, through use of that knowledge especially to help implement
specific prionties identified in selected Country Development Partnerships (CDPs), and third, by sharing
Thailand's development expenence with other countries in the region, particularly 
lower-income

countries.

3. 
To achieve these objectives, WBI will offer its full range of tools and approaches, in particular
by drawing on its experience in:
* delivering thematic learnig activities through regional or country-tailored courses and seminars;
* developing leaming partnerships between Thai and other institutions to share and localize
content,
* using innovations to extend the reach, scope and adaptability of its activities such as global
electronic networks and distance learning, as well as WBI's intemet-based products and services
in support of learming programs;' and
evaluating the effect of delivered knowledge on development outcomes.

* 

4. 
WBI's strategy will have the overarching priority to support the Bank Group country program
objectives in the areas of governance and the knowledge economy. WBI will support these areas
through a customized approach, by providing tailored, 
in-depth learming and knowledge sharing
opportunities. In addition, WBI's existing regional learming programs and course offerings will be
contributed on a case by case basis to the country program. Further details are given below.

5. 
More effective use and potential scaling up of existing GDLN and distance learning centers,
both within Thailand at the provincial level, and in collaboration with neighbouring countries and
global learning institutions, will also be an integral part of the strategy. Particular attention will be paid
to development of knowledge tools and in-country and regional communities of practice in specific
thematic areas as well as to systematic capacity enhancement to adapt and localize content through
secondary networks (e.g. UJNINET or the InterUniversity Network servicing national and provincial
universities) in order to reach regional managers, decision makers, professionals, entrepreneurs, and
community organizations. Going forward, distance 
learming prnornties will include exploring links
between the GDLN at Chulalongkorn University and the university's own national distance learming
network, CUNet, to increase regional reach, as well as using the network to connect countries in the
Greater Mekong sub-region to share experiences.

' These include e-learning activities (e.g. online courses) and other Internet-based activities such as electronic
discussions, thematic and program web sites, and community web sites.

Annex B12
Page 2 of 3

6. 
Finally, in alignienit with CAS objectives, a major priority will be to enable knowledge sharing
withiin and across different stakeholders in civil society and pnvate sector, different branches of
govemment (Executive and Parliament), and at national and sub-national levels.

Highlights of proposed customized support to priority areas

7. 
The customized support proposed under thte WBI country focus in Thailand will aim over three
years to develop leaming activities and partnerships to support in an integrated and synergistic manner the
govemance2 and knowledge economy/ICT programs. WBI's customized learmng programs in Thailand
will be developed to ensure sustainability beyond single leaming activities and possible extension to other
beneficiaries in the Region.

8. 
Governance. WBI will support the accountability, transparency, and decentralization areas
within 
the CDP-Govemance/Public Sector Reform by providing support 
for 
strengthening
parliamentary oversight, building local capacity, and fostering information flow to rural areas and
stakeholders outside govemment. Partnerships with one or more mstitutes in Thailand (such as, for
parliamentary programs, the King Prajadhipok's Institute) will be developed to sustain learnig
activities in these areas. In FY03, a customized course on parliamentary oversight will be developed in
partnership with KPI for delivery in FY04, initially to permanent Parliamentary staff, and eventually to
legislators. While the final content would flow from a needs analysis, these seminars would be expected
to cover the budget cycle in Thailand, implications for Parliament of the Budget Reform process,
improving understanding of Parliament's role in financial accountability in Thailand, and Parliament's
role in decentralization. Training would be a blend of face-to-face and distance learming that would
draw from regional expenences and good practices. As the govemance program advances, links will
also be developed 
to the knowledge economy/ICT programs 
through leaming activities 
in e-
govemance 3 described below. For example, one leaming activity to be pursued under strengthening of
parliamentary oversight 
is knowledge 
sharing on "e-parliaments" which are helping certain
parliamentary bodies worldwide increase administrative efficiency, improve information access and
dissemination, and enhance parliamentarians' interaction with citizens. Leaming programs will also
explore best practice approaches on how to extend participation of stakeholders beyond the govemment,
including through pilot innovative approaches, such as ICT kiosks and community radio networks.

9. 
Knowledge economy/ICT. WBI support in these areas will complement the focus on govemance.
The Thai govemment - like counterparts in Korea, Singapore and elsewhere in the region - sees the ICT
sector as an important contnbutor to its vision of a knowledge-based society. The key obstacle to
realizing this vision in the past has been the lack of an appropriate govemance framework of policies and
institutions 
that link ICT 
to core reform areas such as education, public sector reform, and
competitiveness. WBI will contribute to realizing this vision through peer-to-peer exchanges between
Thai leaders and representatives of govemments and the pnvate sector that have exceeded in the critical
elements of effective knowledge economy governance 
-
public-private partnerships, catalyzing
innovation, and competitive sector management. These will bnng together communities of practice from
national and local junsdictions worldwide where ICTs have been successfully used to enable greater
transparency and efficiency in public service delivery and civic engagement. 
In FY03, the focus will be
on developing a needs analysis with the key stakeholders in the program. The initial part of the program,
which will begin in FY03, will entail one or two short best practice GDLN dialogues on issues ranging

2 The focus on governance, including e-govemance and civil society participation, is also consistent with recent
surveys in the East Asian and Pacific Region on the most highly ranked training needs and priorities identified by
distance learning centers and their clients.
3 Broadly defined as "the use by government agencies of information technologies that have the ability to transforn
relations with citizens, businesses, and other arms of government."

Annex B12
Page 3 of 3

from vision development to implementation of an e-development strategy, 
including 
the role of
Government Chief Information Officers. Subsequently, beginning 
in FY04, the focus will be on
sustaining dialogue in topical areas-such as use of e-government applications to improve internal
efficiency and service delivery, or use of ICT to enhance teacher training, or questions of policy to bridge
the digital divide. A major goal will be to develop communities of practice in this area which WBI will
help catalyze through on-line and face-to-face exchanges. Given that there is also significant potential to
develop leaming partnerships in e-governance within Thailand and the region, this aspect will be explored
as part of this program to enable activities to be developed and delivered in a sustainable manner.

10. 
The specifics of the WBI program will be discussed and fine tuned in the context of the
Country Review and Programming Discussions. An approach to monitonng and evaluation (M&E) will
also be developed that is more inclusive and largely directed by on-the-ground impacts for which the
customized WBI interventions will be designed. To enhance overall validity and effectiveness, it will
incorporate not only the views of training participants, but the perspectives of government and the views
of those (e.g., civil society, representatives of the poor, and others) who are the ultimate intended
beneficiaries. 
It will be participatory 
in the sense that the M&E system consults with intended
beneficiaries, and that these views are taken into account in the regular re-shaping of WBI program
interventions within the country.

11. 

In addition to thie customized support above, WBI capacity building support will continue
through participation from Thlailand in different regional or global course offerings. In FY03, four
WBI regional course offenngs have been offered or are planned in Thailand. Over 300 participants from
Thailand are expected to attend alongside participants from other countries. Furthermore, over 30
participants from Thailand are expected to attend nine WBI regional or global courses offered outside
Thailand in FY03.

Annex B13
Page 1 of 23

Participation and Consultation
in the Thailand-World Bank Group Partnership

Summarv

1. 
To understand what role the World Bank should play in post-crisis Thailand, the Bank
embarked upont a process of consultation and participation in developing its plan for operating in
Thailand. The process evolved over two years, starting in 2001 and including input from Government,
civil society, Parliament, the private sector, and other donors. It was by no means comprehensive, but it
did provide the Bank with valuable insight into where it could be most useful to Thailand.

The Process

2. 
During the first year of business plan development in 2001, the Bank consulted with civil
society organizations. The Thai version of the Country Dialogue Monitor - a publication which spells
out major issues where the Bank maintains an ongoing dialogue with government, as well as the
government's approach and the Bank's assistance - was used as the basis for the World Bank's
consultations. The Bank worked in partnership with civil society counterparts, using a participatory
process, to organize the meetings.

3. 
In early 2002, the World Bank identified several key stakeholders for the consultation process
including the Government- high level policy-makers as well as officials from the operational level, the
donor community, private sector, civil society, the National Economic and Social Advisory Council, and
Parliament. Small advisory groups of key stakeholders were established and consulted to gather advice
on the development pnorities and consultative process, and a senes of consultations were held.

4. 
The consultation process was organized in cooperation with key counterparts. Documents were
translated into Thai, and, depending on the participants, meetings were conducted with simultaneous
translation. Discussions were focused around a set of key issues: the development challenges facing
Thailand; feedback on the World Bank's existing program; as well as input into where the Bank could be
most useful, including in which sectors and using what types of support.

Main Themes and Issues

5. 
A range of issues emerged from this series of discussions. A few themes stand out, however,
because they seemed to reflect the majority of the discussions, including:

* Be a "knowledge bank. " One civil society representative called knowledge "a safe way to contribute
to the country's development." There are many aspects to this issue. Many said they valued the
Bank's research and analysis but said it should be shared more broadly, in Thai, with the grassroots.
Some said the Bank should support other information-sharing activities, also at the grassroots,
including improving access to information mainly through support to community media. Balancing
and exchanging global and local knowledge was another issue. Many saw value in the Bank's ability
to brng global knowledge to Thailand. Others called for more of an exchange - or saw knowledge as
a way to bridge gaps between urban and rural people. And still others saw the Bank's role as bringing
knowledge from outside to help communities understand and adapt to change, particularly in terms of
the rapid changes brought by globalization.

* 

The Bank is a catalyst and a bridge. Some saw the Bank and its research and analysis as a catalyst,
stimulating debate and dialogue on key issues, for example on competitiveness. Others saw the Bank

Annex B13
Page 2 of 23

as a potential bridge between Government and civil society or the private sector and Government, and
even sometimes between different Government agencies. Govemment counterparts for the different
Country Development Partnerships stressed the need for regular meetings of the group and said they
saw the Bank as a bridge to help improve overall coordination in Government among different
departments working on complementary issues.

* The Bank and Thailand need to engage in a true partnership. In many of the consultation meetings,
participants voiced concerns over the use of the word "assistance." They were interested in forming
"partnerships" with international organizations. Donor agencies expressed the need for partnership
and commitment from government, and in some cases, sharing funding of programs. Some of those
consulted also expressed the need for a clear definition of what a partnership between Thailand and
the World Bank Group would really mean in practice.

* Civil society, Parliament, and the private sector are increasingly important stakeholders in the
development process in Thailand. The Bank needs to work with these partners to understand Thailand
better, participants said, but it also needs to engage with them to help strengthen their roles under the
new Constitution. Many expressed the need for the Bank to engage stakeholders more broadly to help
the Bank better understand the local context.

* Capacity building and learning are just as important as technical assistance. People saw the needs
ranging from the community level and civil society organizations to Parliament and Government.
People saw leaming and capacity building in different ways. Some focused on the broader needs of
education reform and skills training, especially in information and communications technology (ICT).
Others discussed capacity building with respect to enhancing governance, particularly in enhancing
the monitoring role of local communities in development projects as government services and budgets
are decentralized. Still others saw learming and training as ways to strengthen communities.
Government officials stressed the need for real learnig and capacity building within government, not
only technical assistance.

* People the Bank consulted with also said they appreciated the programs on governance and
competitiveness, including work on the financial and corporate sectors, poverty, and social protection
and wanted the Bank to do more. They stressed the Northeast as an area of focus as well as the need
for increased emphasis on rural areas. Decentralization should be the focus of the Bank's governance
work, they said, and the Bank should play more of a role in regional development.

The Bank's Response

6. 
The inputs from 
the consultations have beein 
invaluable. Going forward, the Bank 
is
emphasizing knowledge and capacity building as well as working in partnership. The Bank recognizes
and welcomes the expanding role of civil society, the private sector, Parliament, and new institutions like
the National Economic and Social Advisory Council in the country's development. The Bank has also
taken steps to broaden and deepen our dialogue and our working relationships with development partners
in the country, including our primary partner, the government, and is working to build closer links with

regional institutions.

7. 
The Bank also sees its role as a catalyst and a broker and will continue to work in thatfashion.
Since the beginning of this process, the Bank has revised its thinking and the overall partnership
document based on this set of consultations. The Bank hopes this begins a dialogue process to enhance
the impact of the Bank's engagement with Thailand.

Annex B13
Page 3 of 23

Participation and Consultation in the Thailand-World Bank Group Partnership

Introduction

1. 
In 2001, the World Bank Group began work on its new partnership document for Thailand.
The last such plan, approved in 1998 durnng the height of the regional economic crisis, was based on
assisting Thailand through its severe recession. Because of the crisis, it was prepared quickly with little
consultation. In 2001, the country was in a very different situation. The recession was over, although
unemployment was still high, productivity and firm profitability were still low, and income poverty was
still higher than before the cnsis. Thailand had its first directly elected Senate and the first Government
under the provisions of its new Constitution. Thailand had borrowed heavily during the crisis recovery
period, including $2 billion from the World Bank, and had embarked on a serious program of structural
reforms. With the economy stabilized, the country's need and desire for more foreign borrowing had

declined significantly.

2. 
In order to understand what role the World Bank should play in this environment, the Bank
embarked upon a process of consultation. The process evolved over two years, encompassing input from
Government, civil society, Parliament, the private sector, and other donors, and has provided the Bank
with valuable insight into it could be most useful to Thailand.

3. 
This document is being written to ensure that these rich discussions are adequately understood,
synthesized, and documented and that they are properly reflected in the final Thailand World Bank
Group Partnership. The Bank recognizes the need to continue and broaden the dialogue with all
stakeholders so that the Bank's work is effective and relevant. Through the Country Development
Partnership (CDP) programs, the Bank will continue to engage on a regular basis with key stakeholders.

The Process

4. 
From February 2001 to October 2002, the World Bank held a series of consultation meetings
with a variety of stakeholders about Thailand's development priorities, challenges, the World Bank's
role, and the direction of its future activities. The consultations proceeded in two phases. Phase one m
2001 focused on a broad set of issues, ranging from globalization to decentralization and poverty and
from the environment to the evolving role of civil society. The second phase in 2002 concentrated on the
development challenges facing Thailand and the role the World Bank should play. The major
consultations in the first phase were two large meetings with civil society in Prachuab Kinkhan and
Pitsanaulok provinces in 2001. Those meetings had a major impact on the way the Bank consulted with
civil society, including holding a consultation in the Northeast, and the way the Bank looked at issues
such as poverty.

5. 
A second wave of consultations, specifically on the partnership document, began in early 2002.
The World Bank identified the key stakeholders for the consultation process including the Government -
high level policy-makers as well as working-level officials- civil society, the National Economic and
Social Advisory Council, Parliament, the private sector, and the donor community. Small advisory groups
of key stakeholders were established and consulted to gather input and advice. The consultation process
was organized in cooperation with counterparts; documents were translated into Thai, and, depending on
the group gathered, discussions were conducted with simultaneous translation. Discussions were focused
around a set of key issues: the development challenges facing Thailand; feedback on the World Bank's
existing program of support; as well as input into where the Bank could be most useful, including in
which sectors using what types of support (capacity building, technical assistance, knowledge services,
grants vs. loans). The structure of the meetings took different forms, some were more formal than others,
some included breakout groups, some occurred over days, others were much shorter.

Annex B13
Page 4 of 23

6. 
The Bank has already organized feedback meetings to respond to those who joined in the
consultations on how the Bank has integrated inputs from the process mto the actual plan and
implementation, and the final partnership document will be translated into Thai and shared with the
participants of the varnous discussions.

7. 
In addition to face-to-face consultations, the Bank also conducted a survey of key stakeholders.
The findings from that survey, which are included in annex B14, support the findings from the various
consultations.

8. 
This document attempts to give a flavor of the feedback from the various stakeholders by first
summarzing the consultation sessions with civil society; the Government Advisory Working Group;
senior policy makers; donor agencies, private sector representatives; the National Economic and Social
Advisory Council; and Parliament. After each meeting summary, the key recommendations from each of
these groups are given. At the end of the document, the Bank offers its response to the recommendations
- some have been reflected in the partnership document while others would require specific requests from
the Government or are areas where the Bank does not have a comparative advantage or a mandate to
work.

Summaries of the Consultation Meetings - Civil Society

Meetings with civil society representatives in Prachub Kirikhan and Pitsanulok provinces, February and
March 2001*

9. 
The World Bank, in collaboration with Civicnet and the Indo-China Intersection Development
Institute, organized consultative meetings with Thtai civil society organizations from all over the
country in Prachub Kirkhan province (southern region) during February 22-25 and from Pitsanulok
province (northern region) on March 10-11. Representatives of 55 organizations participated in these two
meetings. Civicnet and the Indo-China Intersection Development Institute organized and facilitated the
meetings with input from the World Bank in order to ensure productive consultations with participants
who had never been active in the World Bank's activities in Thailand.

10. 
Many had misperceptions about the Bank, and hence, were wary of its role. Most participants
assumed that all mega projects including the Southern Gas Pipeline were financed by the Bank (they are
not), and that the Bank dictates all of Thailand's development plans (it does not), which the participants
saw as contributmg to Thailand's move towards globalization. The discussions were very frank and
fruitful and were extremely helpful to the Bank in better understanding the role of civil society, their
perceptions of development, their thoughts on Thailand's development challenges and their hopes for the
country, particularly under the new Constitution.

11. 
The issue of globalization-and managing in a globalized world-was a major topic for
discussion. Participants felt that the word "competitiveness," which the Bank used in discussing
Thailand's ability to manage and reap the benefits of a globalized world, implied a fierce battle where

* Note: Because these meetmgs followed a similar format and are documented in a separate report, they are being
summarized together here. Because the partnership document was not yet prepared, these discussions were more
general, focusing on globalization issues and using the Thailand Country Dialogue Monitor to stimulate
conversation on a range of issues. The Dialogue Monitor summarizes the major developments in key sectors like
education and the financial sector and then looks at the Government's policies and programs and the Bank's
dialogue and work in that area.

Annex B13
Page 5 of 23

there is a clear winner and loser. Participants said they felt this did not correspond to the Thai way of life.
Competitiveness should start by realizing the potential of the rural sector, they said, and more attention
given to developing the rural areas, the agricultural sector, and to supporting local products. Some
participants felt that maybe Thailand would be better off not competing in the globalized world at all. The
King's theory of a sufficiency economy was raised as an example of one desired approach. In addition,
participants said the Govemment needed to invest more in building human resource capacity and
developing a learming society.

12. 
Participants suggested that the Bank look to the new Constitution for guidance and justify its
work to strengthen civic participation to enhance transparency and accountability in the public sector.
Participants expressed fear that corruption would increase in the local areas because of decentralization.
They agreed that the role of community media in fighting and preventing corruption is key, particularly
through changing the culture and attitudes of the younger generation.

13. 
Participants seemied torn between the needfor more information and knowledge, and a fear of
the potential negative impacts information and new technologies could have on rural villages. Basic
ICT infrastructure is limited in rural Thailand because equipment is expensive and users lack basic skills.
Participants said this fact has increased the gap between urban and rural Thais.

14. 
Seeing poverty as income alone, participants said, does not give an accurate picture. They said
this approach has encouraged the poor to think more about material wealth than about happiness.
Participants said they felt that the Government did not have a clear policy regarding social issues. They
said the laws are there, but social protection measures are not enforced and do not seem to cover all
groups, especially the vulnerable groups. Participants urged the Bank to focus on poverty in the rural
areas, particularly the Northeast, which they identified as "beanng the brunt of development."

15. 
Participants saw natural resources and the environment as being closely linked to poverty and
urged the Bank to work with these connections in mind. The environment was seen as having been
"sacrificed" for Thailand's export-based development strategy. The way the Government has decided on
and implemented big development projects has created a great deal of mistrust between Government and
civil society. Participants said they felt the Govemment often starts a project well before the public is
informed and that public hearings "are just a Govenmment mechanism to add legitimacy and are not true
consultation." Participants urged the Bank to play a facilitating role to bridge the gap between the
Government and civil society organizations. The Bank should promote 
the management of the
environment by local communities as well as strengthen public capacity to monitor projects that have an
impact on the environment.

Meeting with intemational.NGO representatives in Bangkok. February 28, 2001

16. 
On February 28, the World Bank organized a consultative meeting with eight international
NGOs at the World Bank's office. Participants encouraged the Bank to work more with civil society to
improve good governance along the principles of the new Constitution. In the Bank's support to social
protection programs, participants encouraged the Bank to look at labor issues and the rights of workers.
Many of the participants said they would like to leam more about the Bank's projects in other countries
and urged the Bank to improve the way it shares information.

Meeting between civil society leaders and the World Bank's Regional Vice President in Bangkok, March
14, 2001

17. 
On March 14, key representatives of Thai civil society met witht the Bank's Regional Vice
President to discuss issues affecting the development of civil society, the evolution of the civil society

Annex B13
Page 6 of 23

movement, and the role of the World Bank in Thailand. This was a very small, informal meeting.
Participants encouraged the Bank to work more with the Government to improve the enabling
environment for civil society. They suggested that the Bank set up a system to improve dialogue and
communication with civil society and to find suitable, innovative mechanisms to work directly with civil
society and provide more capacity building for this sector. Within its own projects, they said, it is
important for the Bank to ensure that the benefits reach the target groups especially at the local level, as
well to reduce gender disparities in society.

Meetings with civil society leaders in Bangkok. March 26, 2002

18. 
In March, the World Bank organized a meeting with key leaders of national civil society
organizations to gathier inputs and advice on development issues as well as on thte overall consultative
process. Participants agreed that Thailand is at a critical juncture in its development and needs "the nght
kind of intervention from international organizations." They saw knowledge as a "safe way to contribute
to the country's development" and encouraged a "balance between monetary inputs and knowledge
sharing." They also stressed the importance of improved engagement with civil society. Participants said
that the Bank deals well with Government but not with civil society. They offered advice and assistance
in improving the Bank's consultations with civil society, recommending the Bank take a bottom-up
approach and talk with local, grassroots organizations to share information about the Bank and hear their
ideas and needs.

19. 
Tlte group encouraged the Bank to support learning and knowledge activities at the grassroots
level; to work with local networks to support the exchange of local and international knowledge; to
support alternative voices and creativity in public policy formulation, implementation, and monitoring; to
support a tnalogue among "the state, civil society, and the market." They encouraged the Bank to work
with the "vibrant civil society sector" to engage more with the majority of the people. They recommended
that the Bank think constructively about ways it can use its existing mechanisms of support to improve
the enabling environment for civil society and strengthen the weaker sectors of society, especially the
poor and vulnerable groups. Specific recommendations for Bank programs included a focus on human
development, 
including education reform. They also recommended 
the Bank consider the gender
dimensions of its work to help improve the potential for both males and females m Thai society and use a
"bottom-up approach" to consultations.

20. 
The Bank representatives agreed that focusing on knowledge efforts would help create new
space for dialogue among all sectors in society and bndge country knowledge with global knowledge.
74.
Meeting with local civil society organizations and community leaders, July 11-12. 2002 in Nakorn
Ratchasima

21. 
In response to suggestions that thte Bank consult directly with groups in the Northeast, a
consultative meeting in Nakorn Ratchasima province was organized in July 2002. Seventy civil society
representatives and local community leaders from the upper and lower Northeast region attended the
workshop. Most of the participants had never worked with the Bank before - many did not know about
the Bank before this meeting. They were enthusiastic about the meeting; almost everyone invited
attended. Many participants had misperceptions about the Bank and were suspicious about the Bank's
intentions and its role in Thailand. Most of these were cleared up during a pre-consultation session on the
World Bank and its operations, which was held before the actual discussions on the specific themes. The
consultation started with a review of Thailand's development direction especially towards the Northeast.
Later breakout sessions on key development issues were organized to discuss the current situation and to
offer recommendations.

Annex B13
Page 7 of 23

22. 
The participants said thlat the National Plans were not relevant to thieir daily lives. The plans,
they said, focus more on the capitalist economy and use Western ideas and approaches. This combined
with foreign loans and a lack of voice in the process were perceived as a "new type of colonialism." They
said the Government does not provide opportunities for local communities to participate in vanous
activities including safeguarding their own environment. The participants said the development plans
should be more localized and integrated with the noble truths of Buddhism on caring for, managing, and
safeguarding the environment.

23. 
The key recommendations from thte participants included the need for knowledge from the
outside to help communities adapt to change; support for community media, especially community radio;
increasing training and learning opportunities in the provinces; providing grant funds directly to civil
society organizations; and the organization of a future forum for the poor and disadvantaged to meet with
the World Bank.

Key recommendations from all of the consultations with civil society

For the Bank as an institution
* Provide more information about the Bank and its operations to the public, especially civil society
organizations. This could be done by providing more information in Thai to civil society organizations
and holding a senes of informational meetings for civil society organizations. More information is also
needed on the Bank's role vs. the IMF and ADB.
* Be a "knowledge bank," providing international knowledge and experiences on issues, bridging the
international and local knowledge gaps; analyzing and simplifying information on key policy issues
for the public; disseminating information through forums, articles and publications; supporting local
research capacity, including that of NGOs; helping to bridge the gap between policy makers and civil
society, as well as improving the environment for civil society to participate in public policy. Local
media is recommended as one of the most effective mechanisms to promote local learming and
information sharing.
* Increase participation within projects and encourage the engagement of civil society in early stages of
project design.
* Promote the strengthening of the civil society sector through knowledge activities, capacity building,
and "innovative mechanisms."
* Avoid funding mega-projects in Thailand.
* Strengthen integration of gender issues into the Bank's work.

Competitiveness
* Understand the Thai context, the concept of the sufficiency economy, and the role of community
networks and local wisdom when working on competitiveness.
* Continue promoting transparency and accountability in the private sector and financial sector. Balance
assistance between the macro and micro levels to include community and rural credit.
* Focus attention on the rural areas, particularly the agriculture sector. Support to rural communities
needs to include community strengthening, bridging the macro and micro economies, strengthening of
community information databases and networks, developing skills and alternative education for local
communities, identifying potential markets, determining ways to add value to local products, and the
need for community funds. It is important to strike a balance between the need for more information in
rural areas and the fear they have of potential negative influences.

Governance-public sector reform and people's participation
* Continue efforts to improve the enabling environment for civil society, especially laws relating to
CSOs and participation until civil society has enough strength to dialogue directly with the
Government.

Annex B13
Page 8 of 23

* Empowering the people is key to reforming the public sector. Only a well-informed citizenry could
make Government agencies accountable. There is a need to strengthen the civil society sector and the
newly-created independent organizations so as to improve accountability and transparency in the
public sector, particularly in overseeing procurement, the bidding process, fiscal transactions, and
other decisions. This is especially important in relation to decentralization to consider strengthening
local communities to act as watchdogs over fiscal transactions and other decisions.
* Support the disclosure of information; media capacity building, particularly at the local level, is
encouraged.

Social Policy and Poverty
* Think and work holistically, considenng the connections between sectors and issues, i.e., the linkage
between environment and poverty.
* Involve people and communities in poverty programs and strategies. The World Bank-funded Social
Investment Fund is a good example of the kind of program that builds social capital.
* Assist the Government in developing a rural strategy that focuses on community participation and
empowerment. However, participants also cautioned against separating rural and urban issues too
much.
* Focus more on the Northeast of the country.
* Emphasize education, particularly analytical thinking, and help expand opportunities for quality
education in the rural areas especially to the poor and vulnerable groups through distance learming or
IT.
* Support the enforcement of labor laws and promote the accountability of the employers' sector;
engagement of consumers and employees in SOE privatization; and skills development and welfare
systems for workers.
* Encourage the Government and private foundations to pay more attention to the poor and vulnerable
groups. Bank research should reflect the reality of poor and vulnerable groups.

Environment

* Appreciate the linkage between environment/natural resources and poverty.
* Promote the effective use and conservation of natural resources, strengthen public awareness and
capacity in environmental issues, including EIAs and SIAs, to monitor environmental aspects of
development projects.

Summaries of the Consultation Meetings - Government and Other Stakeholders

Meeting with the Government Advisory Working Group in Bangkok. April 3-4. 2002

24. 
The Government Advisory Working Group includes some 25 working-level representatives
from various agencies who interact regularly with the Bank to implement projects, execute grant funds,
or formulate the frameworks for the Country Development Partnerships. This group of counterparts
knows the Bank very well and has an ongoing, productive relationship with Bank staff, a fact which made
these meetings very frank. The first consultation with the Advisory Working Group was held over two
days in April 2002 to introduce the process for developing the Bank's business plan; and for the Bank to
get the counterparts' insight on the country's development challenges and prionties, lessons learned from
the past, and ideas for the Bank's engagement in the future.

25. 
The participants discussed constraints to development within the Government, including weak
capacity; the lack of ability to execute some programs even when the high-level vision is strong; and the
lack of coordination among mimstnes. Governance, competitiveness, education, poverty reduction, social
welfare, SME/micro-enterprise development, and pnvatization and SOE reform were major challenges
for the future. Participants said they valued the Bank's analysis and research and links to global

Annex B13
Page 9 of 23

knowledge. They also said they valued the Bank's balanced assessments and advice, good individual
projects, and the Bank's ability to stimulate debate and dialogue on key issues. The Bank's emphasis on
competitiveness, for example, raised awareness within Government, and now Government is developing
its own competitiveness framework.

26. 
Participants identified constraints to working with the Bank including language barrlers,
sometimes complex Bank procedures, and need for the Bank to engage more with civil society and the
private sector. Participants emphasized country ownership of programs and emphasized the need for a
"true partnership." They emphasized the need for real capacity building, not Just technical assistance.
Knowledge, particularly global knowledge, disseminated widely in the local language would be highly
valued. Many of the counterparts in this group are involved with the vanous Country Development
Partnerships. This was the first time they had met collectively as a group, and they recommended holding
overall coordination meetings for all of the different CDP counterparts to discuss synergies among
programs and improve Government coordination across ministries and departments. Overall, this group
said the Bank's work in Thailand is highly valued and the Bank should stay engaged in Thailand even
though the Government may not need to borrow.

Meeting with the Government Advisory Working Group in Bangkok. June 14. 2002

27. 
On June 14, 2002, afollow-up meeting with the same group of counterparts was held to further
discuss the framework of the Bank's business plan, the development prionties, and the Bank's country
program for the next three years. The presentation materials from the World Bank's internal review
meeting were also shared with the counterparts. The participants agreed with the direction of the proposed
plan and discussed the practicalities of the CDP process and ways to make it work more smoothly.

Meeting with the Government Advisory Working Group in Bangkok, September 18. 2002

28. 
A third consultation session was organized to share the draft business plan document with the
counterparts in September 2002. World Bank staff led the discussion in Thai to allow for maximum
inputs. This strategy proved to be highly effective as over 20 Government representatives stayed for the
entire four-hour meeting. One key message from this session was the Bank should clearly and explicitly
state its intended development strategy for Thailand, particularly whether it would be based on a lending
or non-lending mode of engagement. The process under which development activities are camed out by
implementing agencies should be modified and streamlined, with proper knowledge transfer to the Thai
agencies beyond just technical assistance. More importantly as the partnership between Thailand and
World Bank progresses, the Working Group and the Bank should hold penodic meetings to discuss
progress, obstacles, results and the impact of the Bank's work in Thailand. In addition, the Bank should
clearly identify exit critena for CDP activities - either stemming from a lack of demand from the Thai
Government or the lack of Bank administrative budget.

Key recommendations:
29. 
In all of these consultations, the discussions were veryfrank and recommendations were
provided ons specific issues.
* The Bank and the Government's relationship is moving from lender-borrower towards development
partner. This new relationship has to be clearly defined and stated in the business plan document
because this is the basis for future work of the Bank. Financial assistance in various forns, for
example, grants as well as loans, have not been ruled out. The form of financial assistance will depend
on the pnorities of the Government and the economic circumstances of the country, as well as the
availability of funds from the Bank.
* The Government representatives said the Bank should align its support with the Government's four
national agenda items, namely, Competitiveness and Cluster Development, Poverty and Inequality

Annex B13
Page 10 of 23

Reduction, Strengthening Human and Social Capital, and Sustainable Development (Natural
Resources and Environmental Management), and consider the budget and financing gaps.
* The Government said it needs expertise, knowledge sharing in sectoral work (such as infrastructure
regulations, social protection, pension reform, and development of ICT capability) and funding from
the Bank for technical assistance and help with coordination of implementation. The group proposed
having a standby credit or revolving fund to bridge the funding gap between immediate needs for
timely technical assistance and the Government's two-year budgeting process. The revolving fund
would disburse quickly while-the Government's budget process was set in motion. When the money
was received from the Budget Bureau, the revolving fund would be repaid.
* The World Bank could work with the Government to organize inputs from other stakeholders and
donors, both in Thailand and in the regional context including the Greater-Mekong Subregion (GMS)
and ASEAN.
* Regarding the need for more focus, for example, when dealing with service delivery, it may be more
effective to specify which sector or geographical area that the Bank would like to work with
stakeholders.
* CDP-Coordinator engagement is needed at all levels - policy and operational - so the CDPs are totally
integrated into Government policies. Some components of the CDP for Competitiveness,l 
for
example, are 
lagging behind while others are advancing. Each component should operate
independently but milestones for subcomponents should be tied together so there is more pressure to
deliver. Monitoring of the CDP process should be publicized and disseminated widely to all levels.
* Continuous monitonng and evaluation are critical to the success of program implementation and need
to be clearly defined in the business plan document.

Meetings with senior policy makers in Bangkok, 2002

30. 
In addition to the Bank's continued engagement and consultation with the Government
Working Group, the Bank also consulted with the Minister of Finance and senior policy-makers
within the Royal Thai Government. In 2002, a series of group meetings were held with senior officials
from key agencies such as the Fiscal Policy Office and the Public Debt Management Office of the
Ministry of Finance, and the Office of the National Economic and Social Development Board (NESDB).
These meetings are not documented individually because many were part of the Bank's ongoing dialogue
with Government on the Bank's engagement with Thailand. A meeting with the Minister of Finance
Somkld Jatusnpitak was held in July 2002 to discuss the overall development framework, the Bank's
value-added role, and progress on the Bank's business plan.

31. 
The Minister of Finance 2 said that Thailand's development framework and challenges as
outlined in the draft document as well as areas of Bank support, proposed activities, and modes of
engagement were crucial and relevant to Thailand's development direction. He said that Thailand
has an ambitious structural reform agenda, and would like support from the Bank, noting that the Bank's
programs focusing on competitiveness and poverty reduction were needed in Thailand. The Minister said
he was pleased with the Bank's proposed partnership programs and would welcome the Bank's continued
support to relevant reform programs, especially in areas of knowledge sharing, analytical and advisory
services, and support to institutional and human resource capacity building, which he called "software. "
Minister Somkid said the Ministry of Finance team will work closely with and support the Bank in
"tailoring projects and development programs" with or without future lending.

' Note: Thls CDP has been refocused.
2 Note: Some of Mirmster Somkid Jatusripitak's comments are quoted from the minutes of the meeting prepared by
Minstry of Finance officials.

Annex B13
Page 11 of 23

32. 
Senior Government officials also confirmed during subsequent meetmgs that the Bank's
understanding of the national development agenda was consistent with Thailand's development direction,
based on the underlying principles of the 1997 Constitution and related legislation.

33. 
Given that Tlailand has yet to produce an Assessment of Investment Needs that would support
the national development agenda and current financial stability, policy makers said it is difficult for
the Government to identify the future investment gaps and financing needs. Senior officials said they
believed that the financing gaps and needs would be reviewed on a case-by-case basis.

Key recommendations:
* The Minister of Finance urged the Bank to put more emphasis on the expansion of the private sector
industrial base, the coordinated and centralized development of SME entrepreneurs, and the
development of competitiveness capacity in specific sectors such as the automotive and food

processing industries.

* Thailand's role in regional development is crucial. The Bank and Thailand could have a leading role in
the development of the Greater Mekong Sub-region (GMS).
* In 
the area of governance, 
the Bank should consider focusing on supporting Thailand's
decentralization process.
* In the area of competitiveness, key reform areas include: competition policy, corporate governance for
non-listed firms, SOE reform, and the regulatory regime. Thailand lacks expertise in these areas, and
knowledge transfer would be valuable.

Meeting with donor agencies in Bangkok. March 20, 2002

34. 
The World Bank organized a pre-consultation with donor agencies on March 20 to discuss the
country's development challenges, the various donor programs, and to share information about the
process and status of the development of the World Bank's business plan. Representatives of key donor
agencies in Thailand, including the Japanese Bank for International Cooperation (JBIC), the Asian
Development Bank (ADB), German Technical Cooperation (GTZ), and AusAID (Australia), attended the
meeting. Donor agencies agreed on the need to closely cooperate on development programs in Thailand in
order to avoid duplication and improve effectiveness. Donors agreed on several other points: individual
programs would be increasingly focused and selective; interest on the part of Government in foreign
borrowing for development had declined significantly; and lending and non-lending programs would
likely decline over the coming years. Co-financing from the Government will be critical for donor
funding in the future to ensure sustainability and commitment. GTZ, for example, said it would only fund
programs co-financed by the Government.

Key recommendations:
* Continue to use partnership matrices to coordinate capacity building and technical assistance efforts,
particularly at a sectoral level.
* Hold periodic donor coordination meetings with key counterparts.
* Explore potential 
tri-lateral partnerships 
(with 
the Royal Thai Government, another GMS
Government, and a donor agency) to work on regional issues.
* Explore the possibility of support to municipalities.

35. 
In addition to formal consultations with donor agenicies on the Bank's proposed program,
Bank representatives have also worked on an ongoing basis with donor counterparts to improve the
coordination of programs in Thailand. In the development and execution of the Country Development
Partnerships, Bank staff engage with donor counterparts to ensure that efforts are complementary. During
the UN's process to develop its United Nations Development Assistance Framework (UNDAF), World
Bank technical staff participated in the various working groups to ensure that World Bank activities were

Annex B13
Page 12 of 23

coordinated with other parts of the UN system. This process, although not a formal part of the
consultations, did contribute to the Bank's information shanng with donors and sharpening of the focus of
the Bank's partnership document.

Meetings with private sector representatives

36. 
Over the past three years, the Bank has engaged the private sector in the context of thie CDP
for Competitiveness and more recently the CDP for Financial and Corporate Competitiveness. The
private sector group includes business people and opinion leaders from large corporations, small and
medium-sized firms, individual entrepreneurs, legal professionals, bankers, and industry experts. There
were two types of consultations. A senes of workshops and meetings have been held with different
groups of stakeholders (leaders from both the public and private sectors, as well as other partners) to
discuss key issues (e.g., the Private Sector Forum); to coordinate and assess the impact of the technical
assistance programs and plan for the future (Technical Assistance Coordination Meetings); or to plan new
development initiatives under the Partnership (CDP Consultations with Private Sector Leaders).

37. 
In addition, meetings were held periodically with respected individuals from the private sector
to review and discuss analytical reports or to follow up on thje relevancy and applicability of policy
recommendations that the Bank has provided to the Thai authorities. The Government requested that
the Bank solicit this kind of feedback from the private sector in order to enhance the effectiveness of
development policy 
initiatives. Recent reports on restructunng non-performing 
loans, corporate
governance, and the Thai Asset Management Corporation were shared with private sector representatives.

Key recommendations:
38. 
Private sector consultations support continued Bank Group engagement with Thailand.
* More dialogue and education is needed on what is meant by "competitiveness" and "good corporate
governance." The Bank Group has been helpful in putting these challenges on the agenda, but there is
still misunderstanding about definitions and implementation among leaders in the public and private
sectors.
* One pnvate sector banker commented that the Bank Group's technical assistance program has high
impact. However, the Bank's policy notes and analytical reports on sensitive financial and corporate
matters, while of very high quality, have not had much recent impact on policy and implementation
by the authorities. Awareness is created and discussion stimulated among decision makers, they said,
but structural change is slow.
* Private sector stakeholders are aware of the analytical work and policy recommendations the Bank
Group has provided to the authonties. The Bank should continue to provide analytical reports in areas
identified by the authorities and incorporate the private sector comments and suggestions as in the
past.
* The Bank Group has been successful in partnering with and engaging the private sector, particularly
by making sure that pnvate sector views are heard and understood by Government policymakers. It
also helps to bnng different agencies of the Government together, which lessens the risk of a "silo"
approach to policy.
* Continued policy advice and technical assistance on the structural reform of the financial sector and
corporate debt restructunng, including legal and judicial development, is welcome.
* Through the Bank Group's knowledge base and expertise, strategy and advice on increasing
investment and commercial bank lending would be welcome.
* Local knowledge of international benchmarks, standards and expectations needs to be enhanced, and
the Bank Group should continue to bring this to Thailand.

Annex B13
Page 13 of 23

Meeting with the National Economic and Social Advisory Council (NESC) in Bangkok. July 13. 2002

39. 
The Bank was invited to give a presentation on thte World Bank and its future strategic
operations in Thailand to thte members of the NESC during the Council's regular session on July 13.
Over 100 participants including the Council's members and advisors attended, and the discussions were
frank and fruitful, particularly considering this was the first time the Bank had met with the Council. The
Bank clarified many misperceptions about the Bank. Members reflected on their frustrations with the
Bank and other international organizations. The Council acknowledged that the proposed CDPs were
needed by Thailand and placed emphasis on anti-corruption measures, good governance, social
protection, decentralization, employment, 
income distribution, and direct assistance 
to grassroots
communities. They strongly recommended that the Bank talk about a "partnership" with Thailand and not
"assistance to Thailand." They did not support new loans, saying that they felt big projects were "nrddled
with corruption."

Key recommendations:
* The Bank should consider changing the document's name from "Country Assistance Strategy (which
is the Bank's standard name for this kind of document) to reflect mutual cooperation and a
partnership with Thailand.
* The Bank should ensure that financial assistance it provided would go directly to the poor and
vulnerable groups.
* The Bank should enforce measures to prevent corruption in assistance projects.

Meeting with members of Parliament in Bangkok, October 9. 2002

40. 
The World Bank in partnership with the King Prajadhipok's Institute (KPI), a research
institute attached to Parliament, organized a half-day consultative meeting witht members of
Parliament in October. Speaker of the House Khun Uthai Pimchaichon opened the event with
appreciation for the Bank recognizing the importance of the legislative branch and seeking to consult on
its strategic framework. The Speaker said he hoped that the Bank would continue to engage the
Parliament and KPI in the Bank's future activities especially through information and knowledge sharing
about key development 
issues from other countries. Fifteen Senators and members of the House
representing various committees such as Education, Health, Finance and Labor attended the meeting.
These Parliamentarians knew the Bank quite well and were supportive of continued engagement in
Thailand. They provided very specific recommendations for the Bank.

* 

Key recommendations:
* There is an increasingly negative public perception toward international financial institutions as part
of globalization. Organizations like the Bank need to adjust more rapidly to this new environment,
namely in recognizing the many new players beyond the Government, such as the Parliament and
civil society. The representatives said, however, that this changing environment makes it difficult for
the Bank to operate effectively.
In terms of its advisory role, the Bank still has a comparative advantage at the macro level. The
monitor publications were cited as useful for the Government and the country.
* Members of Parliament expressed the need for a clear definition of what a partnership between
Thailand and the World Bank Group would really mean in practice. They also asked about the role of
Parliament in this new partnership.
* There was a need expressed for grants to support the legislative process especially in oversight of the
executive branch and to support the oversight institutions established under the Constitution.
* There was a suggestion for a comparative study on legal systems that would enable and empower the
poor and provide knowledge back to the region.

Annex B13
Page 14 of 23

* The Bank needs to clanfy its position and role, especially for medium and long term development,
and not duplicate the work of the IMF, which works on short-term issues. The crisis, where both
institutions were involved in more short-term responses created confusion about the roles of the

respective institutions.

* The national agenda, stated clearly in the Constitution, should be the basis for the World Bank's work
in Thailand.
v The Bank should consider regional cooperation beyond the Mekong sub-region, including support for
ASEAN.
* Bank experts must have a good understanding of the local context in order to effectively analyze

issues.

* Thailand is facing environmental management problems especially on solid waste and wastewater
treatment, most urgently at the local governmental level. The Bank might want to consider partnerng
with the private sector and government agencies to invest in this area.
* Currently, the lending process is managed through the Ministry of Finance. During the crisis the
legislative branch was involved only in approving loan payments and is by law limited to overseeing
the lending process. Parliament hopes to be able to have an opportunity in the future to review
lending documents prior to approval.
* Areas where the Bank could potentially play a role, according to this group of Representatives and
Senators, include education to develop human resources, including ICT; the development of women's
potential; health; technical assistance and knowledge in the area of SMEs, risk-based supervision,
trade, and financial institutions; and investments in science and technology for the short, medium and
long term, focusing in the short and medium-term on agriculture, food and health.

The World Bank's Response to the Consultations

41. 
The Bank higlhly appreciates the time and invaluable inputs each partner has given to develop
the Thailand World Bank Group Partnership. The Bank recognizes and welcomes the expanding role of
civil society, the private sector, Parliament, and new institutions like the National Economic and Social
Advisory Council in the country's development. The Bank has taken steps to broaden and deepen our
dialogue and to work in partnership with stakeholders in the country to help ensure that the Bank's work
is grounded in local needs and priorities. Since the beginning of this process, the Bank has revised its
thinking and its draft partnership document. In the Thailand World Bank Group Partnership document, we
have begun to integrate and reflect the input from the consultations with the various development
partners. The Bank looks forward to discussing these issues further during implementation with a view to
further enhancing the quality of its work.

Recommendations received through the process and the World Bank's response

42. 
The following section addresses the major recommendations from this series of consultations.
The key recommendations have been summarized to reflect similar recommendations from different
discussions with different groups. The World Bank's response follows each recommendation.

On the World Bank in 2eneral

Recommendation: Clearly define the new development partner relationship. (Govt)
WB: The partnership document defines this relationship, including the criteria that will be used
by the partners to decide on country programming choices, both across and within CDPs, as well
as with respect to lending, and sets out the framework for regular monitoring and dialogue.

Annex B13
Page 15 of 23

Recommendation: Rename the Country Assistance Strategy, the Bank's standard name, to reflect mutual
cooperation and partnership with Thailand. (NESC)
WB: The document was renamed the Thailand-World Bank Group Partnership to reflect the new
working relationship.

Recommendation: Recognize the many players in development beyond the Government, such as the
Parliament and civil society. (Parliament)
WB: Throughout the development of the Thailand-World Bank Group Partnership, the Bank has
been consulting with representatives of civil society, Parliament, the NESC, donors, private
sector, as well as Government The Bank will continue to engage these various partners in the
implementation and monitoring of the Bank's work in Thailand, especially the CDPs.

Recommendation: Use the national agenda, stated clearly in the Constitution, to provide the basis of the
World Bank's work in Thailand. (Parliament)
WB: The Constitution has been used as the basis for the Bank's understanding of Thailand's
agenda and provides a very valuable framework for looking at the roles of varnous players in
development, including civil society, media, and Parliament.

Recommendation: Align Bank support with Thailand's four national agenda 
items, namely:
Competitiveness and Cluster Development, Poverty and Inequality Reduction, Strengthening Human and
Social Capital, and Sustainable Development (Natural Resources and Environmental Management), and
consider the budget and financing gaps. (Govt)
WB: The Bank has used the four pillars of the national agenda to organize the discussion on
Thailand's development challenges with the underlying theme of governance stemming from the

Constitution.

Recommendation: Provide expertise, knowledge sharing in sectoral work (e.g., infrastructure regulations,
social protection, pension reform, and development of ICT capability) and funding for technical
assistance and help with coordination of implementation. (Govt)
WB: The Bank is working in partnership with Government and other donors on social protection
and pension reform through the CDP for Social Protection. The Government has also requested
support for infrastructure and ICT and the knowledge economy, and the Bank is working with the
Government on the development of programs in these areas. However, resource constraints also
mean that some tough choices will have to be made about priority areas for Bank involvement.

Recommendation: Have a standby credit or revolving fund to bridge the funding gap between immediate
needs for timely technical assistance and the Government's two-year budgeting process. The revolving
fund would disburse quickly while the Government's budget process was set in motion. When the money
was received from the Budget Bureau, the revolving fund would be repaid. (Govt)
WB: The Bank would be prepared to support a revolving fund for technical support if the
Government requests such support.

Recommendation: Potentially play a role in: education to develop human resources, including ICT; the
development of women's potential; health; technical assistance and knowledge in the area of SMEs, risk-
based supervision, and trade and financial institutions; and investments in science and technology for the
short, medium and long term, focusing in the short and medium-term on agriculture, food and health.

(Parliament)

WB: In some of the areas mentioned, such as ICT and education, the Bank has taken these issues
into account and will be working on them through the development of potential CDPs. In other
areas where the Bank has not been engaged, such as food security and health issues, the Bank
would be prepared to consider working on this if the Government requested our involvement and

Annex B13
Page 16 of 23

if we had a comparative advantage in providing support. However, resource constraints will limit
the number of issues on which the Bank can work.

Recommendation: To ensure greater focus, specify which sector or geographical area that the Bank
would like to work with stakeholders. (Govt)
WB: To ensure greater focus in its programs overall, the Bank-in consultation with the
Government and other stakeholders-has developed critena which will guide country
programming choices, both across and within CDPs, as well as with respect to lending. These
criteria include links to cntical reform areas, ownership, and the Bank's comparative advantage.

Recommendation: Work more in the rural areas, especially in the Northeast. (CSO)
WB: The Bank is providing resources to support activities targeted at rural areas in the Northeast,
such as community radio programs, rural IT programs, and the small grants fund for NGOs.

Recommendation: Avoid funding mega-projects in Thailand. (CSO)
WB: The Bank is no longer engaged in mega projects in Thailand.

Recommendation: Ensure engagement of the CDP at all levels, including the policy level. CDP
components should operate independently, but milestones for subcomponents should be tied together so
there is more pressure to deliver. Monitoring of the CDP process should be publicized and disseminated
widely to all levels. (Govt)
WB: There will be regular reviews of all the CDP programs and involving all of the CDP
coordinators where issues such as links to the policy level will be discussed. The Bank will
explore the idea of linking subcomponents together more closely with the CDP counterparts. An
annual Country Dialogue Monitor with a six-monthly update would be made public to help
monitor progress.

Recommendation: Clearly define monitoring and evaluation plans in the partnership document. (Govt)
WB: One section of the document is devoted to monitoring outcomes of the program. This
approach has three overall objectives: to shift monitonng of progress from inputs and outputs to
outcomes and impacts; to improve the existing CDP matrices so that they can be used as a tool for
enhanced results based management; and to aggregate outcomes and impact across the different
CDPs to evaluate overall program results, in light of the national agenda, measured by specific
goals established by the Ninth Plan as well as the Millennium Development Goals.

Recommendation: Integrate gender dimensions into the Bank's activities. (CSO)
WB: The section on cross-cutting issues in Box 7 of the document gives more detail on how the
Bank is incorporating gender issues as well as poverty and civil society participation into the
CDPs.

Recommendation: Consider working on regional issues and cooperation beyond the Mekong Sub-region,
including ASEAN. (Parliament and Govt)
WB: The Bank will work in partnership with Thailand and other country partners and donors to
further strengthen the GMS Program and the MRC support ASEAN.

Recommendation: Explore potential ti-lateral partnerships (with Royal Thai Government, another GMS
Government, and a donor agency) to work on regional issues. (Donors)
WB: The Bank will further explore this with other donor partners. The Bank will initially focus
on making sure that the experience and expertise in programs the Bank is involved in Thailand
are shared with other countries and in particular with Thailand's neighbors Cambodia and Lao
PDR where capacity constraints are very senous. Specific examples of such cooperation and

Annex B13
Page 17 of 23

knowledge sharing will include dissemination of lessons from the Thailand Social Investment
Fund program and the Thailand land titling program (which was supported by the Bank for over
twenty years) and arranging for Thai experts to provide advice and guidance on similar Bank-
supported programs underway in Cambodia and Lao PDR.

Recommendation: Bank experts must have a good understanding of the local context in order to
effectively analyze issues. (Parliament)
WB: Through engagement with various stakeholders and increased involvement of World Bank
staff from Thailand, the Bank is working to strengthen our understanding of the local context.

Recommendation: Be a "knowledge bank," providing intemational knowledge and expenences on issues,
bridging intemational and local knowledge gaps; analyzing and simplifying information on key policy
issues for the public; disseminating information through forums, articles and publications; supporting
local research capacity, including of NGOs; helping to bridge the gap between policy makers and civil
society, as well as improving the environment for civil society to participate in public policy, including
using local media, one of the most effective mechanisms for information sharing and leaming. (CSO)
WB: The Bank is working through CDP programs as well as with the World Bank Institute and
other resource providers 
to be a "knowledge bank." The Bank will continue to provide
intemational experience and technical support as requested by counterparts and is working with
strengthening civil society and local media through the CDP for Govemance and Public Sector
Reform.

Recommendation: Clarify the Bank's role in medium and long term development; do not duplicate the
work of the IMF or ADB. (Parliament and CSO)
WB: We have tned to clarify this in the partnership document and through our continuous
engagement with donors and other stakeholders. Our CDP programs are geared towards medium
and long-term development. and would not duplicate the work of the INMF, which works on short-
term issues. The World Bank and the ADB are partners in several of the CDPs, including the
CDP for Poverty Monitoring and Analysis where the two institutions work on complementary
aspects of the program.

Recommendation: Provide more information about the Bank and its operations to the public, especially
civil society organizations by providing more information in Thai to civil society organizations and
holding a senes of informational meetings for civil society organizations. (CSO)
WB: 
Information 
on 
the Bank's 
activities 
is 
on 
the World Bank's website
(http://www.worldbank.or.th) and is available at the Public Information Center at Chulalongkom
University in Bangkok on the 5th floor of the Center for Academic Resources. In addition, each
CDP 
involves wide stakeholder participation 
in both formulation as well as monitoring.
Increasingly, documents like the Monitor publications are routinely translated into Thai. The
Bank is working to further these efforts in the coming years, including the development of a Thai-
language website.

Recommendation: Allow Parliament the opportunity to review lending documents prior to approval.
(Parliament)
WB: The Bank is expanding our information shanng with all development partners, including
members of Parliament. Regarding approval of lending, the Bank follows the regulations of the
country.

Recommendation: Clarify the role of Parliament in this new partnership. (Parliament)

Annex B13
Page 18 of 23

WB: The Bank considers Parliament to be an important development partner. The Bank has just
started to work with the Parliament through the WBI-govemance program. In our future
analytical and partnership programs, Parliament will be one of our key partners.

Recommendation: Promote the strengthening of civil society through knowledge activities, capacity
building, and "innovative mechanisms." The Bank should provide resources and adjust mechanisms to be
more flexible to work with civil society groups. (CSO)
WB: The Bank has a small grants program which provides direct assistance for knowledge
sharing and capacity building 
to civil society 
in various countries 
including Thailand.
Unfortunately, the Bank has relatively few mechanisms to work directly with civil society. In
investment projects, the Bank has adjusted our procurement guidelines to provide more flexibility
for community participation.

Recommendation: Increase participation of civil society organizations in the Bank's analytical work and
operations, especially in monitoring and evaluation of Bank projects. (CSO)
WB: The Bank is supportmg the Government in consulting and working with civil society at the
grassroots level to develop poverty reduction strategies and environmental management strategies
and monitor the Government's reform progress and service delivery.

Recommendation: Increase transparency and accountability in the Bank's assistance projects. (CSO,
NESC)

WB: The World Bank has adopted a new policy on disclosure of information, which went into
effect Jan. 1, 2002. A pilot initiative to improve implementation of this new policy is helping to
make more information available in the local language, including the development of a Thal-
language website.

Recommendation: Build stronger mechanisms and enforce measures to prevent corruption in assistance
projects. (CSO, NESC)
WB: The Bank has prior and post- reviews for bidding and contracting of goods and services on
all Bank-funded projects. The Bank's internal audit department also performs random checks to
ensure compliance with procurement procedures on both grants and loans. The Bank is also
working with the Government to improve its procurement and audit systems.

Recommentdation: Hold periodic donor coordination meetings with key counterparts. (Donors)
WB: The Bank will hold meetings every six months with all of the key counterparts in the CDPs
to discuss progress, problems, and opportunities.

Recommendation: Continue to use partnership matrices to coordinate capacity building and technical
assistance efforts, particularly at a sectoral level. (Donors)
WB: The partnership matrices are important tools for Government to manage the often complex
capacity building and technical assistance efforts. These are an integral part of managing and
monitoring the CDPs.

Recommendation: Explore the possibility of support to local governments-municipalities (Donors and
Parliament)
WB: Yes, the Bank is currently supporting local governments through the Regional Urban
Development Fund and would do more if requested by the Government.

Recommendation: Ensure that Bank assistance goes directly toward the poor and vulnerable groups.
(NESC)

Annex B13
Page 19 of 23

WB: The Social Investment Fund (SIF) and the small grants program have provided direct
support to benefit civil society and vulnerable groups; the SEF has closed but the small grants
program will continue-however, the amounts involved are very limited.

Financial and Corporate Competitiveness

Recommendation: Place more emphasis on the expansion of the private sector industrial base, the
coordinated and centralized development of SME entrepreneurs, and help to develop competitiveness
capacity in specific sectors such as automotive and food processing industries. (Govt)
WB: The Bank engaged in an intensive program to boost competitiveness of SMEs, which
focused on increasing participation of Thai SMEs in significant supply chains and providing them
with infrastructure and knowledge services to boost their value added. Four industries received
special attention. The government is implementing and monitoring this program.

Recommendation: Provide technical assistance and knowledge in the areas of SME, trade and financial
institutions, competition policy, corporate governance for non-listed firms, SOE reform, and the
regulatory regime, structural reform of the financial sector and corporate debt restructuring, including
legal and judicial development. (Private Sector and CSO)
WB: Technical training and capacity building are central to the Bank's support, including setting
up and developing the cumculum for the School for Examiners at the Bank of Thailand and the
Institute of Directors, which improves governance of firmns. The Bank is investigating ways to
share knowledge with young leaders in the provinces about economic forces and trends.

Recommendation: More dialogue and education is needed on what the Bank means by "competitiveness"
and "good corporate governance". (Private sector)
WB: The Bank holds dialogue sessions with the private sector and members of civil society
where different understandings are aired and discussed. Technical assistance is provided to
responsible line agencies which adopt best practice within the Thai context.

Recommendation: Enhance the impact on policy and implementation of the Bank's high quality policy
notes and analytical reports on sensitive financial and corporate matters. (Private sector)
WB: The Bank engages at the policy level on sensitive and difficult issues. The authorities have
their own program, and private market participants also have views. While different stakeholders
often agree on the direction of reform, often there are different approaches and speeds of
implementation. The value added provided by the Bank includes serving as a catalyst for
productive dialogue among stakeholders within Thailand.

Recommendation: Continue to provide analytical reports to the private sector and incorporate private
sector comments and suggestions as in the past. (Pnvate Sector)
WB: Yes, the Bank will continue this practice.

Recommendation: Continue to bring different agencies of the Government together, which mitigates the
risk of a "silo" approach to policy. (Private Sector)
WB: The Bank will enhance this work through the CDPs, particularly through bringing all of the
CDP coordinators and partners together bi-annually.

Recommendation: Strategy and advice on increasing investment and commercial bank lending would be
welcome. (Private Sector)
WB: The Bank has advised (a) the BOI on investment strategy, (b) the regulators on a regulatory
platform which encourages new lending and investment, as well as promotes competitive

Annex B13
Page 20 of 23

incentives among financial institutions, and (c) the regulators on reform of the legal regime and
the govemance/disclosure regime which will build confidence and attract new capital.

Recommendation: Continue to enhance local knowledge of intemational benchmarks, standards and
expectations. (Private Sector)
WB: The purpose of the Bank's technical assistance and advisory work is to provide intemational
expenence that can be customized to the Thai situation.

Recommendation: Understand the Thai context, the concept of the sufficiency economy, community
networks, and local wisdom when working on competitiveness. (CSO and NESC)
WB: Yes, the Bank will continue to increase our understanding of the local context when
working on this and other areas.

Recommendation: Attention to the rural areas, particularly the agriculture sector, is important. Support to
rural communities needed includes community strengthening, micro-credit, brndgmg the macro and micro
economies, strengthening of community information databases and networks, developing skills and
altemative education for local communities, identifying potential markets, determining ways to add value
to local products, and the need for community funds. Understand the balance between the need for more
information and the fear that rural communities have of potential negative mfluences. (CSO)
WB: Regardmg access to financial services in the rural areas, the Bank is supporting the
development of a medium-term strategy for the financial sector, which includes a policy
framework for micro-credit.

Governance and Public Sector Reform

Recommendation: Help to strengthen the civil society sector and the newly-created 
independent
organizations so as to improve accountability and transparency in the public sector and govemance,
particularly in overseeing procurement and the bidding processes. (CSO)
WB: Through the CDP for Govemance and Public Sector Reform, the Bank has proposed grant
funding to support the establishment of civil society networks and strengthen their participation m
the monitoring and evaluation of reforms and service delivery at the central and local govemment
levels. The Bank has also been working on strengthening the auditing capacity of the State Audit
Office. Other donor partners to the CDP on Govemance, such as the ADB, have been providing
support to independent organizations such as the NCCC.

Recommendation: Help improve capacity of local media to provide information to local people and help
combat corruption. (CSO)
WB: The Bank has been working on this issue through the CDP-Govemance and Public Sector
Reform. The Bank conducted a study -on the role of community radio programming (2001) in
providing information and in monitoring the govemment's performance. The Bank has also
proposed to fund the development of a model for producing community radio programs.

Recommendation: Enhance disclosure of information. (CSO)
WB: The Bank will work on this issue through the CDP-Govemance and Public Sector Reform
and in the implementation of the World Bank's new disclosure policy. Through, grant funding,
the Bank, has proposed to support pilots of "Electronic Klosks" in local govemment offices to
improve information dissemination and public service delivery at the local level. For its own
programs, the Bank is working to make information more widely available in Thai and is
developing a Thai -language website.

Annex B13
Page 21 of 23

Recommendation: Support the establishment of a fair and transparent performance measurement system
to monitor and evaluate service delivery of line agencies. (CSO)
WB: The Bank supported a public sector client survey (2001) and has proposed to support the
development of a performance management system to monitor and evaluate the performance of
line agencies in a fair and transparent manner.

Recommendation: Continue efforts to improve the enabling environment for civil society, especially laws
relating to CSOs and participation until civil society has enough strength to dialogue directly with the
government. (CSO)
WB: The Bank has been involving civil society in dialogue with the Government through the
CDPs. On laws related to civil society organizations, the Bank has not been working on this issue,
but would consider it if the govemment requested our involvement.

Recommendation: Provide grants to support the legislative process especially 
executive branch. (Parliament)
WB: The Bank and the WBI have been providing assistance to strengthen the oversight role of
Parliament through workshops both in Thailand and abroad. The Bank and WBI have been
discussing with Parliamentarians and KPI ways 
to strengthen 
the 
technical capacity of
Parliament, especially on the oversight of budget allocation and utilization.

in oversight of the

Recommendation: Produce a comparative study on legal systems that would enable and empower the
poor and provide knowledge back to the region. (Parliament)
WB: The Bank has not been involved in this issue. We would consider this if the government
requested our involvement.

Recommendation: Consider focusing on supporting Thailand's decentralization process, 
including
support to strengthen local communities to act as watchdogs over fiscal transactions and other decisions.

(CSO)

WB: The Bank has been supporting Thailand's decentralized process through advice on
establishing rules for allocating grants to local governments, as well as assessing the capacity of
local governments and improving their financial management. The Bank, through grant funding,
has proposed to strengthen the central government's ability to assess and help build local
government capacity; to improve the provision of services by local governments; as well as
information dissemination through piloting "Electronic Kiosks". The Bank, through, grant
funding has proposed to support the establishment of civil society networks and strengthen their
participation in the monitonng and evaluation of reforms and service delivery.

Social Policy and Poverty

Recommendation: Think and work holistically, considering the connections between sectors and issues,
i.e., the linkage between environment and poverty. (CSO)
WB: The Bank and Government will be holding regular six-monthly review meetings to bring
people working in different areas together. Under the CDP for Poverty, for example, the NESDB
and Bank will analyze the interconnection between poverty and the environment. This will also
be a priority for a possible future CDP for the Environment. The Bank has also launched a study
on the link between poverty and the environment in neighboring countries.

Recommendation: Involve people and communities in poverty programs and strategies. (CSO)
WB: The Social Investment Fund was an excellent example of a World Bank-funded project that
has helped to build social capital. Currently, the main focus'in the CDP for Poverty is to support
the implementation of strategies and policies that would create opportunities for the poor, most of

Annex B13
Page 22 of 23

whom reside in the rural areas. In addition, 
the Bank also promotes participation from
stakeholders in the implementation of poverty strategies and programs.

Recommendation: Reflect the reality of the poor and vulnerable groups in World Bank research. (CSO)
WB: Through the Monitor series', the Bank has looked at a range of issues reflecting the reality
of poor and vulnerable groups, especially the latest Social Monitor volume on "Public Policy and
Poverty."

Recommendation: Help build a community database for tracking poverty. (CSO)
WB: The Bank is providing technical assistance to develop a poverty map and database for
poverty research and monitoring. Some of village level data has been put on the NSO's website
(http://www.nso.go.th) and can be accessed by others for poverty analysis and monitoring.

Recommendation: Assist the Government in developing a rural strategy that focuses on community
participation and empowerment - but do not over-separate rural and urban issues. (CSO)
WB: The Bank will discuss with our counterparts 
to see how the Bank can take this
recommendation forward.

Recommendation: Emphasize education, particularly analytical thinking, and help expand opportunities
for quality education in the rural areas especially to the poor and vulnerable groups through distance
learming or IT. (CSO, Parliament)
WB: The Bank is in discussions with Government on potential partnerships on education reform
issues and on ICT, including for the rural areas.

Recommendation: Work more on health related issues. (Parliament)
WB: The Bank would be prepared to consider working on this if the Government requested our
involvement and if we had a comparative advantage in providing support. However, in view of
resource constraints, the Bank will need to be selective and can work on only a limited number of
issues.

Recommendation: Support the enforcement of labor laws and promote the accountability of the
employers' sector; engagement of consumers and employees 
in SOE privatization; support skills
development and welfare systems for workers. (CSO)
WB: The Bank works closely with Ministry of Labor (MOL) on labor market issues through the
CDP for Social Protection, which require coordination and participation from both employers and
employees. Technical assistance 
is provided on occupational health and safety issues and
regulations and on child labor issues.

Recommendation: Provide assistance on social security issues to farmers' groups. (CSO)
WB: The Bank is not involved in this issue. This is not an area where the Bank has a comparative
advantage.

Recommendation: Encourage the Government and private foundations to pay more attention to the poor
and vulnerable groups. (CSO)
WB: Through working with the Government to strengthen the understanding of poverty in the
country with the CDP for Poverty Analysis and Monitoring, the World Bank, the Government,
and other donors are working to raise awareness of these issues among all stakeholders.

Annex B13
Page 23 of 23

Environment and Natural Resources

Recommendation: Promote the effective use and conservation of natural resources, strengthen public
awareness and capacity in environmental issues, including EIAs and SLAs. (CSO)
WB: Through a possible future CDP for Environment, the Bank would be working with the
Government to develop an environmental partnership program.

Recommendation: Promote the management of the environment by local communities. (CSO)
WB: The Bank provided assistance to the Social Fund as well as the Pollution Control
Department to encourage local communities to plan and implement local environmental solutions.

Recommendation: Strengthen the public capacity to monitor environmental projects. (CSO)
WB: The Bank's safeguard policies mandate disclosure of environment and social studies
undertaken for projects financed by the Bank. The Bank has supported capacity building at the
PCD and OEPP on participation and disclosure.

Recommendation: Promote transparency and disclosure of information for all Government projects that
affect the environment. (CSO)
WB: The Bank cannot insist on the application of its safeguard policies on projects that are not
financed by the Bank. However, the Bank has helped to build capacity in the Government to
follow best practice on disclosing environmental and social assessments.

Recommendation: Help increase public awareness on environment issues. (CSO)
WB: Through the Environment Monitors, which are disseminated widely and translated into
Thai, the Bank is helping raise awareness on environmental issues.

Recommendation: Consider partnering with the pnvate sector and Govemment agencies to invest in
environmental management problems especially on solid waste and waste water treatment. (Parliament)
WB: If there is a request from Government for Bank financing for these sorts of environmental
management issues, the Bank would be responsive.

Annex B14
Page 1 of 4

OED Evaluation, QAG Assessment, and Client Survey

1. 
This Annex presents the executive summanes of three key evaluations of the World Bank
country program in Thailand over the last three years. The summanes are not edited so as to convey the
feedback received in its onginal form. For more detailed information, the full document references are
provided in the footnotes.

OED Executive Summary3

2. 
After remaining stagnant for a century, Thailand's real GDP per capita increased six-fold from
1955 to 1995, without declining in any of these forty years. The economy was remarkably resilient to
shocks both external (oil shocks) and internal (military coups, nots and political crises). Suddenly, the
miracle ended with a crisis which took everyone, including the Bank, by surprise.

3. 
With GDP reaching double digit growth in the late 1980s and private capital pouring into the
country in the first half of the 1990s, the role of the Bank became marginal. During the decade preceding
the cnsis net Bank disbursements to Thailand remained negative. Bank lending responded to the demand
of the client, and 80 percent of Bank commitments went to infrastructure (power, transportation, and oil
and gas). These projects received excellent ratings. They were efficiently implemented by competent
organizations and the cost of lending per project was half of the Region's average. This type of lending
contributed to ease the infrastructure bottlenecks connected to double digit growth. But the Bank's impact
on policy was very limited.

4. 
Although the number of poor fell drastically since 1975, income inequalities increased through
the 1980s and the income gap between agriculture and the rest of the economy widened. Bank reports
stressed that most of the poor derived their livelihood from agriculture, but no agricultural project has
been presented to the Board since FY86 and the Bank lacked a coherent strategy to help Thailand
alleviate rural poverty. Since the mid-1980s Thailand had shown little interest in borrowing from the
Bank for agriculture.

5. 
In the mid-1990s, Thailand was expected to graduate soon to Part I status. Although concerns
over the sustainability of the large external current account deficit had been growing since late 1996, the
Bank's strategy remained basically unchanged through June 1997. When the cnsis occurred on July 2, the
Bank held a portfolio of pre-crisis projects with $1 billion undisbursed. These projects no longer fit with
pressing needs. In spite of the $0.35 billion disbursement of a financial adjustment loan in December, net
transfers from the Bank to Thailand in FY98 will not exceed $0.2 billion, or 0.1 percent of GDP. In
FY98, the Bank focused on financial sector restructuring since social and political pressures for reforming
the system were at their peak after the financial meltdown. Still, the Bank could have proceeded to a
much more drastic restructuring of its portfolio.

6. 
The crisis opened a window of opportunity for reforms which would not have been possible
dunng the boom years. To be effective, the Bank should concentrate its efforts in a few areas where it can
have an impact because there is strong ownership of reform. Strengthening the financial system,
improving access to secondary education, reducing corruption in customs services to improve Thailand's
competitiveness and reducing social suffering dunng the cnsis may be quoted as examples. In view of the
uncertainties, the present strategy should be reviewed in a year or two.

3 OED Thailand Country Program Evaluation, 2000 SecM2001-0067.

Annex B14
Page 2 of 4

QAG Assessment Executive Summary4

7. 
This report is the first of three under a special QAG pilot exercise. It is both a learming activity as
well as the testing of a potential new instrument. It explores and assesses the quality of AAA activities
over a rather unique period in the Bank's relationship with Thailand. It is aligned with the latest CAS
period (FY99-01) during which Thailand has substantially emerged from the financial cnsis that started in
mid-1997. The Bank, in a closely coordinated process with major partners, notably the IMF, ADB and
Japan, had provided significant financial support in the 1997-1998 period. By late-1998, soon after the
CAS was formally submitted to the Board, there were already signs that the immediate financial cnsis
was easing. It was becoming apparent that there might not be much new lending beyond the 2-3 large
crisis-driven adjustment operations in the pipeline. But at the same time, there remained uncertainty
about the robustness of the recovery and some doubts as to whether the worst was indeed behind the
Thais. 
In this context, by 1999, the Bank's AAA program, reinforced by the very substantial resources
that were committed during the crisis both by the Bank and other partners as trust funds or direct
contributions, took on an unusually central role in programming. The Bank team more recently has
explored the use of an innovative concept, the Country Development Partnership (CDP).

8. 
In this context of high uncertainty and 'rich' financing, combined with a sophisticated middle-
income client, high expectations have been placed on the AAA program. Overall we rate the
effectiveness of the Bank's AAA program FY99-01 as Satisfactory. There were some key pluses, but
also some important vulnerabilities looking forward. Client engagement was strong, especially around
the crisis-linked tasks. The technical, 'internal' quality of most products was good or very good; the
program was delivered efficiently overall; there were strong and collaborative relations developed with
other donors to the benefit of the client; and there was excellent management leadership provided by the
Country Director. These positive points emerged very clearly in discussions with the Thai officials, other
donors, and even with the often-critical civil society.

9. 
At the same time, there was significant variability among the individual tasks, and also among the
four CAS themes, particularly within the two key dimensions of our assessment - Strategic Relevance
and Likely Impact. There was a significant diffusion of tasks, with several still being Bank-driven rather
than based on indications of strong Thai Government (RTG) commitment to, and/or capacity for, action.
The nch resource endowment of the AAA program (including very substantial SFO funding and bilateral
trust funds) appears to have helped sustain this diffusion. As a result, we conclude that part of the
program, while technically of good quality, is not likely to have a sustainable developmental impact.
However, taking into account the unique and uncertain situation prevailing at the time, notably the fact
that this was a response to a major cnsis, an overall Satisfactory rating is judged to be appropriate.

10. 
There is now considerable demand in Thailand for continued support from the Bank via AAA
activities, even in the absence of lending. The RTG has indicated it values Bank policy advice and
technical assistance, as well as being sympathetic to the more recent CDP mode. There is scope, indeed
a continuing demand, for a well-designed and focused AAA program to help Thailand move beyond
immediate crisis management and deal with some of the challenging long-term structural issues. The
CDP offers a potentially very effective approach to organizing AAA work around clearly client-led
tasks. 
It fosters partnerships with Thais and within Bank teams. This concept holds considerable
promise to improve development effectiveness of the program. 
It can serve to define a broader
consensus around a strategic agenda. However, to be effective it needs to be applied with discipline; the
drivers should be sustainability and (much greater) selectivity. A focus on implementability and results
is key.

4 Country AAA Program Review Pilot Assessment: Thailand. June, 2002. Quality Assurance Group.

Annex B14
Page 3 of 4

11. 

Some important systemic lessons are:
* AAA is a viable standalone instrument in the absence of lending, but must be planned (and
adequately resourced) as such from the beginning.
* A strong AAA program needs to be well-focused; selectivity can be as key as for a project
portfolio.
* For high impact, an AAA program must be planned and resourced with a sustained Bank
engagement in mind and confidence about client ownership.
* Monitorable benchmarks for AAA (ideally within the CAS and updated periodically) should be
the norm for effective performance assessment.
* A CDP-like process can be very effective in building a constituency for focused action; it should
avoid being a mere umbrella; it should start by framing a strategic perspective, then moving to the
prioritization and mobilization of a set of actionable tasks; a strong Bank field presence is a
prerequisite.
* At a minimum there needs to be an improved system for collating information on resources
spent on AAA activities from BB and Trust Fund sources alike; a broader stock-taking of these
activities, maybe via the CPPR, would be very beneficial.

Thailand Client Survey - Summary of Findings

12. 
The Thailand Client Survey 5 was meant to quantitatively gather the opinions of crntical
stakeholders towards the World Bank and its role in development in Thailand. There were 140
respondents out of the approximately 500 paper surveys sent out by an independent opinion research firm
in May, 2002 to opinion leaders in Government, academic, private sector, NGOs, financial institutions,
and donor agencies.

13. 

The survey measured attitudes towards:
* The overall environment in Thailand
* The Bank's programs
* The way the Bank does business in Thailand
* Attitudes toward the Bank's work during the East Asia Crisis in 1997
* Perceptions of the Country Development Partnership
The major findings are summarized below.

14. 
Is Thailand heading in the right direction? In general, stakeholders did not have a terribly high
level of optimism about the future in Thailand (6.0 mean rating on a 10 point scale). Government
respondents across the board (local and national) were most optimistic while NGOs were least optimistic
about the future.

15. What are the greatest challenges 
facing Thailand today? Opinion 
leaders considered
education, by far, the greatest challenge facing Thailand (30 percent of respondents identified this as the
greatest challenge) followed by the economy (17 percent). When asked the second greatest challenge,
corruption emerged strongly.

16. What value does the World Bank bring? Overall, research indicates 
that stakeholders
recognized the basic value of the Bank. Every audience group rated the statement "It's worth doing what
has to be done to work with the Bank" 6.9 and above except NGOs (5.25). Particularly high ratings came
from Local Government representatives (7.9). Views on relevance of the Bank were slightly lower, with
an aggregate mean score of 6.5.

5 External Affairs Client Survey Thailand conducted in May, 2002.

Annex B14
Page 4 of 4

17. What areas should the Bank be involved in? It is not surprising, considenng Thailand's cntical
challenges that stakeholders identified that "strengthening the education sector" and "encouraging greater
transparency in government" were the two most important areas in which stakeholders believed the Bank
should be involved (4.5 on a 5 point scale). Stakeholders reported that it was important for the Bank to be
involved in a number of other areas: helping to reduce poverty; helping to strengthen the financial system;
safeguarding against corruption in projects/programs it funds with procurement rules; and ensuring
attention is paid to the environmental impact of its programs.

18. 
How effective is the Bank? In terms of overall effectiveness, the views of stakeholders varied
significantly. Overall it was slightly positive with an aggregate mean score of 6.7 (10 point scale). NGOs
were particularly harsh (4.2) whereas local government officials and Bank of Thailand respondents were
the most positive (mid 7 range). When asked about "specific" effectiveness, the highest effectiveness
rating was for "encouraging greater transparency in governance. "

How effective is the Bank on project- and program-related issues? Other than a low score for

19. 
building capacity at the community level, most stakeholders rated the Bank in the 6-7+ range in the
following areas:
* Staying involved in projects
* Flexibility in the face of changing circumstances
* Disbursement of funds
* Monitoring projects
* Collaborating with government on Bank supported programs/projects
* Strengthening institutional capacity
However, NGOs and academia were fairly negative about the Bank's approach on most of these issues -
particularly flexibility and building capacity.

20. 
How effective was the Bank in response to the crisis?_Research 
indicates that many
respondents did not believe the World Bank was terribly effective during the East Asia crisis. Ratings (on
10 point scales) were consistently low for pnvate sector respondents, NGOs, and academia. No aggregate
mean score was higher than 6.3. Research findings suggest that for many stakeholders (outside of BOT
and Government), the Bank responded slowly to the crisis, and the Bank's impact on government's
efforts to do the following was negligible:
* Renew competitiveness
* 
Improve governance
* Ease the social impact of the cnsis

21. 
How effective is the Bank in producing and sharing knowledge? In general respondents rated
the effectiveness of the Bank at producing useful knowledge (studies, analyses, advice) quite high (4.0
mean score on a scale of 1-5). Respondents were slightly less positive about whether the Bank makes its
knowledge available (3.8).

Annex B15
Page 1 of 6

Country Development Partnership for Thailand

Summary

1. 
The Country Development Partnership (CDP), which provides an integrated framework of
support for priority areas within Thailand's national development agenda, was developed to help
convert Thailand's development goals into strategy and to advance the implementation of particular
components of the national agenda. Each CDP specifies objectives and a three-year program of actions
for a pnonty thematic or sectoral area, laying out specific milestones and timelines for implementation.
The CDP is developed by the Government-supported by other partners as requested-and executed in
partnership with local stakeholders and with capacity building support and techmcal assistance from
external partners. The World Bank has supported particular aspects of four CDPs to date, for example
through advisory services for the formulation of a CDP program or through mobilization of international
expertise for a particular subcomponent within a CDP.

Description of the CDP

2. 
Although Thailand has emerged from the economic and financial crisis, it continues to face
challenges in sustaining the momentum of its reform program and advancing its medium-ternm
development agenda. To address these challenges, the Government and World Bank developed the CDP,
a three-year integrated framework which lays out a specific work program for a subset of pnority issues
and outlines accountabilities for implementation. The CDP also identifies the capacity building and
technical assistance needed to support the Government's efforts and thus helps coordinate the activities of
the Government's partners in a particular area. Because the CDP is developed by the Government, the
partnership is led by the country but facilitates access to global expenence and expertise. Participation
and collaboration among various government agencies and with domestic partners, including civil society
and the private sector, are also cntical features of the CDP. The CDP helps facilitate greater participation
of all these groups in policy design, implementation, and monitoring.

3. 
Each CDP involves a number of steps, with one to two years required for preparation. The key
steps are:

i. 

ii. 

Ili. 

iv. 

v. 
VI. 

The Government selects pnority thematic or sectoral areas for the CDP.
An integrated strategy is developed, with inputs from concerned agencies within the
government and major stakeholders outside government.
An outcomes-focused action plan with a clear timeline, milestones, and accountabilities
is formulated based on strong analytic work-as laid out in a Development Matnx which
describes the CDP objectives, output benchmarks, and capacity building inputs.
A division of labor and support from other partners is agreed-as laid out in a Partnership
Matnx which details the inputs of partners and identifies potential resources to be tapped
as well as any funding gap.

Arrangements for specific AAA, TA, and capacity building support are determined.
Programs are implemented and monitored on a regular basis, as descnbed below.

4. 
Implementation progress 
is monitored 
tlhroughl consultations 
rather than reporting
requirements. Rather than simply exchanging assessments or implementation reports, the Government,
local partners from civil society and the private sector, and any external donors involved hold
consultations on the progress of each CDP program (as measured against the implementation benchmarks

Annex B15
Page 2 of 6

in the Development Matrix) every year, or more frequently if needed. Depending on the workshop
conclusions, specific action plans are fine-tuned and adjusted as needed.

The CDP from the World Bank Perspective

5. 
Depending on the CDP, the World Bank's contribution to a CDP takes differentforms. In one
CDP, the Government may seek the Bank's support in providing the analytical work which will serve as
the basis for formulating the integrated strategy for implementation. In another CDP, Bank support may
come primarily through technical assistance for a subset of issues. In all CDPs, the World Bank is one
partner among many and "takes the lead" on a limited number of issues as requested. Ultimately, the
Bank's engagement depends on the Government's request for Bank support in an area and the Bank's
comparative advantage in being a partner for that area.

6. 
Providing imiplementation support through a CDP offers a number of important advantages
for the Bank. First, because the Government develops the CDPs for high-pnonty areas within the
national agenda, 
the Bank can have more confidence that the 
limited resources available 
for
implementation support are focused on the most critical strategic areas. Second, by delivering targeted
support through CDPs in which clear implementation plans have been formulated, the impact of the
Bank's involvement is likely to be higher. Third, because the CDP lays out relative roles and
responsibilities of the Govemment's partners, it helps the Bank better coordinate its work with other
donors and stakeholders, reducing duplication of efforts and pinpointing areas in which support is needed.
Finally, involvement in a CDP helps facilitate a quick response should the Government decide to borrow
for a prionty area and puts such borrowing within a larger policy framework for medium-term reform and
improving its longer-term impact.

The World Bank's CDP Support

7. 
Since the development of the CDP concept in 2000, the World Bank has provided support in
various forms to four CDPs-Governance/Public Sector Reform, Social Protection, Competitiveness
(now Financial and Corporate Competitiveness), and Poverty Analysis and Monitoring. The Bank's
involvement in specific subcomponents of these CDPs is described in the attached summary matrices.

8. 
Building on the lessons of the first two years of the CDP concept, the Government and Bank
have been focusing ont how to fine-tune and improve the CDP concept. The CDP for Competitiveness
was the first CDP to be launched and was reviewed as part of the QAG's pilot assessment of Thailand's
AAA program. One of the most important lessons emerging from the QAG assessment was that in order
to have sufficient specificity, clear accountabilities, and maximum impact, it is probably desirable that a
CDP selectively targets a limited number of areas rather than covers all major issues under a pillar of the
national agenda-while remaining sufficiently broad to require participation of a number of institutions
within and outside of government. The Government and Bank subsequently decided to narrow the scope
of work and focused on financial and corporate sector issues, which gave rise to the CDP-Financial and
Corporate Competitiveness, and to consider possible future CDPs in areas of ICT and infrastructure.
Likewise, the other ongoing CDPs focus on a limited subset of issues within a pillar of the national
agenda. Furthermore, as described in the next annex, work is underway to make new CDPs more results-
focused, with an emphasis on outcomes and impact as well as inputs and outputs.

Component 

Thailand Country Development Partnership for Governance and Public Sector Reform (FY03-05)
Objective 

Othler Partners

Bank 

Engagement

Annex B15
Page 3 of 6

Support implementation of performance-based budgeting for line 
ministries by assisting in developing ministerial public service 
agreements and departmental service delivery agreements 
Improve tax administration and collection through the use of ICT by 
assisting in developing online collection reporting for Revenue 
Department's regional and area offices

AusAID, ADB

Policy Dialogue, 
Technical Assistance,
Monitoring
Technical Assistance, AusAID, ADB
Monitoring

Enhancing 
expenditure 
reform 
Improving 
revenue 
management 
reform
Restructuring 
public 
institutions and 
promoting 
human resource 
reform 
Facilitating 
transfer of 
functions and 
decentralization 

(i) Support improvement of efficiency and effectiveness of ministries 
Policy Dialogue, 
through developing guidelines and action plan for revising bureaucratic Technical Assistance,
procedures, rewards, and compensation schemes in pilot ministries, 
Monitoring
(ii) Assist in implementation of results-based management by
developing an agency performance measurement system and key
performance indicators
(i) Support building of local government (LG) capacity through (a) 
utilizing ICT to improve service and information delivery and (b) 
improving central government (CG) agencies' capacity to assess and 
strengthen LG capacity, (ii) Assist in building local government
financial management capacity through provincial treasury offices, (iii)
Assist in revision of intergovernmental transfer system to be more
formula-based.
Enhancing cross- 
(i) Assist in the formulation of anti-corruption strategies by developing 
government 
anti-corruption guidelines and framework to be adopted by CG 
accountability 
agencies and LGs, (ii) Strengthen capacity of independent 
and transparency organizations by assisting the State Audit Office in developing
administrative penalties on issues of budget and financial discipline,
(iii) Strengthen role of civil society and community radio programs in
monitoring CG performance and outcomes, and (iv) Support the
capacity of Parliament and role of King Prajadhipok's Institute in
monitoring govemment performance and public sector reform

Policy Dialogue, 
Technical Assistance,
Monitoring

Policy Dialogue, 
Technical Assistance,
Monitoring

AusAID, ADB, UNDP

AusAID, ADB, UNDP

AusAID, ADB, UNDP

Thailand Country Development Partnership for Social Protection

Annex B15
Page 4 of 6

Component 

Objective 

Social Assistance 

Improve efficiency of the social welfare delivery system through 

institutional and management reform and operational reform 

Bank 

Engagement

Other Partners

TA, policy design, 

AusAID, JICA

capacity building,
AAA work

Employment 
Services 

Reduce risk of unemployment through improved job matching; provide TA, capacity building AusAID, GTZ, JICA
useful and timely labor market information to policymakers

Labor Protection Reform for sustainable and national program of occupational health 
and safety; development of an effective worker's compensation 
program to help workers cope with injury risks

TA, policy design, 
capacity building 

UNICEF, ILO-IPEC, Kenan Institute,
JICA

Unemployment 
Insurance 

Design an effective and financially viable UI scheme to increase 
worker security and act as a counter-cyclical stabilizer 

Statistics for 
Social Protection 

Establish program links with MOLSW for supply of information on 
labor market trends and labor market and social assistance programs 

Pension Reform 

Promote the development of a sound and fiscally sustainable pension 

system

ILO, JICA

TA, policy design, 
capacity building,
AAA work
TA, policy design,
capacity building

TA, capacity building ADB

Thailand Country Development Partnership for Financial and Corporate Competitiveness FY03

Annex B15
Page 5 of 6

Objective 

Bank Group Engagement 

Other Partners

Compontent 

Strengthen the Financial 
Sector Strategy and Structure 

Enhance Supervision and 
Regulation 

Develop Capital Markets 

Improve the Speed and 
Quality of Corporate and 
Debt Restructuring 

Enhance Intermediation on a 
Risk Adjusted Basis 

Enhance Corporate 
Governance 

Policy advice by Bank staff, third 
party technical assistance, capacity 
building, workshops, policy notes as 
requested; policy advice and
investments by IFC

Set medium term strategy for the financial sector 
Policy advice by Bank staff, third
* Financial Sector Blueprint 
party technical assistance,
* 
Improve Market Discipline via Transition to workshops, GDLN, capacity
Limited Deposit Insurance 
building, analytic reports and policy
notes as requested
Policy advice by Bank staff, third 
party technical assistance, 
workshops, GDLN, capacity
building, analytic work and policy
notes as requested

Enhance regulation and supervision of financial 
institutions 
* Build Supervision Capacity 
* 
Implementation of New Regulations 
* Financial Conglomerates 
* Specialized Financial Institutions
Improve access to debt, equity and risk management 
products to support growth of banks and firms 
* Market Architecture and 
Clearance/Settlement for Bond Market 
* Risk Management Products (Derivatives) 
* 
Implement Capital Market Master Plan
Resolve overhang of NPLs and enhance 
Policy advice by Bank staff, third 
competitiveness of Thai banks and firms 
party technical assistance, capacity 
* Thai Asset Management Corporation and 
building, analytic reports and policy 
Financial Institutions Development Fund 
notes as requested; investments by
* Legal, Judicial and Out of Court Regimes 
IFC
Promote sound intermediation and new lending on a Policy advice by Bank staff, third 
risk-adjusted basis to support sustainable growth 
party technical assistance, capacity 
* Risk Management and Rationalization of 
building 
Government-Controlled Financial
Institutions
* Credit Information
* Non Bank Financial Institutions
Promote good governance of financial institutions Policy advice by Bank staff, third 
and firms 
party technical assistance, capacity
* Adopt and Implement Accounting and 
building
Auditing Standards
Improve Shareholder Rights and Education
of Directors

* 

Regulatory Agencies
Worldwide, AusAid, IMF

Regulatory Agencies
Worldwide, AusAid, Kenan
Institute Asia

Kenan Institute Asia,
AusAid, American
Bankruptcy Institute

Regulatory Agencies
Worldwide, AusAid, Kenan
Institute Asia, ADB, GTZ

AusAid

Annex B15
Page 6 of 6

Thailand Country Development Partnership for Poverty Analysis and Monitoring

Component 

Poverty Database 

Measurement and Analysis of 
Poverty, Inequality and 
Vulnerability 

Poverty Reduction Strategy 

Poverty Monitoring and 
Evaluation System 

Objective 

Bank Engagemnent 

Other Partners

Develop and improve disaggregated and issue- 
specific data on poverty and living standards, 
spanning both non-participatory and participatory
methods to serve as input into developing and
monitoring poverty reduction strategies.
Improve the knowledge and techniques of measuring 
and analyzing poverty, inequality and vulnerability
to support the implementation of poverty reduction
strategies action plan and government's effort to
monitor changes in the living standard of the poor.
Strengthen poverty reduction strategy with programs 
focused on practical, prioritized, and costed high- 
impact actions.
Develop an effective monitoring and evaluation 
system that will track key indicators, both for the 
Action Plan and for the MDGs, over time and space
and will assist in the assessment of the poverty
reduction strategy and specific public actions and on
the role of the MDGs in Thailand's development.

Policy Design, TA, Capacity 
Building

UNICEF, ADB

TA, Capacity Building, AAA work 

UNIFEM

Policy Design, TA, Capacity
Building, AAA work

Policy Design, TA, Capacity 
Building

UNDP

Annex B16
Page 1 of 10

Results Measurement and Management

Introduction

1. 
The purpose of this annex is to layout a framework for improving the measurement
and management of results in the implementation of the Thailand CAS. 
In the Bank, results
have predominantly been measured in output terms, such as loan commitments, disbursement
targets, project-specific output indicators (i.e. number of schools built or length of roads
constructed etc.), finished reports/papers, and more recently the quality of projects and
portfolio. Development impact of the Bank's assistance has been evaluated by the Operations
Evaluation Department (OED) only after the completion of the project cycle, which made it
difficult to use OED's impact evaluation as a results orientated management tool during the
program implementation phase. The increasing consensus around the Millennium Development
Goals (MDGs) and Monterrey declaration have now highlighted the need to boost efforts to
better measure and manage the results of development assistance.

2. 
In Thailand, the Government has traditionally used the five-yearly national economic
and social development plans to establish broad targets for achieving its priorities. However,
the measurement of progress toward these targets has predominantly been based on input and
output indicators, captured in the government's budget system, with little attention paid to
results measurement. Prompted by a more outcomes focused design of the Ninth Plan, as well
as other on-going bureaucratic reforms, the Government has begun to shift toward a more
outcome-based system of allocating its resources to agencies at the national and local level. The
Bank partnership with Thailand can build on these promising foundations.

3. 
The Bank and Thailand are entering a new phase and mode of engagement which is
primarily driven by knowledge-based partnerships and less by lending. This assistance will be
based on providing a comprehensive diagnostic overview, predominantly delivered through the
Country Monitor series as well as through periodic development policy and other reviews. The
Bank will also provide selective implementation assistance through the Country Development
Partnerships (CDP). Results measurement in the CDPs is particularly difficult, as outcomes
and impact of this knowledge sharing partnership relies on many complementary contributions
of partners, and their attribution is difficult to establish. Also, the Bank's direct contribution is
less pronounced than in traditional lending programs, limiting its ability to influence the final
outcomes of the partnerships. Nevertheless, as descnbed in the following sections, the Bank has
developed a general approach for improving results measurement and management in the
context of the Thailand country program. This approach is still very much work in progress and
will be refined and improved 
in collaboration with the National Economic and Social
Development Board (NESDB) and other concerned agencies during implementation.

Objectives

4. 
This Results Measurement and Management Framework has three objectives: a) to
shift monitoring of progress from inputs and outputs to outcomes and impacts, accounting for
both government contributions as well as those of the Bank and other partners; (b) to improve the
existing CDP development and partnership matrices so that they can be used as a tool for
enhanced results based management; and (c) to aggregate outcomes and impact across the

Annex B16
Page 2 of 10

different CDPs so as to evaluate overall program results, in light of the national agenda, measured
by specific goals established by the Ninth Plan where appropriate, as well as MDG/MDG+ goals.'

Elements of the Framework

5. 
This integrated framework will be applied to CDPs and has four elements: 
(a)
Measurement units and their indicators (input, output, outcome and impact); (b) Partnership, the
involvement of different partners (elected representatives, government, civil society, pnvate
sector, media and donors); (c) Implementation, applying this framework to measure the results of
actions spelled out in each CDP and to track the progress of implementation benchmarks for
achieving the outcomes (both intermediate and desired); and (d) Risks that need to be addressed.
In addition to the CDPs, the Bank's Monitors (Economic, Environment and Social) which are
used as diagnostic and monitoring tools, can also help to track outcomes and impacts.

6. 
This resulting framework is illustrated in Figure 1 and explained below. 
The
framework 
is applied to the four existing CDPs-Governance and Public Sector Reform,
Financial and Corporate Competitiveness, Poverty Analysis and Monitorng, and Social
Protection-and the preliminary results of an enhanced results summary for each of the four
CDPs are shown at the end of this annex.

2

Figure 1: Results Framework for CDPs

E zF- 
Impacts 

1 

,~----------------------------

CDP 

Development Matrix

Outco 

me 

Implementation Capaciti

Benchmarks 
Year 1 1 Year 2 1 Year 3

Needs

Partnership Matrix 

Cap 

Inputs/Partners 

Risk 

BdeManage 

~~~~~ 

~ 

~~Needsg 

rsent.g 

mesI

Year. 

Year2 

Year3 

I

I

l

I

l

l 

I 

I 

l 

ll

-- -I 

RI

I 

S 
' U ' 

M e 
MI 

IA l 

l 

l~ 

I R e -
IY I

IL I 

T 

Is 

u 

I 

P 

sj' 

T 

A 
R 

Outputs 

E 

I 

I ~~~~~~~~~ 

| M | . 0 

iInput 

s

S 

(REACH 

a. Measurement

I. 

Impact indicators measure the long-term (2002-2015) consequences of the outcomes, the
development changes in society or the economy or environment to which the CDP
contributes. The Thailand-World Bank Group Partnership will consider the goals of the

It is likely that Thailand will achieve most of the MDGs on an aggregate basis However, this may conceal differences among
vanous provinces and population groups, and thus the Govemment is proposing to use MDG+, which is currently being developed

2 Similar Results Summaries will be prepared for future CDPs

Annex B16
Page 3 of 10

Constitution, and MDG and MDG+ indicators 
to measure 
long-term changes. In
Thailand, 28 of the 48 MDG indicators are regularly measured, while the remaining 20
are monitored on an ad-hoc basis. However, the quality, consistency and coverage of the
MDG statistics is inadequate. It should be noted that different ministries and agencies use
various indicators, and at present there is no unified reporting approach in the country to
track overall performance.

ii. Outcome indicators measure the direct and short-to-medium term effects of outputs on
the beneficiaries of the relevant CDP. The indicators are at two levels: ultimate desired
and intermediate. The former is aligned with the overall objectives of the national
development agenda and the targets set by the Ninth Plan. The latter includes completed
measures and reforms, such as policy and institutional changes, amendments to laws and
regulations, and reorganization of institutions and management systems. At the core of
each CDP is the achievement of the ultimate desired outcome of the national agenda and
the Ninth Plan. Specific activities of each CDP are designed to contribute to this desired
outcome in partnership with others and through achievement of intermediate outcomes.

iii. Output indicators track in a conventional way the most immediate results produced by a
CDP - completed reports, workshops, staff trained and dissemination. These indicators
apply to both non-lending and lending activities.

iv. Input indicators measures human and financial resources, such as Bank budget, staff
time, additional trust fund resources mobilized, government counterpart support (budget
and staff time) and additional resources mobilized from other donors. Each results
summary also identifies the contribution of donors.

b. Partnership

In Thailand and elsewhere, it is recognized that activities of partners need to be synchronized
so as to maximize the effectiveness of development assistance. This includes national and
international partners. The partners are broad-ranged and normally 
include elected
representatives, government ministnes and agencies, local government institutions, judiciary,
civil society, pnvate sector, media and donors. In the context of Thailand, partnership issues
are particularly important as the overall Bank assistance is based on a partnership approach
and broad based participation of stakeholders beyond the government has been an important
feature in the country's recent history.

Table 1. Roles of Partners

Inputs Outputs Outcomes 
H 
H 
H 

Partner 
Government - Cabinet/ 
Ministries/Agencies/Local
Elected Representatives 
M 
L 
M 
Community 
L 
M 
H 
Judiciary 
L 
L 
M 
Civil Society 
L 
M 
M 
Private Sector 
M 
M 
H 
Media 
L 
L 
M 
Donors 
M 
H 
L 
H - Highly involved, M - Moderately involved; L - Least involved

Impacts
H

H
H
M
M
H
M
L

Annex B16
Page 4 of 10

In light of the above, the results framework must present a transparent system in which the
contributions of all partners are captured and recognized. However, as the ultimate impact of
a knowledge sharng partnership relies on the many complementary contributions of each of
the partners, the attribution of specific outcomes and impacts to different partners is very
difficult to establish. However, despite the limitations in attributing final outcomes of a CDP
to 
the specific partner contributions, 
the proposed approach 
for enhanced 
results
measurement and management will outline clear responsibilities for deliverng specific
outputs, thereby ensuring that accountabilities are not diluted. To shed some light on the
partnership relationships and how they impact the results measurement and management
framework, Table 1 highlights some of the roles different partners have.

The following example illustrates the partnership in one of the CDPs. 
In CDP-Poverty
Analysis and Monitonng, as an input, the Bank is assisting the NESDB to develop a poverty
map and improve the database through Bank expertise, consulting services and field surveys.
The output will be published maps and improved data that are disseminated at the national
and local level. The intended intermediate outcome from this output is the design of targeted
interventions and its implementation. At both stages, communities will play an influencing
role. NESDB would take the lead at the design stage, with line ministries and local
institutions having a significant role dunng implementation. The donors have a minor role in
supporting incremental capacity building needs. Eventually, a sum of such interventions
should assist the country to meet its desired outcome of enhancing opportunities for the poor
through the implementation of the national Poverty Reduction Strategy. Subsequently, over a
period of time, the longer-term impact will be realized.

c. Risks

A program based on knowledge products has much more uncertainty than a lending-based
country program for the Bank. Normally, such uncertainties stem from a less than explicit
commitment by the government, fluidity in engagement with agencies and lack of leverage to
influence decisions. The risks emerging from these uncertainties will be carefully managed.
For example, there is no requirement for the line ministres to implement targeting of pro-
poor programs based on NESDB's poverty maps, which could skew the desired outcome.
This proposed framework will enable each CDP to identify the risks and their management.
At the launching stage of each CDP, the Government and the Bank will sign a Letter of
Agreement to ensure that both parties are committed to implementing the CDP with the
required resources and support provided by all parties in the partnership. Each CDP will
identify the risks relevant to its activities and outline an approach to mitigate them.

Results Measurement in the CDPs

7. 
The structure of the CDPs are explained in Anntex B15. Each CDP is a two part
document. A development matrix 
is an outcome-focused action plan which 
includes
implementation benchmarks that have both output and process indicators (measured against
time). This is supported by a partnership matrix, which details the division of labor among
partners and identifies the resources that need to be mobilized to implement the partnership
matrix. The application of Results Measurement in CDPs is explained below.

a. The Development Matrix begins with a definition of outcome-oriented objectives for each
selected theme of the CDP. For each objective, the outputs to be realized are identified and

Annex B16
Page 5 of 10

benchmarked so that progress can be tracked during the life of the CDP. The supporting
capacity building inputs are also identified in this matrix; and

b. The Partnership Matrix further elaborates the inputs and identifies funding opportunities for
specific capacity building initiatives. These initiatives can be funded through both internal
and external (donor) sources. It also lists potential external partners whose resources could
be accessed. An indication of the funding gap is also provided in the matrix.

8. 
Looking ahead, 
the four existing CDPs will be restructured to improve 
measurement of results using thisframework. The following changes will be effected.

the

a. 

Improving the linkages between inputs and outputs. The annualized outputs (implementation
benchmarks) will be better synchronized with the inputs 
(capacity building needs) from
partners. 
In future, inputs will be disaggregated to annual requirements. This will give a
timely feedback to learn whether the CDP is on track to achieve the intermediate and desired
outcomes;

b. Adding risk management to the partnership matrix. The identification of risks and their
treatment will provide a more realistic accounting of outcomes. The risks in CDPs could
range from political, economic, resources, staff and participation. Stating the nsks upfront
and ensunng their continuous monitonng will improve the functioning of the partnership.
Government and other donor inputs need to be fully accounted so as to ensure that the
matching amount of resources are available;

c. Harmonizing the contents of CDPs. The CDPs need to strike a balance on the treatment of
issues so that results can be better accounted for, and enable companson of results across
CDPs; and

d. 

Incorporating MDG+ indicators. The relevant MDG+ indicators as developed by the
Government will need to be integrated in the CDPs.

Process

9. 
The implementation of theframework will take place both at the individual CDP-level
and the overall country program. The process is explained below:

a. Each CDP has four stages of measuring results -
(i) at identification, outcome-oriented
objectives are defined; (ii) at concept stage, inputs and associated outputs to achieve the
outcomes are specified, including the selection of indicators 3 ; (iii) dunng implementation, the
progress on achieving the outputs is measured; and (iv) at completion, the achievement of
desired outcomes (including intermediate outcomes) and likely impact to be generated are
assessed;

b. For the Thailand-World Bank Group Partnership for Development, the results framework
could be used at three stages to assess the overall results through a Country Program
Scorecard: (i) a baseline scorecard has been compiled by aggregating the results summaries
of the four CDPs, while those of future CDPs will be added later; (ii) as part of the

3 The following cntena will guide the selection of indicators and the establishment of a baseline - importance of the indicator to
measure the outcome and impact (MDG and other national goals), the availability of histoncal trends, cost of collecting and analyzing
information, familianty of counterpart staff wvth the indicators and their robustness of the in-country statistical systems to generate
date and track trends

Annex B16
Page 6 of 10

programming review process, the implementation progress of the scorecard will be assessed.
The focus here will be the outputs (implementation benchmarks) and intermediate outcomes;
and (iii) at the end of the overall partnership penod, progress towards achieving the desired
outcomes is evaluated along with the assessment of whether the country in on-track to
achieve MDG/MDG+.

Figure 2: Results Measurement and Management Process

Inps 

upt 

Ii~I 

I 

Results Summaries

FI-m-pact-s-

va CDP: Semi-annual Review

CDP-G 

CDP-PAM 

C 

-CDP--CFR

V 

CAS Annual Review

CAS Country Score Card

V 

CAS and CDP:
Completion Reports

Conclusion

10. 
The preliminary results of an enhanced results summary for each of the ongoing CDPs
are attached. They represent an important step forward in developing a results chain that links
inputs to outputs, outcomes, and impact in a logical framework and indicates the role of other
partners and the influence of complementary activities as well as the nsks that need to be
managed. To improve the framework and the specific results summaries, further work needs to be
done in a number of areas, including making the targets (especially the outcome targets) more
specific and monitorable, strengthening the information base, and better defining the role of other
partners and other activities.

Results Summary: CDP for Governance and the Public Sector

Annex B16
Page 7 of 10

Diagnosis: The economic and financial crisis revealed critical weaknesses in RTG's ability to respond to a changed environment and citizens are increasingly concerned about the access, timeliness and quality of RTG
services and their continually rising costs
Strategic Objective: CDP-G seeks to improve governance in central agencies, line ministries, and local governments to increase the efficiency, effectiveness, equity, and transparency of public resource management and
service delivery
Impact 

Long-term consequence of the outcomes, the development changes in society or the economy or 
environmnent to which activity contributes

Reach/Partners 

Risks

MDGQ National (2015): A public service delivery system capable of providing higher level of basic services that facilitates the 
achievement of MDG+ 
Northeast (2015): MDG achieved in the Northeast Provinces through the public service delivery system mentioned above 

* Contribution of all sectors of the 
society to achieve the goals of the 
constitution 

* Lack of RTG commitment
* Lack of coordination among agencies and
other stakeholders
* Change of priorities in National plans

Outcome 

Direct and short-to-medium term effects of outputs on the beneficiaries of the activities supported by the CDP

* 

Desired Outcome: National Goal (2006)- Improved provision and monitoring and evaluation of services which responds to 
the goals of the Ninth Plan and the national agenda 
Intermediate Outcomes: 
* 
Enacting and implementing new laws to reform public administration and finance*, to improve the performance of public 
sector and financial management to be efficient, transparent, and accountable. 
Implementing an operating fiscal decentralization framework and formula that addresses revenue and expenditure 
assignments to ensure transparent and timely fiscal transfers 
Strengthening capacity of local governments to effectively and efficiently perform transferred functions 
Implementing a transparent monitoring and evaluation system for assessing government agencies and local government 
performance
Output 

* 
* 

* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

Prepare policy notes on consistency of reforms and fiscal decentralization 
Conduct regular consultations with counterparts to monitor progress of reform 
Publish annual reform monitoring note by World Bank, King Prajadhipok's Institute (KPI), and civil society 
Develop public service agreements according to new Budget Procedures Act 
Develop public sector performance measurement system and key performance indicators 
Develop framework, guidelines, and training for (a) line agencies to help build local government's technical capacity, (b) 
renewal of ministnes including revisions to civil service procedures to reduce bureaucratic process, and (c) community 
radio programs and community participation in monitoring the reform and service delivery
* Conduct workshops and learning forums 2-3 times a year on topics related to outcomes
linput 

* Strong engagement of central and 
local governments, civil society, 
independent organizations in 
implementing the objectives 
* RTG and CSO collaboration 
* Involvement of the Parliament 
* Bank and other donors support 
incremental capacity needs 

* Delays in passage and implementation of
Acts
* Bureaucratic resistance to reform and
decentralization
* Changes in political direction
* Lack of cooperation between RTG and non-
RTG agencies/CSOs
* Lack of well functioning reform M&E system
* Coordination arrangements fail

* Donor Coordination 
* Coordination among line agencies 
* RTG builds partnership with civil 
society & other non-RTG 
organizations 
* Involvement of KPI in monitoring 
public sector reform

* Discontinuation of participation from
stakeholders
* Delays in commencement of activities
* Consultants lacking appropriate skills
* Timely internal review of documents
Inadequate trust funding for activities

* 

Most immediate results produced by the CDP compotnents
Components: (a) Expenditure Managemlent Reform; (b) Revenite Management Reform; (c) Civil Service Reform; (d) Decentralization; and (e) Cross-Government Accountability and
Transparency

Bank (FY03-05) 

I Resources provided by the Bank, Government and other Donors to implement the components identified above
Donors 
Additional funding mobilized 
from ADB, AUSAid, and UNDP 
for specific program areas. 

* Additional funding from other 
donors 
* Regional sharing of knowledge and 
best practices 

* 

* 

_ 

-

Resources 
- Budget 
= USD 0.55 million 
-Trust Fund = USD 1.5 million 
Expertise 
- 50 percent staff time of TTL 
-1 full-time National staff 
Staff from DEC, WBI and PREM 

Govermment (FY03-05) 
Contribution in kind, estimated to be around 
USD 1.2 million to cover: 
- staff time of about 2 years 
- office facilities 
- counterpart arrangements for meetings,
workshops and forums
- SDP contribution estimated at USD 0.045

* 
* 

Inadequate allocation of grant funds
Inadequate counterpart budget
* 
Inadequate consultant skills
* Delays in the availability of resources, staff
and experts

Footnote:
*The Ministeral Restructuring Act, the Public Administration Act, the Budget Procedures Act, the Public Financial Management and Accounting Act, and the Public Debt Management Act.

Results Summnary: CDP for Financial and Corporate Competitiveness 

Annex B16
Page 8 of 10

Diagnosis: While much has been accomplished since the crisis, the competitiveness and financial condition of financial institutions and firms needs to be strengthened.
Strategic Objective: Enhance structural reform (both strategy and implementation) to decrease vulnerability, allocate resources to the most productive uses, promote sustainable growth and ensure access to assets and
income opportunities for all segments of society during this next phase of the recovery.

Impact 

Long-term consequence of the outcomes, tlhe development changes in society or the economy or 
environment to whlichI activity contributes

MDG : National (2015): The crisis in 1997 cost the Thai taxpayer -30 percent of GDP and drove 3m people (4.5 percent of 
population) into poverty. A key cause was non-productive lending/ investment in the financial and corporate sectors. This 
CDP aims to alleviate poverty by reducing the frequency and cost of future downturns 
Northeast (2015): Poverty reduction in the NE will be addressed in the financial sector strategy and micro finance
components.

Reach/Partners 

Risks

* 

Contribution of all sectors of 
the society to achieve the goals of 
the constitution 

* 
* 
* 

Lack of RTG's commitment & leadership
Lack of coordination among line agencies
Change of RTG's priorities

Outcome 

I Direct and short-to-medium ternm effects of outputs on tile beneficiaries of the activities supported by the CDP

Desired Outcome: Enhance the competitiveness of Thai financial institutions and firms. 
Intermediate Outcomes: 
* Strengthen the financial sector strategy and structure. Enhance market discipline via a transition to a limited deposit 
insurance program from the current blanket guarantee. 
Increase access to financial services on a risk adjusted basis to 
SMEs and people in the provinces, as well as urban areas 
* Enhance supervision and regulation of financial institutions; successful Core Principles assessment 
* Develop capital markets as a source of financing and risk management for financial institutions and firms 
* Improve the speed and quality of corporate restructuring via TAMC and the legal and out of court regimes 
* Promote new lending and investment on a risk adjusted basis 
• 
Enhance corporate governance, disclosure and accountability to stakeholders 

I_I

* Extensive and regular dialogue 
between policy makers and private 
sector participants 
* Engagement of provincial leaders 
* Support from government 
* Support from partners 
* Coordination among line agencies 
and the National Competitiveness
Committee

* Delay in implementation
* Changes in political direction
* Lack of integrated approach and poor
coordination across line agencies and
partners
* Resistance to reform from bureaucratic or
vested interests

Output 

Most immnediate results produced by the CDP components - conmpleted reports, workshops, staff trained and dissemination

* Analytical reports and workshop to support the Financial Sector Blueprint, TAMC & fin/corp competitiveness 
* Capacity building/training to improve supervision and regulation of bank and NBFIs (28 projects) 
* Technical assistance, analytical reports and workshops on capital market architecture and infrastructure, risk mgt 
products and investor education (11 projects), and on corporate debt restructuring via TAMC (3 projects) 
* Twinning and technical assistance which improves governance and risk mgt of gov't owned financial institutions, which 
sets a framework for micro-finance, improves credit information & train property valuers 
Technical assistance, training and equipment to support economic law reform; technical assistance to improve legal and
out of court framework for secured lending and debt resolution
* Capacity building and technical assistance to improve governance and disclosure (six projects)

.

* Coordination among partners 
* Coordination among line agencies 

* Discontinuation in the participation from
stakeholders
* Time consuming intemal review of
documents
* Lack of continuity of the counterparts at the
line agencies

Input 

I Resources provided the Bank, Government and other Donors to implement the components identified above

* 

* 

-
-

Bank (FY 03-04) 
Resources (USD) 
- WB Budget= 500,000 
Trust Fund = 2,400,000 
TA Loan = 3,030,000 
Expertise 
35 percent staff time of TTL
60 percent staff time of a
national staff plus 40 percent of
2nd ntl staf,
Staff from DEC, WBI, FSPS

-
-

* 

* 

Government 
Cost sharing by the counterpart, 
estimated to be around US$ 1,000,000 
Cash contribution from line agencies 
of $1,050,000 (BoT) and for SDP under 
ASEM 

Key Partners 

ADB, IMF; 
Bilateral Partners: Kenan 
Institute, AusAid, GTZ. 

* Additional partner funding 
* Strengthened regional coordination 
on knowledge sharing and 
assistance to enhance 'regional 
public goods' aspect of work in 
Thailand 

* 

* 

* 

Inadequate funding (ASEM grant request
key)
Inadequate budget availability from the
Government counterparts and the Bank
Delays in the availability of resources staff
and experts

Results Summary: CDP for Social Protection

Annex B16
Page 9 of 10

Diagnosis: The economic crisis brought to surface structural weaknesses in the country's social protection system. Previously, Thais were dependent on informal support mechanisms, which on an ad-hoc basis tended to
individual needs. The need to strengthen the formal system is now recognized by the government and civil society.
Strategic Objective: CDP-SP seeks to assist RTG to establish a formal social protection mechanism by diversifying social risk management instruments (insurance, safety net and competitive labor market) while preserving
the community-based approach currently practiced.

Impact 

Long-term consequence of the outcomes, the development changes in society or the economy or 
environment to which activity contributes

MDGI: National (2015): Achieving MDG+ through a functioning social protection system that provides wide coverage with 
choices and equity that embraces formal and informal approaches 
Northeast (2015): Achieving MDGs in Northeast provinces through a system similar to the above. 

Reach/Partners 

Risks

* 

Contribution of all sectors of the 
society to achieve the goals of the 
constitution 

* 

* 

Lack of RTG commitment
Lack of coordination among agencies and
stakeholders
* Change of priorities in National plans

Outcome 

Direct and short-to-medium term effects of outputs on the beneficiaries of the activities supported by the CDP

Desired Outcome: National Goal (2006)- Improved social protection and enhanced social insurance for all age groups. 
Intermediate Outcomes: 
* 
Enhancing coverage, targeting, and efficiency of on-going social assistance programs 
* 
Institutionalizing reforms that broaden the coverage of employment services in an equitable and cost-effective way 
* 
Strengthening information management system to target interventions in a responsive manner. 
* 
Institutionalizing sound and fiscally sustainable pensions system 
* 
Improving compliance with the amended occupational safety and health standards. 
* 
Institutionalizing a management framework that will support the implementation of the unemployment insurance scheme.

* Strong government-led program 
* Donors support incremental 
capacity needs 
* Government and CSO work in 
partnership 
Labor unions are actively 
participating

* 

* 

* 

* 
* 
* 

* 

Commitment of the new Ministry
Reforms fails to achieve their objectives
Delay in implementation
Changes in political direction
Lack of well functioning reform in M&E
Poor coordination across ministries

Output 

Most inmmediate results produced by the CDP components
I Components: (a) Social Assistance; (b) Employment Services; (c) Unemployment Insurance; and (d) Occupational Health and Safety

* 

* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

Prepare Social Risk Assessment (SRA) and labor market information (LMI) report at the national, regional and provincial 
levels 
Improve design of Socio-economic survey and establishment survey. 
Prepare framework and guidelines for the implementation of unemployment insurance. 
Publish policy and technical documents on above components (2 per year) 
Conduct workshops and learning forums on selected topics in labor and social protection issues 
Undertake pilot activities for selected programs -- labor market information, social risk assessment. 
Conduct capacity building/training on labor related issues e.g. Ul simulation, labor market information system, risk and 
vulnerability assessment (> 200 government staff trained in new skills)

* Donor Coordination 
* Ministry, employees and unions 
work together with the Bank 
* Coordination between the PIU and 
other departments within the
Ministry of Labor and between the
PIU and Ministry of Social and
Human Development

* Discontinuation in the participation from
stakeholders
* Consultants lacking appropriate skills
* Timely internal review of documents

Itnput 

Resources provided by the Bank, Government and other Donors to implement the components listed above

* 

* 

Bank (FY03-FY04) 
Resources (USD) 
Budget 
= 0.24 million 
- TrFut-Fund-=-1.5-million-(ASEM) 
-Expertise 
- 50 percent staff time of TTL 
- Half time national staff 
- Staff from DEC, WBI and HD 

* 

Governtment (FY03-FY04) 
Contribution in kind, estimated to be 
around USD 0.55 million to cover: 
- staff time of about 2-years 
- office facilities 
- counterpan arrangements-for- 
meetings, workshops and forums
SDP Contribution estimated at USD

* 

0.035 million

Donors 
Additional funding mobilized 
from ILO, JICA, AusAID, GTZ 
and UNICEF for specific 
-program-areas 

* Additional funding from other 
donors 
* Regional coordination in terms of 
knowledge and trust fund sharing 

* 

* 
* 
* 

Inadequate allocation of the Grant

funds

Inadequate consultant skills
Inadequate counterpart budget
Delays in the availability of resources
and-staff and experts

Results Summary: CDP for Poverty Analysis and Monitoring 

Annex B16

Page 10 of 10

Diagnosis: Poverty re-emerges as an important issue after the crisis. It takes on a new dimension and requires holistic approach to eradicate. Thailand is re-evaluating its poverty-related policies, programs, and
projects.
Strategic Objective: CDP-PAM aims to support the qovernment's effort in reducing poverty through capacity building, policy re'orm and participatory activities.
tmpact 
Reach/Partners 

Long-term consequence of the outcomes, the development changes in society of the economy of 
environment to which activity contributes

Risks

MDG+: National (2015): Improving quality of life for the poor in urban and rural areas that enhance self-reliance opportunities 
for improving the local economy (Goal 1). 
Northeast (2015): Halving poverty in North East Provinces (Goal 1). 
Intermediate goal: Reducing poverty incidence to less than 12 percent by 2006 

* Contribution of all sectors of the 
society to achieve the goals of the 
Constitution 

Outcome 

Direct and short-to-medium termn effects of outputs on the beneficiaries of the activities supported by the CDP

Desired Outcome: Enhancing opportunities for the poor through the implementation of the Poverty Reduction Strategy (PRS) 
Intermediate Outcomes: 
* 
Targeting interventions to tackle spatial distribution of poverty and inequality that can reduce regional variation in living 
standards. 
Standardizing methodology/tool for poverty measurement that analyzes poverty, inequality and vulnerability 
Establishing a tracking system to monitor changes in poverty 
Establishing linkages between poverty and other key dimensions, like gender and environment. 

* 
* 
* 

* Strong role of NESDB in influencing 
the implementation of the PRS 
* Strong network of CSOs and local 
community organizations working 
together 
* Partnership between the government 
and CSO

Output 

Most immediate results produced by the CDP
I Components: (a) Poverty Database; (b) Poverty Analysis and Measurement; (c) Poverty Reduction Strategies; (d) Poverty Monitoring and E aluation System

* 
* 

Lack of RTG commitment
Lack of coordination among
agencies and other stakeholders
* Change of priorities in National
Plans

* 

Lack of RTG commitment for PRS
* The implemented reforms fail to
achieve the objectives
* Failure to implement
* Delays in implementation
* Changes in political direction

* Discontinuation of stakeholders in
the process
* Government discontinues the
implementation of PRS
* Timely internal review of documents

* 
* 

* 

Inadequate trust fund resources
Inadequate budget availability from
government counterpart and from
the Bank
Staff lacking appropriate skills

* 

Disseminate poverty map and, depending on outcome of feasibility study, panel component of socio-economic survey 
(SES). 
* 
Prepare framework and guidelines for poverty, inequality and vulnerability measurement. 
* 
Establish poverty monitoring system, based on indicators from both MDGs and PRS action plans. 
* Conduct feedback workshops and learning forums with counterparts on topics related to outcomes. 
* 
Hold regular consultation with line ministries, civil society, NGOs, researchers and private sector on poverty related 
issues. 
* Conduct capacity building/training on poverty related issues e.g. poverty map, poverty database and measurement and 
panel component for SES survey (more than 200 trained in new skills)
Input 

I Resources provided by the Bank, Government and other Donors to implement the components identified above
Bank (FY03-FY05) 
Government (FY03-FY05) 
Donors 
Additional funding mobilized from 
UNDP, UNIFEM and UNICEF for 
specific program areas. 

* 

* 

Involvement of government, civil 
society and local community 
representatives in shaping outputs 
* Participation of Donors in the 
preparation work and review of draft 
outputs
Involvement of academics and think
tanks

* 

* Additional funding from other donors 
* Regional sharing of knowledge and 
best practices 

* 

* Resources (USD) 
- Budget 
= 0.25 million 
- Trust Fund = 2.3 million (ASEM) 
Expertise 
- 50 percent staff time of TTL 
- Half time national staff 
- Staff from DEC, WBI and PREM 

Contribution in kind, 
estimated to be around USD 
0.95 million to cover: 
- Staff time of about 3 years 
- Office facilities
- Counterpart arrangements for
meetings, workshops and forums
SDP contribution estimated
at USD 0.055 million 

* 

___

