Document of
The World Bank

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Report No. 25141

MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENT

OF THE

INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT

AND

THE INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION

TO THE

EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS

ON A

COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY

OF THE WORLD BANK GROUP

FOR

THE PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF CHINA

January 22, 2003

China Country Management Unit
East Asia and Pacific Region

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance of
their official duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without World Bank authorization.

P

b
u

i
l

c

D

i

c
s

l

o

s

u

r

e

A

u

t

o
h

r

i

z

d
e

P

b
u

i
l

c

D

i

c
s

l

o

s

u

r

e

A

u

t

o
h

r

i

z

d
e

P

b
u

i
l

c

D

i

c
s

l

o

s

u

r

e

A

u

t

o
h

r

i

z

d
e

P

b
u

i
l

c

D

i

c
s

l

o

s

u

r

e

A

u

t

o
h

r

i

z

d
e

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS

(as of October 31, 2002)

Currency 
Currency Unit 

US$ I 00 
Y I 00 

= 
= 

Renminbi

Yuan (Y)

Y 8 277
US$ 0 1208

FISCAL YEAR

July I - June 30

ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS

AAA 
ADB 
APEC 
APL 
AusAID 

CAE 
CAS 
CCICED 

CDF 
CPDF 
DFID 

ESW 
EU 
FDI 
FY 
GDP 
GDLN 
GEF 
IBRD 

ICT 

IDA 
IFC 

-
-
-
-
-

-
-
-

-
-
-

-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-

-

-
-

NGO 
NPL 
ODS 
OED 
PBC 
PPP 
QAG 
RAINS 

Analytical and Advisory Activities 
Asian Development Bank 
Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation 
Adaptable Program Loan 
Australian Agency for International 
Development 
Country Assistance Evaluation 
Country Assistance Strategy 
China Council for International 
Cooperation on Environment and 
Development 
Comprehensive Development Framework 
China Project Development Facility 
Dcpartment for International 
Development (United Kingdom) 
Economic and Sector Work 
European Union 
SDPC 
Foreign Direct Investment 
SME 
Fiscal Year 
SOE 
Gross Domestic Product 
SSIF 
Global Development Learning Network 
TA 
Global Environment Facility 
TVE 
International Bank for Reconstruction and UNDP 
Development
Infonmation and Communication 
Technology
International Development Association 
Intemational Finance Corporation 

WBI 
WTO 

IMF 
JBIC 
MIDGs 
NMIGA 
MOF 
MOFTEC 

UNEP 

-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-

-
International Monetary Fund
-
Japan Bank for International Cooperation
- Millcnnium Development Goals
- Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency
- Ministry of Finance
- Ministry of Foreign Trade and Economic
Cooperation
Non-Government Organization
Non-Performing Loan
Ozone-Depleting Substances
Operations Evaluation Dcpartmenit
People's Bank of China
Purchasing Power Parity
Quality Assurance Group
Regional Air Pollution Information and
Simulation
State Development Planning Commission
Small and Medium Enterprise
State-owned Enterprise
Sichuan SME Investment Fund
Technical Assistance
Township and Village Entcrprise
United Nations Development Programme

-
-
-
-
-
-
-

-

United Nations Environment Programmuie

- World Bank Institute
- World Trade Organization

Vice President: 
Country Director: 
Task Team Leader: 

IBRD 
Jemalud-din Kassum, EAP 
Yukon Huang, EACCF 
Akihiko Nishio, EACCQ 

IFC
Assaad J. Jabre, CIOVP
Javed Hamid, CEAHK
Stoyan Tenev, CEADR

PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF CHINA
COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
Fiscal Years 2003-05

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Page No.

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 

.

.

1. COUNTRY CONTEXT .................... 
A. Overview. 
B. Macroeconomic Management .1
C. Structural Reform ............................. 
............................. 
D. Poverty and Inequality 
E. Economic Outlook and External Environment. 

. .............. 

.............................. 

............... 

.

I
I

3

6

8

2. THE GOVERNMENT'S PRIORITIES .......

................. 

10..................... 
10

3. PROGRESS DURING THE LAST CAS PERIOD AND LESSONS LEARNED .
A. Objectives of the Last CAS ........... 
.
........................................................ 
B. Major Developments Since the Last CAS .14
C. QAG and OED Assessment. 
D. Client Survey and Feedback from Consultations ............ 

.................... 

.......... 

4. THEMATIC FRAMEWORK FOR THE BANK GROUP'S
ASSISTANCE PROGRAM 
...................................................... 
A. Developing Themes for a Changing Situation .22
B. Improving the Business Environment and Developing the Market Economy .23
C. Addressing Needs of the Poorer/Disadvantaged People and Lagging Regions .25
D. Facilitating an Environmentally Sustainable Development Process 
... 
................ 

...... 

14
14

19

20

22

28

30
32

38

44
45
46

5. THE BANK GROUP ASSISTANCE PROGRAM 
.
.30
A. Knowledge Agenda/AAA Program ....................... ........ ........... 
........ 
B. Lending Program: Levels, Focus and Selectivity ....... 
C. Exposure .37
D. Portfolio Management ................. 
E. Safeguard Policies .39
F. Partnerships .40

................................... 

......... 

G. Risks .............................................. 

H. Creditworthiness 
I. 
J. Managing for Development Results 

............. 

IFC and MIGA Programs ................................. 

.............. 

................... 

............... 

... 42

............................. 

................ 

...................... 

ANNEXES

B5: 

A 1: 
A2: 
B 1: 
B2: 
B3: 
B4: 

Key Economic and Program Indicators - Change From Last CAS
China at a Glance
Progress Made in Achieving Goals of Previous China Country Assistance Strategy (1997)
Selected Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
FY03-05 Lending Program
The Knowledge Agenda, FY03-05
Social Indicators
B6: 
Key Economic Indicators
B7: 
Key Exposure Indicators
B8: 
IBRD Medium-tenr 
Exposure Projections
B9(a): Operations Portfolio (IBRD/IDA and Grants)
B9(b): Statement of IFC's Held and Disbursed Portfolio
BlO: Country Program Matrix (FY03-05)
C: 
Summary of Consultation Results
D: 
The Bank Group Assistance Program
E: 
Global Goals and Corporate Priorities
F: 
Private Sector Development Strategy
G: 
World Bank Support for Good Developmental Governance
H: 
Sumnmary of China Country Gender Review
I. 
Improving the Quality and Client Responsiveness of Core Project Services: Financial
Management and Procurement
Overview of Ongoing External Assistance to China

J: 

TEXT TABLES

Table 1 1: Macroeconomic Indicators ................... 
Table 1.2: Key Economic Performance Indicators 
Table 3.1: Operational Performance Indicators 
Table 3.2: 
IFC Program in China: Approvals 1997-2002 
..
Table 5 1: 
The Bank's Evolving Objectives and Instruments: The Case of Energy .. 
Table 5.2: Key Debt Indicators, 1997-2001 
...................................... ...... 

................................. ...... 
.. 
.. 

TEXT BOXES

2
9
14
18
35
45

4

8

Box 1.1: 
Box 1.2: 

Box 2.1: 
Box 2.2: 
Box 3.1: 

Recent Structural Reforms.. 
Summary of China's Progress with Respect to the Millennium
Development Goals 
Main Features of the Tenth Five-Year Plan (2001-2005) 
.
Establishing a Framework for Good Developmental Governance 
Examples of Recent Bank Group Support for Innovation

...... 

and Change in Chm a ............................................... 

.......... .................................... 

.10

.

.

12

................... 19

Box 4.1: 
Thematic Framework for the CAS ......... 
.............. 
.............................. 
Box 4.2: World Bank Support for Improving China's Financial System 
.
.25
Box 4.3: 
Helping China's Rural Poor 
..
Box 5.1: 
Sub-national Development Issues - An Important Area of Bank Involvement .. .

23

27
31

Box 5.2: 
Box 5.3: 
Box 5.4: 

Examples of Support for Innovation and Change ........... 
........................... 
Blending of DFID Grant and IBRD Loan: Partnership in Action ....... 
............ 
China's Development Model and How It Compares with CDF 
....... 
............ 

TEXT FIGURES

Figure 1.1: Headline Economic Indicators (1996-2001) 
........... 
............................. 
Figure 1.2: Number of Poor in Rural Areas, 1987-1999 
............ 
............................. 
Figure 3.1: 
IBRD and IDA Commitments to China, FY93-02 .. .
............................... 
Figure 3.2: Portfolio Quality ............... 
....... 
................................................. 
Figure 4.1: Environmental Issues and Bank Support ................... 
....... 
.............. 
Figure 5.1: Geographic Focus of Lending ..
Figure 5.2: Lending - Sectoral Composition ....................... 
...... 
. .................. ... 
Figure 5.3: Bank Operations by CAS Theme 
...................................................... 

........................... .......... ................ 

36
41
42

2
7
15
16
29
33
34
37

CHINA: COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY

Executive Summary

Background

i. 
This is the first Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) for China smce it ceased borrowing
on concessional terms from the International Development Association (IDA). The country
context now is very different from that of the previous CAS in 1997 and the Progress Report in
1998. In particular, the new CAS coincides with: a shift in China's reforms, from the
liberalization phase to the more difficult structural and institution building phase, dynamic
growth of the private sector; and a continuing need but reduced availability of concessional
external financmg. The CAS also reflects the changing nature of the China-World Bank Group
relationship, in particular: the potential gains to both sides, with China positioned not only to
receive Bank assistance, but also to share lessons of its development experiences more broadly
and contribute to thmiking on global development issues of common concern; the growing
importance of the Bank's advisory services; the more active role that the International Finance
Corporation (IFC) and Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA) will play, and the
recognition of benefits that Bank partnerships with other donors, the private sector and civil
society can have.

Recent Developments

ii. 
Since the last CAS, China has managed macroeconomic conditions well. It has relied on
stimulatory macroeconomic policies and a stable exchange rate to sustain domestic demand and
activity and support structural reforms. Economic performance during 1997-2001 was among
the best in the world, with annual GDP growth averaging 7-8 percent, and a much strengthened
external position At the same time, considerable progress has been made against a broad
structural refonn agenda and with respect to the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) This
is remarkable given the depth of the East Asian financial crisis, as well as the dislocations caused
in the domestic economy as a result of the policy initiatives implemented during this period,
most notably in the enterprise and rural sectors. Chma 's accession to the World Trade
Organization (WTO), achieved in 2001, is providing major impetus to continued reforms.

Developnment Challenges Facing China

iii. 
Despite the impressive growth, sound macroeconomic policies and large cushion of
domestic savings and international reserves, China needs to address the challenges of
strengthening its medium- term financial position. Government debt increased; contingent
liabilities are also large, mainly as a result of non-performing loans in the banking system, under-
funded pensions, and enterprise arrears. Equally, there is need to build on recent reforms to
strengthen the fiscal position, especially sub-national finance, and reshape institutions and the
business environment in order to address key aspects of China's national development agenda.

iv. 
Despite substantial progress on poverty reduction over the last decade, more than 200
million people m China still live on expenditures of less than US$1 a day (34 million in 1999

11

using the official US$0.67 poverty line). They account for about 18 percent of the globalpoor
and are found mostly in rural areas of the lagging inland provinces. Trends in inequality and
social indicators suggest that disparities have widened in recent years, between urban and rural
areas and also between coastal and inland areas. While China is on track to achieve the MDGs,
barriers such as unequal access to health and education are still formidable challenges.

Government's Priorities

v. 
The Govermnent's development strategy, as crystallized in its Tenth Five-Year Plan
(2001-2005) and reaffirmed in the recent 16th National Congress of the Communist Party,
identified as a national goal the achievement of a "well-off society." While GDP is expected to
quadruple during 2000-2020, the concept of China's development that is embraced goes well
beyond increases in income to stress the quality of such growth and the importance of all-round
social progress. Environmental sustainability and the application of modern science and
technology, especially information and communication technology (ICT) to raise productivity
and generate greater benefits are the cornerstones of the strategy. Entrepreneurship, an increased
role for private investment, closer integration with the world economy, and an improwed legal
system and stronger protection of property rights have been emphasized. The increased
flexibility of resource movements, a continued emphasis on human resource development, active
measures to narrow social disparities - especially rural-urban and regional gaps, and better
management of the rural urban transition are identified in recent policy statements as key areas
of concentration. The Govermnent has stressed poverty reduction, sustainable development of
its lagging western region, and informatization as strategic priorities, and for each established a
"leading group" with coordination responsibilities that cut across the mandates of individual
agencies. After downsizmg the central government administrationdrastically in 1998, the
Government has been strengthening governance of the public sector. In particular, it has been
fighting corruption aggressively and transforming the function of government from direct
involvement in commercial activities to strategic guidance and economic regulation, market
supervision, social protection and public service.

Developments and Lessons Learned Since the Last CAS in 1997

vi. 
Operationally, lending declined sharply during this period, due largely to concerns about
exposure of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) to China - since
the IBRD single-country concentration limit was being approached - the increased financial cost
and preparation requirements of IBRD loans, and the availability of domestic low- interest credit
that was provided as part of the Government's stimulus package. However, the Bank's portfolio
has remained strong and even improved, while demand for the Bank's Analytical and Advisory
Activities (AAA) shifted towards more challenging issues - exemplified by deep-rooted
structural problems related to globalization, governance, poverty and sustainable development.
Greater emphasis has also been given in AAA to "rapid response" policy notes, and less to the
more traditional, comprehensive reports. Institutionally, the Bank's decentralization initiative
has made it easier to serve its client, but the complexities in dealing with the Bank's matrix
structure along with the application of its environmental and social safeguard policies have been
recurnng issues.

vii. 
The Bank's Quality Assurance Group (QAG) and the Operations Evaluation Department
(OED) have recently carried out various assessments of Bank-supported activities, including
reviews of operations for poverty reduction, forestry, environment, involuntary resettlement
related to river basin development, energy development, and transport. These evaluations found
strategies to be well directed generally and projects that either in whole or in part set the standard
for best practice; they also provided valuable feedback on areas to improve. The OED is now
carrying out a Country Assistance Evaluation for China, due to be completed in early FY04

Vill. 

Since 1997, government officials, project implementing agencies, and representatives of
civil society have participated in five formal consultation exercises, and most recently in a broad-
based client survey. The private sector has also been extensively consulted by IFC, in particular
through a major study of the domestic private sector in China and a Joint Bank/IFC study on
enterprise reform and corporate governance. Overall, the views voiced during these
consultations have been consistent over time. The Bank's assistance to China has been
appreciated, in particular the transferring of knowledge and new ideas through both lending and
AAA, while concerns have been raised about the cost of doing business with the Bank and the
need to streamline procedures.

Thle World Bank Group's Assistanice Progranm

ix. 
Under the overarching theme of supporting China in makmg two historic transitions -
from a rural, agricultural society to an urban, industrial society, and from a centrally-planned
economy to a more globally integrated market-based economy - the Bank Group's assistance
strategy is designed to help China: (a) impr-ove the business environment and help accelerate the
transition to a market economy, mostly through an array of knowledge transfer activities; (b)
address the needs of the poorer and disadvantagedpeople and lagging regions, through
mvestment lending in rural development, infrastructure and social sectors, as well as AAA and
training; and (c) facilitate an environmentally sustainable development process, through
investment lending in natural resource management, watershed rehabilitation and wastewater
treatment, energy, global environment projects supported by the Global Environment Facility
and Montreal Protocol, and policy work.

x. 
Given the increasing emphasis on knowledge in the China-Bank Group relationship, a
major Knowledge Agenda is planned to facilitate policy discussions and lay the groundwork for
future lending. Its key features can be characterized as being: more demand-driven; reliant on a
variety of delivery mechanisms including research; and based on the increasing use of local
experts and institutions. Under the broad themes identified above, the Knowledge/AAA Agenda
is organized to address some specific development concerns identified by the Government.
Adjustment to its accession to the World Trade Organization (WTO) is one such area of work, as
is sub-national finance. This involves an assessment of domestic as well as
regional/international impacts of the wider opening of the Chinese economy, and the need to
restructure financial institutions and promote the private sector Equally, issues related to rural-
urban migration, labor market flexibility, social protection, and urbanization are being tackled
through this program, supported by capacity-building through World Bank Institute (WBI)
courses (including distance learning). An important thread that runs through much of this work

iv

is the need to address China's still-substantial poverty and growing inequality, exacerbated by
enviromnental problems, in all their dimensions.

xi. 
An annual IBRD lending program of about US$1.2-1.3 billion is envisioned, larger than
in the last two years but less than the US$3 billion peak reached in the mid- 1990s. This is
subject to completion of ongoing discussions of an exposure management arrangement.
Selectivity has been enhanced by focusing more on the disadvantaged regions and the importance
attached to promoting innovation and change through Bank operations, including in the coastal
provinces. In terms of geographical distribution, three-quarters of the proposed projects will
support the poorer, inner provinces, compared with 62 percent dunng the last CAS period. In
terms of sectoral composition, transport - with a focus on completing key segments of the
national and provincial highway system and linking the lagging regions - and urban projects
focused on environmental mitigation (water, sanitation and air pollution) remain the two largest
sectors, accounting for 34 percent and 24 percent of the FY02-04 lending program, respectively.
Lending for social sectors including free-standing techmcal assistance accounts for 14 percent,
facilitated by blending arrangements supported by the United Kmgdom's Department for
International Development (DFID) and potentially by other external partners. Rural
development - supporting both poverty reduction and natural resource management objectives -
accounts for about a fifth of expected lending. Energy - focusing on raising efficiency and on
renewable energy - accounts for less than 10 percent.

xii. 
Support for innovation and change is a major feature of Bank operations. For mstance,
the proposed projects would introduce more programmatic and pilot operations, strengthen links
to private sector financing, push urban lending down to secondary and smaller cities under an
intra-provincial framework, move further toward an inter- modal approach to transport needs
within a province and down to local levels, support non-traditional and smaller-scale energy
projects, and deepen the focus on social service needs in poor areas.

xiii. 
Over the past two to three years, the Bank has deepened its collaboration with other
partners to share knowledge and enhance results. Most notable is the tripartite partnership with
the Government and DFID - its cornerstone is the "blending" of DFID grants with IBRD loans to
provide concessionary finding for social sector and poverty reduction projects in the post-IDA
period, while tapping different types of expertise to enhance the quality of operations. Other
important examples are the first formal Bank-European Union (EU) cofinanced project in Asia
for natural forest management and AusAID's support for the Bank's Global Development
Learning Network (GDLN) activities in one of the poorest western provinces. The ability to
attract more concessional finance for China's development will depend upon stronger upstream
cooperation by external partners on a complex development agenda as well as on innovative
mechanisms that help surmount local financing difficulties. Collaboration has also been
increased with the UN agencies - for poverty- related work and in the health sector especially -
and with the International Monetary Fund on fiscal reforms. With the greater field presence of
the Asian Development Bank, more efforts have been made to align sectoral approaches and
hannonize institutional procedures and policies with those of the client

xiv. 
IFC's strategic priorities during the CAS period include: targeted technical assistance to
improve the business environment, particularly for financial markets, private participation in

v

infrastructure and small and medium enterprises (SMEs); SME capacity building and
development of alternative sources for SME financing; the financial sector development by
supporting private banking and non-bank financial institutions; private sector development in
China's western and interior provinces; enterprise restructuring; and expanding the presence of
private enterprises in infrastructure, social services, and envirom-nental technology sectors. The
focus will be on model transactions that set standards in corporate governance, international
accounting, environmental technologies and practices, and efficiency of private enterprise
operations, with the aim of creating demonstration effects and helping Chinese companies
become internationally competitive players. MIGA's activities are intended to generally
complement the Bank Group's strengthened emphasis on sub-national capacities in China, while
addressing the interest in guarantees and investment marketing ansing out of China's post-WTO
opening.

Risks

xv. While China's current financial situation remains strong, the medium- tenn fiscal position
needs strengthening, mostly due to risks from contingent liabilities. However, in assessing the
overall macroeconomic/financial risk for China, the following factors should also be considered:
(a) the Government's track record in economic management; (b) on the domestic front, China's
impressive growth momentum and its predominant reliance on domestic savings for financing;
and (c) on the external front, its remarkable trade performance, the restricted convertibility of the
currency on capital account, and its strong external reserves position in relation to overall public
indebtedness. As for country risks, the main source would be the economic dislocations that are
likely to follow closer global integration in the wake of accession to the WTO. To manage these
risks, the Government would need to deal proactively in handling post-WTO accession
adjustments, especially in the lagging regions, while continuing to address the longer-term
problems of poverty, inequality and urban labor displacement.

MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE
INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT
AND THE INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION
TO THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS ON A
COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY OF THE WORLD BANK GROUP FOR CHINA

1. COUNTRY CONTEXT

A. OVERVIEW

1. 
The progress of China over the past two decades is as remarkable as the complexity
of the development challenges it faces. So far, it has managed the transition from a centrally-
planned to a market-based economy better than most other transition countries. Officially-
reported per capita income has increased at an annual average rate of almost 9 percent over the
past two decades, reaching US$890 last year. In 2000, China entered the ranks of lower middle-
income developing countnes. During the period since the start of economic liberalization in the
late 1970s, over 250 million people have been lifted out of poverty. Clearly, framed against
international development experience, both its anti-poverty and growth perfonnance are
impressive. In this sense, drawing on its know-how, China has much to offer the developing
world.

2. 
But the size of its population (1.27 billion in 2001) and economy, and its vast
geographical area (third-largest in the world), expose China to the entire range of development
problems confronting large countries These problems are complicated by inadequate human
capital formation, a severely degraded natural resource base, and a still-high incidence of
poverty. Further, China's rapid economic development is occurring in the midst of major
systemic transformations - from central planning to markets, from an agrarian to a
manufacturing/services based economy, and from being relatively closed to fast-paced
globalization. A decentralized administrative and economic setting makes the management of
this complex economic transition even more difficult.

3. 
There are no simple answers to China's development challenges, but China's success will
bring not just national benefits, it will also generate regional and global payoffs. Understanding
and helping to address such challenges constitute the core of the Bank Group's country
assistance strategy.

B. MACROECONOMIC MANAGEMENT

4. 
Since the last full CAS in 1997, China has managed macroeconomic conditions well.
It has relied on stimulatory macroeconomic policies and a stable exchange rate to sustain
domestic demand and support continued structural reforms. Despite the debate on reported
statistics in tracking China's economy, it is clear that these policies, combined with foreign
investment inflows, have delivered strong economic results Economic perfonnance since 1997
has been among the best in the world, especially considering the structural policy and
institutional reform program implemented during this period. Specifically, enterprise reform
initiatives, increased import competition, and a policy- induced "soft- landing" after 1995 resulted

- 2 -

Figure 1.1: Headline Indicators (1996-2001)

in major structural adjustments in the Chinese economy. It is estimated that nearly 26 million (or
one in five workers) in state-owned
enterprises (SOEs) lost their jobs during 
1998 to mid-2002 (in addition to a 
smaller number of non-SOE layoffs) - of 
which some 17 million have since found 
employment. The pace of job-creation 
outside farming fell well below the 2.4 
percent rate considered necessary to 
absorb the 8-9 million people who seek 
new jobs each year. Moreover, the 
persistence of excess production 

100X

6150

o 

-2 

4 -

2x 

12 

10 

250

200

_

o 

50

0

-w. 

-

8 

W

capacity and deflationary pressure 

throughout this period suggests that the 
macroeconomic effects of structural
transitions are still to run their course (Figure 1.1).

1996 

1997 

1998 

1999 

2000 

2001

IGDP r 

'CPI -FX 

reserves

5. 
Nevertheless, neither during the Asian crisis (1997-98) nor in the more recent global
slowdown (2000-present) has the Chinese economy suffered from as severe a downturn as its
neighbors, or other developing countries. Over this period, GDP growth averaged 7-8 percent
annually. Despite strong export growth, the contribution of net external demand (exports less
irnports) to economic growth turned negative after 1999. However, consumption and investment
demand were supported by a combination of fiscal, quasi fiscal, and monetary policy, aided by
the domestic spending resulting from foreign direct investment (Table 1.1). While government
revenue rose from 12.1 percent of GDP in 1997 to 17.2 percent in 2001, the government budget
deficit increased from 1.8 percent of GDP to 4 percent in 1999, before falling slightly to 3.2
percent in 2001. Governnent expenditure, as a share of GDP, increased by 6.5 percentage points
over a fbur-year period. Over the same period, government debt rose from 11.4 percent of GDP
to 23.8 percent.

Table 1.1: Macroeconomic Indicators

| 

1996 

1997 

1998 

1999 

2000 

2001

Growth (% per year) 
GDPgrowth 
Consumer price index 
Non-agricultural employment 
Shares (% of GDP) 
Domestic savings 
Budget balance 
External current account balance 
Total government debt 

Levels (US$ billion) 

96 
8 3 
2 9 

42 
-I 6 
0 9 

I 

88 
2 8 
1 6 

43 
-1 8 
4 2 
11 4 

78 
-0 8 
0 6 

42 
-3.0 
3 4 
17 8 

___IT1 

__

I

7.1 
-1.4 
1 0 

41 
-4 0 
2 1 
20 9 

_

80 
04 
1.9 

39 
-3 6 
1 9 
22 8 

73
0 7
2 2

40
-3 2
1 5
23 8

Net FDI inflow 
38 1 
417 
Stock of intcrnational reserves 
105 
140 
Stock of external debt a/ 
129 
147 
Ofwhich Short-term debt 
25 
31 
Source World Bank and IMF staff estimates and official data
a/ Coverage was cxpanded in 2001 to include categories excluded earlier, especially short-tenm debt, which is now shown
on a remaining, rather than onginal, maturity basis

37 5 
166 
146 
13 

411 
145 
144 
17 

37 0 
155 
152 
15 

37 4
212
170
51

- 3 -

6. 
Macroeconomic growth has been sustained, but the medium-term financial position
needs to be strengthened Not only has recorded govermment debt increased, but contingent
liabilities, too, have risen as a result of non-performing loans in the banking system, under-
funded pensions, enterprise arrears and other liabilities. Under various assumptions, total public
debt could account for a very large proportion of GDP (see Risks: Section 5-G). Despite the rise
in govemment debt, China retains a number of cushions to withstand extemnal economic shocks.
The external current account surplus has narrowed, reflecting the slower growth of world export
markets and a surge in imports as both domestically-owned and foreign- invested finms retooled
for the period following accession to the World Trade Organization (WTO), but export potential
is good. After rising in 1997-98, external debt - both total and short tenr 
- had fallen by 2000;
by end-2001, it was 14.7 percent of GDP (definitional changes do not penmt a comparison
between 2001 and earlier years). The stock of international reserves has doubled from the end-
1996 level, and is 25 percent larger than external debt and more than 9 months of imports. This
is an exceptionally high level of reserves for a developing country. There has also been a rapid
growth of onshore foreign currency deposits in China's commercial banks which has enlarged
the pool of resources available to the economy. China contmues to be the largest developing
country destination for direct investment, with annual gross commitment levels of over US$45
billion. The effective exchange rate has been relatively stable.

7. 
Nevertheless, China's sub-national governments, banks, enterprises and pension funds
cannot simply "grow out" of their current problems; sustained structural and institutional reforms
are needed. It is likely that their funding gaps are larger today than m 1997 which, even with
rising govemment revenues, may reduce the resources available for meeting other development
needs and facing economic contingencies. Concerns about these problems existed even before
the start of this round of macroeconomic stimulus, but the recent increase in govemment
spending has deepened such concerns and stimulated calls for fiscal consolidation and a
reappraisal of the efficiency of govermment expenditures.

C. STRUCTURAL REFORM

8. 
The pace of policy and institutional reform accelerated in the mid-1990s, magnifying
difficulties while improving longer-term prospects. Following successful liberalization
measures in the 1 980s, a second generation of refonns was initiated in the mid- 1 990s to address
structural constraints on productivity-based growth that were inherited from the central planning
era. Simultaneously, the arduous process began of repositioning the public sector to meet the
requirements of an increasingly complex, market-based, and globalizing economy. Central to
the refonrn program was the nexus of issues linking govenmment revenue and expenditure, social
protection, enterprise performance, and financial stability (Box 1.1).

- 4 -

Box 1.1: Recent Structural Reforms

Tlhe Challenge - a Gordian Knot. The 1979 reforms eliminated some major economic dis tortions and boosted
incentives for production, mainly in rural areas By the mid-1990s it became obvious that at the core of China's
development challenge was a rigid production structure sustained by increasing budgetary and banking
subsidies, and protected by sub-national governments in ways that fragmented the domestic market. Declining
enterprise profitability, decentralization and tax evasion caused budgetary revenue to collapse from 35 percent of
GDP in 1978 to below 12 percent This limited the scope for public action, especially in public services
provision and social protection Also, weaknesses in macroeconomic control resulted in unsustainably high
output growth and inflation, which masked a deterioration in banking and enterprise solvency and liquidity

A Difficult Economic Environment Comiplicatinig Enterprise Reforms. The second-generation reforms
initiated in the mid -to-late 1990s focused on restructuring enterprises - raising efficiency, making them market-
responsive, preparing them for globalization They occurred in the context of a policy-induced "soft-landing" in
the economy, leading to capital and labor redundancy and a rapid dismantling of guaranteed employment and
"cradle-to-grave" social policies. Moderate pressure was exerted by import competition and statutory tariffs
falling from over 45 percent in 1993 to 12 percent today, which exacerbated the incipient deflationary pressures
that still persist Further, the decision to maintain a stable Renminbi during the Asian financial crisis protected
regional economies and world financial markets, but at some domestic cost All of these measures highlighted
China's position that the best response to economic contingencies is to stay the course with deep and difficult,
but gradual, structural reforms to increase the flexibility of its domestic economy on which, ultimately, its
economic performance rests

Moving on Multiple Fronts. Because of complex inter-linkages China's policy agenda needs to move on
several fronts, and to accelerate the pace of reform because of visible problems in some areas, global
competitive pressures (since the mid- 1 990s), and the expectations of its citizens The sequence and pace of
recent enterprise-financial system reforms illustrates the challenge Viable, market-responsive enterprises
require modern corporate structures, supporting regulations and business and physical infrastructure, competitive
markets, and diversified sources of finance The Government is working in all of these areas (e g , easing
pnvate entry, developing capital markets, rewriting laws, restructuring auditing and accounting standards and
institutions) But it recognized that such measures would be ineffective if the financial condition of enterprises
did not improve, including the excessive burden of social obligations inherited from the pre-reform past
Systems for the provision of housing and social insurance - traditionally provided in China by enterprises -
needed to change The Government liberalized the housing market, created a mortgage lending instrument, and
promoted the real estate market to tap household savings while addressing housing shortages 
In 2000, it
introduced an improved unemployment insurance scheme and pilot reforms in social insurance to implement the
modern pension scheme that had been under discussion since the mid- 1990s, with risk and financial pooling at
municipal and higher levels Efforts are also underway to establish more equitable and sustainable health
financing schemes

Confronting Financial Sector Reform. Although reform of the financial system has moved at a slower pace,
largely because soft-budget constraints on firms and quasi-fiscal stimulus through the banking system have been
needed to support employment growth since 1998, several measures were implemented These include actions
to help banks (through partial re-capitalization and the transfer of non-performing loans to asset management
companies), establishing supervisory authorities for the capital market and insurance companies, current account
convertibility, use of indirect instruments of monetary control, and greater attention to portfolio quality in banks
With WTO accession and expected foreign entry into China's financial market, the country will need an
overhaul of institutions and market structure

Fiscal reforms have been implemented to repair government revenues, improve expenditure planning and
implementation, and strengthen government financial management Recovering revenues at the Central
Government level were accompanied by a higher level of fiscal stimulus This included transfers to sub-national
governments during the recent economic slowdown, thus supporting employment and growth while other
structural reforms work their way through the economy

9. 
An important change since the last CAS is the growing recognition of the important role
that the private sector can play in addressing China's reform and development challenges. Over
the past decade, China's economy has undergone a fundamental transformation, from complete
reliance on state-owned and collective industrial enterprises to a mixed economy where private
industrial enterprises also play a strong role The private sector (non-agricultural) has emerged as
the most dynamic component of the Chinese economy in the 1990s and today accounts for about
a third of China's GDP. In recent years, new employment in the private sector has exceeded the
combined total for state, collective, and township and village enterprises. The 1999
constitutional amendment giving formal recognition to the country's emerging private sector,
along with the buildup of foreign direct investment and the reform of SOEs, is setting China's
economy on a course of major structural change.

10 
Chinese private companies are the most dynamic players in the economy, and in recent
years government policies have been aimed at promoting their growth. However, they still face
tough challenges in the current busmess environment in terms of entry restnctions, uneven
playing field, weak capacities to partner and compete globally, and inadequate access to
intermediated financing (see Annex F). There are significant regional disparities regarding
private sector development in China, with the interior provinces lagging behind coastal areas.
The continued growth of the private sector cannot be taken for granted without continued
progress in market refonms to improve the business environment. Recently, the Government has
intensified its reform efforts in this area by promulgating laws and regulations to promote small
and medium enterprises (SMEs), introducing measures to improve private enterprises' access to
financing, and gradually relaxing restrictions to private sector entry in a number of sectors (see
Box 1.1).

11. 
The recent round of structural reforms was implemented under difficult circumstances.
Externally, the Asian crisis and more recently the global economic slowdown tempered the pace
of change in several areas, particularly the imposition of hard budget constraints on SOEs and
higher standards of banking sector perfonnance. Domestically, effects of the soft landing and
lagging employment creation influenced the pace and sequence of reforms. Further, concerns
about disparities in social indicators and incomes, emerging gaps in social protection and public
services, and increasing rural discontent since 1997 due to declining fann pnces and reduced off-
farm employment have played a decisive role in tax/spending and policy decisions.

12. 
These issues must continue to be addressed systematically, as the Government launches a
third- generation of refonns to build the institutions needed to sustain a modern market-based
economy. Since 2000, the Government has moved broadly to define a new role for itself in the
economy, de- monopolizing sectors such as energy and telecommunications, while selling
hundreds of SOEs (chiefly at the sub-national level). China's WTO agreement represents the
most radical set of proposals to open its economy ever proposed by a new member. The
Government has announced its intention to adhere to both the letter and spirit of this and other
multilateral agreements. It views such international commitments as a powerful instrument to
revitalize structural reform and build a strong, modern, internationally-competitive economy.

13. 
One area of structural reform needing more attention is sub-national finance. Today,
nearly 70 percent of public expenditure takes place at the sub-national level (province,
prefecture, country and township/village), and more than 55 percent takes place at sub-provincial

- 6 -

levels. In fact, it is the sub-national levels of Government that implement to a large extent the
national agenda, but their very heavy expenditure responsib ilities are out of line with
international practice and are unsustainable given current revenue assignments. Expenditure
assignments at local levels need to be tailored to the revenue that is available. Moreover, the
current system of inter- governmental transfers needs to be examined together with the revenue
and expenditure assignments. This would help support development priorities more effectively
while reducmg the need for ad hoc transfers, which have been growing in recent years.

14. 
Regional disparities in fiscal spending and service provision are very large by
international standards, and have grown rapidly. Fiscal reforms have raised the total tax effort
since the mid- 1990s, and a large share of the increase in revenues has been allocated to spending
by sub-national governments. Recent measures - such as transferring a high proportion of
income tax revenues to sub - national governments - are aimed at strengthening sub - national
finances. However, the current program of earmarked transfers is not fully effective in achieving
policy objectives, and inadvertently, there can be rigidities in existing social spending that
sometimes restnct the ability of sub-national governments to address directly the needs of the
poor. Local governments are highly dependent on extra-budgetary revenues, which are not
always allocated in ways that support national objectives, and the efficiency of many sub-
national expenditures needs to be improved. Ultimately, the ability of the Government to
engineer rapid, pro-poor growth, especially in lagging regions, will be determined by its
continuing efforts to improve the current system of inter-governmental finance. National and
sub- national fiscal issues, considered recently in two detailed studies of central and provincial
expenditures, will continue to merit the Bank's attention.

D. POVERTY AND INEQUALITY

15. 
Poverty in China has been a predominately rural issue, although urban poverty is a
growing concern. In the first stage of economic liberalization during the 1980s and early 1990s,

partial freeing of prices and markets, introduction of individual farming (replacing collectives),
and opening to trade and foreign investment resulted in high growth. While rural poverty fell
substantially due to increased production, high agricultural prices, and expansion of rural non-
farm employment in township and village enterpnses, income inequalities widened as a result of
more rapid growth in China's coastal areas. Now, there are signs that, smce the mid- 1990s,
falling grain prices and the domestic slowdown that followed the Asian financial crisis have
contnbuted to slowing the pace of poverty reduction. By some expenditure measures, the number
of poor may even have risen in recent years, while income gaps are high and persistent.

16. 
Defining poverty either with income of less than US$0.67 a day (the Government 's
definition) or less than US$1 a day (international practice), the number of rural poor has declined
steadily between 1987 and 1999 (Figure 1.2). The former measure shows that the number of poor
people had declined to just 34 million by 1999. Although the number of rural poor with incomes
below US$1 a day has also declined (from 129 million to 97 million), the number of poor with
expenditures below US$1 a day has increased from 214 million to 235 millionduring 1996-
1999. The detailed poverty data for 2000 and 2001 are still being processed by the statistical
authorities, but once all the data are analyzed, it is likely that more recently, China's high overall
growth rate is not reducing its poverty as fast as m the 1980s and early 1990s. This does not
negate China's impressive past success in poverty reduction but suggests that new approaches

- 7 -

that are being piloted currently - combining income diversification with improved targeting and
safety nets - need to be scaled up rapidly.

Figure 1.2: Number of Poor in Rural Areas (1987-1999)

400

350 -

c 
°0 300 
E 
_250-* 
° 200 -

0
X. 

c 150 -
-o 
E 100_

250 

c 

50 -
O 

.

.

.

.

.

, 

1987 

1989 1991 

1993 

1995 

1997 1999
year

-+--officaal 
estmated number
of rural poor (in million)
with income of less than
US$0 67/day
(apprximately)
number of rural poor (in
million) with consumpbon
of less than US$1 /day

> 

-

number of rural poor (in
million) with income of
less than US$1/day

17. 
Trends in inequality suggest that disparities have widened. Household surveys show
that income inequality within the rural and urban areas widened durng the 1980s and 1990s, as
did the gap between the rural and urban areas. At the national level the Gini coefficient index
rose from 28.8 in 1981 to 32.1 in 1990, and further to 41.6 in 1999. Information on sub-national
per capita income shows that income inequality between the coastal and intenor regions
increased during the 1990s, but has declined slightly since 2000, after the Government refocused
its attention on the lagging areas.

18. 
Social indicators tell the same story. From 1960 to 1990, maternal, infant and under-5
mortality rates in China declined at a faster rate than could have been predicted from China's
economic growth in the same period. However, this steady improvement slowed or stopped
during the 1990s despite high economic growth, and large regional variations have developed.
In 1999, for example, the maternal mortality ratio showed a six- fold difference between coastal
Guangdong (25/100,000) and inland Guizhou (161/100,000) while infant mortality In inland
provinces was three times higher than the rate for coastal provinces Part of the problem is
unequal access to health and education. The World Health Report 2000 ranked China 61st out of
191 countries in overall quality of health, but 18 8 1h in terms of faimess in financial contribution
This indicates the problems of sub-national finance that force many localities to levy high fees
and other charges on users of public healthcare services, adversely affecting the lowest income
groups. Similar inequalities in access to education show up in wide provincial and urban-rural
disparities in completion rates within the 9-year compulsory education program, in student
learning achievement, and in adult illiteracy. Box 1.2 illustrates how China measures up to the
Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) on these issues, and the divergence between the
country as a whole and lagging areas in this regard. To make the concept more useful in the
context of China, the MDGs need to be disaggregated regionally in the future.

- 8 -

Box 1.2: Summary of China's Progress with Respect to the Millennium Development Goals

The MDGs as formally endorsed by the member countries of the United Nations, focus on developing countries'
achieving eight major goals and targets by 2015 (UN Millennium Declaration, September 18, 2000) China is
currently on course to achieve these goals at the national level

Goal 1: Halve the proportion of people living in extrene poverty between 1990 azd 2015 Good progress
being made During 1990-99, the number of people with consumption of less than US$1 a day fell from 368
million to 235 million A possible further decline will be confirmed by an ongoing household survey
Nevertheless, progress has been much slower in the inland regions

Goal 2: Achieve universal access to prinmary education by 2015 Excellent overall progress being made The
net enrollment rate in primary education went from 97 8% in 1990 to 99 1% in 1999 Again, regional disparities
exist, particularly in poor, remote and/or ethnic minority areas in western China.

Goal 3: Promote gender equality and empower wom en by eliminating gender disparities in primary anid
secondary education by 2005. Good overall progress being made in basic andjunior secondary education The
national ratio of girls to boys is over 90% for primary education but lower for secondary education since China's
nine-year compulsory education covers only up to the junior secondary lcvcl The Government is emphaszing
helping pupils from extremely poor families to attend school

Goal 4: Reduce iiortality of children underfive by two-thirds between I990 and 2015. Good progress made at
the national level, with infanit mortality having declined from 50/1,000 live births in 1990 to 32 in 2000
Meeting the MDG will involve lowenng the rate to 17 by 2015 However, improving health services and
providing a health security system for western and rural areas remain challenges

Goal5: Reduce the naternal mnortality rate (MMR) by 3/4 by 2015 Good progress made at the national level,
with MMR declining during 1990-98, from 95 deaths per 100,000 deliveries to 56. To address the sometimes
large regional differences, the Government plans to reconstruct rural cooperative health services

Goal 6: Combat HI V-AIDS malaria and other diseases Progress is likely on TB and malaria, but rates of
HIV/AIDS will probably not decline by 2015 since the disease is only now entering the period of rapid spread
Control is made difficult since HIV/AIDS is concentrated in porous border regions

Goal 7: Imiprove the envirotinment by impletienting national strategiesfor sustainable development by 2005
(so as to reverse the loss of enavironmental resources by 2015). Progress being made While no national
strategy existed in 1990, China now has such a strategy and sustainable development is a focus of the Tenth-Fivc
Year Plan (2001 -2005). Still, the widespread environmental degradation that accompanied growth will require
concerted action by all stakeholders

Goal 8: Develop a global partnershipfor development Progress is being made China's accession to the WTO
will accelerate further its global outreach and have broad effects on all aspects of its development. The Bank is
assisting this process in various ways, including support to expansion of the Gl obal Development Learning
Network in China China is already a founding member of the Global Gateway Foundation

(Annex E indicates the link between the MDGs and Bank assistance )

E. ECONOMIC OUTLOOK AND EXTERNAL ENVIRONMENT

19. 
China's long-term growth rate is likely to moderate to the 7 percent per year range,
despite high growth in productivity. The contribution of factor accumulation is expected to be
less significant in determining economic growth in the future, as the demographic transition
lowers the relative numbers entering the workforce, while higher consumption (lower savings)
will bring the rate of investment down to the levels of other well-performing middle- income

- 9 -

countries. This projection of long-term trends takes into consideration expected changes in
foreign investment, a halt to the declining contribution of natural resources, and the effect of
increased skills in the workforce.

20. 
China's external environment over the forthcoming CAS period is affected by the
current uncertainties attached to the global economic recovery. Despite this, China's
external performance is expected to continue to be strong This will permit the domestic growth
rate to be maintained at the present level, even as the fiscal stimulus program tapers off (Table
1.2). It is estimated that China's underlying competitiveness and shifting world consumption
patterns will permit a strong growth of exports, so that by 2010 China's share of world exports
would rise to about 7 percent, compared to 4 percent today. The external sector is less critical to
China's future economic performance than its vast domestic economy; the trade (imports plus
exports)/GDP ratio is likely to stabilize at about 55 percent, compared to 42 percent today.
Continued strength in the growth of consumption is expected, especially to satisfy pent-up
demand for services (housing, education, health care, finance, leisure, travel, and personal
services) among the urban population. Together with investment demand, consumption is
expected to remain an important contributor to growth, although less so than in the period since
1997.

Table 1.2: Key Economic Performance Indicators

Growth (% per year)
Gross domestic product 
Consumption 
Investment 

Shares (% of GDP)
Budget balance 
External current account balance 
Government debt 

Levels (US$ billions) 
Net FDI inflows 
Stock of international reserves 

Source World Bank staff esitmiates

_ 

2001 

2002 

2003 

2004 

2005

7.3 
7 3 
12.8 

-3 2 
1.5 
23.8 

37 4 
212 

7.7 
7.5 
11.5 

-3.2 
1.8 
25.1 

45.0 
264 

7.5 
8.0 
7.2 

-2.8 
1.4 
25.9 

_

45.0 
296 

7 2 
8 0 
6.1 

-2.5 
1.3 
26.3 

50.0 
323 

7.0
7.8
5.4

-2.1
0.9
26.3

55.0
348

- 10-

2. THE GOVERNMENT'S PRIORITIES

21. 
The Tenth Five-Year Plan. Over the last two decades, China has made impressive
achievements, particularly in sustained growth and poverty reduction, while managing major
systemic transformations. 
In the process, the Govermnent has accumulated a wealth of
knowledge and strengthened its own capacity to deal with developmental issues. However,
China is now faced with a number of new and pressing challenges - such as widening income
inequality, stresses on the environment, and persisting difficulties with financial sector and
enterprise reforms - which are more complex than those which it faced during the earlier years of
reform. There is also an added sense of urgency to push forward with reforms, driven by the
accelerated integration into the rapidly changmg global economy expected from WTO entry.
The Tenth Five-Year Plan (2001-2005) was prepared by the Govermnent in such a context.

Box 2.1: Main Features of the Tenth Five -Year Plan (2001-2005)

The Plan aims for higher productivity growth, set in the context of increased globalization and a narrowing of
regional inequalities It gives special attention to an improved natural environment and to harnessing modern
technology more broadly for China's economic development

* Growth - targeted at 7 percent per year for 2001-2005 - slightly lower than the actual growth rate achieved
over the Ninth Plan - which will help achieve a doubling of total output by 2010 (implying an ambitious 7 4
percent target for 2006-20 10)

* Sustainable Development - with increased productivity in agriculture and in industrial SOEs. job
creation by promoting labor-intensive activities, including services, and developing collective, private and
individual businesses to create 40 inillion new urban jobs, and safeguarding the natural resource base

* Economic Restructuring, Rural Reform and Opening to the World- through better macroeconomic
management, fiscal reform, and financial stability, establishing modem corporate structures, building
competitive and globally-integrated markets; accelerating agricultural diversification and rural reforms to
raise incomes, improving science and technology inputs into production, and strengthening cooperation
with other countries.

* Coordinating Economic and Social Development - by paying greater attention to quality-of-life issues,
including investing in human capital (e g , anti-poverty measures, better education), protecting natural
capital (e g , by enhanced ecological conservation and environmental protection), improving social
protection (e g , by strengthening the social security system), promoting the rule of law; and broadening
democratic participation (e g, through political reform and strengthening legislative oversight) The Plan
also seeks to promote a progressive and cooperative social fabric

* Development of Economically and Socially Lagging Western and Central Provinces - by fostering
economic development zones through investments in strategic physical infrastructure for transport, water
resources management, energy, and mining, acceleration of other development objectives cited above, and
introducing advanced technologies to upgrade local industrlies and increase competitiveness

22. 
The Tenth Plan ushers in a new era of Chmese economic development. If, as it is
sometimes said, China has been "growing out of the Plan" incrementally, the Tenth Five-Year
Plan (2001-2005) has pushed this process much further, while changing direction in several
sigmficant ways. The nature of the planning exercise has been adapted since the Seventh Plan
(1986-90) to accommodate the rapid social and economic development of China's transition

- I 1 -

economy, progressively reducing the role of detailed physical investment planning and command
targets. However, the shrinking role of the Government in the economy and higher levels of
economic, administrative and fiscal decentralization have trimmed the ability of the Government
to influence economic behavior in ways that would help realize precisely set Plan targets.
Moreover, the adverse effects of emphasizing high growth rates based on the accumulation of
physical capital and relative inattention to the natural environment had become increasingly
visible during the 1990s. Concerns related to the quality of growth surfaced rapidly, and in the
Tenth Plan they found comprehensive expression in the Government's economic strategies and
public investment programs (Box 2.1).

23. 
Addressing Cross-Sectoral Priorities. In addition to the overall Plan, specific plans
have been prepared for mdividual sectors, normally for implementation by line agencies.
However, within the overall Tenth Plan framework the Govermnent has re-emphasized the
following three sets of strategic priorities, each of which is the responsibility of a "leading
group" with coordination, planning and implementation responsibilities that cut across the
mandates of individual agencies:

* The Leading Group for Poverty Reduction was reorganized following completion of the
Seven-Year Priority Poverty Alleviation Program to address the changing poverty situation
in the country. For the period 2001-2010, it will focus on improved rural poverty monitorng
and geographic targeting, especially for areas with large ethnic minorities. This will be
combined with programs intended to diversify and increase incomes through improved
environmental management and, where potentially effective, the application of credit,
commercial practices, and increased inputs of science and technology;

* The Leading Group for Western Region Developmenit was established in 2000 to accelerate
economic growth in 12 western and central municipalities, provinces and autonomous
regions. These lagging areas represent 18 percent of China's GDP, 29 percent of the
population, 60 percent of the poor people, 72 percent of the minority population, and 72
percent of the surface area of China. This highly publicized initiative seeks to address a key
development challenge, and it includes investments in human capital development and
health, transport and logistics development, water and other environmental management, and
a range of infrastructure. It represents the first major attempt to shift the balance of growth
from the coastal areas - which was the strategy taken two decades ago to accelerate growth in
China - to addressing the needs of the poorer inner regions; and

* Finally, the Leading Group for Informatization was established in 2001 to promote the
coordinated development of Chma's information industry, increase the application of
information and communication technologies (ICT) in addressing social and economic
development challenges, and broaden and enrich the infonnation network in the country
while protecting its security.

24. 
Initiatives to Strengthen Governance of the Public Sector. The March 2002 Report on
the Work of the Government noted that national goals for reform must be accompanied by
building "an honest, diligent, pragmatic and efficient government." Transformnmg the function
of government from planning to economic regulation, market supervision, social protection and
public service is one part of the governance agenda. Another is building a clean and honest

- 12 -

government, which was underlined in the President's speech in 2001, to "fight against corruption
to the end." While progress is being made in reorienting public sector management and
increasing transparency, as Box 2.2 illustrates, the huge process of institutional reorganization,
establishment of a legal framework, judicial reform, capacity building at all government levels,
and wholesale procedural reform will be a long-tenn proposition.

Box 2.2: Establishing a Framework for Good Developmental Governance

The state's role in the economy reduced. In 1998, the Government reorganized and down-sized the central
government. The number of ministries went from 41 to 29, ministries overseeing industrial or commercial
activities were spun off; the remaining ministries were made more "market-friendly", the number of central
government employees was cut in half over three years, the military, police, government agencies andjudicial
organizations were ordered to divest themselves of business activities; and the legal and regulatory framework to
guide propcr developmcnt of a market-based economy was strengthened.

Officials suspected of corruption are investigated and, if found guilty, punished For instance, in 1999
prosecutors investigated tens of thousands of officials suspected of corruption and recovered more than us$200
million Major smuggling and fraud cases were publicly disclosed, and the sentencing of senior officials was
given prominence

Legal and judicial reform. Judicial reform was formally recognized as a priority at the 15th Party Congress in
1997. The Supreme People's Court is midway through its five-year reform plan China's Constitution was
amended in 1999 to include "goverming the country according to law" as an essential principle 
In tandem, many
laws are being amcnded or new laws drafted that will have the effect of enhancing good governance

Regulations and procedures for public sector staff- in government and SOEs- promote transparency.
Integrity and conflict of interest rules introduced for senior government officials and SOE chief executives
A public bidding system for government procurement introduced at central and provincial levels
Government institutions and SOEs audited and subjected to public information disclosure

Introduction of three reforms support good governance. These include reforrm of the government approval
system to reduce opportunities for the "exchange of power for money"; the fiscal and budgetary system to
improve budgetary and treasury management, and the government personnel system, by opening official selection
to competition, improving performance appraisals and strengthening supervision

25. 
Guidance from the 16th Party Congress. The 16th National Congress of the
Communist Party, which took place in November 2002, signaled the transition from China's
"third generation" to its "fourth generation" of leaders. It identified as a national goal the
achievement of a "well-off society." Towards this end, GDP is expected to quadruple over the
period 2000-2020, an indicative growth rate of a little over 7 percent per year. But the concept
of China's development, as articulated at the Party Congress, goes well beyond increases in
income to stress the quality of such growth. Government policy in the years ahead would be
aimed at promoting "all-round social progress, to constantly better people's lives, and to ensure
that all the people share the fruits of dewlopment." The Party Congress reaffirmed the Tenth
Plan's emphasis on environmental sustainability and the application of modern science and
technology, especially ICT, to raise productivity and generate greater benefits. Attention was
drawn to some of the specific areas that the govermment is addressing. Chief among these was
rapid job-creation, to be effected through better management of state assets and financial
resources, accelerated human capital development, increased integration with the world
economy, and measures to "intensify the struggle against corruption." It highlighted the key role
that entrepreneurship will play in China's drive towards rapid modernization and transition to a
market economy. For this, it underscored the importance of an improved legal system and the

- 13 -

potential contribution of private initiative and investors, and the need to safeguard their property
rights. The Party Congress also stressed the importance of maintaining current initiatives that
are aimed at increasing the flexibility of goods, services and resource flows in the economy to
facilitate economic restructuring. Addressing the challenge of narrowing social disparities -
particularly between urban and rural areas and among the provinces - while managmg the
process of labor migration and urbanization to ensure better resource use and raise incomes, at
the same time as improving the quality of habitats, will continue to receive close policy attention.

- 14 -

3. PROGRESS DURING THE LAST CAS PERIOD AND LESSONS LEARNED

A. OBJECTIVES OF THE LAST CAS

26. 
The five themes for Bank support outlined by both the February 1997 CAS, as well as the
CAS Progress Report of May 1998, were: macroeconomic growth and structural reforn;
infrastructure development; human development and poverty reduction; agriculture and rural
development; and protecting the environrment. At the time, these themes were high priorities for
the Government and consistent with the Bank Group's support for a broad spectrum of advisory
services and a blend of IDA and IBRD lending in the range of US$2.5-3.0 billion annually The
substantial progress made against the benchmarks set out in the 1997 CAS is shown in Annex
B1. During this period, the Bank also decentralized responsibilities to the field office and
changed the way it carried out its activities.

B. MAJOR DEVELOPMENTS SINCE THE LAST CAS

27. 
Overview. The global context for the last CAS period turned out to be radically different
from what was envisaged, with the East Asian crisis and the recent global slowdown. As a
result, the Government's prionties shifted, from orchestrating a soft- landing in an inflationary
environment to accelerating growth and structural reform. Unlike other Asian countries which
needed quick-disbursing external assistance to shore up their external position and to maintain
essential budgetary expenditures, China's relatively strong financial position allowed it to sustain
growth through deficit financing and an expansionary fiscal policy without recourse to external
budgetary support operations. This, in addition to other factors discussed below, led to a
reduction in the volume of Bank lending. In the interim, Bank operations also were adjusted to
focus more on the poorer interior provinces and to support on-going reformn efforts The Bank's
portfolio remained strong and improved further during the period. Key indicators of the Bank
Program's performnance are shown in Table 3.1. The above trends and developments are
discussed in detail below.

Table 3.1: China - Operational Performance Indicators

Commitments (US$ millions) 
Number of Projccts 
Disbursements (USS millions) 
Portfolio Size (# of projects) 
% Projects Satisfactory 
QAG quality at entry (%)
China 
Bank-wide 

1997 
2,815 
I1 
2,128 
97 
88 

1998 
2,616 
16 
2,094 
103 
90 

1999 
2,084 
19 
2,026 
110 
95 

2000 
1,673 
8 
1,828 
114 
97 

2001 
788 
8 
1,820 
108 
95 

2002
563
5
2,015
101
96

100 
82 

100 
86 

88 
89 

100
94

28. 
Lending - which was expected in the last CAS to be in the range of US$2.5-3.0
billion annually during the CAS period - instead declined steadily, especially over the last
two years. As shown in Figure 3.1, total Bank lending declined gradually from US$2.8 billion
in FY97 to US$1.7 billion m FY00, then fell sharply during FYO1-02 to US$0.8 and 0.6 billion,
respectively.

- 15 -

Figure 3.1: IBRD and IDA Commitments to China
(FY93-02)

4,000

3,000-

E 2,000

1,000 

0

FY93 FY94 FY95 FY96 FY97 FY98 FY99 FY00 FY0I FY02

|' 

'IBRD -IDA 

rotaI

29. 

This outcome was the result of several factors:

* The Bank Group's institutional constraints. IDA lending to China, which approached
US$1 billion per year in the early 1990s, fell gradually to a low of US$293 million in FY98,
the year before the final year that China received IDA credits. The loss of IDA was
combined with reduced IBRD lending due partly to concerns that the Bank's exposure to
China on IBRD loans might breach the single-country concentration limit at some time m the
future, as a result of high lending volumes in the nineties. Thus, for planning purposes the
volume of IBRD lending was targeted at around US$1 billion during the last few years.

* 

Improved financial position of the borrower and diminished attractiveness of IBRD
resources. Two factors led to increased domestic funding availability. With a rise in the
overall revenue/GDP ratio from 12 percent in 1997 to 17 percent in 2001, and the central
government's use of expansionary fiscal policy to stimulate the economy in the aftermath of
the Asian Financial Crisis, the provinces were able to finance a much larger share of their
investment needs through budgetary transfers. In addition, domestic interest rates were
lowered to levels well below international rates, reflecting deflation in China's economy,
while costs of IBRD loans increased by introduction of the front-end fee and the widening of
the lending spread in 1998. IBRD loans were therefore less attractive, despite their longer
maturities, and demand dropped significantly. The cost of doing business with the Bank,
including lengthy procedures and safeguard requirements, was also perceived to be high by
the provinces. More recently, with the sharp declines in IBRD lendmg rates, these cost
differences have been become less significant. In addition, the increased flexibility provided
by the new financial instruments is seen as a positive step forward.

* Disengagement from areas that could be served by the private sector, such as
telecommunications and thenrial power generation. These areas represented a significant
share of past lending in the form of large capital-intensive projects, but the decision was
taken that domestic or foreign financing could be secured without IBRD support.

- 16-

* Cessation of lending in areas where past projects had proven to be problematic. By the
mnd-90s, it became clear that projects supporting industry-specific restructuring, agro-
processing and credit lines to state commercial banks were not effective, and lending for
these purposes ceased. This coincided with government attempts to shift commercial
projects to alternative funding sources, rather than utilize external concessional resources.

* Reduction in average size of loans, from US$200 million in FY97-98 to US$140 million m
FY99-01 resulted from two factors. The number of large capital-imtensive projects - dams,
thermal power generation, major multi-provincial highways - decreased over time And a
growing proportion of total Bank lending was directed to the poorer inland provinces (going
from 58 percent in FY93-95 to over 70 percent in FY99-01, by number of projects), which
tended to borrow in smaller amounts given their constraints in absorptive and repayment
capacities.

30. 
The quality of the Bank's largest portfolio has remained high and improved further
since the last CAS. In tenns of the number of projects (over 100), the China portfolio is by far
the largest in the Bank, some 50 percent larger than the next tier of borrowers. As illustrated in
Figure 3.2, the quality of the portfolio
deteriorated in the mid-90s. This was due to 
a variety of factors relating in part to the 
rapid build-up of the portfolio. With a
concerted effort to address these issues and 
through project closures, the proportion of
satisfactory projects has returned to its 
traditionally high levels. This was
reconfirmed by OED evaluations of 
completed projects since 1980, which rated

Figure 3.2: Portfolio Quality

Projlcts in

%Of u 

12%

8%-

4%

9 percent unsatisfactory, compared with the 

Bank-wide average of 31 percent. 

0% 9 

91 

92 

.

93 

94 

96 97 

98 

99 00 

01 

02

I 

Unsatisfactory I 

FY

31. 
The AAA program was revamped into a more demand-driven and integrated
Knowledge Agenda. Since the beginning of the Bank's involvement in China, analytical and
advisory activities (AAA) have played a crucial role in the relationship. In the early period, the
program addressed the entire spectrum of developmental issues confronted during the initial
phase of the transition to a market economy The focus was on basic prnciples, liberalization,
and on information for designing institutions and policies with appropriate Chinese
characteristics. But, in recent years, the authorities have had to deal with more technical and
difficult issues including the need to build, consolidate, or reform the core market institutions
that will sustain China's economy in the future. Simultaneously, China needs to address deep-
rooted structural problems related to poverty, globalization, governance and sustainable
development. The Bank is therefore being asked to help address the most complex institutional
and structural policy issues. There has also been increasing client demand for short "rapid
response" policy notes, and less for the more traditional and comprehensive reports that take
much longer to produce. In response to the above developments, the Bank's policy related
program in recent years has been delivered through a wider range of instruments, including
policy notes, comprehensive reports, research studies, conferences and training (including
distance learning courses), by an improved alignment of instruments with objectives. The

- 17-

Knowledge Agenda is also carried out flexibly within themes agreed with the Government.
These changes have been welcomed by the client. See Section 5A, Knowledge Agenda/AAA
Program, for further details.

32. 
Decentralization has enabled the Bank to better serve its client, but some issues are
stiUl being addressed. Decentralization has been a clear success in areas where proximity to the
client has resulted in more responsive services. This is best exemplified by the decentralization
of core fiduciary responsibilities to the Bank's office in Beijing. This has enabled the Bank to
respond more quickly to client demand, for instance by cutting review time for some
procurement documents by about 80 percent and the response tlne to disbursement applications
by more than 50 percent. It has also allowed the Bank to prepare two emergency projects in
record time in the aftermath of natural catastrophes. A greater field presence has also
strengthened the policy dialogue, made it easier to deal with lendmg program formulation, and
facilitated follow-up on portfolio issues as well as increased contact with other donors.
However, coordination problems have arisen in the context of managing the interactions of a
large matrix-based country team with the client, and much effort has been required to develop
local staff capacity to meet the increased demands in the field and the client's support for a
higher level of delegation to field-based staff.

33. 
Since the last CAS, the application of the Bank's environmental and social
safeguard policies has become a significant and recurring issue for the Bank's program in
China. This has resulted from several factors. Both globally and in the Bank, scrutiny of
safeguard issues, particularly environmental impact, resettlement and treatment of ethnic
minorities, has intensified m recent years. The China program has been particularly exposed to
this heightened concern since a large proportion of Bank loans to China - mamly for rural
development and infrastructure - require various safeguard assessments. Moreover, as
mentioned above, the Bank's lending focus has shifted to the western regions, with large
concentrations of minority nationalities and fragile ecosystems.

34. 
However, reviews undertaken by various Bank Group evaluation bodies have
acknowledged the comprehensiveness of safeguard policies in China, relative to other countries.
Domestic policies and guidelines for handlmg environmental, ethnic minority, and resettlement
issues mirror the Bank's policies in many important aspects, although differences exist which the
Government believes are needed to reflect local conditions. The increased scrutiny of safeguard-
related issues m the lendmg program, coupled with the on-going process within the Bank to
refine and clarify its policies, has led to delays m preparation of some operations. China,
meanwhile, has voiced concern about what it sees as unwarranted increases in the project costs it
must bear as a result of, in its view, excessive nsk-aversion in the application of safeguards
policies. During the CAS period, the Bank will continue to work with the Government to apply
safeguards policies more effectively, as described later (para. 85).

35. 
IFC assistance has adapted flexibly to the growth of the domestic private sector and
greater needs in inland provinces. Since the last CAS, the IFC has maintained a program of
about US$200 million per year on average (Table 3.2). More importantly, there were significant
changes in the structure of IFC's investment activities as a result of the emergence of the
domestic private sector and continued market-oriented reforms. IFC's objectives laid out in the
1997 China CAS, were to: (a) finance privately- led joint venture projects; (b) assist SOE

- 18 -

restructuring and corporatization; (c) support 
private participation in infrastructure projects; 
(d) help Township and Village Enterprises 
(TVEs) and domestic private entrepreneurs; 
and (e) promote capital narket development. 
The main changes in the IFC program 
included: a significant increase in IFC's 
investment in financial services; broadened 

support to TVEs and private enterprises; and a 

steady 
increase 
steady increase in IFC' Sinvolvement 

In 

Table 3.2: IFC Program in China: Approvals 1997-2002
(US$ million)
Number of 
Project 

Year 

IFC

Investments 

1997 
1998 

1999 

2000 

10 
8 
4 

9 

Size 

657 
500 
318 

578 

[FC 
Gross 

335 
244 
112 

123 

179 
255 
1248 

Net

134
151
82

95

159
207
828

in IFCsinvo2002* 

2001 

Total 

7 
12 
50 

425 
624 
3102 

Note * as of June 30, 2(002

private sector-led projects in the interior 
provinces with 11 projects implemented so
far. IFC's technical assistance activities durmg the period focused on capacity building in the
financial sector, the investment climate for private sector development, corporate governance,
and private participation in infrastructure. IFC's portfolio as of end-June 2002 consists of 42
investments with a total exposure of US$774 million (composed of US$304 million A loans,
US$192 million in equity and quasi-equity, US$278 million B loans). In addition, 18 investments
for a total of US$266 million are approved and pending commitment.

36 
In line with evolving country needs, both the Bank and IFC have supported
innovation and change with a variety of instruments. These initiatives were designed, for
example, to encourage private sector development, implement creative approaches to
development of the knowledge economy, and transfer new technologies from other countries.
Some recent examples of such support are summarized m Box 3.1.

- 19 -

Box 3.1: Examples of Recent Bank Group Support for Innovation and Change in China

rFC support to developing small and imedium elterprises in tie western provinlces. Two entities have been
established recently in Chengdu, capital of Sichuan province The China Project Development Facility
(CPDF) is funded by the IFC, Australia, Switzerland and the United Kingdom, but managed by the IFC to
improve the environment for SME development and provide financing And the Sichuan SME Investment
Fund (SSIF), managed by the United States' Small Enterprise Assistance Fund, provides equity and quasi-
equity financing for SMEs in Sichuan. Other investors include New York Life, Germany's DEG, Swedfund
and Norfund.

Knowledge Econtomy report. The well-received Bank report China and the Knoivledge Economy - Seizinig the
215' Century (2001) recommended, inter alia, that China address its declining international competitiveness by
improving productivity, shift away from resource-intensive development and towards services and knowledge-
based development, integrate more with the global economy, leapfrogging to take advantage of evolving
technologies, refonn education, and promote greater use of information and communication technologies (ICT)

The Global Development Learning Network (GDLN) and Global Developmgent Gateway to help develop
Clzina * kntowledge economy. 
ICT development- a priority of the Tenth Plan that was reemphasized at the
recent 16'h Party Congress - is supported by the Bank, with a focus on promoting distance learning to achieve
various development goals A GDLN center in Beijing has been delivering World Bank Institute (WBI)
programs. WBI is also helping develop Chinese versions of the courses for delivery through institutions like the
National Accounting Institute in Beijing A major breakthrough has been linking GDLN with the China
Education and Research Network (CERNET), which connects more than 800 institutions, enabling low-cost
connectivity with all members. In October 2001, a GDLN center was established in the western province of
Ningxia, funded by AusAID under the Virtual Colombo Plan China has sought assistance from donors to
establish GDLN centers in other western provinces. In May 2002, China became a founding member of the
Global Gateway Foundation

The Water Coonservationt Project (FYOI) addresses serious water scarcity in China's Northern Plain - where
increasing demand can no longer be met by constructing hydraulic infrastructure and where groundwater
overexploitation continues The project is disseminating an innovative approach used in the United States and
Israel to increase "real" water savings by reducing non-recoverable water losses from evapo-transpiration (ET)
and losses to unusable water bodies like the ocean This approach uses an integrated package - of soil moisture
management, improved irrigation, and agronomic measures - to boost agricultural production per unit of water
use. This can alleviate groundwater over-exploitation and significantly increase agneulture production per unit
of ET.

C. QAG AND OED ASSESSMENT

37. 
Assessments of the China portfolio by the Bank's Quality Assessment Group (QAG) and
Operations Evaluation Department (OED) have for the most part been favorable. QAG ratings
of supervision quality and of project quality at entry to the portfolio normally rank China in line
with or, more often, above Bank-wide averages. When judged on the basis of OED evaluations
of completed projects, China has by far a greater proportion of satisfactory projects than the
institutional average. One OED report attributed the generally strong implementation
performance of Bank-supported projects in China to the high level of client ownership and the
"responsibility system," requiring direct project beneficiaries to repay their share of the
financing.

38. 
Aside from their standard evaluations, QAG and OED have carried out various
assessments focused on Bank-supported activities for poverty reduction, forestry, the
environment, involuntary resettlement related to river basin development, the energy sector and
the transport sector. All of these evaluations found strategies to be well directed generally and

- 20 -

projects that either in whole or in part set the standard for best practice. 1 For example,
resettlement and livelihood restoration under the Shuikou Hydropower Development Project,
considered best practice, had "substantial and well-directed Bank involvement . .. with an
equally dedicated govermment and excellent results (Recent Experience with Involuntary
Resettlement: Overview, page 54)." And "China's forest work has been remarkably successful;
it is a high point in one of the Bank's highest-quality portfolios (China - From Afforestation to
Poverty Alleviation and Natural Forest Management, page 91)."

39. 
These evaluations have also been helpful in indicatmg areas where strategies or project
design might be strengthened, and such advice has been heeded in both current and subsequent
work by, for example, taking extra precautions to ensure the sustainability of poverty projects,
pursuing a dialogue on the difficult issue of energy sector tariff refonn, and participating directly
in China's influential Task Force on Forestry and Grasslands in order to increase our impact on
forest policy.

D. CLIENT S URVEY AND FEEDBACK FROM CONSULTATIONS

40. 
The size of the China portfolio and the seriousness with which China approaches its
partnership with the Bank have prompted regular consultations with clients on the Bank's
policies, procedures and program. Since 1997, governmeit officials, project implementing
agencies and, lately, representatives of civil society have participated in five formal, focused
consultation exercises (see Annex C). The private sector has also been extensively consulted by
IFC, in particular through a major study of the domestic private sector in China and a joint Bank/IFC
study on enterprise reform and corporate governance. Based on the feedback obtained from the
various consultations, the Bank has sought to improve its client services and respond to client
concerns.

41. 
Most recently, in the context of OED's ongoing preparation of a Country Assistance
Evaluation (CAE), a series of consultation workshops took place during June-July 2002 in
Beijing, in several coastal provinces, and in a western province. Attending the workshops were
representatives of all stakeholder groups - key government ministries, officials from a broad
sampling of provinces, project staff from throughout China, and leaders of civil society involved
in areas such as economic reform, poverty reduction, environment, rural development, and
health. This recent consultation made use of the Bank's increasing outreach to civil society,
which has been spurred by several Bank programs supporting development of non-government
organizations (NGOs). A client survey, covering not only the govermnent but also the private
sector, research institutions, the media, civil society organizations and other development
partners, is being carried out. Preliminary results are consistent with the earlier consultations.
The results will be used as an input for shaping the Bank's program in the future.

42. 
Overall, the views voiced dunng these consultations have been consistent over time. The
Bank's assistance to China is appreciated, particularly in transferring knowledge and introducing

l These included QA G Quality at Entry Assessment Report (1997), Recent Experience with Involuntary
Resettlement (1998), Transport in China-An Evaluation of World BankAssistanice (1999), China - From
Afforestration to Poverty Alleviationi and Natural Resource Management (2000), The Bank's Assistance to China's
Energy Sector - An OED Country Sector Evaluation (2001), and China - A Review ofDevelopment Challenges
Across Selected Sectors and Performance Assessment Reports (2002)

- 21 -

new ideas and innovations through lending and non- lending services. The Bank's contributions
in areas such as water resources management, poverty reduction, environmental protection and
infrastructure services were noted Civil society representatives, most of whom had participated
in Bank projects, were generally positive about the Bank's support to China and hoped that the
Bank would provide more concessional funding for NGO development and projects.

43. 
Although recent consultations also indicated major progress in making non-lending
support more timely and responsive to client needs (see para. 31), concerns about other issues
remain, the principal ones being: (a) project complexity, given multiple objectives and
conditionality; (b) costly and lengthy project preparation due to the Bank's preparation,
documentation and clearance requirements; and (c) implementation procedures that do not
sufficiently recognize China's own growing capacity.

44. 
Safeguards requirements have attracted particular comment as being complex and
unclear, costly to comply with, and at times inconsistent with Chinese regulations, which are
considered to be of reasonable standards. In addition, the Bank's financing terms are often seen
as unattractive, considering the front-end fee, the lack of IDA funds, and a perception that local
terms are better.

45. 
Over the past five years, measures responding to these concerns have been taken by the
Bank - by streamlining some of the Bank's project preparation procedures and clearance
requirements in the late- 1990s; providing more timely service to Chinese borrowers with the
help of project, procurement and financial management staff now decentralized to the Bank's
Beijing office (see para. 32); and issuing guidelines on practical solutions to deal with
differences between Chinese and Bank safeguard policies (see paras. 33-34, 85). The Bank's
collaboration with the United Kingdom's Department for International Development (DFID) has
also reduced the cost of borrowing for social sector and poverty reduction projects (see para. 89,
Box 5.3).

46. 
However, the views among stakeholders are quite diverse and the Bank needs to do more
to develop agreed positions. Institutional policies - such as for procurement - are not easily
modified. Also, depending on their responsibilities, clients often have different perspectives.
While some officials appreciate the benefits of international competitive bidding, others find it
inefficient and costly. While some welcome the Bank's role in knowledge transfer, others worry
that projects may become overly complex in introducing innovation and change While
safeguard objectives are welcomed by some parts of society, they are often questioned by those
charged with the more technical aspects of project implementation.

47. 
In the ongoing dialogue between the Government and the Bank, the Bank continues to
discuss with the Government how to address client concerns by finding mutually acceptable
ways to deal with differences and foster better understanding.

- 22 -

4. THEMATIC FRAMEWORK
FOR THE BANK GROUP'S ASSISTANCE PROGRAM

A. DEVELOPING THEMES FOR A CHANGING SITUATION

48. 
The first Bank Group's assistance program for China in the post-IDA period is matched
to the Government's priorities as identified in the Tenth Plan and related strategic
pronouncements including the recent 16 Party Congress, our own assessment of future
development trends, lessons from recent evaluations of program effectiveness, and results of
client survey/consultations. Global goals (in particular the Millenmium Development Goals) and
the Bank's corporate priorities (Annex E) were also taken into account in shaping the program.

th

49. 
The CAS is framed m a country context which is different from that in the previous
CASes. In particular, the new CAS coincides with: the shift in China's reform process, from the
liberalization phase to the more difficult stnictural and institution-building phase; the dynamic
growth of China's private sector; and the continuing need but reduced availability of
concessional external financing. It also addresses frontally the two critical challenges that have
emerged from past patterns of growth - social inequalities and environmental sustainability.

50. 
The issues to be addressed in the forthcoming CAS period are linked inextricably with
each other. Therefore, the planned program of lendmg and AAA support will need to grapple
with the emerging challenges that are more complex and multi-sectoral than the issues addressed
during the last CAS period, using a wider range of instruments (lending, studies, technical
assistance and traming) to assist the Government to achieve its objectives.

51. 
Under the overarching objective of supporting China in making two historic transitions -
from a rural, agricultural society to an urban, industrial society, and from a centrally-planned
economy to a more globally integrated market-based economy - the Bank's operational strategy
for China is organized around three main themes that are designed to:

* 

Improve the business enviromnent and help accelerate China's transition to a market
economy;

* Address the needs of the poorer and disadvantaged people and lagging regions; and

* Facilitate an environmentally sustainable development process.

52. 
Box 4.1 identifies the major sub-themes that will be addressed through a mix of lending
and AAA services. Annex D contains a detailed description of the core activities planned within
these sub-themes, including initiatives in individual sectors. The remainder of this section uses
the thematic framework to describe the strategic thrust of the planned assistance program.

- 23 -

Box 4.1: Thematic Framework for the CAS

Overarchiing Objective: Supportinig China's Two lhistoric Transitionts -from a Rutral, Agricultural Society
to an Urban, Inidustrial Society andfrom a Centrally-Planned Economy to a More Globally
Integrated Market-based Econonily - and to do it oni a Sustainiable Basis.

1. 

Improving the Business Environment and Accelerating Transition To a Market Economy

A Strengthening Macroeconomic Management
B Promoting China's Integration into the Global Economy in the WTO Era
C Reforming the Financial Sector
D Promoting Private Sector Devclopment and Entcrprise Reforms
Improving Public Sector Management and Delivcry of Services

E 

It. Addressing the Needs of the Poorer and Disadvantaged Peopl e and Lagging Regions

A 
Increasing Employment and Productivity Off and On the Farm
B Strengthening Transport Links within and to Lagging Regions
C Developing Human Resources
D Strengthening Social Protection
E 
Improving Targeted Poverty Reduction Programs

III. Facilitating an Environmentally Sustainable Development Process

A Strengthening Effectiveness of Environmental Institutions
B 
Improving Air Quality
C Managing Water Resources
D Managing Land and Natural Resources
Protecting Global Environmental Commons

E 

B. IMPROVING THE BUSINESS ENVIRONMENT AND DEVELOPING THlE MARKET ECONOMY

53. 
Today, many, if not most, resource allocation decisions in China are market-based.
Nevertheless, it is necessary to level the playing- field between public and pnvate financial and
non- financial institutions, and in some cases to eliminate major inefficiencies. With accession to
the WTO in December 2001 - a process that is largely to be completed by 2007 - the Chinese
authorities decided to hasten the pace of reform by making far-reaching commitments to further
liberalize entry into economic activities. In some cases, the direction of changes in the economy
can be foreseen. Successful adjustment to such changes will require an intensification of the
policy reforms that are underway - for example, deploying market-based instruments for
macroeconomic management, resolving banking system distress, and trade and investment policy
reform. In others, new institutions are required to improve the investment climate and to
promote the functioning of broader, deeper and more dynamic markets for stable and sustained
economic growth. These include, for example, legal and judicial institutions, competition and
private enterprise support policies, improved corporate governance, and better provision of
public services.

54. 
The key to sustained economic and employment growth in the future lies less in factor
accumulation and more on economy-wide growth in productivity. Towards this end, there is a
need to ensure that China's financial institutions and enterprises are competitive and viable. The

- 24 -

Bank Group Private Sector Strategy (see Annex F) will assist this process through interventions
designed to (a) help deepen and broaden the financial sector and support the growth of private
financial institutions; (b) support industrial restructuring and ownership diversification; (c)
improve the busmess environment by assistmg government's efforts to build the legal and
institutional foundations of a market economy; (d) support the adoption and dissemination of
environmentally and socially responsible and sustainable business practices by the Chinese
private sector; and (e) promote private sector participation in social and physical infrastructure
services. More generally, the ability to pursue the national development agenda depends for the
most part on the performance of sub-national governments, as mentioned earlier. Addressing the
unsatisfactory state of inter-governmental fiscal relations will enhance the ability of the public
sector to support growth in a sustainable way. This is specially important to tackle the urban
transition that is underway in China today. Productivity in urban areas - where the
overwhelming majoonty of jobs will be created - and the provision of improved urban living
conditions depends crucially on better municipal management and the availability of adequate
financial resources.

55. 

The assistance program in these areas has three important characteristics:

* They can rarely be addressed by IBRD investment lending On the other hand, IFC's
investments can have a significant demonstration effect and play a strong catalytic role
regardmg the private sector's response to market openings and improvements in the business
environment. Therefore, Bank Group involvement will be mostly through an array of
activities including technical assistance supported by trust funds, and direct financial support
by IFC to private enterprises and financial institutions (Annex F contains a fuller description
of the Bank Group strategy for private sector development in China).

* More so than m other thematic areas, there is exceptional synergy among the many reforms
and activities needed to lmprove the business environment and develop market mstitutions.
There are numerous actors and channels for interaction, and need for coordinated and well-
sequenced actions. The Bank Group has the breadth and the quality of resources and
instruments to provide the type of assistance that the Goverunent expects on addressing the
complex issues of improving the business environment. This will however require good
coordination of resources and activities, particularly between IBRD and IFC. Box 4.2
illustrates the complexity of objectives and activities in the financial sector, where sustained
commitment will be required to ensure the effectiveness of the assistance program.

* Progress on several components under this theme will depend on the Bank's ability to be
extremely sensitive to the pace of the reforms envisaged. In addition to financial sector, SOE
and inter-governmental fiscal reforms, this is especially true of better governance of the
development process. The Government's actions in this sphere have demonstrated that an
adequate platform exists for designing and implementing a sensible program of assistance.
See Annex G for discussion on the Bank's ongoing assistance in developmental governance.

- 25 -

Box 4.2: World Bank Support for Improving China's Financial System

Targets and Problems 

Proposed Activities

Systemiiic Issues

Reform strategy 

Vision note on future of China's financial sector

Financial sector integration 

Background study and policy note on financial conglomerates

Financial Intermediaries and Markets

Restructuring the bankitng system

State-owned banks 
* 
poor governance 
* 
insolvency 
* 
low profitability

Medium and small banks 
* 
poor governance 
* 
financial distress 

Rural credit cooperatives 
* 
poor governance 
* 
insolvency

Policy notes on (a) restructuring strategy, (b) building effective
supervision Technical assistance on institution building in policy banks
IFC's investments and assistance in the resolution of distressed assets

Policy note on failure -resolution strategies
IFC investment in city commercial banks
IFC's technical assistance to medium and small banks.

Studies on rural financial reform
Technical assistance on rural finance

Capital market development 
* 
stunted bond market 
* 
low institutional investment 
* 
limited products 

Policy notes on development of institutional investors, and technical
assistance on (a) government bond market reform, (b) government
cash management, (c) risk management for securities and futures,
(d) infrastructure finance, and (e) corporate bond market development

Finance for smnallfirmns 

Regional Outreach

Finance & Development 
Program ofAsia 
Pacific Economic 
Cooperation (APEC) 

IFC investments and technical assistance in asset management, fixed
income, housing finance, consumer finance

Study, policy note, technical assistance and pilot programs on small and
medium enterprise finance, and study and technical assistance on credit
guarantee and information systems

CPDF technical assistance to banks in the interior in building capacity for
SME lending and helping SMEs in the interior to improve thelir access to
financing SSIF direct equity funding for SMEs in the interior of China

Co-chairmanship with MOF of annual APEC Forum
Region-wide technical assistance program for (a ) government bond
market development, (b) finance for small firms, and (c) corporate
governance and financial institutions. Research on cross-border finance
and economic development

C. ADDRESSING NEEDS OF THE POORER/D ISADVANTAGED PEOPLE AND LAGGING REGIONS

56. 
Over the past decade, Bank Group support for China's development has shifted from the
increasingly well-off coastal areas to the disadvantaged inland provinces and, within therr, to
designated poor counties. There has been intensive collaboration on multi- sector diagnostic
studies, intensive involvement in poverty analysis and poverty- focused and other projects in the
lagging regions of the country. On the basis of these, a clear strategic framework has evolved for
continued assistance to the Government's programs for the lagging regions, specifically for the

- 26 -

central and western provinces (which are the primary focus of the Tenth Plan efforts) and the
largely-urbanized "rust belt" areas of the northeast.

57. 
Bank assistance will be focused upon five nodes that are intended to accelerate pro-poor
growth and target the specific needs of disadvantaged groups. The program consists of new
investments in rural development, transport and education, as well as AAA, including distance
learning.

* 

It will stimulate employment and productivity growth, recognizing that poorer endowments
and sparser populations require the implementation of strategies that are in many ways
fundamentally different from those seen in the better-endowed and densely-populated coastal
areas. Rural development and technology initiatives, agglomeration and urbanization issues,
and private sector promotion and support services are key areas of work.

* 

In addition to endowments, the integration of the vast domestic market requires a set of
policies, infrastructure investments, and logistics development to combat the geographical
remoteness of the disadvantaged regions.

* There will be continuing emphasis on basic education, skills development, and improvements
in the unfavorable human and social indicators in such regions. Special attention will be
given to rural health issues particularly accessibility to services and insurance schemes as
well as HIV/AIDS. This will enable disadvantaged groups, including a high proportion of
the minority population, to take advantage of employment and income diversification
opportunities within and outside these areas. More analytical work will be conducted on
gender issues (Annex H), as mputs into the Bank-China dialogue on the relevance of gender
issues in development assistance and for identifying effective gender components in Bank-
supported projects where appropriate.

* 

In order to address social concerns and promote risk-taking, the Bank will continue its
analytical and capacity building support for social protection. In this regard, the program
intends to go beyond urban pension reforms, to a broader array of urban social 'issue s
including migration, retraining and unempbyment.

* The program will address two divergent trends in the nature of poverty in China, building
upon our strong support to the poverty reduction successes since the early-80s, which
resulted from growth as well as targeted policies Starting from a position of high and
ubiquitous poverty, China has now reached a stage where poor people are concentrated in
geographic clusters that are amenable to poverty targeting through the use of a tested package
of interventions (e.g., rural roads, basic education, childhood vaccinations, public services for
income diversification). Box 4.3 illustrates the nature of multi-sector/multi- instrument
interventions that will be deployed for this purpose and reflecting the need for both growth,
empowerment and poverty targeting as elements of an effective strategy. At the same time,
increasing labor market mobility has meant that the focus of poverty reduction efforts has to
shift gradually towards household targeting, as in the developed countries. This is an area of
policy expertise that is severely under-developed in China but one in which the Bank has
considerable expertise to offer. Therefore, the Bank will play an enhanced role in supporting
the next stage of poverty reduction.

- 27 -

THE CHALLENGES 

AND HOWV THEY ARE ADDRESSED BY THE FVORLD BANK

Box 4.3: Helping China's Rural Poor

IDENTIFY THE CAUSES OFPOVERTY 
INCREASE FUNDING FOR THE TRULYNEEDY. 

More efficient and equitable fiscal transfer 
systems needed along with better targeting of 
poor communities 

IMPROVEACCESS TO SOCIAL SERVICES. 

RAISE ON-FARM PRODUCTIVITY THROUGH:
- SUPPORTIVE INFRASTRUCTURE 

- RESEARCHAND TECHNOLOGYTRANSFER 

to serve mountainous areas and assist 
shift to higher-value crops 

- MICRO-CREDIT. 

PROMOTE MORE OFF-FAR,M EMPLOYMENT 
AND LABOR MOBLITY TO URBANAREAS 

EMPOWER THE POOR 

MAKE THEM MORESECURE in terms of land 

use rights, access to markets and information, 
improved water use efficiency to protect 
against drought, etc 

+ Overcoming Rural Poverty (2001) Report
+ Provincial Expenditure Review (2001-02) and Sub-

national Economic Reports (FY03 -04)
* TA for Poverty Mapping, Improved Targeting of Poverty
Funds
* TA to Monitor indicators for social sector spending and
its impact, Strengthen financing and improve access to
social services for rural poor
* Projects Tuberculosis Control (FY02), Basic Education in
Western Areas (FY03), and ongoing social projects

* 

Inner Mongolia, Hubei and Third Shaanxi Highways

Projects (FY02-04) with Roads in Poverty Area (RIPA)
components and the Hubei Hydropower (FY02) and
Renewable Energy (FY04) Projects to make power
available in poor areas

* TA to develop a new approach to rural development in

* 

+ 

poverty counties with degraded lands
* Projects like Sustainable Forestry Development (FY02),
Jiangxi Integrated Agriculture Development (FY03),
Agriculture Tcchnology Development (FY04)
IFC's support to industry-agriculture linkages through
investments in resource-based industries
* Analytical work on rural finance issues
* Credit provided under ongoing/proposed rural poverty
projects
* Possible IFC support to micro -finance institutions
* Studies of labor market reform and development
IFC capacity building and funding to SMEs in western
areas
IFC's support to rural community development through
projects in forestry and agribusiness
* TA for empowering poor women in western China
* Highly participatory approach in projects, e g , Sustainable
Forestry Development (FY02), Gansu/Xinjiang Pastoral
Development (FY03), Poor Rural Communities
Development (FY04)
* TA Support to Water Users' Associations
* 
Increased local control of schools in basic education
projects
+ TA to introduce land tenure reforms, promote water
users' associations
* Agriculture projects improving water use efficiency and
market access

* 

58. 
Sustainable improvement in the living standards of poorer and disadvantaged regions will
require accelerated development of the private sector in the Western provinces. The Bank Group
will give special focus In its advisory and investment activities to issues related to private sector
development m China's interior. IFC will continue to support private sector-led projects in the

- 28 -

mterior and, through the China Project Development Facility (CPDF, see Box 3.1), improvement
in the business climate there. Supporting growth of SMEs in the Western provinces will be a
high pnonty for IFC and support in this area will be delivered through CPDF, the Sichuan SME
Investment Fund (SSIF, see also Box 3.1), and SME linkages as part of larger projects.
Following its successful experience in Sichuan, IFC is widenng its focus to cover a second
intenor province, Shaanxi. IFC's experience in Sichuan suggests that focusing on one province
pays off in terms of what IFC can accomplish, in terms of visibility, critical mass of
developmental impact and knowledge of local business conditions.

D. FACILITATING AN ENVIRONMENTALLY SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT PROCESS

59. 
Despite the Government's efforts of the last decade, China's rapid economic growth
poses a major challenge for the management of its natural enviromnent. Increasing land
degradation, severe deficiencies in water quality and the distribution of the available water, high
levels of air pollutants, and declining natural forests threaten the sustainability of long-tenn
growth. The causes and impacts of such environmental problems are mtertwined across sectors
and regions in complex ways, sometimes even beyond China's geographical borders. Mostly,
they require coordinated solutions that cut across domestic admimstrative boundaries, using
state-of-the-art mitigation technologies and participatory policy interventions. Moreover,
environmental deterioration and the declining productivity of many natural resources are
associated with poverty and unsustainable production practices, especially in the
environmentally fragile central and western provinces. Consequently, sustainable development
is a primary theme of both the Tenth Plan strategy and the Western Region Development
program.

60. 
The Bank has a major program of environmental cooperation in China, as illustrated in
Figure 4.1. The planned Bank Group program includes new investments in energy conservation,
natural resource management, watershed rehabilitation and wastewater treatment, global
environment projects supported by the Global Environment Facility (GEF) and Montreal
Protocol, and AAA. This is also an area where strong partnerships have been built with other
multilateral (e.g., UJNEP, UNDP), bilateral (e.g., Norwegian Government), and NGOs (e.g.,
World Wildlife Fund, Ford Foundation) The program during the CAS period is shaped by the
findings of a major study, China: Air, Land and Water - Environmental Priorities for a New
Millennium, which was jointly produced in 2001 by China's State Enviromnental Protection
Agency and the Bank. The study suggested mainstreaming environmental considerations in the
planning processes of all major government agencies; providing the funding necessary for
environmental agencies to fulfill their mandates; and developing diversified approaches and tools
to deal with the country's wide-ranging needs. Stemminmg from that study, as shown below, an
intensive level of support is planned for the forthcoming CAS period to help shape
environmental institutions, manage China's air, land and water resources, and protect the global
commons.

61. 
A major focus of IFC's investment activities in China will be to support the adoption and
dissemination of environmentally and socially responsible and sustainable business practices by
the Chinese private sector. IFC will continue to pursue investment opportunities in sustainable
forest management and renewable energy. IFC will give a special priority in its business
development strategy to projects that support the development of China's environmental

- 29 -

industries, including those bringing international envirortnental technology to China, as well as
those that manage wastewater and sewage treatment plants. IFC will also, as it does globally,
seek to help investee companies find profitable opportunities to reduce waste and emissions

Figure 4.1: Environmental Issues and Bank Support

Issues 

Bank Support

Global Environment: 
Think globally but act locally 
How China deals with its environmental 
problems has global implications. It is a key 
stakeholder in intemational environment 
conventions 

Environment Institutions & Regulatory
Framework: 
Comprehensive but gaps exist 
Existing framework requires continuous 
updating and refinement to improve 
effectiveness and cover emerging issues 
(e g , post-WTO) 

Air Quality: 
A major health issue in China 

While national emission of major air 
pollutants have declined in the 1990s, 
emission from vehicles has worsened and 
continued reliance on coal and other
high carbon fuels will reverse the trend 

* 

Water Quality and Quantity: 
Nearing crisis proportions in some parts 
of the country 
e Some progress has been made in pollution 
control of industnal wastewater discharges, but A* 
municipal wastewater and agncultural 
discharges are worsening 
* Water scarcity is becoming acute in some 
areas, particularly in northem China

Land and Natural Resources: 
Degradation is widespread and 
increasing 
* Rapid growth has accelerated the land 
degradation process making China one of the 
most senously eroded countnes in the world 
* Loss of cultivated land, grassland 
degradation, and decline of natural forests are 
increasing as well as important biodiversity. 

Grants 

v

* Global Environmental Facility- comprehensive program of investments
in biodiversity protection and reduction in greenhouse gas emissions
* Phase-out of Ozone Depleting Substances (ODS)
TA/Studies
* National Strategy Study for the Clean Development Mechanism of the
Kyoto Protocol
* Preparation for the Phase-out of Persistent Organic Pollutants (POPs)
Program (with the potential for future grant assisted projects)

Lending/Grants
* Environmcntal TA and Economic Law Reform Projects
TA/Studies
* Strategic Environmental Impact Assessment Study
* Environmental Administration Study
* Environmental protection regulations, procedures and guidelines

Lending/Grants

e Renewable Energy Scale-up Program
Heating Reform and Building Energy Efficiency
Urban Projects

TA/Studies

* RAINS-Asia Program (Phase 111)

Lending/Grants
* Urban Environmental Improvement Projects with major wastewater
treatment components
. Tarim Basin I and 1I Projects
Water Conservation Project
. Hai River Integrated Water Resources Management
. TA/Studies
* North China Water Study

Lending/Grants
* Loess Plateau Projects (I and 11)
* Forestry Projects (1, 11, and 111)
* Biodiversity Projects - Nature Reserves Management Project and Lake
Dianchi (new)
* Coastal Zone Management Project
* Gansu and Xinjiang Pastoral Development Project (new)
* Sustainable Forestry Development Project (new)
TA/Studies
* Livestock Sector Note
. Task Force on Forestry and Grasslands of China Council for
International Cooperation on Environment and Development

- 30 -

5. THE BANK GROUP ASSISTANCE PROGRAM

62. 
Operationally, the program would be shaped by factors reflecting the changing nature of
the relationship between China and the World Bank Group, in particular:

* The potential gains to both sides, with China positioned not only to receive the Bank

group's assistance, but also share lessons of its successful experiences more broadly and
contribute to the thinking on global development issues;

* The growmg importance of the Bank's advisory services relative to lending m the coming
years and the more active role that IFC and MIGA will play as part of the Bank Group's
program;

* With the array of choices available to China for both policy advice and financing, selectivity
and specialization will be an important consideration in formulating the Bank Group's
program (although the size and diversity China's economy will inevitably draw the Bank
Group into a range of issues and activities); and

* Recognition of the benefits that Bank partnerships with other donors, the private sector and
civil society can have, given the changes in China that have occurred over the past decade.

A. KNOWLEDGE AGENDA/AAA PROGRAM

63. 
As mentioned earlier, the Bank is now asked to assist with the most complex institutional
and structural policy issues. Requests for collaboration could be extremely narrow in focus (e.g.,
the momtoring of local government fiscal risks) or strategic and sweeping in scope (e.g.,
education or environmental strategies to meet near-term challenges). These depend on China's
own assessment of where the Bank's contribution would be highest.

64. 
Therefore, the general strategy for collaboration on the Knowledge Agenda can be
characterized as: (a) demand-dnven; (b) balanced between activities that inform or otherwise
support specific policy events or decisions, and those that address strategic development issues
where the authorities feel that the Bank can make unique contributions; (c) grouped around
themes of high priority, which are discussed intensively with the authorities and approved by the
State Council (cabinet); (d) reliant on a variety of delivery mechanisms, including policy notes,
detailed operational studies, face-to-face and distance learning courses, seminars and workshops,
study tours for Chinese officials, and research; and (e) based on the increasing use of local
experts and institutions.

65. 
For the three-year period FY03-05, the Bank's Knowledge Agenda is organized internally
under eight sub-themes consistent with the three CAS objectives shown in Box 4.1: economic
monitoring; economic management,financial sector development; markets and enterprises;
revitalizing lagging economies; human/social development; environmental management; and
infrastructure and urban development. The major activities under each of these themes are listed
in Annex B4-The Knowledge Agenda, FY03-05. A significant characteristic of the Knowledge

- 31 -

Agenda is the closer integration of economic and sector tasks containing a high operational
content with capacity building conducted through WBI, and trust funds and research on strategic
issues undertaken by the Bank in collaboration with local and international researchers and
institttions. Typically, major economic and sector work (ESW) is carried out in tandem with
WBI courses, including use of GDLN programs, in order to transfer cutting-edge analytical
methods or international experience to local counterparts, or to disseminate findings more
broadly. Bank Group-assisted research will be instrumental in deepening understanding of the
Chinese development experience, building local research capacities, and feeding into the design
of policies and projects in which the Bank Group and other developirent partners are mvolved in
China. 
In addition, in this way the Bank Group can bring longer-termn development problems to
the Governnent's attention while also assisting policymakers to grapple with the more
immediate economic and social agenda. The dissemination of the Bank Group's research
through a Chinese- language website will facilitate the transfer of international development
experience to local researchers. At the same time, high quality evaluation of the Chinese
projects, policies and institutions - through diagnostic and advisory ESW and research - is
planned in order to scale up China's development experience to other countries.

Box 5.1: Sub-national Development Issues - An Important Area of Bank Involvement

The Issue Differences in endowments and geography have interacted with economic policies to exacerbate
disparities among regions. At the same time, weaknesses in the operation of China's intergovernmental fiscal
system weaken the implementation of the national policy agenda Due to a mismatch between the major
expenditure responsibilities of sub-provincial governments - particularly for providing vital public services such
as education and health - and their funding capacities, extremely large - and growing - regional disparities have
emerged in fiscal spending, service provision and people's welfare While a system of earmarked budgetary
transfers exists, it has not achieved policy objectives The problems are especially severe in the lagging regions
of westem and northeastern China.

Diagnosis Together with SDPC, the Bank has addressed some of the issues related to sub-national economic
development, focusing initially on economic constraints, trade and logistics issues, human development needs,
private sector development, and environmental infrastructure in three western provinces More recently,
working with the Ministry of Finance, the Bank has addressed the fiscal issues in its report, China - National
Development and Sub-National Finance A Review of Provincial Expenditures (Report No 22951, April 2002)
The report recommends reforms to improve expenditure and revenue assignments for the various levels of
government, to distribute fiscal resources more equally, and to improve use of these resources through better
budget managcment at all government levels A comprehensive effort to re-gear all components of the inter-
governmental fiscal system is called for since selective interventions on specific issues create perverse
incentives

Piloting Reforms The report was welcomed by senior government officials, who requested Bank support in
implementing the recommendations Planning has therefore begun for a multi-year pilot effort to provide
several western provinces with technical assistance for introducing fiscal reforms that reduce regional inequality
and improve provision of key services to local populations A collaborative effort of China, the Bank Group and
selected external development partners is envisioned Simultaneously, research on the business environment,
investment promotion, removal of inter-regional barriers to trade and resource mobility, and on the development
of economic belts is proposed This is to be complemented with increased capacity building efforts for lagging
regions, including the use of WBI programs targeted towards the western provinces, and the use of the Ningxia
GDLN node and related ICT to reach target audiences in the lagging provinces

66. Within the overall Knowledge Agenda shown in Annex B4, which covers not only AAA
but also efforts by WBI and the Bank's research units, there are three areas where better

- 32 -

integration of ESW, capacity-building and research is likely to be most effective. The first is a
deepening focus on sub-national issues, motivated by the need to address regional and other
inequalities while reforming local institutions in order to accelerate growth and the reduction of
poverty (see Box 5. 1, Sub-national Development: An Important Area of Bank Involvement).
The second is in the closely related area of the investment climate, both at a national level and
specifically for the lagging regions, where the need for improvement seems greatest. 
In addition
to ESW on specific elements of corporate and local governance and impedLments to the
expansion of private business, particularly in lagging regions, the planned research program
includes an intensive assessment of firm- level surveys of the business environment. The third
area where ESW, capacity-building and research complement each other closely is m managing
the adjustment to post- WTO global integration. A major research project on the policy and
poverty linkages of WTO accession is being completed with the assistance of DFID, while a
number of WBI and GDLN activities deliver international knowledge and build local skills for
actions needed to modermize and strengthen public institutions and domestic markets, and to
benchmark and reach international standards of competitiveness (see Annex B4).

67. 
Interactions between the Chinese economy and the rest of the Asian region have become
an important area of policy interest as China increased its participation in world trade,
investment and payments processes. The Knowledge Agenda contains a solid program of work
in this area, whlch is intended to respond to the request from Governnent for policy advice as
well as to feed into regional discussions. A set of studies addressing the effects of China's WTO
accession on trade and investment in Asia is nearing completion. A region-wide study is looking
at broader issues associated with China's emergence as a low-cost manufacturing base and
destination for a huge volume of foreign investment, as well as behind-the-border issues to help
regional integration. A specific study assessing China's strategic choices in terms of regional
cooperation is also underway. Finally, a set of AAA activities that is planned for supporting the
development of lagging regions will also examine linkages with bordering countries, and ways in
which they could be strengthened. As several other externa I agencies are simultaneously
assessing regional cooperation issues in other bordering areas (e.g., Mekong, Northeast Asia,
Central Asia), a vast body of knowledge and potential policy recommendations is being
developed to guide China's emergence as a major player in the world economy.

B. LENDING PROGRAM 

LEVELS, FocUS AND SELECTIVITY

68. 
The case for lending to China. Although China is now a lower middle-income
developing country, continued Bank financing remains relevant for the following reasons:

* China sees Bank lending to be a vehicle not only to transfer resources but also to transfer
knowledge, build institutions, share advanced managerial experience and support innovation
and change at a critical tume in its transition. Continued mvestment lending, for example, m
infrastructure for both the inner and coastal provinces, also reflects the strength of the
portfolio over the years and perceptions that the Bank projects have contributed significantly
to China's growth performance and improving the quality of domestically funded
investments;

- 33 -

* Although China has made significant progress on poverty as mentioned earlier, there are still
more than 200 million people with expenditures below US$1 a day, who account for about
18 percent of the global total. The gains in poverty reduction have been uneven
geographically, leaving the vast majority of the poor in China concentrated in the lagging
regions, hence making their development a national priority; and

* Although China has taken steps to strengthen its fiscal position, the Government's revenue to
GDP ratio remains very low and there is not yet an effective mechanism to transfer resources
from the central to the poorer sub-national governments. In the meantime, the Bank can play
a significant financial intermediary role in supporting mvestments in poor areas.

69. 
Lending Levels. An annual lending program fluctuating in the range of US$1.0-1.5
billion and averaging about US$1.2-1.3 billion is envisaged. This would be about one third to
one-half of the peak amounts reached in the mid-90s but higher than the last two years. A higher
lending level is neither feasible given the Bank's nsk-bearing capacity nor commensurate with
client demand. The planned lending program is consistent with the client's financial needs and,
purely from the viewpoint of the program's operational impact and administrative cost, may be
seen from both sides as the minimum effective size in relation to the developmental challenges
facing China. China, however, is projected to become IBRD's largest borrower during the CAS
period, and in the absence of arrangements to manage exposure, projected debt outstanding
under such a lending program would risk exceeding IBRD's portfolio concentration limit,
currently US$13.5 billion. In order to ensure that any new lending does not involve projected
exposure in any future year exceeding the concentration limit, the authorities and the Bank have
agreed to the text of a Framework Agreement, which will provide a mechanism for flexibility in
the lending program while keeping projected effective exposure within the concentration limit.
(See Section 5C below and Annex B8.)

70. Within the US$1.0-1.5 billion range, actual annual lending amounts will depend on a
number of factors, including implementation of the exposure management framework and the
cost of IBRD financing relative to domestic and other external sources. Given China's
decentralized structure, the Bank is effectively dealing with some dozen or more local authorities
coordinated by certral agencies. Borrowing provinces typically will weigh the potential value-
added that Bank projects bring before seeking assistance from the Bank, while the Bank has to
judge the effectiveness of its program against progress on structural reforms and poverty
reduction - which can vary from province to province.

71. 
For discussion of financial and country risks, see section G. In the case of a major
deterioration of the economy, a substantial
slowdown in structural reforms or any 
significant increase in risk, the implications for 
the Bank's assistance program would be 
discussed in a CAS Progress Report 

Figure 5.1: Geographic Focus of Lending
(by number of projects)

58

72. 
Selectivity and Focus. Consistent with 
the CAS themes, the lending program in Annex 
B3 focuses on the poorer inland provinces and

42

40% 

20% 

0%

80% 

60% 

76%

24%

FY93-95 

FY96-98 

FY99-01 

FY02-04

I + Coastal 

(B 

Inland|

- 34 -

typically addresses poverty and/or environmental objectives. Many projects also have innovative
features or are designed with knowledge transfer as an important objective. In terms of
geographical distribution, three-quarters of the proposed projects will support the poorer, inner
provinces, compared with about 62 percent since the last CAS progress report (see Figure 5. 1).

73. 
Regarding the sectoral composition (see Figure 5.2), transport - with a focus on
completion of the main transport links to and within the inner and western provinces - and urban
projects - focused on environmental mitigation (water, sanitation and air pollution) - are the two
largest sectors, accounting for 34 percent and 24 percent, respectively, of the FY02-04 lendmg
program. The increasing prominence of urban lending, both in coastal as well as inner
provinces, is a natural consequence of the rapid urbanization process underway in Chma and the
priority being given to environmental issues. The transport lending reflects the client's
continued concerns over promoting growth and its lmks with poverty reduction by strengthening
regional integration and competitiveness through a well functioning multi-modal system
(highways, inland water transport, railways and urban transport services). Nevertheless, while
these two sectors have a slightly increased share of lending compared to the previous period, the
actual amounts lent will be less than m the mid- 1 990s. Compared with the past, the increased
share of urban lending is mitrrored in a decreased share of rural development projects as the Bank
moves away from financing large-scale rural infrastructure (e.g., dams and major irrigation
systems) and credit/agro-processing projects to assisting natural resources management (water,
forestry, and grasslands). Lower lending for the social sectors and TA in FY02-04 (down 4
percent from the previous period) points up the fact that lost IDA resources have been only
partially compensated by blending arrangements supported by DFID (and possibly other
bilaterals in the future). Energy - with a concentration on renewable and efficiency objectives is
more likely to be supported by GEF assistance in the future than with IBRD lending. These
projected sectoral shares represent a continuation of trends that enmrged durmg implementation
of the previous CAS. They reflect client preferences and China's system of decentralizing
repayment obligations to the local beneficiaries - which shapes both the size and nature of
projects selected.

Figure 5.2: Lending- Sectoral Composition
(by number of projects)

FY99-01 

FY02-04

Transport 
32% 

Rural/Env 
26% 

Transport 
34% 

Rural/Env
21%

_m11~EnvS 

N 

_D 

R 

al 

-

So~~~cial/TAv 

Urban/Env 
18% 

1 

18% 

Energy/Env 

~~~~6% 

\ ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~14%

SociaVTA

Urban/Env 

Urban/Env 

124% 

f 

Energy/Env
7%

74. 
Consistency with sectoral strategies and the potential for mnovation/knowledge transfer
form the criteria for project selection. The nature of the Bank's lending relationship with China
has been grounded historically on support for agreed sectoral policy objectives. Operations were

- 35 -

designed to reflect the client's strong ownership and reform objectives developed to bring about
incremental but significant and sustained progress over time. This principle remains valid. Thus
at the sectoral level, there needs to be consistency in the strategies as agreed between China and
the Bank, and our financing role must be evaluated periodically, relative to overall progress in
the sector.

Table 5.1: The Bank's Evolving Objectives and Instruments: The Case of Energy

1996-1997 

| 

2001-2002

Strategic Objectives

Expand and modernize supply capacity to support 
rapid economic growth 
* 
Support construction of least cost large scale projects 
with modem technology and environmental facilities 
* Assist in transfemng new technologies for large 
coal-fired and hydropower projects, applying modem * 
power system operation methods 

Transit the energy sector to a diversely owned, market -
based system.
* Accelerate the transition by assisting the government to
clarify policies and solidify strategies for sector
restructunng, market development and regulation
Support implementation of restructunng and power
market development at regional and provincial levels

Promote energy sector reform to improve the financial 
performance of energy companies 
* 
Promote the transition from a vertically integrated 
industry to a purchase agency model 
* Commercialize/corporatize power, oil/gas companies 
* Upgrade management capabilities and systems to 
enable the energy enterpnse to operate efficiently 

Improve fuel mix, increase energy efficiency and limit
environmental impacts
.
Promote transmission, distnbution and use of natural
gas, and cleaner coal technologies
Improve demand side energy efficiency especially
through marked-based mechanisms
Promote expanded use of renewable energy

* 

* 

Develop a legal and regulatory framework 
* Delineate ownership and regulatory functions 
* 
Separate govemment from enterpnse management 
and establish separate regulatory institutions 

Develop effective institutional and regulatory capacity
* Develop regulations and institutions consistent with the
increasingly competitive and privately owned sectors to
replace "old style" administrative framework

Promote private participation/new sources of 
finalicing 
* Encourage altenative financing strategies for energy 
development 
* Gradually increase the overall tanff level to cover 
supply cost and simplify the complex tanffs 
* Develop model agreements to govern the 
commercial relationship among energy entities

* 

Reduce social inequities
Promote electricity access to remote, sparsely populated
areas through renewable energy development
* Coordinate electricity service provision with efforts to
alleviate poverty and reduce inequities among regions
Promote west to east transfer of energy through assisting
in policy development to maximize development impact

* 

Meains anud Tools

* The choice of investnent projects was consistent 
with Government objectives of eliminating energy 
shortage, modernizing the sector and improving its 
efficiency. Lendinig mainly supported large scale 
mainstream projects equipped with modem 
technology 
* Limited sector work focused on defining each sub- 
sector's strategic reform options and developing the 
roadmap for sector restructuring and the 
establishment of legal and regulatory frameworks 
* Accompanied at provincial level by TA to 
commercialize and corporatize power companies, 
upgrade institutional capacity 

* The choice of investment vehicles reflects increasing
availability of capital for mainstream generation,
infrastructure constraints to market development, and
the need to convert to clean fuels and increase energy
efficiency. Lending is limited to niche markets not well-
served by others
* Very wide range of sector work and TA focus on
assisting the central government to develop legal and
policy frameworks, define asset divestiture options and
clanfy market development strategy
Parallel TA at provincial levels to support design and
implementation of power markets, transmission pricing
and consumer tanffs

* 

- 36 -

75. 
This approach is exen-plified above with respect to the energy sector. Table 5 1 contrasts
the nature of the issues in the mid-90s with the situation today and illustrates both the progress
that China has made and how the Bank's program, in terms of lending and non-lending services,
has responded to these changes. In the absence of policy-based lending and tranchmg, Bank
lending m support of continued reforms in the case of China is validated by the country's strong
track record and mirrored by the evolution of the Bank's assistance program.

76. 
At the project level, the Bank continually looks for opportunities to transfer new
approaches and technology as part of project design and implementation. Each project is
designed to build on the lessons of earlier ones and where the situation is appropriate, to
introduce innovation as part of project selection and design. Examples of key innovative
features in the lending program are illustrated in Box 5.2 and Annex B3, page 2.

Project Name 
Shanghai Urban 
Environment APL (FY03) 

Box 5.2: Examples of Support for Innovation and Change
Recent and Proposed Projects
Support for Innovation and Change
First Adaptable Program Loan in China Supports development and
implementation of new financing mechanisms - in particular issuance of long-
term infrastructure bonds by the municipality that can serve as a precedent for
future long-term revenue bond issues in China - and private sector participation

Hunan City/Regional 
Development (FY04) 

Second Energy 
Conservation Project 
(GEF) (FY03) 

Agricultural Technology 
(FY04) 
Inner Mongolia Highway 
(FY02) 

Sustainable Forestry 
Development (FY02) 

First Bank project in China for comprehensive development of an integrated
urban region including three large cities in a river basin Project follows City
Development Strategy exercise

Supports energy-efficiency investments and associated reductions in pollutants,
through the development of China's nascent Energy Management Contract
(EMC) industry EMCs are a new concept to China and patterned on energy
service companies in North America and Europe The EMCs undertake energy
conservation investments in "host" enterprises, based on contracts between the
two, and carry out project design, procurement, installation, financing, etc
Focuses on development of dryland and environmentally sound technologies,
targeted to the poor western provinces

Pilots private sector implementation of maintenance Addresses regional
inequalities and improves access of low-income areas Supports trade between
China, Russia and Mongolia

Pioneered concept of protecting natural forests and associated biodiversity in
support of Government's new forestry policy along with sustainable forest
plantations First formal co-financing in Asia with the European Commission
and complemented by GEF grant.

77. 

Lending and AAA - Supporting Sectoral Objectives and Innovation Bank Group

support can be provided through lending and/or AAA, as appropriate. In some instances, issues -
such as those in developing a market economy - are more effectively addressed through policy
studies or TA - often on grant terms - and through Bank partnerships with bilaterals and non-
governmental institutions. In other cases, such as addressing inequality and environmental
issues, Bank lending provides a multi-year framework for collaboration and hands-on
expenence, both vital to knowledge transfer and institution building. The Bank's program
therefore builds on synergies between lending and AAA supported by both the Bank's budget
and donor grants.

- 37 -

78. 
As illustrated below, lending tends to be concentrated in support of the second theme -
addressing the needs of the poorer and disadvantaged people and regions - and the third theme -
facilitating a more environmentally sustainable development process. While AAA, as measured
by the amount of the budget spent, both from the Bank's administrative budget and trust funds, is
more concentrated in the first theme on improving the business environment and helping to
accelerate China's transition to a market economy. Overall, this pattern in the use of the Bank's
instruments provides a more accurate sense of the role that the Bank plays in supporting China's
developmental needs.

Figure 5.3: Bank Operations by CAS Theme

(A) Lending by Theme (FY96-04) 

(B) AAA Expenditures by Theme (FYOO-01)

#of 

Projects9
20

18 c 
16 -
14 -

12 -
10 

8
6 -

4 
2 -

$million

8-

7-
6-

5_
4-

3

2

1

0 

I 
II 
O FY96-98 i FY99-01 

Iil Theme 
° FY02-04 |O 

0 

-

I 

Adm Budget 

II 
l Trusi Fund

Il 

Theme

LEGEND:
Theme I Improving Business Environmcnt/Accelerating Transition to Market Economy
Theme 11. Addressing the Needs of the Poorer and Disadvantaged People and Regions
Theme III Facilitating an Environmentally Sustainable Development Process

C. EXPOSURE

79. 
IBRD Exposure. Since FY02, IBRD's largest exposure has been to China. Large
IBRD commitments in the mid-1990s led to a rapid build-up m the exposure from US$2.5 billion
at end-FY1990 to US$11.4 billion at end-FY2001. Continuation of lending commitments at the
rate of the mid-1990s would have led to IBRD's single country concentration limit of US$13.5
billionbeing exceeded within a very few years. Partly in response to this, new commitments
from IBRD were reduced. Over FY01-02 lending was projected at about US$1 billion per year
but the outcome was lower, and if these recent levels were to continue, the concentration limit
might not be exceeded, provided that disbursements, cancellations and exchange rates stayed
within a certain range. However, in view of the agreed lendmg program (Annex B3), which
reflects higher demand for IBRD loans and the potential role that the Bank can play in China's
development, China and the Bank jointly developed a proposed arrangement (described in para.
81) to manage IBRD exposure, which would provide China with greater upward flexibility in
borrowing from IBRD.

80. 
Loans outstanding to IDA and IBRD are projected to increase to US$21.5 billion by
2005, including gross debt to as much as US$14.5 billion to IBRD, although IBRD would have

- 38 -

protection under the special arrangements described in para. 81 against exposure above the
concentration limit of US$13.5 billion. Total debt to IBRD and IDA would be about 1 0-1 1
percent of China's total external loans outstanding. See Annex B7 for Exposure Indicators.

81. Management of IBRD Exposure. The arrangement developed jointly would allow
China access to the lending levels planned in this CAS, while protecting IBRD against cash-flow
losses from principal exposure above the concentration limit, in the unlikely event that China's
loans were to go into non-accrual. The arrangement includes a menu of measures that China
might take, including cancellations, prepayments, lower lending or the purchase of special
private placement bonds from IBRD. This arrangement was endorsed in principle by the Board
on August 6, 2002 (Board Paper R2002-0135), subject to further Board approval of the
application of the approach in a specific case. Management expects to seek Board approval
shortly to use the approach in the case of China, and if approval is obtained, the legal documents
detailing the arrangements would likely be signed shortly thereafter. In brief, IBRD will carry
out an Annual Review around imd-August each fiscal year, and will notify China of any
projected exposure above the concentration limit in light of the out-turn of the previous year and
the prospective lending program for the fiscal year in question. IBRD will also notify China of
any shortfall between projected interest due on China's loans above the concentration limit and
interest payable by IBRD on special Private Placement Bonds held by China in the year ahead.
In any fiscal year, new lending to China within the CAS program will be available to the extent
that it does not involve either projected net exposure above the concentration limit in future years
or any shortfall m such net interest payments. Any loans approved by the Board beyond this
would have as a condition of effectiveness that China had taken the necessary measures to
protect IBRD against any projected net exposure above the concentration limit and any shortfall
in such net interest payments.

D. PORTFOLIO MANAGEMENT

82 
As discussed in Section 3 (para. 30), China has the largest portfolio in the Bank and its
quality is among the best performing. OED and QAG assessments have confirmed satisfactory
project implementation, outcomes, and portfolio management.

83. 
In view of the portfolio's strength, as well as its complexity and size, the strategy has
been to identify particular issues that have been seen as posing particular risks or impacting
negatively on the quality Many of these come from the past OED and QAG reviews, the annual
reviews of the portfolio and sector-specific reviews done by the region. Several of the issues
coming out of these reviews - largely directed at streamlining and accelerating project
preparation, procurement and disbursement procedures - were implemented as part of the Bank-
wide streamlining of procedures and program decentralization in FY98 and continue to be the
focus of ongoing efforts. Any cross-cutting issues identified are addressed in a focused manner,
e.g., through thematic supervision or assessment and discussion with relevant sector or local
authorities. This has proven to be more effective in achieving results than trying to address such
issues through a more general process of Country Portfolio Performance Review, given the
nature and size of the portfolio in China.

- 39 -

84. 
Nevertheless, the portfolio is under pressure in dealing with safeguard and fiduciary
issues and coping with the shuft toward the poorer, inner provinces where implementation
capacity is weaker. In response, fundmg for supervision has been steadily increased in recent
years, staffing of the Beijing office has been considerably expanded to deal with sector issues as
well as core services, and project-specific supervision has been supplemented by thematic
supervision of safeguard and fiduciary issues as part of our efforts to reduce risks. In addition to
the various measures on safeguard policy implementation (described below), the Bank's Beijing
units dealing with fiduciary issues also provide training in procurement, financial management,
disbursement and auditing requirements to project implementing agencies To achieve a
broader impact, the Bank has been working with one of China's leading universities to deliver
procurement courses and has prepared an Operational Procurement Review. On financial
management, the Bank has contributed to a broad study carried out by the Asian Development
Bank on financial management issues in China. Also, the Bank has been working with the
Government to address identified financial management and procurement issues (see Annex I)
and to pilot improved financial management in a province.

E. SAFEGUARD POLICIES

85. 
Given the Bank's increasing support to the western regions, which represent the bulk of
the minority nationalities and are characterized by fragile ecosystems, the Bank is addressing
systematically the application of its safeguards policy m China. These efforts are designed to
clarify understandings on the objectives and application of such policies and harmonize Bank
and national guidelines, with the view of reducing the costs mvolved in project preparation and
implementation. The elements of the strategy for more effective safeguards policy application in
China include the following:

* Policy Dialogue: The Bank will continue efforts to clarify and ensure hannonization
between Bank safeguard policies and domestic law or regulations. This includes reviewing
differences between Bank and client sequencing of safeguard assessments in relation to
project preparation and approval. The intention is also to establish a specific institutional
arrangement whereby designated government and Bank officials meet regularly to discuss
issues more broadly.

* Project Preparation: The Bank will promote project preparation procedures that lead to
earlier identification and resolution of potential issues of safeguard policy application. This
will include increased efforts to provide project- level counterparts with basic safeguards
policy orientation during project conceptualization.

* Project Supervision: Through intensive supervision, the Bank will endeavor to identify
safeguards-related problems at an earlier stage of project implementation. In additionto
regular supervision of individual projects, "thematic supervision" has proven to be a useful
vehicle for supervision of safeguard aspects across multiple projects. The main objectives of
this approach have been to identify recurring or cross-cutting issues, explore synergies across
sectors, and achieve cost effectiveness due to economies of scale realized from covering
multiple projects. Sector-specific thematic supervision exercises regarding involuntary
resettlement have been undertaken for all the major sectors over the past three years.

- 40 -

Environmental thematic supervision was undertaken for rural and transport projects in
FYO 1/02.

Training and Capacity Building: Considerable domestic capacity already exists for
environmental and resettlement planning and monitoring. While these areas will continue to
be supported through Bank activities, support for development of domestic capacity m social
assessment techniques is an immediate priority.

F. PARTNERSHIPS

86. 
The donor community in China has played a relatively small financial role in
supporting China's development over the past two decades but its impact cannot be
assessed by simple comparisons with financial aggregates. China utilizes around US$5
billion of official financial flows per year, which accounts for less than 1 percent of China's
GDP. Thus compares with the more than US$40 billion m direct foreign investment that has
been corning in annually in recent years. However much of the FDI is for purely commercial
activities and external assistance needs to be assessed against the implications of a still relatively
weak fiscal system. Given recurrent expenditure obligations, external financing has in fact
accounted for a significant share of financial support provided through the budget for "public
goods" types of investments over the past decade, averaging about 15-20 percent.

87. 
Financial assistance in the form of investment loans from the World Bank, the Asian
Development Bank (ADB) and the Japan Bank for International Cooperation (JB IC) has
traditionally accounted for about 80-90 percent of total official financial flows in recent years.
Both ADB and JBIC loans have supported mfrastructure (energy, transport, urban),
environmental investments (e.g., urban wastewater management) and to a lesser extent rural
development. However, reflecting shifting priorities in China, lending strategies have begun to
evolve - ADB towards projects in poorer areas, and JBIC towards greater emphasis on education,
poverty, natural resources management and the environment in poorer areas. The United
Nations agencies and a range of bilaterals, includmg the European Union (EU), provide mostly
grants for technical assistance and training in such areas as poverty reduction, social
development, governance and environmental management. The International Monetary Fund
(IMF) is heavily involved in fiscal reform issues. Among the bilaterals, DFID is working toward
scaling up the impact and effectiveness of its program through enhanced collaboration with other
donors including the Bank.

88. 
Traditionally, the Government has tended to allocate certain types of projects to each
donor reflecting both regional specialization as well as project size and complexity, leaving each
donor to work alone on different geographical areas, sector issues, etc. While donors have been
working more closely in recent years, as discussed below, the split in coordinating
responsibilities within the Govermment - basically with Chma's Ministry of Finance (MOF)
being responsible for loan and selected grant assistance and the Ministry of Foreign Trade and
Economic Cooperation (MOFTEC) for bilateral grants - is an issue which needs to be addressed
in achieving broader donor coordination. The emphasis of support provided by China's variDus
donor partners is shown in Annex J.

- 41 -

89. 
China and its partners have begun to work more closely with each other over the
past two -three years, recognizing that knowledge sharing and capitalizing on each
partner's comparative advantage can improve the effectiveness of their programs and thus
help China to address its complex challenges. Over the past few years, the Government has
begun to encourage donors and other partners to share knowledge and collaborate. Donors,
including the Bank, have done so, while also demonstrating selectivity in their involvements,
based on their particular strengths and capacities. Further, the Government has encouraged the
Bank to seek cofinancing with bilateral donors to soften the overall financing package for social
sector and poverty reduction projects, while also strengthening their effectiveness by building on
complementary interests and capacities. This is exemplified by the innovative "blending"
partnership between the Government, DFID and the Bank as described in Box 5.3. DFID is also
considering expanding this lending partnership through possible establishment of an arrangement
to support Bank-DFID collaboration for policy work in a number of areas.

Box 5.3: Blending of DFID Grant and IBRD Loan: Partnership in Action
The Government, DFID and the Bank started by considering different variants of cofinancing to "blend"
DFID grants with IBRD loans to lower the costs of financing and improve the quality of the project being
supported A key consideration for all parties was to have a mechanism which generates a single stream of
blended funds to the Government, to achieve simplicity and low transaction costs to the recipient At the
same time, a more coordinated approach would encourage the development of a project which tapped the
relevant skills and interests of both partners 
In the end all parties agreed on an approach where, in essence,
the Bank administers the DFID grant in a trust fund, and uses the grant to prepay an agreed proportion of the
IBRD loan at regular intervals during project implementation

For the Tuberculosis Control Project, a DFID grant of US$37 million is used to prepay 36 percent of the
Bank loan amount disbursed and outstanding, every six months over seven years of project implementation,
effectively reducing China's liability from the full loan amount of US$104 milllon to US$67 million These
parameters were agreed in such a way that, if the assumptions hold, the net effect to China would be a loan
of US$104 million at about 2 percent interest per annum MOF will guarantee an interest rate of 2 percent
per annum when passing on the loan to the 16 beneficiary provinces

Under this financing model, not only are the administrative and transaction s aspects kept to the minimum
for both the Government and DFID, but more flexibility is also created for DFID and the Bank to work with
the Government on the policy and project issues Administratively MOF will have to deal with only one
stream of funds (the Bank loan) and the procedures of only one donor (the Bank), which is not the ease with
conventional parallel orjoint cofinancing A key by-product of this approach was the realization of a
mutually agreed policy framework among all three parties, with technical expertise from the World Health
Organization, and thus preparation of a potentially more effective and larger scale project than if more
traditional cofinancing arrangements had been utilized

90. 
Two other notable partnerships also provide useful models: cofinancing by the EU, the
Bank and GEF to support the Sustainable Forestry Project - the first formal cofinancing
arrangement with the EU in Asia; and an Australian Agency for International Development
(AusAID) grant-financed distance learning center in the poor western province of Ningxia, for
which the Bank is the implementing agency. These partnerships make good use of comparative
advantages of each donor, lead directly to results on the ground, and are highly appreciated by
the Govermnent. HIV/AIDS prevention and control in China will likely be a future focus of the
Bank's partnership activities, involving the Global Fund and other donors now active in this area.

- 42 -

91. 
The Bank is also deepening its cooperation with civil society groups in China. In
view of the increasing importance of civil society groups m contributing to China's development,
the Bank has assisted them in a variety of ways, namely through the Small Grants Program -
whuch for instance awarded a grant to the Women's Federation in Xishuangbanna Dai
Nationality Autonomous Prefecture in Yunnanprovince, where HIV/AIDS infection rates have
been increasing dramatically, to finance a series of workshops on AIDS prevention and control.
Also local NGOs have been involved in implementation of some Bank-supported projects - for
instance the local women's federation is part of the steering committee of the Anmnng Valley
Development Project and plays a leading role in mobilizing local women to participate in project
activities and provides training for poor women.

92. 
China's approach to development exemplifies many of the key benchmarks of the
Comprehensive Development Framework (CDF) concept - in particular client ownership, the
holistic approach and the importance of ensuring that institutional structures are in place as part
of the reform process. See Box 5.4. One CDF concept which China is trying to benefit more
from is making better use of partnerships - with donors, private sector and civil society.

Box 5.4: China's Development Model and How It Compares with CDF
China already exemplifies many of the key benchmarks embodied in the CDF concept. The main
themes underpinning the CAS flow directly from client requests and China's Tenth Five-Year Development
Plan - which is a comprehensive statetnent of the country's objectives encompassing the various structural,
social and institutional prerequisites for sustainable growth and poverty reduction The Plan is well targeted
to the country's major challenges and has therefore been broadly endorsed by donors. And, equally
reassuring, poverty reduction has remained a dominant theme of its development approach over the past two
decades

But there are somc gaps. Thus, if one axis of the CDF - the holistic approach - is well covered, the other
axis - showing the development players - indicates a program that is strongly client-driven but more
selective than other developing countries in terms of drawing directly on the intellectual capital available
both internally and externally 
It has, therefore, been cautious about making maximum use of partnerships
in drawing on outside experience

The CAS, while fundamentally grounded on a continued poverty reduction-cun-knowledge-enhancing role
for the Bank Group, also aims at promoting a broader dialogue over the coming years and taking a step-by-
step approach in piloting activities As mentioned in Section F, the Bank has made good progress with the
Govcrnment/DFID/Bank partnership to address priority issues in the social sectors, environment and
poverty, and are now scaling this up Our interaction with representatives of a broader spectrum of civil
society has also been growing gradually The May 2002 visit to China by thc Bank's President generated
momentum on both fronts Over the CAS period and beyond, the Bank will continue to assist the
Government in forging partnerships which leverage results on the ground, and in engaging a wider spectrum
of the society in its developmcnt process

G. RISKS

93. 
Financial Risks. As noted in Section 1, China's near-term economic prospects continue
to be favorable but there are financial weaknesses embedded in the domestic economy. Non-
performing loans (NPL) in the banking system have been targeted by the Government since
1998, when it partially recapitalized the matn state-owned banks, and subsequently transferred
nearly 14 percent of loans to newly formed asset management companies for collection and debt-
equity conversions. Despite this, according to government statistics, NPL for the four major

- 43 -

state-owned commercial banks averaged an estimated 25-30 percent of outstanding loans at end-
2001. At the same time, other hidden government liabilities exist, both for other financial
institutions as well as for under-funded pension obligations and enterprise arrears. Although a
precise determination of such quasi- fiscal liabilities is constrained by data limitations, the total
potential burden on the Government could be a very large proportion of GDP. Consequently, the
medium-tenn fiscal outlook remains a source of concern, although the explicit public debt is
relatively low by international standards. Slower economic growth, combined with the lack of
fiscal consolidation and a failure to address the underlying weaknesses in the enterprise and
financial sector could exacerbate these risks and undennine investor confidence. However, in
addition to the Government's track record in macroeconomic management, there are the
following factors which make China a creditworthy borrower. On the domestic front, China's
substantial growth momentum and its predominant reliance on domestic savings for financing
provide a cushion. On the external front, its strong trade performance, the restricted
convertibility of the capital account, and its substantial external reserves position in relation to
overall public indebtedness are sources of comfort. Nevertheless, these factors do not lessen the
urgency for fiscal consolidation as well as for exerting finn and contmnuous pressure on
enterprises and banks to improve their operational efficiency and profitability.

94. 
Country Risks. The central country risk arises from the pattern of domestic response to
the adjustments that are likely to follow closer global integration in the wake of accession to the
WTO. The risks of adverse effects are especially high in the lagging interior regions of China,
which are generally disadvantaged in tenrs of incomes, geography and endowments.
Increasingly, social cohesion will be a concern both in rural and urban areas, and will place
pressures on the Government. In rural areas, where more than half of the population live, there
are already pressures from stagnant grain prices, liberalization of agricultural trade, and
persistence of multiple fees and other burdens on fanners. These pressures may encourage more
farmers to seek work in urban areas, far beyond the current level This would exacerbate
imbalances in urban employment, expected in the wake of WTO accession-related restructuring.
The resolution of rural discontent, as a consequence, is being accorded high priority by the
Government, as reiterated at the recent 1 6 ih Party Congress. Recent efforts to convert onerous
rural fees into more equitable taxes are a prime example of key government measures to improve
rural conditions. Despite the Government's policy effort, in some urban areas unemployment is
likely to continue rising. The above pressures also make acceleration of pension reform more
pressing, because of the rapid aging of China's population where the ratio of workers to retired
persons is projected to decline to about 3 to I by 2050, from 10 to 1 in 1995. The mitigation of
both rural and urban social concerns is hence urgent.

95. 
Flexible markets and a supportive business enviromnent, coupled with adequate
arrangements to smooth the transition for finns and farms and provide safety nets for those worst
affected, are needed to maximize the potential benefits from joining the WTO. At the same time,
the capacity of all levels of Govermnent to understand and monitor the adjustment process, and
design appropriate growth-enhancing responses to them, needs to be developed. Thus, the main
risks to China's growth prospects over the forthcomng CAS period stem from its ability to act
pro-actively m handlng post-WTO accession adjustments, especially in the lagging regions,
while continuing to address the longer-term problems of poverty, inequality and urban labor

- 44 -

dislocation The state of natural resources and environuental management is another area to be
monitored carefully.

96. 
Risk Monitoring and Mitigation. The types of systemnc risks identified above require
close monitoring, and a special focus on the nodes at which they occur. Together with the
authorities, the Bank Group's assistance strategy addresses the most critical of these nodes The
Bank has developed a major advisory program in the financial sector, which supports reforms of
banks and supervision, and the introduction of better credit practices and a wider array of
financial instruments for savings and risk diversification. The monitoring and evaluation of
domestic fiscal nsks, together with comprehensive debt management and budgetary reforms
intended to strengthen public finances and budget management, are also important components
of this program. Earlier work on pension reform is being extended to broader urban labor market
and social protection issues. Finally, a linked program of activities is aimed at improving the
transparency, integnty, and flexibility of resource allocation mechamsms in China, in order to
strengthen the ability of the economy and society to absorb domestic and external shocks. Such
measures range from improved bankruptcy procedures to facilitating resource movements within
the dynamic enterprise sector, to the development of flexible market-based systems of
macroeconomic management. These also include the application of better risk-pooling,
financing, and risk-sharing methods in areas such as the provision of municipal services, social
insurance, credit, construction and operation of infrastructure, and interventions to provide stable
livelihoods for low- income groups.

H. CREDITWORTHINESS

97. 
Although China's government debt (domestic and external) has increased sharply from
11.4 percent of GDP in 1997 to an estimated 23.8 percent in 2001, it is still well below levels for
comparable middle- income countnes (see Table 5.2 below). The increase m public debt was
driven entirely by the domestic fiscal stimulus program of the Government, which was
undertaken to counteract the slowdown in growth and employment in the period since the last
CAS. External public debt rose from 4.0 percent of GDP in 1997 to a peak of 4.8 percent in
1999, before falling to 4.5 percent in 2001. Total external debt stood at US$170.1 billion at the
end of 2001, or 14.7 percent of GDP, of which short-term debt (on a remaining maturity basis)
amounted to US$50.6 billion. Total external debt service to exports of goods and non-factor
services fell from 8.7 percent in 1997 to 7.9 percent in 2001, and is projected to decline further to
5 9 percent in 2005. Interest payments on external debt remained relatively unchanged at 3 3
percent of exports of goods and non- factor services from 1997 to 1999, before dropping to the
current level of 2.6 percent.

98. 
China's international liquidity situation has improved significantly since 1997. Foreign
exchange reserves rose from US$140 billion (7.1 months of imports of goods and non- factor
services) in 1997 to US$212 billion in 2001 (9.4 months), and further to US$259 billion in
September 2002. A continued mcrease to US$348 billion in 2005 is projected (Table 1.2). In
addition, the net foreign assets of the banking sector increased from US$5.2 billion in 1997 to
US$85.4 billion in 2001. International reserves are equal to more than nine months of imports
and 416 percent of short-term debt, which should provide a cushion against debt servicing
problems over the CAS period.

- 45 -

Table 5.2: Key Debt Indicators, 1997-2001

Actual 
1998 
1999 

2000 

1997 

Estimated
2001

External Debt

Outstanding and disbursed (DOD) 
(US$ billion)
DOD/GDP(%) 
IDA-IBRD-DOD/GDP (%) 
Debt service (DS) (US$ billion) 
Dcbt service ratio (DSR) (%) 
IBRD debt service/DS (%) 

Public Debt

Domestic (RMB billion) 
Domestic/GDP (%) 
Extemal (RMB billion) 
Extemal/GDP (%) 

146.7 

144 0 

152 1 

145 7 

170 1

163 
1 8 
18 4 
8 7 
4 6 

551 
7 4 
298 
4 0 

152 
1 9 
18 4 
8 7 
4 6 

1050 
13 4 
345 
4 4 

153 
2 0 
26 9 
11 7 
4 3 

1321 
16 1 
394 
4.8 

135 
1 9 
27 1 
9 3 
4 3 

1671 
18 7 
365 
4 1 

147
1 8
24 3
7 9
6.3

1851
19 3
434
4 5

1. IFC AND MIGA PROGRAMS

99. 
Given China's size, liquid banking system, and attractiveness to foreign direct
investment, IFC's comparative advantage is not primarily its ability to provide long-term risk
capital, despite the fact that Chinese private companies continue to face many difficulties in
accessing intermediated financing. The main differentiatmg factors that underpin IFC's role in
China are IFC's cross-country experience as a global developmental institution which domestic
banks do not have, its clearly focused strategy on the interior of China which international
financiers do not share, and its unique capabilities in the areas of corporate governance,
environmental and social sustainability, and SME development (see Annex F for more on IFC
role). In its business development strategy IFC focuses on sectors and projects where these
differentiating characteristics are potentially of the highest value.

100. 
IFC's goal in China during the CAS period is to support rapid development of the
domestic private sector through investments and advisory services, in conjunction with the
World Bank. Strategic priorities are: (a) improvmg the business environment, particularly as it
relates to financial markets, private participation in infrastructure and SMEs, through targeted
technical assistance, (b) encouraging development of small and medium sized enterprises
through capacity building, and the development of alternative sources for SME financing; (c)
helping deepen and broaden the financial sector by supporting private banking and non-bank
financial institutions; (d) supporting pnvate sector development m China's western and interior
provinces; (e) enterprise restructuring through model transactions promoting industry
consolidation and restructuring and by cooperating with China's Asset Management Companies;
and (f) expanding the presence of private enterprises in infrastructure, social services, and
environmental technology sectors (see Annex F-PSD Strategy). The focus will be on model
transactions that are setting standards for private sector investments in corporate governance,
international accounting, environmental technologies and practices, and efficiency of operations,
with the aim of creating demonstration effects and helping Chinese companies become global
and internationally competitive players.

101. China is the Corporation's ninth largest country portfolio. The portfolio mainly supports
general manufacturing, followed by the financial sector, chemicals, and mfrastructure. China is

- 46 -

significantly underweighted in IFC's portfolio relative to its share in emerging markets GDP, but
much less so if we correct for the share of the private sector in China's GDP. With the rapid
expansion of private sector's share in GDP, the emergence of larger and more sophisticated
private companies, and the continued opening of new sectors to private sector participation, IFC
expects to see a significant increase in its China program despite the challenging environment.
During the CAS period, projected volumes of investments are expected to double the historic
average of about US$200 million per year on the assumption of continued improvement in the
business climate. IFC's investment program will be complemented by targeted technical
assistance with a focus on the general business environment for private sector development,
SMEs, financial markets, and private participation in infrastructure (see Box 4 2, Annex B4, and
Annex G and Annex F). To deliver this larger program IFC has strengthened considerably its
field presence in Beijing, Chengdu and Hong Kong as part of its decentralization strategy.

102. MIGA will continue to provide China with demand-based guarantees and
investment marketing services. As of April 30, 2002, MIGA's gross exposure to China stood
at US$87.0 million, representing 1.8 percent of the Agency's outstanding exposure. The
portfolio, consisting of 12 contracts, is diversified with about half of the exposure in the
infrastructure sector and the remainder in manufacturing projects. MIGA is receiving a
significant number of inquiries for projects m the oil and gas sectors, and for infrastructure
projects. In particular, it is underwriting a project in the water sector, which is expected to be
concluded in FY03. In addition to its guarantee activities for projects m China, MIGA will also
cooperate in training and staff exchanges with "Sinosure," China's national export credit and
investment insurance agency. Technical assistance provided by MIGA m investment marketmg
services has gone to regional and provincial investment promotion entities, largely on an ad hoc
basis. The Government is now considering establishing a national investment promotion
organization, and if this should go forward MIGA stands ready to provide support to the new
entity in defining and implementing an investment promotion strategy.

J. MANAGING FORD EVELOPMENT RESULTS

103. China has always had strong ownership of its development strategy, and hence a keen
interest in achieving tangible goals, tying instruments closely to their achievement, and
maximizing results from irmplementing agreed measures. However, as the transition from central
planning has evolved, the detailed quantitative targeting (tied mostly to physical achievement)
contained in previous development plans has been largely abandoned. This can be seen, for
instance, in the Tenth Five-Year Plan, which contains indicative targets with respect to broad
outcomes (e.g, annual employment creation of 8 million, growth in per capita rural mcome of
above 5 percent per year) and processes. Moreover, where new programs and processes are
concerned, China has made good progress in absorbing practical and up-to-date knowledge,
tracking information about what is happening on the ground in a timely manner, and building the
capacity to evaluate various projects and programs. A good mdication of the progress already
made in this regard is the way Chma has been able to identify development models that work,
and then to scale them up to cover vast numbers of beneficiaries and geographical areas.

104. Over the years the Bank has been helping China devise development goals and monitor
them. At the broadest level, a number of activities are clustered around assisting in the transition

- 47 -

from a Soviet-type statistical system to a modernized, internationally-harmonized system that is
more m line with development planning and decision making in a market-based economy.
Strengthened capacity for auditing and accounting, monitoring social disparity, social spending,
rural poverty and pollution, and new capacity for tackling emerging development problems such
as migration and urban poverty, corruption, natural resource degradation, services sector growth,
and private sector development are some areas of continued engagement. As China's
development agenda grows increasingly complex and the basic infrastructure of statistics for
monitoring is built, the Bank is ready to assist the Government further. Specifically during the
CAS period, the Bank will make particular efforts to assist the Government develop and track
results-focused indicators in the following areas:

* Macroeconomic. 
In addition to the standard indicators such as fiscal balances, external
position and direct foreign investment, key indicators will be identified to monitor the reform
process, especially modernized national accounts, risk indicators, and improved measures of
public sector and inter-governmental fiscal performance.

* Poverty/social. To track progress made in reducing poverty, including the effectiveness of
the Government's programs in the poorer western provinces, the Bank will assist the
Government in developing sub-national MDGs. Other relevant indicators to be developed
for this purpose may include better measures of rural consumption and income, returns to
land and labor, infant/maternal mortality, educational achievement (especially the mne years
compulsory requirement), as well as more complex but key indicators such as quality of
basic education, direction and nature of migration flows, and domestic PPP-adjusted
measures of economic well-being.

* Environmental. Measures will be designed to track changes in ambient environmental
quality and the factors impinging on it. Specific ambient environmental quality parameters
include air and water quality, surface and groundwater availability, land use patterns, forest
cover, and status of the biotic environment. Factors impinging on ambient environmental
quality include air and water pollutant discharges, net ground and surface water consumption
rates, deforestation rates, desertification rates, and areas of land in nature reserves and other
land protection classes.

105. 
The progress made through the Bank-China collaboration in the above areas will be
shared with the Board through a CAS Progress Report, currently planned for Board presentation
in early FY05, and will thus contribute to the effort of the development community as a whole to
make headway in managing for results.

James D. Wolfensohn
President

Pieter L. Woicke

By.
Shengman Zhang 

Washington, D.C.

China -Key Economic and Program Indicators - Change from Last CAS

(as of November 15, 2002)

CAS Annex Al
Page 1 of I

Forecast in Last CAS 

Actual 

Current CAS Forecast

1998 

1999 

2000 

1998 

1999 

2000 

2001 

2002 a/ 

2003 b/ 2004b/ 2005b/

National accounts (% GDP)
Current account balance (BOP) 
Gross investment 

1 6 
37 8 

0 7 
38.8 

0.3 
39.7 

Economy (CY) 
Real growth rates (%)
GDP 
Exports (GNFS) 
Imports (GNFS) 

Inflation (%) -CPI 
- GDP deflator 

Public finance (% GDP)
Fiscal balance 
Foreign financing 

International reserves 
(as months of imports)
Program (Bank's FY) 
Lending (S million) 
Gross disbursements 
($ million)

a/ Estimated year
b/ Projected year

7.5 
6.0 
11.8 

3.8 

7.4 
8.7 
14.1 

4.2 

7.4 
8.8 
11.2 

4.4 

-0 8 
-0 2 

10 2 

-0.5 
-0 3 

9 9 

-0.5 
-0 3 

9.6 

7.8 
7.2 
3.1 

-0.8 
-2.4 

3 4 
37 7 

-3.0 
0.0 

10 6 

7 1 
15.2 
22.6 

-1 4 
-2.2 

2.1 
37.4 

-4 0 
0 0 

9.8 

8 0 
30.6 
24.5 

0 4 
0 9 

1.9 
36.1 

-3.6 
0.0 

7.9 

7.3 
9.6 
10.8 

0.7 
0.0 

7.7 
10.2 
16.1 

0.4 
1.0 

7 5 
11 1 
11.9 

1.7 
1.5 

7.2 
10.9 
11.2 

2.1 
2.0 

1 5 
37 9 

1 8 
39.4 

1.4 
39.5 

1.3 
39.3 

-3 2 
0.0 

9.4 

-3.2 
0.4 

-2 8 
0.4 

9 8 

9.3 

7.0
11.6
11.4

2.9
2.5

0 9
38 9

-2 1
0.3

8 1

FY05
1275
1140

-2.5 
0.4 

8.7 

FY04 
1229 
1316 

FY98 
2619 
2250 

FY99 
2270 
2300 

FY00 
2630 
2350 

FY98 
2616 
2094 

FY99 
2083 
2026 

FY00 
1673 
1828 

FY01 
787.5 
1820 

FY02 
563 
2015 

FY03 
1271 
1570 

CAS Annex A2
Page ] of 2

China at a glance 

11/15/02

East 

Lower-

POVERTY and SOCIAL 

Asia S middle-
Pacific 
Income 

China 

Development diamond'

2001
Population, mid-year (millions) 
GNI per capita (Atlas method, US$) 
GNI (Atlas method, US$ billions) 

1,271 9 
890 
1,129 3 

1,826 
900 
1.649 

2,164 
1,240
2,677

Life

Average annual growth, 1995-01

Population (%) 
Labor torce (%) 
Most recent estimate (latest year avaliable, 1995-01) 

0 9 
1 0 

1 1 
1 3 

1 0
1 2 

GNI 
per 

G r, Gross
primary

Povertv (% of population below national poverty line) 
Urban population (% of total population) 
Life expectancy at birth (vears) 
Infant mortality (per 1,000 live births) 
Child malnutrition (% of children under 5) 
Access to an improved water source (% of population) 
Illiteracy (% of population aCe 15+) 
Gross primarv enrollment (% of school-aqe population) 
Male 

S
38 
71 
32 
10 
75 
15 
107 
106 

37 
69 
36 
12 
74 
14 
107 
106 

46
69
33
11 
80
15
107 
107 

Access to improved water source

China
Lower-middle-income group

-

Female 

109 

108 

107

KEY ECONOMIC RATIOS and LONG-TERM TRENDS
1981 

1991 

2000 

2001

Economic raUos'

GDP (US$ billions) 
Gross domestic investment/GDP 
Exports of qoods and services/GDP 
Gross domestic savinqs/GDP 
Gross national savinqs/GDP 

228 3 
32 5 
8 6 
32 9 
32 8 

4026 
34 8 
19 4 
38 1 
38 5 
38 
07 
15 0 
101 

1,077 5 
36 1 
25 9 
38 8 
38 0 
1 9 
0 6 
13 5 
9 3 
12 5 
46 0 

1,150 1
37 9
25 8 
40 3
39 4
15 
05 
14 8 
7 9
11 7
43 5

Trade

Current account balance/GDP 
Interest payments/GDP 
Total debt/GDP 
Total debt service/exports 
Present value of debt/GDP 
Present value of debt/exports 

04 
02 
2 5 
6 9 

Domestic 

K. 

Investment

savings

Indebtedness

1981-91 

1991-01 

2000 

2001 

2001-05

(averaqe annual qrowth)
GDP 
GDP per capita 
Exports of qoods and services 

10 0 
8 4 
12 1 

9 7 
8 6 
17 0 

8 0 
7 1 
30 6 

7 3 
6 6 
9 6 

7 3 
6 5 
11 0

China
Lower-middle-income group

STRUCTURE of the ECONOMY

1981 

1991 

2000 

2001 

GrowthofinvestmentandGDPI%)

(% of GDP)

Aqriculture 

31 8 

245 

159 

15 2 

20T _ 

_ 

_ 

_

Industry 
Manufacturinq 
Services 
Private consumption 
General qovernment consumption 
Imports of qoods and services 

46 4 
38 5 
21 8 
52 6 
14 5 
8 2 

421 
32 7 
334 
488 
13 1 
16 1 

509 
34 5 
332 
482 
13 1 
23 2 

511 
35 4 ~ 
336 
46 0 
137 
23 4 

'St

s 

o 

z

ol

96 

97 9, 

99 

OD 

51

GDI 

0 GOP

1981-91 

1991-01 

2000 

2001 

Growth of exports and imports

(average annual growth)
Aqriculture 
Industry 
Manufacturinq 
Services 
Private consumption 
General qovernment consumption 
Gross domestic investment 

52 
114 
11 1 
12 6 
90 
9 9 
10 4 

40 
12 6 
11 6 
87 
80 
8 5 
10 3 

2 4 
9 6 
9 1 
7 8 

28
87 
90 
7 4 

30 

, 

-

20 -

10,- 

O

8 7 
12 2 
4 2 

64
11 5 
12 8 

ss 

97 

9O 

99 

Os 

1

Exports 

o 

Imports

tmports of qoods and services 

9 6 

14 8 

24 5 

10 8

Note 2001 data are preliminary estimates
The diamonds show four kev indicators in the country (in bold) compared with its income-qroup averaqe 
be incomplete

If data are missinq, the diamond will

CAS Annex A2
Page 2 of 2

China

PRICES and GOVERNMENT FINANCE

1981 

1991 

2000 

2001 

Inflation I%)

Domestic prnces
(% change) 
Consumer prices 
Implicit GDP deflator 

20
15

25 7 
2 3 

3 4 
6 7 

0 4 
009 

0 7 
000 

11

Government finance 
(% of GDP, includes current grants)
Current revenue 
Current budqet balance 
Overall surplus/deficit 

s

24 2 

16 9 
2 3 
-1 1 

15 3 
0 6 
-3 6 

17 2 
1 0 
-3 2

-5 

93 

97 

98 

99 

o0 

01

-GDP 

deflator 

t Pi

0 8 

TRADE

(US$ millions) 

1981 

1991 

2000 

2001 

Export and import levels (US$ mill)

Total exports (fob) 
Food 
Fuel 
Manufactures 
Total imports (ctf) 
Food 
Fuel and energy 

22,007 
2,924 
5,228 
11,759 
22,015 
3,622 
83 

71,843 
7,226 
4,754 
55,698 
63,791 
2,799 
2,113 

249,210 
12,282 
7,851 
223,752 
225,097 
4,758 
20,637 

266,155 
12,780 
8,420 
239,800 
243,610 
4,980 
17,490 

300,000
250.000

200.000

200..L. 
150,000 trt 

i
E Eb11 

1

100,000
50 
I 

U 

il

Capital goods 

5,866 

19,601 

91,934 

107,040

Export pnce index (1995=100) 

16 

51 

67 

65

Import price index (1995=100) 

13 

49 

75 

73 

0 Exports 

* Imports

Terms of trade (1995=100) 

118 

103 

90 

90

BALANCE of PAYMENTS

(US$ millions) 

1981 

1991 

2000 

2001 

Current account balance to GDP (%)

Exports of goods and services 

24,410 

78,909 

279,561 

299,410 

5

Imports of goods and services 
Resource balance 

23,426 
984 

65,339 
13,570 

250,688 
28,873 

271,324 
28,086 

s

4

Net income 
Net current transfers 

-124 

840 
830 

-14,666 
6,311 

-19,173 
8,492 

3 

_

2 -

Current account balance 

860 

15,240 

20,519 

17,405 

1 

l 

_ 

_

Financing items (net) 
Changes in net reserves 

4,149 
-11,091 

-9,971 
-10,548 

29,920 
-47,325 

o0 

II 

| n 

__

95 

93 

97 

98 

99 

00 

01

Memo:
Reserves including gold (US$ millions) 
Conversion rate (DEC, locallUS$) 

48,154 
54 

171,753 
83 

219,970
83

2 1 

EXTERNAL DEBT and RESOURCE FLOWS

1981 

1991 

2000 

2001

(UJS$ millions) 
Total debt outstanding and disbursed 

Composition of 2001 debt (US$ mill)

5,798 

60,259 

145,706 
11,217 
8,771 

170,137
11,660A
8,654 

IlRD 

3,494 

IDA 

3,672 

G 41,6800 

8.654

Total debt service 
IBRD 
IDA 

1,744 

8,305 
357 
23 

27,092 
1,291 
131 

24,297 
1,550
151 

/ 

\D 6,476

/

f F~~~~ 8~~ 23,704

Composition of net resource flows
Official qrants 
Official creditors 
Private creditors 
Foreign direct investment 
Portfolio equity 

19 
506 

406 
2,044 
2,493 
4,366 
565 

147 
1,497 
-4,668 
42,096 
7,814 

2,5
2,156 
-4,017
47,052
2,404 

0 

F 77,963

World Bank program

Commitments 
Disbursements 

196 
0 

2,622 
1,280 

1,536 
1,907 

1,230 
1,791 

A - IBRO 

E- Bilateral
F -Pnvate

B - iOA 
C - IMF 

D - Other multilateral 

Principal repayments 

0 

131 

644 

904 

G -Short-term

Net flows 

0 

1,149 

1,263 

887

Interest payments 
Net transfers 

250 
899 

778 
485 

797
90

Development Economics 

11/15/02

Development 
Objectives 
l. Promote 
Growth with 
Macro-economic 
Stability 

Progress Made in Achieving Goals of Previous China Country Assistance Strategy (1997)

CAS Annex B I
Page 1 of 5

Contmue structural 
reforms of public 
finance system 

Progress Benchmarks 

Achievements/Results 

Issues Outstanding

* Increased revenue to 
GDP ratio by 2000 
* Improved 
management of extra- 
budgetary funds 
* More equitable 
intergovemmental fiscal 
arrangements 
established 

Government 
Strategy/Actions
* Strengthen indirect 
* Expanded use of open * PBC increasingly engaged in open market operations for 
. Lack of progress in developing fixed-
instruments to manage market operations 
adjustment of base money supply, with total transactions 
income instruments (corporate bonds mainly)
aggregate demand 
reaching RMB 1 5 tnllion m 2001. Since June 2002, it has 
continues to distort the transmission
been issuing central bank notes for repo (repurchase option) mechanism for monetary policies Also,
operations in lieu of fiscal instruments -about RMB 200 
coordination between monetary and fiscal
billion so far Despite continued interest rate regulation 
policies needs strengthening
these actions are seen to affect interest rates on the interbank
market and those for bill discounting
* Revenue collections rose from 12 1 percent of GDP in 
1997 to 17.2 percent in 2001, and are projected to rise to 18 
percent in 2002 
* Extra-budgetary revenues of five govemment 
departments have been incorporated in the budget 
* Total transfers to subnational govemments rose from 3 8 
percent of GDP in 1997 to 5.8 in 2001 Fixed subsidies and 
those for income equalization rose from 0 5 percent of GDP 
to 1 5 percent, and specific purpose transfers rose from 0 7 
percent to 2 percent of GDP A new sharing formula for 
income (enterpnse and personal) taxes was introduced in 
2002 
It will provide additional transfers to poorer regions 
Moved responsibility for salary payments for teachers from 
township to county level to ensure adequate financing for 
rural education
* The average import tariff rate fell from 17 percent in 
1997 to 12 percent. As a result ofjoining the WTO, they 
will fall to about 6 percent within five years Quotas, 
licenses and specific tendering requirements have been 
partially or fully abolished on wool, cotton, acrylic fibers, 
polyester, fertilizer, automobile tires Foreign entry into the 
services sectois has been liberalized greatly
* Credit ceilings for state-owned commercial banks 
abandoned in 1998 and replaced with indicative credit plans 
. Greater margm of float around regulated interest rates 
Financial institutions can charge 10% below and up to 30% 
above regulated lending rates, with deposit rates unchanged 
Experiment to further relax controls in rural area underway 
* Along with new, risk-based loan classification methods, 
banks allowed more autonomy m bad debt wnte-off and 
loan loss provisioning, subject to discretionary tax 
deduction 

* Medium-term fiscal sustainability needs to
be managed through improved revenue
mobilization and consolidation of expenditure
. Majonty of extra-budgetary revenues, and
spending that results from them, still need to
be brought under effective budget control
* Inter-governmental fiscal relationships still
need restructurng to reduce vertical and
honzontal imbalances, and to address the
national development agenda on growth and
poverty reduction more effectively The first
step is to take an integrated view of expendi-
ture and revenue assignments/transfers, rather
than continue refomung each separately

* Lending decisions sometimes influenced
by policy pressures rather than commercial
criteria
. Rates insufficient to allow sustainable bank
lending to SMEs or to cover loan losses and
operational costs of rural finance
* Tax-deductibility insufficient incentive for
financial institutions to provison adequately
Tax rules need to be made consistent with
loan classification methods

* China's WTO accession agreement
contains a radical set of trade and investment
liberalization programs, by the end of the
accession penod it will have one of the most
open trading and investment regimes among
developing countries

* Lower tariffs and 
non-tanffbamers 

* Reduced tariffs and 
barriers totrade 

* Continue structural 
reforms of financial 
system 

* Credit plan for com- 
mercial banks 
eliminated 
* Administered rates 
adjusted more often 
* Increased tax- 
deductibility of loan-loss 
provisioning 

Progress Benchmarks 

Achievements/Results 

Issues Outstanding

CAS Annex B I
Page 2 of 5

Development 
Objectives 

Government 
Strate2v/Actions
* Continue structural 
reforms of SOEs 

Improve legal 
framework and 
strengthen 
implementation 

H. Alleviate 
Infrastructure 
Constraints 

* Improve legal and 
regulatory frameworks 
appropriate for a 
socialist market 
economy 

__________________ 

_________ 

___________ 

.________ 

Increase supply of 
environmentally 
sustainable 
infrastructure 

* Expand power 
generation capacity, 
national roads, railways, 
mland waterways, and 
water- sanitation 
systems 

im plem ented

* Installed generation capacity increased from 260 GW in 
1997 to 338 GW in 2001 or an avcrage 19 5 GW a year 
* Since 1997, about 16,000 km of expressways added to 
National Trunk Highway System, railways system expanded 
by 4,500 km (8% increase) and inland waterways by 10,500
km (9 5%) High level of watcr supply service coverage in
urban areas Significantly increased investments in
sewerage and wastewater treatment systems

Increased 
corporatization of SOEs 

* Progress in phasing 
out commercially 
unviable SOEs 

* Some 20,000 SOEs went through bankruptcy procedure 
since 1997 Due to liquidation and closure, the number of 
SOEs fell from 262,000 in 1997 to about 180,000 in 2001 
* Takeover of SOEs by private firms now far more 
common Regulations on merger of SOEs with foreign
companies/domestic private firms under review by State
Council
* Four AMCs set up to dispose of Y I.4 trillion in non-
performing loans
* Corporatization with diversified equity structure now 
accepted by govemment as basic approach for large SOE 
reform More large and medium SOEs corporatized in past 
five years Number of listed compames tncreased from 745 
in 1997 to over 1,200 in 2002 
. Progress in key 
. Central Banking Law and Banking Law (1995) 
economic legislation, 
* Other laws Sole Enterprises (1999), Trust (2001), Small 
i e , laws for securities, 
and Medium Enterpnscs (2002) 
bankruptcy, banking and * Intellectual property laws and foreign trade laws revised 
central banking and 
for WTO 
company
. Establish legal and 
regulatory framework 
based on Electncity Law 
.
Power industry 
restructuring plan 
submitted to National 
People's Congress for 
approval 
* Railway Law revised 
to separate state and 
enterpnse functions 

* Smce 1997, regulations and implementation rules for 
power sector promulgated, and in 1998, the State Economic 
and Trade Commission assigned responsibilities for sector 
regulation 
* In 2002, decision made to establish separate State Power 
Regulatory Commission (SPRC), which is now being 
created, and in early 2002, China's leaders appioved 
comprehensive power sector restructuring plan 
. While no recent revision of Railway Law, smce 1999 
Ministry of Railways has declared intent to undertake 
market-based reform, which is slowly being elaborated and

* Draft Bankruptcy Law could not be
reviewed and passed by the National People's
Congress in 2002.
* Creditors' protection needs strengthening

* Many SOEs slow to corporatize due to
difficulties in attracting new investors to
diversify ownership structure
Corporatization, diversificationuandeP
had a vanable effect on SOE performance
* Bankruptcy Law modermization - revised
drafts discussed but not enacted, the main
issue being relationship to social security
reform
* Company Law revisions - still pending

. Electncity Law and related regulations
require revision appropriate to new industry
and market structures A Gas Law needed to
promote gas development
* Decision to establish SPRC only start of
long, intensive process to develop effective,
well functiorung institution
* Govemrment's power sector reform plan
provides vision for future, but detailed
analysis and implementation rules still needed

* Generation capacity is over-weighted
towards base-load generation and there is a
lack of seasonal energy storage capacity in
grids with a large proportion of hydropower

Development 
Objectives 

Government 
Strategy/Actions
Introduce price 
reforms and user fees 
to provide 
infrastructure 
companies with 
investment funds 
* Develop 
framework for private 
participation in 
infrastructure 

Progress Benchmarks 

Achievements/Results 

Issues Outstanding

CAS Annex B 1
Page 3 of 5

* Average power tariffs * Average power prices now cover costs in most provinces, * No separate tanff for transmission and
approach LRMC, 
even higher than LRM C in coastal provinces 
distnbution Consumer tanff structures do not
particularly on coast 
Railway fares adjusted several times since 1997 and 
reflect the cost of supply
* Railway tariffs 
railways said to be operating at a profit Ministry of
adjusted to approach 
Railways now uses traffic management information system
LRMC 
that allows more accurate LRMC calculation
* Implementation of 
* Three pilot BOT projects procured through competitive 
pilot BOT projects 
public bidding 
.
Issuance of BOT 
* While planned BOT decree and law not issued, BOT is 
decrees 
not the only appropriate model for private participation in 
China, as shown by variety of models through which private 
investment channeled into infrastructure in China 

.
Pilot BOT projects had mixed results
* Because 1995 BOT circular did not
address whole legal and regulatory
framework, it did not expand BOTs
* Govemment consensus not yet reached on
policy measures, legislative changes and
regulatory provisions needed to foster and
regulate pnvate participation in infrastructure
* Lack of intermediaries and restrictive
institutional investor base, need for hedging
instruments and better market & regulatory
infrastructure, cumbersome issuance/listing

Diversify intemal 
financing sources, 
using domestic capital 
markets 

* Use of domestic 
capital markets 
promoted, especially 
bond market 

* Government issued Y 488 billion in 2001, distributed 
47% and 16% into mterbank and stock exchange market as 
book-entry bonds, and 37% to public as non-marketable 
savings certificates 

.
Increased poverty 
spending to RMB 15 
billion in gth Plan period

Ill. Promote 
Human 
Development 

* Under national 
poverty program, raise 
per capita income in 
poor counties
* Improve access of 
poor/minorities to 
basic education 
* Raise education 
quality. 

* Govemment bond matunty profile extended to 30 years 
in 2002. 
* Improved transparency of Govemment funding through, 
e g , appointment of pnmary dealers/underwnters, use of 
master underwriting/repurchase agreements, quarterly 
announcement of Govenmment funding schedule 
* In equity market, Y 110 billion raised from 84 IPOs and 
126 nghts issues The number of domestic listed companies 
increased from 745 m 1997 to 1,160 in 2001 
* Funding for China's poverty reduction program increased
to about RMB 30 billion by 2000 (end of 9th Plan Period)

* Education access and retention improving, percent of 
cohort reaching grade 5 increased by about 6% to 94 5% in 
2000 
* National Education Curriculum revised for pnmary and
for lower secondary levels and being piloted Reform
supports key elements to improve education quality
* Studies have recommended provincial education
financing systems and financing formulae/criteria

approval process
* Fragmented bond market, Govemment
bonds pnced at "administered' yields, absence
of Govemment T-bill program, inadequate
credit culture to further develop corporate
bond market
* Equity market - overly speculatative, 
dominated by SOEs, mnadequate corporate
govem ance/transparency.

-

* Maintain efforts to improve quality
* Provincial education financing strategies
not yet developed

Development 
Objectives 

Government 
Strategy/Actions
* Decentralize 
education financing/ 
administration and 
reform rural health 
finance system 
* Expand programs 
for communicable and 
non-communicable 
diseases 

* Strengthen the 
social safety net by 
reforming social 
insurance (pension, 
unemployment, etc) 

IV. Promote 
Agricultural 
Development and 
the Rural 
Economy 

* Protect agricultural 
land 
. Upgrade marginal 
land and water 
resources 

Progress Benchmarks 

Achievements/Results 

Issues Outstanding

CAS Annex B 1
Page 4 of 5

* Rural health finance system still to be
improved.

* Govemnment took initiatives providing health services to 
the poor, e g, national TB control program and targeted 
interventions to meet basic health needs of poor While
China still lacks a comprehensive national plan for rural
health services risk-sharing, initiatives have been taken up
and are expanding
* Government has announced major health initiatives,
including Five-Year Plan for HIV/AIDS control and
mcreased emphases on childhood immunization and control
of hepatitis B epidemic Efforts initiated to increase funds
for preventive health activities under local budgets
. Pension system 
* Framework of new pension system introduced m 1997 
. Pension coverage still limited and many
refonmed to reduce 
and national pilot begun in 2001 
groups not covered, system still fragmented
fragmentation, increase 
.
Pension arrears reduced with strong fiscal support, 
and level of poolmg low
coverage, unify benefit 
pension coverage expanded beyond state sector, pension 
Inadequate program monitoring,
structure, and allow for 
benefit calculation method unified nationwide, differences in compliance rate low due to informal sector
higher level pooling 
contribution rates narrowed 
* Benefit structure still overly genero us (esp
. Long term financial 
* Pension payment responsibility for most pensioners 
retirement age), leading to heavy fiscal
viability of pension 
being shifted from enterpnses to local social insurance 
burden; no funding strategy to transit to a
system assured 
agencies 
partially funded scheme
* Policy on safety net 
* Income -tested cash transfer program (minimum living 
* Financial mechanism for safety net needs
developed, with high 
allowvance program) established for urban residents in 1999, 
improvement, strategy to provide cash
percent of the poor 
82% of estimated eligible urban poor now receive benefits. 
assistance to rural poor unclear
receiving benefits 
* Special benefit program created m 1998 for SOE laid-off 
. Lack a transparent financing arrangement
* Employment support workers Unemployment insurance (UI) policies refined and 
of Ul program, Ul coverage needs to be
mechanism developed, 
key regulation issued in 1999 Social benefit program being 
expanded to cover a wider group of employed
unemployed get financial 
phased out and Ul to become pnmary benefit program for 
workers
support/ employment 
the unemployed In some municipalities, this transition
services 
completed
* Increased number of 
* Provinces in process of finalizing coastal zone
provinces with coastal 
management plans in accordance with "Law of Marine
zone management 
Resource Use of the People's Republic of China" passed by
* Increased forest 
Government in January 2002
cover 
* Bank-assisted forest development projects established
about 1 02 million ha of forest plantations, increasing forest
cover by about 0 1% of China's land area

.

Progress Benchmarks 

Achievements/Results 

Issues Outstanding

* Acreage imgated 

. Total imgated area increased by 2 million under Bank-
supported projects alone

CAS Annex B I
Page 5 of 5

* Reduced marketing 
margm and increased 
proportion of grain sales 
at market prices
. Reduced deterioration 
rate in water and air 
pollution 

.
Increased excise tax 
on major pollutants and 
increased collection rate 
for pollution levies 
* Improved level and
structure of user charges
for environmental

services

* Although all grain has traditionally been marketed 
through government channels, since August 2001 eight
provinces have more or less fully liberalized grain trade

. Significant investments in sewerage and wastewater 
treatment in major urban areas, followed by ambitious 
national targets set (60% to be treated m all cities by 2010, 
and m all provincial capitals by 2005)
* Good progress being made China adopted Euro I auto 
emission standards for new cars/trucks in 2000 and proposes 
to introduce Euro 2 in 2004 (2003 in Beijing) China has
also phased out use of unleaded gasoline
* Progress continues to be made, with about 150 laws,
regulations and other environmental regulatory documents
issued by National People's Congress, State Council or
Minister for Environment

. Pollution levies being increased progressively. 
. Some progress made on user charges for environmental
services (e g, wastewater collection, solid waste
management), particularly in larger cities

* Government continues to invest heavily in "ecological
construction," i e, afforestration, reforestation and
watershed protection

* Continue liberalizing grain trade

. Within data limitations, air and water
pollution measurements suggest declines in
latter quarter of 1990s but levels still high

.
Implementation of regulations needs to be
strengthened

. Pollution levies insufficiently punitive

Development 
Objectives 

Government 
Strategy/Actions
.
Invest in water 
transfer, storage and 

imgation

.
Improve efficiency 
of grain distnbution 

V. Safeguard the 
Environment 

* Prevent and control 
industrial pollution 

. Complete national 
vehicle pollution 
control action plan 

* Expand 
environmental legal 
system 

* Improve use of 
economic incentives 
(effluent fees/fines) 
and environmental 
taxes 

* In rural areas, 
governmentpolicies an 
investments in 
soil/water/forestry,
expansion of protected
areas

CAS Annex B2
Page 1 of I

China: Selected Indicators* of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management

As of 11/12/2002

Indicator 
Portfolio Assessment
Number of Projects Under Implementation a 
Average Implementation Period (years) b 
Percent of Problem Projects by Number a, c 
Percent of Problem Projects by Amount a, c 
Percent of Projects at Risk by Number a, d 
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount a, d 
Disbursement Ratio (%) e 

2000 

2001 

2002 

2003

114 
3.8 
2 6 
1.4 
2.6 
1.4 
17 4 

108 
4.4 
4.6 
5 5 
4.6 
5.5 
18 5 

101 
4 9 
5.0 
2 5 
5.0 
2.5 
23 5 

101
5.0
5 0
2 5
5 0
2 5
9 0

Memorandum Item 
Proj Eval by OED by Number 
Proj Eval by OED by Amt (US$ millions) 
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Number 
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt 

Since FY 80 Last Five FYs
140 
40
18,041 4 
6,652 1
8.7 
7.5
8.0 
6.5

a As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY)
b Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio
c Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) and/or implementation progress (IP)
d As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
e Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the
beginning of the year Investment projects only
* All indicators are for projects active in the Portfolio, with the exception of Disbursement Ratio,
which includes all active projects as well as projects which exited during the fiscal year

China: FY03-05 Operational Lending Program
(Includes Standby Projects)

Project Name 

FY03 

Tianjin 11 Urban Development 

Shanghai Urban Management APL 
(Stage I) 
Liaoning Urban Development 
Jiangxi Integrated Agricultural 
Development 
Gansu and Xinjiang Pastoral 
Development 
Third Xinjiang Highway 
Hubei Highway 
Yi-Xing Pumped Storage 
Basic Education in Westem Areas 

Loan Amount 

(US$ Million) 
150 

200 

110 
100 

66 

150 
250 
145 
100 

Project Name 

FY04 

Zhejiang Urban Development 

Hunan City/Regional Development 

Lake Tai Water Quality 
Poor Rural Communities 
Development
Agricultural Technology 

Inner Mongolia Highway 11 
Inland Waterways IV 
National Railway II 
Wuhan Urban Transport 
Economic Reform Implementation 
Distance Leaming/Knowledge 
Dissemination

Loan Amount 

(US$ Million) 
140 

150 

110 
100 

100 

100 
95 
200 
200 
30
4

CAS Annex B3
Page 1 of 2

Project Name 

FY05

Chongqing Small Cities Urbanization 
and Environment
Shanghai Urban Management APL 
(Stage II)
Henan Medium-Sized Cities 
Liuzhou (Guangxi) Environment 

Upper Yangtze Watershed 
Rehabilitation
Heilongjiang Dairy Development 
Fuzhou Urban Transport 
Henan Highway IV 
Hubei Highway II 

Loan Amount

(US$ Million)
150

200

150
100

100

100
100
175
200

Subtotal 

1,271 

Subtotal 

1,229 

Subtotal 

1,275

Stanidbys 
Second Anhui Highway 

Acquaculture 

250 

10 

Sta ndbys 

Guangdong-Pearl River Delta 
Environment 
Shaanxi Highway III 

150 

200 

Total 

1,531 

Total 

1,579 

Standbys
Sichuan Urban Environment 11 or 
Ningbo Water Management
Rural Village/Cities Water Supply & 
Sanitation
Taiyuan Integrated Urban 
Development
Education or Health Project 

Irrigated Agriculture Intensification III 

Total 

100

50

150

75
200
1,850

Notes
I This table presents the operational lending program agreed by the Govemment and the Bank for the next three years Since the table includes stand-by projects (which should be ready
for possible Board presentation in the year specified if other operations slip) and, in the outer year, tentative projects still being identified, actual lending each year is expected to be less
than the total shown The actual lending volume is also subject to penodic reviews for management of IBRD exposure Lending amounts for individual projects are also provisional,
subject to developments in project preparation and consultations with the Govemment The lending program will be updated annually in consultation with the Govemment
2 A GEF program complementing World Bank lending is expected to comprise FY03 - Grassland Management (US$1 I m), Energy Conservation (US$26 m), FY04 - Hai Basin (US$17
m), Renewable Energy (US$50 m), Integrated Coal Gasification Combined Cycle (USSI5 m), and FY05 - Heating Reform and Building Energy Efficiency (US$18 m)

CHINA: Special Features of Selected Operations, FY03-04 /a

Project Name 

Special Feature

CAS Annex B3
Page 2 of 2

Rural Development
Jiangxi Integrated Agricultural 
Modermization 
Gansu & Xinjiang Pastoral Development 
Poor Rural Communities Development 
Transport
Third Xinjiang Highways 
Hubei Hilghway 
Wuhan Urban Transport 

Third Shaanxi Highway 

Fourth Inland Waterways 

Second Inner Mongolia Highways 

Urban Development
Tianjin Urban Development and 
Environment 11 
Zhejiang Urban Environment 11 

Guangdong - Pearl River Delta 
Environment 
Energy Development
Yixing Pumped Storage 

Human Development
Basic Education in Westem Areas 

Design features fully vertically integrated agricultural development Also a high level of participation and
strengthening of farmers' institutions
Exclusive focus on improving degraded pasture lands.
State-of-the-art poverty targeting, including of disadvantaged minority peoples

Promotes trade by improving last section of road linking Kazakhstan border and a coastal China port
Improves accessibility to low-income areas, increases commercialization and contracting out of maintenance
Develops institutions to regulate competitive transport services and reduce pollution. Strengthens institutions to
pa,mnge and finance urban transport
Improves access in poor areas of Shaanxi, promotes trade between western region - Qinghai, Gansu, Ningxia and
Inner Mongolia - and eastern metropolitan areas
Completes Pearl River Waterway Development to improve access to isolated regions - Guangxi, Guizhou, and
Yunnan - and to low-income areas - Guangdong Further commercializes waterway agencies and promotes
intermodalism and containerization
Supports China, Russia and Mongolia trade by building highway from Manzhouli, largest international land port
between China and Russia, to Hailar, major city in northern Inner Mongolia Corridor connects to Harbin port and
on to Vladivostok

Water pollution control in river basin and international sea, with GEF funding First Bank-assisted project in
China with significant water reuse and pern-urban development work
Includes integrated infrastructure upgrading in famous medium-size ancient city and smaller canal town (cultural
_ hertage preservation)
Regional environmental management with strong linkages to iHong Kong within regional economic development
plan Advanced PPI in broad-based environmental improvements

First Bank project in China to support implementation of a wholesale power market and the direct access to the
generators by big consumers

With DFID's support, scales up in poorest townships of five western provinces the Government's new quality
focused child-centered cumculum

/a Excludes projects mentioned in Box 5 2 in text Examples of Support for Innovation and Change in Recent and Future Projects

China - The Knowledge Agenda, FY03-05

CAS Annex B4
Page 1 of 4

CAS Themes 

1. Business 
environment and 
market economy 

A Macroeconomic 
management 
B. Post-WTO 

global integration 

C Financial sector 
D PSD and 
enterpnse reform 
E Pubmc sector 
management and 
service delivery 

AAA 
Sub-Themes 
Economic 
Monitonng 

Economic 
Management 

Core Written Outputs 
(D-Diagnostic; A-Advisory)

FY03 
* CEM Shanng Opportunities and Wealth 
at the Time of Globalization (D) 
* Economic/Social Monitonng Bnefs (D) 
* WTO Accession Impacts Growth,
Poverty, Trade, Investment, Regional
Cooperation (A)
FY04 
* Public Expenditure Review/CFAA (D) 
* Economic/Social Monitonng Bnefs (D)
FY05
* Development Policy Review (D)
* Economic/Social Monitonng Bnefs (D)
FY03 
* Reform of Public Service Units (A) 
* Country Procurement Assessment Report 
Follow-Up (A) 
* Procurement Post-Review (A) 

FY04 
* Evaluation and Management of Domestic 
Debt Risks (A) 
* Subnational Fiscal Issues in Westem

Provinces (A)

Financial Sector 
Development 

FY03 
.
Policy Note on Domestic Finance for 
Infrastructure (A) 
* Policy Note on State Commercial Bank 
Restructunng (A) 
* Policy Note on Development of 
Institutional Investors (A) 

Technical Assistancea 

Researchb"

FY03 
* WBI-WTO Issues for China 
Improved Monitonng Indicators for Social 
Spending

* 

FY03
* WTO Accession, Policy
Reform and Poverty Reduction

FY04
* Enhancing Government Audit Capacity

FY03
* SDPC Policy Modeling
* Building Government Debt Management
Capacity
* GDLN Devt for Knowledge Management
. WBI-lntergovemmental Relations and Local
Government Management of Finance
FY04
* Statistical Capacity Building
* Decentralization (Regional Project)

FY05
* Knowledge Management
Piloting Fiscal Reforms in Western Provinces
FY03
* Finance for Small Firms
* APEC Forum TA
. WBI-Non-bank Financial Institutions
. WBI/DLFrontiers of Infrastructure Finance
* Development of Deposit Insurance System
* Bad Dept Resolution for Banks
IFC Capacity Building in Secunties Industry

* 

a/ Covers self-standing TA, other capacity-building, and WBI activity, including distance learning (WBIUDL)
b/ Covers research programs being camed out by the Bank Group's Development Economics (DEC) staff

CAS Themes 

AAA 

Sub -Themes 

Markets and 
Enterpnses 

Govemance 

2. Disadvuantaged 
Revitalizing 
people and lagging Lagging 
regions 
Economies 

A Employment 
and productivity 
B Transport 
C Human 
resources 
development 
D Social 
Protection 
E Targeted 

poverty reduction 

programs 

Core Written Outputs 
(D-Diagnostic; A-Advisory)

FY04 

Strategic Framework for Financial 
Conglomerates (A)

FY03 

* Corporate Govemance of Enterpnse 
Groups (A) 
.
Gas Development (A) 
.
Energy Sector Policy Notes (A) 
.
Judicial/Legal Reform (A) 
* 
IFC/WB Transformation of Small and 
Medium Sized SOEs (A) 
* 
Improving the Investment Climate 
(WB/IFC/CPDF/FIAS) 

FY03 

* Trade, Transport Services and Logistics 
(A) 
* 

PSD Strategy in Lagging Regions (A) 

FY04 
Skills Development for Competitiveness 

* 

(A) 

~frn

Technical Assistance 

Research

CAS Annex B4
Page 2 of 4

FY03

.
Industnal Competitiveness,
the Investment Climate and
Development of SMEs

FY04

.

Govemment Secunties Market Reform

FY03 

* 

.
Power Generation Divestiture, Regulation 
and Pricing 
* Oil and Gas Sector Regulation 
State Enterprise Debt Restructunng and Loan
Workouts
* WBI/DL-Corporate Govemance/Strategy
* WBI-Accession to WTO Issues
IFC Corporate Govemance-Training for
Company Directors
.
Improving the Business Environment in the
Intenor (WB/CPDF/IFC/FIAS)
FY04
* 
Legislative Drafting, Court System Reform
and Judicial Training

* 

FY03
* Lagging Poor Areas
Breaking Geographic Poverty
Traps
* Uninsured Risk and
Poverty
.
Causes for Changes in
Income Distnbution
Poverty Monitoring and
Evaluation
* Land Tcnure 
Impacts on
Farm Investment and
Productivity

* 

FY03 
.
Post-WTO Reform of Ministry of Agnculture 
. WBI-Rural Poverty Reduction in Westem 
China 
. WBI/DL-Ecological Agnculture and 
Sustainable Development 
* WBI/DL-Agncultural Production, Rural 
Growth and the Environment 
. WBI-Sustainable Livestock Management & 
Pastoral Development 
* WBI-Rural Devt training of trainers 
* WBI-Decentralization 
* Development/Improvement of Land Tenure 

Reforms

* New Model for Rural Development Poverty
Reduction and Environmental Protection
* Lagging Regions Development Plan
* 
Strengthening Management of Poverty
Reduction Funds

CAS Themes 

AAA 

Sub-Themes 

Core Written Outputs 
(D-Diagnostic; A-Advisory)

Technical Assistance 

Research

CAS Annex B4
Page 3 of 4

Human/Social 
Development 

FY04
* 
Strengthening Farmer's Associations in
Sichuan Province (A)
* Removing Inter-Provincial Trade Bamers
to Achieve Market Integration (A)
FY03 
Improving Financing for Effective 
Delivery of Basic Social Services (A) 
* Monitonng and Evaluation for Better 
Social Service Delivery Outcomes (A) 

* 

FY03

* 

* 

Social Assessment Manual
* Mainstreaming Gender
Improving Health Care Access of Rural Poor
* Capacity Building for Urban Medical
Insurance Reform
* WBI-Poverty Identification, Policies, and

FY04 
.
Country Gender Assessment (D) 

FY05
Poverty Assessment (D)

* 

* 

FY03 
Policy Note on Environmental 
Administration (A) 
* Environmental Protection-Post WTO (A) 

FY04 

* 

Strategic Environment Assessment (D) 

3. Sustainable 
development 

Environmental 
Management 

A Environmental 
institutions 
B Air quality 
C Managing 
water resources 
D 
Land and 
natural resources 

E Global

environmental 
commons 

Evaluation

* WBI-Health Sector Financing and Reform
* WBI-SPS on Rural Health
Training of Local Health Bureau Directors
FY04
Poverty Mapping
* Empowenng Poor Women in Westem Areas
* Managing Health Sector Adjustment

* 

FY03 
* New Cost Model for Environment 
* CCICED Forestry and Grasslands Task Force
* Reducing Persistent Organic Pollutants
.
WBI-Environmental Economics and Policy
. WBI/DL-Urban Air Quality Management
* WBI-Urban Project Analysis/Management
Sustainable Development of Livestock and
Grasslands in the Northwest Provinces
FY04

* 

* Energy Efficiency in Buildings
* Clean Development Mechanism
* 
Industnal Pollution Prevention

* WBI-Environmental Directors Training

. WBI-Environmental Compliance/Enforcement

FY03

* 

Industnal Pollution Control

CAS Themes 

AAA 

Sub-Themes 
Infrastructure and 
Urban 
Development 

Core Written Outputs 

(D-Diagnostic; A-Advisory)

FY03 

FY03 

Technical Assistance 

Research

CAS Annex B4
Page 4 of 4

* Urban Restructunng Policy Note (A) 
* WBI/DLSustainable Urban Development and 
* Housing Maintenance/Operations Policy Management 
Note (A) 
* WBI/DLTransparency in Infrastructure 
* Urban Transport Policy Note (A) 
Concession 
* Consolidating Commercialized Toll
Roads Policy Note (A)
* Road Traffic Safety Agenda Note (A)

FY04

* City Development Strategy

FY03

* WBI-Regulatory Reforn In
China's Infrastructure Sectors
(research and dissemination
activities)

CAS Annex B5
Page I of I

China Social Indicators

Latest single year 

Same region/income group

POPULATION
Total population, mid-year (millions) 
Growth rate (% annual average for penod) 
Urban population (% of population) 
Total fertility rate (births per woman) 
POVERTY

(% of population)
National headcount index 
Urban headcount index 
Rural headcount index 
INCOME
GNI per capita (US$) 
Consumer pnce index (1995=100) 
Food price index (1 995=100)
INCOME/CONSUMPTION DISTRIBUTION

Gini index 

Lowest quintile (% of income or consumption) 
Highest quintile (% of income or consumption) 
SOCIAL INDICATORS
Public expenditure
Health (% of GDP) 
Education (% of GDP) 
Social secunty and welfare (% of GDP)
Net primary school enrollment rate
(% of age group)
Total 
Male 
Female 
Access to an Improved water source

(% of population)
Total 
Urban 
Rural 
Immunization rate
(% under 12 months)
Measles 

DPT 

Child malnutntion (% under 5 years) 
Life expectancy at birth
(years)
Total 
Male 
Female 
Mortality
Infant (per 1,000 live births) 

Under 5 (per 1,000 live births) 

Adult (15-59)
Male (per 1,000 population) 

Female (per 1,000 population) 

Maternal (per 100,000 live births) 
Births attended by skilled health staff (%) 

1970-75 

1980-85 

1994-00 

9164 
2 3 
17 3 
34 

1,051 0 
1 4 
22 6 
24 

1,262 5 
1 0 
32 1 
1 9 

200 

280 

17 

25 

88 
78 

68 
67 
70 

37 

65 

185 

148 

65 
64 
66 

48 

120 

249 

180 

4 6
<2
46

840 
109 

40 3

59
46 6

21 
23 

91 
90 
92 

75 
94 
66 

90 
90 
10 

70 
69 
72 

32 

39 

161 

115 

60

85

East 
Asia & 
Pacific 

1,855 2 
1 1 
35 2 
2 1 

Lower-
middle-
Income

2,047 6
1 1
42 0
2 1

1,060 

135 

1,130
146

20 
29 

91 
91 
91 

75 
93 
66 

85 
85 
10 

69 
67 
71 

35 

45 

183 

132 

2 3
46

91
91
91

80
95
69

89
89
11

69
67
72

33

41

192

125

Note 0 or 0 0 means zero or less than half the unit shown Net enrollment ratios exceeding 100 indicate discrepancies
between the estimates of school-age population and reported enrollment data

2002 World Development Indicators CD-ROM, World Bank

CAS Annex B6
Page I of 2

China - Key Economic Indicators

Actual 
1998 
1999 

Estimated 
2002 

Projection
2004 

Indicator 
National accounts (as % of GDP)
Gross domestic producta 
Agnculture 
Industry 
Services 

1996 

1997 

2000 

2001 

2003 

2005

100 
20 
50 
30 

100 
19 
50 
31 

100 
19 
49 
32 

100 
18 
49 
33 

100 
16 
51 
33 

100 
15 
51 
34 

100 
15 
51 
35 

100 
14 
50 
36 

100 
13 
50 
37 

101
13
49
38

Total Consumption 
Gross domestic fixed investment 
Govemment investment 
Pnvate investment 

58 
34 
2 
32 

57 
34 
2 
32 

58 
35 
3 
33 

59 
36 
3 
32 

61 
36 
4 
32 

60 
38 
4 
34 

59 
38 
2 
36 

60 
39 
2 
37 

60 
37 
2 
35 

61
36
2
34

Exports (GNFS)b 
Imports (GNFS) 

21 
19 

23 
18 

22 
17 

22 
19 

26 
23 

26 
23 

27 
26 

29 
28 

30 
30 

32
31

Gross domestic savings 
Gross national savings' 

42 
40 

43 
42 

42 
41 

41 
40 

39 
38 

40 
39 

41 
41 

40 
41 

40 
41 

39
40

Memoranduoi iteois

Gross domestic product 
(US$ million at current pnces)
GNP per capita (US$, Atlas method) 

816490 

898244 

946301 

991356 1079961 

1159031 1260763 1375650 

1504191 

1649721

620 

710 

740 

780 

840 

890 

940 

1000 

1060 

1120

Real annual growth rates (%, projections calculated froii 2001 pnces)
Gross domestic product at markct prices 
9 6 
8 8 
Gross Domestic Income 
9 8 
9 3 

7 8 
6 9 

7 1 
6 3 

8 0 
4 8 

7 3 
7 2 

7 7 
7 9 

7 5 
6 8 

7 2 
6 7 

7 0
6 2

Real annual per capita growth rates (%, projections calculated from 2001 prices)
Gross domestic product at market prices 
8 5 
7 7 
6 8 
Total consumption 
9 1 
5 5 
6 4 
Pnvateconsumption 
11 1 
5 2 
5 8 

6 2 
8 4 
8 0 

7 1 
5 2 
3 7 

6 6 
6 5 
5 4 

6 9 
6 7 
4 0 

6 7 
7 2 
5 9 

6 4 
7 2 
6 7 

6 3
7 1
7 0

Balance of Payments (US$ millions)
Exports (GNFS)b 
Merchandise FOB 
Imports (GNFS)b 
Merchandise FOB 
Resource balance 
Netcurrenttransfcrs 
Current account balance 

171678 
151077 
154127 
131542 
17551 
2129 
7243 

207239 
182670 
164416 
136448 
42823 
5143 
36962 

207425 
183529 
163589 
136916 
43836 
4278 
31471 

220964 
194716 
190323 
158735 
30641 
4943 
21114 

279561 
249131 
250688 
214657 
28873 
6311 
20519 

299410 
266075 
271324 
232058 
28086 
8492 
17405 

342241 
303439 
324059 
277053 
18182 
8662 
22583 

395455 
350064 
383131 
328366 
12324 
8835 
19493 

453952 
400824 
444728 
381468 
9224 
9012 
19301 

520100
457340
515068
442906
5032
9192
14403

Net pnvate foreign direct investment 
Long-temi loans (net) 
Official 

38066 
1744 
4401 
-2657 
-15391 
-31662 

41674 
5381 
4315 
1066 
-48293 
-35724 

41118 
-8822 
2288 
-11110 
-57341 
-6426 

36978 
-16713 
3387 
-20100 
-32875 
-8505 

37483 
-8237 
1496 
-9733 
-392 18 
-10548 

37356 
-7868 
2156 
-10024 
432 
-47325 

45000 
-10000 
997 
-10997 
-8890 
-48693 

45000 
-12000 
1509 
-13509 
-20300 
-32193 

50000 
-11000 
1943 
-12943 
-3 1200 
-27101 

55000
-10000
2420
-12420
-35000
-24403

Private 

Other capital (net,incl errors &oninssions) 
Change in reservesd 

Memloranduoi ilents

Resource balance (% ofGDP) 
Real annual growth rates ( YR90 prices)
Merchandiseexports (FOB) 
Primary 
Manufactures 
Merchandiseimports(CIF) 

2 1 

4 8 

4 6 

3 1 

2 7 

2 4 

1 4 

0 9 

0 6 

0 3

246 
257 
245 
307 

232 
101 
253 
68 

77 
-68 
100 
2 1 

146 
56 
159 
245 

31 9 
320 
320 
284 

93 
60 
97 
108 

95 
40 
96 
160 

105 
56 
105 
11 6 

104 
46 
104 
109 

11 1
45
112
11 3

China - Key Economic Indicators

CAS Annex B6
Page 2 of 2

Indicator 

1996 

1997 

Actual 
1998 
1999 

2000 

2001 

Estimated 
2002 

Projection
2004 

2003 

2005

Public finance (as % of GDP at market prices)'
Currentrevenues 
Current expenditures 
Current account surplus (+) or deficit (-) 
Capital expenditure 
Foreign financing 

113 
10 6 
0 7 
2 3 

120 
11 5 
0 5 
2 4 

130 
12 6 
0 4 
3 5 

150 
13 7 
13 
4 6 

153 
147 
0 6 
4 2 

172 
16 3 
1 0 
4 1 

175 
17 5 
0 0 
3 3 
0 4 

185 
18 3 
0 2 
3 1 
0 4 

190 
18 7 
0 3 
2 8 
0 4 

196
19 0
0 6
2 7
0 3

Monetary indicators
M2/GDP 
GrowthofM2 (%) 
Private sector credit growth / 
total credit growth (%)

Price indices( YR90 =100)
Merchandiseexportppnceindex 
Merchandise import pnce indcx 
Merchandise terms of trade index 
Real exchange rate (US$/LCU)r 

Real interest rates
Consumer pnce index (% change) 
GDP deflator (% changc) 

112 1 
25 3 

122 2 
196 

133 4 
14 8 

146 1 
14 7 

150 6 
12 3 

165 0 
17 6 

170 0 
12 0 

179 2 
15 0 
66 0 

186 9 
14 1 
685 

194 4
14 1
730

1777 
182 7 
97 3 
107 4 

1745 
175 4 
99 5 
112 2 

1630 
169 2 
96 3 
112 4 

1507 
160 6 
93 9 
106 9 

146 1 
169 9 
86 0 
107 7 

1427 
166 0 
86 0 
110 5

1485 
162 8 
91 3 

1550 
172 9 
89 7 

1608 
181 2 
88 7 

165 1
189 0
87 3

8 3 
5 9 

2 8 
0 8 

-0 8 
-2 4 

-1 4 
-2 2 

0 4 
0 9 

0 7 
0 0 

0 4 
1 0 

1 7 
1 5 

2 1 
2 0 

2 9
2 5

a GDP at market prices
b "GNFS" denotes "goods and nonfactor services
c Includes net unrequited transfers excluding official capital grants
d 
Includes use of IMF resources
e Consolidated central govemnment
f "LCU" denotes "local currency units " An increase in US$/LCU denotes appreciation

CAS Annex B7
Page I of I

China - Key Exposure Indicators

Actual 
1998 
1999 

Estimate 
2002 

Projection
2004 

Indicator 

1996 

1997 

2000 

2001 

2003 

2005

Total debt outstanding and 
disbursed (TDO) (US$m)'

128817 146697 144007 152086 145706 170137 182596 195032 210665 212336

Net disbursements (US$m)' 

13936 

18506 

-14185 

-1611 

-5272 

-33 

-4660 

-4620 

-4200 

-3992

Total debt service (TDS) 

15756 

18445 

18435 

26862 

27092 

24298 28227 

29522 30292 

31379

(US$m)'

Debt and debt service indicators
(%)
TDO/XGSb 
TDO/GDP 
TDS/XGS 
Concessional/TDO 

68 8 
163 
87 
123 

67 6 
152 
87 
186 

66 3 
153 
117 
195 

49 8 
13.5 
93 
212 

55 0 
147 
79 
180 

52 7 
145 
82 
163 

48 4 
142 
73 
148 

45 3 
140 
65 
13 1 

39 9
129
59
125

158 

145 

IBRD exposure indicators (%)
IBRDDS/publicDS 
Preferred creditor DS/public 
DS (%)C
IBRDDS/XGS 
IBRDTDO(US$m)d 
Of which present value of
guarantees (US$m) 
Share of IBRD portfolio (%) 

56 
7.4 

51 
76 

74 
109 

77 
11 2 

87 
196 

121 
233 

136 
176 

87 
182 

75 
189 

73
187

.

04 
8239 

04 
9644 

05 
10400 

04 
11217 

05 
11660 

06 
11973 

03 
03 
12564 13033 

02
13379

7616 

99 1 
92 

110 2 
9 6 

122 
98 

119 2 
10 2 

110 8 
10 7 

97 6
11 1

.

IDA TDO (US$m)' 

7579 

7830 

8693 

8907 

8771 

8654 

8560 

8455 

8320 

8120

IFC (USSm)

Loans 
Equity and quasi-equityc 

67 
30 

122 
48 

161 
43 

210 
48 

186 
88 

177 
110 

215 
157 

na 
n a 

na 
n a. 

n a
n a

MIGA
MlGAguarantees(US$m)f 

112 

99 

131 

133 

121 

113 

87 

na 

na 

n.a

a 

Includes public and publicly guaranteed debt, pnvate nonguaranteed, use of IMF credits and net short-
tenm capital
b "XGS" denotes exports of goods and services, including workers' remittances
c Preferred creditors are defined as IBRD, IDA, the regional multilateral developmenit banks, the IMF, and the
Bank for International Settlements
d 
includes present value of guarantees
e Includes equity and quasi-equity types of both loan and equity instrumenits
f MIGA's outstanding gross exposure, as of end FY

CAS Annex B8
Page 1 of 3

Medium-term IBRD Exposure Projections

The rapid rise in IBRD exposure to China during the 1990s and the risk that exposure
would exceed IBRD's single borrower limit of US$13.5 billion prompted management and the
Chinese authorities to implement in 2000 a periodic monitoring system with reports to the Board,
and then recently to agree on a draft framework for achieving flexibility in the lending program
while respecting effectively the concentration limit. The framework is designed to protect IBRD
against either cashflow interest losses or principal losses on exposure above the concentration
limit in the unlikely event that China was to go into non-accrual.

Implementation of the framework, however, requires careful projections of IBRD
exposure. These projections are sensitive to not only the lending program itself but also
cancellations of undisbursed balances of already approved loans where these are no longer
needed for projects, and prepayment of outstanding loans, where the borrower wishes. In
addition, exposure in future years will vary with the pace of disbursements, e.g., faster
disbursements of the pipeline of loans will increase exposure more quickly while slower
disbursements will result in a less rapid rise in exposure. Exposure in US$ terms, in which the
concentration limit is denominated, will also vary with exchange rate valuation effects, e.g.,
depreciation of the dollar will increase the dollar value of the 20 percent of China's loans in
other currencies while appreciation of the dollar will reduce the value of exposure in dollar
terms.

Chart 1: IBRD Projected Exposure to China - US$1,000m Lcnding per Year
With 10% US$ depreciation and disbursements 10% above
plus 10% US$ appreciation and disbursements 10% below

160-
15 5 -
15 0 -
14 5-
140
135 
13 0-

11 5-
10
10 5
- --Concentrato-0- 
10 0

0li Bas Cae-~ 

( - DSBlw5 p+ 

I 

boe$Dw

FYO0I 

FY03 

FY05 

FY07 

FY09 

FYI1I 

FY13 

FY15 

FY17 

FY 19

-- 

- Concentration Limit 

~~Base Case --

) -- DI S Below S Up -- *DIS A:bove $ Down

In order to assess the likelihood that lending within the range envisaged in the CAS might
result in IBRD exposure exceeding the concentration limit, and hence require remedial actions
by China before new loans above the concentration limit can become effective, exposure
projections have been prepared on different assumptions. Chart I shows exposure projections in

CAS Annex B8
Page 2 of 3

the medium-term on the assumption that lending is at the lower end of the CAS range, i.e US$1
billion a year not only during the CAS period FY03-05 but also beyond. On the base case
assumption of a normal rate of disbursements in line with past long-run trends, similar
cancellations to the current year and that exchange rates would be unchanged from their end-
FY02 levels, exposure would be projected to peak slightly below the concentration limit m FY06
and peak at around US$13.6 billion in FY07, which would require China to take modest
corrective measures.

Chart 1 also shows the range of outcomes for exposure if disbursements and exchange
rates varied. If disbursements were 10 percent faster than normal and the dollar depreciated by
10 percent a year during the CAS period and then remained constant, exposure might exceed the
limit in FY04 and peak at more than US$14 billion in FY07, requiring more substantial
corrective measures by China before such a lending program could be sustained. If
disbursements were 10 percent slower and the dollar appreciated by 10 percent a year, however,
exposure would peak at less than US$13 billion, i.e. within the concentration limit and the
lending program could go ahead without measures by China. The range of outcomes
demonstrates the uncertainties about future exposure levels.

Chart 2: IBRD Projected Exposure to China - US$1,500m Lending per Year
With 10% US$ depreciation and disbursements 10% above
plus 10% US$ appreciation and disbursements 10% below

160
15 5-
15 0-
14 5
140

135 

13 0 -

120 

-

11 5-
11 0 

10 5-

10 0 

.
FY01 

.
.
FY03 

.
FY05 

FY07 

FY09 

FY11 

FY13 

FY15 

FY17 

FY19

- Concentration Limit 

Base Case - -

- DIS Below S Up + 

DIS Above $ Down

Chart 2 shows the same sensitivity analysis for lending of US$1.5 billion a year during
both the CAS penod and beyond. In the base case, exposure would exceed the concentration
limit in FY06 and would then peak at slightly less than US$15 billion in FY11. If disbursements
were faster and the dollar depreciated, then exposure might exceed the concentration limit as
early as FY04 and peak at around US$15.3 billion in FY10. Conversely, if disbursements were
slower and the dollar appreciated, exposure might peak at around US$14.6 billion, rather later, in

CAS Annex B8
Page 3 of 3

FY12. In all these cases, substantial remedial measures would need to be taken by China to
allow the lending program to go ahead.

These projections show the sensitivity of exposure to alternative assumptions. They also
show a wide range of possible outcomes. Different disbursement and exchange rate assumptions
might, in turn, offset each other leading to outcomes within these relatively wide ranges.
Management, therefore, intends to monitor actual and projected exposure carefully at the annual
reviews within the framework agreed with China, and to inform the Board of the lending
program which can be accommodated each year in light of measures taken by China, where
necessary, to protect IBRD against cashflow or principal losses on exposure above the
concentration limit in the event that China was to go into non-accrual.

Closed Projects 

145

lBRD/IDA -
Total Disbursed (Acbre) 
of which has been repaid 
Total Disbursed (Closed) 
of which has been repaid 
Total Disbursed (Active I Closed) 
of which has been repaid 

Total Undisbursed (Active) 
Total Undisbursed (Closed) 
Total Undisbursed (Active + Closed) 

8,775 78
387 83
18,887 06
5,942 82
27,662 84
6.330 64

6,481 94
0 95
6,482 89

Active Projects 

China: Operations Portfolio (IBRD/IDA and Grants)

(as of October 31, 2002)

CAS Annex B9 (a)
Page I of 3

Last PSR 

Supervision Rating 

Original Amount in US$ Millions 

Difference Between
Expected and Actual

Disbursements'

Project ID 

P040513 
P003619 
P058844 
P051856 
P049665 
P050036 
P042109 
P036952 
P003566 
P003646 
P049436 
P003589 
P003603 
P060270 
P003632 
P036414 
P036953 
P045910 
P046051 
P047345 
P003602 
P034618 
P051859 
P003598 
P003637 
P058308 
P057352 
P040185 
P003586 

Project Name 

Development 
Obtectives 

Implementation 
Progress

Fiscal Year 

IBRD 

IDA GRANT 

Cancel 

Undisb 

Ong Frm Revd

2nd Henan Prov Hwy 
2nd Inland Waterways 
3rd Henan Prov Hwy 
ACCOUNTING REFORM & DEVELOPMENT 
ANNING VALLEY AG DEV 
Anhul Provincial Hwy 
CH-BEIJING ENVIRONMENT II 
CN-BASIC ED 
IV 
CN-BASIC HEALTH (HLTH8) 
CN-CHONGQING IND POL CT 
CN-CHONGQING URBAN ENVIRONMENT 
CN-DISEASE PREVENTION (HLTH7) 
CN-ENTERPRISEHOUSING&SOCSECREF 
CN-ENTERPRISE REFORM LN 
CN-ENVIRONMENT TECH ASS 
CN-GUANGXI URBAN ENVIRONMENT 
CN-HEALTH IX 
CN-HEBEI URBAN ENVIRONMENT 
CN-HIGHER EDUC REFORM 
CN-HUAI RIVER POLLUTION CONTROL 
CN-HUBEI URBAN ENVIRONMENT 
CN-LABOR MARKET DEV 
CN-LIAO RIVER BASIN 
CN-LIAONING ENVIRONMENT 
CN-NAT'L RURAL WATER 3 
CN-PENSION REFORM PJT 
CN-RURAL WATER IV 
CN-SHANDONG ENVIRONMENT 
CN-SHANGHAI ENVIRONMENT PROJECT 

S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
U 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
HS 

S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
U 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
U 
S 

1996 
1998 
2000 
1999 
1999 
1999 
2000 
1997 
1998 
1996 
2000 
1996 
1995 
1999 
1993 
1998 
1999 
2000 
1999 
2001 
1996 
1996 
2001 
1995 
1997 
1999 
1999 
1998 
1994 

210 
123 
150 
27 4 
90 
200 
349 

170 
200 

275 

72 
10 
150 
20 
105 5 
125 
10 
100 
110 

16 
95 
160 

5 61 
30 

85 
85 

100 
75 
5 
50 
20 
50 

50 

25 
20 

70 
5 
30 

164 8 

20 

283 

60 63 
74 21 
11833 
21 16 
4977 
84 77 
32877 
1 86 
3794 
2 72 
188 33 
15 31 
10028 
347 
249 
7815 
41 85 
140 03 
3111 
102 05 
48 31 
5 54 
87 60 
1225 
965 
2 53 
31 04 
29 69 
24 94 

60 6 
60 2
233
20 7
114
22 6
1167
4 7
20 2
167 5 
27 2
25 4
1188 
53 
32 
517 
117
28 3
294
-3 5
78 8 
78
3
123 
10 
2 7
14 2 
24 1
24 9 

5 64

2 72

6573
118
2 86
1 79

37 61

818
8 84

-2 38

12 94

Active Proiects 

Project ID 

Project Name 

P003648 
P043933 
P003600 
P071`147 
P003635 
P003599 
P003473 
P003647 
P003653 
P051736 
P037859 
P003606 
P046952 
P035693 
P051705 
P003626 
P003594 
P003627 
P051888 
P046564 
P058843 
P003614 
P038988 
P035698 
P068049 
P07044 1 
P049700 
P039838 
P070459 
P058845 
P003540 
P056216 
P041890 
P003654 
P036949 
P041268 
P058846 
P003590 
P003571 
P003595 
P003592 
P046829 
P038121 
P003638 
P044485 
P003649 

CN-SHANGHAI SEWERAGE II 
CN-SICHUAN URBAN ENVIRONMENT 
CN-TECHNOLOGY DEVELOPMENT 
CN-Tuberculosis Control Project 
CN-VOC ED REFORM PROJ 
CN-YUNNAN ENVIRONMENT PROJECT 
CN-ZHEJIANG MULTICITIES DEVELOPMENT 
China Economic Law Reform -LEGEA 
Container Transport 
E CHINA/JIANGSU PWR 
EGY CONSERVATION PRO 
ENERGY CONSERVATION 
FOREST DEV POOR AR 
FUEL EFFICIENT IND 
Fujian II Highway 
Fujian Prov Highway 
GANSU HEXI CORRIDOR 
GRAIN DISTRIBUTION P 
GUANZHONG IRRIGATION 
Gansu & Inner Mongolia Poverty Reduction 
Guangxi Highway 
Guangzhou CityTransport 
HEILONGJIANG ADP 
HUNAN POWER DEVELOP 
Hubei Hydropower Development in Poor Are 
Hubei Xiaogan Xiangfan Highway 
IAIL-2 
IV ODS PHASE OUT PRJ 
Inner Mongolia Highway Project 
Jiangxi II Hwy 
LOESS PLATEAU 
LOESS PLATEAU 11 
Liaoning Urban Transport 
Nat Hwy2lHunan-Guangdong 
Nat Hwy3-Hubei 
Nat Hwy4/Hubei-Hunan 
National Railway Project 
QINBA MOUNTAINS POVERTY REDUCTION 
RAILWAYS VII 
RED SOILS 11 AREA DEVELOPMENT PROJEC 
REF 
INST'L & PREINV 
RENEWABLE ENERGY DEVELOPMENT 
RENEWABLE ENERGY DEVELOPMENT 
SEEDS SECTOR COMMER 
SHANGHAI WAIGAOQIAO 
SHANXI POVERTY ALLEV 

Implementation 
Progress 
S 
S 
S 
5 
5 
5 
5 
5 
U 
5 

Last PSR 
Supervision Rating 
Development 
Objectives 
S 
S 
S 
5 
5 
S 
5 
5 
S 
5 
S 
5 
5 
5 
5 
5 
5 
5 
5 
S 
5 
5 
5 
5 
5 

5 
S 
5 
5 
5 
S 
5 
5 
U 
5 
5 
5 
5 
5 

5 
5 

5 
S 
S 
5 
5 
5 
5 
5 
5 
5 
S 
S 
5 
S 
S 
S 
S 

5 
5 

5 
S 
5 
5 
S 
5 
5 
S 
5 
5 
5 
5 
5 
5 
5 
5 
S 

CAS Annex B9 (a)
Page 2 of 3

Difference Between
Expected and Actual
Disbursements~

Original Amount in US$ Millions 

FiclYa 
FiclYa 
1996 
1999 
1995 
2002 
1997 
1996 
1993 
1995 
1999 
1998 
1998 
1998 
1998 
1997 
1999 
1994 
1996 
1993 
1999 
1999 
2000 
1998 
1997 
1998 
2002 
2003 
1998 
1998 
2002 
2001 
1994 
1999 
1999 
1997 
1998 
1999 
2002 
1997 
1995 
1994 
1993 
1999 
1999 
1996 
1997 
1996 

IBO 
IBD 
250 
100 
200 
104 
10 
125 

71 
250 

63 
100 

200 
140 
60 
325 
80 
60 
200 
200 
120 
300 
105 
250 
300 

100 
200 

100 
150 
400 
250 
350 
160 
30 
400 

13 

80 
400 

DAGNT 
IAGAT 

2 

20 
25 
110 
10 

100 

90 
165 
20 
100 

150 
50 

150 

150 
50 

20 

100 

22 

32 812 

350 25 

35 

3 

18 1 

3 1 
86 

Cne 
Udsb 
Cne Unsb 
82 06 
97 50 
10 16 
103 33 
0 16 
82 43 
1 06 
4 20 
20 34 
73 10 
506 
45 70 
74 23 
915 
121 67 
12 29 
88 70 
29 60 
5945 
89 20 
152 68 
129 54 
21 20 
163 70 
105 00 
250 00
31 51 
245 49 
100 00
182 10 
1 58 
79 06 
69 02 
99 72 
47 29 
167 67 
95 20 
53 29 
69 48 
5 85 
2 65 
12 87 
26 65 
15 03 
174 77 
6 57 

109 

100 

9 4 

1 07
6 67

2 50

50 09
-3 01

riFmRed
OgFrRvd
82 1 
394 
13 2
-0 7
1 3
77 7 
1 3 
4 9
23 2
159 1 
5 5
12 9
-38 4 
11 7
85 2
30 4 
62 2
30 4 
28 8
33 6 
35 2
126 2
19 8
227 7 
3 5

30 38

20 44

-5 85

45 64

15 64

1 2
-36 8

3 1
-0 2
52 6
48 8
99 7
-0 2
56 4
-2 3
56 7
177 5 
1 2 
3 1 
924
14 3
25 5 
102 8 
15 9

26 50
1 16
2 72

-2 75
19 31

Active Proiects 

Project ID 

P003585 
P003609 
P003404 
P036947 
P045264 
P003639 
P003591 
P003539 
P064729 
P056596 
P060029 
P046563 
P042299 
P003409 
P056424 
P003650 
P056199 
P058847 
P045788 
P045915 
P036405 
P056516 
P034081 
P003644 
P003643 
P003596 
P003641 
P064730 
P003642 
Overall result 

Last PSR 

Supervision Rating 

Original Amount in US$ Millions 

CAS Annex B9 (a)
Page 3 of 3

Difference Between
Expected and Actual

Disbursementsi

Project Name 

Development 
Obiectives 

Implementation 
Progress

Fiscal Year 

IBRD 

IDA GRANT 

Cancel 

Undisb 

Ong Frm Revd

SHENYANG IND REFORM 
SICHUAN GAS DEV & CONSERVATION 
SICHUAN GAS DEV CON 
SICHUAN TRANSMISSION 
SMALLHLDR CATTLE DEV 
SOUTHWEST POVERTY REDUCTION PROJE 
STATE FARMS COMMERCI 
SUSTAINABLE COASTAL RESOURCES DEV 
SUSTAINABLE FORESTRY DEVELOPMENT P 
Shijiazhuang Urban Transport 
Sustainable Forestry Dev(Natural Forest) 
TARIM BASIN II 
TEC COOP CREDIT IV 
THIRD ODS PHASE OUT 
TONGBAI PUMPED STORA 
TUOKETUO POWER/INNER 
Third Inland Waterways 
Third Xinjiang Highway Project 
Tn-Provincial Hwy 
Urumqi Urban Transport 
WANJIAZHAI WATER TRA 
WATER CONSERVATION 
XIAOLANGDI MULTI II 
XIAOLANGDI RESETTLEMENT 
Xinjiang Hwy II 
YANGTZEBASIN WATER 
YANGZHOU THERMAL POW 
Yangtze Dike Strengthening Project 
ZHEJIANG POWER DEVT 

S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
HS 
U 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
# 
S 
S 
S 
S 
HS 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
HS 

S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
U 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 

S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
HS 

1995 
1994 
1994 
1995 
2000 
1995 
1998 
1998 
2002 
2001 
2002 
1998 
1999 
1995 
2000 
1997 
2001 
2003 
1998 
2001 
1997 
2001 
1997 
1994 
1997 
1995 
1994 
2000 
1995 
Result 

10 

200 

60 
35 

16 

120 1 

175 
255 

270 
93 5 
475 
150 
100 
93 9 
100 

90 
10 

320 
400 
100 
150 
230 
100 
400 
74 
430 

110 

110 

300 
100 
350 
210 
400 
13962 8 2532 61 586 162 

2 7 

80 8 
2 3 

4152 
51 50 
0 02 
12 15 
43 55 
11 87 
8 45 
49 09 
93 90 
96 00 
16 82
67 53 
3917 
36 40 
304 94 
6543 
96 00 
150 00
67 42 
70 04 
50 61 
59 12 
92 63 
2 04 
11 71 
270 
3 32 
166 61 
58 95 
971 50 6821 53 

1025 

95 

75 

60 

11 5 

41 5
51 5
0 8
107 2 
20 2
364 
83 7 
33 9
0 5
32 9

53 4
-4 5
6 4
55 3
1448 
0 5

34 6
24 7
124 1 
4 2
123 5 
0 1 
717 
57 
14 8 
79 6
64 6
3983 2 

0 93

3643
3 00

-1881

-4 39

120 19
-1 51
6 71
568
2 17

506 00

a Intended disbursements to date minus actual disbursements to date as prolected at appraisal

China
Statement of IFC's
Held and Disbursed Portfolio
As of 6/30/2002
(In US Dollars Millions)

Held 
Equity Quasi 
0 
0.03 
0 
2.54 
0 
0 
6 
0 
0 
0.99 
0 
2 48 
0 
0 
0 
1 95 
2 
0 25 
24 67 
0.5 

Loan 
9.52 
0 
11 72 
0 
0 
0.9 
0 
30 
17 87 
3 76 
25 
0 
5 
15 
1.92 
11.13 
0 
0 
0 
2.5 

Partic Loan 
0 
11.9 
9 52 
0 
0 
0 
0 2329 
11.72 
0 
0 
0 
25 
0 
0 
0 
09 
09 
0 
0 
0 
0 
68.8 
19 74 
0 
0 
15.32 
0 
0 
3.76 
0 
0 
20 
0 
0 
0 
0 
5 
0 
0 
0 
15 
0 
0 
1 92 
0 
0 
11 13 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
1.65 
2 5 

CAS Annex B9 (b)
Page 1 of 2

Disbursed
Equity Quasi Partic
0 
0 
11.9
0 03 
0 
0
0 
0 2329
2 54 
0 
0
0 
0 
0
0 
0 
0.9
0.45 
0 
0
0 
0 45.26
0 
0 
0
0.99 
0 
0
0 
0 
0
2.48 
0 
0
0 
0 
0
0 
0 
0
0 
0 
0
1 95 
0 
0
2 
0 
0
0 
0 
0
24.67 
0 
0
0 5 
0 
1 65

0 

3 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 
20 
18.53 
0 
7.4 
3.2 
0 
0.36 
0 
0 
0 
0.01 
0 
0.21 
0 
2 4 
25 59 
0 
12.46 
4.15 
0 
9.75 
0 
16.1 
31.5 
0 
20 
0 
32.5 
0 
6.1 
1 35 
9 
2 
0 
26 58 
6.82 
3.81 
0 
30.7 
0 
1.95 
304.22 166.98 

0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
28 64 
18.53 
0 
0 
8.6 
3.7 
3.2 
0 
0 
0 
0.36 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 01 
0 
0 
0 
0.21 
0 
0 
0 
2 4 
0 
30 
16 11 
0 
0 
10.4 
12.46 
4 15 
8.09 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
16.1 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
69 23 
32.5 
0 
0 
0 
4 5 
1 35 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
26.46 
0 
19.38 
6.82 
3 81 
0 
0 
0 
23.32 
0 
0 
0 
1.95 
25 277.79 206.13 127.02 

0 

0

0 
0
0 28.64
0 
4.3
0 
0
0 
0
0 
0
0 
0
0 
0
0 18.89
0 
104
0 
0
0 
0
0 
0
0 
0
0 69.23
0 
0
0 
0
0 
0
0 19.38
0 
0
0 
0
0 233.8

FY Approvw Company 
1997 Onent Finance 
1997/00 
PTP Holdings 
1997 PTPHubei 
1996 Pacific Ports 
2001 Peak Pacific 
1998 Rabobank SHFC 
2000 SSIF 
1998 Shanghai Krupp 
1999 Shanxi 
1993 Shenzhen PCCP 
2001 Sino-Forest 
1995 Suzhou PVC 
1998 WIT 
2000 Wanjie Hospital 
1996 Weihai Weidongn 
1993 Yantai Cement 
1998 Zhen Jing 
2002 Advantage 
1999/00/02 Bank of Shanghai 
1996 Beijing Hormel 

1998/00 

CIG Holdings PLC 

2002 CPEF 
1996 Caltex Ocean 
1998 Chengdu Huarong 
1998 Chengxin-IBCA 
1987/92/94 China Bicycles 
1994 China Walden Mgt 
1994 China Walden Ven 
1994 Dalian Glass 
1999 Dujiangyan 
1995 Dupont Suzhou 
1994 Dynamic Fund 
1999 Hansom 
2002 HuarongAMC 
2002 IEC 
1996 Jingyang 
1998 Leshan Scana 
2001 Maanshan Carbon 
2002 NCCB 
1996 Nanjing Kumho 
2001 New China Life 
1995 Newbridge Inv. 
Total Portfolio: 

CAS Annex B9 (b)
Page 2 of 2

Approvals Pending Commitment

2002 Darong 
2002 Narada Battery 
2002 ZhongChen 
2002 ASIMCO 
2002 Sino Mining 
2002 ShuangDeng 
2002 KHIT 
2002 SML 
1996 Jingyang 
1998 PTP Hubei BLINC 
2000 CIG Zhapu 
2000 Meijing 
2000 CIMIC Tile 
2001 Daning Coal 
2001 AACI 
2001 Minsleng 
2002 HuarongAMC 
2002 IEC 
Total Pending Commitment: 

Loan 
Equity Quasi 
Partic
10000 
1500 
0 
8000
6600 
0 
0 
0
25000 
0 
0 32000
0 
1500 13500 
0
5000 
0 
0 
5000
12500 
2800 
0 
0
0 
3000 
0 
0
0 
6000 
0 
0
4000 
0 
0 
0
0 
0 
0 
1500
6000 
0 
5000 
0
9000 
0 
0 
7300
15000 
0 
5000 15000
0 
2000 
0 15000
0 
2000 
0 
0
0 
0 23500 
0
15000 
3000 
0 
0
0 
0 
5000 
0
108100 21800 52000 83800

COUNTRY PROGRAM MATRIX (FY03-05)
Thematic Framework

CAS Annex BlO
Page 1 of2l

Overall Theme: Supporting China 's Two Historic Transitions -from a Rural, Agricultural Society to anl Urban, Industrial Society anidfrom a Centrally-
Planned Economy to a More Globally Integrated Market-based Economy - and to do it on a Sustainable Basis.

I. 

Improving the Business Environment and Accelerating Transition To a Market Economy

A 
Strengthening Macroeconomic Management
B. Promoting China's Integration into the Global Economy in the WTO Era
C Reforming the Financial Sector
1. Establishing an Overall Sector Policy Structure
2 Restructuring of Banking System
3. Improving Govemance and Regulatory Structures
4. Establishing Capital Markets
D. Promoting Private Sector Development and Enterprise Reforms
1. Improving the Environment for Private Sector Activity
2 Corporate Restructuring, Ownership Diversification and Industrial Reorganization
3. Strengthening Corporate Governance
4 Promoting Private Sector Participation in Infrastructure
Improving Public Sector Management and Delivery of Services
1. Improving the Regulatory and Incentive Environment for Good Governance
2. Strengthening Management of Cities
3. Strengthening Performance of Public Utilities in Delivering Infrastructure Services

E. 

II. Addressing the Needs of the Poorer and Disadvantaged People and Lagging Regions

A 
Increasing Employment and Productivity Off and On the Farm
B. Strengthening Transport Links withm and to Lagging Regions
C. Developing Human Resources
D Strengthening Social Protection
PE 
Improving Targeted Poverty Reduction Programs

III. Facilitating an Environmentally Sustainable Development Process

A. Strengthening Effectiveness of Environmental Institutions
B 
Improving Air Quality
C. Managing Water Resources
D. Managing Land and Natural Resources
E. Protecting Global Environmental Commons

China Country Assistance Strategy: Country Program Matrix (FY03-05)

Development 
Objectives 

Government 
Strategy/Actions 

Progress Benchmarks 

Bank Group Strategy 

I. Improve the Business Environment and Accelerate Transition To a Market Economy

IBRD/IFC/ 
MIGA/GEF

Instruments
AAA 

Other Donors

CAS Annex B10
Page 2 of 21

I.A. Strengthening 
Institutions for 
Macroeconomic 
Management 

Promote macroeconomic 
stability to support 
sustained investment 
spending and job-creation 

Low inflation, sustainable macro 
balances, improved vulnerability 
indicators, nsing pnvate investment 
levels and more newjobs across 
China 

Advise on interest rate 
liberalization, extemal 
payments, and fiscal 
sustainability issues, and share 
information on investment 
climate and labor market 
policies 

Two ongoing TA projects 
China Reseaich, 
Institutional Support and 
Preinvestment Project 
(CRISPP) and Fourth 
Technical Cooperation 
Project (TCC IV) 

Strengthen fiscal 
management capacity 

New systems and capacity for better 
management of the govemment 
budget, debt and fiscal nsks 

Advise on reforms to improve 
analysis and management of 
govemment budget, debt and 
fiscal risks 

Ongoing Fiscal TA Project 

Strengthen framework for 
inter-govemment finance 

Further adjustments i revenue and 
expenditure assignment and transfers 
between local, provincial and 
national goverments 

Advise on inter-govemment 
finance issues 

TA to PBoC on Interest Rate 
Liberalization (FY02 -03), 
Country Economic Report 
(FY03), Policy Notes on Macro 
Management (FY02-04), Fiscal 
Policy (FY02-04), TA for 
macro-modeling (FY02-04), 
Statistical capacity building 
(FY03), WBI course on fiscal 
implications of WTO accession 
(FY02) 
Bond Market Development 
(FY02-03), TA for Debt 
Management Capacity (ASEM) 

Provincial Expenditure Review 
(FY02), Sub-National Fiscal 
TA 

I.B. Promoting 
China's 
Integration into 
the Global 
Economy 

Build capacity for 
conforming with WTO 
regime 

Implementation of revised laws/ 
administrative practices relevant to 
intemational trade and investment 

Measures to unify currently 
fragmented export processing regime 
and encourage outward investment 
by Chinese firms 

Continue reforms on 
trade & business 
environment to maximize 
benefits of open 
trade/investment for 
Chinese economy and 
poor 
Continue stnuctural 
reforms to smooth impact 
of increased globalization 

Accelerate service sector 
development 

Advise on design and 
implementation of trade -related 
laws and regulations, and 
support training 
Advise on issues of trade de- 
licensing, simplification of 
business processes, and 
competitiveness, and collaborate 
on impact analyses 

Ongoing Economic Law 
Reform Project 

WBI distance leaming on 
Globalization and China's 
Accession to WTO (FY02) 

Evaluation and Reform of 
Export Processing Trade (FY02) 
TA by MIGA on outward 
investment from China (FY01- 
03) 
Research on WTO Accession, 
Policy Refonm and Poverty 
Reduction (FY02) 
Study Inter-provincial Bamers 
to National Market Devt 

Actions to liberalize labor markets 
and reduce bamers to trade within 
the national market 

Advise on structural reform of 
factor and product market 

Reduction of govemment 
monopolies and govemment 
interference in service activities 

Advise on strategies for service 
sector liberalization and 
development

Ongoing Container 
Transport Project 

Services Sector Development 
and Competitiveness (FY02) 

ADB TA on
Intergovemmental Fiscal
Transfer, Budget Law,
Coordination of Fiscal-
Monetary Policy, etc
AusAID: Tramining in
taxation issues
CIDA Public Policy
Options Program
EU: Public Administration
Co-op Program, training in
national statistics
GTZ: TA to Structural
Reform Commission & to
NPC's Finance/Economic
Committee
IMF: Proposed TAm tax
adminstration, tax policy,
public expenditure mgt,
govt finance statistics, etc
OECD: TA m statistics,
fiscal reform, monetary

ADB WTO-related studies
AusAID training officials
in WTO and market issues
CIDA: WTO Capacity
Building Program
EU: Co-op Programs on
WTO & Information
Society, major scholarship
program
ILO: vanous studies on
WTO impact
Japan: Focus Area of
Future Support
OECD: TA for intellectual
property nghts
UNDP Customs Reform
for WTO

Development 
Objectives 

Government 
Strategy/Actions 

Progress Benchmarks 

Bank Group Strategy 

Promote China's 
knowledge economy 

Improvements in R&D capacity, 
national and intemational 
information flows, quality of higher 
education, and in bndging the digital 
divide 

Advise on knowledge strategies 
to strengthen global 
competitiveness and leverage 
new ICT technologies for 
knowledge shanng 

IBRD/IFC/ 
MIGA/GEF
Distance Leaming Project 
(FY04) 

I.C. Reforming the 
Financial Sector 

I) Establish an overall 
financial sector policy 
structure appropnate to a 
market economy 

Govemment to reach a consensus on 
its long-term financial sector 
objectives and its appropnate future 
role in the sector 

Advice on long-term strategies 
and policy reformns 

2) Continued 
restructunng of banking 
system to one capable of 
serving the needs of a 
market economy, while 
minimizing fiscal and 
social stability 
implications 

Steady progress in commercializing 
the operations of four major state 
commercial banks (SCBs) along 
with diversifying their ownership 
Pnvatization of other banks 

Advice on strategies and policy 
reforms and technical assistance 
on key aspects of the reform 
process 

CAS Annex B IO
Page 3 of 21

Instruments
AAA 

Other Donors

IMF: Proposed TA to
PBC, workshops on central
bank accounting and capital
account, training in money
and banking statistics

Using Knowledge for China's
Development (FY02), Senior
Pohcy Seminar on Knowledge
Strategies (FY02), Structure of
Agncultural Research (FY02),
GDLN Pilot Program in Ningxia
Province (FY02), Development
Gateway (FY02), WBI
Strategic and policy advice on 
( I ) key issues in making 
transition from planned to 
market-onented financial 
system, arid (2) specific areas 
like interest rate liberalization,
WTO entry and financial
servies industry integration
Bank/IFC advice on SCB refomi AusAID Training in
and restructunng, bank super- 
finance and banking
vision/regulation, deposit 
DFID Financial Sector
insurance, credit nsk 
Traimng Program
management, promoting 
EU: ASEM grants, training
restructunng of small/medium 
of financial sector
banks 
regulators & supervisors
ASEM-funded TA on asset
management company/bad debt
resolution

3) Improve govemance 
structures and regulatory 
systems for financial 
institutions capable of 
serving the needs of 
firms, households and 
governments in rapidly- 
growing market economy 

Expanded and conimercially 
sustainable access to financial 
products and services by households, 
firms and govemments, including in 
rural areas 

Improved govemance, management, 
profitability, capital base and 
intemal controls in financial 
institutions (banks, secunties firms, 
insurance companies) 

Includes improved financial services 
industry infrastructure - accounting, 
auditing, disclosure, regulation and 
supervision 

Participation of pnvate domestic and 
foreign financial institutions in 
banking, insurance, capital markets 

Advice on policy refomis and 
technical assistance on key 
aspects of the reform process 

Policy advice/TA on finance for
small finms, IFC advice on
leasing legislation/regulation
IFC/Bank policy advice/TA to
pilot urban SME lending
Policy advice and TA on
restructunng rural financial
institutions.
China Development Bank Medium and Small Bank, and 
component of TCC IV 
Failure Resolution components 
Accounting Reform 
of CRISPP 
Project 

Workshops/policy advice to 
IFC investment in Bank of 
Secunties and Insurance 
Shanghai and Nanjing City Regulatory Commissions 
Commercial Bank, in 
insurance companies, 
fiunds, secunties 
companmes, housing 
finance 

IFC advice on banks' auditing 
practices, WBI training of bank 
supervisors. 

ADB TA in Banking Law
& Regulation, Improving
Information Disclosure,
Studies isn Trading Rules,
Compansons of Financial
Sector Regulatory &
Supervision Regimes
IIF: Proposed TA in
banking nsk analysis and
bank supervision
OECD: TA in govemance
of financial institutions,
taxation of financial
markets

Development 
Objectives 

Government 
Strategy/Actions 

Progress Benchmarks 

Bank Group Strategy 

I.D. Promoting 
Private Sector 
Development and 
Enterprise Reform 

Strategic and policy advice, TA 
and training to responsible 
govemment units, official think 
tanks and quasi-governmental 
institutions on long-term 
strategies and pnonty refonms 

4) Establish sound capital 
markets capable of 
serving the needs of 
firms, households and 
govemments in a rapidly -
growing market economy 

Reform of govenmment secunties 
market, including introduction of 
treasury bills, strengthening debt 
management capabilities and 
reducing portfolio nsks 

Develop inter-bank money market 
and improved liquidity management 
by banks/finance institutions 

Growth of institutional investors 
(mutual funds, insurance companies, 
etc )

Development of market -based 
infrastructure finance mechanisms 

Initial steps to develop the bond 
market 

I) Improve business
environment and 
encourage greater 
private sector activity 
Open markets to greater 
competition and provide 
level playing field for all 
types of pnvate sector 
firms Strategy is to 
implement commitments 
under WTO covenng 
- Improvements in legal 
framework and 
enforcement capacities to 
provide increasingly 
equal opportunities to 
firms of all ownershup 
classes 
- Reduction of bamers to 
entry and exit 
- Transparency and 
rationalization of 
domestic laws and 
regulations 

Implementation of specific 
commitments made underWTO 
accession discussions such as 

Support development and 
improved judicial enforcement 
of modem business laws 

- Non-discnminatory national 
treatment of all enterpnses Revision 
of investment guidelines in full 
conformity with the WTO agreement 
and repealing all laws and 
regulations inconsistent with WTO 
rules on national treatment 
- Eliminate dual pncing practices 
- Publish in official joumal list of 
goods and services subject to state 
pncing together with price-setting 
mechanisms and policies 
- Formulate Law on AntbMonopoly 
- Implement commitment to grant all 
enterprises nght to conduct 
intemational trade within three years 
after accession 

Advise on streamlining fiscal 
and user charges, implementing 
new bankruptcy law, and 
competition and regulatory 
policies 

Advise on pnvate sector 
development, particularly in the 
intenor provinces, and support 
for access to new technology 
and management know-how 

Funding and TA support to the 
pnvate sector, and support for 
development of business 
services

CAS Annex B 10
Page 4 of 21

Other Donors

ADB: Capital Markets
Devt TA
EU: China Financial
Services Cooperation
Project
IMF/World Bank:
Regional workshop on
Developing Bond
Markets

ADB SME Business
Advisory Support, TA for
pnvate sector devt
AusAID/DFID/Swiss/lFC
China Project Developmen
Facility
EU major business
tramining program, junior
managers training,
Enterpnse Reform
Project for SME Devt
Japan Focal Area of
Future Support
OECD TA on SME
development policies

IBRD/IFC/ 
MIGA/GEF
Financial Sector TA 
Project 

IFC investment in bond 
rating company

Ongoing Economic Law 
Reform Project 

IFC projects with the local 
pnvate sector 

IFC public-pnvate sector 
forums to improve SME 
business environment 
particularly in Westem 
Provinces 

IFC capacity building and 
funding to SM Es in the 
intenor thiough China 
Project Development 
Facility in Chengdu and 
Sichuan Investment Fund 

Instruments
AAA 

Policy advice on govt secunties 
market reform, IFC advice on 
secunties law 

TA for improved cash 
management by govemment 
debt issuer 

Policy advice on interest rate 
liberalization and the Central
Bank's role in money market
development

Policy and strategic advise for
promoting growth of
institutional mvestors, and for
infrastnicture finance
mechanism

Bankroptcy Study (FYOI), On- 
going WBI funding support to 
CASS Institute for Regulation 
and Competition Policies 

IFC/IBRD study of Post- 
Pnvatization Needs of 
Enterpnses (FYO 2), WBI course 
on Regulatory Economics and 
Incentive Theory 

Research on China's Industnal 
Competitiveness and Investment 
Climate (ongoing) 

Technical assistance in the
development and utilization of
online infonmation services
(FY02)

WBI TA for implementation of
measures identified in the
Knowledge Economy study
ASEM trust fund supported
study on corporate restructunng

_____________________________ 

WB I workshop on corporate
restructuring and enterprise
ms

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~refom 

Development 
Objective s 

Government 
Strategy/Actions 

Specialization/consoli- 
dation of firms to 
improve investment 
efficiency in 
manufactunng/service 
sectors 

Provide business 
support services, 
especially for small,
remote, and high-ech
firms
2) Corporate 
Restructunng, 
Ownership Diversi- 
fication and Industnal 
Reorganization 

Progress Benchmarks 

Bank Group Strategy 

IBRD/IFC/ 
MIGA/GEF
Advise on investment promotion MIGA guarantees
policies, encourage the use of 
IFC/FIAS/MIGA
nsk mitigation techniques, and 
assistance in building
facilitate access to global 
capacity of investment
knowledge and capital 
promotion intenmedianes

Progress in moving from 
approval-based system to 
registration and disclosure-based 
system in areas like company 
law, business licensing, and 
capital market debt

Enactment of a comprehensive
e-oommerce law

Announcement of 
comprehensive policy on 
mergers/acquisitions 

Advise on legal and regulatory 
frameworks to support hard 
budget constraint 

Harder budget constraints on 
enterpnses, further separation of 
SOE from Govt control, fewer 
loss-making SOE and SOE- 
related non-performmg loans at 
four largest state-owned banks 

Progress in disposing/ 
restructunng assets acquired by 
the asset management 
companies including through
foreign investor participation

Substantial transfer out of SOE 
of hea Ith/education facilities, 
health insurance schemes, and 
housing

Accelerate the program of 
pnvatizing or liquidating small 
industnal and service sector
SOEs

Support efforts to reduce excess 
capacity and number of loss- 
making enterpnses, and the 
development of support schemes 
to assist laid-off workers 

Ongoing Shenyang 
Industnal Refonm Project 

Advise on separating the 
provision of both education and 
health services from SOEs 

IFC support to AMCs for
disposal and/or
restructunng of assets

Assist in corporatization of 
sector oompanies and improve 
their creditworthiness

Ongoing Enterpnse
Reform LIL

CAS Annex B IO
Page 5 of 21

Instruments
AAA 

Other Donors

ASEM-supported study on corporate 
restmictunng 

IFC/UKTA for ownership 
transformation in Leshan 

WBI workshop on corporate 
restructunng and enterpnse refonn 

ADB: TA for industnal
enterpnse and SOE
restructunng
ADB/OECD:Anti-
corruption Initiative mn
East Asia
DFID SOE Reform
Project in Sichuan/
Liaonng
EU: ASEM grants
GIZ Training managers
of medium-size
enterpnses, advice to
Ministry of Labor

Development 
Objectives 

Government 
Strategy/Actions 

Progress Benchmarks 

Bank Group Strategy 

3) Strengthen 
Corporate 
Governance 

Appoint and use Board 
Committees such as audit and 
compensation committees 

Advise on corporate govemance 
issues, train trainers, assist in 
developing distance training 
facilities 

IBRD/IFC/ 
MIIGA/GEF
Ongoing Projects for 
Accounting Reform, 
Enterprnse Refomm and 
Economic Law Reform 

Introduce/enforce accounting, 
auditing and disclosure 
standards consistent with 
intemational practices 

Support the development of 
accounting, reporting and 
auditing standards consistent 
with international practices 

Further strengthen CSRC
regulations

Assist in attracting pnvate sector 
financing 

All oil &gas companies listed 

Increased number of IPPs, listed
power companies and decision
to further divest generation
assets

New policies opening access to
pnvate sector implemented

Transport Services. Creation of
regulatory agencies, liftmg of
tanff constramints and guidelines
on transport services

Roads. Investment in toll road 
projects to foster growth, trade 
and poverty alleviation, with 
pnvate sector partlicipation or 
potential for asset secuntization 
Promote policy for 
commercialization, consolida-
tion, and market financing of
public toll roads companies
Assist in reform of road agencies
to focus on policy and regulation

roles

4) Promote Private 
Sector Participation 
in Infrastructure 
Energy Promote 
pnvate sector 
investment 

Transport Services. 
Encourage pnvate 
transport operations 
Develop instnrments to 
encourage, manage and
regulate competitive
transport services
Roads. Expand 
market-based 
development, financuig 
and maintenance of 
roads 

_________________________ 
_________________________ 

CAS Annex B IO
Page 6 of 21

Instruments
AAA 

FY0 I Bank study of Bankruptcy of 
SOEs 
FY02 IFC- Bank stLdy, Corporate 
Govemance and Enterpnse Reform in 
China 
FY03 study, Corporate Govemance of 
Enterppnse Groups 
WBI distance training in corporate 
govemance and training of trainers in
executive development program

Other Donors

ADB Study on
Improving Corporate
Govermance and
Financial Performance of
SOEs, enterpnse
accounting system reform
OECD: TA for corporate
govemance

PPIAF/Bank Group study on
Framework for Pnvate Participation in
Infrastructure (FY01)
TA for Public/Pnvate Partnership in
Gas Distnbution (proposed FY04)

Toll Roads Protects 
Ongoing projects and 
Hubei Highway (FY03), 
Shaanxi Ill Highway
(FY04), Henan IV and
Hubei 11 Highways (FY05)

Highway Sector Study (FY01) 
TA for Consolidating Commercialized 
Toll Roads 

Japan ongoingJBIC
toll road construction
projects

Development 
Objectives 

Government 
Strategy/Actions 

Progress Benchmarks 

Bank Group Strategy 

IBRD/IFC/ 
MIGA/GEF

Instruments
AAA 

Other Donors

CAS Annex B1O
Page 7 of 21

Promote competition in highway
management and development
of pnvate contractors
Assist reform of legal and
regulatory framework, develop
policy for pnvate participation
in roads servingthe poor

Railways. Support the 
restructunng process of Ministry 
of Railways 
Process railway loans only as 
benchmarks achieved

Water Transport. Assist 
commereialization of inland 
waterway agencies 

Railwavs. National
Railway P roject (FY02)
and proposed project in
FY04

WaterTransport Ongoing
2 
Inland Waterways
Project
3 d Inland Waterway
Project (FY01)
4 Ih Inland Waterway
Project (FY04)
Ongoing IFC investments
in transportation sector

Railway 
Separate 
regulatory from 
operational 
responsibilities in 
railways 

Separate transport 
operations from 
manufactunng SOEs in

railways

Water Transport. 
Introduce more open 
policies for pnvate 
participation 

Railways Create railway 
operating enterpnses 
Develop tools needed by railway 
to operate in market economy 
Spin off non-rail activities 
Contract out services
Concessioning or franchising of
operating functions

Water Transport Wholly 
pnvately owned, shipping 
operating companies, with 
foreign investors 
Further commercialize SOE 
shipping companies 
Pnvate sector participation in 
terminal operations 
Commercialize waterway 

agencies

I.E. Improving Public 
Sector Management 
and Delivery of 
Services 

1) Improve 
regulatory/incentive 
environment for good 
governance 

Improve 
legaVregulatory 
framework & 
transparency of 
government financial 
management, 
procurement practices 

Improved procurement guide- 
lines and expanded capacity for 
their implementation 

Better coverage, quality and 
timeliness of publicly available 
reports and audit statements 

Help to introduce transparent 
govemment procurement 
procedures and strengthen 
procurement capacity 
Assist in strengthening 
govenmment fiscal management, 
reporting and auditing systems 

Strengthen responsive- 
ness and accountability 
in the delivery of 
public services 

Greater use of performance 
standards and consumer 
feedback in the delivery of 
public services

Support the development of 
public service standards 

Ongoing Projects for 
Fiscal TA, Accounting 
Reform and Economic 
Law Reform 
Ongoing and new projects 
support the use of public 
service standards 

Financial management training 
provided in conjunction with projects 

Tramining of govemment procurement 
specialists and local trainers (WBI), 
Country Procurement Assessment 
Report 
WBI course on Fiscal 
Decentralization (FY02) 

ADB Planning devt of
legaUjudicial system and
further support proposed
ADB-OECD Anti-
Corruption Initiative
AusAID Governance
Program, legal reform
support, Human Rights
TA Program
CIDA Civil Society
Program, Legal Aid
Project, Procuratorat e
Reform Project
EU LegaUJudicial Co-op
Program
France:Judicial Training
GTZ: Devt of economic,
labor and admin laws

Development 
Objectives 

Government 

Strategy/Actions 

Progress Benchmarks 

Bank Group Strategy 

Strengthen legal pro- 
fession/judicial system 

Improving independence and 
capacity of lawyers and judges 

Reduce conruption in 
the public sector 

Decline in instances of reported 
conouption in the public sector 

Support court reforms, 
professionalization of the 
judiciary and training of lawyers 

Assist govt identify factors 
contnbuting to conuption and 
implement structural reforms 
addressing conuption 

Develop official legal 
information system by 
compiling natl /local legislation/
regulations to be made available
to public through intemet

Instruments
AAA 

Support training and workshops for 
govt officials dealing with corruption- 
related issues Support analytical work 
to strengthen anti-corruption efforts, 
building on work in areas like pro- 
curement policy, accounting rules, 
project-related financial mgt policies 

IBRD/IFC/ 
MIGA/GEF
Ongoing Economic Law 
Reform Project 

Ongoing Economic Law 
Refomi Project 

CAS Annex B1O
Page 8 of 21

Other Donors

Japan Focal Area of
Future Support
SIDA TA for legal &
judicial training in
Shanghai, NGO devt
UNDP Legal systan
reform, public admini-
stration reform,
govemance support
US Support for legal and
judicial reform proposed

2) Strengthen
Management of Cities
Promote sound urban 
devt, especially small 
cities/towns, to improve 
rural-urban interface, 
econ efficiency, equity 

Strengthen plans & 
policies to facilitate 
economic/spatial 
restructunng, relax 
household registratlon 
restnctions 

Improve urban 
management and 
planning 

- Separate govt/market 
functions, improve 
regulatory capacity, 
strategic planning, 
investment/services
management
- Improve urban/utility 
financing, increase cost 
recovery, diversify 
urban financing, and 
facilitate PPI 

Acceleration of urban job 
creation and absorption of rural 
surplus labor 

Urban economic restructunng, 
esp tertliary sector devt in large 
cities, diversification of urban 
economies, stronger economic 
ties between localities 

Corporatization of utilities 
Streamlined and focused 
govemment units 

Enhanced technical and 
management sklls and
organization in govemments and 
consulting industry 

Support establishment of policy 
framework to facilitate factor 
mobility, urban economic 
restructunng, and rural-urban 
interface 

Tianjin Urban 
Development and 
Environment 11 (FY03) 
Chongqing Small Cities 
Urbanization & Envir 
(FY05) 
Hunan City - Regional 
Help design and fin ance projects Development (FY04) 
to support development of urban 
Shanghai Urban 
clusters, metropolitan regions, 
Environment APL 11 
and small cities and towns 
(FY05) 

Beijing #10 Water 
Treatment Plant PPI (IFC 
FY03) 

Provide TA to strengthen the 
planning and regulatory 
functions of local govenmments, 
strengthen the finance, operation 
and management of utilities 

Support the above with TA and
project-related action plans

Increased cost recovery for 
transportaton and utilities 

Expand pnvate participation in 
infrastructure and utilities 

Encourage financial 
improvements through TA and 
action plans
Facilitate PPI with TA and
cofinancing

Zhejiang Urban
Development 11 (FY04)

Urban Restructunng (FY03) 
Liaonmng Urban Poverty (FY03) 
Urban Transport (FY03) 
Urban Poverty (FY04) 
City Development Strategy Programs 
(FY03-05) 
Sustainable Urban Development and 
Management Training (FY03-05) 
City networking (FY03 -04) 
Beijing Metro Restructunng and 
Management (FY03 -05) 
Municipal/ Utility Finance (FY04-05)

ADB: TA-Urbanization
Strategy, Urban Devt &
Envir Improvement,
Medium Cities Devt
CIDA Integrated
Municipal Devt Program
Cities Alhance:City
Development Strategy
Program
DFID: City Develop-
ment Strategy Program

Utility Operation/Management 
(Proposed) 
PPI for Water, Wastewater, and Solid 
Waste Management for Shanghai, 
Sichuan, Chongqing (FY03-04) 

EU: Liaoning Integrated
Envir Program
UNDP City Planning,
Mgt /Devt in 21
Century

Improve housing and 
housing market 
mechanisms 

Complete housing reform steps, 
diversify housing industry and 
finance products 

Provide analytical support for 
assessment and development of 
the markets 

Housing maintenaiice and operations
(FY03), Ilousing market development
(Proposed FY05)

Development 
Objectives 

Government 
Strategy/Actions 

Progress Benchmarks 

Bank Group Strategy 

Maximize utilization of 
cultural hentage assets 

Preservation, restoration, and 
use of cultural assets 

Provide technical assistance and 
limited financing for restoration 
and utilization of cultural assets 

IBRD/IFC/ 
MIGA/GEF
Several ongoing projects 
and FY04 Zhejiang Urban 
Environment 11 Project

Instruments
AAA 

Other Donors

Building Codes, Planning and
Cultural Assets Management (FY04)

CAS Annex B IO
Page 9 of 21

3) Strengthen
Performance of Pubhc
Utilities in Delivering
infrastructure Services
Introduce appropriate 
regulatory and corporate 
structures for the energy 
sector 

Improve efficiency in 
provision of urban 
services 

Corporatization/ 
commercialization of power 
companies well advanced 

Assist in designing and 
implementing competitive 
power markets 

State Council approval of 
proposal to develop competitive 
power markets 

Assist in establishing and 
implementing a sound regulatory 
framework 

Decision to separate generation 
from transmission/distnbution 
Oil and gas sector restructured 

Commercially viable pncing of 
water supply and wastewater 
mgmt services 
Corporatization of utilities 

Broadened scope of PPI, with 
local company participation in
utilities

PPI or corporatization in toll 
roads, bus and mass transport 

Energy projects for 
commercialization and 
corporatization of 
power/gas SOEs 
YLxmg Pumped Storage 
Project to restructure 
Jiangsu Wholesale Power 
Market (FY03) 

Work on new waves of reforms 
(FY00) 
TA and PPIAF Study on Oil & Gas 
Regulation (FY02) 
Revised Paper on Power Regulation 
(FY02) 
TA for Power Regulatory Bureaus 
(FY 02) 

Shanghai APL and Tianjin 
Urban Development 11 
(FY03), ongoing Beijing 
Envir 11 

PPIAF for Chongqing water 
supply/wastewater mgmt 
Utility Refonm and Regulation (part of 
N China Water Quality Mgmt Study)

ADB TA to establish
National Electricity and
Regulatory Commission,
Study on Tanffs for Inter-
provincial Power
Transfer (FY02),
proposed Power Tanff
Strategy, all projects
providing urban services
and energy
AusAID Study to
Develop Regional Power
Market in East China
OECD: TA for
regulatory pohcy
development

Highway Sector Strategy Review
(FY02)

Public transport 
components of ongoing 
and new urban transport
projects

Institutional strengthening,
policy reform and road
safety components in
highway projects

National Railway Project
(FY02) and proposed
railway project in FY04

Support improvement of PPI 
framework, including 
regulations 
Help improve mgmt/pncing of 
water supply and sanitation
services

Support pnvate provision of 
public transport systems, 
especially bus services 
Stipport restructunng of Public 
Transport Companies

Advise on legal and regulatory 
framework 
For sustainable road mgmt, 
balance expenditures for 
construction and maintenance of
different road classes
Help fonmulate policy for road
financing, e g, introduction of
road user charges
Support broader approach to
road safety
Support railway reform 

Improve quality of 
highway and railway 
services 

Road sector oriented to market, 
with improved 
govemance/sustainability of 
road maintenance 

Railway restructured and 
reformed 

Instruments
AAA 

1BRD/IFC/ 
MIGA/GEF
Urban Transport Projects 
in Unumqi (FY01), 
Shijiazhuang (FY01),
Wuhan (FY04), Fuzhou
(FY05)

CAS Annex B 10
Page 1O of21

Other Donors

ADB urban transport
projects

Development 
Objectives 

Government 
Strategy/Actions 

Progress Benchmarks 

Bank Group Strategy 

Providing More 
Efficient Urban 
Transport Services & 
Networks 

Create market -based business 
framework for PTCs, including 
removing responsibility for 
redundant labor and housing, 
and developing intemationally 
benclhmarked perfomiance 
targets 
Public Transport Concession 
Law enacted, including 
provisions for pnvate sector 
participation 
Create regulatory agencies, lift 
tanff constraints and have 
guidelines on transport services

Assist in prepanng legal and 
regulatory framework for range 
of models for pnvate 
participation in Public Trans- 
port, including concessions 
Assist devt/promulgation of
performance targets for opera-
tional and financial performance
and advise on how to meet them
Encourage transparent provision
of compensation by govt to
transport enterpnses for public
service obligations

H. Address the Needs of the Poorer and Disadvantaged People and Lagging Regions

II.A. Increasing 
Employment and 
Productivity Off 
and On the Farm 

1) Spur Off-Farm Job
Creation
Build on local 
comparative advantages, 
promote pnvate 
investment, support off- 
fanm job creation 
initiatives, and facilitate 
migration 

Rising investment efficiency and 
diversification of local economic 
activities, increasing number of 
SMEs, growing absorption of 
rural surplus labor in off-farm 
employment, and nsing rates of 
local GDP growth 

2) Enhance Agricultural
Productivity
Further refonm 
agnculture sector from 
focus on gratn production 
to higher-value 
production as signaled by 
market demand 

Strengthen land property 
nghts to stimulate pnvate 
on-farm investment 

Increasing trend in introduction 
of higher-value crops, livestock, 
aquatic products and high 
quality grains and declimng 
trend in area planted to standard 
grain crops 

Formali7ed land use market and 
increased market participation 

Share successful intemat exper- 
ience in regional devt and in 
promoting local investment 
climate with central and sub- 
national Govts, promote devt of 
SMEs, support policy reforms 
creating more flexible markets 
for land, labor and capital 

TA for legislation to promote 
environmentally sustainable 
econ devt in westem region

Support agncultural reform, 
based on market cntena 

Promote policies permitting (a) 
devt of land use market, (b) use 
of land as collateral for credit, 
and (c) incentives for quality 
enhancing land investments by 
farmers 

IFC and WB projects in 
intenor provinces 

Ongoing Economic Law 
Reform Project 

Ongoing projects Jiangxi 
Integrated Agncultural 
Modemization (FY03) 
Gansu & Xinjiang Pastoral 
Development (FY03) 
Heilongjiang Livestock 
Sector (05) 

Multi-sector studies/work-shops on 
development constramints and on how 
to accelerate pro-poor growth in 
lagging regions (FY02-03), Sub- 
national Economuc Reports (FY03-
04), Labor Market Reform study,
Pnvate Sector Devt Strategy in
Lagging Regions (FY03)
TA on better monitonng indicators for
social spending (ASEM), TA for
poverty mapping (ASEM)

Major report on Rural China 
Transition and Development (FY99) 
basis for dialogue 
TA for Refonm of Ministry of 
Agnculture (FY03), Livestock Note 
(FY03), TA on Food Safety (04) 

Land Titling TA (IDF, 02), follow-up 
TA on land management issues 

_________________ 

___________________________________________________________I 

___________________ 

__I__I_Developmeentmes

ADB: TA to develop -
Provincial Development
Strategies for selected
lagging Provtnces

ADB Study of Structural
Adjustment of Agnc
Sector
AusAID: Agnc Devt in
liebei and Inner Mongolia
for the poor, Qinghai
Community Devt
CIDA: Projects in
livestock, drylands
fanming, and grasslands
OECD MOA reform of
agricultural policies, TA on
rural finance
WFP/IFAD Wuling
Mountains Rural

Development 
Objectives 

Government 
Strategy/Actions 

Progress Benchmarks 

Bank Group Strategy 

Increase investments in 
imgation, water saving, 
and flood protection 
infrastructure, and soil 
and water conservation 

Promote policy and 
institutional reform for 
sustainable water 
resources management 

Promote sustainable 
agricultural development 
through expanded 
research program 
Refonm system of 
administrative fees and 
taxes in rural areas 

Encourage pnvate sector 
involvement in sector 

Reforms adopted for water 
management 

Build key reforms into water 
resource projects, support 
strategic studies 

Restructure, revitalize and 
increase investments in research 
and extension, focused on
pnonty areas
Raise agncultural taxes if
appropnate and abolish
administrative fees imposed only
on farmers
Increase proportion of 
agncultural commodities 
marketed by non-State entities 
Increase in agncultural FDI and 
in non-state research and 
extension
Increase proportion of rural 
enterprises and the proportion of 
output under non-collective 
ownership

Gradually remove constraints to 
migration and to urban 
enterpnses employing migrants 
Strengthen O&M of rural credit
cooperatives and enable them to
provide the majonty of financial
services in rural areas

Publicize/enforce intellectual 
property nghts to encourage 
transnational firm participation 
in provision of agncultural 
inputs

Promote pnvate sector
participation in input marketing
and technical advice

Promote conducive policy
framework to transform TVE
ownership (collective) into more
efficient pnvate/corporate
structures
Reduce agncultural population 
and alleviate labor migration
constraints

Instruments
AAA 

CAS Annex BIO
Page 11 of 21

Other Donors

ADB Songhua River
Flood Management

Water Sector Strategy for North 
China, Slhu Integrated Basin Water 
Management Study, TA to establish
training centers for SIDD

Agncultural Research Study (FY01)

ADB TA for legislative
support for water sector

IBRD/IFC/ 
N1IGA/GEF
Ongoing Projects Loess 
Plateau I & 11, 
Heilongjiang ADP, Tanm
Basin 11, Anning Valley,
Guanzhong Imgation,
lmgation Agnculture
Intensification

Agnculture Technology 
(FY04)

Studies done for Laggmg Region
Development Program
TA on Farmer's Associations in
Sichuan (04)

CEM (03)

Development 
Objectives 

Government 
Strategy/Actions 

Progress Benchmarks 

Bank Group Strategy 

Strengthened capacity to address Develop environmental 
environmental issues in Westem 
capabilities in regional planning 
Development 
Promote better management of 
natural resources 

IBRD/IFC/ 
MIGA/GEF
Sustainable Forestry 
Development (FY02) 
GEF for Protected Areas 
Management 

3) Promote 
environmentally 
sustainable 
development in Western 
Regions 

4) Assist poor western 
areas to develop their 
energy resources and 
provide poor provinces 
with increased access to 
energy 

Poor region production and 
consumption of energy 

Increase system efficiency 
(pumped storage) 

Hubei Hydropower in Poor 
Areas (FY02) 

I I.B. Strengthening 
Transport Links 
within and to 
Lagging Regions 

Improve road transport to Major progress in developing 
and within Western areas 
road networks in and to Western 
in accordance with long- 
provinces, measured by number 
term plan covenng 
of km of roads built in vanous 
- devt of 8 East -West and 
road classes, toward GOC 
North-South comdors 
objectives 
totaling about 18,000 km 
to link the intenor region 
to coastal area and to link 
Westem provinces 
toget her, 
- rehabilitation/upgrading 
of technical standards of 
about 180,000 km of road 
network in western area, 
and 
- devt of about 150,000 
km of rural access road to
alleviate poverty in ural
villages

Finance higher class roads in the 
Central and Westem provinces 
at economicallyjustified 
standards 

Assist GOC design road 
development plans for Westen 
provinces, based on economic 
analysis and design cntena to 
ensure efficiency of investments 

Promote development of small 
and medium enterpnses in road 
construction, road transport
services and supporting services
(freight forwarding,
warehousing, etc)

Highway projects in 
Xinjiang, Hubei, Anhui 
(FY03), Shaanxi, Inner 
Mongolia 11 (FY04), 
Henan, Flubei (FY05) 
Ongoing highway projects 
in Gansu, Guangxi, Inner 
Mongolia, and Ningxia 

Inland Waterway IV 
Project (FY04) and 
ongoing waterway projects 

Instruments
AAA 

Environment Sector Report (FY01) 

TA on Strategic Environmental 
Assessment of Great Western 
Development Plan (Norway) 
New Model for Rur-al Devt (Norway) 
Westem China forest/grasslands task 
force - CCICED
Paper on transfer of energy from west 
to east (FY02) 

Highway Sector Strategy Review 
(FY02) 

CAS Annex B10
Page 12 of 21

Other Donors

DFID/IBRD Loess
Plateau 11 Project
GTZ Sustainable Devt
of Mountainous Area of
Jiangxi, Participatory
Approach to Agnculture
and Forestry

JBIC Small
hydro projects in Gansu
& Hubei
ADB Northwest Gnd
Super High Voltage
Transmission Project

ADB Road projects in
six western provinces,
Railway Projects in
Yunnan and other
western provinces,
Studies for Rural Road
Development Strategy
and of Gansu Road Devt
Japan: Ongoing JBIC
Road Construction
Projects in areas like
Gansu, Henan, Hunan,
and Chongqmg

Improve logistical 
services 

Multiplication of internodal 
tenminals operating in inland 
provinces 

Support measures to reduce 
transport component in total 
logistics costs

Transport Services and Logistics
(FY02-03)

Extend railway system to 
underserved areas

National Railway Projects

Development 
Objectives 

Government 
Strategy/Actions 

II.C. Developing 
Human Resources 

1) Improve coverage 
and quality of education 

Progress Benchmarks 

Bank Group Strategy 

IBRD/IFC/ 
MIGA/GEF

Instruments
AAA 

CAS Annex B IO

Page 13 of 21

Other Donors

ADB Study for Reform
in Compulsory Education
Financing, TA for
distance education
AusAID Textbook
Project for Poor and
Mionties
CIDA: Capacity
Strengthening in
EducationMonitonng
DFID Support to WB
Basic Education in
Westem Areas Project,
also Basic Education for
Poor in Gansu, Yunnan,
Tibet, and Distance
Leamung Project for
teachers in westem
provinces
EU: Basic Education for
Poor in Gansu
Japan Focal Area of
Future Support
UNDP Knowledge
Transfer to Strengthen
Westem Provinces

Expand Access to 
Quality Basic Education 

Strengthen 
intergovernmental 
transfer systems for 
Westem Areas 
Ensure high quality 
universal basic education 
(UBE) 

Decentralize education 
planning and budgeting 

Rationalize rural education 
finance system as 
education surcharges are 
replaced by comprehensive 
tax system 
Promote equity in terms 
of educational outcomes 
- increased support for 
poor and minonty
children

Achieve Education for 
All (EFA) and 
Intemational 
Development Goals 
(IDG) in education 

Increased use of ITC for 
distance education 

Reorient Education and 
Training 

Increase inter-govemmental 
earmarked funds for poor 
provinces and counties 

Achieve UBE, with report of 
student participation by 
education level, gender, ethnic 
minonty, county/province and 
income quintile 

Decentralized responsibilities for 
staffing, budgets, setting enroll- 
ment targets, and development 
of Provincial Education 
Strategies and financing formula 

Raising the quality of 
educational inputs and outputs 

Basic Education in 
Westem Areas (FY03) and 
Ongoing Fourth Basic 
Education Project 

Increasing autonomy of 
educational institutions 

Rationalizing the financing of 
the Education System 

Strengthen delivery of pro-poor 
education strategy of basic life 
and lifelong learning skills 

Assist in improving access to
education and ensunng that
access is equitable

Monitor EFA, IDG, and girl's 
enrollment data

Development of GDLN-
supported DLCs in province
sites

Policy notes on Financing for 
Effective Delivery of Basic Social 
Services, and Better Monitonng 
Indicators for Social Spending 

ASEM-funded TA to monitor and 
strengthen financing of Chinese 
education- advice on restructunng 
local finance of education 

Note on Monitonng & Evaluation for
Better Service Delivery Outcomes

Bank financing of DLC centers in
Ningxia and Guizhou, and assistance
in secunng financing for centers in

Realize Education for All 
goals 

Hiigher completion rates in 9- 
year education 

Advise on the possible use of 
intemet and IT in ensunng 
Education for All 

Study on Strategic Goals for Chinese 
Education in the 21 " Century (FY00)
Govemment to build and utilize a
global distance leaming center

AusAID Chongqing
Vocational Education
Reform Project

Development 
Objectives 

Government 
Strategy/Actions 

Progress Benchmarks 

Bank Group Strategy 

Accelerate the 
development of high 
skills, particularly in 
science and technology 

Higher enrollment rates in 
tertiary education and larger 
number of available high-skill 
training programs 
Better quality of curncula and 
teacher training 

IBRD/IFC/ 

_MIGA/GEF

Encourage the strongest parts of Ongoing Higher Education 
the education system, pnmanly 
Reform Project 
in urban and coastal areas, to 
increase their quality, with the 
aums of enhancing equity and 
responding tu needs of a 
competitive economic 
environment 

Strengthen adult literacy, Market-based and demand- 
skill development and 
dnven tramining programs 
improve effectiveness of 
Enactment and enforcement of 
training and retraining 
pnvate education law 

Advise govemment on effective 
literacy instnuments and demand 
dnven train ing and skill 
development approaches 

Ongoing Projects for 
Vocational Education 
Reform and Labor Market 
Development 

CAS Annex B1O
Page 14 of 21

Instruments
AAA 

Other Donors

Japan Ongoing JBIC
Higher Education
Projects in many Western
Provinces, MOFA grant
for voc-ed equipment
OECD: Program of
International Student
Assessments in Shanxi
UNDP Professional
human resources devt &
mgt for westemn region
Study on Skils Development in 
EU: Vocational Training,
Lagging Regions 
Science & Technology
TA for the development of China's 
Programs
Pnvate Education Law (under TCP IV GIZ Vocational
TA Project) 
Training Program,
support for Continuing
Education Centers

Develop supporting 
environment for 
establishment of
pnvate/non-state delivery 
of education services 

2) Protect Health 
Services/improve 
Health Outcomes 

Provide full public 
funding of defined 
essential public health 
functions 

Improve health system's 
efficiency and 
responsiveness to demand 
Promote standards and 
awareness on public 
health issues 

Ensure appropnate 
planning of health 
resources and provision 
of health services at the 
subnational level 

Advice on development of the 
new pnvate education law 

Ongoing IFC support to
pnvate education

TA for pnvate education law 

Ongoing Economic Law
Reform Project

Increased resources channeled to 
health sector 

Help in modermizing public 
health system, particularly to 
meet the growing challenges of 
HIV, TB, NCD, injury and aging 

Improved quality and 
affordability of health services 

Enhancement and better 
enforcement and public 
awareness of standards for 
occupational and road safety and 
public hygiene 

Implementation of "Regional 
Hlealth Planning" framework, as 
endorsed by SDPC 

Support cost-effective 
Ongoing Health VII 
interventions ("best buys") for 
Project for health 
China's public health pnonties 
promotion un 7 cities 
Assist in developing strategies to Ongoing Health IX Project 
build public awareness on issues 
for improved prevention 
of safety and personal health, 
and control of 
including HIV/AIDS prevention HIV/AIDS/STDs 
and control 

Support promising provincial 
and local public health 
initiatives and promote their 
demonstration effect country-
wide

Policy notes on Financing for 
Effective Delivery of Basic So cial 
Services, and Better Monitonng 
Indicators for Social Spending 
WBI course on Sustainable Health 
Sector Funancing and Reforms 
Note on Monitonng & Evaluation for 
Better Service Delivery Outcomes 
Distance learning on Getting Health 
Sector Reform Right 
Review Health V health promotion 
institutionalization 

Study on modernizing public health 
functions as provincial level 
Grant funds as seed money for cities
comminted so public health

ADB/DFID Yunnan
HIV/AIDS Control
AusAID Health
programs is Xinjiang,
HIV/AIDS support to
Health IX Project
DFID HIV/AIDS
Projects
Japan Focal Area of
Future Support Ongoing
MOFA grants for TB
Control in Poor Areas
fectious diseases n 7
western provmices
UNnDP HIV/AIDS
Care/Prevention n Hcnan
UNICEF Mekong
HI V/AIDS Program
includes Yunnan

Development 
Objectives 

Government 
Strategy/Actions 

_____________ 

_______________ 

Progress Benchmarks 

Bank Group Strategy 

Improve health outcomes 
and rational use of health 
resources in underserved 
and poor areas. 

Ensure optimal health of 
workforce and reduce 
adverse effects on health 
of economic development 
initiatives in lagging 
regions 

Improved health outcomes 
among disadvantaged groups 

Increased health care 
affordability, quality and 
effectiveness 

Increased per capita public 
health funding in rural areas 
compared with urban areas 

Increased linkage of provider 
payment to service utilization 

Rationalization of investment 
planning and staffing of health
care facilities

Assist the govemment to meet 
basic health needs of 
disadvantaged population 

IBRD/IFC/ 
MIGA/GEF
TB Contxl (FY02) 
Major Ongoing Projects 
Health VII - Immunization 
and health promotion 
Reform the role of govemment 
Health VIII - Basic Health 
from provider to regulator and 
Services for poor rural 
enabler of health programs, and 
population Covers 
funding of essential public 
improved funding,
health, and services for the poor management, facilities, 
service quality, and 
affordability 
Health IX - for matemal
health and child develop- 
ment in poorest areas of 
China

CAS Annex B1O

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~Page 

15 of 21

Instruments
AAA 

Other Donors

Focused empincal analysis of poverty DFID Support to Health
and health, economic development, 
VIII and TB Control
health and productivity (HD Poverty 
Projects, urban health
funds) 
reform for vulnerable
groups
SIDA: TA and trainig to
improve health services

Five studies of health fund use and 
health accounts (ASEM) 

Study of costs and sources of funds
for health safety net and Insurance
Coverage for the Poor

TA for Improving Access to Health
Care by Rural Poor (Japan TF)

Ensure safe dnnking 
water in rural areas 

Reduced incidence of water- 
bome diseases 

Support to improving rural water 
and sanitation facilities 

Potential Fifth Rural Water 
Supply Project following 
on ongoing Rural Water 
Supply and Sanitation 
Projects 

II.D. Strengthening 
Social Protection 

1) Develop a country. 
wide strategy for social 
protection 

Clanty in national social 
protection pnonties 

Advise govemment on 
reforming social protection 
policies and institutions 

TA for Social Secunty Refonm and 
Social Aspects of Corporate 
Restructunng (ASEM) 

______________________ 

_______________________ 

Establish municipal 
management of all 
aspects of social 
insurance 

Strengthen the 
unemployment insurance 
system 
2) Reform the Pension
System
Continue reforms to 
ensure financial 
sustainability of the 
pension system 

Full municipal management of 
all social insurance in selected 
municipalities 

Help improve the ability of 
municipalities to identify and 
meet the needs of the poor 

Timely payment of living 
allowances to laid-off workers 

Advise govenument on income 
support systems 

Ongoing Labor Market 
Development Project and 
SOE reform projects 

Study of Urban Labor Adjustment 
(FY0 1, FY03) 

Enact national policies and 
implement pilots to provide a 
basic benefit, fully fund 
individual accounts, reduce 
contnbutory non-compliance,
adjust parameters of provincial
pooling and unify benefit

formula

Facilitate policy decision s and 
their implementation on a pilot 
basis and country-wide to
promote financial sustainability

Ongoing Pension Reform 
Project 

Continue reforms to ensure financial
sustainability of the pension system

ADB TA for Rural
Water Supply & Sani
tation
AusAID: Programs in
several provinces
DFID Pilot programs in

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~Yunnan 

& Sichuan

ADB: TA program for
Social Secunty Reform
AusAID Training in
Social Secunty Reform
DFID Pilot
Unemployment Insurance
Project
EU Social Secunty
Reform Program
UNDP Support to trade
unions in assisting laid-
off workers

Development 
Objectives 

Government 
Strategy/Actions 

Progress Benchmarks 

Bank Group Strategy 

Municipalities collect pension 
contnbutions, manage pension 
accounts/disbursements, and 
allow for portability 
Municipal contnbution rates are 
increasingly unified within 
provinces and across similar
types of enterpnses

Support development of analyti- 
cal tools and municipal 
management information 
systems to further strengthen the 
pension system at municipal and
provincial levels

CAS Annex B1O
Page 16 of 21

Instruments
AAA 

Other Donors

IBRD/IFC/ 
MIGA/GEF
Support to Liaoning Pilot
Activity under ongoing
Enterpnse Housing and
Social Secunty Project

Facilitate continued 
unification and increasing 
coverage of pcnsion 
system at the municipal 
and provincial levels 

3) Develop Functioning
Labor MNarkets and
Capacity for Managing
Labor Dislocation
Strengthen market based 
institutions and services 

Improve effectiveness of 
retraining and re- 
employment program 

Support Job Creation & 
SNME Development for 

Disadvantaged Areas & 

Vulnerable Groups 
Empower the vulnerable 
group through skill 
development 

Improve capacity/quality of 
employment services forlob 
seekers 

Policy advice and building 
national and local capacity to 
adapt to change 

Ongoing Labor Market 
Development Project and 
SOE Reform Projects 

CEM (03), Policy Notes on labor 
issues (03-05) 

Evaluate ongoing programs and 
introduce demand-dnven and 
demand-side financing in 
retraining 

Advise govemment on
improving effectiveness and
develop capacity for monitonng
and evaluation

Skills development and 
entrepreneunal training for 
unemployed and laid-off 
workers, especially women 

Provide support and opportunity 
to the vulnerable group for nsk 
coping sk ills and employment 

IFC capacity building and 
funding to SMEs in 
lagging areas via China 
Project Development 
Facility in Chengdu and 
Sichuan Investment Fund 
JSDF Grant - Empowenng 
Poor Women

OECD: TA on enforcing
labor laws, devt of social
protection programs for
laid-off workers

ADB: SME Business
Advisory Support
EU Enterpnse Reform
Project for SME Devt
OECD SME devt
policies piloted in
Chongqing

Improve access to capital, Capital and skills for small 
opportunity for 
business creation 
employment/enterpnrse

Direct support to the target
groups for SME development

II.E. Improving 
Targeted Poverty 
Reduction 
Programs 

Strengtlieii financiiig, 
targeting and 
effectiveness of anti- 
poverty programs in 
lagging areas 

Continued reduction in the 
numbers of those in absolute 
poverty in both rural and urban 
areas 

Advise on anti-poverty strategy 
Poor Rural Communities 
Rural Poverty Study (FYO1), 
and policies and on effectiveness Development (FY04) 
Netherlands TF Study on New 
of poverty reduction programs 
Ongoing poverty reduction Approach to Rural Development in 
projects in the southwest, 
Poverty Counties with Degraded 
Qinba mountains and the 
Lands 
west 
Research on Income Inequality Issues 

ADB NGO Partnerships
for Poverty Reduction
ADB/Dutch: Poverty
Planning Methodology
AusAid Chongqing
Comprehensive Poverty

Reduced leakage of poverty 
funds to non-poor 

Assist in promoting better 
targeting and accountability 
under poverty reduction 
programs 

Bank-funded TA for poverty 
targeting, ASEM-funded TA on 
Poverty Mapping, Better Monitoring 
Indicators for Social Spending 

reduction projects

CIDA Fund for Local
Initiatives, poverty
DFID Poor Rural
Communities Devt
GTZ Poverty Alleviation

Projects

Japan Japan Social
Development Fund
UNDP Poverty Reduction

ProPects

Development 
Objectives 

Government 
Strategy/Actions 

Progress Benchmarks 

Bank Group Strategy 

III. Facilitate an Environmentally Sustainable Development Process

I ________________ 

I 

III.A. Strengthening 
Effectiveness of 
Environmental 
Institutions 

1) Strengthen 
environmental laws, 
administrative 
procedures and 
institutions 

Revised environmental laws, 
regulations, procedures, and 
guidelines 

Advise and help the authonties -
to strengthen the environmental 
legal, regulatory, and 
institutional framework, and 
develop better assessment tools 

IBRD/LFC/ 
I___________________ 
M IG A /G EF

j 

Ongoing Environmental 
Technical Assistance 
Project 

2) Improve Pollution
Monitoring/Enforcing
Clean up major nver 
systems through major 
investment and regulatory 
programs 

Improve urban air quality 
by increasing the use of 
cleaner energy and 
stncter vehicle emission 
control

Increase municipal sewage and 
solid waste collection and 
treatment, and reduce discharge 
of industnal wastewater, to 
iniprove water quality of urban 
streams and major rivers 

Support sustainable expansion 
and improvement of urban 
sewage and solid waste 
management 

Reduce emissions from coal 
buming and vehicles, and hence 
reduce ambient air pollution 

Support measures for conversion 
to clean fuel, energy efficiency, 
and emission control 

Ongoing Environmental 
Technical Assistance 
Project 
All ongoing new urban 
environment projects 

All ongoing energy 
projects All ongoing and
new urban transport
projects

CAS Annex BIO
Page 17 of 21

Instruments
AAA 

Other Donors

CIDA leading multi-
donor support for
CCICED
DFID: Supports
CCICED Environ Econ
Working Group
EU: Environmental Mgt
Co-op Program
GTZ Supports SEPA &
State Council's Intemat'l
Envir Advisory Board
NORAD Major support
to improve envir policy
& envir mgt tramining
SIDA TA for sustainable
devt
UNDP/Sweden Chia
Human Devt Report
2002 Making Green
Devt a Choice

SIDA Envionmental
Monitonng Projects in
Kunming and Qingdao

FY02 Follow up to Environmental 
Sector Review and related ministenal, 
NGO, donor workshop (FY0 1) 
Water Strategy Study (FY0 1) 
Environmental Administration Study 
(FY03), Pollution Cost Model (on- 
going) 

Strategic Environmental Impact 
Assessment development (ongoung) 
WBI/Bank training in environmental 
policy, legislation and 
enviromnentally sound decision- 
making training 
Workshop on Clean Air 

IDF to strengthen envitonmental 
laws/procedures/guidelines 

TA to Strengthen Environmental 
Protection in post -WTO Era

Urban Wastewater Management 
(FY02) 
Update of Urban Envir Services 
Report (FY02-03)
Water Pollution Prevention Initiative
National Strategy Study for Clean
Development Mechanism
RAINS-Asia, Phase I & 11

CAS Annex B IO
Page 18 of 21

IBRD/IFC/ 
NIIGA/GEF

Instruments
AAA 

Other Donors

Pilot on environmental enforcement in
selected municipalities (DEC)

Indoor Air Pollution Study

Development 
Objectives 

Government 
Strategy/Actions 

Progress Benchmarks 

Bank Group Strategy 

Improve enviromnental 
regulations and their 
enforcement 
Increase 
pollution levies to 
provide incentives for 
increased compliance 

Increase use of economic 
incentives and public 
participation for pollution 
control and treatment

Preserve, rehabilitate and 
improve the use of 
hentage 

Increased compliance of 
enterpnses with pollution 
standards, increased collection 
of pollution levies and sewerage 
tariffs 

Increased public awareness of
environmental quality and
improvement programs

Support strengthening of 
pollution monitonng and control 
measures, Provide technical and
policy advice and finance further 
technical support to help
improve regulations and their
enforcement

Improved regulatDns for 
preservation of built assets 

Optimized existing assets 

Help identify and finance high
pnonty rehabilitation or hentage
assets, pnmaniy in partnership
with other donors

III.B. Improving 
Air Quality 

1) Assisting Conversion
to Clean Fuels

Promotion of cleaner 
fuels 

Delivenes of natural gas 
Increased focus on renewable 
energy and energy efficiency in 
the i1'0 FYP 

Increase gas and 
renewable energy 
penetration 

Gas penetration to increase from 
2% in 2000 to 6% by 2010 

Renewable energy share to be 
maintained at the 2000 level or 
increased (more than 5%) 

Program to close small and 
polluting power plants under 
implementation 

Support use of natural gas, clean Ongoing Beijing 
coal technologies, small hydro, 
Environment 11 
renewable energy sources and 
WB/GEF Renewable 
energy conservation 
Energy Scale-up Program 
Support for town gas conversion 
(FY04) and Ongoing 
through urban environment 
Renewable Energy Project 
improvement projects 
Ongoing Sichuan Gas 
Project 
Integrated Coal 
Gasification (FY04)
Passive Solar Energy for
Health Climcs (GEF)
GEF Heating Reform and
Energy Efficiency in
Buildings (FY05)
Renewable Energy 
Development Project 
(restnuctured in 2001 with 
focus on PV markets in 
northwestem provinces) 

Judicious support for pnonty 
investments which have low 
prospects to attract pnvate 
financing in conjunction with 
increased penetration of gas and 
renewable energy 

Reduce adverse health effects of 
domestic indoor airpollution 
(IAP) 

TA on Clean Coal Technologies 

Clean Coal Technology Study (2'd 
phase with ESMAP) 

National Strategy Study on Clean 
Development Mechanism 

Vanous Donors: ADB,
CIDA, UNDP/UNF,
World Bank/GTZ support
Clean Development
Mechanism Initiative
ADB Wind Power Devt
Project, Gansu Clean
Energy Devt, Coal Bed
Methane Devt

EU: Energy & Environ-
ment Program for renew-
able energy & natural gas
CTZ Wind/Solar Energy
in Inner Mongolia,
Reduction of Industnal
C02 Emissions

Improve efficiency of 
energy use 

Increase in energy efficiency, 
measured in project perfonmance 
indicators 

Increased financially viable 
investments thru market -based 
mechanisms 

GEF Energy ConservatDn 
11 (FY03) 
GEF Heat Reform and
Building Efficiency

TA/studies in parallel with investment 
projects 

SIDA: Distnct Heating
Projects

Development 
Objectives 

Government 
Strategy/Actions 

Progress Benchmarks 

Bank Group Strategy 

IBRD/IFC/ 
MIGA/GEF

Instruments
AAA 

CAS Annex B1O
Page 19 of 21

Other Donors

2) Providing Efficient
Energy Delivery

Increase efficiency on the 
supply and demand sides 

Energy Conservation Law 
enacted and being implemented 

Tanff gradually increased to 
cover costs of supply 

Trends mn conversion rates 
Issuance of new standards 
New standards on coal quahty 

Increased water use efficiency 

Increase in imgated area 
covered by self-financing water 
enterpnses 

Reduction in damages and 
deaths caused by floods 

Conversion of coal-fired 
industnal fumaces to 
larger, more efficient 
units 
Tighten national
standards on fuels, engine
designs and exhaust
emissions
Tighten standards on coal
quality
- Water conservation 
technologies and 
measures 
- Rational water pncing 
mechanism 
- Imgation and drainage 
system rehabilitation to 
increase delivery 
effliciency, more efficient 
imgation technologies 
and water saving 
practices 
- Improved flood control 
through dam and dike 
constnuction 
- Develop water-efficient 
industnes 
- Promote reuse of water 
- Promote integrated nver 
basin management 
- Improved water 
distnbution systems 

III.C. Managing 
Water Resources 

Promote energy efficiency and 
Jiangsu Wholesale Power 
optimal use of existing capacity Market (in Yixing Pumped 
Storage Project, FY03) 
GEF Energy Conservation 
11 (FY03) 
GEF Heating Reform and 
Energy Efficiency in 
Buildings (FY05) 
GEF Passive Solar for 
Rural Clinics (FY02)
GEF Energy Conservation
II (FY03) and ongoing
GEF/WB Energy
Conservation Project

PPIAF Study On Pnvate Sector 
Participation in Gas Distnbution 
(FY2002) 

Study on Power Pncing (FY 2002) 

TA for energy efficiency in the water 
sector (FY 2002) 

DFID/IBRD/GEF:
Energy Efficiency
EU: Energy & Environ-
ment Program for energy
efficiency
GTZ: TA for power
station technology,
energy mgt , rehab of
hydro plants

- Investments in water saving 

Water Strategy Study (FY01) 

Urban Wastewater Management 
(FY02) 

- Comprehensive flood 
prevention and control program 

- Support for improved water 
pricing 
- lmgation and drainage rehab 
and self-financing water 
enterpnses 

Water Conservation 
Project (FY01 ) 
Ongoing Wanjiazhai Water Environmental Sector Study (FY01) 
Transfer Project 
All urban/rural water 
projects 
Ongoing imgation projects 
for Guanzhong (Shaanxi 
Province), Anning Valley 
(Sichuan), Tanm Basin, 
IAIL 11 
Ongoing Yangtze Dike 
Strengthemng Project 
Upper Yangtze Watershed 
Rehabilitation (05), IAIL 
III (05) 
Hai Basin Management 
-Studies and pilot investments in GEF (04) 
wastewater reuse 
Wastewater reuse 
-Investments in nver basin 
component in Tianjin
mgmt 
Urban 11 (FY03)
Lake Tai Pollution
Control, Pearl River Delta
Environment (FY04),
Sichuan Urban Devt 11
(FY05)

ADB urban environment
projects and TA for
Legislative Support for
Water
Sector/Conservancy
AusAID Yangtze River
Flood Control Project
DFID Water Equity and
Yunnan Environmental
Devt Projects
EU Water Resources
Conservation Program
Japan: Many ongoing
JBIC projects, e g,
Water Saving lmgation
in Gansu, model city
projects for provinces/
municipalities throughout
China

Development 
Objectives 

Government 
Strategy/Actions 

Progress Benchmarks 

Bank Group Strategy 

Water transfer from 
Yangtze basin to 
Northem China and
development of

remaining sustainable

water supplies in North

Improve water quality 
through expanded urban 
sewage treatment, 
regulation, and 
strengthened 
management of water 
resources over nver basin 

Ill.D. Managing 
Land and Natural 
Resources 

Promote soil andwater 
conservation tn Yellow, 
Yangtze, and Pearl River 
watersheds 

Banned commercial 
logging of natural forests 
in upper reaches of 
Yangtze and Yellow 
Rivers and promote 
sustainable protection and 
management of 
remaining natural forests 
Convert steep agriculture 
land back to forest and 
grasslands 
Strengthen management 
of biodiversit y and nature 
reserves 

Promote large-scale 
reforestation for 
ecological protection and 
to meet increasing 
demands for wood 
Prevent further land 
degradation 

Expand urban sewage treatment 
to 45% 

Help improve planning, design, 
construction, and operation of 
environmental infrastructure 

Clean up three most polluted 
nvers and three lakes, and Bohai Help finance key or model 
bay 
investments 

Establish working models for 
wastewater reuse 

Increase in erosion control and 
decrease in desertification 

Decline in loss of natural forests 

Increase in forest and grassland 
areas in mountainous areas 

Active management on-the- 
ground 

Introduction of integrated 
watershed planmung and 
management, Analysis of 
conflicting NRM policies 

Analysis of the impacts of the 
logging ban on local 
governments, communities, and 
enterpnses, and promotion of 
sustainable management and 
protection of remaining natural 
forests 

Analysis of the impacts of the 
program on local communities 
and enterpnses 
Investment in umproving 
technical and managenal 
capacity 

Increase mn commercial forest 
areas and protection forest cover 
along cntical watersheds 

Investments in commercial tree 
plantations 

Decrease in rate of 
encroachment of deserts and 
land degradation 

Analytical inputs into ongoing 
efforts 

IBRD/IFC/ 
MIGA/GEF
Ongoing Wanjiazhai Water
Transfer Project

Loess Plateau Watershed 
Rehabilitation Projects I & 
11 (ongoing) 
Upper Yangtze Watershed 
Rehabilitation (FY05) 

WB/GEF/EU Sustainable 
Forestry Development 
Project (FY02) 

Ongoing Nature Reserves 
Management Project 
(WB/GEF) 
Lake Dianchi (GEF-MSP) 
WB/GEF/EU Sustainable 
Forestry Development 
Project (FY02) and 
ongoing Nature Reserves 
Management Project 
IBRD/GEF
Gansu/Xinjiang Pastoral
Development (FY03)

CAS Annex B IO
Page 20 of 21

Instruments
AAA 

Other Donors

North China Water Quality 
Management (FY03 -5) 

Urban Environmental Management 
(FY04-05) 

Participation in Chuna Environment 
Council's task force on 
forest/grasslands 

Participation in the National Working 
Group on forest certification 

Grassland Note (03) 
Grassland/Sheep management study 

Participate m GoC/ADB/GEF 
partnership on dryland management 

Study on New Rural Development 
Model (Norway TF) 

Kf%W: Training program
for wastewater treatment
& plant operations,
Sewage Treatment
Projects
SIDA Sewage Treatment
Projects, Flood Control
TA, small envir projects
throughout China
ADB TA for
Implementing Nat'l
Guidelines for Water/Soil
Conservation, Western
Region Soii Erosion

Rehab

Dryland Farming in
Northem Region Project
AusAID Qinghai Erosion
Control and Forest Rehab
Projects, Chongqing water
supply/sanitation for poor
AusAid/UNDP Wetlands
Resource Management
CIDA Biodiversity
Protection/Sustainable
Agric in Inner Mongolia
EU Natural Forest Mgt
Project, Bliodiversity
Protection Program
GTZ Pesticide Residue
KfWV: Rural smallholder
afforestation programs
Japan. Ongoing JBIC
forestry projects, MOFA
grants for afforestation

Improve solid waste 
management 

Shanghai Environment APL (FY03,
FY05)

Development 
Objectives 

Government 
Strategy/Actions 

Progress Benchmarks 

Bank Group Strategy 

III.E. Protecting 
Global 
Environmental 
Commons 

Participate in Multilateral 
Fund for the Montreal 
Protocol (MFMP) 

Calibrated Reduction of ODS 
consumption and production in 
China by 2010 

Participate in Convention 
on Biological Diversity, 
Convention on Climate 
Change, Convention on 
Combating 
Desertification 

Improved conservation of 
biodiversity of global 
significance, reduced 
greenhouse gases, desertification 
and land degradation 

Support ODS phase-out in 
wrld's largest remaining 
producer/consumer while 
ensunng no accompanying loss 
of industnal capacity 

Support access to GEF resources 

IBRD/IFC/ 
MIGA/GEF
ODS-111 and ODS-IV 

Instruments
AAA 

Ongoing support to MOF to develop 
capacity to administer the GEF 

Ongoing GEF projects 
Nature Reserves Mgt, 
Sichuan Gas, Efficient 
Industnal Boilers, Energy 
Conservation, Beijing 
Envir 11, Renewable 
Energy Devt, Energy 
Efficient Rural Health 
Clinics, Sustainable Forest 
Development, Energy 
Conservation 11 
Proposed GEF projects 
Hai River Basin, 
Renewable Energy Scale- 
Up, Integrated Coal 
Gasification Combined 
Cycle, Heating Reform &
Building Energy
Efficiency, Guizhou
Medicinal Plants

National Strategy Study on
Clean Development
Mechanism

Gansu and Xinjiang
Pastoral Development
Project - GEF (FY03)

CAS Annex B1O
Page 21 of 21

Other Donors

ADB/GEF Shanxi
Greenhouse Gas
Abatement Project,
Integrated Ecosystem
Management, Program
for Land Degradation
AusAIDIUNDP/GEF:
Capacity building for
rapid commercialization
of renewable energy
DFILD/GEF Energy
Efficiency 11
GEF/PRC: Partnership
on land degradation in
dryland ecosystems
GIZ Substitution of
CFC in Refngeration
SIDA Greenhouse Gas
Emission Reduction
Program
UNDP/GEF Wetlands
biodiversity conservation

Various Donors: ADB,
CIDA, UNDP/UNF,
World Bank/GTZ support
Clean Development
Mechanism Initiative

I 

I

Support CDM process 

Participate in Clean 
Development Mechanism 
(CDM) under Kyoto 
Protocol 

Participate in 
Intemational Convention 
on Persistent Organic 
Pollutants (POPs) 

Phase out of POPs 

Capacity building and analytical 
work 

Training on POPs program
Case studies on temiite control and
PCB disposal

ADB - Asian Development Bank, AusAID- Australian Govemment Overseas Aid Program, ASEM -Asia-Europe Meeting Trust Fund, CIDA- Canadian Intemational Development Agency, DFID- Department for Intemational
Development (UK), EU - European Unmon, GTZ- Gesellschaft fur Technische Zusammenarbeit (Germany), ILO- Intemational Labor Organization, IMF- Intemational Monetary Fund, JBIC - Japan Bank for Intemational
Cooperatio n, KfW - Kreditanstalt fur Wiederaufbau (Germany), NORAD - Norwegian Agency for Development Cooperation, OECD Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, SIDA - Swedish Intemational
Development Cooperation Agency, UNDP- United Nations Development Programme

CAS Annex C
Page 1 of 4

China-Bank Consultations: A Summary of Findings

Over the past five years, China and the Bank have exchanged views during five formal
consultation exercises that considered various aspects of our work. These included: (a) a 1997
Cost Effectiveness Review that sought client opinions on how the Bank might improve its
services and reduce transaction costs for borrowers and the Bank; (b) a consultation in 2000 with
China and other Middle-Income Countries on their perspective of the Bank's role and operations
and how the Bank could serve them better; (c) a Cost of Doing Business Assessment in 2001
focused on fiduciary and safeguard policies; (d) a meeting with selected project managers from
various ministries with the Bank's Regional Vice-President to get feedback on the Bank's
activities; and (e) a major consultation exercise carred out in June-July 2002 in conjunction with
preparation of a Country Assistance Evaluation (CAE). The views shared during those
consultations are summarized below.

Cost Effectiveness Review. This consultation, carried out to make the Bank a more
results-onented and cost-effective institution, sought the views of China's officials (and those of
selected other borrowing countries) on the overall Bank-borrower relationship, areas of strength
in the Bank's services to the client and areas where the client would like to see changes and
improvements. That consultation indicated that China was generally satisfied with the Bank's
work but had a number of concerns.

Issues Addressed.
* Borrowers sought faster and better support to core services and other aspects ofproject
preparation and implementation, which would be facilitated by the devolution of decision-
making authority to the field and expansion of the Bank's office in Beijing. Shortly
thereafter, the Chma Department was decentralized, and the Beijing office now has a
substantial contingent of procurement, disbursement and sectoral staff.
* Borrowers sought a new approach to non-lending services, with policy advice delivered with
shorter, more quickly prepared reports, prepared by teams of Bank and Chinese specialists.
* Borrowers sought new and more concessionalfinancial proclucts to replace loss of IDA (as
of July 1999), so the Bank worked with DFID to develop a blending mechanism to reduce
the cost of IBRD loans while enhancing project quality.
* Borrowers asked the Bank to delegate more responsibility to thefield where staff are more
familiar with local conditions. Now, field staff are managing a much larger share of lending
and non- lending operations.

Other Concerns of Some Borrowers.
* That the Bank's institutional policy objectives increase project complexity. The Bank tries to
work with clients receptive to policy reform or assists clients to understand the rationale and
benefits of reforms.
* That the Bank's project preparation process is lengthy and costly. Since the Bank's
safeguard policies often trigger such concerns, the Bank often mobilizes grant assistance and
encourages clients to prepare required environmental and social protection assessments as
soon as possible
* That use of expensive international consultants should be judged more rigorously against the
quality of their services. The Bank tries to be judicious in determining when such expertise

CAS Annex C
Page 2 of 4

is critical and will bring important benefits to clients. Client appreciation of such expertise
varies significantly.
* That Bank procurement guidelines, particularly ICB, cause complications and delays and
inefficiencies Many clients, however, also appreciate the benefits of international
procurement practices, which have lowered costs and reduced distortions.

Consultations in 2000 and 2001. Three different types of consultations with
government were carried out in 2001/02. One sought China's views from the perspective of a
lower- middle- income country, another looked at the cost of doing business with the Bank, and
the third, led by the Bank's Regional management, solicited the views of government project
managers in various sectors and provmces. In the course of these exchanges, China praised the
improvement in Bank services as a result of decentralization and, in 2002, expressed
appreciation for the concessional lending allowed via the Bank-DFID blend. China stressed the
importance for increased lending for infrastructure projects to develop its inland areas 
It also
looked to the Bank for a more flexible lending menu, and in the past few years the Bank has
introduced new lending products including LILs and APLs. However, China also noted the
financial costs of Bank loans, which were seen as increasingly uncompetitive with other
financing sources.

While China endorsed the Bank's general policies and goals, it noted that their
application was sometimes problematic, and suggested developing borrower capacity in these
areas. The Bank therefore provides significant training to Borrowers in fiduciary and safeguard
areas. In response to a request to hannonize China's and the Bank's safeguard policies,
differences in the respective polices were identified and practical solutions to the differences are
being discussed. Guidelines for applying various Bank safeguard requirements were also
published. In addition, some concerns voiced earlier were repeated concerning cumbersome
procurement procedure requirements, excessive loan conditionality, the length and cost of the
Bank's project preparation procedures; and the complexity and cost of safeguards policies -
despite Bank efforts to the contrary.

Country Assistance Evaluation Consultation in June/July 2002. In conjunction with
preparation of a Country Assistance Evaluation by OED, a series of consultation workshops were
held in Beijing, Liaoning and Zhejiang Provinces on the coast, and Ningxia Hui Autonomous
Region in western China. Attending the workshops and sharing their views were representatives
of all stakeholder groups - key govermnent ministnes, officials from these and many other
provinces, project staff gathered from throughout China, and leaders of civil society involved in
economic reform, gender equality, poverty reduction, environment, national minorities, rural
development, health, and non-profit agencies. The results of those exchanges are described
below.

Consultation with Representatives of Civil Society

* The Bank's major contribition to China is the transfer of knowledge. The Bank has

introduced new ideas, supported refonns and helped to change management systems.
* The Bank's support to basic and higher education and the development of science and

technology contributed significantly to China's development.

CAS Annex C
Page 3 of 4

* 

Inclusion of social assessments in Bank projects is helpful and has improved project design
and beneficiary participation.
* The Bank used to work only with the government, but in recent years provided support to
infonnation sharing and capacity building of China's NGOs. Since NGOs play a
complementary role to the government and are more innovative, the Bank should expand its
support for development of civil society/NGOs in China, particularly NGOs in western
provinces and those dealing with issues such as sustainable development, laid-off workers,
urban poverty, AIDS, etc.

Consultations with Central Ministries and Agencies, Provincial Government
Officials, and Project Management Offices

They Value the Bank's Contributions and Procedures

* The major benefit is the Bank's advice on policy and management, technology transfer,
human resources development, and introduction of knowledge and innovation.
* Bank projects also introduced international best practice to China, such as competitive
bidding procedures ensuring project quality and cost savings, a project supervisory system
promoting successful implementation, use of international consultants, and helpful
approaches to enviromnental and resettlement assessment. These all supported changes and
reforms in the way institutions function As a result, Bank-assisted projects have higher
quality and better management than domestic projects.
* The Bank's project preparation cycle, procurement procedures and the stpervision system
improve the chances for success. All civil works projects in some provinces have adopted
the Bank's project management procedures as standard practice
* The Bank's environmental assessment and resettlement policies take a new, thoughtful
approach to these issues.
* Competitive bidding, whether mternational or national, has reduced mvestment costs to
levels much below original budgets. Bank procurement procedures maybe less flexible than
for some other donors but they also provide more bene fits.
* Bank expertise and the quality of its non- lending services are viewed as high quality.
* Bank assistance is particularly valued for health, water resources management, forestry,
environmental protection, poverty reduction, and infrastructure. Future assistance was
requested in some of these areas and for post-WTO training, rural employment and cross-
sectoral studies,
* The Bank's decentralization to Beijing facilitated efficient comrmunications, timely Bank
responses, and faster loan disbursement.

But Some See Room for Improvement, Sometimes in Areas Valued by Others

* Project Preparation Procedures. The preparation and approval process for Bank-assisted
projects should be further streamlined. Current procedures require borrowers to carry out
duplicate tasks and should be harmonized with local approaches.
* Project Design - projects sometimes have components that the Borrower does not want and
subsequently has difficulties in implementing.

CAS Annex C
Page 4 of 4

* Procurement procedures should be more flexible. For example, the Bank requires award of
contracts to the lowest responsive bidder, which in China might encourage bidders to offer
very low pnces to get contracts, with the result that prices must be increased later or quality
suffers.
* The Bank should reduce the time for reviewing bidding documents by setting a deadline. In
the case of procuring computers, borrower problems with the bidding and review process can
cause delays and result in the purchase of already obsolete equipment
* Use of International Consultants for Project Supervision and TA Components. The cost
and benefits of foreign technical assistance were queried, particularly for consultants
unfamiliar with China. Borrowers favor use of local experts, given the experience they have
accumulated over the past decades.
* Chinese collaboration on studies is particularly important to ensure quality and relevance.
* Safeguard Requirements are often seen as excessive and complicated
* Bank Lending Terms. Representatives of poor western provinces sought concessional
financing for projects, particularly those for rural development.
* Bank lending terms are not attractive. The front-end fee is too high and a major burden. If
indirect costs such as for international consultants and training are included, the costs of
Bank loans are higher than financmg from other sources.
* Counterpart funding requirements may be too high for poorer provinces.
* Loan commitment and front-end fees should be rebated when project components are
adjusted and part of the loan is cancelled.
* Supervision. While missions are effective and useful, the timing (twice a year) may be too
frequent and the length of missions too long. The number of supervision missions should be
decided flexibly on the basis of implementation performance, so as to lower costs for both
the Bank and the Borrower.
* Geographical Focus. While the shift in the Bank strategy to the western provinces is
correct, the eastern provinces still need new, innovative ideas, institutional improvements and
lessons from the Bank's experience which come from continued lending.

CAS Annex D
Page 1 of 10

The Bank Group Assistance Program

China is in the midst oftwo major transitions - from a rural, agricultural society to an
urban and industrial power, and from a centrally planned economy to one that is more globally
integrated and market-based. While the results have been impressive, the process is far from
complete, and important aspects of the reform agenda have not been fully addressed. These
overarching trends - the two historic transitions and growing concerns about the challenges to
China's growth - are at the heart of the Tenth Five-Year Plan and also form the basis for the
three themes of the Bank's operational strategy for China. That strategy is designed to:

* 

Improve the business environment and help accelerate China's transition to a market

economy;

* Address the needs of the poorer and disadvantaged people and regions; and

* Facilitate a more environmentally sustainable development process.

A. 

Improving the Business Environment and
Developing the Market Economy

From virtually nothing, the private industrial sector now accounts for about a third of
China's industrial and commercial activities, although among the larger enterprises some form of
mixed private/public ownership is often the case. Although the current operating environment
still leavily favors SOEs, whether m providing access to markets or to finance, government
policy has increasingly been directed at advancing the interests of the private sector. Improving
the domestic business environment and building institutions to release the full productive forces
of a well-functioning, knowledge-based market economy will require stable macroeconomic
management and public finance, enterprises - increasingly in the private sector - and banks that
are competitive in a global environment, as well as an efficient public sector which is a
facilitator, regulator and server of the market rather than its controller.

The Bank Group's work on this strategic theme focuses on five - often overlapping -
issues: macroeconomic and public expenditure imnagement; challenges posed by China's
further integration with the global economy as exemplified by WTO membership; refonn of both
the corporate and financial sectors; and strengthening public sector management. Since these
issues are often not amenable to IBRD investment lending, our involvement will be largely
through an array of AAA activities including technical assistance supported by trust funds and
direct financial support to private enterprises/banks provided by IFC.

Macroeconoitic Maniagemenet. Macroeconomic advice will continue to be largely client
driven, as the Bank Group responds to China's requests for assistance on specific topics of
immediate concern. However, more in-depth and longer-gestating analytical work will also be
done in areas of particular importance. For example, the Country Economic Memorandum now
being prepared investigates the effects of China's accession to the WTO on its economic
structure, regional growth and poverty reduction. National and sub-national fiscal issues,
considered in a recent Provincial Expenditure Review, will continue to ment attention in view of

CAS Annex D
Page 2 of 10

the need for improvements in inter-governmental fiscal relations, which currently inadvertently
contribute to inequality and create impediments to poverty reduction.

Integration withi tde Global Econony. China's WTO accession agreement will open
most segments of its economy to foreign competition, and will have profound effects on resource
allocation and the efficiency of resource use. Governing rules and institutions, agnculture,
services, and some manufacturing sectors are likely to experience rapid and wrenching changes,
although the net effect of Chma's WTO accession is expected to be strongly positive for
economic welfare both in the country and in the rest of the world.

The Bank Group's non-lending program is designed to help the authorities cope with this
challenge. This will be achieved partly through strategic analysis of the links between increased
globalization, trade policy and poverty, reform of the financial, enterprise, and social protection
sectors, commercialization and privatization of sectors that have been dominated by public sector
monopolies, modermization of economic laws and macroeconomic management systems and
institutions, and steps to improve the investment climate. This will be reinforced by capacity
building and technical assistance, including those for the lagging regions.

Illustrative of the Bank's support for China's WTO transition and its emergence as a
regional and global player is our collaboration with the Ministry of Finance in co-chairing the
three-year APEC Finance and Development Program (AFDP). The AFDP - to improve financial
intermediation for Regional economic growth, stability and development - combines traming
workshops, research, and an annual forum to disseminate research findings. In addition, a
dialogue has been initiated recently with the government to explore technical assistance and
trainig possibilities to strengthen the anti-money laundering and combatmg the financing of
terrorism.

Financial Sector Reforot. The Bank Group's involvement m the financial sector
buttresses both market development and integration with the global economy. The challenges
inherent in transforming China's financial system to meet the needs of the country's increasingly
market-oriented economy and to take advantage of the entry of foreign financial services
providers under WTO are formidable. The Bank has therefore made a substantial multi-year
commitment to support tl- authorities with a wide-ranging program of strategic and policy
advice, studies, workshops and support for TA programs. The overall framework includes
support to strengthen the policy environment and infrastructure that would help develop more
efficient financial intermediaries and capital market. Its ultimate objective is to create more
effective market-based channels to link savers/lenders with borrowers/users Given the
complexities and magnitude of the challenges, the Bank is annually targeting specific issues
within this broader framework - issues seen as critical and receiving high- level attention. This
would include anti- money laundering and combating the financing of terrorism (AML/CFT) for
which a dialogue has been initiated recently. The program has five pillars:

* Overallfinancial sector reform through work outlining the broader dimensions of financial
sector development, with the objective of assisting the Govenmment to reach a consensus on a
comprehensive sector strategy;

CAS Annex D
Page 3 of 10

* Banking System Restructuring, covering various aspects of banking system reform, including
addressing policy issues that would support the recapitalization and restructuring of the four
state-owned commercial banks that account for two thirds of total bank assets and half of all
financial assets. This would include assistance to smooth the process of bad debt resolution
in tandem with corporate restructuring;

* Capital Market Development to assist China in establishing a more balanced financial system
to meet its increasingly sophisticated financial services needs. This effort includes support
for strengthening the government bond market to facilitate domestic borrowing on
sustainable termns, development of institutional investor, adoption of market-based
infrastructure finance mechanisms, and improvement in regulation and supervision of the
securities industry. IFC will support private financial institutions - such as the emerging
private banks, life insurance companies, credit rating agencies, and housing finance
institutions - to broaden and deepen the sector;

* Finance for Small Finns, which now face limited access to credit and other financial services
but are potentially important engmes of innovation, job creation and growth. This is a
priority for IFC as exemplified by the newly established facility in Sichuan supporting
development of small and medium enterprises (SMEs); and

* Rural Finance System Reform to address problems like the high share of non-perfonning
loans and poor governance, which restrict rural entrepreneurs' (both farmers' and other rural
residents') access to financial services and thereby present a major obstacle to higher rural
growth. The Bank will assist China with these problems through studies and technical
assistance. The feasibility of channelng project funds through rural financial institutions
will also be explored.

Private Sector Development antd Enterprise Reform. Similarly cross-cuttmg is the Bank
Group's involvement to reform state-owned enterprises and nurture emerging private companies,
all in the context of greater competition from abroad and a need to develop China's inland
provinces. The Government is subjecting SOEs to greater market discipline and China's
commitments under the WTO will materially expand the scope of private sector activities and
level the playing field. However, growth in the pnvate sector is constrained by the lack of fully
developed legal, regulatory and judicial systems for transparent commercial dealings And in
many sectors, the existence of SOEs discourages private entry, restricts competition and reduces
the volume of debt and equity financing available to other investors. The Bank Group and IFC
would support development of a domestic private sector by.

* 

Improving the business environment by building the legal and institutional foundations for a
market economy;

* Supporting SOE reforms and ownership transformation in order to improve the
competitiveness of domestic firms and expand the scope for private sector activities; and

* Promotingprivate sector participation in infrastructure in order to supplement state
investment in infrastructure services required by the private sector.

CAS Annex D
Page 4 of 10

Policy advice and technical assistance will be provided in all three areas. This would
include continuation of support for developing more effective institutional arrangements for
exercising state ownership rights in large enterprise groups; protecting public shareholders
against expropriation by state-owned parent companies; and helping asset management
compames manage their holdings in converted corporate equity more effectively. Such issue-
specific assistance may well lead to other opportunities to help the Government develop or
implement reforms in the areas of insolvency, corporations, securities, mergers and acquisitions
and competition law. Other planned efforts include IFC support to Asset Management
Compames in structuring international auctions of non-perfonning loans, and a major Bank-IFC
study of Private Participation in Infrastructure in China. In the urban and transport sectors,
World Bank loans will be used to leverage policy and regulatory reforms and expenment with
greater private sector participation, building on the past securitization of Bank- financed
expressways (see Box 1). IFC investments will focus on developing model transactions that
have demonstration effects, are located in the interior provinces and support introduction of
international environmental technology to China. A fuller discussion of the Bank Group-IFC
strategy for corporate sector development in China is given in Annex F.

Box 1: Leveraging Private Capital from Existing Toll Roads in China

During the 1990s, China's demand for capital to finance its highway program triggered an estimated
US$12 billion in new highway capital from private sources, without sovereign guarantees This represented about
10 percent of total investment in the road sector Private capital flows peaked in 1996-97 then steeply dropped in
the wake of the Asian financial crisis However, private investors are showing renewed interest in road projects

Investment came in the form of equity from Hong Kong and the domestic markets as well as creative use
of existing toll highways and bridges, including World Bank-funded assets, to leverage new private finance
During the 1990s, 20 such asset securitization transactions were completed with the issuance of shares to foreign
or domestic investors Total capital raised from these listings exceeds US$2 billion The World Bank participated
in five separate transactions which helped pioneer this approach, in which operating road and bridge assets that it
had earlier financed were injected into the balance sheets of newly-listed provincial expressway development
companies for share listings on the Hong Kong and Shenzhen stock exchanges The procecds were used to build
or expand additional expressways in the province The Bank's reputation and assets have contributed greatly to
the initial creditworthiness of the listed development companies, and very likely given an added level of comfort
to investors as well

Governance and Public Sector Maniagement. The Government places a high priority on
improving public sector management in the broadest terms, including, inter alia, supporting
good governance, strengthening municipal management, improving service delivery by public
utilities and reducing fraud and corruption. Bank Group support of such efforts has been in areas
in which the Bank has a comparative advantage, and this approach would continue during the
CAS period. Government-Bank collaboration would center on completion and revision of
economic laws to confonn with WTO standards, judicial reformn and institutional strengthening
to help in promoting the rule of law (see Box 2), sub-national fiscal refonn - particularly to
eliminate off-budget revenues that are subject to malfeasance, training of public sector staff in
international approaches to government administration, and promotion of transparency in
financial management and procurement. The Bank would also continue to share with local
governments its expertise in countering corruption, and to support activities like the Anti-
Corruption Workshop held at the Tsinghua University in April 2002, which the Bank co-
sponsored

CAS Annex D
Page 5 of 10

Box 2: Legal and Judicial Reform in China and Bank Assistance
Over the last decade, China has been creating a framework of laws, regulations and related
institutions necessary for the transition to a market economy Some legislation enacted earlier in the
reforrm period are now being revised to reflect experience (e g, laws on companies, lawyers and
bankruptcy) and to comply with WTO requirements
Difficulties in implementing the new legal framework have underlined the need for institutional
reformns, e g, the incrcased role of the court system in resolving disputes, and the conversion of the legal
profession from government offices to private practitioners Judicial reforn was recognized at the 1 5th
Party Congress in 1997 Despite certain progress, major reforms are still needed to address such daunting
problems as local protectionism, weak enforcement ofjudgments and interference withjudicial
independence, and these reforms will require deeper structural reforms outside the court system
The Bank has directly supported the gradual devclopment of China's national "economic" laws
and regulations and strengthening of key lcgal institutions through an ongoing technical assistance
project, the Economic Law Reform Project (ELRP), which has supported the drafting of about 50 laws
and regulations, training at 4 legal educational institutions, as well as institutional development at the
National Peoples Congress, the State Council, the Ministry of Justice, and now the Supreme Court
Bank support during the CAS period would prinimrily focus on legislative drafting of
strategically important laws and regulations, developing China Legislative Information Network Systems
(CLINS) that will give the government and the public electronic access to Chinese local and national
legislation and regulations, court administration and other court reforns, judicial training, and the national
judicial exam (unified for lawyers, judges and prosecutors)

Good governance in the dealings of local authorities as well as improved standards of
public service provision would further benefit from Bank involvement in improving municipal
management. Since about 80 percent of China's economic growth originates in cities and towns,
national growth objectives would also be served. The Bank has therefore increased support for
improving the institutions and infrastructure delivering urban environmental services in both
coastal and inland areas, including use of a multi-phased APL in Shanghai to introduce
institutional and financial innovations to city management over the next ten years. In the energy
sector, we will build on past policy work to help implement the next wave of power sector
reforms involving creation of new and separate companies to separate generation from
distribution and creation of competitive power markets.

B. Addressing the Needs of the Poorer and
Disadvantaged People and Regions

Over the past decade, Bank Group support for China's development shifted from the
increasingly well-off coastal areas to the disadvantaged inland provinces and, within those
provinces, to nationally and provincially designated poor counties. The Bank has welcomed the
Government's emphasis on spurring development in the particularly disadvantaged western
provinces - where most of the very poor also reside - and has collaborated with it on multi-
sectoral diagnostic studies identifying investment constraints and skills needs in the west. The
findings of those studies were discussed last year at an international seminar aimed at mobilizing
donor assistance in addressing the development challenges facing this area. Based on the
studies' recommendations and the Bank's particular strengths developed over the years, future
Bank Group support to the lagging areas - both in the west and in the traditional industrial belt of
the northeast - and for the poor will focus on the five cntical areas of employment generation off

CAS Annex D
Page 6 of 10

and on the farm, infrastructure provision, human development, social protection, and targeted
poverty interventions:

Enhaancing Employment anid Productivity Off and On the Farot. China's agricultural
sector faces challenges such as WTO accession, insufficient technological change for production
of hlgh- value, high-quality products, inadequate marketing infonnation, unclear land use rights,
inadequate financial services, and environmental degradation. The Tenth Plan aims to correct
some of these deficiencies, and the Bank will assist with investments to demonstrate improved
approaches to hlgh- value, diversified agricultural development, natural resource management,
watershed rehabilitation, and agricultural research addressing China's specific needs. Analytical
work will focus on issues related to WTO accession, agricultural market institutions (farmers'
associations), livestock production, water resource use, and rural credit, among others. This
includes continued support in addressing relevant tax and fiscal policies, issues of providing
public and private financial services in rural areas, and land tenure issues.

Private economic activity was the main engine of growth in the coastal provinces but
lags far behind in the western region. Promoting private investment and private entrepreneurship
in the west has thus been a key Bank-IFC objective. In addition to Bank-IFC support for
enterprise reform described above, IFC has taken an mnovative approach by providing targeted
assistance to Sichuan Province through investments, support to improve the environment for
SME investment as well as establishment of a Fund for this purpose. With the expenence
gained, IFC is now working in another western province, Shaanxi, to assist the province attract
FDI and develop a pipeline of potential investments.

Improving Transport Links for and to Lagging Regions. Economic development of the
lagging provinces will depend on improving their transport sectors in order to lower transport
costs and gain a competitive edge in China's major domestic markets on the coast. Currently,
however, transport in the interior provinces is inadequate in terms of infrastructure scale and
quality, service efficiency, institutional structures, mul4- modal arrangements, and
competitiveness. These deficiencies have been magnified with China's entry into the WTO,
which will end protection of the inland provinces' outputs of coal and minerals and the
manufacture of industrial and consumer goods. Once protection and rail subsidies are removed,
it will be possible to import most products in the fast-growing coastal markets more cheaply than
they can be delivered from inland provinces. Thus, without a substantial reduction in transport
and other logistics costs, regional development will face an uncertain future. The Bank Group
program addresses these challenges with investments in roads, inland waterways and the railway,
upgrading of local transport institutions, and, starting with a study of Trade, Transport Services
and Logistics, improving transport logistics.

Hunman Development. China and the Bank have addressed increasing regional disparity
in educational attainment through a series of basic education projects in poor areas, higher
education reform involvmg tertiary institutions in poorer areas, and - recently - expansion of the
Global Development Learning Network to China's western provinces. Currently under
preparation in collaboration with DFID is a Basic Education Project targeted on the poorest
communities in five western provinces to increase access to primary schooling among ethnic
minorities where enrollment rates have lagged behind. Based on the findings of ongoing Bank
studies such as one on Skills Needs for Competitiveness with a focus on the lagging regions, a

CAS Annex D
Page 7 of 10

program of future support will be identified. Health and other social service delivery to
disadvantaged groups would be supported under ongoing lending, including a recent TB Control
Project which supports a national program to eradicate TB in China over the coming decade.
Future financial assistance, in partnership with other donors, is likely to focus on the
deteriorating health situation in rural areas, emerging concerns such as HIV/AIDS and rural
water supply and sanitation. These efforts are being supported by some ongoing TA programs,
notably with support of the Asia-Europe Meetmg (ASEM) Trust Fund, and policy studies
addressing the quality and financing of social services both in rural and urban areas.

Social Protection. The lack of a national social safety net puts vulnerable groups in
lagging regions, including the vulnerable northeast, particularly at risk. The Bank has been
supporting the Government's search for an appropriate national social protection system through
very well-received policy advice on pension reform, training in long-term pension system
analysis, development of labor market information systems, and technical assistance and lending
for labor redeployment During the CAS penod, the Bank will continue analytical support and
policy advice on these issues and will provide financing and TA to the Government's primary
pilot program for social security reform, which is being implemented in northeastern Liaonmg
Province, an area with substantial labor retrenchment and pension liabilities.

Targeted Poverty Reductioni Efforts. Assisting China's rural poor continues to be one of
the Bank's main objectives. However, as indicated in various studies, most notably Overcoming
Rural Poverty (March 2001), done jointly by the World Bank, China's Leading Group for
Poverty Reduction and United Nations Development Programme, helping the poor has become
more difficult since a constellation of factors contribute to their plight. The lessons of China's
experiences in reducing poverty will be the focus of a global conference on poverty alleviation
planned for later next year in Shanghai. By showcasing China's successes with the similar
successes in other developing countries, it is hoped that best practices will be shared and national
efforts can be scaled up accordingly.

Focusing on individual problems in a range of poor areas, as in our basic education,
childhood vaccination, roads or rural water supply projects, is one instrument in the Bank's anti-
poverty toolkit. Another - and a very effective one - is addressing a range of problems in a
limited geographic area. Working in collaboration with China's Leading Group for Poverty
Reduction, the Bank has found that one of the best means of assisting the poor is to take an
integrated, multi-sectoral approach to assisting areas of severe poverty. This approach - which
benefited about three million people under the recently completed Southwest Poverty Reduction
Project and millions more under several ongoing projects - is being further refined with the Poor
Rural Communities Development Project to begin next year. The latter aims to improve
livelihoods security and achieve sustained participation of the poorest rural people in targeted
poor counties in four western provinces. The project would improve on previous interventions
by introducmg a participatory approach to project design, implementation, monitoring and
impact assessment.

C. Facilitating an Environmentally Sustainable Development Process

Economic growth is overwhelming environmental protection efforts in many respects,
although China has done many things right in the environmental area over the past decade,

CAS Annex D
Page 8 of 10

including large-scale afforestation and massive investments to reduce air and water pollution.
Some major signs of stress are the following:

* 

land degradation is widespread and increasing - China has some of the worst water-caused
erosion problems m the world, the highest ratio of actual to potential desertified land in the
world, and rapidly degrading grasslands;

* water availability and quality was a critical problem throughout the 1990s, particularly in the
north, and is likely to worsen over the next decade, requiring decisive action on the growing
problems of municipal wastewater discharges and agricultural emissions; and

* while national emissions of major air pollutants, such as sulfur dioxide and particulate matter
have declined since 1996, the economy continues to rely heavily on coal and oil, constraining
efforts to mitigate acid deposition and carbon dioxide emissions

The causes and impacts of these environmental problems are intertwined across sectors
and regions in complex ways. In the Loess Plateau area, for example, environmental
deterioration and poverty are closely inter-linked, as more than 50 million poor farmers use
totally unsustainable fan-ning practices, which has caused one of the highest erosion rates in the
world, very low crop yields and high sedimentation of the Yellow River. Water availability and
quality problems can only be addressed effectively through concerted actions extending beyond
sectoral or regional boundaries, including reforestation of upstreamwatersheds, reduction of
effluent and more efficient use of water, among others. Added to these complexities are the
environmental protection and remediation aspects of developing the environmentally fragile
western region and the environmental implications of WTO accession.

The World Bank has a major program of environmental cooperation in China which
supports the Government's plan to mainstream environmentally sustainable development in its
national development programs. The Bank provides and/or administers assistance in the form of
lending and non- lending services, with financial support provided through IBRD loans and
Bank-administered bilateral/multilateral grants from the Global Environment Facility (GEF) and
the Montreal Protocol (MP). The Bank also works in partnership with the Norwegian Trust Fund
for Environmentally and Socially Sustainable Development (NTF-ESSD), agencies including
UNEP and UNDP, and NGOs such as the Ford Foundation and World Wildlife Fund.

IFC's investments m China are helping companies introduce and improve environmental
standards and practices. In addition, IFC has made a number of investments in sustamable forest
management which have helped to reduce pressures on Chma's natural forest resources. IFC will
continue to support the development of China's enviromnental industries through investments in
a range of projects, including those bringing international environmental technology to China, as
well as those that manage wastewater and sewage treatment plants. IFC will also, as it does
globally, seek to help investee companies find profitable opportunities to reduce waste and
emissions.

The Bank program to be carried out during the CAS period is shaped by the findings of a
major study, China: Air, Land and Water -Environmental Prioritiesfor a New Millennium,
which was completed in 2001 by China's State Environmental Protection Agency (SEPA) and

CAS Annex D
Page 9 of 10

the World Bank. Based on the study's analysis, Bank support for China's environmental agenda
would have five main dimensions: general institutional issues, protecting and managing air, land
and water resources, and cooperating with institutions protecting the global commons.

Strengthening the effectiveness of environomental institutions. The broadly rangmg
Bank program of support includes technical assistance and training in environmental
administration and regulatory reform, strengthening of SEPA's technical capacity for
environmental enforcement and management related to WTO accession, strengthening of
enviromnental impact assessment procedures, development of a pollution cost model for China,
and - with WBI - providing traming in environmental policy, legislation and environmentally
sound decision-making.

Inproving air quality. In the near term, Bank Group support would focus on:
development of clean coal technologies and expanded use of renewable energy sources that
decrease dependence on high-sulfur coal; promotion of energy use efficiency for heating and in
buildings; stricter vehicle emissions controls supported under urban transport projects; and
continued involvement in the Acid Rain and Emission Reduction in Asia (RAINS-Asia) program
to help policymakers and researchers anticipate effects from acid depositions resultmg from
sulfur dioxide emissions and identify cost-effective control options.

Water resource nianagemnenit. China is improving its water resources management
through actions like finalizing revision of the Water Law and highlighting water management in
the Tenth Plan. Bank assistance on this issue will be governed by a Country Water Resources
Assistance Strategy developed jointly by the Ministry of Water Resources (MWR) and the Bank.
Key activities will include: a North China Water Study, recommending initiatives to address
severe water shortage in the area and following up on a Water Sector Stuidy prepared last year;
TA in integrated river basin management; a Water Pollution Prevention Initiative; projects taking
a river-basin approach to water management - for Upper Yangtze Watershed Rehabilitation
(FY05) and Hai Basin Water Resources Management (FY04; GEF-funded); wastewater
treatment in Shanghai, Liaoning, and the Pearl River Delta under urban environment projects;
wastewater re-use under a proposed Tianjin Environment Project; and implementation of
ongoing projects for Water Conservation in northern China and Water Transfer in Shanxi.

Managing land and natural resources. Proposed Bank Group lending for watershed
rehabilitation in the Upper Yangtze and Upper Pearl River Basins, sustainable pastoral
development, and ongoing project support for, among others, sustainable forestry, rehabilitation
of the Loess Plateau and a GEF-funded Nature Reserves Management Project will address
several of China's most critical land degradationand natural resource problems. Complementing
this will be continued Bank Group support for various influential groups, such as the China
Environmental Council's Task Force on Forests and Grasslands in western China. Upcoming
work for the Task Force will focus on analyzing key issues for reform of China's forestry sector,
including land tenure insecurity, tax and fiscal policies, and forest resource management and
marketing regulations. Land protection will also be addressed in the Alternative Rural
Development Model and technical assistance following up on findings of Air, Land and Water.

Protecting theglobal environmenttal conmlmonis. The Multilateral Fund for the Montreal
Protocol (MFMP) and, to a somewhat lesser extent, the GEF have made significant contributions

CAS Annex D
Page 10 of 10

to addressing global environmental issues in China. The China MFMP program (US$323
million) is the biggest in the world. About 67,000 tons of ozone-depleting substances have been
phased out under the program, which far exceeds the combined perfonnance of all other
signatones to the Montreal Protocol. Most GEF-funded investment - US$128 million - has been
for greenhouse gas reduction projects, but an additional US$30 million went to biodiversity
conservation. During the CAS period, further GEF support to China totaling almost US$120
million is proposed for renewable energy development, energy conservation, energy efficiency
of buildings, integrated river basm water resources management, land degradation and
biodiversity restoration in the western region.

Discussions are also underway on China's participation in three additional global
programs: the new Prototype Carbon Fund (PCF), a Bank-administered pilot program to assist
participants prepare green house gas reduction projects and market carbon credits on the global
market; the Clean Development Mechanism (CDM) under the Kyoto Protocol; and the Program
for the Phase-out of Persistent Organic Pollutants (POPs).

D. A Cross-cutting Theme: Urban Development and Environment

As the 10 th Plan recognizes, urban development holds a key to China's economic growth
and equity. Cities and towns generate over half of the national product and over 80% of growth,
but the relatively small urban population - at some 36% of the national total - is growing slowly
and increasing the large rural-urban income gap 
In addition, decentralization of fiscal authority
and economic management functions to urban areas makes local governance important for Bank
support. The Bank will therefore expand assistance to development of small and medium-sized
cities and towns and to provision of jobs for the urban unemployed and the large pool of rural
surplus labor. Such urban development will be a necessary ingredient for the development of the
western provinces. Along with actions under projects, policy studies and TA will be carried out
on urbanization, finance, and planning and management, along with more technical mfrastructure
studies and knowledge-sharing. The Bank will particularly extend assistance in four urban
development needs: (a) Next Stage of Utility Reform: toward more efficiency and sustamability
via support for improved monitoring and regulation, financial innovations, asset management,
and private sector participation; (b) Addressing Urban Poverty: an increasingly important issue
as a result of economic restructuring, migration, and urbanization of rural areas; (c) Beyond
Individual Cities: supporting small cities and semi-rural areas, the most dynamic yet the most
needy part of the urban system, and recognizing the fact that most environmental issues needs to
be addressed at the scale of river basms and/or larger metropolitan areas; and (d) Broad urban
management and policy: increased assistance for central policy formulation, city-level strategic
planning, and learning among cities, in search of new ways of managing the urbanizing
economy. As this assistance agenda broadens, the cross-sectoral integration will increase.

CAS Annex E
Page 1 of 3

Global Goals and Corporate Priorities

A. China's Progress with Respect to the Millennium Development Goals

The Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) as formally endorsed in September 2000 by the member countries of
the United Nations, focus on developing countries' achieving eight goals and targets by 2015 (UN Millennium
Declaration, September 18,2000) China is currently on course to achieve most MDGs by 2015

Goal): Halve the proportion of people living in extrenme poverty between 1990 and 2015 Good progress being

made During 1990-99, the number of people with consumption of less than US$1 a day fell from 368 million to
235 million An estimated further decline will be confirmed by an ongoing household survey. Similarly, using
China's more austere poverty line of US$0 67 a day, its poor population went from 250 million at the end of the
1970s to 30 million in 2000 This success resulted from overall economic growth, the Government's National
Poverty Reduction Plan begun in 1992 to wipe out poverty by the year 2000, and substantial government funding of
poverty alleviation prograrm in 1994-2000 Despite the progress, results varied by region, with the most success in
high-growth coastal provinces but sluggish progress in the central and western regions The Government therefore
launched a Western Development Initiative to narrow regional disparities, while a new National Poverty Reduction
Plan for 2001-2010 takes a more comprehensive approach with better targeting The World Bank continues to assist
this effort with, inter alia, targeted projects for poverty reduction, rural health and basic education, lending
concentrated on lagging regions, studies on ways to accelerate growth in those provinces, and TA to improve
poverty targeting.

Goal 2: Achieve universal access to primnary educationt by 2015 Excellent progress is being made The net
enrollment rate in primary education went from 97.8% in 1990 to 99 1% in 1999 Again, regional disparities exist,
particularly in poor, remote and/or ethnic minority areas in western China The Government has funded a range of
initiatives to improve education access and quality, and the Bank is assisting through sub-national fiscal studies to
address education funding problems in poor areas, multi-sectoral poverty reduction projects and stand-alone basic
education projects focused on educating the poor, girls and minorities in the western provinces, and support to
bringing the GDLN to all western provinces

Goal 3: Elimniniate gender disparity in primary and secondary education by 2005. Good progress is being made in

basic and junior secondary education The national ratio of girls to boys is now over 90% for primary education but
lower for secondary education since China's nine-year compulsory education policy covers only up to the junior
secondary level Progress at the higher secondary level has also been made The good results on basic education for
girls should continue as the Government gives emphasis to helping pupils from extremely poor families to attend
school World Bank support for this goal includes education projects focused in part on girls' education in poor,
western areas and efforts to mainstream gender considerations in project design

Goal 4: Reduce mortality of children under -five by two-thirds between 1990 and 2015. Good progress being

made 
Infant mortality went from 50/1,000 live births in 1990 to 32 in 2000 Reaching the target of 17 would bring
China into the ranks of middle-income countries The main obstacle is the need for rural health insurance. The
Bank is assisting through projects aimed at child health, including basic inoculations, and support for developing
rural health insurance

Goal 5: Reduce the miaternial mortality rate (MMR) by '/4 by 2015 Good progress being made The MMR was

almost halved from 1990 to 1998, going from 95 deaths per 100,000 deliveries to 56/100,000, and the proportion of
women of child-bearing age with access to contraception is 83% Concerns exist, however, that the transition to a
fee-based health care system has halted the decline in MMR in the western provinces and rural areas The
Government aims to improve rural primary medical care, and the Bank supports women's health with projects for
maternal and child health, rural roads to facilitate energency transport and assistance in overall development of the
Western region

Goal 6: Combat lIl V/AIDS, malaria and other diseases Progress is likely on TB and malaria, but rates of
HIV/AIDS will probably not decline by 2015 since the disease is only now entering the period of rapid spread
Control is made difficult since HIV/AIDS is concentrated in porous border regions, where drug users and migrants
cross back and forth The Government has a control program that can combat the rising incidence, but a broader
strategy is needed TB prevalence has declined but better results could be achieved by fully implementing the

CAS Annex E
Page 2 of 3

WHO-recommended DOTS strategy The Bank's TB Control Project supports this effort HIV/AIDS is also
addressed in a current Bank project

Goal 7: Improve the environimient by imiplemilentinig latiollal strategiesfor sustainable development by 2005 (so
as to reverse the loss of environmiienital resources by 2015). Progress is being made While no national strategy
exlsted in 1990, China now has such a strategy and sustainable development is a strategic focus of the Tenth-Five
Year Plan (2001-2005) Still, the widespread environmental degradation that accompanied economic growth will
require concerted action by the Government and its development partners The Bank is helping in this effort through
major studies of problems, TA to strengthen environmental institutions, cooperation with other institutions involved
in protecting the global commons, and projects for urban environmental management, sustainable rural development
and land management, renewable energy and energy conservation, innovative water management improvements,
and watershed rehabilitation

Goal8: Develop aglobalpartiiershiipfordevelopmenit Progress is being made. China's accession to the WTO
will accelerate further its global outreach and have broad effects on all aspects of its development The Bank is
assisting this process in various ways, including support to expansion of the Global Development Learnig Network
in China China is already a founding member of the Global Gateway Foundation

B. Alignment of China CAS with Corporate Priorities

The Bank's corporate priorities are outlined in the Strategic Directions Paper i under two groups 
the Corporate
Advocacy Priorities (CAPs) and the Global Public Goods Priorities (GPGPs) CAPs are defined as the "the critical
enablers of poverty reductiol that the Bank is particularly well-qualified to champion by sharing knowledge (both
research and experience) and building awareness with clients, development partners, and other stakeholders " They
build on two key pillars of the Strategic Framework Paper (a) building the climate for investment, jobs and
sustainable growth and (b) empowering poor people to participate in development and investing in them Regarding
the first pillar, the CAPs advocate that the Bank should play a catalytic role in improving investor confidence and
boosting private sector investment With reference to the second pillar, the CAPs advocate treating clients as
participants rather than recipients of development aid

The China CAS plans to support policy and institutional reforms as outlined in the Government's Tenth Five-Year
Plan to create an environment conducive to investments by the private sector And, by supporting widely ranging
human development initiatives and increased participation in the development planning process, it helps to make
development recipients into participants

Table 1: Corporate Advocacy Priorities and their Alignment with the CAS

Corporate Advocacy Priorities 

CAS Strate

Investment Climate 
* 
Support for urban and rural development 
* 
Infrastructure services to support private sector 
development 
* Regulatory reform and competition policy 
* 
Financial sector reform 
Public Sector Governance 

CAP 1: Building the Climatefor !nvestlnent, Jobs and Sustainiable Growth
Improving the Business Environment The CAS
supports macroeconomic stability, sound fiscal
management, establishing a business environment
suitable for global trade, financial sector reform,
private sector development and reform of the
enterprise sector, improvements in public sector
management - through tightened governance as well
as legal and judicial reform, and delivery of public
, Rueo Lw( At-oruto)services - by cities and utilities - that meet commercial
* Public administrationi and civil service reforn 
standards
(mcl Public expenditure accountability) 
Addressing the Needs of the Disadvantaped The
* Access to and administrationi ofjustice judicial 
CAS supports rural development, particularly in the
reform) 
disadvantaged lagging regions of western and central

China

World Bank, Strategic Directionsfor FY02-04 Implementing the World Bank's Strategic Framework, March 28,
2001

CAS Annex E
Page 3 of 3

Corporate Advocacy Priorities 
CAS Strategy
CAP 2: Empowering Poor People to Participate in Development and Investing in Them
Empowerment, Security and Social Inclusion 
Addressing the Needs of the Disadvantaged The
* Gender mainstreaming, civic engagement and 
CAS supports human development and social
participation 
protection, with an emphasis on developing a national
* 
Social risk management (mcl risk mitigation) 
social protection system, girls' education, skills
Education 
development for competitiveness in lagging arcas, and
* Education for All- with emphasis on girls' 
health care aimcd at communicable diseases, mothers
education 
and children and provision of basic infrastructure to
* Building human capacity for the knowledge 
poor areas
economy 
Improving the Business Environment The CAS
Health 
supports China's development of a knowledge
economy as It continues its integration with the global
* Access to clean water, air and sanitation by poor 
economy
people
* Maternal and child health care

The second group of corporate priorities focuses on the global public goods priorities (GPGPs) These require a
relatively higher level of intcrnational coordination since they involve extcrnalities, and the succcss of achieving
them will depend on the extent to which global programs are implemented at the country level. Table 2 lists the
GPGPs and their alignment with the CAS

Table 2: Global Public Goods Priorities and Their Alignment with the CAS
Global Public Goods Priorities 
CAS
Communicable Diseases

* HIV/AIDS, tuberculosis, malaria and childhood 
diseases, mcl the relevant link to education 
* Vaccines and drug development for major 
communicable diseases in developing countries 
Environmental Concerns
* Climate change, water, forests 
* Biodiversity, ozone depletion and land 
degradation 
Promotion of agricultural research 

* 

Trade and Integration
* Market access 
* 
Intellectual property rights and standards 

Information and Knowledge
* Redrcssing the Digital Divide and equipping 
countries with the capacity to access knowledge 
* Understanding development and poverty 
reduction 

International Financial Architecture
* Development of international standards 
* Financial stability (mcl sound public debt 
management) 
International accounting and legal framework 

* 

Addressing the Needs of the Disadvantaged The CAS
supports improving the access and quality of health
services for the poor TB Control and childhood
vaccination projects are ongoing

Facilitatine Environmentally Sustainable
Development The CAS supports improving air and
water quality, countering land degradation, and
protecting the global environmental commons
Addressmg the Needs of the Disadvantaged The CAS
supports agricultural research A project for this
purpose, for needs of poorer areas, is being prepared

Improving the Business Environment The CAS
supports establishing the policy and institutional
framework needed for China's continuing global

integration

Addressing the Needs of the Disadvantaged The
CAS supports using the GDLN to promote
development of China's lagging areas. The Bank
helped establish two GDLN centers in the west and is
helping the govcrnment find additional funding for
other centers

Imprroving the Business Environment Thc CAS
supports financial sector reform and development,
public debt management, accounting and legal
refonm. Policy advice and lending in all these areas
are ongoing

CAS Annex F
Page 1 of 10

China Private Sector Development Strategy

China is undergoing a major transformation. Over the past decade, the economy has made the
transition from complete reliance on state-owned and collective enterprise to a mixed economy where
private enterprise also plays a strong role. China is emerging as a global manufacturing powerhouse and
as the world's top destination for foreign direct investments. China's nse to economic prominence is not
without its nsks, however The extent to which China can realize its great promise will depend to a large
extent on decisive actions to resolve structural weaknesses and improve the business environment for
private enterprise. This annex provides an overview and analysis of key developments in China's
enterpnse sector and outline the Bank Group's strategy in this area.

I. China's Enterprise Sector: Restructuring and Organic Growth

The size, structure and performance of the Chinese private sector are shaped by two increasingly
interrelated processes: the restructunng and ownership diversification of the state sector and the organic
growth of China's de novo private sector.

1.1 

Painful Enterprise Reforms

Over the last three to four years the reform of China's state enterprise sector has accelerated and
has acquired some qualitatively new features. First, the scale of change has expanded to affect almost
every kind of State-owned Enterpnse (SOE) - small, medium, large and very big, under both central and
local control. Second, the role of the wholly state-owned non-financial company has declined
substantially in many areas. Third, the range of restructuring mechanisms being used has expanded
dramatically to include bankruptcies, liquidations, listings and de-listings, debt-for-equity swaps, sales to
private parties - domestic and foreign, auctioning of state firms, their assets or liabilities, standard
corporate governance technmques, etc. Finally, mass layoffs, something unheard of just four or five years
ago, have become a widespread phenomenon.

At the grassroots level, local governments have been particularly active in implementing
corporatization and ownership diversification in SOEs, taking the most decisive actions to grapple with
the financial burdens and unemployment pressures resulting from loss-making SOEs. More than 80
percent of small- and medium-sized SOEs have been transformed through corporatization, liquidation,
bankruptcy, leasing to private parties, and sales to insiders and outsiders. Local governments' approach
to divestiture of state assets is influenced mainly by concerns to minimize immediate budget outlays on
unemployment insurance, minimum living allowances and pensions related to layoffs, early retirement
and laid-off (xiagang in Chinese) workers. This is not necessarily conducive to a process of meaningful
restructunng and leads to significant regional variations in the extent and depth of restructuring. Most of
the SOEs that are being sold to insiders remain over-leveraged and overstaffed. In instances where
outsiders with money and ideas have taken over some of these SOEs, we do see positive and rapid
changes. However, in many cases the problems have been postponed, but not solved Hence, although the
process of ownership diversificationlprivatization is likely to be formally completed over the near term,
the restructuring challenge will remain and will take longer to resolve.

Regarding larger SOEs, more than 1,200 companies have been listed over the last decade. Their
market capitalization is about 60 percent of GDP and they have about 65 million individual shareholders
that have become more assertive over the years. A significant challenge is preventing parent SOEs from
expropriating minority shareholders through related party transactions. The regulator - China Securities
Regulatory Commission (CSRC) - has stepped up efforts to strengthen corporate governance practices
among Chinese listed companies. Of systemic importance for China is the process of divesting state
assets through the initialpublic-offenng (IPO) process to fund the national social secunty system.

CAS Annex F
Page 2 of 10

Some restructuring of SOEs is expected to occur through the four Asset Management Companies
(AMCs) which have been created to takeover more than US$170 billion in non-performing loans from the
four big state-owned banks As part of their program, 580 SOEs accounting for about 40 percent of the
state sector's assets and sales have been selected for debt-equity swaps The AMCs have emerged as
important and often majority shareholders in a number of large SOEs The AMCs have multiple
objectives; the desire to maximize immediate financial retums to Government may conflict with the need
for meaningful restructuring of fimis in their portfolio. Recent regulatory measures, however, making it
easier for foreign investors to buy significant and controlling shares in SOEs, are likely to expand the exit
options for these AMCs and create more opportunities for diversification of state ownership through the
AMCs.

The Government has been implementing industry rationalization programs in a number of
industries, closing obsolete plants and reducing capacity to combat oversupply and deflationary pressures
The initiative has so far shown mixed results. In many industries such as glass and textiles, for each unit
of closed capacity several additional units have been created. This demonstrates the difficulties the
Govemment is facing in fighting against market forces. In the present business environment, these
market forces are not necessarily sending signals that are consLstent with economic efficiency, given still
rampant local protectionism resulting in market fragmentation.

In the strategically important infrastructure and energy sectors, while the regulatory framework is
still evolving, monopolies have been broken and competition introduced, many companies corporatized
and some listed in China and internationally. China has nurtured over 20 giant corporations and
conglomerates that have proven competitive in the international market. Some of these companies are
laying off tens or even hundreds of thousands of employees, not because they are in a financial distress-
in fact some of them are hugely profitable-but because they want to position themselves as important
international players. As of last year, the top 12 Chinese transnabional corporations, mainly SOEs,
controlled over US$30 billion in foreign assets with some 20,000 foreign employees and US$33 billion in
foreign sales.

This process of transformation of China's state sector has been, and will be, socially panful.
Some 25 5 million SOE workers have been laid off since 1998, and according to official government
statistics, 8.7 million of these have not found new jobs. The practice is so widespread that almost every
SOE has laid off employees. This has quite understandably led to social discontent. The number of labor
disputes of all kinds has been increasing. Two economic factors have emerged with cntical importance
for alleviating the social cost of restructuring development of the national social security system (there
has been a significant increase in central budget expenditures on social security in recent years: from 1
percent in 1997 to 6.3 percent in 2002), and promoting the growth of the new private enterprises to absorb
laid off workers from the state sector.

1.2 

China's Private Sector: A Growth Engine That Shouldn't Be Taken for Granted

From very humble beginnings in the early 1 980s, the private sector has emerged as the most
dynamic component of the Chinese economy in the 1990s. While the role of state firms and collectives
has declined, output and employment by private domestic finrs have been growing rapidly. In recent
years, new employment in the private sector has exceeded the combined total for state, collective, and
township-and-village enterprises. Today, the pnvate sector has come to be viewed notjust as an
appendage of the state economy, but rather as a key player in the reform process.

The private sector has grown to a stage where it is populated by firms at different levels of
development Most of the domestic private enterprises are smaller and younger than their counterparts in
the SOE, collective, and foreign-invested sectors, although some private firms have reached a size

CAS Annex F
Page 3 of 10

comparable to the size of large public state-owned enterprises. There are significant regional disparities
regarding private sector development in China, with the inland provinces lagging behind coastal areas in
tenms of domestic and foreign private investment. In terms of industries, private enterprises play a much
more important role in some labor-intensive service sectors - such as retail, catering, and construction -
than in the manufacturing sector. There is a marked shift away from manufacturing: while in the late
1980s and early 1990s, almost 70 percent of all private enterprises were in the manufacturing sector, by
the late 1 990s this was reduced to less than 40 percent. In contrast, the services sector is growing
increasingly important, reaching a combined share of 55 percent of all private enterprises. This shift
reflects the competitive advantage of private enterprises in the services sector as a result of low entry
bamers, relatively small capital requirements, and responsiveness to customer demand 
It may also
reflect problems with over-capacity and crowding out in the traditional manufacturing sectors. However
in some of the more strategic sectors such as banking (see Box 1), airlines and port operation sectors, the
participation of private enterprises is negligible.

Box 1: Negligible Private Sector Presence in Financial Intermediation

At present, ownership structures of the real sectors do not align with those of the financial sectors Despite the
existence of a large number of othier financial institutions and the growing number of private or near-private
banks, the state-owned commercial banks' share of deposits and assets continucs to be overwhelming This
contributes to the current disparity between the share of the private sector in the economy and its share in credit
allocation while the private sector accounts for about 40 percent of the economy it absorbs only 15 percent of
total credit

Non-state banks like Minsheng Bank, the Development Bank of Shenzhen and Everbright do not face the
challenges that the Big Four banks face These non-state banks tend to intermediate capital without much political
interference Although small, these non-state banks are well positioned to fill a number of niches such as
providing better retail banking services and catering to the needs of small- and medium enterprises (SMEs). They
can be a catalyst of change in banking regulations in China because they provide evidence to policy leaders that
banks in China can be run the right way-with good standards of corporate governance, risk management and
incentive structures However, the growth of private banking and non-banking financial institutions is constrained
by serious structural as well as internal obstacles The 5 percent tax on gross revenues, limited tax deductibility on
losses and the lack of reliablc access to a Renminbi interbank market make it difficult for banks to achieve
profitability Internally, the new private financial institutions nced to strengthen their management structures,
corporate governance practices, and risk management capacities

Domestic private companies are exposed to greater market discipline includtng bankruptcy or
closure. This is a major difference relative to SOEs, whlich historically have not faced a market-based
threat of bankruptcy or closure. An important implication of this is that the performance of the private

sector is more volatile than that of other segments of the Chinese economy'. On one side, this is simply a
restatement of the fact that private firms are subject to exit discipline, and are younger and smaller than
other firms. But it also reflects the fact that other sectors of the economy and particularly the state-owned
sector react more slowly, if at all, to business opportunities and exit pressure

Because most of the pnvate enterpnses grew up in a period when the Govemment's commitment
to the private sector was weak and the benefits (in tenms of better access to bank financing or listing) of
being more formal were practically non-existent, the domestic private sector is organized in a very
informal way. Many enterprises possess only the vaguest of property nghts, corporate govemance
mechanisms, and financial records. Related to the issue of informality is the extent of diversification in
the domestic private sector. Chinese private companies, not unlike those in other Asian economies, are

I For example, the volatility of the UBS Warburg China private chip index is on average 1 5 times higher than the volatility of
the Hang Seng index and is significantly higher than the volatility of Chinese SOEs and govemment-affiliated companies listed
on the Hong Kong stock exchange

CAS Annex F
Page 4 of 10

often part of complex groups of companies, spanning many different activities. They show quite a high
degree of diversification, even at relatively small sizes. The excessive diversification can be understood
partly as a defensive mechanism in a hostile environment in the past, partly as the result of a deliberate
effort to become more opaque, and partly as the result of poor business judgment and decision- making.
The high degree of opacity makes it very difficult for outside investors to protect themselves against
expropriation through related party transactions. However, there are private entrepreneurs that have
reached a stage in their development where they are ready to invest in becoming more formal. With
further progress in reforms and the associated higher benefits of formality, the shift from informal to a
more formal way of doing things in the private sector is likely to accelerate.

Chinese pnvate companies are the most dynamic players in the economy, but they face tough
challenges in the current business environment, and their continued growth cannot be taken for granted
without continued progress in market reforms. The majority of domestic private firms face difficulties
accessing intermediated sources of financing. The discrepancy between the dynamism of the private
sector and its limited use of intermediated financing suggests that the pnvate sector may not be able to
sustain its current rate of growth unless it can increase its access to financing.

Even if domestic private companies are able to grow and achieve relatively large sizc, they often
find that opportunities for further growth are quickly exhausted by lack of market-driven exit
mechanisms, restricted entry in a number of sectors and local protectionism. While there is a gradual but
steady improvement in the business environment, entry barriers remain high in China. 2 A growing
number of private enterprises compete with SOEs that operate under soft budget constraints and have
poor compliance with environmental and safety norms. Smce exit mechanisms are underdeveloped in
China, excess capacity situations tend to develop quickly and exert downward pressure on profitability.
With low margins and declining asset turnover rates, many relatively large Chinese private companies are
unable to accumulate enough capital to upgrade their operations. Under significant competitive pressure
and facing an uneven playing field, private entrepreneurs tend to actively seek opportunities to
circumvent regulations and make themselves less transparent. Deprived of the benefits of scale, firms
avoid specializing, and instead diversify into new business lines - local lines, for the most part - simply to
insure cash flow. The concem for the future is that to the extent such finrs fail to achieve the benefits of
both scale and specialization, they will find it increasingly difficult to partner and compete globally.

Sustaining the dynamism of the non-state sector will require concerted actions at several levels.
At the enterprise level, Chinese companies need to take on a more sustainable path of development by
improving corporate govemance, transparency and disclosure, and by adopting better environmental and
social practices in order to enhance their access to intermediated financing and compete successfully in
the post-WTO environment. The Chinese financial system needs to develop capacities to serve better the
financing needs of private enterprises and to intermediate resources more efficiently toward the areas of
growth and job creation. Banks and other financial institutions need to improve their own corporate
governance practices, and to develop skills and expertise in areas such as project finance, risk
management, and SME lending. To enhance the pnvate sector's access to intermediated financing, the
role of private financial institutions in China's financial markets should expand. China's private sector
has evolved to a stage where it is populated by firms at different levels of development with different
financing needs. In this context, altemative sources of financing need to evolve rapidly, particularly non-
banking financial institutions.

Finally, at the policy level, the process needs to be supported by continued improvement in the
business environment. The Tenth Five-Year Plan commits the Government to improving the domestic

2China's capital requirements for pnvate limited companies are among the highest in the world In a recent Bank survey among
75 developed and developing economies, China ranked 51 in terms of start-up delay, and 43 in terms of start-up cost Some
localities have recently undertaken steps to reduce entry costs

CAS Annex F
Page 5 of 10

business environment, establishing a stable financial system, facilitating modem corporate structures,
building globally competitive firms, increasing the scientific and technological intensity of production
and narrowing regional inequalities. Through implementation of this strategy, entry and exit regimes
should become more market-based and transparent, and domestic private enterprises should be granted
national treatment regarding market access, land use, listing, tax treatment and import and export nghts
ahead of market opening in the context of WTO agreements. A number of factors influence the extent of
private participation in areas such as infrastructure Developing a more favorable legal and regulatory
framework would be helpful. Of critical importance for the overall business environment will be to
improve commercial legislation regarding investment approvals, credit security, bankruptcy, and use of
more sophisticated financial instruments.

II. World Bank Group Private Sector Strategy

The Bank Group's private sector strategy is an integral part of the overall Bank Group CAS It
underpins the three main themes of the Bank Group's operational strategy of improving the business
environment and helping accelerate China's transition to a market economy, addressing the needs of the
poorer and disadvantaged people and regions, and facilitating an environmentally sustainable
development process by supporting rapid development of the pnvate sector in China.

11.1 
The World Bank Group Comparative Advantage and Role in Promoting Private Sector
Development in China

China is facing a number of reform challenges that are more complex and multi-sectoral than
before. Private sector issues are intrinsically linked with financial sector reform and development, SOE
reform, social safety net issues, and regional disparities. The Bank has a comparative advantage and is
typically asked to assist with the most complex institutional and structural issues, many of which address
constraints to private sector development.

While domestic and .foreign investments in China are high in absolute terms, they are unevenly
distributed regionally and there are concems about their quality and sustainability 3 The Bank Group has
a comparative advantage in helping to catalyze pnvate investment to the intenor provinces and to
improve the productivity of private sector investment by building capacity, assisting government reform
efforts, and promoting the adoption and dissemination of sound business practices in the area of corporate
govemance, environmental and safety standards, and efficiency of operations This comparative
advantage is based on the Bank Group's diverse range of products and instruments suitable for promoting
private sector development in challenging environment, its global presence, the Bank Group's leadership
in sustainable development, as well as the Intemational Finance Corporation's (IFC's) expenence and
track record in investing in the interior of China, in assisting small companies, and its strong presence in
the field.

IFC's role in China is influenced by the fact that the domestic private financial sector is still very
small and that international financial institutions have limited access to the domestic market. In this
environment, IFC can play an important role in addressing the needs of the domestic private sector in
long-term financing, in supporting the growth and institutional strengthening of domestic private financial
institutions and in promoting the opening of financial markets. The Government is seeking to open up
many markets to private competition, although often slowly and cautiously, and with a good deal of
internal dissent by those who will now need to compete. In this situation, IFC participation has often
been sought by both the Government and private investors to serve as an "honest broker" in the early

3The Western regions have attracted only 4% of China's cumulative FDI and the ratio of FDI per capita between
the Coast and the Interior is 18 tol

CAS Annex F
Page 6 of 10

transactions. Speed of liberalization often depends on how successful pioneering transactions are, and
IFC has an important role to play in promoting such investments.

11.2 

Bank Group Strategic Priorities in the Area of Private Sector Development

The Bank Group Program will support Government's efforts to accelerate the transition to a
market economy and improve the business environrment. The focus is on the following areas:

* 

Improve the business environment by assisting the Government's efforts to build the legal and
institutional foundations of a market economy,
* Help deepen and broaden the financial sector and support ownership diversification;
* Support industrial restructuring and ownership transformation in order to improve the
competitiveness of domestic firms and expand the space for private sector activities,
* Support the adoption and dissemination of environmentally and socially responsible and
sustainable business practices by the Chinese private sector; and
* Promote pnvate sector participation in social and physical infrastructure services.

Across all these dimensions of the Bank Group's private sector strategy, special attention will be
given to supporting pnvate sector development in the interior provinces of China.

The Bank Group will meet these objectives by providing policy advice; technical assistance for
revising laws and regulations; and building regulatory capacity. In the water and transport sectors, Bank
loans will be used to leverage policy and regulatory refonns and experiment with greater pnvate sector
participation. IFC investments will focus on developing model transactions that create demonstration
effects and set standards for private sector investments in corporate govemance, international accounting,
environmental technologies and practices employed, and efficiency of operations Where appropnate,
IFC financing will be supplemented by technical assistance and advisory services to build capacity at the
enterprise level and at the level of the regulator.

11.3 

Business Environment

The goal is to assist the Government in creating a market-friendly legal, regulatory, and financial
environment to accelerate further development of China's private sector. The Bank Group will support.
improvements in the legal framework and enforcement capacity; greater transparency and consistency of
laws and regulations consistent with WTO commitments; and establishment of better incentives at the
enterprise level to improve business practices and compliance. The Bank Group's approach will be to
maximize synergies between the Bank's expertise in policy advise and IFC's sector-specific knowledge
gained through its transaction experience (see Box 2). The specific delivery vehicles are:

Supportfor Small and Medium Enterprise Development. TFC has established the China Project

Development Facility (CPDF) and Small Enterpnse Investment Fund in Sichuan Province. These
facilities will focus on strengthening the capacity of financial institutions to work with SMEs, on training
entrepreneurs and on addressing business climate issues for private sector development in the intenor.
IFC has recently invested in a financial intermediary utilizing an innovative lending technology to small
businesses aimed at relaxing the collateral constraint on SME lending by making it easier to base credit
decisions on the use of accounts receivable as collateral, as opposed to real estate, for instance. IFC will
continue to explore opportunities to assist similar financial institutions focusing on SME lending.
Through policy notes and seminars, the Bank Group will continue to provide advice on financial and
market reforms and capacity-building to develop pnvate enterprises in rural and western regions. This

CAS Annex F
Page 7 of 10

work will address issues such as providing forms of business organization appropriate for small private
enterprises, micro-finance, special financial institutions serving the needs of small pnvate enterprises.

Box 2: Business Environment Issues as Reflected in IFC's Portfolio Experience

While IFC's portfolio experience in China has been positive overall, there are a number of business environment
issues of a general nature that have resulted in hligher transaction costs, worse than expected project performance,
and limited opportunities for IFC to reach and serve certain categories of private enterprises in China

Distorted market behavior of state-owned Chinese comnpanies operating under soft budget constraints and

benefiting from localprotectionism have resulted in excess capac2tt in many sectors, in segmented national
markets, and unfair conietition Poor compliance with, and correspondingly inadequate enforcement of, safety,
environmental, copyright, and othcr industry regulations, have produced similar effects Such practices have
penalized companies that introduced modern technologies, offer quality products, and follow strictly the rules of
the game

Control over market entry and interference by local governments in selection of oint venture (JV) partners have
often produced sub-optimal and overly complicated JVstructtires This has often impeded the capacity ofjoint-
venture companies to provide adequate project completion support, to agree on a coherent business strategy and
react quickly and appropriately to the dynamic business conditions in China

Projects whose financial performance relied on expectations of imminent sector refonrs, have often suffered from
delavs in promulgation and implemie,ntation of reform initiatives An example is the IFC-supported credit rating
agency, which relied on announced government plans for reduction in administrative controls over the corporate
bond market IFC has extensively used self-standing and project-related technical assistance projects to build
regulatory capacity and promote market-oriented reforms in various sectors, particularly in the financial sector

Controls over foreign currency borrowving by domestic private enterprises have limited IFC's ability to reach such
enterprises This has a particular impact on the interior provinces where foreign investors are scarce, and on
frontier sectors for China, such as private health and education, where local financiers are reluctant to invest

Corporate governance and financial reporting practices are poorly developed in China This underscores the
need for more intense monitoring, including through an increascd field presence to follow up project performance
At the same time, this is an area where IFC has a strong role to play by introducing domestic companies to
international practices in corporate governance and accounting

Assistance in enhancing public and corporate governance. This may include advice on issues

related to a government-business relationship conducive to a modem market economy, and efficient
public sector management. Following the assistance provided to CSRC on developing capacity for
training of independent directors in corporate governance, IFC will continue to support efforts to establish
and strengthen institutions for training and capacity building in these areas and in securities markets.
There will be further technical advice on specific issues raised in the recently completed Bank Group
study on corporate governance and enterprise reform in China, such as the role of institutional investors in
improving corporate governance and the corporate governance of enterprise groups

Ongoing Bank Economic Law Reform Project This project, currently under implementation, will

continue to assist the government to strengthen and further rationalize the commercial law framework and
build human capacity and skills within the government and the judiciary. WBI will provide support to the
Chinese Academy for Social Sciences Institute for Regulation and Competition Policies.

Building capacity of investment promotion intermediaries. IFC's Foreign Investment Advisory

Service (FIAS) has completed a diagnostic study of investment approval policies in one of the provinces
Building on this, at the request of provinces, the Bank Group will support implementation of programs
aimed at promoting private investments in the interior provinces

CAS Annex F
Page 8 of 10

11.4 

Support to Private Financial Institutions

In the context of WTO entry, the Government has been gradually liberalizing the financial sector,
and this opens opportunities for domestic and foreign private institutions. The Bank's support for
improving China's financial system will be mainly in the form of advisory services and is expected to
cover all major areas of financial sector activities. Of particular importance for the growth of ownership
diversification among financial institutions are the Bank's planned AAA services on finance for small
firms, the collateral regime, corporate bond market development and infrastructure finance, and in these
areas the Bank and IFC will work closely together to implement proposed activities.

IFC has been active in the financial sector, having undertaken several pioneering transactions and
advisory/TA assignments, including investments in commercial banks (Bank of Shanghai, followed by
Minsheng Bank and the Nanjing City Commercial Bank), a major life insurance company (New China
Life), a credit rating agency, plus technical assistance in reviewing leasing legislation and regulation,
securities law, insurance regulation and strengthening of institutional capacity of a number of financial
institutions (see Box 3). IFC will be looking to support other private and city commercial banks,
especially in the westem regions, as well as non-banking financial institutions, such as housing finance
and asset management companies. IFC will also explore with the Chinese authorities ways to help
develop the local corporate bond market. The CPDF will continue to work with commercial banks and
other financial institutions from the interior provinces to strengthen their capacities to serve the needs of
SMEs. The share of financial market transactions in IFC's China program is expected to increase over
the CAS period.

Box 3: Institutional Development at Bank of Shanghai

The Bank of Shanghai was established in 1995 through a merger of urban credit coopcratives as part of the reform
and development of China's financial sector The bank's lending is oriented primarily toward support for local
small and medium enterprises.

The Bank of Shanghai's strategy for transforming itself into a modem banking institution focuses on entering into
technical assistance arrangements with reputable international banks and attracting strategic investors 
IFC has
supported the bank's efforts since 1995 through technical assistance and direct investments A total of US$1 3
million in wide-ranging technical assistance in the areas of corporate governance and risk management was
provided through grants from the govcrnment of Japan, the European Union, and IFC and was executed by Allied
Irish Bank, ABN/AMRO Bank, and IFC In 1999, IFC made a US$22 million equity investment in the Bank of
Shanghai, representing 5 percent of the bank's expanded share capital

Corporate governance practices in the bank have improved significantly An independent director was appointed
to the board, and the board has become nore engaged in active discussions with the management on strategic
development of the bank The board has set up three committees - those for audit, compensation (both chaired by
independent directors), and risk management The management team has introduced various improvements in all
the operational areas, particularly in credit risk management and internal controls 
In 2001 the Bank of Shanghai
was able to attract two strategic foreign investors the Hong Kong and Shanghai Banking Corporation and the
Shanghai Commercial Bank, the first time foreign commercial entities have invested in a Chinese domestic bank

CAS Annex F
Page 9 of 10

11.5 

Corporate Restructuring and Ownership Diversification

Significant transformation and ownership diversification have taken place in the SOE sector, but
there are many remaining challenges. A joint IFC/World Bank study will examine the financial, technical
and manpower needs of recently privatized enterprises This may lead to advisory work on structural
reforms needed for Chinese companies to cope with the expected restructuring, including the role of
foreign investors in SOE reform and restructuring; further privatization of small and medium or selected
large SOEs; the institutional framework for exercising state ownership rights in remaining large SOEs and
groups; exits from non-viable SOEs; and development of safety nets and private sector employment
altematives for redundant workers.

Another area of possible Bank Group assistance is in evaluating the potential impact of post-
WTO intemational competition on the Chinese corporate sector and the effectiveness of the
Government's planned response. The Bank Group may assist in evaluating the impact of WTO-
liberalization on key industrial sectors and the social, financial, and fiscal implications. The Bank may
also provide or marshal advice to the Government on intemational experiences and potential effectiveness
of strategies that might be used to cope with post-WTO competition, such as industrial policy, enterpnse
grouping, government-led reorganization and IPOs.

China's four AMCs have been given responsibility - as the largest creditors - for the financial and
operational restructunng of a large number of distressed SOEs. It will be important for the Chinese
AMCs to leam from the recent experiences and shortcomings of AMCs in other countries. Technical
assistance to China's AMCs will be designed to facilitate the resolution of remaining NPLs, manage
converted equity more effectively, and facilitate follow-on operational restructurng and ownership
transformation. Knowledge dissemination activities will be organized to provide local practitioners with
international experience in the market-based restructuring of large companies 
IFC facilitated the first
major sale of distressed assets in China by one of the four AMCs. The success of this landmark auction is
expected to set a precedent for future sales and provide momentum to the development of a NPL market
IFC will pursue other opportunities in this field through participation in resolution of NPLs and through
pilot projects to demonstrate model enterprise-level restructunng.

11.6 
Support the Adoption aiid Dissemination of Environmentally and Socially Responsible
Business Practices by the Chinese Private Sector

China's high economic growth has been associated with significant local environmental costs
Addressing these, and reconciling economic growth with improved water and air quality, are prionties for
the Government. As described in the main CAS document, the Bank is proposing an intensive level of
support in this area to help shape environmental institutions, manage China's air, land and water
resources, and protect the global commons. IFC's investments in China have helped companies improve
their environmental and safety practices. In addition, IFC has made a number of investments in
sustainable forest management. These investments have helped to commercialize in an environmentally
sustainable way the use of plantation resources, some of which were created with Bank assistance, and
have strengthened the relationship between these companies and the rural communities where forest
resources are located, thus contnbuting to improvement of the communities' living standards. IFC will
continue to support the development of China's environmental industries through investments in a range
of projects, including those bringing intemational environmental technology to China, as well as those
that manage wastewater and sewage treatment plants. IFC will also, as it does globally, seek to help
investee companies find profitable opportunities to reduce waste and emissions.

CAS Annex F
Page 10 of 10

11.7 

Expanding the Presence of the Private Sector in Social and Physical Infrastructure

The goal is to prevent social and physical infrastructure from becoming a bottleneck in the
expansion of private investments and trade. Investments required for establishing a world-class
infrastructure are huge. The Bank Group will leverage its lending in the infrastructure sector to support
the creation of a regulatory regime that facilitates competition, encourages pnvate entry and mobilizes
private risk capital. Bank support for infrastructure development will be delivered through:

* TA for public private partnership in gas distribution; and wind-power concessions;
* Support for asset securitization under Bank-assisted highway projects;
* A highway sector study to examine commercialization and market financing of public toll road
companies and promote competition in highway management and development of pnvate
contractors;
* National railways projects to support the Government's railways reform program;
* Ongoing and proposed Inland Waterways Projects to assist commercialization of inland waterway
agencies;
* TA and a study by the Bank's Public and Private Infrastructure Advisory Facility (PPIAF) for
design and implementation of a regulatory framework for competitive power markets, as well as
TA and study on deregulation of the oil and gas sector; and
* Energy projects to support development of wholesale power markets.

Due to the relatively underdeveloped regulatory framework in China for private participation in
infrastructure (PPI) and constraints on local currency financing, IFC's transactions in this sector have so
far been limited. Looking forward, given the Government's commitment to open up this sector, IFC
should be able to engage, especially in close coordination with the Bank. IFC's focus in the area of
physical infrastructure is likely to be on small-scale power plants with industrial clients, transportation
(ports), water (utilities), logistics and distnbution and gas distribution.

In the area of social infrastructure, IFC has recently approved its first health care investment in
China. IFC will continue to pursue opportunities in health and education, including the establishment of
financing mechanisms in these areas, i.e., student loan programs and life and health insurance products
IFC has already launched a study to explore opportunities for private sector investments in health and
education in Shanghai, Shaanxi, and Sichuan Provinces

11.8 

Focus on Promoting Private Sector Development in the Interior

A special focus in the Bank Group's advisory and investment activities related to private sector
development in China will be given to the interior provinces. Given the high developmental priority of
the western areas and the difficulties of doing business there, this region has been a key focus of IFC's
strategy in China. IFC has undertaken a number of transactions in Sichuan province, including
establishment of the CPDF and Small Enterprise Investment Fund, and with the expenence gained, is able
to widen its focus to cover a second interior province, Shaanxi IFC's experience in Sichuan suggests that
focusing on one province pays off in terms of what IFC can accomplish, in tenrs of visibility, critical
mass of developmental impact and knowledge of local business conditions.

CAS Annex G
Page 1 of 3

World Bank Group's Support for Good Developmental Governance

Government Efforts to Improve Governance and Fight Corruption With the objective
of pushing China more rapidly toward a market-based economy, a noticeably accelerated program
of refonns was introduced in March 1998 by the then newly installed Government. A top priority
area smce that time has been state sector reform, including public sector management and state
enterprise rationalization. The major objective underpinning these refonns is to address many of
the institutional issues which have led to increased corruption over the past decade. The thrust of
public sector reform has been to streamline the govermnent organization and staffing and to take it -
and the military - out of operating commercial activities. China's leaders are clearly concerned with
issues of accountability, fostering a more competitive environment and the establishment of a public
sector that is "honest, diligent, pragmatic and efficient."

Some of the bold initiatives taken include:

* The State's Role in the Economy Reshaped In 1998, the new adminstration reorganized
and down-sized the public sector. The number of mimstries went from 41 to 29; ministries
overseeing industrial or commercial activities were spun off; the remaining rmnistries were
made more "market- friendly"; the number of public sector employees was cut in half over three
years; the military, police, government agencies and judicial organizations were ordered to
divest themselves of business activities; and the legal and regulatory framework to guide proper
development of a market-based economy was strengthened.

* Officials suspected of corruption are investigated and, if found guilty, punished For
instance, in 1999 prosecutors investigated more than 30,000 officials suspected of corruption
and recovered more than US$200 million. Major smugglmg and fraud cases were publicly
disclosed, and the sentencing of senior officials was given prominence.

* Legal and judicial reform. Judicial reform wNas formally recognized as a priority at the 15th
Party Congress in 1997. The Supreme People's Court is midway through its five-year reform
plan. China's Constitution was amended in 1999 to include "governing the country according
to law" as an essential principle. In tandem, many laws are being amended or new laws drafted
with provisions encouraging good governance.

* Regulations and procedures for public sector staff - in government and SOEs - promote
transparency.

-

Integrity and conflict of interest rules introduced for semor government officials and SOE
chief executives.
- A public bidding system for government procurement introduced at central and local levels.
- Government institutions and SOEs audited and subjected to public information disclosure.

* 

Introduction of Three Reforms Support Good Governance. These include reforrms of: the
government approval system to reduce opportunities for the "exchange of power for money,"
the fiscal and budgetary system to improve budgetary and treasury management; and the
government personnel system, by opening official selection to competition, improving
performance appraisals and strengthening supervision.

CAS Annex G
Page 2 of 3

In tandem with the campaign for clean government is a broader program addressing
economic and financial crime in all parts of the society. This accords with senior leader directives
that "The fight against corruption should be intensified both to resolve the current problems and to
eliminate the root causes." In this, it is recognized that corruption in all forms is a threat to social
stability and modernization.

Ongoing Bank Support. In China, the Bank has been supporting, according to its mandate,
better developmental governance in areas where it has the greatest levels of expertise, experience
and comparative advantage, for instance in the areas of economic law, procurement, accounting and
financial sector management. More recently, the Bank co-sponsored an international seminar on
anti-corruption with Tsinghua University and the Carnegie Endowment for Peace, where it
presented the latest m analytical tools concerning corruption. Our major areas of involvement are
as follows:

* Promoting the Rule of Law. It might be argued that the government's chief advance in its
1998 reforms was to recognize the importance of the rule of law, which is now reflected in
China's Constitution. While China's transition to a legally oriented society will take some time
to accomplish, the Bank is supporting the process by helping develop an adequate legal
framework and training officials who will improve the current level of law enforcement. Under
the Economic Law Reform Project, for example, the Bank has provided technical assistance to
the government in (a) assisting in the preparation of economic legislation in prionty areas; (b)
promoting implementation of laws through traminng of government officials, judges and legal
professionals; and (c) strengthening key institutions responsible for legislation and
implementation of economic laws. Fifteen laws and regulations supported by the project have
been already enacted, and more than 25 others are being drafted. Four universities/institutes
have received support to provide continuing legal education Further, both lending and non-
lending activities frequently help develop the legal underpinnings for market-based operations
in the various sectors - the energy sector probably realizing the greatest achievements in this
regard.

* Promoting Good Governance, Both in Government and Corporations. The Bank is well
positioned to help the Govermnuent achieve its objective of improving the attitudes of civil
servants, in terms of responsiveness to the people served and in tenrns of developing greater
probity. It has, among other things, worked with the National School of Administration,
responsible for training civil servants, to develop appropriate standards for public service and
develop a national civil servants training system. With WBI, we plan to follow up the latter
work by developing corruption-prevention training programs. Further, to strengthen China's
low-yielding tax system that has led to the imposition of mynad fees and opened the door to
corruption and predatory behavior, our Fiscal Technical Assistance Project has been helping to
strengthen the tax administrationand collection systems. Short policy studies focused on
specific fiscal issues have also been provided, as well as a Public Expenditure Review that looks
at the severe provincial- level fiscal problems that give rise to a variety of abuses.

* 

In the corpomte arena, the Bank is using a range of activities to encourage the reform of state
enterprises into market-oriented entities employing transparent practices. Among these
activities are: a major joint Bank/IlFC policy study on corporate governance in enterprise refonn,
collaboration with the World Bank Institute on delivery of corporate governance training

CAS Annex G
Page 3 of 3
programs (one Internet-based), IFC-led training for independent directors of Chinese listed
companies, provision of advisory assistance on transparent disposal of assets by Asset
Management Companies, review of the business environment of private enterprises, and
ensuring that ownership diversification mechanisms are open and transparent.

Promoting Financial Transparency. Bank support for good financial practices takes many
forms, in keeping with the government's key goal of strengthening financial management and
auditing at all levels of the public sector, among SOEs and private sector firms, and in the
financial sector. At the most basic level, the Accounting Reform Project is (a) training
government and enterprise staff in international accounting and auditing standards, (b) training a
special cadre of senior auditors charged by the Premier to mspect enterprises for the purpose of
curbing waste and corruption; and (c) strengthening financial management in state enterprises
and government bodies. More generally, financial management trainng is provided to
implementing agencies country-wide by our in-country team.

To bolster government efforts preventing waste and fraud within the banking system, the Bank
is supporting a Financial Sector Technical Assistance Project and a range of TA activities that,
inter alia, strengthen the competence of banking staff, deal with the financial dimensions of
enterprise restructuring in an open and orderly way, and develop new corporate governance
mechanisms for China's largest banks. IFC's investment in the financial sector are typically
accompanied by technical assistance to improve corporate governance, regulatory compliance
and risk management skills at the level of financial institutions and to strengthen regulatory
capacity particularly in areas that are being opened to private sector entry.

* Promoting International Procurement Practices. Since corruption significantly increases
economic inefficiency as uncompetitive firms win contracts and deliver poor services, a focus of
Government and Bank attention has been to improve transparency in goods and services
procurement, making the process more fair, equitable and economic. Bank efforts were initially
directed at safeguarding World Bank-assisted projects, but in recent years have extended to
general govermnent procurement procedures Assistance has been provided to the Government
to: (a) formulate and disseminate its Bidding Law, containing measures and sanctions against
fraudulent practices; (b) train large numbers of civil servants, project staff and others in
international procurement procedures, with discussion of corruption issues; (c) develop a
procurement training program at Tsinghua University, with coverage of anti-corruption
activities; and (d) update guidelines and model bidding documents for Bank- financed projects
by introducing, in particular, fraud and anti-corruption measures.

Knowledge Sharing. Increasingly, the Bank has helped bring to China international experience
with governance issues. For example, the Bank, Tsinghua University and the Carnegle
Endowment for International Peace organized a seminar on "Economic Reform and Good
Governance: Fighting Corruption in Transition Economies," held at the Tsinghua University in
Beijing during April 11-12, 2002. This was the first international conference held in China on
the topic, and attracted in situ about 150 high level participants. The Bank contributed two
speakers, both underlining the usefulness of new governance and anticorruption diagnostic tools,
complemented by cross-country governance indicators.

CAS Annex H
Page 1 of 3

Summary of China Country Gender Review

A China Country Gender Review, as a basis for producing the more in-depth Country
Gender Assessment, was completed in June 2002. The document is expected to promote
dialogue between the Bank and China on the relevance of gender equality to effective
development assistance. It also is intended to contribute to nmainstreaming of gender-related
activities in World Bank projects when appropriate. The following summarizes review findings

Chinese women's journey over the last hundred years from feudalism to emancipation to
full equality under the law has prompted justifiable pride in China. It is remarkable that such
radical social change could have been accomplished within a few generations. However,
officials and experts on gender issues in China share concerns whether socioeconomic changes
in the past decade have led to some regression in the status of women In fact, the vanous gaps
separating men and women's status, income and power keep shiftmg in response to constantly
changing social, economic, cultural and political realities in China.

Several trends related to the changing role of the State in citizens' lives continue to affect
gender equality in China. These include:

* Devolution of central government responsibilities to lower admmistrative levels;
* 
Increasing reliance on the rule of law; the emergence of NGOs and the participation of
civil society in the policy and legislation process;
* The deepening of economic reforms and accession to the WTO;
* The disappearance of the "iron rice bowl" and gradual creation of a social security
system;
* 
Introduction of market forces m health care and education; and
* The growth of rural urban migration and rapid urbanization.

These social and economic shifts interact with underlying cultural beliefs about gender
roles, which - despite 50 years of advocated equality - remain deeply institutionalized and
socialized.

The enabling environment for gender equality is good, and includes the following:

* A comprehensive legl and regulatory framework;
* The adoption of a comprehensive framework for the development of women coordinated
and monitored by the National Working Committee on Women and Children (NWCWC),
which was established in 1992 with leading officials from 24 Ministries and 5 mass
organizations;
* The adoption of international conventions and commitments such as the international
Convention to Eliminate Discrimmation Against Women and the Beijing Platform of

Action;

* The evolution of the All China Women's Federation into a more advocacy-oriented non-
governmental orgamzation; and
* An extended networks of individuals, universities and research institutes, and NGOS
devoted to promoting gender equality.

CAS Annex H
Page 2 of 3

Trends toward progress in gender equality are notable and include closing the gender
gap in school enrollment rates (48 percent of pupils enrolled in primary school in 1998 were girls
compared about 45 percent in 1980) and increasmg the number of female school teachers at both
the primary and secondary levels (in 1998, female teachers comprised 47 percent of primary and
36 percent of secondary schools teachers compared to 37 percent and 25 percent, respectively, in
1980). An overall decrease in the birth fertility rate also means more opportunity for more
women to pursue activities beyond those associated with family life or child-rearing.

Yet there are still barriers to gender equality. Key gender issues included:

* Gender inequality in the labor market in terms of income gaps, discrimination in hirmg
and firing, unequal access to credit, and uneven impact of economic reform of men and
women;
* Growing gender poverty gap in both rural and urban areas due to male out-migration,
feminization of agriculture, lack of opportunities;
* Unequal access to education m rural areas: illiteracy rates (26 percent of females over 15
year old compared to 9 percent of males over the same age). Uneven gender impacts of
the introduction of market forces in health and education;
* The very strong preferences for male children in rural families;
* Vulnerability of women and girls, particularly in rural areas, to abuse and other ills; and
* Little progress over the last decade in women's participation in political decision-making
and governance.

Given the situation described above, Chinese researchers and scholars have identified the

following areas as priorities for gender equality interventions:

* Legal and civil society reform to improve the enabling environment and reduce gender
gap, including greater clarity on equal rights, and greater gender awareness among public
officials and legal/judicial personnel;
* Measures to identify and address the growing gender poverty gap including gender-
sensitive research and analysis, gender-sensitive poverty reduction strategies, and better
enforcement of equality guarantees in labor and land laws;
* Measures to address gender inequalities in the labor market including labor adjustment
programs, revision of retirement age, and effective maternity insurance programs;
* Measures to mitigate the uneven impacts of market refonns and changes in provision of
health care and education, and to address the gender impacts of the family planning

policy;

* Measures to mitigate the vulnerability of women and girls to violence, abduction, and
suicide; and
* Measures to improve the participation of women in political decision- making and
administrations at all levels.

CAS Annex H
Page 3 of 3

Possible Areas of World Bank Involvement

The Country Gender Review includes an analysis of the country context and a review of
the current portfolio. In the past, gender issues have been integrated into social sector studies
and projects, but not into other sectors where they can be expected to be relevant, such as
agriculture. Specific recommendations for areas of possible Bank intervention, both to address
specific gender issues and to mamstream gender-related activities into the project pipeline,
include the following:

* Research and analysis activities, including technical assistance in generating sex-
disaggregated data to support the development of social policy, social programming and

legislation;

* Policy oriented research in areas such as regulatory frameworks for the enforcement of
equal nghts protection when relevant to economic development; instruments to support
the growth of not-for-profit social services delivery; gender-sensitive modalities to
improve social services delivery; and promotion of greater women's participation in
public life in economic activity;
* Support of civil society especially the budding women's NGOs movement and a network
of scholars specializing in gender issues; and
* There is scope for developing projects or project components targeting barriers to gender
equality. There also is some scope for effectively mainstreaming gender analysis and
activities in new and existing Bank projects, supported by capacity building on gender
issues for Bank staff and partners in China.

Methods to Increase Gender Mainstreaming in Bank-financed Projects

Recent experience suggests that several steps can be taken at relatively little additional
cost to improve gender analysis during project preparation, and to improve effectiveness of
project implementation in tenns of gender equity, for instance, conducting an initial gender
baseline study and gender needs assessment during identification stage; including project
activities or components which by their nature promote more equitable participation or access to
benefits in project preparation stage; and collecting gender-disaggregated participation
information and reflected in project progress reports in project implementation stage.

CAS Annex I
Page 1 of 4

Improving the Quality and Client Responsiveness of Core Project Services:
Financial Management and Procurement

A. Financial Management

Background. China realizes the importance of establishing and maintaining a sound
financial management system to ensure transparency and accountability and to minimize potential
fraud or corruption. Consequently, various measures have been introduced, as follows:

* Two Bank assisted projects are under implementation to bring China's accounting standards to
international levels (International Accounting Standards - IAS). Sixteen new accounting
standards have since been promulgated;
* The quality of services of various governing agencies, such as the China National Audit Office
(CNAO), Chinese Institute of Certifie d Public Accountants (CICPC), China Security Regulatory
Commission (CSRC), has greatly improved in recent years;
* As economic reform further proceeds, services provided by auditors in both the public and
private sectors are getting increased attention; and
* The role of media in disclosing publicly financial irregularities has drawn praise.

However, diagnostic work completed thus far (Country Profile of Financial Accountability in
FY97, a study of Corporate Governance Issues in China's Enterprise Reform in FY01, and a major
study of Financial Management and Governance Issues in China by the Asian Development Bank in
2000) identified the following areas that require further improvement:

* 

* The pace of harmonizing China's accounting standards with IAS has been slower than expected,
and the issues to be addressed more complex than envisaged;
Increased collaboration between standards setting and regulatory bodies needs to be encouraged
to minimize inconsistency in information disclosure practices;
* Capacity building for major supervising bodies (CNAO, CSRC and CICPA, etc.) in supervising
techniques, examination and certification systems, and strategic planning for professional
development warrants more attention; and
* Shortage of qualified professionals has rendered enforcement weak, and coordination among
governig agencies with overlapping accounting and auditing responsibilities needs to be
improved.

Risks to Bank Funds. The portfolio has not encountered significant problems in use of
Bank funds, due to the general awareness of the importance of project financial management.
However, reviews of audit reports for the IBRD/IDA portfolio indicate some cases of the following:

* Withholding offunds by financial bureaus at lower government levels or project management
offices (PMOs), though usually temporary, tends to slow down implementation;
* Late submission of audit reports has been a problem in the past few years, potentially leading to
delays in taking corrective measures; and

* Temporary transfer offunds to non-project activities by local levels experiencing cash-flow

problems, although these may be officially sanctioned and short-lived in most cases, creates an
undesired financial burden on project implementation, and opens up opportunities for financial

irregularities.

CAS Annex I
Page 2 of 4

Addressing the Risks. One response to addressing fiduciary risks has been to "ring fence"
project financial management. This has been done through financial management assessment at
project entry to ensure establishment of a financial management system meeting the requirements of
OP/BP 10.02; reviews of annual audit reports, and subsequent follow-up on corrective measures
taken to address audit findings.

The Bank uses its own staff and consultants to (a) verify whether project accounts are being
properly set up and identify internal control weaknesses, (b) determine whether supporting
documentations for disbursements made via Statement of Expenditures are available and legitimate,
and (c) identify areas in financial management and disbursement that require further improvement.

Planned Systemic Initiatives. Rather than "ring fencing" project financial management,
fiduciary risk reduction would be significantly enhanced by a more systemic approach to the issues
This would involve a streamlining of China's financial accountability system and upgrading the
system to international levels. Such an approach would lessen the burden of "ring fencing"
investment projects, and provide the Bank with a basis for engaging the Government on
strengthening and improving its financial management and accountability systems. A fiduciary risk
mitigation and capacity building strategy will therefore be undertaken in FY03-05, entailing in-depth
analytical work and targeted technical assistance by the Bank. The following work is planned

* Build on ADB's study of Financial Management and Governance Issues in China in 2000, and
analyze areas that have changed rapidly in the past few years or that deserve further scrutiny, and
over time cover all major areas usually assessed as part of a full CFAA exercise;
* On a sectoral basis, identify obstacles to the smooth flow of funds from the Bank to the ultimate
beneficiaries and propose corrective measures; and
* Conduct an extensive peer review as well as on-site reviews of audit fieldwork to determine the
quality of audit reports and propose corrective measures.

TechlnicalAssistance in building capacity of key public accountability oversight institutions
will be provided through policy dialogue, as well as provision of Bank-administered trust funds. The
following technical assistance programs are planned:

* Contin ued training of CNAO staff, particularly at the municipal or county levels. CNAO
training is well justified since it is well positioned to audit Bank projects, mainly due to its
association with the Government and the sanction powers given to it by the State Council.
CNAO's organizational structure at various administrative levels is also well defined and staffed;
* Tlte APEC Finance and Developmtent Program, co-chaired by China and the Bank, was
proposed by China as a means of addressing the need for capacity building in finance and
economics among APEC members;
* Project Support. The National Accounting Institute component of the Bank-assisted China
Accounting Reform and Development Project will be monitored to ensure achievement of
objectives, i.e., establishment of three residential training facilities (in Beijing, Shanghai and
Xiamen), which are expected to have major impact on training professional financial managers
and accountants;
* Borrower Training. Continue to provide borrowers with training in FM/disbursement
procedures, using FM assessments, project launch workshops, regular training programs,
provision of training materials, and speedy response to ad hoc assistance requests; and

CAS Annex I
Page 3 of 4

* Donor Cooperation. The Bank would continue to collaborate with other major donors (e g,
ADB, DFID) and provide assistance in addressing capacity building needs for major supervising
bodies, such as CICPA, CSRC and CNAO.

Joint Goverintent-Bank Supervision. Starting in FY03, joint supervision missions
involving MOF, CNAO and the Bank will be carried out, with a focus on a specific industry or
sector, or a specific geographical area. These exercises will supplement annual audit work, provide
better and consistent coverage, help identify weaknesses in financial management specific to a given
industry, sector or area, and assist in designing counter measures.

Full decentralization of the Bank's FM/disbursement function to the Beijing office, expected
to be completed in early FY03, has been well received by borrowers, as follows:

* FM assessment at project entry and subsequent participation in supervision missions by Bank
staff close to project implementation have helped ensure that sound FM systems and practice are
in place and functioning as intended;
* With the World Bank Office in Beijing serving as a focal point, communications that used to be
hindered by language barriers, time differences and cultural differences have since improved; and
* The volume and turnaround of withdrawal applications processed and flow of Bank funds to
ultimate beneficiaries have been accelerated since decentralization was introduced. Response
time to queries from PMOs has been reduced considerably and the quality of advice on project
expenditures has also improved.

B. Procurement

Procurement Environment. The procurement environment in China has improved
substantially during the transition from a planned to a market economy. One of the key
improvements is that the principle of competitive bidding is now firmly anchored in Chinese bidding
law and procurement practices and is the norm in government capital construction projects.
Conversely, the newly enacted Government Procurement Law, which deals with public procurement
funded from fiscal resources, can be strengthened further to reflect current best practices.
Procurement under Bank-financed projects in China has generally been satisfactory, as reported in
the Procurement Audit carried out in April 2001. The Audit concluded: "generally the contracts
subject to prior review are procured in accordance with the procedures laid down in the loan/credit
agreements. Procurement work for the China portfolio is managed effectively and efficiently."
Since decentralization to country offices was introduced in China several years ago, there has been a
dramatic improvement in the quality of our procurement services to our Borrower. Turnaround time
for the review of procurement documents has been reduced from 20 to 30 days to 2 to 3 days. The
number of procurement documents being reviewed locally in Beijing has quadrupled Furthermore,
the Beijing office provides advisory, troubleshooting and training assistance to implementation
agencies. Although procurement processing has improved substantially in China, project
procurement assessment reviews and an Operational Procurement Review indicate some areas
require more attention:

* Procurement Legislation and Procedures: The Government's Tendering and Bidding Law

which became effective in January 1, 2000 needs to be widely disseminated. Differences
between government and Bank procurement procedures sometimes result in

CAS Annex I
Page 4 of 4

misunderstandings and delays in the bidding process, causing inefficient and uneconomical
procurement results;
* Procurement Training Program: Unfamiliarity with the Bank's procurement procedures
results in lower quality documents and prolongs the processing time and increases the cost of
doing business;

* Still Developing Contracting, Manufacturing and Consultinig Industries give rise to

problems. Inadequate designs, lower-quality technical standards and specifications,
unreasonably low bid prices, and inadequate contract management lead to a high amount of
works contract variations, substantial delay of contract implementation, excessive revisions
of costs and contract disputes, and low quality of some manufactured equipment, causing
poor utilization of resources; and
* Internal Review Process Govemment agencies' involvement in bidding document and bid
evaluation review, in particular for mechanical and electronic products, and inadequate
communication between the parties involved sometimes seriously delay the procurement
process.

Diagnostic Work. The following has been completed: some 30 specific project
procurement capacity assessments carried out in the last three years, a procurement audit carried out
in April 2001and a recent Operational Procurement Review. These review activities confirm that
while procurement is generally carried out in an efficient, economic, transparent and fair manner,
there are still some areas needing improvement

Risks Mitigation. The Operational Procurement Review proposes a risk mitigation and
capacity building strategy. Tentative recommendations and an action plan include:

* Extending the Outreach of a Sustainable Procuremenit Training Program would produce a

major improvement of the govemment procurement process, and establishment of such a
program is a key recommendation of the Review. To this end, the Bank would assist in the
implementation of the training program in five Chinese universities and help the universities
deliver training courses on a country-wide basis in a sustainable manner,
* The Bank would continue to work with the Govemment and other multilateral agencies like
ADB in supporting China's public procurement reforms, actively participate in the
preparation of the proposed Govemment Procurement Law, and assist in the Disseminlation

Program of Procuremenit Legislation throughout China;

* The Bank would continue to provide assistance to the Govemment in drafting and updating
Model Bidding Documents, contract forms and manuals, and guidelines for use in both IFI-
and govemment-funded procurement; and
* Procurement processing would benefit greatly from improvement in the intemal
Procurement Review Process and in the Bank's own review process through increased
decentralization. The Bank will, therefore, provide technical assistance aimed at identifying
the bottlenecks and recommend methods to streamline the process.

To support the Coontracting, Manufacturing and Consulting Industries in China, the Bank,

in collaboration with other international financial institutions, would continue to provide assistance
such as business opportunities seminars, and help develop specific training courses for industries to
enhance competitiveness and strengthen their capabilities in the procurement process.

CAS Annex J
Page 1 of 1

Overview of Ongoing External Assistance to China

Theme 1: Improving the Business 
Environment and Accelerating the Transition 

Theme 11: Addressing Needs of Poorer and 
Disadvantaged People and Regions 

Theme Ill: Facilitating an Environmentally
Sustainable Development Process

to a Market Economy

c7 

E 

J 

c'EE0

0- 

0

~~OC ~ -~~ 
~ 

0

-0)C ~~ 

0 

-0~rt

0)CE 

e-o>~~~ 
co~~~- 

o~~cc 
c~~ 

cE s 

-

-

~ 

E~0 

~ 

.~to 

t 

~ 

2

2 

E 

C)>2 

to~- >~ 

Tn 

-2

Multilateral s

ADB 
European Union 

X X 
X 

X 

X 
X 

X 
X 

X 
X 

X 

X 
X 

X 
X 

X 
X 

X 
X 

X 
X 

X 
X 

X 
X 

X
X

X 

X 

IMF 

X 

X 

X 

X

OECD 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X

UN Agencies 
World Bank 
Bilaterals

X 
X 

X 
X 

X 
X 

X 
X 

X 
X 

X 
X 

X 
X 

X 
X 

X 
X 

X 
X 

X 
X 

X 
X 

X
X

X 

X 

Australia 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X

Belgium 

X

Canada 
Denmark 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X

_ 

X 

X 

X 

X

Finland 

X 
X 

X 
X 

X

France 

X 

X 

X 

X

Germany 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X

Italy 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X

Japan 
Luxembourg 
Netherlands 

X 

X 

X 
X 

X 

X 
X

X 

X 

X 

X 

X

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X

Norway 

_ 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X

Spain 

X 

X 

X

Sweden 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X

United Kingdom 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X

Other Institutionsi

Ford Foundation 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

x

;WNdd, i. 

c, 

,S,iV': 

,oi 

rtV 

*i. 

l 

I* 

Ir

"'Y4~~V'I 

'i 

I 

-iN-H

O;* 

t 

'1 

, 

, , 
4 ,, 

.

-

l 

. 's88c_J-t 

C 

,IRtteeZ"rws 

i.xsl4 st$/ s~~C. 4l1J"yIlf-, t.a' 

f,> 

/~~ ~~4 , 

[ 

( 

) s 

... 4' 

ts< x,j 

A 

1'vII$|t^>zl>>s'NIHDN 

h

. , 

1

4.'r -;

.4.fi ., ,

' 

s 

' oil'1 

4V)Jt 

th 

vrt; 

.-. ,- ' -

.J. 2 

' 

> 

, 

:e,g, 

; 

< 

i*( 

,rl 

i

" ' ' ' 

~ti-

, , s 

_ , '-^~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~1 

¢rY'9;

Vd 

.; 

,. 

r wr, 

^. - .,> >* _ < .*, < h _ r * k 1lt~~~~~~~~~~~-.4.

% ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ 4 
~ 

.

{>4'1s 

1 

tt- 

-

a 

_>^

49~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~.

iO)~ rii 

; 

vfttl;W 

>E- 

..-'$t 

# , 

8 

4,d 
't- 

, ,. 

J.

