Public Disclosure Authorized

Document of
The World Bank
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Public Disclosure Authorized

Public Disclosure Authorized

Report No. 25228-JO

MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENT
OF THE
INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND
DEVELOPMENT
AND THE
INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION
TO THE
EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS
ONA
COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY

Public Disclosure Authorized

FOR THE
HASHEMITE KINGDOM OF JORDAN
December 20, 2002

Thiz: document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the
perf brmance of their official duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without World
Bank authorization.

CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS
(as of December 10, 2002)
Currency Unit = Jordanian Dinar (JD)

US$1.00 =JDO.71

JD 1.00 = US$1.41
JD1.00 = Fils 1,000

PRINCIPAL ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS USED IN THE TEXT
AAA
APC
CAE
CFAA
CIDA
CPAR
CT
CVDB
DFID
ECE
EDCO
EIA
EIB
ERFKE
ESW
EU
FIAS
GDLN
GDP
GEF
GOJ
GTZ
HDI
HEIS
HRDSIL
IBRD
ICT
IDB
IDECO
IDF
IFC
IMF
IPP
JEPC
JICA
JIPC
JMRC
JPMC
JRV

Analytical and Advisory Services
Arab Potash Company
Country Assistance Evaluation
Country Financial Accountability Assessment
Canadian Intemational Development Agency
Country Procurement Assessment Report
Country Team
Cities and Villages Development Bank
Department for Intemational Development
(UK)
Early Childhood Education
Electricity Distribution Company
Environment Impact Assessment
European Investment Bank
Education Reform for Knowledge Economy
Economic and Sector Work
European Union
Foreign Investment Advisory Services
Global Development Leaming Network
Gross Domestic Product
Global Environment Facility
Govemment of Jordan
Gessellshaft fUr Technische Zusammenarbeit
Human Development Indicators
Household Expenditure and Income Surveys
Human Resources Development Sector
Investment Loan
Intemational Bank for Reconstruction and
Development
Information and Communication Technology
Islamic Development Bank
Irbid Distnct Electricity Company
Institutional Development Fund
Intemational Finance Corporation
Intemational Monetary Fund
Independent Power Project
Jordan Export Promotion Council
Japan Intemational Cooperation Agency
Jordan Investment Promotion Council
Jordan Mortgage Refinance Corporation
Jordan Phosphates Mining Company
Jordan Rift Valley

Vice President
Director
Task Team Leader

IBRD
Jean-Louis Sarbib
Joseph Saba
Osman Ahmed

JSDF
JTC
JUH
JVA
KfW
LIL
LMICs
MDG
MENA
MEREN
METAP
MIGA
MOH
MOP
M&E
MTBF
NAF
NGO
O&M
OED
PESW
PPI
PRG
PSD
PSR
PSRL
PSET
QIZs
RJ
RMS
SME
SPP
SSC
TA
UNDP
USAID
WAJ
WBI
WTO

Japan Social Development Fund
Jordan Telecommunications Company
Jordan University Hospital
Jordan Valley Authority
Kreditanstalt fir Wiederaufbau
Learning and Innovation Loan
Low and Medium Income Countries
Millennium Development Goals
Middle East and North Africa
Middle East Regional Development Enterprise
Mediterranean Environmental Technical
Assistance Program
Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency
Ministry of Health
Ministry of Planning
Monitoring and Evaluation
Medium Term Budgetary Framework
National Aid Fund
Nongovemmental Organization
Operation and Maintenance
Operations Evaluation Department
Programmatic Economic and Sector Work
Private Participation in Infrastructure
Partial Risk Guarantee
Private Sector Development
Public Sector Reform
Public Sector Reform Loan
Program for Social and Economic
Transformation
Qualifying Industrial Zones
Royal Jordanian Airlines
Royal Medical Society
Small and Medium Enterprise
Social Productivity Program
Social Security Corporation
Technical Assistance
United Nations Development Programme
United States Agency for Intemational
Development
Water Authority of Jordan
World Bank Institute
World Trade Organization

IFC
Assaad Jabre
Sami Haddad
Margaret Henderson

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Contents
E,XECUTIVE SUMMARY
I. COUNTRY CONTEXT
A. Political and Governance Issues
B. Poverty and Social Challenges
C. Meeting the Millennium Development Goals
D. Poverty Reduction Programs
The Correlates of Poverty: Education and Health
Improving Employment Opportunities
E..Gender
F. Public Sector Reform: Quality, Equity,
Accountability, and Efficiency in the Delivery of Public Services
G. Resources Scarcity_

IHRECENT ECONOMICDEVELOPMENTS AND MEDIUM-TERM OUTLOOK
A. Recent Economic Developments
B. Medium-Term Economic Outlook_
C. External Environment

II . COUNTR Y DE VELOPMENT OBJECTIVES AND PRIORITIES
_
IK BANK GROUPASSISTANCE STRATEGY
A. Progress and Outcomes in Past World Bank Group Programs
B. Objectives and Principles of CAS
C. CAS Instruments

V BANK GROUPACTIVITIES TO SUPPORT THE STRATEGY

i
1
1
2
3
5
5
8
10
10
11

_ 13
13
15
17

18
19
19
19
24

26

26
A. Human Development and Poverty Reduction
27
B. Achieving Greater Gender Equity
C. Private Sector Development and Infrastructure for Sustainable Growth and Job Creation 28
30
D. Improving Water Resource Management and the Environment
31
E. Improving Public Sector Efficiency and Governance
32
F. Supporting the Knowledge Economy

P1. MANAGING THE ACTIVITIES
A. Portfolio Management
B. Monitoring Indicators and Benchmarks
C. Lending Scenarios and Triggers_
D. Bank Exposure

33
34
35
35

38

i'lI.RISKS

Annexes
A2
E.2
E.3-1
E 3-2
E4
E,5

33

Country at a Glance
Selected Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
IBRD Program Summary
IFC and MIGA Program Summary
Summary of Nonlending Services
Social Indicators

This doc ament has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in
the perfarmance of their official duties. Its contents may not be otherwise disclosed

without 'World Bank authorization.

2
B6
B7
B8-1
B8-2
B9
B 10
C

Key Economic Indicators
Key Exposure Indicators
Operations Portfolio
Statement of IFC's Held and Disbursed Portfolio
CAS Program Matrix
CAS Summary of Development Priorities
USAID and EU Programs in Jordan

Boxes
I.1
I.2
1.3
1.4
I.5
IV. 1
IV.2
IV.3

Country Profile
Millennium Development Goals: Summary of Jordan's Progress
Women's Education
Women's Health
Women in the Labor Force
Implementation of Previous CAS
World Bank Assistance Evaluation Reports
Major Partners in Jordan

Tables
I.1
I.2
11.1
VI. 1
VI.2
VI.3
VI.4

Poverty Trends in Jordan, 1987-2001
Selected Human Development Indicators in Jordan and Comparable Countries
Key Macroeconomic Indicators
Portfolio Management Indicators
CAS Monitoring Indicators
Assumptions and Triggers for the Lending Program
World Bank Assistance Program (FY03-05)

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Jordan, a middle income country, without significant natural resources, relies primarily on its
i.
hum an capital for development. Over the past decade, Jordan has focused on human resource investment,
structural reforms and fiscal discipline to enhance opportunities for growth and stability. Performance
trends have been mixed over the decade, but over the past two years, despite adverse extemal factors,
Jordan's strategy has produced positive and promising results. However, faced with demographic
pressure, severe external shocks, and persistent natural resource constraints, Jordan faces daunting
problems. Prior Country Assistance Strategies for Jordan were focused on assisting Jordan to meet these
challenges. This CAS aims to help Jordan strengthen and deepen past efforts-capture and retain the
gains, better manage resources, and optimize human resource development, thus encouraging growth and
presenting a backward slide into increased unemployment and consequent poverty.
Jordan's achievements in human development over the past 30 years have been impressive.
ii.
Life expectancy at birth has increased from 58 to 70 years and adult literacy from 47 to 90 percent. Infant
mortality fell by nearly 50 percent, and fertility rates are declining. Remittances from mainly skilled
Jordanians working overseas, mostly in the Gulf states, contribute 25 percent to GDP. Overall, the
counitry has made significant progress in meeting the Millennium Development Goals of universal
priliary education and reduction in child mortality. However, the cost in terms of public expenditures has
been relatively high. Moreover, the capacity to maintain the gains through coherent policies, effective
inst tutions, and adequate economic growth remains uncertain.
Given demographic pressure, the gains made on human development to date cannot be
iii.
suslained without major improvements in the quality and efficiency of education and health
services. Jordan spends about 9 percent of its GDP on health (3 percent more than comparable countries);
reforms to improve efficiency are needed. In education, Jordan must raise quality and realign the
cun iculum to meet the demands of labor markets and the challenges of the knowledge economy.
Although progress has been made in achieving gender equality, especially in education, the legal status of
worrien and their access to employment still need improvement. The potential of women in the economy
remains largely unrealized.
The performance of Jordan's economy has improved since the last CAS was presented to the
iv.
Board in November 1999. Annual growth was more than 4.7 percent during 2000-02 (compared to
3.2 percent in 1996-98). Exportsjumped 21 percent in 2001 after five years of very little growth.
Infl ation has been less than 2 percent. The economy has also shown resilience in the face of the escalating
regional tension and the events of September 11, 2001. The resilience is based in part on the Government
of Jordan's (GOJ) broad, decade-long program of structural reform. However, the economy's capacity for
growth is fragile and its rate of growth may not resolve long-standing challenges. Unemployment and
underemployment remain high, and deep pockets of poverty persist. Underemployment, especially among
university and secondary graduates, and persistent poverty could undermine social cohesion. Further
escalation of regional conflicts could undermine fiscal discipline, the reform process, and investor
confidence, thereby exacerbating poverty and joblessness.
Despite some progress, Jordan faces serious challenges in natural resources management.
v.
As one of the most water-deprived countries in the world, Jordan must enhance management of its limited
water resources. Strategic challenges facing the water sector are a lack of sustainable policies dealing with
the long-term water balance with available water per capita declining over the next decade. Resource
management requires considerable attention, particularly the efficiency of use in agriculture.

ii
vi.
In response to these challenges, in May 2002, the GOJ announced a National Strategy for
Poverty Alleviation. Previously, in October 2001, the GOJ launched an ambitious multi-year
development program aimed at deepening and accelerating the pace of structural reforms and
increasing investments for human development and poverty reduction. Taken together, these
programs are clear commitments to poverty alleviation, improved human resources development, public
sector efficiency, and realignment of the roles of state and private sector in the economy.
vii.
The CAS addresses the same systemic challenges as the last one. Its overarching objective
remains aligned with Jordan's goals: sustained growth to create jobs and permanently reduce
poverty. Building on lessons of the past, Bank Group support to Jordan will concentrate on five
priority areas:
0 Human resources development pursued strategically to support the key development goals of
reducing poverty and enabling more Jordanians to participate in the knowledge economy.
I Water resource management and protection of the environment.
I Private sector development and infrastructure for sustainable growth and job creation.
> Public sector reform and governance for more equitable, efficient, and higher quality delivery of
public services.
I Gender inclusion in development planning and analysis.
viii.
The CAS includes several activities and instruments to achieve its objectives: lending,
analytical and advisory activities (AAA), partial risk guarantees, equity and loan financing to the
private sector, and training for institutional capacity building.
ix.
The Bank lending program for the FY03-05 period ranges from US$305 million in the base
case to US$380 million in the high case (compared to US$300 and US$450 million, respectively, in
the last CAS), in addition to two partial risk guarantees of US$150 million. In the low case, which is
considered unlikely, lending will be reduced to US$100 million. Bank lending will concentrate on the
areas of human resource development (largely education) and public sector reform, which together
will account for more than 75 percent of the lending, a continuation of Bank support in both areasreflecting the need for long-term engagement to address deep, underlying structural issues.
x.

For sectors and areas where longer-term strategic Bank Group engagement is necessary,

whether or not lending is envisaged, Bank support wilH focus on AAA, including multi-year

nonlending services in the form of Programmatic Economic and Sector Work (PESW). During the
period of this CAS, such nonlending support is proposed for the following areas: water sector reform,
education sector strategy and implementation, pension fund reform, and the monitoring and evaluation of
the GOJ's development programs. The entire assistance program is shown in table VI.4.
xi.
Preparation of the CAS was participatory. The process of preparing the CAS began with a
one-day brainstorming retreat for members of the Bank's Jordan country team (CT) and senior GOJ
officials, followed by sector-by-sector discussions between the CT and the GOJ. Two Bank missions later
visited Jordan to discuss the strategy with the GOJ, civil society, and other development partners.
Discussions with other major donors, both in the field and at their respective central offices were held in
October 2002 to ensure upstream collaboration. Consultations with civil society, including one half-day
session with most of the major NGOs, the private sector, think tanks, academia, and the media was jointly
organized by the Bank and the GOJ and took place in mid-October 2002. The priorities that emerged from
.these consultations form the basis of the CAS.
xii.
Developments and lessons since the last CAS. Ten projects have closed since the last CAS was
presented to the Board. Of the ten projects, eight have been evaluated and found to have achieved their

deve,lopment objectives. The current portfolio consists of eight projects for a total net commitment of
US'255.5 million. Seven of the current projects are free of problems and risks. The portfolio management
targets set in the last CAS were largely met. The AAA program set under the last CAS also was
satisfactorily completed. A draft Country Assistance Evaluation by the Operations Evaluation Department
(OED) concludes that the Bank's AAAs have generally been successful in advancing the reform agenda.
OED's overall evaluation of the lending portfolio was more mixed. While implementation outcomes were
gen -rally satisfactory, development impacts were rated as modest. This CAS reflects the
recommendations of the several recent evaluations of the effectiveness of assistance.
From experience over the past two CAS periods, it has become clear that the developmental
xiii
impact of lending operations is more likely to be successful if the operations are the instruments of
coherent policies and strategies rather than activities undertaken in reaction to immediate needs.
Coherent, comprehensive strategies often have been lacking, incomplete or not consistently implemented
due to the exigencies of a particular period. Moreover, often there has been a lack of synergies between
the Bank's AAA work and the lending program. Demand for the Bank's AAA work has increased this
pasi year and shifted to the more challenging tasks of assisting the design, implementation, and evaluation
of tie development agenda. Thus, the CAS AAA program has been designed to include a more strategic,
denmand-driven agenda. PESWs will focus on education, water, and the pension system. Additional AAA
will be directed to a broad menu.
IFC has been active in direct support to the private sector in Jordan for many years and has
xiv,
a current portfolio of US$94 million in 15 companies. IFC will continue to be active in Jordan as the
invi stment environment continues to improve, and as new opportunities for export-oriented businesses
open up in response to the free trade agreement recently concluded with the United States, as well as the
association agreement reached with the European Union. In addition to export-oriented sectors, IFC plans
to focus on investments in the financial sectors, including support for SMEs, infrastructure development,
and information technology. The Bank will consider partial risk guarantees for major projects to attract
privrate sector participation and to provide a stronger financial package for critical infrastructure projects.
The country strategy faces several risks, the most significant of which are: (i) regional
xv.
including the continuing violence between Palestinians and Israelis, and the possibility of a
flicts,
con
conflict in Iraq, a major trading partner and source of financial assistance; (ii) vulnerabilities to
inturnational and regional developments, given Jordan's heavy reliance on remittances from workers
abroad (25 percent of GDP) and tourism (10 percent of GDP); (iii) domestic tensions arising from
regional conflicts and high unemployment and persistent pockets of poverty; and (iv) the high level of
ext ,rmal debt, which in spite of recent efforts still constitutes a major drag on the economy.
xvi.

The Executive Directors may wish to consider the following questions:
> Is the assistance strategy sufficiently focused? Is it in line with Jordan's needs and the Bank's
comparative advantage?
I Is the three-year lending level of US$305 million in the base case appropriate given the country's
needs and the Bank's exposure, with the option of moving to the high (or low) case if conditions
in the corresponding triggers are met (or not)?
0 Are the lending and nonlending instruments appropriate, flexible, and in line with the country's
needs and consistent with the Bank's role as a knowledge institution?

I. COUNTRY CONTEXT
A. Political and Governance Issues
Economic growth, poverty reduction, and general improvements in welfare have been the
1.
top priorities of the Jordanian Government under the leadership of King Abdullah since his
ac cession to the throne in February 1999. Toward these goals the GOJ has continued and often
accelerated the stabilization and structural reforms initiated in the early 1990s. Significant steps
taken to integrate Jordan into the global economy include an association agreement with the
Eairopean Union (EU) in 1999, membership in the World Trade Organization (WTO) in 2000,
and a free-trade agreement with the United States in 2001. Taken together, Jordan's economic
reform agenda makes it one of the leaders in the Middle East and North Africa (MENA) region.
Good governance, sound macroeconomic management, public sector reform, and the rule
2
of law have gained strong momentum over the past three years. Advances have been made in
reducing government interference and delays in private sector economic activity; improving civil
slXrvice recruitment, management, and training; and enhancing the rule of law through more
efficient and transparent legal administration and judicial reform. Macroeconomic management
performance generally exceeded expectations in 2000 and 2001, but the country's external debt
r-mains high. Outmoded and heavily bureaucratic procedures, a weak service orientation, and
continued patronage in recruitment, though improving, continue to burden access to and delivery
of basic public services.
AWhile Jordan's democratization process is generally regarded as strong in comparison
vith the region, recent events-including the dissolution of parliament in June 2001, two
postponements of elections for a new parliament, and measures to limit the diversity of
e xpression-may represent a slowdown of that process.
Box I.1

Country Profile

Jordan is a small, heavily urbanized country with a population of about 4.9 million. About 92 percent of Jordan's
land is semi-arid; around 6 percent is arable, subject to the annual vagaries of water availability. Agriculture is
.oncentrated in the Jordan River Valley, with some non-irrigated crops grown upland. Much of Jordan's
groundwater is not renewable. Other natural resources are primarily limited to phosphate and potash. Jordan's
reasonably well-developed human resources are the driving force of the economy.
Politically, Jordan is a constitutional monarchy with executive authority vested in H.M. the King and his Council of
Ministers. The Council of Ministers is appointed by the King and led by the prime minister. It is responsible to the
Chamber of Deputies on matters of general policy. Legislative power rests in the bicameral National Assembly.
The 104 members of the Chamber of Deputies are elected to four-year terms. The 52-member Senate is appointed
by the King. The current parliament was formed after the 1997 elections and dissolved in June 2001. The next
elections are scheduled for spring 2003.

Jordan's geopolitical realities directly affect the country's development prospects. Events
4.
in the region since 1999 have adversely impacted the country's reform agenda. Building
institutional capacity; changing the relative roles of the state, civil society, and the private sector;
and addressing resource constraints, especially the water shortage, all require time and
reasonable security. But escalating violence in the West Bank and Gaza and the prospects of

2

further conflict in Iraq-Jordan's major trading partner and energy supplier-have had a chilling
effect on investment. Expectations of a "peace dividend" in 1994 have turned to frustration,
which in turn intensifies the need to demonstrate specific welfare benefits from the still
unfinished reform agenda. Thus, the necessity of a long-term, comprehensive approach to
systemic problems has been compromised by short-term solutions to immediate problems. In
summary, Jordan's reform effort has been strong over the past three years, but external volatility
has constrained growth.
B. Poverty and Social Challenges
5.
Poverty Dimensions and Trends. Over the last decade, poverty has become a serious
problem in Jordan. It is estimated that only 3 percent of the population were poor at the end of
the 1980s. By 1992, the proportion of poor rose to 14.4 percent, and the number of poor
increased more than sixfold. The Gulf War and its aftermath, combined with the collapse of oil
prices and subsequent drop in worker remittances from neighboring oil-producing countries, and
the return of 300,000 Jordanians from the Gulf countries all tended to sharply raise the incidence
of poverty in Jordan.
6.
Poverty declined between 1992 and 1997 (from 14.4 percent to 12 percent) primarily due
to a decline in inequality resulting from better-targeted Government transfers. The poorest
40 percent of the population had higher per capita expenditure levels in 1997 than in 1992, while
the richest 60 percent were worse off. This clear reduction in inequality outweighed the effect of
the decline in per capita expenditure levels during the period and led to a lower poverty rate in
1997 than in 1992. Inequality in per capita consumption expenditure, as measured by the Gini
Index, declined from 0.40 to 0.36 during this period. This underlying level of inequality is
moderate by regional and international standards. '
7.
The poverty analysis in Jordan is based on household expenditure and income surveys
(HEIS) conducted by the Department of Statistics in 1992 and 1997. New data and analysis will
be available in 2003 based on a 2002 HEIS. However, using the estimated increase in real per
capita private consumption since 1997, and assuming no worsening of its distribution, poverty in
terms of the percentage of population is not expected to have changed significantly since the last
analysis, but poverty in terms of the number ofpoor is expected to increase slightly due to the
high population growth, as noted in Table 1.1.
8.
Location and Profile of the Poor. Most of Jordan's poor live in urban areas (primarily
around Amman and areas north of Amman) mainly because Jordan is a highly urbanized country
with 79 percent of the population living in urban areas. Nevertheless, the incidence of poverty is
nearly twice as high, and poverty is twice as deep in rural than in urban areas. The proportion of
population in rural and urban areas that are poor, is 18 percent and 9.5 percent respectively. The
depth of poverty, as measured by the income gap from the poverty line was 4 percent and
2 percent in rural and urban areas, respectively. Deeper pockets of poverty exist in a number of

l Jordan's level of inequality is similar to that of other MENA countries at similar income levels. The Gini
coefficient for Tunisia (0.40) and Morocco (0.39) show greater inequality, whereas Algeria (0.35) and Egypt (0.32)
seem to have less inequality.

3
rLual areas. In Mafraq, a sparsely populated and predominantly rural govemorate, for example,
tho poverty gap was nearly five times that in Amman.
Table 1.1

Poverty Trends in Jordan, 1987-2001

Headcount index (percentage of population)'

2001

1987

1992

1997

1 9 99 b

20 00 b

30

14 4

11.7

11 7

11.5

11 2

556

561

563

Number of poor people (thousands)
Pcverty gap (percent of poverty line)

85

538 3

522

0.3

36

25

Gi ii coefficient of inequality
Gl)P per capita index (1987=100)

0.36

0 40

0 36

0 36

0 36

0 36

100

79.1

81.4

81 3

82.2

83 2

_

-

-

Not available
a. The headcount index is based on updates of the official poverty line (per capita consumption expenditure per year) originally
de nved by the Ministry of Social Development for the year 1987. For example, the 1992 update of the 1987 official poverty line
ge9nerated a per capita poverty line of JD261 per year, which, in 1997 prices, is the equivalent of an annual per capita poverty line of
JD313.5 (US$442).
b Assuming that inequality did not change from its 1997 level, a per capita income-poverty elasticity of -2, and given the per capia

GDP growth rates of-0.1 in 1998, 0 in 1999, 1.1 in 2000, and 1 3 in 2001
S urce. Radwan Shaban, Dina Abu-Ghaida, Abdel-Salam Al-Naimat (2001), Poverty Alleviation in Jordan: Lessons for the Future

Poverty is highly correlated with employment, education level, household size, and
9.
gender of the head of household. Households headed by the unemployed had the highest
i icidence of poverty. Those with household members employed in the public sector are less
likely to be poor than those with the head of household or members employed in the private
sector, pointing to the disparity in average wages between the public and private sectors.
HIousehold size is also directly related to poverty with large households more likely to be poor.
Vulnerability of the Poor. The poor are particularly vulnerable to economic shocks. A
0.
(lecrease of only 5 percent in real per capita consumption (roughly the magnitude of fluctuations
in the 1990s) would potentially increase the incidence of poverty by 12 percent. This
vulnerability to economic fortunes, coupled with the sensitivity of Jordan's economic
:erformance to developments in the region, highlights the need for effective social safety net
programs to cushion the poor and vulnerable from the effects of these shocks.
C. Meeting the Millennium Development Goals
2
Jordan has made excellent progress toward the Millennium Development Goals
11.
(MDGs). It compares favorably with the low and middle income countries (LMICs) as a group,
and with most countries in the Bank's MENA region on all eight MDG targets. The country's
youth literacy rate is about 99 percent (compared to 88 percent for MENA and 85 percent for the
LMICs). Infant mortality, at 26 per 1,000 live births, is lower than the MENA and LMIC
averages of 43 and 33, respectively. The proportion of the population living in extreme

In September 2000, the member states of the United Nations unanimously adopted the Millennium Declaration,
committing the organization to what are now known as the Millennium Development Goals. The goals give force to
an expanded vision of development, one that vigorously promotes human development as the key to sustaining
social and economic progress in all countries and that recognizes the importance of creating a global partnership for
development. There are eight goals targeting poverty, education, gender equality, child mortality, maternal health,

2

HIV/AIDS, environment, and partnership.

4
Box 1.2 Millennium Development Goals: Summary of Jordan's Progress
Goal 1: Eradicate extreme poverty and hunger
Target I Halve, between 1990 and 2015, the proportion ofpeople whose income is less than one dollara day
Target 2. Halve, between 1990 and 2015, the proportionofpeople who sufferfrom hunger
1990
2000
Population below SI aday (°/O
______
________
<2
<2

Prevalence of child malnutrition (%of children under 5)
Income share held by lowest 20%

6.4

5.1 (1997)
76 (1997)

Target

1.15
3.68

Goal 2: Achieve universal primary education
Target 3 Ensure that, by 2015, children everyuhere, boys and girls ahke, will be able to complete afjlil course ofprimary schooling
___________________________________
__1990
2000
Target

I

Net primary school enrollment ratio (%of relevant age group)
Youth literacy rate (%ages 15-24)

66.3
97 0

96.5 (1999)
993

100
100

Goal 3: Promote gender equality and empower women
Target 4 Eliminategender disparity in primary andsecondary education, preferably by 2005, and to all levels of education no later than 2015
________
_
____
_________
1990
2000
Target

Ratio of girls to boys in primary and secondary education (%)

Ratio of young literate females to males (%ages 15-24)

93.2

96.5 (1999)

100

973

100

100

1990

2000

Target

34 0
30.0

30.3

11 33

2000

Tar_ t

41 (1995)
97 (1995)

13.5
100

Goal 4: Reduce child mortality
arget5 Reduce by two thirds, between 1990 and 2015, the under-frve mortality rate

Under 5 mortality rate (per 1,000)
Infant mortality rate (per 1,000 live births) _
Immunization, measles (%of children under 12 months)

87.0

26
94.0 (1999)

8.3

Goal 5 Improve maternal health
Target 6 Reduce by three quarters, between 1990 and 2015, the maternalmortality ratio
.
1990
Matemal mortality ratio (modeled estimate, per 100,000 live births)

Births attended by skilled health staff(% of total)

87 0

Goal 6: Combat HIV/AIDS, malaria and other diseases
Target 7 Have haltedby 2015 and begun to reverse the spreadof HIVIAIDS
Target 8. Have halted by 2015 andbegun to reverse the incidence of malariaand other major diseases

[

1990
Prevalence of HIV, female (%ages 15-24)
Tuberculosis cases detected under DOTS (%)

2
2000
0.02
33 (1999)

Target

Goal 7: Ensure environmental sustainability
Target 9. Integratethe principlesof sustainabledevelopment into country policies andprogrammes andreverse the losses of environmental
resources
Target 10 Halve by 2015 the proportionofpeople without sustainableaccess to safe drinking water.

Access to an improved water source (%of population)
Access to improved sanitation (%of population)

1990
97.0
98 0

2000
96 0
99 0

Target

Goal 8: Develop a global partnership for development
Target 18 In cooperation with the privatesector, make available the benefits of new technologies, especially information andcommunications

Personal computers (per 1,000 people)
Fixed line and mobile telephones (per 1,000 people)

1990
6 4 (1995)

57.9

2000
22 5
151.2

Target

poverty (less than US$1 a day) is less than 2 percent in Jordan; it averages 23 percent in the
LMICs. Jordan has also made major strides in gender equality. The ratio of girls to boys in
primary and secondary enrollment is 97 percent; it is 83 percent for MENA as a whole. The
youth literacy gap between females and males in Jordan is less than 1 percent. However, the rate
of participation of women in the labor force continues to be low and the unemployment rate

5

among women (25 percent) is nearly twice that for men (15 percent). Regarding political
parlicipation, the parliamentary elections scheduled for Spring 2003 are likely to result in female
rep]resentation. Jordan is ahead of MENA and the LMICs on access to safe water and sanitation,
but access is significantly lower in rural areas of the country than in its towns and cities. Water
der letion and pollution, coupled with worsening urban air quality, indicate that more progress is
needed if Jordan is to reach the environmental MDG.
D. Poverty Reduction Programs
12.
A Three Pronged Strategy. Poverty alleviation remains the top priority for Jordan and a
newv National Strategy for Poverty Alleviation was launched in May 2002. The GOJ strategy
aims at: (i) providing access to quality education and assuring access to health care for all below
the poverty line; (ii) improving employment opportunity for those capable of working; and
(iii) improving the social safety net for the poorest. The basic approach being followed is to
im-)rove upon and support existing government programs, such as those administered by the
National Aid Fund (NAF), the government agency providing cash assistance to the poorest in
Joidan. The plan also proposes longer-term strategies for the private sector to have a greater role
in .reating jobs and in strengthening public-private partnership.
13.
The PSET. Cognizant of these challenges, the GOJ announced, on November 15, 2001, a
multi-year (2002-05) Program for Social and Economic Transformation (PSET). The PSET, an
extension of past and ongoing reforms, aims at:
* Raising the quality of life for all Jordanians through qualitative improvement in
education, health, rural and community development, and enhancing social productivity
to combat poverty.
* Enhancing the capacity of the economy to attract more private capital through
acceleration of the ongoing privatization program, promoting private investment in large
infrastructure projects, and further improving the environment for private investment.
* Improving the efficiency and effectiveness of government institutions, and improving the
quality and delivery of basic public services through gender-responsive public sector
reform programs.
* Adopting a results-based budget that maintains fiscal stability while targeting priority
areas such as education, health, rural development, and poverty reduction.
* Creating the institutions, incentives, and infrastructure necessary for the introduction and
adoption of information and communication technologies (ICT) and for knowledge-based
development in all areas of the economy. (See paragraphs 52-55 for further discussion of
PSET)
'The Correlates of Poverty: Education and Health
1.4.
With indicators of basic education and health services above the MENA average
(lable I.2), Jordan outperforms four regional countries that have more resources-Algeria, Syria,
Tunisia, and Iran. However, improving the quality and focus of the education system and the
efficiency of health service delivery pose major challenges. There is strong evidence of a
substantial mismatch between the skills taught by the education system and those in demand in

6
the labor market. Similar challenges also affect the health system, where rapid population growth
increases demand for services and complicates health management.
Table 1.2

Selected Human Development In dicators in Jordan and Comparable Countries
Jordan
1970-75

Life expectancy (years)

Comparable Groups

1999/2000b

MENA
1993-00

Lower-middle
Income, 1993-00

60

70

68

69

Total ferbility rate (births per woman)

8

3.7

3.4

21

Infant mortality (per thousand births)

49

26

43

33

96

89

80

72

104

97

107

Male

79

104

103

107

Female

65

104

90

107

48

92.7

64

70

34
24

15

Access to an improved water source (percentage of
population)
Gross primarya enrollment (percentage of school-age

population)

Gross secondarya enrollment (percentage of age group)
Male
Female
Adult ilirteracy (percentage of population age 15 and above)
Male

91.8
93 6
39

10

22

5.5

Female
56
16.6
46
Negligible
Note: Data refer to the most recent year available during the period specified.
a
The primary cycle is assumed to be grades 1-6, while the secondary cycle is assumed to be grades 7-12 in Jordan.
GER data for Jordan for the year 2000.
Source: World Bank, Wodd Development Indicators (various years)

15.
Education. Jordan has made great strides in improving its education system since
reforms started a decade ago. Gross enrollment rate for grades 1-6 was 104 percent (2000) while
the net enrollment rate was 96.5 percent (1999). Primary completion rate was estimated at
100 percent for both boys and girls (1999). Female adult illiteracy rates, however, remain high at
16.6 percent compared to male illiteracy at 5.5 percent. At the same time, Jordan is well placed
in achieving the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) with regards to elimination of gender
disparities. Female enrollment accounted for 49 percent of all basic education enrollment,
50 percent of the upper secondary enrollment, 68 percent of community college enrollment, and
47 percent of public university undergraduate enrollment (1999). Jordan has emphasized the
development of human capital, spending over the years about 5 percent of its annual GDP on
education and trying to maintain universal access to basic education, despite high population
growth. In 2001, public expenditures on education represented 5.6 percent of GDP and
17 percent of total government expenditures. The commitment to "education for all" is reflected
in the fact that 80 percent of total education spending goes for basic education.
16.
Despite its considerable achievements, Jordan lags behind its international peers (e.g.,
Tunisia and Turkey in mathematics), and the gap between Jordan's highest and lowest

3 The

human development index is a composite index that measures a country's achievements in terms of life

expectancy, educational attainment, and adjusted real income.

9
21

7
performing students is wider than in most other countries, implying the current education system
is nt delivering equal learning opportunities to all students. Ongoing efforts to improve the
image of women and to eliminate the associated stereotypes in textbooks need to be strengthened
further. The learning culture remains one of memorizing rather than learning to learn. Education
speniding is thus not used efficiently, and for the poor, access remains limited at higher levels.
Bec ause the education system is not focusing on the right skills, as indicated by the segmentation
of the labor market, it is now necessary not only to improve the quality of education, but also to
align the curriculum with the skills demanded by the labor market. Too many graduates of
prog,rams that lack relevance are unemployed, due in large part to the skills mismatch. The new
glolbal economy requires that Jordan develop an education system that promotes high-level
thirking skills and prepares students to take on jobs. But improving the quality of education is
the key challenge the authorities face-to get more efficiency from the already high levels of
put lic spending on education.
Box 1.3 Women's Education
Jord an has made significant progress in extending universal access to all. Girls are as well represented in education
as a -e boys (see Table below for GER for girls and boys). The ratio of female to male enrollments is 97 percent
(19519) in primary and secondary education. Primary school completion rates are 100 percent, 101 percent for
fem ales and 100 percent for males. Female enrollments account for 68 percent of community college enrollments
and 47 percent of public university undergraduate enrollments (up from 37 percent in 1994). Kindergartens for 4 to
6 ye ar-olds are not compulsory and services are provided on a fee basis. Females account for 47 percent of all
kin(lergarten enrollments.
Although only 50 percent of students who take the general secondary exam (tawjihf) pass, female success rate is
sigr ificantly higher than that for males. The success rate of females was higher than that for males by as much as
18 percent in the governorate of Irbid and as low as 3 percent in Tafila. In more than 75 percent of the govemorates,
the female success rate was more than 12 percent higher than that for males.
Gender Disaggregated Gross Enrollment Rates (percent), 2000
Total
Female
Male
Grade
20 86
19.75
21.91
KGI
47.39
45 22
49.47
KG2
11762
116.23
118.98
1
10369
10406
10333
2
100.57
100 89
100.27
3
101.15
102.03
10033
4
10199
101.85
102.12
5
101.24
10128
101.21
6
10357
10616
101.09
7
99.59
98 76
10037
8
96.81
97.37
96 28
9
91 79
91.66
91 91
10
83.75
84.69
82 83
11
79.48
81 73
77.35
12
Source: MOE

Health. The health system in Jordan performs relatively well in terms of overall access to
17
he;alth services (financial and physical) and outcomes (as measured by indicators such as infant
mortality and life expectancy). However, with Jordan spending more than 9 percent of its GDP
on health (3 percentage points more than comparable countries), the country is at a crossroads in
the evolution of its health system. Passive acceptance of the status quo would likely result in a
sy,stem with high costs, gaps in access for vulnerable groups, wasteful excess capacity, and a
poDr ratio of outcome to investments. The rising costs of public programs-driven by the aging

8
population, the epidemiological transition to chronic and noncommunicable diseases, continued
high rates of population growth, and clinical and economic inefficiencies in the service delivery
system-would have a major impact on sustainability of the country's fiscal position. About half
of health expenditures are privately financed, and government subsidies do not reflect ability to
pay.
18.
New health challenges have arisen. Although the incidence of infectious diseases has
been reduced, increasingly prevalent noncommunicable diseases (cancer, cardiovascular disease,
diabetes, hypertension), costly to treat, are straining the sustainability of the health system.
Treating such diseases efficiently will necessitate adjustments in the delivery of services. Major
causes of death are now cardiovascular disease, accidents, pneumonia, and cancer. The main
issues that need to be addressed in the health sector are inefficiencies, growth in health
expenditures, geographic maldistribution of resources, excess capacity, long-run financial
sustainability, and universal coverage.
Box 1.4 Women's Health
Educatior. isthe strongest factor affecting fertility levels. Women who had attended secondary school had the lowest
level of fertility (about 4.1) while those with no education had the highest (6.9). The total fertility level was 6 for
women with primary education and 5.4 for women with secondary education. Women with secondary education had
the highest median age at first birth (21.2 years). The improvement of educational opportunities, particularly for
girls, has resulted intheir staying in school longer, and subsequently pushed the age of marriage upward. Women
who have had more than secondary education tend to marry almost 6 years later than those with no education or
only primary education. The fertility level has been declining steadily during the last decade. The birth rate has been
declining from a rate of 50 per 1000 inthe mid 1970s to 33 per 1000 in 1995. The total fertility rate declined from
7.5 children per woman in 1975 to 6.1 in 1985 and 3.7 in2000.
Improving Employment Opportunities
19.
Private Sector Development. Improving employment opportunity through private sector
development is one of the three aims of Jordan's National Strategy for Poverty Alleviation and
the PSET. Jordan has worked hard to create one of the better business environments in the
region, in terms of macroeconomic stability, trade access, and regulatory climate. While growth
has been disappointing, there have been some successes; proactive export policies have recently
resulted in strong export growth, and privatization and liberalization have led to new
investments, especially in the Qualified Industrial Zones (QIZs). Analysis by the Bank and
others indicate that Jordan's low growth is due to a combination of factors-among them
regional volatility, sluggish private investment, in part due to the uncertainties arising from
ongoing regional conflicts, and poor competitiveness. While Jordan cannot affect its geography,
challenges related to private sector investment and productivity at the firm level can be
addressed. Five critical factors are at play: (i) disincentives caused by the effects of fiscal deficits
and public debt burden; (ii) certain high transaction and logistics costs due to inefficiencies in
public sector performance; (iii) a mismatch between labor market demand and the skills of the
work force produced by the education system; (iv) limited access to credit and high cost of
credit, particularly for small and medium-scale enterprises; and (v) an oligarchic business
structure which impedes the entry of new firms.

9

Financial Sector. Jordan's financial system is dominated by its banking system. In
20.
addition to local and foreign commercial banks (nine and five, respectively), the banking system
includes two Islamic banks, five small investment banks, and three small public and semi-public
specialized banks. Non-bank financial intermediation is small, although market capitalization of
the Amman Stock Exchange, at 77 percent of GDP, is one of the highest ratios in the region. At
pres.,nt, most activity on the exchange takes place for a few of the larger listings, and trading
volume is small. Most firms remain closely held and prefer to borrow from banks than to raise
func s by expanding share ownership or issuing bonds to the public. One of the key challenges
for the Jordanian financial system is the extension of credit to a wider segment of the private
sector. Bank hesitation to extend credit on a longer-term basis is in partly a reflection of the
uncertainty surrounding the country's short-term economic prospects. However, lack of
accc ptance of more diversified collateral (e.g., movable property) and poor sources of
information of credit-related behavior also reduce the number of potential borrowers.
Privatization. The privatization program in Jordan is one of the most successful in the
21.
regi:bn. Several major transactions have been completed over the past few years (Jordan
Telcoms, Public Transport Corporation, cement companies, the management contract for
Gre ater Amman water, and divestiture of government shares in approximately 44 companies),
and there is a strong pipeline for future privatization in different sectors. Support for the
pri-vatization program is a good example of donor cooperation with the Bank providing the
teclnical expertise and USAID providing grant financing.
Pension Reform. Improving public pension system in Jordan is inextricably linked to the
22.
third goal of Jordan's National Strategy for Poverty Alleviation: improving the social safety net
for the poor. The system comprises the Civil Servants Pension Fund, the Military Pension Fund,
and the Social Security Corporation (initially created for workers in the private sector). The GOJ
has adopted several reforms to improve financial sustainability and reduce the fiscal drain. Since
1995 the Civil Servants pension fund has been closed to new entrants. This has allowed a
reduiction in unfunded pension liabilities, although these still account for 69 percent of GDP. The
Coumcil of Ministers has also recently approved a reform of the military pension scheme. This
sysi.em provides rates of return that often surpass 20 percent per year and has unfunded pension
liatilities equivalent to 180 percent of GDP. The reforms have been agreed upon as part of a
program supported by the IMF and to be implemented from January 2003 with ongoing Bank
support. It contemplates the phasing out of the military pension scheme by enrolling new recruits
in the Social Security Corporation (SSC), reducing the prevalence of disability awards that are
currently granted to around 90 percent of new beneficiaries, and rationalizing various elements
of the benefit package. Altogether, these measures should reduce the financial burden of military
per sions by around 2.5 percent of GDP over 50 years. As these systems are phased-out the fiscal
buwden will eventually dissipate.
As the most urgent problems of the pension system are being addressed, the GOJ can
23.
focus its attention on the Social Security Corporation. While the SSC is currently running a cash
surplus, it is running a long-term deficit. Its medium and long term sustainability are in question.
Re Forms are necessary to strengthen actuarial linkages between contributions and benefits, to
obtain a better balance between mandatory and voluntary savings, to eliminate incentives that
enc ourage retirement rather than work, to minimize distortions in labor markets, and to address
peiverse distributive effects (such as higher rates of return for individuals with rising wages and

10

long life expectancy). As SSC sets its new Investment Unit, careful attention needs to be given to
legal and governance structures to ensure that reserves are managed in the best interest of plan
members, while contributing to the development of financial markets.
E. Gender
24.
Female empowerment and inclusion remain a challenge. Jordanian women have made
great advances in basic measures of welfare in the past 30 years, largely due to the GOJ's
progressive approach toward women's development. In fact, gender has been a key focus of
public health services and education (see boxes I.3 and 1.4 above). Over the past 30 years,
maternal mortality fell by nearly half to 41 per 100,000 births. The gross female primary school
enrollment rate is about 104 percent. Although women's participation in the formal labor force is
still low, it grew rapidly from about 15 percent in 1980 to 24 percent in 1999 (see box I.5 below).
Average unemployment rates among women are high-at 25 percent versus 15 percent for
men-particularly in the entry cohorts of the working age distribution (16-25 years old), where
it reaches 78 percent. Female unemployment rates tend to increase with successive levels of
education while the reverse holds true for males-higher education levels mean lower
unemployment for males but higher unemployment for females. Women feature prominently in
NGOs and political participation has increased with the next Parliament expected to have female
members. The legal status of women has improved somewhat, but significant inequalities persist
in matters of personal status. The GOJ has advocated a number of policies and programs to
advance women's status. Nevertheless, considerable work is needed to identify issues and
propose solutions.
Box 1.5 Women in the Labor Force
The participation of women in economic activities is increasing. From 1980 to 1999, the female labor force as a
proportion of the total labor force increased from 15 to 24 percent (from I percent in 1961). Education is one of the
main factors promoting women's participation in the labor force: 64 percent of females in the labor force have
intermediate diplomas and higher. Nevertheless, unemployment rates are generally higher for females, at all levels
of educationi, but especially for vocational training.

F. Public Sector Reform: Quality, Equity, Accountability,
and Efficiency in the Delivery of Public Services
25.
The fourth goal of Jordan's National Strategy for Poverty Alleviation is to improve
public sector performance in the delivery of core services-health, education, and social
protection. The particular challenges of education and health are discussed above (in paragraphs
14-18). Significant progress has been made in reforming the public sector to improve service
delivery, but recent surveys have shown that outmoded and bureaucratic administrative
procedures still impose substantial costs on the public. Key issues continuing to affect the ability
of the public sector reform to deliver high quality services, equitably and efficiently, are:
*
e

*

centralization and rigidity of central systems with little cross-sectoral overview;
limited oversight, accountability, and access to information; and
emphasis on material investments over opportunity costs and results.

Procurement. The environment for public sector procurement in Jordan has benefited
26.
from the general respect for rules and regulations among civil servants and the widespread use of
committees and the Audit Bureau to oversee procurement processes and provide checks and
balances. Consequently, Jordan's procurement system represents a low-risk environment for
bi:lders-fraud and corruption have been contained at below-average levels. There have not been
auny cases of misprocurement under Bank-financed projects in recent years. Barriers to foreign
bilders, however, have been troubling. The GOJ has made progress in lowering these barriers,
especially in connection with the privatization of state-owned enterprises through competitive
bilding. However, the GOJ's internal procurement processes are not yet in line with
international standards.
Financial Management. The FY01 Country Financial Accountability Assessment
27.
(C'FAA) concluded that the financial controls, management systems, and reporting underpinning
Jordan's public financial management provided an acceptable level of accountability-but it also
found them complex and oriented toward compliance rather than results. With regard to
accounting and auditing practices in the private sector, the CFAA noted that the local accounting
arid auditing profession was generally considered weak, particularly in the adoption and
ertforcement of internationally accepted accounting and auditing standards. The CFAA provided
St ggestions for overhauling the law on public accounting, focusing mainly on streamlining the
roles of practicing accountants and auditors, establishing an oversight board for the profession,
arid ensuring enforceability of the relevant professional standards.
G. Resources Scarcity
Water. The shortage of clean water is one of the most critical environmental constraints
211.
tc sustainable development in Jordan. The country is one of the most water-deprived countries in
the world. Ninety percent of Jordan receives less than eight inches of rain annually. Of that,
91) percent is lost to evaporation. Aquifers are being depleted at a rapid rate. Periodic droughts
add to the water stress. Agriculture, which generates about 2.1 percent of GDP and 5 percent of
einployment, accounts for 70 percent of water consumption, indicating a need for greater
eificiency and a shift to higher-value crops. One of Jordan's main challenges is better
rr anagement of water resources, without which sustained long-term development is at risk.
In 2001 the GOJ, working closely with the Bank and other partners, updated its 1997
29.
strategy for managing water demand and supply. The strategy emphasizes the need to increase
,water supplies and improve operations and maintenance by managing water better in urban and
niral sectors. The update has highlighted the following key challenges:
Insufficient water supply to meet demand.
Growing competition for water between rural and urban users, as the relative share for
urban use (municipal and industrial) is expected to increase from 30 to 50 percent over
the next 20 years against a backdrop of persistent drought.
* An unsustainable draw-down of groundwater, particularly in the highlands.
* Inadequate management of waste water (treatment and reuse).
* Inefficiencies in agricultural water use, resulting mainly from the tariff structure.
*
*

12
e

•

Obstacles to new investments, highlighting the critical need for internal financing,
through better cost recovery and improved water services by the Water Authority of
Jordan (WAJ) and the Jordan Valley Authority (JVA).
Institutional limitations in policy formation, management and information systems, and
financial planning.

30.
Environment. Projected population growth and its geographic concentration-in the
north and in urban areas-represent a major challenge for Jordan's sustainable development.
Although no recent estimates for Jordan are available, estimates for other countries in the MENA
region indicate that the average cost of environmental degradation is 5-9 percent of GDP and
that the burden of diseases associated with environmental factors is significant. 4
31.
Land degradation is a significant problem, with large areas suffering from soil erosion,
salinization, and overgrazing-all of which affect agricultural productivity. Jordan's rich and
important biodiversity is under threat of habitat destruction due to agricultural encroachment, the
introduction of invasive species, the increasing presence of chemicals, and degradation of land
and water resources.
32.
However, Jordan has repeatedly shown a commitment to sustainable development. It is
the first country in West Asia to develop its Agenda 215 and the only Arab country to develop
strategies for environmental information, awareness, communication, and education. These
commitments still need to be converted into actions.

Environmental problems account for 14 percent of the burden of disease in the region. The primary problems are
poor water and sanitation (8 percent) and urban air pollution (3 percent).
4

Agenda 21 is a comprehensive plan of actions to be taken globally, nationally, and locally by organizations of the
United Nations system, governments, and other groups with respect to human impact on the environment.

13

II. RECENT ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENTS
AND MEDIUM-TERM OUTLOOK
A. Recent Economic Developments
Real GDP growth reached 4.2 percent in 2001, as in the previous year. Since 1997, GDP
33.
growth has exceeded population growth (3.1 percent per year), but has not reached the 6 percent
necessary to absorb all the new entrants into the labor force. Jordan's rate of GDP growth in
2C 01 was the highest and most resilient among the countries of the region, overcoming the twin
shocks of the Palestinian intifada, now more than two years old, and the events of
St ptember 11.6 Preliminary GDP data for the first 2 quarters of 2002 show growth heading to the
projected target of 5 percent, confirming the recent positive growth performance. The resilience,
so far, of the Jordanian economy to adverse regional and international shocks is partly the result
of ongoing structural reform efforts.
A surge in exports, a pick up in construction activity, and a revival of industrial
34.
production and services has helped Jordan pick up growth momentum. The export performance,
in particular, has been exceptional over the past two years. After remaining flat at around
U s$1.8 billion annually for five years, exports jumped in 2001 by 21 percent (19 percent in
ccnstant dollar terms), and they have continued to increase at around 25 percent (year on year) in
the first 2 quarters of 20027.
Trade is likely to remain a main driver of growth in the coming year for a number of
3'i.
reasons. First,the Qualified Industrial Zones have recently shown strong dynamism. In fact,
e).ports from QIZs to the United States accounted for half of the dramatic rise in exports in 2001
in the face of the slowest world trade growth since the oil crisis of the 1970s. QIZ exports have
shiown remarkable strength; however, they offer limited domestic value added and only weak
liiikages to the rest of the economy. Second, non-QIZ exports have also shown rapid growth,
with more extended linkages with the rest of the economy. Third, the association agreement with
tde EU, which went into effect on May 1, 2002, and the free trade agreement with the United
S ates, which went into effect in December 2001, carry significant potential for greater
ir vestment in Jordan and increased preferential exports of Jordanian agriculture and industrial
goods. Fourth, the entire Aqaba govemorate was declared a special economic zone, effective
January 1, 2002. It offers foreign and domestic investors lower business costs and preferential
tax treatment for business income (5 percent versus 35 percent outside the zone) and selected
pi,rsonal consumption goods (7 percent versus 13 percent outside the zone).
High Unemployment and Frustrating Underemployment. Notwithstanding the recent
315.
p:-omising trends on growth and exports, providing jobs for a growing young population is one of
the most important challenges facing Jordan. Currently Jordan has a high unemployment rate,
v hich is officially estimated at 15 percent but may be closer to 25 percent if underemployment is
included. At the same time, the labor force is growing at 4.0 percent annually requiring the
c]reation of additional new jobs for young job seekers. The incidence ofjoblessness is twice as

6

Real GDP growth rates in 2001 for Jordan, Syria and Lebanon are estimated at 4.2, 2.8, 1.3 percent, respectively.
The figures do not include re-exports.

14
high among the young as other groups. The percentage of women seeking employment is also
likely to increase in the coming years (with the continued rise in female participation in the labor
force), putting additional pressure on the job market. These new jobs need to be generated in the
private sector as employment in the public sector and emigration to the Gulf are no longer
sustainable. At present, the country's labor market is highly segmented, with scores of skilled
Jordanians working abroad (mainly in the Gulf) and many low-skill foreign laborers (mainly
from Egypt and Iraq) occupying menial jobs in the country, which Jordanians, for cultural and
attitudinal reasons, are unwilling to accept. To absorb the new entrants into the labor force and
reduce the current unemployment (to about 6 percent by 2010), GDP must grow at about
6 percent annually, a rate that has not been achieved since the 1970s.
37.
In juxtaposition to the growth data and in partial explanation of the weak job creation in
recent years, the decline in rate of investment stands out. Total fixed investment rate in Jordan at
around 21 percent in 1998 was near an historic low for the preceding 25 years but was at 25% in
2001. As a consequence, the rate of physical capital accumulation has decelerated from 16
percent per year in 1976-80 to a mere 3 percent per year over 1996-00. The failure of private
investment to respond strongly to structural reforms compensating for the inevitable decline in
public investment has held back total investment in the economy. Total factor productivity
(measured as a residual from GDP growth after allowing for the role of factor accumulation) is
also low or a small negative in the 1990s, though steep declines in TFP witnessed in the late
1980s have been arrested with structural reforms.
38.
Inflation. Inflation in Jordan has been moderate, averaging only 1.7 percent over the last
five years (1996-2001), helped partly by the unchanged nominal exchange rate between the
Jordanian dinar and the U.S. dollar since 1996. The U.S. dollar's strong appreciation against the
currencies of Europe-the source of a third of Jordan's imports-caused the country's real
effective exchange rate to appreciate. Together with cuts in import tariffs, that appreciation has
helped keep the cost of imports low. Annual inflation, as measured by the consumer price index,
averaged 0.7 percent in 2000, but began climbing in the beginning of 2001 to an average of
1.8 percent per annum, before subsiding again by mid-2002. The causes of the temporary hike
were increases in some administered prices-including petroleum and higher education-and the
extension to trading sectors of a 13 percent general sales tax.
39.
Fiscal Management. Medium-term gains continued to be the chief goal of fiscal
management efforts. The introduction of a 13 percent general sales tax and a new public debt law
that empowers the cabinet to cap gross public debt at 60 percent of GDP, are strong indicators
that fiscal prudence will remain the overriding aim of fiscal policy. To reduce vulnerability to oil
price changes, the authorities announced increases in administered prices of petroleum products
in July-August 2001, and again in April 2002. For 2001, the budget deficit (before grants) is
estimated at 8.1 percent of GDP (3.8 percent after grants), a decline of 0.8 percentage point from
the previous year but still higher than the Government program supported by the IMF of 6.9
percent.

15
External Debt. Although external debt has diminished significantly in the last few
40.
yeE'rs-from 114 percent of GDP in 1995 to 85 percent 8 in 2001-interest payments still absorb
15 percent of total government revenue. 9 On July 11, 2002, the Paris Club concluded an exit
0
arringement for restructuring debt owed to Paris Club members amounting to US$1.2 billion.'
Th (sarrangement will give Jordan greater freedom in macro economic management by freeing
up to an estimated US$150 million a year in rescheduled debt service in the next five years.
B. Medium-Term Economic Outlook
Base-Case Economic Scenario. The base-case scenario is built around the current
41.
government macroeconomic program for 2002-04, which is supported by an IMF stand-by
agi eement (table 11. 1). The economic program encompasses a reduction of the fiscal deficit in the
medium term, underpinned by a long-term reform of the public pension schemes, continued
strong external donor support as well as the recent debt rescheduling agreement. Continued
strong external performance, albeit a bit slower than in the last 6 quarters, is expected from the
im1 ,lementation of recent trade agreements and continued structural reform efforts, as well as a
stabilization of the real effective exchange rate.
Based on the improved medium-term fiscal outlook and strong exports performance, the
42.
scenario assumes a base rate of GDP growth between 5 and 6 percent, slightly above the rate
achieved in 2000-1 in the face of global and regional weaknesses. In the near term, GDP
growth could climb up to 6 percent, in response to the GOJ's special stimulus package-known
as the Program for Social and Economic Transformation (PSET)-which is to be implemented
over the next four years. The success of the PSET depends on the country's access to more grant
financing from donors in the near term. The GOJ is committed to refraining from external
bo Towing to finance the program. In the event that adequate external grant financing does not
materialize, growth would slow to underlying base level. The uncertainty engendered by the
curTent regional context also reduces growth prospects somewhat, but Jordan's economy has
diversified significantly and proved resilient to ongoing regional events. Inflation is expected to
fall below 2 percent after a moderate increase in the past year as subsidies on petroleum products
art eliminated.
As the economy picks up momentum, the pressure on the current account of the balance
43
of payments is expected to be offset by buoyant exports and reduced interest payment on
ex :ernal debt, allowing the current account to move close to balance in the medium term. The
real exchange rate should stabilize as a result of low domestic inflation and continued strength of
the Euro against the U.S. dollar.

8External

debt includes total government and government guaranteed external debt, collaterized Brady Bonds and

short-term debt (5 percent of GDP in 2001).
9 TDtal public debt was estimated at 97.6 percent of GDP in 2001, including net domestic government debt of JD I
bill ion (US$1.42 billion), equivalent to 16 percent of GDP.
'° The arrangement offers a decreasing share over time (100 percent until July 2004 coinciding with IMF Stand-by
arr mgement, but diminishing by 10 percentage points in the following three years) of the total amount originally
fall ing due over this period of about US$2 billion.

16
44.
The need for government borrowing is expected to decline gradually to below 4 percent
of GDP, in line with the GOJ's debt policy, and thanks to continued external grants in amounts
equivalent to 5 percent of GDP per year average in the next three years. Active external debt
management (Brady Bond buy backs, negotiated swaps) has brought the ratio of external debt to
GDP down to 85 percent in 2001.11 The July 2002 Paris Club debt rescheduling agreement,
together with continued prudent fiscal management, is expected to bring down the debt to GDP
ratio below 60 percent by 2005. The new public debt law, enacted in 2001, will allow Jordan's
external debt to cap at 60 percent of GDP in the future.
45.
Risks in the Base Case. The GDP projections underlying the base-case scenario are
vulnerable to external risks that could reduce effective growth to around 4 percent over the next
two years. These risks include continued or yet greater Israeli-Palestinian violence, lower than
expected grant financing of the PSET, a reduction in market appetite for state assets to be
privatized, and a slowdown in export growth. Even in the case of a full implementation of the
PSET, high uncertainty might reduce its expected growth impact. Lower growth would make it
difficult for the GOJ to reach the fiscal targets of the base case. While some tightening will be
expected under such circumstances, especially in discretionary programs, the base-case scenario
will include some limited flexibility in fiscal targets in case of external shocks to the economy.
The situation will be monitored in close collaboration with the IMF (see paragraph 108 for more
discussion on risks).
46.
High-Case Scenario. The high-case scenario contemplates a situation where benign
external conditions and a firm implementation of the government program allow economic
growth rates and fiscal parameters that fully meet or exceed the base-case scenario targets. The
recent dynamism in exports, as well as the new free trade agreements with the United States and
Europe, bear the potential for achieving the kind of growth that will allow a dent to be made in
the high unemployment rate in Jordan. Robust growth is also an opportunity to aggressively
address the budget deficit, which remains high. Enhanced economic performance will also hinge
on concrete actions to address the most difficult items of the country's structural reform agenda,
particularly in sectors such as water and public administration.
47.
Low-Case Economic Scenario. The low-case scenario considered in this document
assumes a worsening policy stance on fiscal and monetary issues, leading to low economic
growth and inefficient use of public resources in the economy. Substantial slippage from the
government fiscal targets supported by the IMF Stand-By Arrangement or continued strong
appreciation of the real exchange rate would represent policies that, under normal external
conditions, could not be supported by adjustment lending from the Bank. Such policies would
justify a lower overall lending volume.
48.
This document does not discuss the potential impact of a war in the region, which could
dramatically worsen the terms of trade for Jordan, cut off a major source of foreign grants, and
affect the trade logistics of the economy. Among the countries in the region, Jordan would be
among the most severely affected in the short term. It is likely that concessional foreign

" Extemal debt includes total government and govemment guaranteed extemal debt, collaterized Brady Bonds and
short-term debt (5 percent of GDP in 2001).

17

assistance would rise to offset partly the impact on macro balances. GDP growth would,
nev -rtheless, be adversely impacted in the event of such a conflict in the near term (see
paragraph 108 on risks).
Table 11.1 Key Macroeconomic Indicators
Indicators

| 1991 -95

1996-00

2001

2002

2003

2004

(Proj.)
(Prel.)
58
6.0
5.1
4.2
3.1
7.3
Rea GDP (mkt. Pr.) growth
28.3
9
27
29.6
25.8
27.3
23.7
GNI
of
in
%
prices,
current
Gro.;s national savings,
27 7
27 6
25.7
25 9
26 1
32.4
Gron;s domestic investment, current prices, in % of GDP
18
2.5
2.4
1.8
2.7
4.3
Inflation (CPI) in %
Fisc sl balance (central govt.)
-84
-10.3
-8.4
-8.1
-8.2
-4.2
Excluding grants in % of GDP
-3 9
-4 3
-3.3
-3.8
-4.1
0.6
Including grants in %of GDP
3.9
4.3
3.3
3.8
4.1
-0.6
Fiiiancing in % of GDP
25
27
20
-0 1
1.4
00
Prvatization (net) in % of GDP
-0.1
0.8
13
2.3
1.2
-1.3
DOcmestic Borrowing (net) in % of GDP
-0 4
-0.3
0.9
0.7
0.6
6.0
Primary balance in % of GDP
4
29
3
31
6
29
30.8
31.1
0
37
of
GDP
%
in
grants
Fiscal revenues including
33
3
35
6
33.3
33.8
35.4
36.0
Fiscal expenditures in % of GDP
n/a
9
1
0.9
n/a
n/a
n/a
Of which Program for Social and Economic Transformation
speiiding in % of GDP
0.7
0.1
3.7
-0 1
0.6
-9.5
Curient account balance including grants in % of GDP
12.3
12.9
11.9
12.5
15.5
17.1
TotE I debt service (commitment basis) in % of exports'
3
62 5
66.9
72.0
75.8
88.9
120.7
External public debt, end period in % of GDP
32 3
32 2
20.4
21 9
19.2
28.4
Doniestic Debt, end period in % of GDP
2
7.6
8.1
9.1
7.0
8
6
6
2
of
imports)
Gross Reserves (as months
income
factor
service,
non-factor
and
goods
of
export
to
1. Debt service ratio is the ratio of debt service
Not s:
receipts and worker remittance receipts.
2 Gross reserves as months of imports are calculated for 1999-2007 and estimated for 1991-1998 as gross
international reserves divided by merchandized imports excluding re-exports.
3. Extemal debt refers to govemment and government guaranteed medium- and long-term extemal
debt, excluding collaterized Brady Bonds.
Sou rces: 1. IMF staff estimates as of November 2002 and Article IV Consultation Report 2002.
2. Monthly Bulletin (November 2002) by Central Bank of Jordan

C. ]External Environment
Because Jordan's economy is small and relatively open, it is significantly affected by the
49.
exti,rnal environment. Four key external factors that challenge Jordan in the near term are the
slowvdown in world trade growth, the decline in tourism, more selective interest by foreign
inv.-stors in emerging markets, and the weak outlook on oil prices. Mitigating factors are present
but do not override continuing uncertainty arising from ongoing conflicts in the regions.
Weak demand and increasing capacity from non-OPEC sources are expected to keep oil
50.
prices at around US$20 per barrel for the next three years, down from the average of US$28 per
bar-el recorded in 2000. The weak oil prices will limit demand from neighboring oil producers
for goods and workers from Jordan. However, cheaper international oil prices could help Jordan
spe -d up the process of eliminating domestic price subsidies for petroleum products.

18

III. COUNTRY DEVELOPMENT OBJECTIVES AND PRIORITIES
51.
In addition to maintaining macroeconomic stability, Jordan's main development
challenges can be summarized in three cross-sectoral objectives: (i) achieving higher growth to
reduce and avoid poverty; (ii) improving the quality and efficiency of public services, with an
emphasis on education, health, and safety net programs; and (iii) addressing severe resource
constraints, beginning with the growing water scarcity. These challenges can be met by
deepening the reforms undertaken to date; building institutional capacity to implement, sustain,
and deliver reforms, while generating benefits to the population; and ensuring greater
effectiveness of resource use and enhancing the role of the private sector.
52.
Strategic Vision. The National Strategy for Poverty Alleviation and the PSET together
constitute a strategic vision for poverty reduction and growth. They represent a clear and firm
commitment by the GOJ to pursue policies and programs in line with achieving the MDGs while
also preventing an increase of poverty and inequality.
53.
Supporting Programs. To achieve its goals, the PSET calls for deepening and
accelerating the pace of structural reforms and of investments in key sectors, and for
strengthening development partnerships between the public and private sectors. Among the
structural reforms envisaged under the PSET are: (a) legal and regulatory changes aimed at
further improving the investment climate; (b) an accelerated program of privatization covering
almost all public enterprises; (c) public sector reform to improve the efficiency of public service
delivery; (d) pension fund reform; and (e) education and health sector reforms.
54.
The PSET calls for a large package of additional spending and reform in several areas.
Public investment will be increased in education, vocational training, culture, media, youth care,
health care, social productivity and poverty alleviation, water resources and rural development,
and telecommunications. The PSET will also encourage private investment in large infrastructure
projects, including the Disi water conveyance project, power plants, a natural gas pipeline from
Egypt, and the development of Aqaba, Amman, and the Dead Sea. For 2002, the program
envisages an off-budget expenditure of up to JD200 million, contingent on the availability of
privatization proceeds and supplementary foreign grants.
55.
Diagnosis. The Bank has been assisting the GOJ in PSET implementation with a program
of technical assistance in FY02 and FY03. Sector reviews were provided as well as a well
received model for prioritizing projects. Moreover, further assistance is contemplated in FY04
and FY05. The PSET is not without risk. It will increase the presence of the public sector in the
economy through significant additional expenditures. As a result, the fiscal deficit (before grants)
is likely to increase in the event that external grant financing could not be mobilized or
expenditures could not be correspondingly trimmed. The long-term impact on the deficit will
depend on the inertia of the spending programs. Although the GOJ is committed to financing
PSET expenditures from non-debt-creating sources, recurrent outlays are likely to be requiredthe GOJ informed the Bank that it plans to create some fiscal space through budgeting efficiency.
Even if adequate external resources can be mobilized, the program is likely to increase the
dependence of the Jordanian economy on foreign grants. The program's long-term growth and
development effects will depend largely on the response of the private sector-that response is
likely to depend on matters lying outside the scope of the PSET.

19

IV. BANK GROUP ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
A. I'rogress and Outcomes in Past World Bank Group Programs
56.
Implementation of the Previous CAS. The last CAS was designed to support the
couitry's development objectives through a broad array of instruments: adjustment lending;
investment operations in water, education and training, and export development; partial risk
gua-antees to catalyze private investment in large infrastructure projects; technical assistance and
anal ytical and advisory (AAA) services to facilitate knowledge sharing and capacity building;
and partnership with other donors to leverage Bank support. The adjustment operations went
forward. The guarantee operations did not proceed as the relevant transactions became delayed.
The only investment operation that was approved by the Board was in higher education. Several
smaller investment projects did not proceed due to changed policies, availability of grant funds
or a lack of institutional capacity to implement as planned. AAA implementation was generally
successful. An analysis of the implementation of the last CAS is shown in box IV. 1.
Evaluation of Bank Performance by Operations Evaluation Department. The Bank's
57.
Operations Evaluation Department (OED) is evaluating the effectiveness of World Bank Group
assistance to Jordan from 1990 to 2000. While OED has not finalized the Country Assistance
Evaluation (CAE), one conclusion of the draft CAE is that since growth has not resumed as
exp2cted, the Bank's adjustment lending supporting structural reforms did not achieve its
ultimnate objectives, even though many of the reforms were implemented. It should be noted,
however, that growth did pick up in 1999 and continued strong despite regional disturbances and
the worldwide impact of the events of September 11. The record since 1999 indicates that
Jordan's economy has gained resilience from the structural reforms supported by the Bank. Some
preliminary conclusions of the draft CAE are shown in box IV.2.
B. Objectives and Principles of CAS
58.
CAS Objectives. The overarching objective of the CAS is poverty reduction and
prevention. Guided by the principles outlined below and the GOJ's own strategy, and limited to
the areas in which the Bank Group can provide results, the five priorities of the CAS are:
* Promotinghuman development for poverty alleviation including gender-responsive
policies, strategies, and programs for education, health, and social insurance and
assistance.
* Enhancingconditionsforgrowth led by the private sector.
* Addressing resourceconservation, exploitation, and management with a focus on water
scarcity.
* Improving governance through public sector reform and broader, deeper analytical
determination of development policies, priorities, and strategies, and through institutional
capacity building for efficient and equitable implementation of policies.
* Promotinggender inclusion in development planning and analysis.

20
Box IV.1

Implementation of Previous CAS
What Did Not Happen

What Happened
Bank portfolio of 9 projects was implemented satisfactorily
indicating excellent Bank/GOJ partnership in project execution

Project lending was considerably lower than expected because
the GOJ strove to limi borrowing to bring down its high level of

However, close supervision continued as the country's capacity
to implement complex operations, particularly in infrastructure,
continued to be weak

external debt.

Public Sector Reform (supported by Public Sector Reform
Loans-PSRLs)
Civil Service Reform: Implementation of new civil service bylaws
and regulations and procedures on selection and performance
evaluation of Government employees, within the Bank
supported PSRLs.
Legal and Judicial Reform. Adoption of arbitration code, basic
upgrade of Amman court management system, presentation of
law to parliament for reform of Judicial Institute.
Govemment Restructuring: Cabinet approval received for
creation of Ministry of Administrative Development and Civil
Service.
Financial and Procurement Reform Preparation of draft public
procurement law and regulations meeting intemational
standards prepared with support from Bank staff.

Very slow implementation of budgetary reform

GOJ's internal procurement processes not yet in line with
international standards; procurement law not yet passed

Economic Growth
Investment Promotion: Legislation prepared, approved by
cabinet, and presented to parliament.
Prnvatization progressing well-51 transactions completed,
raising more than US$900 million achieved with close Bank
advice and technical assistance (TA).

Some large privatization transactions-Royal Jordanian
Airlines, power generation-delayed.
Cooperative sector not restructured, as envisaged under the

Export Development supported by the Bank through a series of
Economic Reform and Development Loans (ERDLs). Impressive
growth of 25 percent in 2000-01

previous CAS.

Human Development and Social Protection
Education- Successful implementation of Higher Education
Project under way; Global Development Leaming Network
center established at University of Jordan with direct Bank
assistance and supervision Several new features being
prepared or introduced in schools to meet challenges of the
knowledge economy. Based on Bank's AAA work, broad
consensus in govemment and among the public is that a new
education vision is needed.

Improvements in leaming outcomes not adequate.
Continued lack of coherent, comprehensive strategy for
improving quality and relating education to needs of the labor
market
Insufficient progress toward improving quality and allocative
efficiency of health care system.

Health: Health sector strategy updated, and a long-term reform
program begun with Bank's assistance.
Poverty Reduction: Comprehensive national poverty alleviation
strategy adopted.

Poverty cannot yet be accurately measured or targeted.

The project activities financed under the Community
Infrastructure Development Loan have created job opportunities
for local labor estimated at 240,600 work days.
Water
Water sector strategy updated with Bank's assistance.

Outside Amman, slow progress in preparing water systems for
operations and maintenance contracts with private sector
parties. Tender documents for Disi-Amman Water Conveyor
Project delayed.

21

Box IV.2

World Bank Assistance Evaluation Reports

OE[D prepared two reports as background to the Country Assistance Evaluation Report; one on Bank assistance for health,
educ ation, and poverty reduction, and one on the Economic Developments in the 1990s and World Bank Assistance The reports
cove r the period 1990-2000.

Economic Developments in the 1990s and World Bank Assistance
The evaluation found the Bank's economic and sector work highly satisfactory, although some Important sectors (e g., labor
marliets) should have had greater attention.
The report evaluated the outcome of the Bank loans as moderately satisfactory because while they helped stave off Jordan's
finaicial crises and helped support the stable currency, they did not boost investment or growth. The Bank 'sperformance was
mocerately satisfactory: although its loans did not incorporate all of its analytical work, there were areas where the government
did liot feel a consensus existed for reform and the Bank could have been more persuasive The GOJ complied with the loan
covernants, but resisted including important reforms as loan conditions that may have improved outcomes. There has been no
mar ced change in institutions, and their development is therefore rated as modest. There does, however, seem to be a widespread
agreement that the reforms were desirable, and sustainability is therefore likely.
The evaluation recommended that future Bank assistance should support a significant reduction in government expenditures,
especially those that many PERs have already identified as being poorly spent. Given the high and persistent unemployment, a
study of the labor market rigidities could provide the basis for their removal, thereby reducing unemployment and helping
alle ,iate poverty.

Hcalth, Education, and Poverty Reduction
OEI) rated the overall quality of the Bank's AAA program in poverty, health, and education as satisfactory. The overall quality
of tie lending portfolio was more mixed, with the outcomes generally rated as satisfactory, but the development impacts rated as
modest and their sustainability uncertain.
* For the AAA program, although the Bank has been able to identify some of the most pressing sectoral issues and
develop a strategy to deal with poverty, there have been some limitations. First, most of the recommendations made
have not found their way into actions. Second, the early work on education was too narrowly focused and did not
provide an adequate perspective from which to plan a comprehensive assistance strategy for the sector
* For the lending portfolio, the evaluation found that, although the health projects have improved primary health care and
health sector manpower development, major problems persist-such as high expenditures, inefficiency, poor
management, and the absence of a universal insurance scheme. The evaluation also found that results in education
would have been better if the Bank had provided a review of policy and technical issues for the education sector as a
whole rather than addressing sectoral policy and technical issues piecemeal.
OE D Recommendations
* Analytical work to identify development priorities for the sector and the economy as a whole should precede project
lending intended to tackle those priorities. The Bank's assistance program for education, for example, should be a
review of the entire sector. The review should address the question of priority areas for future assistance
* A more purposeful and effective way to monitor and evaluate the outcomes of the projects should be developed
* Greater emphasis should be put on institutional development impact and sustainability, particularly in the design of
health and education projects.
* The CAS should identify the reasons for recent increases in poverty and design actions to reverse those increases.

59.
Building on Lessons Learned. Over the past decade, Jordan adopted many of the
re orms supported by Bank lending and AAA program. Many of the immediate outputs of the
AkA program were achieved, but the overall objective of growth and poverty reduction
relnained elusive. As the draft OED evaluations and other Bank analysis noted, the development
censtraints were usually not financing but rather institutional capacity, and information and
kr owledge about international best practices and how other countries have addressed similar
challenges. Consequently, this CAS, while not making dramatic break with the past, does
atiempt greater focus in its objectives and guiding principles. The CAS program is built around

22
the cross-cutting themes of capacity building and knowledge development to help put in place or
strengthen, where the Bank can, those absent development factors, the foundation stones for
sustainable growth and poverty reduction.
Participation,Partnership,and Selectivity
ParticipatoryProcess. The CAS preparation process began with a one-day retreat for the
60.
Country Team and GOJ representatives in key sectors. Results from the consultations revealed
substantial common ground among participants and helped identify development goals and shape
the Bank's draft program. A mission visited Jordan in June 2002 to discuss with the GOJ the
areas of focus and the instruments proposed in the CAS. The mission also met with other major
stakeholders in the private sector, academia, NGOs, and the donor community.
Furtherconsultations with civil society and key donors took place during afollow-up
61.
CAS mission in mid-October 2002, which was led by the Country Director. The mission, which
also included IFC, met with 45 representatives of different segments of Jordan's nascent civil
society-the private sector, NGOs, academia, and the media. The meeting revolved around
Jordan's development priorities and challenges from the perspective of civil society, and what
the Bank can do to support Jordan meet these challenges, and also provided a forum for
discussions between the GOJ and civil society on the country's main development issues,
generated considerable interest in longer-term process of engagement.
62.
Coordinationwith Development Partners.Official development assistance to Jordan
during the last five years averaged about US$640 million per year, of which 51 percent were
grants. This does not include concessional oil sales from Iraq, which represent the equivalent of a
grant of US$300 million. USAID is the biggest bilateral donor, followed by Japan, the European
Union, and Germany. The Arab Fund and the Islamic Development Bank, in addition to the
Bank, are the most important multi-lateral donors. Box IV.2 shows the major partners and the
sectors in which they are involved. The Bank has regular meetings with the major partners in
Jordan, as well as at their home offices, to exchange views and information, and to coordinate
and complement our assistance strategies to the country. The CAS was discussed with EU
counterparts in November. Bilateral talks were also held with Germany, France, Canada, and
USAID. Bank staff also regularly consult regional development banks such as the Islamic
Development Bank (IsDB) and Arab Fund for Social and Economic Development. The
relationship with the IsDB has been formalized in a Memorandum of Agreement on the
modalities for greater cooperation in the Middle East and North Africa Region, including Jordan.
The OED and IsDB recently collaborated in the preparation of the Country Assistance
Evaluation on Jordan.
There is room for more effective collaboration between development partners. The draft
63.
OED evaluation recommended that the Bank needs to strengthen its coordination with other
main partners in Jordan.12 The Bank intends to do so through regular exchange of views on each
other's assistance strategy, in order to ensure greater coordination, strengthen the spirit of
partnership, enable greater selectivity for the Bank's own program, and identify specific areas for

12

OED, Country Assistance Evaluation for the period 1990-2000 (in preparation).

23
Box IV.3

Major Partners in Jordan

Dunng the last five years, Jordan has received an average of US$640 million in foreign aid-including an average of US$324
million in grant assistance and US$316 million in loan assistance-from about 35 foreign govemments and multilateral agencies
Foreign Aid to Jordan 1998-2001 (USS million)

800
600

619000

1200

*Loans|

_

_-

::_FnlF

|Grant

W

__
21

tTla

2

X

The United States. The United States is Jordan's largest source of development assistance, which comes in the form of grants.
USfID intends to spend US$150 million in Economic Support Funds in FY2002 and US$250 million in FY2003. USAID's program
focuses on three strategic objectives (a) improved water resources management; (b) improved access to and quality of
repr3ductive and primary health care; and (c) increased economic opportunities for Jordanians. Gender and NGOs receive
proriinent treatment. (some of USAID actvities in Jordan are listed in Annex C)
The European Union. A recent EU country strategy paper outlines European assistance to Jordan for the period 2002-06 The
main objective inthe medium term is to ensure successful implementation of the EU-Jordan association agreement as part of
Jorc an's overall modemization and to mitigate negative effects of economic reforms by supporting social reforms (poverty
alleviation) and human resources development (employment creation) (some of the EU's activities in Jordan are listed in
Ann x C).
Jap in. Japan provides grants, soft loans, and technical cooperation. Pnority areas are: (a) basic human needs, including water
supply, food supply, primary health care and medical services, and education; (b) industry, and (c) environment conservation
Gernany. Germany's development cooperation dunng 2002 concentrates on four areas water and environment, capacity building,
rura development and agriculture, and poverty alleviation.
Aral) Funds and the Islamic Development Bank. The Abu Dhabi Fund for Development, the Arab Fund for Economic and Social
Dev alopment, and the Islamic Development Bank are all significant donors to Jordan. They emphasize water, infrastructure,
capaicity building, and direct investments in human aevelopment (health and education).
Othirs Although less important in terms of financial flows, other bilateral and multilateral agencies contnbute significantly,
esp(icially interms of technical assistance and training Among the bilaterals, Canada, France, Italy, Spain, and the United
Kingdom are important The principal multilateral partners are the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, the
Intei national Fund for Agricultural Development, the United Nations Development Programme, the United Nations Environment
Pro Iramme, and the World Food Program

up,tream collaboration over the CAS period, and to ensure that the donor community remains
invDlved in the CAS implementation process. A recently created Donor Coordination Group
cortsisting of most of the major donors in Jordan meets regularly. Visiting Bank missions
participate in these discussions when possible. The Lebanon Country Office, which also serves
Jor Ian, has been strengthened. The country economist for Jordan has been transferred from
Washington to Beirut, giving the office greater field presence and enabling greater participation
in informal donor group monthly meetings and more regularly coordinate with other partners in
the field. Since July, several meetings have been held in Amman, Brussels and Washington with
the principal partners.

24
Selectivity and Partnership. Lending in the CAS will focus on areas where (i) other
64.
donors are less active (public sector reforms); (ii) there are heavy policy agenda and knowledge
transfer components (e.g., education reforms), in which the Bank has a relative comparative
advantage; and (iii) where Bank support can have a catalytic impact on private investment (e.g.,
partial risk guarantees for power and water). Just over 75 percent of Bank lending during the
next three years is proposed for only two operations-public sector reforms, where few other
donors are involved, and in education reform for the knowledge economy. The Bank plans to
collaborate with the European Investment Bank and other partners in the education sector, with
the Bank taking the lead in policy and capacity-building components. In nonlending services, as
earlier recommended by OED, Bank assistance will complement the work of other partners (e.g.
privatization and enterprise development which are heavily supported by USAID), or provide the
analytical underpinning, in terms of sector work and technical assistance for support by other
donors (e.g., water sector reforms, labor market study, pension fund reform, health sector
strategy, poverty assessment).
C. CAS Instruments
The instruments used in the CAS must strike the right balance between lending and
65.
nonlending services to fulfill Jordan's priorities and make optimal use of the Bank's comparative
advantage as a global knowledge institution. Financial constraints are not the most binding
development constraints for Jordan. Geopolitical considerations ensure that Jordan is one of the
highest per capita aid recipients in the world (US$103 per capita in 2000), and there is
considerable room in Jordan to reduce, as well as to improve the efficiency of, public
expenditures. Moreover, Jordan's desire to limit external borrowing and bring down the
country's level of external debt, means that the volume of future Bank lending will be limited
and resource transfer will not be the primary form of Bank support. On the other hand,
knowledge about how other countries have addressed similar development challenges, and
information about international best practices and how to tailor them to Jordan's circumstances,
should become relatively more important. More knowledge transfer through technical assistance,
advisory services, economic and sector analysis, and dissemination of cutting-edge knowledge
and international experience will become more important vehicles for future Bank support.
Lending. Bank lending to Jordan will focus on areas where the Bank can promote and
66.
accelerate key policy changes, have a catalytic impact on private investment or donor support,
bundle lending with knowledge (in the form of technical assistance and international best
practice), or support innovative approaches likely to lead to systemic changes. The level of Bank
lending and guarantees will be lower than in the previous CAS.
Analytical and Advisory Services. Because Jordan needs sustained support for policy
67.
reforms, as well as help in moving into knowledge economy, the Bank's support over the next
three years will focus heavily on analytical and advisory (AAA) services. In addition to the more
traditional AAA, the Bank plans to use Programmatic Economic and Sector Work (PESW)
which would enable the Bank to provide sustained support for policy reform, implementation,
and institutional development. Jordan may have access to alternative sources of finance, but it
also has a clear need for assistance in shaping the institutions and structures responsible for
making and implementing policy reforms. The PESW, which is likely to be an increasingly
important form of Bank assistance to Middle Income Countries, will provide: (1) sustained and

25

systematic outcome-oriented support in the absence of lending; (2) structure, discipline, and
incentives to exploit knowledge services-through direct links to outcomes and through a
management, quality assurance, and budget framework that supports sustained and effective
ergagement by staff in the absence of a lending framework; and (3) creation of a mechanism for
aligning Bank and partner support around core development objectives. Support by other
pz,rtners could build on the Bank's analytical work.
6k:.
The PESWs are structured, focused, client-owned tools for dialogue, policy advice and
kinowledge sharing. A PESW can be a viable standalone form of assistance or it can be linked to
one or more ongoing activities or reforms which separately may be financially supported by the
Bmnk or by another partner. PESW is essentially a work prograrn, structured on agreed
timetables, outputs, progress benchmarks and monitoring for impact. Each PESW is an agreed
fr,mnework for a focused program of knowledge sharing aimed at assisting the client in achieving
a ;pecific developmental goal. PESW selectivity is linked to the five CAS priorities (paragraph
58). Because it is a new activity for Jordan and for the Bank's Jordan Country Team, there is no
detailed or fixed template yet for each of the areas selected for its use. However, the general
principles are clear. For each PESW, the timeframe is to be agreed, and is anticipated to be 1-3
years. The agreed priority components and an impact-oriented action plan with clear
responsibilities for the Bank, the client, and any other partner will be set out in a memorandum
which includes benchmarks and periodic reporting to determine progress or exit. The GOJ and
the Bank have agreed on three areas for PESW-education, water, and pension fund reform.

26

V. BANK GROUP ACTIVITIES TO SUPPORT THE STRATEGY
The CAS program is described in matrix format (table VI4). The sections below indicate
69.
the activities as organized in the five priority areas.
A. Human Development and Poverty Reduction
Education for a Global Economy. Building on the extensive initiatives of the past
70.
decade, and in response to internal and external evaluation recommendations, the Bank intends
to help Jordan develop a comprehensive strategic framework for education. The first step was the
convening, in September 2002, of a highly successful forum aimed at articulating a vision for an
education system responsive to the needs of the knowledge economy. A National Education
Strategy drafted at the forum has formed the basis for subsequent discussions by the Economic
Consultative Council's Third Economic Forum, chaired by the King and representing the GOJ
and private sector. These discussions and consultations will be followed by a series of
consensus-building workshops with stakeholders-including local and district-level officials,
community leaders, private education providers, and labor market representatives-to build
consensus around the strategic vision and to design plans for implementing the vision. The
Bank's technical assistance to help the GOJ develop this strategy and identify the means of its
implementation are key goals of the CAS.
Lending. The Bank will work with the GOJ to design the third lending project in the
71.
series of Human Resources Development Sector Investment Loan, titled Education Reform for
the Knowledge Economy, on the basis of the new National Education Strategy. The project
objectives include achieving sustainable learning outcomes relevant to the knowledge economy
by supporting gender-responsive educational reform at the governance, program, and facility
levels. The project accommodates improving the quality of the physical learning environment,
building information and communications infrastructure in schools, training teachers in
information and communication technologies and e-learning, and supporting implementation and
evaluation of e-learning pilots.
PESWandAAA. In addition to the lending, as part of the National Education Strategy,
72.
the Bank will also carry out a PESW to support the Ministry of Education and the National
Council of Family Affairs to develop an Education Strategy, including an investment strategy for
early childhood education. Bank support is expected to contribute to an enhanced institutional
capacity for early childhood education within the Ministry of Education, a cadre of early
childhood educators, increased access to kindergartens for the poor, and parent and community
participation and partnership (public awareness and understanding).
Reforming the Health Sector. To provide a framework for comprehensive health sector
73.
reform in Jordan, the Bank proposes to:
Assist the GOJ in organizing a health reform symposium to take stock of health reform
efforts to date, define government priorities, and identify the main strategic directions to
implement them.

27
a

*

*

Provide technical assistance to the GOJ in the form of a Health Sector Strategy, and more
specifically to the Higher Health Council, supporting the elaboration of a health sector
strategy that will include short-, medium-, and long-term actions based on ongoing work
in the country by the GOJ and intemational and national agencies. This strategy should
take into account the epidemiological transition in the country and the need to adjust the
health system to provide integrated chronic care. This strategy should also identify the
resources (financial and human) necessary to implement the strategy.
Ensure that those components of the ongoing World Bank Health Sector Reform Project
that focus on global pharmaceutical and health information system reforms are
adequately implemented.
Provide support for the development of a nationwide network for monitoring and
promoting women's health.

74.
Poverty Assessment. In FY04, in support of the National Strategy for the Alleviation of
Pove rty, the Bank and the GOJ will undertake a poverty assessment based on the HEIS to be
completed in 2003. It is proposed that a poverty-targeted operation responsive to the results of
the assessment should be developed at the municipal level in FY04. The objectives of the
operation will be to improve living conditions in poor communities by: (i) developing an
intergovemmental transfer mechanism that is poverty sensitive and gender-responsive and that
equalizes fiscal conditions across local governments; (ii) strengthening the institutional capacity
of the Cities and Villages Development Bank (CVDB) to ensure a hard budget constraint to
municipalities (to avoid future insolvency and disruption of services); (iii) improving the
capacity of governorates and municipalities to do participatory planning, budgeting, and
implementation; and (iv) addressing the basic infrastructure needs of poor communities through
dem,md-driven community development. The GOJ's recent empowerment of governorates and
its amalgamation of municipalities (from 328 to 99) puts regional and local government in a
muc:i better position to implement the operation and respond to the needs of the populace. The
operation will build on the lessons learned from the ongoing Community Infrastructure
Devtdlopment Project and the Jordan Social Productivity Program.
Poverty and Gender Data Collection and Analysis. Capacity for data collection and
75.
analyisis will be funded by the Institutional Development Fund (IDF), to build analytical capacity
in the Department of Statistics for poverty measurement, poverty profiling and distribution, and
poverty monitoring, including gender aspects. WBI will also assist the Ministry of Planning in its
program of poverty monitoring and evaluation.
76.
Pension Reform PESW. In FY03, the GOJ and the Bank will embark on a PESW, in
collhboration with the IMF, to implement short-term reforms of pension funds for civil servants
and ,nilitary personnel, and to initiate the preparation of a gender-responsive multi-year program
for systemic reform of the entire pension system.
B. Achieving Greater Gender Equity
The Poverty Assessment (FY03-04) and Public Expenditure Review (FY03-04) will
77.
integrate gender analysis into the poverty diagnosis and public expenditure frameworks. These
effoits will be informed by ongoing work in gender. For example, through two IDF grants, the
Ban1c is supporting women and family issues in the delivery of public health services. Among the

28
anticipated outcomes of the IDF funded efforts are a nationwide database of women's issues in
Jordan; a detailed plan for the establishment of a national women's center; and a needs
assessment survey of female dependents of military personnel. With the findings, the Bank plans
to help the GOJ develop a detailed package of curative and preventive services for the target
population, especially those in underserved areas of the south.
The Country Gender Assessment (FY04) will identify gender-responsive policies and
78.
actions important for poverty reduction, economic growth, human well-being, and development
effectiveness in a collaborative process. The assessment will update and synthesize existing
analytical work and help identify priority gender areas for further analytical work, policy design,
advisory services, partnerships and project activities.
C. Private Sector Development and Infrastructure for Sustainable Growth and Job
Creation
In close partnership with other donors, notably USAID and the European Union, the
79.
Bank will focus on three areas in which it has a strong comparative advantage-improving the
investment environment, privatization, and export development. A FY04 Labor Market Study
will provide the information needed to assist both anti-poverty measures as well as private sector
efforts for job creation.
Improving the Overall Investment Environment. Work in this area will involve all the
80.
World Bank Group's private sector actors; IBRD (with strong support from WBI), IFC, and
Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA). A principle objective of past and ongoing
Bank support for structural reforms is to improve the environment for private investment. 13
Expanding lending will be addressed in Mortgage Market Technical Assistance.
MIGA has been actively promoting its guarantee services, which appear to have become
81.
more attractive as a result of the heightened tensions in the region. MIGA is currently reviewing
seven applications (involving potential projects representing an estimated US$1 billion in foreign
direct investment). Specific technical assistance interventions by MIGA will be identified case
by case. With an exposure of US$39.5 million (as of March 31, 2002), Jordan is the second
largest host country for MIGA guarantees in the MENA region. MIGA recently concluded a
cooperation agreement with the Jordanian Investment Board (JIB) to participate as a content
partner in MIGA's new FDI Xchange e-mail alert service. This online service provides
customized e-mail updates on new investment opportunities and market analysis matching the
interests expressed by registered users.
IFC has made business development in Jordan a high priority. During the previous CAS
82.
period IFC experienced steady demand for financing from successful private sector companies,
including many export-oriented firms. IFC has been active in Jordan for many years and held a

13The focus of Economic Reform and Development Loans (ERDL 1, II, and III) which were implemented during

1996-99 was to improve the investment climate-trade liberalization, legal and regulatory reforms, privatization
support, sectoral reforms. The ongoing Public Sector Reform Loans (PSRL I, II and III) aim to improve the interface
between the public and private sectors-judiciary reform, civil service reform, restructuring of government agencies
that deal with the private sector, improved service delivery of government agencies.

29
portiolio of US$94 million in 15 companies as of November 2002. The investments are
dive sified in hotels, financial services, chemicals, manufacturing, and industrial zones. Over the
past few years, IFC made an effort to diversify activities because almost half of its total exposure
had ,een in hotels, including three city hotels in Amman and two resort hotels on the Dead Sea.
IFC's exposure in tourism is now 30 percent of the outstanding portfolio. While tourism is one of
threc: priority areas for the GOJ, the sector is volatile because of the political climate in the
region. Moreover, a decline in hotel occupancy and room rates since 1995 indicates that the
marl;et is saturated.
Privatization. In cooperation with USAID, the Bank will continue to manage a trust fund
83.
to support Jordan's privatization agenda and private provision of public infrastructure.
Privatization is expected to improve the environment for private investment through (1)
enhEnced productivity and provision of better quality, lower cost services, and (2) by
encc.uraging private investment. Bank work on privatization combines both transactions and
regulatory capacity-building measures.
Export Development. While export growth has surged over the past two years, it is
84.
driven by the QIZ system, which has weak linkages with the rest of the economy. A recent Bank
study on the sources of growth in Jordan identified infrastructure and trade logistics as a key
constraint to further export development. The Bank plans to conduct a follow-up Trade Logistics
Stucly to identify measures to improve trade logistics and facilitate exports. This work will
identify critical policy reforms, and clear priorities for future work. The Bank is providing direct
support for export diversification and development in the agriculture sector through a Learning
and Innovation Loan approved in FY02. Success of this pilot operation will open the door for
further Bank support in this area. MIGA has guaranteed a foreign investment in a fertilizer and
animnal feed supplement production facility in Aqaba. The project is expected to generate an
avelage of US$54.5 million in fertilizer exports during the first five years of operation.
IFC will continue to support export-oriented investments. In the past, the Corporation
85.
made a number of investments in QIZs, which are primarily for export to the U.S. In FY01, IFC
invested in Boscan Jordan, a luggage manufacturer, and Jordan Gateway, an industrial zone. In
FY(12, IFC invested in two industrial zones in Jordan-Al Tajamouat Industrial City (committed
in C'ctober 2001), and Cybercity, an integrated industry and technology park (committed in
January 2002). IFC also committed MEREN, an investment in a silica sand project, primarily for
the export market. IFC is currently exploring new investments in pharmaceuticals, and exportoriented electronic goods sectors. IFC is also investing in the IT sector, including software
development and animation for the regional market, via a venture capital company. The signing
of tbade agreements with the United States and the European Union is likely to enhance
prospects for private investment in export-oriented activities and IFC will continue to seek
oppDrtunities to support such activities.
Catalyzing Private Investment in Infrastructure: Partial Risk Guarantees and
86.
Direct Investment. At the GOJ's request, the Bank Group will consider providing partial risk
guarantees to two projects: the Disi-Amman Conveyer Project (to transport drinking water to
Amman from the Disi aquifer on the Saudi Arabian border), and Samra First Private Power
Proj ect (the first build-operate-transfer power project in Jordan). The Bank may also consider a
partial risk guarantee to support the ongoing privatization in the power sector. Additionally, the

30

Bank plans to support transport and tourism operations to alleviate transportation bottlenecks and
contribute to further development of the tourism sector, which accounts for about 10 percent of
GDP. A recent Bank study' 4 identified high transportation costs and poor transport logistics as an
important element in the high cost of doing business in Jordan. The Bank plans to support the
development of the transport corridor in the greater Amman area that would link the Zarqa
industrial area' 5 with Aqaba, the country's only sea outlet. The Bank will also support a lending
project for the Cultural Heritage, Tourism, and Urban Development project to attract private
investment in poor areas with significant cultural heritage assets.
IFC will continue to provide direct support to private sector participation in
87.
infrastructure. An investment in Samra wastewater Build-Own-Operate is in the early stages. IFC
is in preliminary discussion on investment in the first IPP in Jordan. IFC would also be interested
in looking for investment opportunities in the oil and gas sector, including pipelines. A Bank
funded Energy Strategy Paper should assist in identifying promising opportunities.
D. Improving Water Resource Management and the Environment
Water Resource Management. The Bank plans to assist the GOJ in two important
88.
areas-water demand management and supply augmentation. Its program for FY03-05 will
include a PESW to support a continuing policy dialogue on water issues facing Jordan. The Bank
will continue to support a comprehensive approach through integrated analysis and dialogue
about sectoral development policy in agriculture, industry, and urban development-with wider
participation of the public. The Bank will encourage a comprehensive policy on allocating water
among competing users; on pricing (which should take into consideration the economic value of
water and incentives for water conservation, including wastewater and drought management); on
the right institutional framework for managing water management and delivering services
efficiently; and finally on legal and regulatory aspects. To counter the impact of industrial
wastewaters and other industrial wastes on water resources, the Bank will help the GOJ form
policies and strategies to address pollution at the source, providing economic incentives that
enable industries to reduce pollution while maintaining their competitive advantage. To the
extent possible, such industrial policies should promote the use of clean technologies and dry
industries. A water sector strategy update would chronicle these activities and set out the desired
comprehensive approach. WBI will also support water sector reforms, primarily through sharing
the global knowledge and concrete country experiences.
89.
Environment. The Bank's environmental assistance to Jordan will focus first on
addressing priority environmental issues by assisting in further mainstreaming of environmental
aspects in projects under preparation and supervision. Special efforts will be made to build on the
links between environmental protection and social development, economic efficiency, and
poverty alleviation, and to provide environmental management consultations where needed. The

Jordan Sources of Growth Study, World Bank, 2001.
Amman, along with the urban area of Zarqa to the northeast, accounts for over 50 percent of the country's
population. It is the major commercial and industrial center of the country with over 80 percent of its industrial
sector located in this region.
4

1SGreater

31

seccnd prong of the Bank's support for the environment in Jordan will be to help protect the
country's natural heritage and the global commons through the following planned activities:
Conservation of Medicinal and Herbal Plants, a Global Environment Facility (GEF)
project (FY03)
Integrated Ecosystem Management in the Jordan Rift Valley GEF (FY04)
Gulf of Aqaba Environmental Consolidation Phase GEF (FY 04)
E. Imiproving Public Sector Efficiency and Governance
Public Sector Reform and Governance will continue to be a major area of Bank work
90.
in Jordan for the next three years, but with a major shift in approach. In the past, much of the
dialogue in this area has focused on government-wide issues, pursued through large adjustment
loar s. This approach has provided the context and justification for the large financial transfers
requested by the GOJ, but it has not allowed the Bank to develop the knowledge-based
partnership that is needed to support the GOJ's public sector reform and institution-building
program. A Public Expenditure Review will be a centerpiece of the work program.
In terms of substance, work on public sector reform will continue to focus on public
91.
adm7inistration, including the civil service, in support of the GOJ's effort to increase staff
accountability for delivering public services promptly, efficiently, and transparently. However, it
will focus more sharply on budgeting and financial management, consistent with the GOJ's
con mitment to advance policy reforms on this front. In particular, the work will support
government plans to move toward greater efficiency in expenditures and preventing the
exp mnsion of government spending. Work will focus on a results-oriented, medium-term
expenditure framework that will require much closer coherence and conformity with the Paris
Club and the program agreed with the IMF for exit from debt constraints and external finance
dependency. At the same time, Bank work will support the GOJ's programs to improve public
financial management, including procurement and auditing, through a Country Procurement
Assessment Report and a Country Financial Accountability Assessment.
Reform of the Municipal Sector. Half of Jordan's municipalities were declared
insclvent in 2000. In 2001, all 328 municipalities were amalgamated into 100 larger municipal
unil s. Their debt to the CVDB-a public municipal fund-was rescheduled. The factors
contributing to their insolvency included: (i) the mushrooming of small, poorly managed,
overstaffed municipalities; (ii) the lack of a hard budget constraint on municipal spending; and
(iii) poor built-in incentives and lack of horizontal equity in the intergovernmental transfer
syslem.
92.

The recent measures to consolidate municipalities were necessary to generate economies
93.
of scale in delivery of services and to raise municipal capacity, but they are not sufficient to
ensure that insolvency will not recur. Public sector reform efforts should include a municipal
governance component. Three areas of reform need to be considered: (i) strengthening the role
and autonomy of the CVDB as a specialized intermediary for municipal finance;
(ii) reconsidering the distributional criteria for intergovernmental transfers; and (iii) improving
municipal resource management practices and incentives. A FY03 Urban Management/
Mu,icipal Finance Strategy, which provides a detailed examination of the above challenges and

32
proposed reforms is being prepared.' 6 WBI also intends to focus on municipal management
capacity-building activities. In the High Case, the CAS includes a Municipal Development
Project.
F. Supporting the Knowledge Economy
94.
Knowledge Economy. A key plank in the PSET is focused on creating an enabling
environment for knowledge-based development in all areas of the economy. This explicit
recognition of the increasingly knowledge-intensive nature of competitive economies globally is
fairly unique in the region. The Bank and the GOJ will work with the private sector and other
key stakeholders to prepare a knowledge assessment of the Jordanian economy, complete with
recommendations. The assessment will be based on the five pillars of the knowledge economy
framework:
* An economic and institutionalregime that provides incentives for the efficient use of
existing knowledge, the generation of new knowledge, the dismantling of obsolete
economic activities, and the creation of more efficient and competitive ones.
* An educatedand entrepreneurialpopulation that can create, use, and effectively
disseminate new knowledge.
* A dynamic information infrastructurefor effective communication, dissemination, and
processing of information.
e An efficient innovation system of firms, science and research centers, universities, think
tanks, consultants, and other organizations that can interact and tap into the growing
stock of global knowledge, assimilate and adapt that knowledge to local needs, and use it
to create new knowledge and technology.
* An inclusion of leadership, governance, and gender indicators as part of the knowledge
economy framework.
The assessment would make the linkages between sectors such as ICT, education, private
95.
sector development, much more explicit and facilitate prioritization of public policy choices. The
diagnostic work performed in the assessment will form the basis of a technical assistance to
evaluate and build on the assessment's recommendations. Annual triggers and monitorable
indicators will allow both the GOJ and the Bank to gauge progress toward agreed outcomes.
Such a technical assistance program would also allow explicit linkages between sectors such as
private sector development, education, ICT, etc., thus improving prioritization of public policy
choices for decision-makers.

16

"Jordan- Intergovernmental Fiscal Relations and Municipal Finance Sector Note," draft, September 2002.

33

VI. MANAGING THE ACTIVITIES
A. Portfolio Management
IBRD Lending. Since the last CAS, Jordan has been able to maintain a very strong
96.
portfolio performance. Eight of the ten projects closed since the last CAS achieved their
de ielopment objectives and were completed with only minor delays. OED has evaluated five of
the eight projects and rated their sustainability as likely, their outcome satisfactory (between
highly satisfactory and moderately satisfactory), and the performances of Bank and borrower as
salisfactory. The Bank's Quality Assurance Group reviewed four projects under supervision and
foimd the overall quality of supervision to be satisfactory.' 7
The current portfolio comprises seven loans and one Montreal Protocol project, for a total
97.
net commitment of US$255.5 million and an average project age of 4.4 years. The ongoing
projects focus on education, urban development, health, social protection, water and sanitation,
ani tourism. All are in line with Jordan's present development agenda. Seven of the eight
projects are free of problems and risk, and the portfolio management targets set in the 1999 CAS
were largely met. The disbursement ratio for FY02 was 28.2 percent-on target and much higher
th; m the regional average of less than 14 percent (table VI. 1).
In preparation for this CAS, the Bank conducted a thorough review of the portfolio in
98.
October 2002. During the CAS period, the Bank plans to conduct one or two output-based
Country Portfolio Performance Reviews. Strong ownership from Jordan, the excellent quality of
thz dialogue between the GOJ and the Bank, and the generally good project implementation
capacity of Jordanian institutions are the main factors behind the portfolio's relative success.
Decentralization. Of the seven loans in the active portfolio, two are managed by staff
99.
lo ated in the Bank's Lebanon Country Office. This allows for proactive and flexible supervision
thait in turn promotes sustainability, facilitates mentoring, and allows for extensive monitoring
and evaluation. Because of these benefits, decentralization of the portfolio will be applied
whlenever feasible. The Country Economist is also now posted in the Lebanon Country Office.
1C0. No major changes are anticipated in the portfolio management strategy in th,e coming
years. The Bank will continue to use quality at entry and readiness filters' 8 as its main tools,
fo-using on realistic objectives that are fully owned by the GOJ. In supervision, the Bank will
ccntinue at the current level of intensity to allow for successful implementation and continued
institutional capacity building.

upervision Quality in FYOO, A QAG Assessment, The World Bank.
purpose of qualty at entry is to provide real-time feedback to staff and managers to improve the
developmental impact and identify systemic issues as a basis for improving quality of future operations.
Tb,e readinessfi lter is a tool that helps the user judge whether a project is ready for implementation before the loan
be -omes effective. Those criteria depend on the context of each country and include, among others, parliament
17

18'rhe

ral ification, implementation arrangements, framework for training if necessary, procurement plan, procedures

minual, etc.

34
Table VI.1
Indicators

Portfolio Management Indicators

Previous CAS

Target

Commitment at risk (percentage of

FY02 Actual

FY03

Targets

FY04

FY05

0

19

0

0

0

30
100

28.2
100

25
100

20
100

24
100

Investment)

Disbursement ratio
Realism index

B. Monitoring Indicators and Benchmarks
101.
Progress toward the achievement of the CAS objectives is shown in the CAS matrix
(Annex B9). Specific targets and possible intermediate indicators for each of the four areas of
CAS focus are shown below (table VI.2). The indicators should be interpreted with caution,
keeping in mind the difficulty of developing sound quantitative monitoring indicators, a weak
database on poverty, Jordan's limited monitoring and evaluation capacity, and the fact that the
true impact of interventions often can be observed only in the long run, making it necessary to
use interim or leading indicators for the CAS period.

Table VI.2
Areas
Human development
Poverty

Basic Education
Macroeconomic stability and growth

CAS Monitoring Indicators
Intefmediate Indicators

Goals (2005)

Reduction in unemployment from
15 percent at present to 13 percent by2004
Design of poverty mapping
Proportion of poor covered by
govemment assistance nses from
18 percent at present to 30 percent by
2004
Implementation of education sector
reforms
Macroeconomic program targets met
GDP growth in excess of 4 5 percente
Export growth 10% and 9% inthe years

Ratio of people living under
US$2/day reduced by 50 percent
from the current 12 percent to 6
percent

100 percent primary school
enrollment
GDP grows 5.5 percent or moreb
Nontraditional exports grow by
15 percent annually

2003 and 2004 respectively

Public sector reform and govemance

All policy reforms under PSRL I, II,and
IlIl fully implemented

Water resources management

Demand management policies adopted
and implemented
Cost recovery policies adopted

Improved service delivery as
measured by satisfaction of clients
expressed through service delivery
survey of selected govemment
agencies and departments to be
conducted starting FY04
Efficiency of water use in irrigated
agnculture improved by 5 percente
(from 45 percent to 50 percent)

a. Rate of growth required to keep unemployment from rising.
b. Target rate for growth for absorbing entrants to the labor market and reducing stock of unemployment.
c. As measured by water use per unit of agricultural output. Savings can result from efficiency of irrigation or from
shifting to higher-value crops.
102. To address these limitations in the CAS period, the various AAA activities are expected
to build reliable baseline data in key areas, such as poverty, gender, and efficiency of delivery of

35
basic public services, and to provide training and capacity-building assistance to key institutions
in inonitoring and evaluation. The Bank will also work with the GOJ to refine key targets. In the
are a of poverty, the Bank will support the inclusion of an extensive poverty and gender
coraponent in the 2003 household expenditure and income survey and help establish a poverty
monitoring unit in the Department of Statistics through an ongoing grant from the Institutional
De velopment Fund. The development of an adequate monitoring and evaluation system for the
delivery of government services is one of the important aspects of the public sector reform (PSR)
program. Supported by the Bank, the PSR program includes surveys of deliveries of basic
government services as well as capacity building in monitoring and evaluation (M&E) for key
ministries and agencies. The Bank will also support M&E capacity building for the National
Ceniter for Human Resource Development, which is charged with educational policy
formulation, monitoring, and evaluation. The Bank expects this capacity building to be
undertaken as part of the education sector reform that is to be supported by the proposed
Ed ication Reform for the Knowledge Economy (ERFKE). In addition, through a PESW the
Baik will provide support to the Ministry of Planning in its plans to establish a system for
des igning and monitoring key development indicators.
C. Lending Scenarios and Triggers
10 3. Bank lending for FY03-05, not counting guarantees, is expected to range from US$305
million in the base case to US$380 million in the high case (US$455 million and US$530 million
inc luding guarantees for the base and high cases, respectively, table VI.4). Assumptions and
triggers for the high case are described in table VI.3.
*

Base Case. The proposed ERFKE (formerly HRDSIL III), and an adjustment operation for
public sector reform (PSRL III) together account for over three-quarters of total Bank
lending in the base case. In addition, US$150 million in partial risk guarantees are envisaged
for the base- and high-case scenarios. The guarantees, which have been postponed from the
previous CAS, are proposed as a catalyst for private investment in water and power sectors.

*

Low Case. Lending wvould be reduced to US$100 million.

*

High Case. Lending would be raised to US$380 million. In addition to the partial risk
guarantees and the operations in the base case, the high case envisages a municipal
development project with a poverty focus, and an additional operation which has not yet been
identified.

1C4. In the previous CAS, adjustment lending accounted for 87 percent of lending. In the
CAS, it is expected to account for just 36 percent in the base case. The only adjustment operation
envisaged is the last of the PSRL series.
D. Bank Exposure
1(5. The Bank's exposure to Jordan reached US$952 million at the end of FY02 and is
projected to increase by almost 30 percent in FY03-04 to reach US$1.272 billion under the CAS
base case. Net flows to Jordan are projected to remain substantially positive in the coming two
years. Such exposure levels are relatively high given Jordan's small economy. Jordan stands

36
close to the very high end of the spectrum of all IBRD borrowers for traditional exposure
indicators, such as IBRD debt relative to gross national income or IBRD debt relative to the
country's population. In part, this reflects Jordan's significant total indebtedness relative to its
national income. But it also reflects the high share of IBRD involvement in Jordan vis-a-vis other
creditors, including other preferred creditors.
106. One mitigating factor, however, is that Jordan is a rather open economy. This means that
relative to exports, total indebtedness as well as IBRD exposure, though high, may be more
manageable. It remains pertinent, however, to judge indebtedness relative to the actual domestic
value added of those exports, which may be limited, most notably for those new exports
emanating from export processing zones and QIZs. In any event, total debt, including IBRD
debt, will remain manageable if Jordan's recent export and current account performance can be
sustained, and if bilateral aid flows remain substantial. Another mitigating factor for IBRD
exposure is the long maturity structure of IBRD debt, which has kept IBRD debt service so far at
reasonable levels, around 2 percent of exports.
107. Overall however, from the Bank's risk-management standpoint, concerns about exposure
and creditworthiness, particularly concerns related to the vulnerability of Jordan's current
account to exogenous shocks (see section VII on Risks), constrain the overall CAS lending
envelope that the Bank may envisage.
Table VI.3 Assumptions and Triggers for the Lending Program
Low Case Triggers
Deterioration in portfolio
performance (more than 20
percent of ongoing projects rated
unsatisfactory and disbursement
ratio below 20 percent)

Base Case Assumptions
Portfolio performance remains
satisfactory (with 10 percent or
less rated unsatisfactory and
disbursement ratio at or above 20
percent)

High Case Triggers
Base Case Assumptions Plus

Macroeconomic program
supported by the IMF (SBA 200004) falls off track or major targets,
especially fiscal deficit, are
missed

Macroeconomic program targets
broadly met. Sustainable
macroeconomic framework in
place (fiscal deficit less than 4.3
percent, after grants)

By mid-2004 GOJ establishes a
systematic process of mediumterm expenditure programming
within a rolling macroeconomic
framework

Significant slowdown in
implementation of structural
reform program, especially on
public sector reform, education,
health system reforms, and
privatization

Continued progress in privatization
of Jordan Phosphate Mining
Company, Arab Potash Company,
Royal Jordanian Air Academy and
Training Center, Jordan
Telecommunications Company,
and state-owned cement and
power companies

Completion of commercialization
and privatization preparation
process and good-faith offer of
power companies to the private
sector, including power
generation

Public sector reform program on
track, especially the
implementation of legal and
judicial reforms and training of
judges in commercial law, civil
service reforms, and adoption of
medium-term budget framework
Passage and implementation of
.__
_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ Electricity Law

GOJ fully meets its
macroeconomic targets agreed
with IMF

Reform of water tariffs to cover
operations and maintenance of
Jordan Valley Authority and
Water Authority of Jordan by
end-2004. Enactment and
implementation of ground water
by-law to reduce overdraft

37

Table Vl.4 World Bank Assistance Program (FY03-05)
Stiategic Objective
Private sector
devuilopment for
sustainable growth
and job creation
Human development
and poverty reduction

Lending/GuaranteesAnalytical and Advisory Activies
High Case (US$ millions)
Base Case (US$ millions)
Privatization TA (USAID) (yearly)
Cultural Heritage, Tourism
Cultural Heritage, Tourism
Trade Logistics (04)
and Urban Development
and Urban Development
($45, FY05)
($45, FY05)
Education Strategy (including followup to the Cost Efficiency Study and
the Vision Forum (PESW))
Health Sector Strategy (03)

Education Reform for
Knowledge Economy
($120, FY03)

Education Reform for
Knowledge Economy ($120,
FY03)

Public sector reform
and governance

Public Sector Reform Loan
($110, FY04)
111

Public Sector Reform Loan
ill ($110, FY04)

Public Expenditure Review (04)
Pension Fund Reform PESW (yearly)

Waler resource
mar iagement and
env ronment

Disi-Amman Conveyor
Guarantee ($100, FY04)

Disi-Amman Conveyor
Guarantee ($100, FY04)

lnfr, structure/finance

Amman Development
Comdor ($30, FY05)
Samra 1st Private Power
Guarantee ($50, FY05)

Amman Development
Corridor ($30, FY05)
Municipal Development
($20, FY05)
Samra 1st Private Power

Water Sector Strategy and
implementation PESW (yearly)
Natural Resources Management and
Environment TA (04)
Urban Management/Municipal
Finance Strategy (03)
Mortgage Market TA (03)
Energy Sector Strategy (04)

Poverty Survey/Assessment (03-04)

Guarantee ($50, FY05)
Geiider

Country Gender Assessment (04)

Economic
ma.iagement

Country Economic Management (05)
Economic Monitoring (yearly)
Govemment Development Program
TA (yearly)
Labor Market Study (04)
Knowledge-Based Economy (04)

Lending Operation TBD

Un nilocated/Others

($55)

Country Procurement Assessment
Review (04)

Country Financial Accountability
Assessment (05)
TBD
Leiiding and

$455

$530

$305

$380

Guarantees

oiw Lending
TA Technical assistance

38
VII. RISKS
108. Despite the GOJ's efforts to deepen its structural reform efforts and so enhance the
resilience of the country's economy to exogenous shocks, the economy faces the following risks:
Regional Conflicts. Existing and possible conflicts in the region pose grave risks to the
Jordanian economy. The escalating violence between Israel and the Palestinians, the
possibility of a spillover of that conflict into neighboring countries, and the possibility of
military action against Iraq (from which Jordan gets most of its oil and at subsidized
prices) create a high degree of uncertainty which adversely affects prospects for
privatization, increased investment, and growth. A conflict in Iraq would create an even
more difficult situation that could dramatically worsen the terms of trade for Jordan,
decrease tourism, and affect workers' remittances and possibly reduce or even cut off
major sources of foreign grants. In the event of a conflict in Iraq, oil supplies from Iraq
and the attendant grants (valued at about US$300 million) could be abruptly terminated,
forcing Jordan to seek alternate sources which could raise the country's oil import bill by
as much as 50 percent. Additional effects would be at least the temporary loss of the Iraqi
export market (Jordan's second largest export market, accounting for 12 percent of
merchandise exports), and cost-push pressure on domestic prices.
*

External Vulnerabilities. Apart from major shocks due to conflicts, Jordan's
performance is heavily dependent on socioeconomic developments in the region. A large
number of Jordanians work as expatriate workers in the oil producing countries of the
Gulf. Their remittances-as great as Jordan's exports of goods-have typically been
equal to almost 25 percent of GDP. A quarter of Jordan's trade is with neighboring Arab
countries (trade with Iraq alone amounts to around 12 percent). Financial support from
the Arab world has been significant, but depends on the political economy at any time.
The Jordanian dinar circulates in the West Bank and Gaza, where Jordanian banks have a
significant presence. Tourism accounts for about a quarter of Jordan's exports, or about
10 percent of GDP. Tourism receipts fluctuate, not only with war and peace prospects,
but also the economic circumstances of the potential tourists and their perception of risks
in Jordan.

*

Domestic Tensions. Tensions from regional developments, unfulfilled expectations, and
persistent unemployment may militate against the structural reform efforts, and could
lead to social tension inside Jordan. Postponement of parliamentary elections, in part due
to the uncertainties created by escalating regional conflicts, could raise doubts about the
GOJ's commitment to political reforms.

*

High Indebtedness and the Risks of Policy Slippages. Though on a declining trend, the
size of Jordan's public debt remains high. Total public sector debt relative to GDP
declined from 114 percent of GDP in 1995 to 85 percent in 2001. Interest payments cost
the GOJ about 15 percent of total government revenue. The GOJ has received relief from
its debt burden through a rescheduling agreement with the Paris Club in July 2002. That
agreement, coupled with the program agreed with the IMF, is intended to be an "exit"
agreement, permitting Jordan to sustain development without incurring undue
indebtedness. With the fiscal position already tight, it will be difficult to maintain fiscal
discipline if there are policy slippages or other events which constrain growth and/or lead

39

to a demand for greater expenditures. In particular, if external resources are insufficient
to fund the PSET and conditions deteriorate, there will be a risk that at least part of the
PSET will be debt funded. In that event, debt to GDP ratios could increase again, which
could significantly undermine Jordan's creditworthiness. The Bank will continue to work
with the GOJ on prioritizing the programs in the PSET to ensure 'that expenditures stay
within the resource envelope available from non-debt creating sources.

James D. Wolfensohn
President

By:
She ngman Zhang

Washington D.C.
December 20, 2002

Peter Woicke

Jordan at a glance
Jordan

M. East
& North
Africa

LowermiddleIncome

50
1,750
88

301
2,000
601

2,164
1,240
2,677

30
40

20
29

10
12

12
79
70
26
5
96
10
104
104
104

58
68
43
15
89
34
97
103
90

46
69
33
11
80
15
107
107
107

POVERTY and SOCIAL

2001F
Populaton, mid-year (millions)
GNI per capita (Atlas method, US$)
GNI (Atlas method, US$ billions)

CAS AnnexA2

Development diamond'
Life expectancy

Average annual growth, 1995-01
Population (%)
Labor force (I%)
Most recent estimate (latest year available, 1995-01)
Poverty (%of populabon below national poveriy line)
Urban populaton (%of total population)
Life expectancy at birth (years)
Infant mortality (per 1,000 live births)
Child malnutrition (%of children under 5)
Access to an improved water source (%of population)
Ilirteracy (%ofpopulation age 15+)
Gross pnmary enrollment (X ofschool-age population)
Male
Female

GNI
per
capita

Gross
pnmary
enrollment

I

Access to improved water source

Jordan
Lower-middle-income group

KEY ECONOMIC RATIOS and LONG-TERM TRENDS
1981

1991

2000

2001

GDP (USS billions)
Gross domesbc investmenUGDP
Exports of goods and services/GDP
Gross domesbc savmgs/GDP
Gross natonal savings/GDP

44
45 4
43 0
-8 7
42 2

42
25 9
59.5
26
15 0

85
27.2
41.8
05
27.8

88
25 9
42 8
04
25 8

Current account balance/GDP
Interest payments/GDP
Total debtVGDP
Total debt servicelexports
Present value of debtVGDP
Present value of debVexports

-0 9
18
49 2
97

07
29
941
12 3
90.0
129 9

- 1
26
859
12 5

-10
6
231
24

1
8
3
3

..

Economic ratios
Trade

Domestc
savmgs
s

Investment

Indebtedness
1981-91

199101

2000

2001

2001-05

15
-2 5
45

45
10
24

42
11
21

42
13
46

5.7
30
58

(average annual growth)
GDP
GDP per capita
Exports of goods and services

Jordan
Lower-middle-income group

STRUCTURE of the ECONOMY
1981

1991

2000

2001

Agnculture
Industry
Manufactunng
Services

61
29 8
14 5
641

85
26 2
13 7
65 3

23
25 3
15.5
72.4

21
25 2
15 3
72 7

30
20 ..
10-0

Private consumpton
General govemment consumpbon
Imports of goods and services

77 7
311
97 2

71 4
26.0
82 8

74 5
25 0
68 5

76.7
23 0
68 3

-20

(%6
of GDP)

(average annual growth)

Growth of Investment end GOP (%)

z

1981-91

1991-01

2000

2001

Agnculture
Industry
Manufactunng
Services

85
-05
07
23

-40
45
54
49

84
33
5.5
52

2.2
63
5.8
43

Pnvate consumpton
General govemment consumpton
Gross domestc investment
Imports of goods and servces

-0 1
06
-2 5

49
49
17
24

11.3
68
10.7
14 5

-0.3

01

GDI
G

e

GDP

Growth of exports and Imports (%)
20
1s

10
s

62
o
-4 6 4 9
-0.9
2.2

0/

n
Expons

i

-O

amports

Note 2001 data are preliminary estmates.
The diamonds show four key indicators in the country (in bold) compared with its income-group average If data are missing, the diamond will
be incomplete

Jordan
PRIC ES and GOVERNMENT FINANCE

Domi istc prices

1981

1991

2000

2001

(%change)
Cons imer prices
Implcii GDP deflator

77
18.9

8.2
5.1

0.7
-0 1

1.8
00

Gove rnment flnance
(%dl GDP, hncludes curnent grants)
Current revenue
Current budget balance
Oven ill surplus/defici

Inflation (%)
e

4

4

2

o49.1
22.5
7.2

44.8
13.1
83

30.0
1.0

4.7

30.8
2.2
-3 8

(US$ millions)
Total expofts (fob)
Food
Phosphates
Ma ,ufactures
Total imports (cr)

1981
734
100
166
215
3,170

1991
1,132
126
181
403
2,512

2000
1,899
164
128
933
4,577

2001
2,295
191
130
1,269
4,833

Fu il and energy
Ca Alelgoods

533
1.256

355
369

718
1,313

702
1,311

88
124
71

87
97
89

91
106
86

92
108
85

(USI millIons)
Exp(rts of goods and services
lmpc rts of goods and services
Resi,urce balance

1981
1,909
4,215
-2,306

1991
2,484
3,429
-945

2000
3,536
5,796
-2,260

2001
3,777
6,027
-2,250

Net income
Neti:urrenttransfers

87
2,178

-362
884

-27
2,345

9
2,236

41

423

58

-5

-5
47

403
20

714
-772

-180
184

1,300
03

930
07

2,763
0.7

2,579
07

1981

1991

2000

2001

2,186
45
78

9,700
511
76

7,969
798
57

7,588
886

303

740

723

779

3
1

97
2

106
3

105
3

891
306
29
141
0

383
414
-97
-12
0

404
-63
-155
751
104

460
338
-70
78
-113

25
22

25
40

35
38

120
161

-2

99

9a

97

99

01

oo

CPI

GDP deflator

-

1

TRAIDE

Fogid

Expc rt prnce index (1995=100)
Import price index (1995=100)
Terrrs of trade (1995=100)

613

508

747

733

Export and Import levels (USS mili.)
a,ooo

.

9.0
4.i

4,0
3.990

2

2e000
0

i,0. . 4jj. E
9e

95

97

99

9a

01

99

e Imports

raExports

BALkNCE of PAYMENTS

Cunrant acoount balance
Financing iterris (net)
Cha iges in net reserves
Man lo:
Res arves induding gold (USS mDillons)
Con iersion rate (DEC, loca/USS)
EXI ERNAL DEBT and RESOURCE FLOWS

(US milions)
Totai debt outstanding and disbursed

lEIRD
ICiA
Tot.il debt service

IBRD
1IDA
Cor ipostion of net resoune flows
Cfficial grants
CiOficial creditors
F nvate creditors
Foreign direct investment
Foitfolio equity
Wo id Bank program
('ommitments
Clisbursements
F'nncipal repayments

54
3

2

o

-

2

97

98

99

01

DO

43
.5

ComposIiMon of 2001 debt (US$ mrlL)

55G447

A8
F 840

B* 439
C 439

0D 981

0

56

56

57

Net flows

22

-16

-17

104

Iiterest payments
let transfers

3
19

43
-59

53
-71

51
53

De, ielopment Economics

Current account balance to GOP (%)

E 3,940

A -IBRD
B-IDA
C -IMF

0 -Other multilateral

E -Bilateral
F -Pnvate
G - Short-term

12t20/02

CAS Annex B2

CAS Annex B2 - Jordan
Selected Indicators* of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
As of December 12, 2002

Indicator
Portfolio Assessment
Number of Projects Under Implementation 8
Average Implementation Period (years)b
Percent of Problem Projects by Numbera' c
Percent of Problem Projects by Amounta c
Percent of Projects at Risk by Number8, d
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount4 d
Disbursement Ratio (%)e
Portfolio Management
CPPR during the year (yes/no)
Supervision Resources (total US$'000)
Average Supervision (US$'000/project)
Memorandum Item
Proj Eval by OED by Number
Proj Eval by OED by Amt (US$ millions)
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Number
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt
a
b
c
d
e

2000

2001

2002

2003

12
3.4
0
0

11
4.2
0
0

9
4
11.1
1.9

0

0

11 1

0
16.9

0
16 3

1.9
28.2

8
4.4
12.5
13 7
12.5
13.7
13.4

No
801
69

No
651
59

No
710
71

No
525
70

Since FY 80 Last Five FYs
49
6
1510
225.4
16 7
16.7
12 9
8.2

As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY).
Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio.
Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) and/or implementation progress (IP).
As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program
Ratio of disbursements dunng the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the
beginning of the year Investment projects only. To-date for FY2003.
All indicators are for projects active in the Portfolio, with the exception of Disbursement Ratio,
which includes all active projects as well as projects which exited dunng the fiscal year.

CAS Annex B3
Page 1 of2

CAS Annex B3 - Bank Group Program Summary - Jordan
As of December 12, 2002
P oposed IBRD/IDA Base-Case Lending Program
Fiscal
year

Proj ID

Education Reform for Knowledge Economy
Subtotal
2004 Third Public Sector Reform Loan
Disi Amman Water Conveyor (Guarantee)
Subtotal
2005 Cultural Heritage, Tourism, and Urban Development
Amman Development Corridor
Samra 1st Pnvate Power (Guarantee)
Subtotal
Total Excluding Guarantees
Total Including Guarantees
2003

Implementation b
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~Strategic
US$(M)

Rewards b

Risks (H/M/°L)

120.0
120.0
110.0
(100 0)
110 0
45.0
30.0
(50.0)
75.0
305.0
455.0

H

M

H
H

M
M

H
H
H

M
M
M

a. This table presents the proposed program for the next three fiscal years
t. For each project, indicate whether the strategic rewards and implementation risks are expected to be high (H), moderate
or low (L).
(%A),

CAS Annex B3
Page 2 of 2

CAS Annex B3 (IFC & MIGA) for Jordan
Jordan - IFC and MIGA Program, FY 1999-2002
IFC approvals (US$m)

2000

2001

2002

2003

4.40

25.00

25.50

0.00

40

80

0

20

0

100

100

0

96
4

98
2

0
0

Sector (%)
Financial Services
Construction & Real Estates
Food & Agro-Business
Hotels & Tourism
Oil, Gas and Mining
Textiles

100

Total

100

60

Investment instrument(%)
Loans
Equity
Quasi-Equity
Other

50
50
0

0

0

0

Total

100

100

100

0

MIGA guarantees (US$m)

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

CAS Annex B4

CAS Annex B4 - Summary of Nonlending Services - Jordan
As of December 12, 2002

Product

Recent completions
Pt blic Sector Reform Review
Country Assistance Strategy
Pcverty Alleviation in Jordan in the 1990
Privatization Technical Assistance
Ptiblic Procurement Modernization (IDF)
Scurces of Growth
W_men's Health Issues

Completion
FY

Cost
(US$000)

Audience'

Objective b

FY00
FY00
FY00
FY98-99
FY01
FY01
FY02

0
0
17 9
0
0
193 4
65 9

Government
Bank
Government
Government
Bank/Government
Government
Government

Problem Solving
Knowledge Generation
Knowledge Generation
Problem Solving
Problem Solving
Knowledge Generation
Knowledge Generation

Ongoing
Ongoing
Ongoing
Ongoing
Ongoing

414
47 1
10
10
90

Govemment
Government
Government
Govemment
Government

Problem
Problem
Problem
Problem
Problem

FY03
Ongoing
FY03
FY03
FY03
FY03

98 9
24 8
148.8
60.2
5
107.1

Government
Govemment
Government
Government
Bank/Govemment
Government

Knowledge Generation
Problem Solving
Knowledge Generation
Knowledge Generation
Knowledge Generation
Knowledge Generation

FY03
FY04
FY04
FY04
FY04
FY03
yearly

209
100
150
110
70
50

Bank/Government
Bank/Government
Bank/Government
Bank/Government
Bank/Government
Government
Government

Knowledge
Knowledge
Knowledge
Knowledge
Knowledge
Knowledge
Knowledge

yearly
yearly

50
50

Government
Bank/Government

Knowledge Generation
Knowledge Generation

yearly
FY04
FY04
FY05
FY04

125
200
200
200
80

Bank/Government
Govemment
Bank/Government
Bank/Government
Bank/Government

Problem Solving
Knowledge Generation
Knowledge Generation
Knowledge Generation
Knowledge Generation

CPAR

FY04

100

Bank/Government

Problem Solving/
Knowledge Generation

CFAA

FY05

100

Bank/Government

Mortgage TA

FY03

30

Bank/Government

Problem Solving/
Knowledge Generation
Knowledge Generation

Govemment Development Program TA

yearly

50

Bank/Government

Problem Solving/
Knowledge Generation

Knowledge-Based Economy

FY05

100

Bank/Government

Problem Solving/
Knowledge Generation

Uniderway

Privatization TA (including USAID TF manag.)
Department of Statistics (IDF)
Enhancing Women's Health Issues (IDF)
National Council for Family Affairs (IDF)
nlegrating At Risk Children into Mainstream
Society (JSDF)
Dnvelopment Policy Review
In egrated SEA into Water Quality Mgt (GPG)
Cost Efficiency of Education
Early Childhood TA
Vision for Education Forum
Uiban Management/Municipal Finance Strategy
Planned
Country Assistance Strategy
Eiiergy Sector Strategy
Labor Market Study
N, tural Resource Management & Environment
Tiade Logistics
H_alth Sector Strategy
Education Strategy (incl. Follow-up to the Cost
Efficiency Study) (PESW)
_Pnsion Fund Reform (PESW) yearly
Water Sector Strategy and Implementation
.(F'ESW) yearly
Macroeconomic Monitoring yearly
P jblic Expenditure Review
P )verty Survey/Assessment
CEM
CDuntry Gender Assessment

T 3D

FY04-FY05

a Govemment, donor, Bank, public dissemination.
b Knowledge generation, public debate, problem-solving.

Solving
Solving
Solving
Solving
Solving

Generation
Generation
Generation
Generation
Generation
Generation
Generation

CAS Annex B5

Jordan Social Indicators
Latest single year

POPULATION
Total population, mid-year (millions)
Growth rate (%annual average for period)
Urban population (%of populaton)
Total fertility rate (births per woman)

1970-75

1980-85

1995-01

M. East
&North
Africa

18
37
57 8
75

26
39
66 4
61

50
3.0
78.8
37

300 7
2.0
57 7
34

2,163 5
10
45 6
21

2,000
112

1,240
186

3

25

104
104
104

97
103
90

107
107
107

96
100
84

89
96
79

80
94
70

73
85

94
97
5

86
86
15

89
88
11

.

66
64
67

70
70
73

68
66
69

69
67
71

49
71

38
42

26
30

43
54

33
42

153
116
41
97

183
151

POVERTY
(%of population)
National headcount index
Urban headcount index
Rural headcount index
INCOME
GNI percapda (US$)
Consumerpnceindex (1995=100)
Food pnce index (1995=100)

Same region/income group
Lowermiddleincome

11 7

.

23

1,990
52

INCOMEICONSUMPTION DISTRIBUTION
Gini index
Lowest quintile (%of income orconsumphon)
Highest quintile (%of income or consumption)

1.750
116

36 4
76
44 4

SOCIAL INDICATORS
Public expenditure
Health (%of GDP)
Educabon (%of GDP)
Social secunty and weltfare (%of GDP)

56

Gross primary school enrollment rate
(%of age grup)
Total
Male
Female

87
91
82

72
71
72

Access to an Improved water source
(%of population)
Total
Urban
Rural

Immunization rate
(%under 12 months)
Measles
DPT
Child malnutrition (%under 5 years)
Life expectancy at birth
(years)
Total
Male
Female

17

.

Mortality
Infant (per thousand live births)
Under 5 (per thousand livebirths)

Adult (15-59)
Male (per 1,000 population)
Female (per 1,000 population)
Matemal (per 100,000 live births)
Births attended by skilled health staff (%)

.
..

,,

75

CAS Annex B5 This table was produced from the CMU LDB system
Note 0 or 0.0 means zero or less than half the unit shown Net enrollment ratios exceeding 100 indicate discrepancies
between the estmates of school-age populabon and reported enrollment data.

198
131

12/20/02

CAS Annex B6

Jordan - Key Economic Indicators

Indicator
National accounts (as %of GDP)
Gross domestic producta
Agriculture

Actual
2001
2000

1999

Estimate
2003

2002

Proiected
2006
2005

200.4

2007

100
2

100
2

100
2

100
2

100
2

100
2

100
2

100
2

100
2

26
72

25
72

25
73

24
74

24
74

24
74

24
75

23
75

23
75

Total Consumption
Gross domestic fixed investment
Government investment
Private investment

93
23
6
18

100
26
5
20

100
25
6
19

95
24
6
19

95
26
7
19

95
26
7
19

95
26
7
19

95
26
7
20

94
26
7
20

Exports (GNFS)b
Imports (GNFS)

43
61

42
68

43
68

46
67

44
67

43
66

43
66

42
65

42
64

Gross domestic savings
Gross national savingsC

7
30

0
28

0
26

5
29

5
28

5
28

5
29

5
29

6
29

8135

8466

8829

9499

10362

11157

11996

12896

13869

1620

1830

1830

1830

1920

2050

2170

2280

2390

4.2
2.8

4.2
4.4

5.1
9.0

6.0
5.2

5.8
4.2

5.6
4.6

5.6
4.7

5.6
4.7

1.3
1.1
4.0

2.2
2.3
1.7

3.3
2.6
4.5

3.2
1.7
5.6

3.2
1.9
-0.2

3.2
2.1
3.4

3.2
1.4
2.0

Industry
Services

Memorandum items
Gross domestic product
(US$ million at current prices)
GNP per capita (US$, Atlas method)

calculated from 1995 prices)
Real annual growth rates (%/o,
3.1
Gross domestic product at market prices
3.3
Gross Domestic Income

Real annual per capita growth rates (0/o, calculated from 1995 prices)
1.1
0.0
Gross domestic product at market prices
6.8
-4.6
Total consumption
7.9
-5.9
Private consumption
Bazlnce of Payments (US$ millions)
Exports (GNFS)b
Merchandise FOB
Imports (GNFS)b
Merchandise FOB
Resource balance
Net current transfers
Current account balance

3534
1832
4990
3699
-1456
2016
405

3536
1899
5796
4577
-2260
2345
58

3777
2295
6027
4833
-2250
2236
-5

4329
2760
6335
5042
-2006
2431
353

4580
2910
6956
5560
-2376
2466
9

4819
3050
7397
5903
-2578
2630
76

5142
3260
7892
6295
-2750
2789
91

5474
3473
8415
6708
-2941
2960
79

5820
3691
8866
7040
-3046
3102
129

Net private foreign direct investment
Long-term loans (net)
Change in reservesd

154
-37
-36

751
-361
-772

78
-159
184

51
-144
-683

306
-249
-141

209
-233
-162

236
-290
-163

233
-275
-185

228
-281
-166

-17.9

-26.7

-25.5

-21.1

-22.9

-23.1

-22.9

-22.8

-22.0

4.2
-5.8
11.0
-0.9

8.5
7.1
11.4
20.8

19.2
39.1
36.7
3.2

6.4
7.6
4.9
5.9

6.9
4.9
9.4
8.1

8.2
5.8
11.0
3.1

8.4
6.4
10.7
3.9

7.8
6.6
9.2
4.5

8.1
7.5
8.9
3.6

Memorandum items
Resource balance (% of GDP)
Real annual growth rates ( YR95 prices)
Merchandise exports (FOB)
Primary
Manufactures
Merchandise imports (CIF)

(Continued)

CAS Annex 86
Jordlanlll - IKey EconDomk fITmdhCato0rs

(Connnea1
-; -;Actuial
! ,Cr!oi
~

99I9

-

Public finance (as % of GDP at market pricesy
Current revenues
30.7
Current expenditures
28.4
Current account surplus (+) or deficit(-)
2.3
Capital expenditure
6.3
Foreign financing
2.0

2001

R

'

2001

-'

2002

Estimate
20;03

Prced
2004

ljWO

2j,

77

EI

30.0
29.0
1.0
4.9
-1.4

30.8
28.6
2.2
5.2
1.5

29.6
27.9
1.6
5.4
1.5

31.3
30.0
1.3
5.6
0.7

29.4
27.7
1.7
5.6
1.5

28.8
26.6
2.2
5.6
-2.8

28.4
25.6
2.8
5.6
-2.8

27.7
24.8
2.9
5.6
-2.8

Monetary indicators
M2/GDP
Growth ofM2 (/o)

117.0
12.0

123.9
10.2

125.7
5.8

127.9
9.5

129.0
10.1

130.3
8.7

131.4
8.5

132.7
8.5

133.8
8.5

Price indices( YlR95 =100)
Merchandise export price index
Merchandise import price index
Merchandise terms of trade index
Real exchange rate (US$/LCU)f

92.1
96.8
95.2
117.3

88.0
99.1
88.8
123.0

89.2
101.4
88.0
129.6

100.8
99.9
100.9
129.6

99.4
101.9
97.6
129.6

96.4
105.0
91.8
129.6

95.0
107.7
88.2
129.6

93.9
109.8
85.5
129.6

92.2
111.3
82.9
129.6

0.0
-0.2

0.7
-0.1

1.8
0.0

2.4
2.4

2.5
2.9

1.8
1.8

1.8
1.8

1.8
1.8

1.8
1.8

Real interest rates
Consumerpriceindex (%change)
GDP deflator (% change)

a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.

GDP at factor cost
"GNFS" denotes "goods and nonfactor services.'
Includes net unrequited transfers excluding official capital grants.
Includes use of IMF resources.
Consolidated central govemment.
"LCU" denotes "local currency units." An increase in US$/LCU denotes appreciation.

CAS Annex B7

Jordan - Key Exposure ltndicators

_ _

_______

' 1 .

Indcaror

Total debt outstanding and

1999

203

=

__

202

2I

._

_ec_

__=,

2C03

2004

2005

2

600

8837

7969

7588

7689

7675

7594

7424

7221

7010

28

-869

-381

101

-14

-81

-170

-203

-211

823

723

779

818

916

937

922

928

948

147.4
99.6
13.0
42.4

125.6
87.0
11.4
43.6

120.0
84.8
11.3
42.1

112.9
80.9
10.8
45.9

110.5
74.1
13.1
49.2

103.0
68.1
12.5
52.0

95.6
61.9
11.3
54.4

88.8
56.0
10.8
56.9

83.3
50.5
10.3
61.0

15.9
62.1

15.9
32.3

14.9
49.4

13.0
49.7

11.4
60.1

12.5
59.1

12.7
58.5

12.8
56.5

12.2
53.5

2.1
835
60

1.8
798
57

1.7
886
55

1.4
1012
52

1.5
993
50

1.6
1256
47

1.4
1239
45

1.4
1220
42

1.3
1185
40

disbursed (TDO) (US$mY
Net disbursements (USm)a
Total debt service (TDS)
(USSmf
Debt and debt service indicators
(%/0)
TDO/XGSb
TDO/GDP
TDS/XGS
ConcessionalVTDO
IBRD exposure indicators (%)
IBRD DS/public DS
Preferred creditor DS/public
DS (%)'
IBRD DS/XGS
IBRDTDO(USSmf
IDA TDO (USSmf

a. Includes public and publicly guaranteed debt, private nonguaranteed, use of IMF credits and net shortterm capital.
b. "XGS" denotes exports of goods and services, including workers' remittances.
c. Preferred creditors are defined as IBRD, IDA, the regional multilateral development banks, the IMF, and the
Bank for Intemational Settlements.
d. Includes present value of guarantees.
e. Includes equity and quasi-equity types of both loan and equity instruments.

CAS Annex B8
Page 1 of 2

CAS Annex B8 - Jordan
Status of Bank Group Operations (Opertions Portfolio)
As of Decomber 12, 2002
Closed
Projects

S

IBRD/DA

Total Disbursed (Ambe)
otwhich has been repaid
Total Disbursed (Closed)
of which has been repaid
Tot Disbursed (Adve * Closed)
otfwhlh has been repaid

148.34
8.00
1.808 21
955 24
1.954 54
93 25

Total Undisbured (ActNe)
Total Unduibursed (Caosed)
Total Undusbumed
(Active+Cbse

102.39
314
105 54

DHfference Between
Expected and Actual
Dnsbursements

ActiveProlaM
Lost PSR
Supervislon Ratdng
Project ID Project Name
P049581
P039749
P005307
P076961
P048521
P069326
P035997
P049706
Total

Community Infrastructure
Health Sector Reform
Human Res Dev. SIL
Hortlcultural Exports Promotlon
AmmanVWater&Sanitatlon
Higher Educrabon Developrnent
Second Tounsm D8v.
ODS Phaseout 11

2Q

IE

S

S
U
S
S
S
S
S
S

U
S
S
S
S
S
S

Amount In USS Milion
Fiscal
Year
1998
1999
1995
2002
1999
2000
1998
1997

IBRO

GRANT

30 0
35 0
60.0
60
55.0
34.7
32.0
00
251.7

0.0
0.0
0.0
00
00
0.0
0.0
38
3.8

Cancel

Undhab.

0.0

7.2
19.9
5.3
50
21.1
27 9
159
0.9
103.3

Orig. Frm RevXd
7.2
43
5.3
00
168
8.6
15.1
06
57.7

72
0 0,
53
00
0.0
00
0.0
05
13.0

CAS Annex B8
Page 2 of 2

CAS Ann®at BB (OC) gor Jordan
Jordan
Statement of IFC's
Held and Disbursed Portfolio
As of 11/30102
(In US Dollars Millions)
FY A

roval

1998
1987/1990/1993/1995
1997
2001
1997
2002
1995
1998
2001
1998
1999
2000
2002
2002
1996
3i h~f ltOlIO
|

-| T

litlUktIon mm"a
AIHC
AI-Hkma
BTC
Boscan Jordan
El-Zay
IITPDC
Indo-Jordan
JHTC
Jordan Gateway
Jordinvast
MAICO
MEIB
MEREN
SIC
Zara
* :
.1 i.

0.00
0.00
3.11
7.20
2.88
12.50
14.00

8.57
3.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
4.40
8.00
13.76

1n

.'

.usl~AJ
FY
Approval
17 lirt
Patt4,f3.60
0.00
0.00
0.00
2.37
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
1.41
0.00
0.00
1.00
0.00
0.00
2.20
2.15
0.00
0.60
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
2.97
0 00
0 00
.3tt78.
4.52
0.00

Lo",

IF¢ Diib

0.00
0.00
3.11
7.20
2.86
0.00
14.00
8.57
3.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
6.00
13.76
58.61

Equity
IFOODhb
3.60
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
1.41
0.75
0.00
0.00
0.00
2 97
8.73

Quasi
IFCEw.sb
:J i
0.00
2.37
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
2.15
0.00
0.00
0 00

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0 00

CAS Annex B9
Page I of 11

JORDAN

CAS PROGRAM MATRIX
FY2003-05
Needs and Priorities

Needs a rirMonitoring Indicators
I
Government Strategy/Actions
World Bank
Country
Government.Strategy/Actions
_____________.

World Bank Group Support FY03-05
.

Lending/
.-... Ongoing Projects

Knowledge

Support from
Supor

_____m

Partners

Advisory Services

L Human Development and Poverty Reduction

1.1 Education for a Global
Economy
* Articulate a vision for an
gender responsive
education system that is
conducive to the needs of
knowledge economy.
o Give more attention on
quality and relevance of
learning.
o Monitor and evaluate
implementation of
Government strategy for
education reform.
* Emphasize early
childhood education.
* Establish mechanism for
lifelong learning.

* Build on the results of the
Education Forum (held in
October 2002) which aimed
at articulating a new vision
for an education system
suitable for global knowledge
economy.
o Continue the ongoing reform
program with new orientation
toward creating a knowledge
economy.
* Hold consensus-building
workshops with all
stakeholders, including local
and district-level officials,
community leaders, private
education providers, and
labor market representatives.
* Develop a strategy for early
childhood education.

e

o

o
*

*

*

Same as Country
Produce validated
column
document embodying
a new, comprehensive
vision for the
.eHelp
education system.
Increase net
enrollment for basic
and secondary
education.
Introduce IT
connectivity in school
system.
Increase student
achievement in core
subjects at basic and
secondary stages..
Achieve higher
education: levels ofjob
placement.
-Adopt strategy for
early childhood
education.

Proposed Proiects
* ERFKE
* PSRL Ill

Ongoing Proiects
o Higher Education

*Assist the
Government in
building on the
Vision Forum.
develop
ECE.
-Develop capacity
building program
using the GDLN
center.
*Workshops on
education sector
reform, training of
teachers in use of
Internet, and
knowledge
economy (WBI).
*Programmatic

ESW in education.
eCountry Gender
Assessment.

EIB: school
construction
CIDA: elearming
KfW: school
construction
DFID: manager
training
JICA: digitized
science
textbooks

CAS Annex B9

Page 2of I I
Needs
and
Needs nd Prioritie

.overnment
Strategy/Actions
Governmffat 4Sxteg/Acions

.rIorities

Monitoring Idicators
..

Country

World Bank

Lending/

Knowledge

.________________

Ongoing Projects

Advisoryervices

Contain public sector
health expenditures.
o Reduce percentage of
uninsured from 32 to
universal coverage by
2010.
o Increase occupancy
rate of public hospitals
from 63 percent to 70
percent by 2005

o Achieve good
progress in phase I
of reform program.
o Implement Health
Sector Reform
Project component
focusing on global
pharmaceutical and
health information
system.
o Improve sector
quality and
efficiency.

Proposed Projects
o PSRL III

oAssist in
organizing a
health reform
symposium.
oTA for proposed
Higher Health
Council.
oTA for
development of a
network
nationwide,
promoting
women's health.
oCountry Gender
Assessment.

o Achieve equal rights
for women under labor
laws.
o Equal regulations for
womEn relation to
women relating to
social security, social
safety net and taxation.

o Same as Country
column.

1.2 Health
o

Contain public sector
health expenditures.

o

proportion of
population (32 percent)
lacking formal health
coverage.

oReduce

o Achieve

long-run
financial sustainability of
health-care system.

1.3 Gender
o Increase female
participation in the labor
force.
o Lower female
unemployment rate,
including young women
and educated women.

Adopt long-term reform
program drawing together
MOH, RMS, JUH, and the
private sector, with first phase
focusing on:
-containing growth in
health expenditures;
-efficient-use of physical
facilities;
-improving delivery and
quality of services;
-expanding health
insurance coverage.

o Review labor laws.

Review laws and regulations
relating to social securitybenefits, allowances,
pensions-social safety nets,
and taxation to give women
legal status as heads of
households alongside men,
regardless of marital status.
o Ensure gender-balanced jobo

creation and training projects. I

World Bank Group Support FY03-0

o

Onnoing Proiects
oHealth Sector
Reform

Ongoing Proiects
o Health Sector
Reform
Proposed Proiects
Psed Pri
o PSRL III
o HRDSIL

oJSDF legal aid for
poor women.
oIDF for enhancing
women's health.
oIDF for National
Council for
Family Affairs.
oCountry Gender
Assessment.

Support from
Partners

USAID: TA and
training for
developing
insurance
options
Public Health,
Clinic
Rehabilitation

CAS Annex B9
Page 3 of II

Needs and Priorities
1.4 Social Protection/
Poverty Reduction
* Increase efficiency of
government aid and
provide flexibility to
respond quickly to
negative impact of
economic shocks.
* Improve and minimize
duplication of services.
* Improve poverty/gender
measurements to better
target programs.
* Improve sustainability of
microcredit programs.
* Reform pension funds and
social security.

. t ,. .
Government Strategy/Actions

Inidicators .
A~~~~~~~[6loitoiring
.
World Bank
Country.

* Target existing safety net

* Replace Recurrent

more accurately on poor.
i Establish database capable of
avoiding duplication of
benefits and services.
* Improve poverty
measurement and changes
over time.
* Reform pension funds.
* Enhance role of local
government in poverty
alleviation.

Cash Assistance
Program with new
Family Income
Supplement program.
* Restructure the
management of NAF
to improve delivery of
assistance to the
neediest.
* Develop poverty
sensitive and gender
responsive
intergovernment
transfer system
(municipalities).

* Demonstrate

progress on pension
reform.

'World Bank Group Support FYO."S
.
W
Knowledge
Lending/
Ongoing Projects
Advisory Services
Proposed Proiects
. PSRL III
. Municipal
Development
Project
Ongoine Proiects
. Community
Infrastructure
Development
* PSRL 11

*Poverty
Assessment.
*Country Gender
Assessment.
*IDF under
implementation
for improved
poverty
measurement.
*Pension fund
Reform.
*Workshops on
pension reforms
(WBI).

Support from
Partners

Islamic
Development
Bank:
computerization
of NAF
Save the
Children
program
JICA Rural
areas
communities
USAID: poverty
strategy
GTZ:
Municipalities
(manuals for
SPP)

CAS Annex B9
Page 4 of II

Needs

and

Priorities

GovernmentStrategy/Actions

Monitorng Indicators
World Bank_Group Support FY03-45
Country
World Bank
Lending/
Knowledge
.______________.__I___________._____
Ongoing Projects
Advisory Services
11. Private Sector Developmentfor Sustainable Growth and Job Creation

Support from
Partners

2.1 Improving the
Investment Climate
* Reform/restructure public
sector institutions that
promote investment.
* Improve and make more
transparent government
contracting for goods and
services.
* Reform judiciary.
* Develop SME and
microenterprise, especially in
poorer areas.
* Enhance public/private
dialogue on key policy issues
affecting the private sector.
* Improve physical and human
infrastructure for PSD.

* Restructure/consolidate JIPC and JEPC.
* Create effective eprocurement system.
* Establish effective
arbitration mechanism
as alternative for
commercial disputes.
* Train agreed number
ofjudges in
commercial and
business laws.
* Institutionalize
public/private dialogue
and means of
information
dissemination.

* Same as Country

column.

* PSRL 11 and III
* Infrastructure
(transport)
development to
facilitate interregional trade and
exports (high
case).

* Trade Logistics
Study.
* Labor Market
Study.
* Knowledge and
information
sharing on PSD
(FIAS, IFC,
MIGA, SME
Department).
* Learning
workshops on
trade policy and
WTO (WBI).
* Macroeconomic
course (via
Distance
Learning).
* Country Gender
Assessment.
* Mortgage
Market T.A.

USAID
EU

CAS Annex B9
Page 5 of I I

Needs and Priorities

Go.enme Stratgy/Monitoring Indicators
Government Strategy/Actions ISpotfo
World Bank
Country
NeXdsand Priorities
.___._______-__;__._

2.2 Privatization
* Accelerate
implementation of
privatization program.
* Continue to build capacity
in regulatory agencies.

2.3 Private Provision of
Infrastructure: Energy/
Water
* Promote private sector
participation in the power
and water sectors.
* Develop infrastructure to
introduce natural gas for
power generation and
industries and to promote
regional trade of gas.

World Bank Group Support FY03-05
Lending/
Ongoing Projects

* Privatize JPMC,

* Complete all identified

* Complete most of the

privatization transactions.
* Continue to build regulatory
capacity of agencies
regulating privatized
companies, especially
utilities.

privatization
preparation process
and bring to point of
sales of JPMC, APC,
Rl Air Academy, RJ
Training Center, postal
service, Jordan
Cement, Power, JTC,
Jordan Silos, and
General Supply.
* Strengthen regulatory
capacity for telecom,
power, and water
sectors.

* Privatize generation, IDECO,

* Increased private

* Deepen sector

* Guarantees for

and EDCO.
* Introduce economic-based
tariff structure.
* Develop comprehensive
strategy for privatization of
generation and distribution.
* Close Samra IPP financial
package.
* Approve private investment
in Disi-Amman Conveyor.

sector share of power
market.
* Increase volume of
private investment in
developing and
conserving water
sources, wastewater
treatment and service
delivery.

restructuring for
market competition
* Implement a legal
and regulatory
framework for
natural gas.

IPP pipeline
transmission
project.
* IFC potential
direct investments
in infrastructure,
* Guarantee for
Disi-Amman
Conveyor.

a

JTC, power
generation and
distribution
companies; APC.
Strengthen
regulatory capacity
for telecom and
power sectors.

Support from

Knowledge
Advisory Services

Partners

*Continued
supervision of
USAID
Cooperative Trust
Fund for
privatization.
*IFC's advisory
role (e.g.,
transport, power,
water)
oTimely provision
of advice and
response to TA
needs.
*Workshops for
regulatory
agencies (WBI).

USAID through
the Bankimplemented
Cooperative
Trust Fund.

*TA for developing
energy sector
strategy, including
regional trade.
*TA for
privatization of
generation and
distribution assets.

EU/EIB: energy
regulatory
system.
Arab Fund:
power
restructuring.
Germany:
water; power.
Japan: water
USAID: power
IDB: power
UNDP: power

CAS Annex B9
Page 6 of 11
Needs_andriorities
Governmen Strategy/ActisMonitoring Indicators
Country
_______________________

2.4 Export Development
* Develop nontraditional
exports.
o Expand the linkages of
the export sector to the
rest of the economy.

Establish national system for
testing, certification, and
quality control.
* Promote linkages between
farmers and exporters.
* Further development of
special economic zones.
* Improve institutional
structure for export
promotion.
e

World Bank
____________________

a Increase volume of

nontraditional exports.
e Expansion of export
growth beyond the
QIZs.
* Boost coordination
between different
investment and export
promotion agencies.
* Increase number and
frequency of trade
shows.

e

______

Establish national
system for quality
control.

World Bank Group Support FY03-05
Lending/
Knowledge

Ongoing rojects

Advisory Services

Proposed Projects

oTrade Logistics
Study.

* Possible follow-

on operation to
Horticultural
Exports LIL.
* IFC proposed
investments in
export-oriented
manufacturing
sector, and IT
related
investments.
Ongoing/Portfolio
Proiects
* Horticultural
Exports.
* IFC portfolio
investments in
QIZ firms.

Support from
Partners
USAID:
increased
economic
opportunities.
EU: business
service team

CAS Annex B9
Page 7 of I I

Monitoring Indicators
Needs and Priorities

Govern,ment Strategy/Actions

Country

World Bank

World Bank Group Support FY03
Lending/
__Ongoing

2.5 Financial Sector
Development
o Further develop
primary and secondary
housing finance
markets.

o Continue activities to
strengthen JMRC bonds.
o Encourage the development
of the primary mortgage
market, including the
entrance, over time, of
nonbank mortgage lenders.
o Pursue the development of
policy, institutional, and the
legal and regulatory
framework for the
development of mortgagerelated securities.
o Develop an effective
mortgage insurance program.

o Ensure regular JMRC
bond issues, at yields
mirroring market rates
elsewhere in the
financial sector.
o Reduce spreads
between deposit rates
and market interest
rates on mortgage
loans.
o Issue mortgage bonds.
o Achieve widespread
use by banks of
mortgage insurance.

Projects

o IFC will consider
providing
technical
assistance.

Knowledge

Support from
ipotfo

Partners

Advisory Services

Ongoing
oMortgage Market
T.A.

USAID:
securities

CAS Annex B9

Page 8 of I1
Needs

_nd

NQeeds end E?rlo riifiez

_rloritie~
.overnment
__
_ r te__/Ac__ns

Monitoring indicators

¢oven ment StnmegylA¢tionls

World Bgntt Group Support FY03-O45

Wol_ak

_

Country

-.

World

Lndn/mmw

~

aoi

Pro ecb

g
Adviso

Services

IML PublicSector Reform and Governance
3.1 Legal and Judicial
Reform
ReforImpm effective
mImplement
retive
mechanism for resolving
commercial disputes.
aModerize case load
handling system.
o Train judges and key court
officials on commercial
laws.

o Expedite litigation process.
o Modernize court system.
o Adopt plan for countrywide
court management.
Recruit additional judges.

Reduce backlog of
commercial cases
significantly.
o Make substantial
progress in
modernizing the
commercial legal
system.
o Create well
functioning dispute
resolution
mechanisms.
o Engage better trained,
up to date corps of
o

Same as Country
column.

Proposed Promects
-PSRL IIl
Ongoing Proiects
-PSRL 11

oPublic
Expenditure
Review.
oCourse on legal
and judicial
reforms (WBI).
oTraining ofjudges
on commercial
and business laws
(WBI).

judges and auxiliaries.

3.2 Civil Service Reform
o Modernize the civil
sMoemivi secicvi
l a
service.
stefructurand link t
structure and link to
performance.
oIncrease

staff

accountability.

o

Implement new civil service
bylaw.
Design and approve new pay
structure for civil service,

o Put in place
transparent and
efficient and gender
responsive practices

o Introduce merit-based

promotion and compensation.
.

for hiring, firing, and

promotion.
o Attract and retain

qualified civil servants.

Same as Country
column.

Same as above

Labor Market
Study.
Poverty
Assessment.
Country Gender

Assessment.

Suprt from
?aporteros

CAS Annex B9

Page 9 of II

Needs and Priorities
3.3 Improving Public
Services
* Update and simplify
public service procedures.
* Make information on
public services
transparent.

Government Strategy/Actions
,.
;

* Simplify public service

procedures.
* Post public services by
e

department for transparency.
Launch e-government
initiative.

-Monitoring Indicators°.
d
r

. ~~~~~Country-^_i___._C_-_-____

k

.__

World Bank Group Support FY03-05
KPrtnr
KNrdJn
edn/Inowledge
Ongoing Projects Advisory Services
Same as above.

* Institutionalize service

eTA on

intergovernmental
fiscal relations for
municipal finance.
eTA as needed.
*Training for urban
management
(WBI).

delivery surveys.
* Publish service
standards in all
departments.

Supprt from
Partners

GTZ: TA in
development of
performance
indicators for
key ministries
and public
sector agencies.
USAID
DFID: PSR

3.4 Financial Management
and Budgetary Reform
* Introduce Medium-Term
* Update and decentralize
Budgetary Framework
budgetary procedures.
(MTBF).
* Introduce Medium-Term
* Convert Audit Bureau to fully
Budgetary Framework
independent audit institution
(MTBF).
by transferring ex ante audit
* Streamline internal and
functions to Government's
external audit function in
internal audit department.
accordance with Bank's
* Overhaul law on public
2001 CFAA.
accounting.
* Overhaul law on public
accounting as suggested in
the CFAA.

* Implement MTBF

fully at center and in
key ministries.
* Put performance
management system in
place.
* Revise audit law to
convert the Audit
Bureau into an
independent audit
institution.

*

Same as Country
column.

Same as above.

*Report on
observance of
accounting
standards and
codes.
*Training for
poverty
monitoring and
evaluation (WBI).

CAS Annex B9
Page 10 of II

Needs and Priorities

Government Strategy/Actions

Monitoring Indicators
W

C
Counitry,

World Bank Group Support FY03-05

Worldl

Lending/

IBank

______

__

___

_____Ongoing

Knowledge
Pro'ects

Support from
Partners

Advisory Services

IV. Water Resource Management and Environment
4.1 Water
o Future water balance and

auality: Manage water
resources carefully.
o Achieve greater efficiency
inmunicipal, industrial,
and agricultural water use.
o Increase use of treated
wastewater for irrigation
in Jordan Valley.
o Move to high-value crops
to obtain adequate return
on agricultural water use.
o Supply Augmentation:
Increase water supply to
narrow gap between
supply and demand.
o Financing and
Institutional Challenges:
Increase internal financing
of WAJ and JVA to meet
fiscal pressures for water
investments.

o Undertake a pilot project to
improve irrigation efficiency
in the Jordan Valley.
o Implement the groundwater
by-laws to reduce
groundwater abstraction in
highlands, ensuring
operational performance of
meters, enforcement of
licensed quantities, and
volumetric tariffs.
o Manage demand by raising
water charges by WAJ and
JVA.
o Sign management contracts
for water and sanitation
networks to main cities
(Amman already has one).
o Develop strategy and action
plan for reuse of treated
wastewater in agriculture and
urban areas.
o Strengthen awareness
campaigns on water
conservation and quality.

o Achieve constancy in
supply of water.
o Reduce overdrafts of
renewable aquifers.
o Reduce unaccountedfor water (target is 30
percent).
o Increased percentage
of O&M costs of WAJ
and JVA recovered
through tariffs (target
is full recovery).
o Increasing percentage
of wastewater
collected, treated, and
reused.

o Define and
disseminate sectoral
policy on
intersectoral water
allocations.
o Establish strategy
for managing
sustainable
groundwater
resources.
o Complete well
metering process.
o Establish
mechanism for
implementing
groundwater
monitoring program.
o Supervise ongoing
projects and provide
advice and response
to TA needs.

Proposed Projects
o Potential IFC
involvement in
financing private
sector investments
in wastewater
systems.
Ongoing Proiects
oAmman Water
and Sanitation.
PRG for DisiPRG
Conveyor
Amman Conveyor
project.

oProgrammatic
ESW for
continuing policy
dialogue.
oUpdating of water
sector strategy.
oLearning events
on water sector
reform and PPI
(WBI).

US EIB
Japan/JICA
CID- IKFW/
Italy
GTZOperations and
management
support for
Jerash/Irbid.

CAS Annex B9
Page II of 11
Monitoring Indicators
Needs and Priorities^-

Needs

Knd

.rloritles~

Goveromeot StrategylActions

Governmept Stratet~r/Actions
______________________

4.2 The Environment
* Enact essential
environmental regulations
such as environmental
impact assessments
(ElAs), based on the 1995
environmental protection
law.

* Enact, at the national level,

essential environmental
regulations, including ElAs.

Country.

.

WOrld Bank

____________________

__________________

* Put environmental

* Same as Country

regulatory framework
in place.

World Bank Group Support FY03-05
Lendingl
-flO inog

Sup,oort from

Knowledge
Projects

column.

Note: Acronyms and abbreviations used in the table are defined in the list that appears at the front of the CAS.

Advisory Services

Natural Resources
Management TA.
GEF proiects
*Conservation of
Medicinal and
Herbal Plants.
.*Integrated
ecosystem in JRV.
*Gulf of Aqaba
Environmental
Consolidation.

Partners

_

_

_

_

_

_

-EU/EIB's
support for
environmental
work through
METAP
UNDP
KFW

_

CAS Annex BI0 - Jordan
CAS Summary of Development Priorities
As of December 1t, 2002

Country
Network area

Major issueb

performance'

Country

Bank

Reconciliation of

pnonty'

pnontyc

country and Bank
pnonties d

Poverty Reduction &Economic
Manage. nent
Incidence relatively high and progress

Poverty reducton
Econorr ic policy
Public sector
Gender
Human Development Department
Education
Health, utrition &population
Social protection

fair
good
fair
good

limited
Public debt/budget deficit
Efficiency in delivery of core services
Female employment

high
high
high
moderate

high
moderate IMF will take the lead
high
moderate

good
good
good

Quality/relevance
Efficiency
Efficiency

high
high
high

high
high
high

Environrnentally & Socially Sustainable
Developi nent
Rural di ivelopment
Environi nent
Social development

fair
fair
fair

Rural poverty
Water resource management
Capacity of local institutions

moderate moderate
high
high
moderate high

Finance, Private Sector & Infrastructure
Financial sector
Private nector
Energy Smining
Infrastrt cture

fair
good
good
good

Weak intermediation
Compettioniuncertainty
Restructuring/privatlzation
Transport costs/maintenance

moderate
moderate
moderate
moderate

a
b
c
d

moderate
moderate
moderate
moderate

Use 'exo ilient,' 'good,' fair,' or 'poor'
Indicate I inctpal country-specific problems (e g, for poverty reduction, 'rural poverty,' for education, 'female secondary completion,' for environment, 'urban air pollution')
To ndica e pnornty, use 'low,' 'moderate,' or 'high '
Give exp' anation, if pnonties do not agree, for exemple, another MDB may have the lead on the issue, or there may be ongoing dialogue

Annex C
USAID and EU Programs in Jordan
USAID Proaram in Jordan
Water
data collection, institutional improvements to water sector institutions
rehabilitating existing water systems to improve water use efficiency
improve, expand waster water treatment plants by improving wastewater quality
Economic Opportunity
Support for increase access to business services including microenterprise lending
Identification of key economic policy reforms to raise private sector competitiveness
Policy based balance of payment program focusing on reform to trade, investment, prvatization and others.
Technical assistance to establish Aqaba Special Economic Zone
Health, Population
Improved knowledge about modern contraceptives, in part through media campaign
Improvements in health centers to raise access and quality of primary health care
Encouragement to private sector for engagement in marketing family planning products and serves
Support for health policy reform

EU Program in Jordan
The main ongoing projects financed under MEDA (financial program to support EU partnership) are:
Industrial Modernization Programme
Support for regulatory reform and privatization (SRRP)
Global financing facility for SMEs - Risk capital (EIB)
Water Sector Intervention Programme
Support of SMEs - Risk capital (EIB)
Management unit for the Amman Water Rehabilitation Programme
Tourism development and preservation of cultural heritage
The social development project (SDP)/Development and
employment fund (DEF) (financed under Protocol 11,Ill, IV)
National Indicative Program for Jordan 2002-4 (approved August 2002), may change
Structural adjustment facility to support fiscal consolidation through reform of VAT and public pensions
Support to the implementation of the Association Agreement
Support to Aqaba Special Economic Zone Authority
Program for human rights and democratization

MAP SECTION

IBRD 29234

38

370

350

I'

.

J

I'

AiIon0

~

~

'

o

n

'
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~MAFRAK

/

J

'

/

,

'1'

.

@X,-'

2

33~30

\

,/

330

3

39:

ir

V

1

-33
'.

.

nmm

320rrk

"s/

t

314i>\

-310

K~~~~~
-31'~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~0

.ssenNnqb

...,

2'

.

A N

.
C

, , e

,/

/6 NATIONAL CAPITAL

;

SELECTED CITIES AND TOWNS

0

EXPRESSWAYS
0.

_ _ .

|

0

0

25

25

50

50

75
75

'''''''

ToAIB',,

100
100

36°

RAILROADS
PERENNIAL RIVERS AND STREAMS

125 KILOMETS
125 KILOMETERS

~

-------

--

29-

INTERMITTENT STREAMS AND WADIS
GOVERNORATE BOUNDARIES

-

Ths mop wos produced by the Mop Design Unit of TheWorld Bonk
The
boundories, colors, denominations ond onyother informotion shown
on this mop do not imply, on the port of TheWorld Bonk Group, any
judgment on the legolstotus of any territory, or any endorsement or
occeptance of such boundories
^50

|

75 MILES

50

25

0

29

ROADS

AlMudesowwoetA

-

INTERNATIONAL BOUNDARIES
370

380

390
DECEMBER 1997

I Danari
%OCJSI

Type:

25228

Ma^ :

CAS

JO

