Public Disclosure Authorized

Document of
The World Bank
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Public Disclosure Authorized

Report No: 24127-RU

MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENT
OF THE
INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT
AND THE INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION

Public Disclosure Authorized

TO THE
EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS
ON A
COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
OF THE WORLD BANK GROUP
FOR

Public Disclosure Authorized

THE RUSSIAN FEDERATION

May 14, 2002

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the
perfonnance of their official duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without
World Bank authorization

DATE OF LAST CAS
(December 1, 1999)
CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS
Currency Unit = Ruble (Rb)
US$ 1.00 = Rb 31.1498 (market rate, April 17, 2002)
Rb 100 = US$3.21

WEIGHTS AND MEASURES
Metric System

ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS
AAA
APL
CAS
CAE
CEM
CFAA
CIDA
CIF
CIR
CPAR
DFID
ENV & NRM
EU
FDI
FEC
FIAS
FSAP
FTIP
GEF
GDR
GRP
GOR
Goskomstat
HBS
HIV/AIDS
IBRD

- Analytical and Advisory Activities
- Adaptable Program Loan
- Country Assistance Strategy
- Country Assistance Evaluation
- Country Economic Memorandum
- Country Financial Accountability Assessment
- Canadian International Development Agency
- Cost, Insurance and Freight
- Country Impact Review
- Country Procurement Assessment Report
- Department for International Development
- Environment and Natural Resource Management
- European Union
- Foreign Direct Investment
- Federal Energy Commission
- Foreign Investment Advisory Service
- Financial Sector Assessment Program
- Federal Target of Investment Program
- Global Environment Facility
- Gross Domestic Product
-Gross Regional Product
- Govermnent of Russia
- Russian State Statistical Agency
- Household Budget Survey
- Human Immunodeficiency Virus
- International Bank for Reconstruction and
Development

ICT
IFC
IVE
MDG
MIGA
NGO
ODS
OECD
PEP
POPs
PPP
RLMS
SIDA
SME
STD
TA
TB
TDO
UES
USAID
WHO
WTO

- Information and Communication
Technology
- International Finance Corporation
- Initial Vocational Education
- Millennium Development Goals
- Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency
- Non-Governmental Organizations
- Ozone Depleting Substances
- Organization for Economic Cooperation
and Development
- Private Enterprise Partnership
- Persistent Organic Pollutants
- Purchasing Power Parity
- Russian Longitudinal Monitoring System
- Swedish International Development
Agency
- Small and Medium Enterprises
- Sexually Transmitted Diseases
- Technical Assistance
- Tuberculosis
- Total Debt Outstanding
- Unified Energy System
- United States Agency for International
Development
- World Health Organization
- World Trade Organization

FISCAL YEAR
January I - December 31

Vice President
Director
Tearn Leader

IIBRD
Johannes Linn
Julian Schweitzer
Christof Rihl

IFC
Assaad Jabre
Edward Nassim
Kutlay Ebiri

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
TABLE OF CONTENTS

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY....V
I.

COUNTRY CONTEXT .................................................

1

The break-up of the Soviet Union ........................................................... l
Political, economic and social developments since the 1998 crisis ..................................................
The political environment ...........................................................
The Government's economic reform program ...........................................................
Recent economic developments ...........................................................
The impact on poverty ...........................................................

1
1
2
2
3

Challenges to sustained growth and poverty reduction ...........................................................
Economic diversification ...........................................................
Social and human development ...........................................................
The environment ..........................................................
Public sector management ..........................................................

5
6
9
11
12

Medium-term macroeconomic scenarios ..........................................................

14

II. THE BANK GROUP'S ASSISTANCE STRATEGY ............................................. 16
The Bank Group's three strategic pillars ..........................................................

16

18
The operating enviromnent ..........................................................
Lessons from the Country Assistance Evaluation and the Country Inpact Review ............................. 18
Lessons from the last CAS ..........................................................
20
Core diagnostic reports ..........................................................
20
Anti-money laundering efforts ..........................................................
22
Portfolio implementation ..........................................................
22
Changing the way we do business ..........................................................

23

Building partnerships ..........................................................

25

Choosing the World Bank Group's instruments ..........................................................
Improving the business environment and enhancing competition ......................................................
Improving public sector management ...........................................................
Mitigating social and environmental risks ..........................................................

27
28
30
30

Lending scenarios and triggers ..........................................................

31

Creditworthiness ..........................................................

33

Risks and risk management ..........................................................

35

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the
performance of their official duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without
World Bank authorization.

LIST OF BOXES
5

Box I

Gender issues ...........................................................

Box 2

Economic development of Russia's regions in 1994-2000 ........................................................ 14

Box 3

Millennium development goals in Russia ...........................................................

Box 4

Russia Country Assistance Evaluation and Country Inplementation Review, 2002 ................. 19

Box 5

Monitoring and evaluation of non-lending services ...........................................................

24

Box 6

CAS consultations and dissemination ...........................................................

27

17

LIST OF TABLES
Table 1

Small enterprises in selected transition economies (1998) ........................................................... 7

Table 2

Macroeconomic scenarios, 2002-2005 ...........................................................

15

Table 3

MDGs in the Russian Federation ...........................................................

18

Table 4

Country diagnostic reports ...........................................................

21

Table 5

The proposed Bank lending program, FY 2003 - 2005 ...........................................................

33

Table 6

Key exposure and burden sharing indicators, 1999-2004 .......................................................... 34

Annexes
Al Key economic & program indicators - change from last CAS
A2 Country at a glance
B2 Selected indicators of Bank portfolio performance and management
B3 IBRD/IDA/IFC/MIGA program summary
B4 Summary of non-lending services
B5 Social indicators
B6 Key economic indicators
B7 Key exposure indicators
B8 (IFC) held and disbursement portfolio
B8 Operations portfolio (IBRD/IDA and grants)
B9 Country Assistance Program matrix
B 10 Summary of Development Priorities
B 11 Comprehensive assistance framework

Attachments
Attachment 1

Russia's development priorities and program of cooperation with the World Bank..... 37

Attachment 2

CAS consultations prior to upstream review ..........................................................

41

Attachment 3

Poverty in Russia ..........................................................

43

Map No. 27188R

iv

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
i. The World Bank Group's last Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) for Russia was discussed by the
Board of Executive Directors in December, 1999, and a Progress Report was discussed in January, 2001.1
The central theme of the last CAS, prepared in the uncertain environment following the financial crash of
August 1998, was to continue the strategy of "promoting an environment conducive to economic growth,
revamping the social safety net and ensuring equitable access to social services". The CAS saw little
prospect for a reduction of poverty during the CAS period. The 2001 Progress Report noted encouraging
advances in many of the areas described in the 1999 CAS and highlighted increased economic stability
and an improving investment climate. The Progress Report outlined a base case lending scenario of up to
US$ 600m per fiscal year, compared with the intermediate lending scenarios in the 1999 CAS of between
US$ 300-450m p.a.
ii. Over the period FY 1999-2002, Russia has made remarkable progress in moving out of crisis and
towards sustainable development and poverty reduction. Building on the experience gained in the nineties,
and in a much more stable political environment, the Government has been able to develop and enact a
sound reform agenda and maintain macro-economic stability. Since 1999, assisted by high commodity
prices, the economy has grown strongly, business confidence has begun to revive, and poverty has
declined. Russia's sovereign credit rating has improved, although not yet to investment grade.
iii. The World Bank Group (WBG) has been a strong partner in this turnaround. The WBG was able to
deliver strategic policy advice and assistance to key aspects of the Government's broad reform agenda (for
example, the tax system, federal-regional fiscal relations, judicial, deregulation, education and social
protection). The Bank developed a strong dialogue in a wide range of areas central to the next phase of the
Government's reform efforts (e.g. civil service reform, pensions, communal services, small business
development, the knowledge economy). At the same time, a vigorous effort to improve portfolio quality
through cancellations of no longer useful loan components and joint Government-Bank monitoring
produced considerable overall improvements over the CAS period, although lengthy delays in processing
operations up to loan effectiveness has become a serious issue. The creditworthiness risk noted in the 1999
CAS did not materialize and WBG exposure has begun to decline. Likewise, the reputational risk
highlighted in the Progress Report has proved to be manageable.
iv. Despite the strong progress since 1999, formidable challenges remain. At least 40 million Russians
still live in poverty, with children particularly at risk. There is a growing risk of an HIV epidemic. Growth
has been uneven, with poor regions and segments of the population falling further behind. Exports are
largely commodity based and investment remains over-concentrated in the same sectors. Small and
medium enterprise growth has been anemic. Institutional capacity remains weak and governance and
corruption are still serious issues. Despite Russia's current strong fiscal position, this CAS will therefore
argue for a continued strong WBG presence over the FY 2003-05 period, in order to assist the
Government consolidate and implement its formidable development agenda. A strong WBG presence is
also the wish of the Government, which, for the first time in its relationship with the WBG, recently
adopted its own Program of Cooperation between the Russian Federation and the World Bank for
calendaryears 2002-2004. This call for continued engagement was also asserted in the consultations with
civil society and business which were carried out during the preparation of the CAS.
v. This CAS is organized around three central themes: improving the business environment and
enhancing competition; strengthening public sector management; and mitigating social and environmental
risks. These broad themes are consistent with the objectives of the Government's Medium Term Plan and
Assistance Strategy for the Russian Federation, Report No: 19897-RU, December 1, 1999 and Country
Assistance Strategy Progress Report. Report No: 21709-RU, January 11, 2001.
XCountry

V

are mirrored in the Government paper on cooperation with the WBG. The CAS envisages an IBRD
program of lending and guarantees of up to US$ 600 million per fiscal year over the CAS period,
supported by an extensive program of analytical work in support of the reform agenda. This prudentexposure IBRD strategy will be carefully integrated with IFC and MIGA interventions to ensure a strong
and integrated focus on private sector development, particularly improving the overall business
environment, the small and medium enterprise sector, and financial intermediation.
vi. The strategy described below takes into account the lessons leamed from previous work in Russia and
the 2002 Country Assistance Evaluation (CAE) and Country Impact Review (CIR)2 . The priorities in the
CAS are consistent with the key conclusions and recommendations of the CAE and CIR, namely to focus
assistance on areas of strong Government commitment, to expand advisory services in key reform areas,
drawing on global practice, to expand assistance to Small and Medium Enterprises (SMEs) and explore
possibilities of working with Russian companies. As recommended by the CIR, the CAS also attaches a
high priority to ensuring the best possible coordination of IBRD and IFC activities. The strategy exploits
the synergies and comparative advantages of other major institutions working in Russia, including the
EBRD, IMT, EU and bilateral agencies. The risks to the Bank Group's credit standing and reputation
embedded in this CAS are manageable: a large fall in commodity prices; poor macroeconomic
management; political risk; slowing pace of reforms and portfolio implementation.
vii. Executive Directors may wish to address the following questions in the Board discussion:
*
*
*

Are the three strategic pillars of the CAS: improving the business environment and enhancing
competition; strengthening public sector management; and mitigating social and environmental
risks; the correct ones and does the lending program reflect these priorities?
Does the proposed mix of Bank Group products, including investment lending and increased
emphasis on knowledge products to support the Government's reform agenda, provide a balanced
mix of services for this CAS period?
Does the CAS take into account the lessons learned during the nineties and the advice provided by
the recent Country Assistance Evaluation?

Federation, Country Assistance Evaluation, April 3, 2002, OED, and Country Impact Review, April 23,
2002, OEG.
2Russian

vi

MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE
INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT
AND THE INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION
TO THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS ON A
COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY OF THE WORLD BANK GROUP
FOR THE RUSSIAN FEDERATION

I.

COUNTRY CONTEXT

THE BREAK-UP OF THE SOVIET UNION

1.
The break-up of the Soviet Union and the transformation from central planning to market
coordination in Russia was difficult, and associated with high social costs. Price liberalization and high
levels of subsidies for enterprises created high rates of inflation for a protracted period (1992-1995), while
output and real income plummeted. The world's largest privatization program ensured a large and
irreversible shift to the private sector, but the process was widely perceived as flawed and biased in favor
of government and industry insiders. Output did not recover, and large scale capital flight added to
Russia's economic woes.
2.
At the heart of the problem were continued subsidies to inherited unprofitable enterprises, directly
and by quasi-fiscal means, which delayed the emergence of competitive new private firms. In a chaotic
political environment, the resulting unsustainable fiscal imbalances were covered from 1995 onward by
domestic and, increasingly, by foreign loans. In August 1998, credit relations collapsed and Russia
defaulted on its sovereign obligations.
POLITICAL, ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENTS SINCE THE 1998 CRISIS

The political environment
3.
Mr. Putin's appointment as Prime Minister in August 1999 and his subsequent decisive victory in
the 2000 Presidential election began a broad consolidation of the existing constitutional order. President
Putin built a solid and well-disciplined political party, moved toward a more rational and coherent division
of power across all levels of government, including relations between the executive and the legislature and
between the federal government and the regions, and began to clarify the role of the state and the private
sector in a number of areas where the boundaries between public and private ownership had become
muddied. Though none of these issues are fully resolved, most observers agree that the previous political
instability and uncertainty has been significantly reduced.
4.
The Government has been able to put in place significant reforms of the tax system, the regulatory
framework, land sales and the court system that had previously been blocked by political wrangling.
Though elections are scheduled for the Duma in December 2003 and for the President in March 2004, they
are unlikely to restart past constitutional conflicts. The political party system is maturing as competing
parties stake out more coherent positions on the political spectrum and strengthen their organizational
base. In turn, the political debate at the federal level has shifted away from the basic philosophy behind the
1

economic reforms to more pragmatic discussions about the implementation of these reforms and their
social and economic impact.
5.
The impact of the creation of seven administrative super-regions (okrugs) on efforts to ensure
greater regional conformity to federal laws and mandates remains unclear. The federal government's
efforts to delineate clear boundaries between the public and private sectors have not always been matched
at the regional level, where regional government structures and powerful local businesses often remain
closely entangled. Although a number of relevant Constitutional Court decisions have been enforced
recently throughout the country, it remains to be seen whether these powerful local interests could be a
major obstacle to the next phase of structural reforns, which may threaten some of their claims.
The Government's economic reform program
6.
A key milestone was laid in July 2001, when the Government began to implement its Medium Term
Program of Social and Economic Development for 2002-2004 (see Attachment I for a more detailed
description of the program and its implementation to date). Most observers credit the Government with
addressing the key challenges facing the nation, and with timely and persistent passage of reform
legislation. Implementation of the reforms remains the crucial issue.
7.
The Medium Term Program identifies five structural reform priorities, which in tum have been
driving the legislative agenda:
*
*

*

*

*

Reduce poverty levels and income differentials by providing incentives for wage and employment
growth, and by improved targeting of social assistance.
Achieve economic modemization and improvement in enterprise efficiency, inter alia by: (i)
eliminating implicit subsidies embedded in low tariffs (utilities and social transfers), (ii)
simultaneously increasing the efficiency of the infrastructure monopolies, housing and communal
services; and (iii) improving the innovative and technological potential of the economy.
Create an institutional environment favorable to investment in the real sector, and develop
financial intermediation. Introduce effective protection of property rights, and develop competitive
markets for goods, services and capital (including land); increase the role of small and medium
businesses.
Improve fiscal efficiency by focusing budget expenditures on the priority targets of social and
economic policy, by improving control over the assets and liabilities of the state, by streamlining
the budgeting process, and by maintaining an efficient tax system.
Reduce regional differentiation in social and economic development, and strengthen the economic
foundations of the Russian Federation by ensuring conformity of federal and sub-national
legislation, and by introducing clear functional divisions of authority and financial resources
between the federal and sub-national levels of govermment.

Recent economic developments
8.
The speed and extent of the recovery since 1998 has surprised most observers. Although the
macroeconomic and structural reform outlook appeared gloomy when the last full CAS was discussed in
1999, the CAS update written a year later already noted fiscal prudence and a more coherent pursuit of
structural reforms as hallmarks of the period after the presidential elections in 2000. Russia's
macroeconomic tumaround has indeed been remarkable: since the beginning of 1999 until the end of
2001, GDP has grown by 21 percent, inflation fell from 85.7 percent to 17.7 percent, the fiscal position
went from a deficit of 4.9 percent of GDP in 1998 to a surplus of 3 percent in 2001, the current account
balance improved from US$ 506 million to US$ 29.5 billion, and Russia's reserves reached US$ 36.62
billion, up from US$ 7.8 billion in December 1999.
2

9.
As a result of hard budget constraints, barter and arrears have largely disappeared and the economy
has been re-monetized. The share of loss making enterprises fell from 55.2 percent in 1998 to 38.4 percent
in 2001; bank credit to the private sector as a share of GDP recovered from 10.6 percent in 1999 to 15.4
percent in 2001, and in Spring 2002, the stock market reached its highest level since April 1998.
International rating agencies have upgraded Russia's sovereign credit risk, although not yet to investment
grade level.
10. Over the last three years, the factors which have driven Russia's economic growth have changed. In
1999, the first year after the crisis, the trade balance provided the single largest contribution to economic
growth, reflecting ruble devaluation and oil price improvements. In the following year, domestic
investment was the biggest contributor, with consumption demand assuming this role in 2001. The initial
export impulse thus translated into increased investment and improved real incomes, and from there into
increased consumption. Domestic demand induced growth has been important, not least for the large
segments of the population that suffered declining real incomes since the start of the transition. However, a
recent slow down in growth rates also indicates that domestic demand, in particular investment demand,
may not yet be strong enough to sustain the recovery, and that Russia's growth still depends largely on
natural resource prices.
The impact on poverty
11. Ten years after the start of transition, poverty is still a major issue. Depending on the data source, the
prevalence of poverty in Russia was between 22 and 33 per cent in 2001 (see Attachment 3 for a
discussion of measurement). However, all available data show an increase in the incidence and severity of
poverty, and a sharp rise in social disparities over the last decade, up to the time immediately after the
1998 crisis, with declining rates since then (Figure 1).
12. The increase prior to 1998 was a direct outcome of the collapse in incomes and increased inequality
that accompanied the transition. Between 1992 and 1998 thirteen million jobs were lost, registered
unemployment increased from 5.2 percent to 13.3 percent, and there was a reduction in real wages of 40
percent. During most of the nineties, employees and their families took the brunt of the transition, as the
adjustment to lower output was also shouldered in the form of a substantial growth in wage arrears. This,
together with the need to stay close to work-based social support systems, led to the emergence of the
working poor. Inequality also increased during the transition; between 1992 and 1998, the Gini coefficient
for money income calculated by Goskomstat increased from 0.29 to 0.40.
13. Those facing the highest risk of poverty, and of remaining chronically poor, are households with
several children, or headed by someone who is unemployed, or with low education attainment, or by a
single-parent, almost always a woman (see Box 1). The incidence of poverty declines with age. Children
have the highest incidence (10 percent more than the national population), while old-age pensioners are
less likely to be poor: their poverty rate (measured by disposable resources) was 24 percent in 2000,
compared with 33 percent for the national population.
14. The rural population has a higher prevalence of poverty than the urban population (by about 10
percentage points). However, since 73 percent of Russia's population lives in cities, two-thirds of the poor
are urban residents. There is also a large spatial variation in poverty, with four times higher incidence in
the poor Tuva oblast than in the rich Tyumen oblast, or in Moscow City. Moreover, inter-regional
inequality has increased substantially over the years (see Box 2), with about one third of national
inequality attributed to inter-regional inequality, compared to less than ten percent in Eastern European
countries. This difference is even more profound in case of the long-term poor. Just two economic regions

3

(the Volga-Vyatsky region and the Urals) account for about 44 percent of the country's long-term poor.3
Long-term poverty is concentrated in the 'rust-belt' areas of the Urals, and is also wide spread in the
hostile climatic conditions of the North.
15. The non-income dimension of poverty in Russia, i.e. increased alcoholism, insecurity and exclusion,
has become painfully obvious over the last decade. Women have been disproportionately affected by an
emerging wage gap in the workplace and increased home violence. At the same time, men have
experienced a significant deterioration in life expectancy, likely caused by stress, alcohol and drug abuse.
Male life expectancy at birth was a very low 59 years in the year 2000, down from 64 years in 1990, and
female life expectancy 72 years. During the past decade, there has also been a sharp increase in the
incidence of tuberculosis, STDs, and HIV/AIIDS (see par. 35-37).
Figure 1. Official Poverty Estimates, quarterly, 1997-2001 (Goskomstat)
60%
50%

p.

30%

.

IL20%

.

.

.
U

-4--- Money Income poverty, 92 poverty line

10%
0%

.

.

-.

.3-+ Money income poverty, S99 poverty line
Poverty using disposable resources, '92 poverty line
I

ht

I

=

E 5

~~~~~

TIT

45

-

,

= S z

j

I

~~~~

j

I

>

I

E

; E388>8

16. Children have suffered particularly from the consequences of social upheaval, high adult mortality
and divorce rates. They are a high risk group for alcohol and drug use, and for contracting infectious
disease. Conservative estimates of the current number of street children range from 100,000 to 150,000.
However, the press has reported up to three million children "at risk", i.e. those that are spending time on
the streets and attending schools only sporadically. Another 660,000 children are deprived of parental care,
with 180,000 residing in institutions and facing serious challenges of integration into society upon
graduation. The incidence of disability among children also rose by a factor of six over the last five years,
reaching as many as 3 million children. The extent of the problem and its long term impact are not fully
4
understood and urgently need further analysis and policy responses.
17. A high proportion of poverty in Russia is transient and the poverty numbers are very sensitive to
growth in the economy. 5 This has been particularly the case during the period of high post-1998 growth,
which has also been pro-poor in that it helped to reduce income differentials. The high rates of growth of
the post-1998 recovery testify to the importance of economic growth and new employment as effective
weapons to reduce poverty: based on the 1997-2000 trends, a one percent growth in real per capita income
caused an average decline in poverty by 2.1 percentage points. The distribution of benefits from economic
growth is also important: practically all regions have seen a reduction in poverty, and the relative increase
3Economic regions referred to here are different from both "regions" as subjects of the Federation, and federal supraregions, or okrugs. Economic geographers distinguish 10 economic regions in Russia - a concept dating back to
Soviet times.
4 World Bank (2002), Children in Crisis: The Case of Russia.
5 According to recent estimates, about 55 percent of the poor in Russia during 1995-1996 had managed to escape
poverty when observed a year later (UN Common Country Assessment, p.22).

4

in the expenditure of the poorest quintile was 50 percent more than that of the richest quintile between
1998 and 2000, making the economic recovery broad and pro-poor. An important factor has been the
improved financial position of the government and business, allowing a reduction in wage arrears,
pensions, and social transfers.
18. The poverty-reducing impact of growth within each region and across regions would be
strengthened further if growth were based on a more diversified economy with a rapidly developing SME
sector, instead of the current highly concentrated industrial structure dominated by natural resource
exporters. Improving the business climate in general, and fostering new firm growth is key to the longterm reduction of poverty in Russia. Improving the performance of the public sector is also essential: a
healthy fiscal position enables the federal and regional governments to avoid delays in payment of wages,
pensions, and transfers. Moreover, improving the targeting and performance of the social safety net will
enhance the Government's capacity to reduce poverty and in particular, to assist the long-term poor, who
are often isolated and excluded and fail to benefit from sustained economic growth. The mitigation of
various social risks (e.g., through improved healthcare, child welfare, better targeted entitlements) is also
an important element in improving general living standards and tackling poverty.

Box 1 Gender issues
Important gender issues have emerged since the beginning of reforms in Russia in the
economic, legal, social, and cultural spheres. Lack of social and income protection, difficulties
in finding stable jobs and stable earnings are among the most important female gender related
issues. The national wage gap between men and women averages 40 percent, while the gap in
marginal labor efficiency levels is below 20 percent (World Bank (2000), The Feminization oJ
Poverty in Russia, p. 95, and Goskomstat). Informal female labor appears to be on the rise.
Every fifth family with children below 18 years old has no father.
However, there are also gender issues affecting the male population, most notably the
extraordinary 13 year difference in life expectancy between Russian men and women, largely
caused by alcohol, smoking, higher incidence of cardio-vascular diseases, accidents and a
sedentary lifestyle. In addition, there is anecdotal evidence that boys are dropping out of
secondary school faster than girls.

CHALLENGES TO SUSTAINED GROWTH AND POVERTY REDUCTION
19.

Five factors are mainly responsible for Russia's remarkable economic recovery:
(i)
(ii)
(iii)

The 43.8 percent devaluation of the real exchange rate in 1998, which made large scale import
substitution possible.6
The rise in the international price for key natural resource exports, led by oil and gas, which
improved the current account position, fiscal revenues, and contributed directly to growth.7
The availability of cheap domestic inputs to production, in particular labor, due to the real
wage collapse after the crisis, and low domestic energy prices. 8

6Real effective exchange rate, December 1998/ December 1997
7The average oil price 1/1996 - 8/1998 was US$15.3 per barrel and declining,

as compared to US$ 18.7 per barrel

and mostly increasing from 9/1998 to 12/2001; for the gas price the respective ratio is US$ 74.1 per thousand m3 and
US$ 21.2 per thousand rn.
3

5

(iv)
(v)

Excess capacity and employment (labor hoarding) before and after the crisis, which made
large productivity gains possible as output and utilization rates recovered. 9
The pursuit of sound economic policies after the crisis: in particular, the elimination of the
fiscal deficit, the hardening of budget constraints at the enterprise level and the unprecedented
rate at which structural reforms have been passed by parliament since the 2000 presidential
elections.

20. The first four of these factors were one-time adjustments. The fifth factor, sound economic policies
in a period of political stability, has been key to securing high growth rates since 1998. Although the
implementation of the reforms has only just started, there is growing confidence in the Government's track
record. Nevertheless, despite the much improved economic outlook since 1998, Russia faces a daunting
long-term challenge. The economy will have to grow at rates of five percent or higher for more than a
generation, if Russia is to catch up with the lower end of the income scale of OECD economies. Creating
the underpinnings of sustainable economic and social development will require diversifying the economy,
modemizing and improving education, health and social welfare systems and safeguarding and improving
the environment. A modem, effective and transparent public administration will be crucial to address these
goals.
Economic diversification
21. Newfirm growth. The first, and most serious structural obstacle to growth over the medium term is
the lack of economic diversification. The economy is still dominated by large, cash rich raw material
exporters, which increasingly have merged with "old economy" enterprises to form big financial industrial
conglomerates. There is a relatively small share of new, private (and often small and medium sized)
enterprises. Second, the Russian economy remains overly dependent on the export prices of natural
resources, in particular oil and gas. In 2001, 80 percent of Russia's export earnings were commodity
based. In the same year, approximately 70 percent of all investment went into the oil and gas sector, or
consisted of budgetary expenditures.
22. Dependence on commodity prices and the dominance of the natural resources sector exposes the
economy not only to external risk, but also to unbalanced sectoral and regional development. The
consequent uneven distribution of income and wealth is exacerbated by low income and low growth
caused by the absence of new private firms. The experience of other transition economies demonstrates
that the emergence of new private enterprises, often small or medium in size, is the key driver of sustained
and more equitable growth. The self employment rate, which captures the shift of workers from enterprises
to new entrepreneurial occupations, was only 5.3 percent in 2000, a remarkably low number given the
country's level of development, and lower than the level reached by most Central and Eastern European
countries in 1993 (the typical rate in OECD countries is between 8-10 percent). It is also likely to be
overstated (for tax reasons). Inherited enterprises often contribute negatively to the economy's rate of
growth, and even the restructuring of old enterprises may often be less productive than green field
investment. A recent Bank report suggested that SMEs need to account for approximately 40 percent in
employment or value added in order to become an engine of economic growth.10 As Table 1 shows, SMEs
in 1998 contributed less than 20 percent to employment, and little more to value added. In 2000, the share
of employment in small and medium enterprises was estimated between 22 and 28 percent, depending on
the data source.

8

Real wages fell by 35.6 percent from June 1998 to June 1999, the already low, government regulated, domestic

energy prices increased slower than inflation during 1998-1999.
9 Output fell by 42.5 percent cumulatively in the 8 years prior to the crisis, and employment by 15 percent.
10 See The World Bank (2002), Transition - thefirst ten years.

6

23. The system of financial intermediation is weak with the result that available resources (aggregate
savings) tend to flow into acquisitions of existing companies or are "parked" abroad, rather than into
domestic net investment which would augment the capital stock. Accordingly, the new start-ups and small
and medium enterprises, which would be the "engines" of growth and technological improvement, find it
difficult to obtain finance at reasonable rates, while capital outflows continue almost unabated at about
US$ 20 billion per year. As a result, despite impressive achievements in scientific research, much of
Russian manufacturing industry is technologically obsolete and globally uncompetitive and Russian
industry accounts for a negligible percentage of global (non-military) high tech exports. In this way, the
existing export dependency and the lack of effective financial intermediation and banking combine to slow
down economic growth.
24. As noted in the 2001 Foreign Investment Advisory Service (FIAS) study of "Administrative Barriers
to Investment within Subjects of the Russian Federation", Russia has been underperforming, relative to
other Transition and Emerging Market economies, in terms of new investment (especially FDI), and
domestic SMEs. Both the volume of investment, and the activities in which it is concentrated, are
symptoms of significant problems, including corruption. The "missing investors" are readily identifiable.
FIAS noted in its first report on Russia (1992) that the only foreign investors coming to Russia were those
that had to be there. At present, this includes mostly brand-name consumer-goods producers, and
relatively few others. Notably absent are the export-oriented manufacturers and others involved in the new
"globalized" production system, which are so prominent in other transition economies".
Table 1 Small enterprises in selected transition economies (1998)
Share of SMEs in
Share in total
Share in total
Value added per
Countries
all enterprises
employment
value added
employee
Belarus
37.7
15.9
Czech Republic
97.0
48.7
53.5
109.9
Georgia
88.6
39.6
39.3
99.2
Hungary
96.1
54.9
63.6
115.8
Kazakhstan
88.6
15.6
22.4
143.6
Latvia
91.2
45.5
50.4
110.9
Lithuania
97.4
55.1
55.3
100.4
Poland
92.1
45.7
54.4
118.9
Russia
56.3
18.6
23.0
123.7
Ukraine
69.2
16.9
30.0
177.5
- Not available. Note: Average for enterprises of all sizes = 100. Small enterprises are defined as having 50
or fewer employers. Source: The World Bank (2002), Transition- thefirst ten years.
25. Infrastructure monopolies. Distortions are pervasive, not only with respect to the composition of
firms and economic activities across sectors, but also with respect to resource allocation, with the larger
part in the infrastructure, including housing, and energy sectors. Partial estimates of fiscal and quasi-fiscal
subsidies and other transfers from the infrastructure and energy sectors show them well above the
approximately seven percent of GDP the government budgets for health and education services. These
distortions have a number of effects. They deprive the infrastructure and energy sectors of needed
operation and investment funds, protect enterprises outside the infrastructure and energy sectors from
competitive pressures, and disproportionately reward better-off households with subsidized infrastructure
and energy services, while exposing all households to decreasing service quality and access to essential
public services.
" The International Institute for Management Development, working for the World Economic Forum, ranked Russia
last in terms of overall competitiveness in its list of 47 developed and emerging market economies in 2000 and 45 th

of 49 countries in 2001.

7

26. The structure of production, transmission and distribution of infrastructure and energy services plays
a large role in the presence or absence of competitive pressures. Progress in this respect has been uneven.
The coal sector has been effectively privatized and de-monopolized, and oil has been partially restructured,
with production now privatized and subject to competition. An ambitious ten-year plan consistent with
international experience is underway to restructure the electricity sector - the second largest in the world.
The gas sector, however, remains firmly in Government hands and plans to restructure the gas monopoly
are delayed. Some reforms have taken place in transport, but improvements in the system for financing
future highway construction are critically needed.
27. Rail represents, a major challenge. Freight rates are high and discriminatory, and the financial
transactions of many non-core activities and ancillary companies are not transparent. The cross-subsidy to
passenger services forces rail freight rates well above costs, damaging remote locations and potential
export trade. Faced with declining market share and massive needs for new investment (about US$ 25
billion over the next ten years), the Government has just announced far-reaching reforms. It intends to
separate government regulatory functions from commercial functions, spin off non-core activities and
abolish the existing monopoly by introducing competition in rail transport services.
28. Restructuring of communal services, such as water, transport and housing, presents similar
challenges. As a result of the severe economic contraction and sharp real income decline during the 1990s,
reformns related to housing and communal infrastructure were deferred. Despite high levels of subsidies, in
some cases at three to four times OECD levels, inadequate financing has resulted in dilapidated
infrastructure, shuttered wastewater treatment plants, and increasing failure rates in the distribution of
heat, water, and power. Much of the housing stock was privatized, while at the same time, cities have
continued to build and distribute free housing. In the absence of reform of communal services, there have
been few incentives to manage better, much less upgrade, the highly energy-inefficient housing stock or
utility services. The Government articulated reform program highlights the complexity of moving toward
more efficient and equitable service delivery, with development of an effectively targeted social protection
program one of the key challenges in removing subsidies from the economy.
29. Agriculture. A third area in which the inherited structure of the economy inhibits sustained growth,
is agriculture and food production. In an appropriate policy and institutional environment, Russian
agriculture could make a substantial contribution to the national and global economy. Its productive
potential is enormous, because of its size, fertility of its soils, climate in many areas and human capital.
Through increased technical and economic efficiency, Russia should be able to restore its position as a
major producer and even exporter of many crops, and thereby integrate itself into world food markets.
Given its promise, agriculture could be a solid foundation for growth and poverty alleviation for a
significant part of the Russian population.
30. At the federal level, the most serious policy issues in agriculture are not with pricing or trade policy,
but rather with the legal framework, continued state domination of some markets, and administration of
the limited subsidies in ways that undermine mnarket development. A large volume of indirect support is
administered in an inefficient and non-transparent way through large enterprises."2 Large state farms face
soft budget constraints with tolerance of non-payment of debt, resulting in an increasing debt burden, little
incentive for true restructuring, and an uneven playing field with respect to the private sector. The
environment for private farming is not supportive, with the result that this sector is stagnating. Legislature
enabling the privatization of non-urban land is high on the Government's agenda, but thus far has been
blocked by powerful lobbies, including interest groups at the regional level. Land privatization, effective
tradability and the development of ancillary markets, such as mortgage markets, will boost economic
development in many regions.

12

See The World Bank (2001), Agnicultural Policyfor Russia.
8

31. The financial sector. The past two years have seen a number of slowly emerging positive trends in
the evolution of the banking sector following its collapse in 1998. By the end of 2001, the banking system
had recovered most of its pre-crisis positions, with slowly rising demand deposits suggesting some return
in public confidence. The Joint Program for the Reform of the Banking Sector, developed by the
Government and the Central Bank, provides a tentative framework for the development of the banking
sector in Russia over the next five years. Nevertheless, the financial system remains insufficient for the
task ahead and it needs a higher place on the Government's reform agenda. It remains under-capitalized,
fragmented and non competitive, and dominated by the state Savings Bank (Sberbank), which is owned by
the Central Bank of Russia and accounts for 75 percent of all household deposits. Long term lending is
still restricted by the short maturity of deposits, weak accounting and disclosure, as well as inadequate
protection of creditor rights. Many of the smaller banks actually function as non-credit institutions, or
pocket banks for single companies or conglomerates and do not compete for most banling products.
Recent estimates by the Central Bank of Russia indicate that the share of bank credits for financing of
fixed investments during 2000 was around 10 percent - the bulk of this scarce lending being directed
primarily towards large enterprises in the fuel and energy industries. Other than by the large state banks,
there is relatively little lending to the manufacturing sector and in particular to SMEs, or new firms. Thus,
financing for private investment comes overwhelmingly from internal earnings and shareholder funds.
Without further substantial restructuring and privatization, the financial sector will remain a major
bottleneck on the path to sustainable development.
32. SMEs in the regions are particularly affected by the lack of access to finance. While there are
officially 1300 licensed banks operating in Russia today, there are only a handful of Russian banks able
and willing to carry out effective and prudent financial intermediation. Another important segment of the
financial sector which merits continued reform is capital markets (debt and equity). As recent positive
market trends, in particular the explosive emergence of a commercial bond market, have signaled, capital
markets could offer an additional source of domestic and foreign funds for companies looking to raise
finance.
33. In summary, measures to improve the business and investment climate and to strengthen the
financial sector are crucial for Russia's future prosperity. The Government program described above and
in Attachment I recognizes the challenge. The envisaged measures include efforts at all levels: the
removal of administrative and other barriers to entry, the creation of a stable legal and institutional regime
(from taxes, to corporate governance, to legal recourse), and the establishment of an effective system of
financial intermediation that allows resources to flow to their highest valued use. Without these reforms,
Russia faces an uncertain future, heavily dependent on volatile export prices for commodities, with a
distorted domestic economy oriented toward mineral extraction.
Social and human development
34. Over the long term, Russia faces the serious challenge of maintaining and improving high standards
of health care and education, as well as developing effective systems of social protection, to ensure a
highly skilled and mobile population capable of competing with OECD economies.
35. Health and Demographic Challenges. Today, the principal health threats arise from preventable
illnesses and premature deaths. The general trend in demographics and human health over the past decade
has been downward. Increased alcoholism, smoking and other factors have caused an increase in the
mortality rates of adult males. Life expectancy at birth in 2000 was 59 years for males, compared to 72
years for females - the highest such difference in the world. At 1.2 live births per woman, Russia has one

9

of the lowest fertility rates in the world. Deaths considerably exceed births and by some forecasts the
Russian population will decline from the present 144 million to 127 million by mid-century."3
36. Death rates remain high from chronic non-communicable diseases and are projected to grow from
infectious diseases, due to the dual epidemic of tuberculosis and HIV/AIDS. There were 342,000 cases of
TB reported in 2001, of which 133,000 were new. Although the annual rate of new infections dropped by
3 percent, the cumulative burden of TB is still large. As result of the resurgence of TB, the standardized
death rate for TB has become significantly higher in Russia (19.7 per 100,000 persons per year in 2000),
compared to 6.3 in the EU. There has been a nearly six-fold increase in the incidence of HIV infections in
two years alone, with 177,000 persons registered as HIV positive in the Russian Federation by January
2002. Given low levels of testing, epidemiologists estimate that approximately 1 million people, or 0.6
percent of the population, are now HIV positive. Unless the epidemic is quickly contained, three million
people could be HIV positive by the end of the decade, at huge human and economic cost.
37. Russia's health sector presents a difficult challenge, partially due to misguided reforms in the past.
Effective efforts to improve health status, services and finance would focus on (i) improving health
outcomes, and (ii) developing instruments as well as the institutional capacity for a more efficient and
equitable health system. Rather than pooling funds and decentralizing delivery, financing has been
decentralized to the regions, despite their weak ability to raise revenues. At the same time, provision of
services remains centrally controlled, but there is weak governance at the federal level. One result has been
inefficient allocation of resources at the regional levels, as well as inequities across and within regions. Per
capita spending for the public sector is estimated to vary 10-15 fold across the 89 regions, with wide ruralurban disparities within regions.14 Private health service provision is largely unregulated, but out-of-pocket
expenditures are estimated at about 54 percent of the total for 2001. This suggests significant risks of
impoverishment for notionally "free" health care services and drugs. Real public health care expenditures
have declined by a third this past decade. However, expressed as a percentage of GDP, total health care
expenditures compare favorably with the EU average. And despite a modest decline in the number of beds
per 1,000 population, this indicator remains significantly higher than in many much wealthier countries.
The data thus points to major inefficiencies as key problems in the Russian health sector, rather than
under-funding alone.
38. Education. At the beginning of the transition, Russia had an advanced education system, and far
more comprehensive enrollments than other middle income countries. However, over the past ten years,
inherited inefficiencies and contracting budgets have combined to affect access to good quality education.
While current official education statistics continue to indicate almost full enrollment in primary education,
an absence of gender issues and high levels of literacy, emerging evidence gives a picture of an education
system affected by falling enrollments and diminishing quality. Estimates by the Ministry of Education
for 2002 suggest that about 370,000, or 1.7 percent of the age cohort between ages 7-17, have dropped out
of school without entering the labor force, but the true figure may well be higher, especially as some street
children continue to attend school sporadically. Anecdotal evidence suggests higher drop-outs among
boys. Despite a decline in the number of rural schools during the nineties, financing and operating them
continues to strain the capacity of the educational system. The quality of education in rural schools in
general is poor, due to lack of supplies and antiquated facilities. In urban areas, where the vast majority of
students reside, there are too few schools. With low actual public expenditures on education (3 percent of
GDP in 2000, compared to 5 percent of GDP on average for OECD), private payments add approximately
30 percent to total expenditures. There is a growing risk that access to good quality education and
especially to third level education, will be denied to all but those able to pay. An under-funded and
deteriorating education system will impact social capital and threaten Russia's future competitiveness.

Corporation (2002) Dire Demographics
Goskomstat, Russian Regions in 2000

3Rand
4

10

39. Social safety nets. Russia has an elaborate and complex safety net, which includes benefit programs
inherited from the socialist era (pensions, entitlement programs, institutional care) and new programs
introduced during the 1990s (unemployment benefits, social assistance and child allowances). However,
expenditures are not well targeted to the poor, with considerable leakage in benefits. The system of
housing allowances and privileges is particularly off target, with most privileges and housing allowances
received by pensioners in urban areas - a category whose poverty rate is much below the national average.
Program design is often too complex and not aligned with administrative problems at the regional level.
Moreover, funding for this extensive system, at both federal and regional levels has often fallen short of
promises, with arrears in benefit payments still an issue - child allowances arrears totaled 17 billion rubles
as of January, 2002. The recent reforms of the labor code and unemployment benefit are insufficient to
shift worker protection now provided by firms to a public safety net; and the recent reform of the pension
system which is designed to create a two-tier system faces major implementation challenges: in
administrative capacity, financial market requirements and fiscal sustainability. Of greatest concern,
however, is an increase in the costly and ineffective institutionalization of children at risk. With declining
demographics, Russia can ill afford to under-invest in its human capital.
The environment
40. Russia has globally important natural resources, among them 22 percent of the world's forests and
15 percent of its carbon reserves. For the first time since the breakup of the Soviet Union, overall levels of
key air, water and other toxic pollutants increased in 2000, mirroring the shift from economic decline to
renewed growth, in particular in the manufacturing sector. Russia now faces the challenge of strengthening
its environmental management so that future growth is environmentally sustainable and the most
threatening environmental risks are mitigated. This requires progress on three fronts: (i) economic
reforms; (ii) institutional development; and (iii) global and regional environmental cooperation.
41. Past environmental neglect and the economic difficulties during the transition have left a legacy
including environmental hotspots caused by highly polluting heavy industries, deteriorating water quality,
due to financially unsustainable utilities and crumbling infrastructure, and increased risk of environmental
accidents and emergencies, as a result of deteriorating infrastructure. Distorted prices and poor
competition have fostered inefficient use of natural resources and energy, such as the flaring of natural gas.
Poor agricultural practices contribute to an excess of nutrients that affects groundwater, rivers and seas.
Forest management is of increasing concern as logging and pulp and paper production recover and are
now among the fastest growing sectors, particularly in Northwest Russia and the Far East.
42. The Government's economic reform program should benefit the environment. Economic reforms
will gradually put enterprises on a sounder footing and make available capital for more environmentally
friendly, productive and energy efficient equipment. Trade liberalization, restructuring of industrial
conglomerates and natural monopolies and foreign investment can also help to correct perverse incentives
which currently prevent the adoption of modern, cleaner technologies. Energy pricing reform and
restructuring of the electricity, gas and oil sectors should reduce energy intensity and help offset rising air
pollution due to renewed growth. In the future, energy prices will need to take into account the
environmental impact of different fuels, in order to avoid unintended changes in fuel-mix toward dirtier
fuels, e.g. from natural gas towards coal. Gas sector reforms are being considered that would give private
entrepreneurs the opportunity to capture flared gas and sell it. Grossly polluting vehicles are gradually
being replaced with higher quality automobiles, trucks and buses.
43. Although there is a relatively good legal and regulatory framework, institutional capacity to
implement and enforce these regulations is weak. A critical challenge is the strengthening of
environmental management at the oblast and local level, which carry most of the work load for
implementation of environmental policies. Russia's environmental legislation supports public
consultations, but the process is not always transparent. There is scope to reform the system of
11

environmental assessments so that more of the work is outsourced and the government's role reduced to
reviewing results and managing the process of inspection and permits. Furthermore, better incentives for
the private sector are needed to improve environmental management. But the most urgent need is for the
Government to put in place a restructured environmental management system that can address effectively
environmental issues.
44. Russia is an indispensable participant in global and regional environmental policy. While Russia
successfully reduced Ozone Depleting Substances (ODS) consumption and has completely eliminated
ODS production, it now faces new challenges to build institutional capacity to implement the Kyoto
Protocol for Greenhouse Gas reduction, to manage its forests and swamps, to maintain the world's largest
system of protected areas (58 million hectares), and to reduce Persistent Organic Pollutants (POPs).
Equally important problems are the sound management of arctic and riparian ecosystems, including the
preservation of World Heritage sites such as Lake Baikal, and the successful implementation of regional
environmental management agreements in the Caspian, the Black Sea, and the Baltics. In all these areas,
continued support from the international community will be essential.

Public sector management
45. Implementing the Government's reform agenda, as well as developing effective human and social
services and environmental management, depend crucially on a well-functioning system of public
administration. Recent surveys suggest that public administration in Russia is widely perceived as lacking
in transparency, lacking a service culture, slow moving and unresponsive to change. Although the results
are subject to confirmation, these surveys also suggest that corruption remains deeply embedded, that
expenditures on corruption by businesses and households are of the same order of magnitude as tax
revenues, and that the costs of corruption fall heavily on the poor, who have to pay disproportionately for
social services. The Government has recognized that Russia needs an effective, merit-based and
corruption-resistant public administration if the country is to be able to compete internationally and to
create an investment climate capable of attracting Russian and international capital. In his recent annual
address to the Federal Assembly, President Putin specifically noted the need to tackle corruption by
reducing administrative barriers and restructuring public administration. Experience in many countries
indicates, however, that this is a huge challenge, since a system of public administration evolves over
many decades and inherits characteristics and cultures which are difficult to change.
46. The government comprises a number of sometimes competing and overlapping structures - the
Government itself (ministries and other agencies); the Apparatus of the Government; and the
Administration of the President. The presence of a strong Apparatus of the Government often weakens the
policy-making role of line ministries and lessens their status, contributes to fragmentation, and also
undermines the ability of ministries to exercise effective horizontal co-ordination with other ministries and
agencies. This in turn leads to the wide use of inter-ministerial Conunissions to resolve complex intraagency issues. In this way, too many issues rise to too high a level in the system for resolution, thereby
crowding out more strategic management within the government.
47. The capacity of the public administration remains low, despite a growing number of public sector
employees at the regional and municipal level. Rising public service employment in the regions has
outpaced cuts in the Federal State Service over the years. As a result, by 2000 the total number of public
service employees had increased to 1.16 million (from 1.06 million in 1995), of which, 413,200 were
employed in the Federal State Service (down from 422,100 in 1995), and 636,100 by regions and
municipalities (up from 534,400 in 1995). The changes are even more pronounced if one looks at the
executive branch of government alone. In Moscow, civil servants working for the executive were slimmed

12

down by 10 percent (from 33,800 to 30,300), whereas their numbers increased by 10 percent in the regions
(from 911,300 to 999,200)."
48. However, Russia's public administration is not so much overstaffed, as lacking a service culture.
Intemal and particularly extemal accountability mechanisms are weak and participation is closed.
Authority (and particularly discretion and discretionary powers) is allocated to too many civil and public
servants in an unclear, contradictory, and complex legal and regulatory environment. Civil service
personnel management is weak and the merit principle is not established. Civil service pay and benefits are
not competitive with the private sector, leading to significant areas of recruitment and retention difficulty
and potential corruption. Use of IT and of Intemet-based approaches is falling behind the private sector.
49. A comprehensive Concept for Reforming the Civil Service System in the Russian Federation,
approved by President Putin on 15 August 2001, aims at the creation of an integrated civil service system,
to be achieved by building a modem, merit-based and corruption-resistant professional civil service. An
Action Plan for Civil Service Reform is scheduled for approval during 2002, with implementation planned
for 2003. The Govemment has also just announced plans to restructure and simplify the relationship
between the Federal Government and subjects of the Federation: a vital step in the modernization of the
state.
50. In addition to civil service reform, the Govemment has in the past year ensured passage of important
legislation, much of which addresses corruption and other impediments to the business environment. This
includes: (i) significant deregulation, which by easing registration and licensing procedures and reducing
the number of certificates and inspections required of enterprises, will lower business costs and
opportunities for rent seeking by public officials; (ii) judicial reform to delineate precisely the respective
and adversarial roles of the different actors in the legal process, and to reduce corruption; (iii) reforms in
tax and customs administration and a new tax code which dramatically simplifies tax rates and should
reduce significantly the opportunities for arbitrary behavior by the authorities; (iv) urban land reform
which codifies the mechanisms for the purchase and sale of land and sets the scene for the emergence of
land and mortgage markets; and (v) the reform of the labor code, which eliminates some of the rigid
constraints on employer-employee interaction. In addition, the Govermment has begun to introduce
important reforms in financial management - treasury, federal-regional fiscal relations, public
expenditures, etc. The Bank has provided advice and assistance in many of these areas.
51. Many challenges remain. The enacted legislation needs to be implemented at the federal and
regional levels and the public needs to be convinced that the results translate into better, more cost
effective, less corrupt and more accessible services. A well functioning court and judicial system is
essential in this regard. While the Govermment has moved ahead rapidly in legislating reforms, their
implementation in many cases must take place at the regional level. Some regions have moved vigorously
to implement reforms, but progress overall is uneven. Some regional governments are reported to restrict
competition, through increased ownership stakes, direct and implicit subsidies and a variety of competitive
advantages to selected firms, actions which impact negatively on the business climate. In addition, while
reforms are underway at the central level to strengthen the relationships and incentives between the center
and the regions, much needs to be done to improve fiscal management, transparency and accountability at
the regional level. Many of the Federation's key policy measures such as improving the targeting of social
benefits, and strengthening the systems of health and education have to be implemented by regional
governments and this is made more difficult by the wide diversity in initial endowments and in growth that
exists among regions (Box 2). This CAS emphasizes support for the implementation of reforms at the
regional level.

15

Goskomstat (2001), Report N4 (78).
13

Box 2 Economic development of Russia's regions in 1994-2000

The gap in regional development is widening. The (richest) regions in the first quintile produced
3.4 times more Gross Regional Product (GRP) per capita than the regions in the (poorest) fifth
quintile in 1994. In 1998 and 1999 this ratio rose to 4.0 and 4.5, respectively (Figure 2). A
slightly different measure confirms the trend: over the same period, the share of GDP produced
by the 16 richest regions (out of 79) increased from 37.9 percent of the total in 1994 to 47.6
percent in 1999. Capital investment follows the same trend -- the 16 richest regions attracted
over 40 percent of all capital investment in Russia in 1994, and 48.5 percent in 1999. Foreign
investment follows the same pattern, also concentrating in the richest regions. These trends
indicate that investments have started to flow to their highest valued use. However, the
magnitude of this adjustment will have serious implications for social cohesion, inequality and
income distribution across Russia, and ultimately for the sustainability of economnic development
in poor regions and remote locations.
Figure 2: Gross Regional Product and Domestic
Investment per Capita
8.0 -

_

7.0
6.0 -Z
5.0 -Z
4.03.0
2.0
1994

1996

1998

1999

2000

GRP per capita, ratio of Quintile I to Quintile 5
-Capital

investment per capita, ratio of Quintile I to Quintile 5

MEDIUM-TERM MACROECONOMIC SCENARIOS
52. In the base case growth scenario (Table 2), macroeconomic management remains sound, there is
continued implementation of reformns in the key areas of the business environment, public sector
management and social and environmental risk mitigation; and oil prices stay in line with the international
consensus forecasts of about US$ 21 per barrel of Urals. The growth rate remains at 4 percent in 2002 and
2003, as the economy can no longer rely on spare capacity and surplus labor to grow, but recovers to 4.5
percent in 2004 and 2005 as progress is made in improving the investment climate and the growth of new
enterprises. Growth is increasingly driven by domestic demand, while fiscal policy supports sterilization of
large capital inflows. Continued good macroeconomic management thus results in a steady increase in the
fiscal surplus, and a mild appreciation of the real exchange rate helps to sustain the trade balance and
bolster reserves. The Base Case is the most likely scenario.
53. However, any medium-term macroeconomic scenario for Russia must take into account the
sensitivity of its resource based economy to commodity price changes. As discussed above, eighty percent
of Russia's exports are accounted for by natural resources (including metals) and the majority of
investment is directed into extractive activities. Sudden price fluctuations in these commodities are also
14

likely to have indirect effects, as they affect confidence and future growth through variables such as capital
outflows, as well as private saving and investment decisions. In addition, Russia is one of the largest oil
producers, so that it itself influences the international price of oil.
54. In the low growth scenario, there is a sudden deterioration of commodity prices with a
discontinuation of key reforms. The oil price drops to US$15/bbl and growth rates decline as a result of the
external shock. This is compounded by weak fiscal performance, a deteriorating trade position and a
considerable fall in reserves. The business environment deteriorates because of delays in e.g.
implementing the already legislated deregulation measures, restructuring the natural monopolies and
reforming the financial sector. In the absence of public administration reform, the authorities' capacity to
respond to the deterioration in the external enviromment and to implement further reforms would be
weakened. A lack of progress in identifying better the incidence of poverty would thwart improvements in
the targeting of transfer payments. This in turn could multiply the potential costs of deteriorating economic
conditions and increase the risk of social discontent.
55. The lending scenarios below take account of the fact that Russia's good economic performance
since 1999 can be sustained only with continued structural and institutional reforms. To buttress these
reforms, the scenarios make continued investment lending contingent on progress in the key areas of
reform implementation outlined in para. 54.
Table 2 Macroeconomic scenarios, 2002-2005
.___ __ __ _ __ _ _Actual
_
_
GDP Growth, %
Base Case
Low Case
Federal Fiscal Surplus, US$ billion
Base Case
Low Case
Trade Balance, US$ billion
Base Case
Low Case
Real Exchange Rate
Base Case
Low Case
Reserves, US$ billion
Base Case
Low Case

l2001 2002
5.0
4.0
3.0
7.4
8.7
5.6
49.4
48.6
45.0
100
102.8
100.0
36.6
40.0
35.7

Scenario
2003
2004

2005

4.0
2.0

4.5
1.5

4.5
1.0

10.6
3.0

12.8
3.7

14.9
4.2

47.5
40.9

46.8
42.0

45.9
43.7

105.8
93.0

107.2
91.0

108.7
88.0

42.3
31.1

44.0
27.1

44.9

24.2

Note: Oil price assumption is US$2 1/bbl for the base case and US$15/bbl for the low case. For 2002, since
the year is already well advanced, the 2002 Russian Federation budget oil price assumption of US$ 18.5 bbl
has been used for the low case

15

II. THE BANK GROUP'S ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
THE BANK GROUP'S THREE STRATEGIC PILLARS

56. The WBG's strategy in Russia proposed for FY03-05 is to support the effective implementation of
the Government's comprehensive reform program, to help mitigate the underlying risks to the
sustainability of growth and to extend the opportunities arising from the reform process more widely
across the rich diversity of Russia's population. These goals are closely aligned with corporate priorities
and the Millennium Development Goals (Box 3).
57. Following extensive discussions in Russia, and recognizing its own competitive advantages and
constraints, as well as the support to Russia from other development partners, the Bank Group identifies
the following three priority areas for assistance in FY 2003-2005:
58. Improving the business environment and enhancing competition. New business development is
key to sustained growth and poverty reduction in Russia. Focal points include:
*
*

*
*

creating the conditions for diversification of the economy in order to reduce over-reliance on the
natural resource sectors, upgrading infrastructure and restructuring the natural monopolies;
promoting a level playing field among businesses by improving the protection of property rights
and fostering competition by limiting administrative barriers, special privileges, and preferential
treatmnent;
increasing effective financial intermediation and opportunities for entry and growth of new firms;
and
developing and delivering modem and flexible education and training services, developing the
knowledge economy and ensuring that Russia's science and technology assets are effectively used.

59. Strengthening public sector management. Better governance and service delivery are key to
improving business confidence, sustaining growth and reducing poverty. Critical elements in this area
include:
*

*
*

enhancing accountability mechanisms and information flows within and across different levels of
government to assure consistent implementation of reforms and to reduce the incentives for
corruption;
improving fiscal management at the national and sub-national levels;
improving the efficiency and quality of public service delivery, particularly in areas such as the
provision of basic infrastructure and communal services, that are critical for improving the
investment climate and supporting long-term growth.

16

60. Mitigating social and environmental risks. Though overall trends in living standards have begun to
improve following the renewal of economic growth, ensuring improved health and education has been more
difficult and significant social risks remain for certain segments of the society as well as with respect to natural
endowments. Key components of this pillar are:
*
*
*
*

reducing poverty and mitigating the negative consequences of income insecurity, including the
identification of vulnerability to particular risks by age and gender;
improving the quality of selected health and education services, and in particular addressing the threat
of communicable diseases (e.g. HIV);
improving the design, targeting, administrative capacity and financing of social protection programs;
addressing environmental hazards and improving environmental management.
Box 3 Millennium development goals in Russia
In the year 2000, the Bank -- together with all 189 member states of the UN system,
including Russia - adopted the Millennium Development Goals (MDG), which are intended
to cut by half the proportion of people in extreme poverty worldwide by 2015, increase
access to education and health care, and preserve the environment. These broad goals
require some adaptation in the case of Russia. For example, the MDGs use a poverty target
of US$1 in PPP per day, which is too low for Russia, where the basic needs must include a
higher allowance for heating, clothing, and caloric needs in a cold climate. The official
poverty line is thus set at about US$4.70 in PPP per day, or US$ 1.75 at the current
exchange rate. At that level, the measures of the incidence of poverty range between 23.8
percent to 49 percent (see Attachment 3 for an explanation of the differences in measures).
Russia has in general attained the goals of universal youth and adult literacy, as well as
gender equality in education, but there has been an erosion in quality in some areas. And
although Russia still has lower rates of maternal and child mortality than other middle
income countries, the pandemic of HIV and other infectious diseases are worrisome. Based
on the specific epidemiological and demographic situation of Russia, the biggest burden of
disease and disability is amongst the adult (rather than child) population. The deterioration
in the life expectancy of adult males, a key human development indicator, indicates the need
to tackle health issues urgently. The MDGs in the environment sector cover access to clean
water and sanitation, the proportion of land covered by forests, material resource depletion
and improvement in environmental policies and institutions. Access to water and sanitation
is relatively good, but these services as well as district heating are often of poor quality and
in increasing danger of collapse because of poor financing and management. Energy sector
reforms are also key to reducing energy intensity and, hence, air pollution. Half of Russia's
land mass is covered by forest, but land management has deteriorated since 1990, due in
part to slow progress in completing land and agricultural reforms. Inadequate nutrient
management, soil and water conservation practices and deterioration of irrigation and
drainage structure contribute to soil erosion, land degradation and nutrient runoff into
groundwater and rivers. Agricultural reforms, together with better land management and
sustainable forestry practices should address these issues. However, despite a number of
reorganizations, there is substantial potential for improved environmental management. If a
carbon market becomes effective, Russia could attract significant external financing for
energy reducing investments.

17

Table 3 MDGs and the Russian Federation
1990
Poverty and malnulrition

1998

2015 Largqe=hals:e 1990 USSI aday pov_y andrnlnuntion

Population below US$ 1 a day7()
Universal primary education _

.

_1
_

_7

2015 wargeit

net eniollment 100

98.1

Net primary enrollment ratio (% of relevant age group)
Youth literacy rate (_%ages 15-24)
Gender equality _

99.8

99.8

100.0
2015 Target reduce 1990 under 5 nortnaliry by 2i3r .

17.4
21.4

16.4
20.3

Maternal mortality

2015 Larettreduce 1990 figure by 3/4ths

Maternal mortality ratio (per 100,000 live births)
Other healtb

2015 tnrget = halt and befn revwto AIDS

47.4

Contraceptive prevalence rate (% or women ages 15-49)
Reported HIV Cases (thousand)
Incidence of Tuberculosis (per 100,000 people)
Environment
GDP per unit of energy use (1995 US$ per kg of oil equivalent)
Carbon Dioxide emissions (metric tons per capita)
l

99.8

2005 mrgeL- education rato 100

Ratio of girls to boys in primary and secondary education (%)
Infant and chlld mortality
Infant mortality rate (per 1,000 live births)
Under 5 mortality rate (per 1,000)

Other indxcators

2000

.

34.0
0.1
34.2

16.9
21.5

_

44.0

39.7

34.0
56.0*
90.0

3.6
76.1

2015 urgets - vanous

0.5
9.8**
.

-

Total fertility rate (births per woman)
Life expectancy at birth (years)
Male Life Expectancy at birth (years)
Female Life Expectancy at birth (years)
* The reported HIV cases increased to 177,000 by January 2002 - see par. 36.
** Latest data available is from 1997.

1.9
69.2
63.8
74.3

-

1.2
67
61.3
72.9

TiHE OPERATING ENVIRONMENT
Lessons from the Country Assistance Evaluation (CAE) and the Country Impact Review (CIR)
61.

The CAE for Russia dated April 3, 2002 evaluates the development effectiveness of WBG programs

in Russia for the 10 year period 1991-2001. The CAE notes that the transition was difficult, but there have
been no major policy reversals and the economy is now recovering. Although there was significant social
and economic dislocation and human suffering, an easier transition path was unlikely. During the period
under review, poverty increased and indicators of social and human development declined, social services
deteriorated, and market-based social protection mechanisms were slow to develop.

18

1.2
66
59
72.2

Box 4 Russia Country Assistance Evaluation and Country Impact Review, 2002
The CAE judges the outcome of most Bank supported operations which were closed and evaluated
during 1991-2001 as unsatisfactory, but notes that sustainability ratings are higher than outcome
ratings as many of the lessons from the Bank's operations and analytical advice were applied after
1998. The modest but cumulative benefits of WBG operations, together with the positive impact
of Bank advice, contributed to building the foundations for Russia's recent turnaround. The CAE
notes that since 1998, portfolio performance has improved - partly through the cancellation of
troubled projects and partly through joint Russia-Bank efforts to improve implementation. The
Bank has become the main external interlocutor on the microeconomic and social reform agenda,
and the government has adopted many of the policies that the Bank had recommended. The Bank
Group has focused on long term social and institutional development, and it has helped to improve
e.g. fiscal management, the targeting of social assistance programs, and the restructuring of the
coal sector. The continued dialogue on structural reforms and the Bank's outreach activities
played a role in preventing policy reversals, in formulating the current reform program, and in
strengthening client ownership. Over the period 1998-2001, the outcome of Bank assistance has
been satisfactory, and it has had a substantial institutional development impact. An open question
is the resilience of these achievements to external shocks, in particular to a significant drop in the
prices of oil or other export commodities.
The CIR assessed the relevance and efficiency of IFC's activities and experience in Russia. It
recommended that IFC give greater attention to SMEs, coupling TA support for SMEs with
sustainable wholesale investment operations; increase its efforts to finance Russian sponsored
businesses, while concentrating its promotional efforts on oblasts with a good business climate
(subject to private investors' being interested in investing in these oblasts); and play a more active
role in developing Russia's capital markets by exploring the possibility of issuing ruble bonds
itself or providing partial credit enhancement for ruble obligations. The CIR recommended the
Bank Group develop a coordinated approach and division of labor for addressing obstacles and
promoting improvements in the investment climate.

62. The CAE suggests that the key lesson of the Bank's experience in Russia is that country ownership is
crucial to the success of assistance and the Bank should focus its assistance even more sharply on areas with
the strongest government commitment to reform and relative social consensus. The three priority areas
proposed in the CAS are compatible with the lessons drawn in the CAE. In particular the focus on expanding
AAA work, on enhancing dissemination, and on widening consultations flows directly from the CAE
recommendations.
63. Most of the CIR conclusions and recommendations have already been incorporated in this CAS.
Assistance to SMEs is a focal point of IFC's Russia strategy: IFC is intensifying its SME and micro-enterprise
directed work through its TA programs in corporate governance, supply-chain linkages, corporate governance
training, equipment leasing, bank lending for both fixed and working capital investments, and advocacy work
at local government levels. lFC is already working directly with Russian companies in the mobile telephony,
internet access, software development, air transport and coal mining sectors, and with medium-sized Russian
banks and other financial intermediaries to strengthen institutions and build confidence in the financial system.
IFC's investments in regional banks are designed to help expand the volume of their lending to the SME
sector, and offer longer maturities. IFC has also begun providing partial credit enhancement for ruble
obligations.

19

64. IBRD, IFC and MIGA are intensifying their coordination to realize synergies from their substantial
skills, experience, resources and leverage potential for catalyzing change. IBRD and IFC are also working at
enhancing their cooperation through (i) joint project teams, for example in coal mining privatization; (ii)
coordinated policy dialog and joint assessments; and (iii) common understandings on the division of labor,
such as financing of the private sector through financial intermediaries to be undertaken by IFC and the policy
dialogue to be conducted by the Bank.
Lessons from the last CAS
65. The last CAS, covering the period FY1999-2001, was presented to the Executive Directors on December
1, 1999. Prepared in the aftermath of the 1998 crisis, it focused on a "shorter term response to the uncertainties
in Russia's political and economic landscape". The CAS cited substantial risks to the Bank - both to its
financial standing and its reputation - from Russia's creditworthiness, difficulties in portfolio implementation,
and corruption. In January 2001, a cautiously optimistic Progress Report noted a remarkable recovery from the
crisis, greater political stability, and encouraging progress in many of the areas identified by the Bank for
achieving sustained growth, albeit slowly and with some notable exceptions such as in the financial sector.
66. A number of lessons are evident. First, the 1999 CAS emphasized the long term nature of Russia's
journey to a market economy, and noted that a substantial policy reversal appeared unlikely. However, it also
highlighted the substantial risks of resistance to reform in an unstable economic environment. This CAS
therefore emphasizes policy dialogue with the Government and other key stakeholders in the reform process.
67. Second, the 1999 CAS identified a lack of consensus in the Government in its dealings with the WBG as
a key reason why Bank project implementation was typically delayed and less effective than anticipated. For
this CAS period, the Government has formulated its own program of cooperation with the Bank Group, which
is reflected in this CAS.
68. Third, when discussing the difficulties of portfolio implementation, the 1999 CAS noted the high
knowledge intensity of the Bank's successful operations. The Coal SECAL project (restructuring and
privatization of coal mines) for example, often held as an example for a successful Bank operation, was
possible only because of the high degree of knowledge about the sector which had been accumulated within
the Bank. The present CAS focuses on analytical work and the need to fill existing knowledge gaps.
69. The 1999 CAS emphasized other themes that have been taken up in this CAS. The last CAS correctly
underlined the central role growth plays in poverty reduction in Russia (Par. 18-20). The 1999 CAS also
correctly emphasized solid economic management and a functioning public sector. However, the 1999 CAS
underestimated the speed with which the economy was capable, after years of decline, to generate high growth
simply by increasing the utilization of idle capacity and labor without new investment and it underestimated
the importance of private sector growth for sustainable development. A hallmark of this CAS, which follows
from the need to augment the capital stock, is the emphasis on new firm growth. This was not drawn as clearly
in the 1999 CAS.
Core diagnostic reports
70. The Bank has made substantial progress in undertaking fiduciary assessments and more are planned for
FY03-05 (Table 4). A Development Policy Review is underway and a Country Economic Memorandum is
planned for FY03-04. An FSAP is underway and will be finished in FY03, and a Poverty Assessment has
begun, with survey work planned for FY03 and a final report in FY04. The Bank completed both a Country
Financial Accountability Assessment (CFAA, FY02) and a Country Procurement Assessment (CPA, FY01),
which concluded that better public financial management since the 1998 crisis has contributed to improved
fiscal outcomes at both the federal and regional levels. There have been systemic changes in tax collections,
20

tightening of budget discipline, extension of budget coverage of quasi-fiscal operations and a sizable reduction
in payment arrears and the stock of public debt.
71. Public Expenditure Reviews carried out by the Bank jointly with other donors (in public investment,
transport, health, education, social transfers, housing, utilities, science, extra-budgetary funds, and public
administration) suggest that with improvements in aggregate fiscal discipline, attention needs to shift from
budget execution to budget preparation, and to the strengthening of intemal controls and audits, including
external audits. This will strengthen financial management and, in particular, reduce further the opportunities
for the misuse of public funds. 16
Table 4 Country diagnostic reports
Report
Poverty Assessment
CFAA
CPA
CEM
DPR
PER/PIP
FSAP

Progress
Memorandum of Understanding
signed. Survey work, FY03,
final report FY04
Completed FY02, Goverrnent
discussions underway
Completed FY00, draft
legislation to be discussed in the
Duma, CYO2
Complete in FY04

Partners
DFID

USAID, DFID, SIDA, CIDA,
IMF, EBRD

Complete in FY03
PIP complete in FY02. Sectoral DFID, CIDA, USAID, SIDA
I PERs ongoing
I
Underway, complete in FY03 IMF

72. The Government recognizes that financial management and accountability reforms are important to
achieve its development goals. To that end, it is implementing with Bank support a wide-ranging and phased
reform program to improve budget preparation and implementation, treasury operations, government
accounting and public sector auditing, modemize tax and customs administration, and improve civil service
incentives and accountability. The Govemment has embarked upon the accelerated development of a
nationwide treasury network to ensure that timely and accurate fiscal data at both the federal and regional
levels of government are available. This includes the development of budget and accounting standards for
regional and local govemment levels which account for most spending on the social sectors, and where key
public services are delivered.
73. These reforms are also key to combat corruption. The Bank is providing support to the Government's
efforts in this area through a number of mechanisms. First, using a Trust Fund, an NGO has recently
completed and will soon disseminate a diagnostic survey. Second, the Bank is undertaking a three-year Russiawide survey to help the Govemment assess the impact of the recently passed package of laws on deregulation;
and the Bank is also assisting the Govemment develop monitoring indicators to measure progress in creating a
merit-based and corruption-resistant civil service over the short and medium-term. Third, lending operations
are supporting the modemization of the federal treasury as well as modemization of tax and customs
administration. Further lending support is planned in the crucial area of judicial reform.
74. With improvements in treasury control and management, the authorities can work progressively toward
a govemment-wide system of intemal audit, as well as further improving the transparency and public
disclosure of public accounts. In the interim, special financial management and "ring fencing" arrangements
16

See World Bank 2001, Russia: Towards Improving the Efficiency of Public Investment Expenditure.
21

for World Bank funded projects will continue to be used to ensure as far as possible against fiduciary risks.
Disbursement of adjustment loans will be tracked through the Treasury system, while the disbursement of
investment loans will continue through Special Accounts, which are subject to annual audits. The Bank has
surveyed local audit firms, so that only firms consistently capable of ensuring high audit standards are now
used for Bank-financed operations.
Anti-money laundering efforts
75. Russia remains on the Financial Action Task Force blacklist of 19 countries considered as impeding
global efforts against money laundering. However, Russia is supporting counter-terrorism measures taken by
the United Nations Security Council by taking steps to implement the provisions of Security Council
Resolution 1373 into national law. In addition, an anti-money laundering law became effective on February 1,
2001, which sets forth a basic framework for criminalization and deterrence of money laundering.' 7
Substantial work remains to assure adequate enforcement. A number of regulations have yet to be drafted
concerning reporting obligations with respect to banks, non-bank financial institutions and other companies
commonly used for the purpose of money laundering. Considerable training and technical assistance is needed
to make the Committee on Financial Monitoring (which carries out the functions of a Financial Intelligence
Unit) fully operational and there remain gaps in the law which will require amendments as the institutional
capacity of the Committee increases, and cooperation with relevant law enforcement officials improves. A
number of bilateral donors are providing assistance in this regard. The Bank also provides advice to
government officials.
Portfolio implementation
76. IBRD. The last CAS highlighted the need for intensive supervision and proactive management of the
portfolio. Russia remains the IBRD's eighth largest borrower, though lending has dropped considerably since
1998. The current IBRD portfolio includes 31 projects (including two GEF Grants) totaling US$ 2.7 billion
(net of cancellations). Many loans required restructuring and significant efforts were directed at portfolio
management after the 1998 crisis. This resulted inter alia in cancellations of US$ 746 million in the current
portfolio. Nevertheless, despite a significant improvement in the portfolio under implementation, the share of
problem projects (although still below the 30 percent limit set in the 2001 CAS Progress Report), has started to
increase due to effectiveness delays for recently approved projects (Annex B2).
77. About half of the Bank's current projects will close in the next two years, many of which are older
"rehabilitation" projects from the first generation of Bank lending to Russia. New projects entering the
portfolio will have stronger links to policy reform, which will allow a greater focus on development impact.
Implementation, however, will continue to have high priority to prevent a reversal of the important gains of the
past few years in portfolio quality. An annual Bank-Government review prior to the start of each fiscal year
will identify and correct any possible implementation issues before they arise, e.g. upcoming closing dates and
possible extensions, and loan cancellations. In addition, a joint Government-Bank working group will be
strengthened to ensure day-to-day monitoring of the program, using new software developed by the Federal
Center for Project Finance. Starting in FY03, a quarterly report on lending, non-lending and portfolio
management will provide increased opportunity for review and actions by the Government and the Bank at a
senior level. Finally, lending triggers will continue to be tied to portfolio targets and will additionally take into
account effectiveness delays (see par. 111).
78. To ensure full Government ownership and coordination of new operations, there will also be an annual
lending review, scheduled prior to the start of the Bank Group fiscal year, to agree lending priorities for the
t7

Law No. 115-FZ on CombatingLegalization of Income Obtained by CriminalMeans.

22

next fiscal year. Given the existing resource constraints and limited implementation capacity, this annual
review is essential to ensuring selectivity in the choice of operations.
79. IFC. LFC is currently processing more than 20 investment projects in Russia, with total IFC financing of
more than US$300 million expected to be approved in the next 18 months. IFC's investment program has
grown substantially, from US$45 million in approvals in FY00 to US$171 million in FY01. The current
portfolio comprises twenty-eight projects totaling US$258 million, or 2 percent of IFC's total portfolio, of
which US$226 million is currently disbursed. Since the beginning of the transition, IFC's Board has approved
63 projects in Russia, totaling US$916 million on the Corporation's own account (and US$353 million in
participant funding). lFC has worked through its largest portfolio problems in the industrial sector. Currently,
total loan and equity loss provisions on Russian projects stand at US$38.4 million, significantly less than the
US$99.1 million at the end of August 2000. Two problem projects, representing about one half of total
reserves for Russia, were restructured in the past year.
80. MIGA. Russia is MIGA's fourth largest client, accounting for approximately 5 percent of its total gross
exposure. MIGA's outstanding portfolio in Russia consists of ten contracts of guarantee, with a total gross
exposure of US$ 263.5 million and net exposure of US$ 144.2 million. The total amount of foreign direct
investment facilitated by MIGA in Russia is US$ 1.2 billion. To date, MIGA has not received any claims in
Russia.
CHANGING THE WAY WE DO BUSINESS
81. Recognizing the need for a fundamental review of its priorities and needs for WBG assistance given the
improvements in Russia's economic prospects, the Government has prepared, for the first time, its own
Program of Cooperation between the Russian Federation and the World Bank for 2002-2004, which was
approved in principle by the Cabinet on Feb 21, 2002 (Attachment 1). The priorities and borrowing levels
described in the Government document are consistent with those in the CAS.
82. From our dialogue with Russian counterparts at various levels of government and society, shifts in the
demand for Bank Group's services can be summarized as follows: lending for budget support is not required at
this time as the risk of macroeconomic instability remains small, but should remain a possibility in the event of
serious exogenous shocks and continued adherence to the reform program. The government has set an
ambitious timetable for adopting and implementing reforms and requires high quality non-lending services,
supported by investment operations that combine international best-practice experience with a deep
understanding of the Russian environment. As diversification of the economy and the creation of a favorable
investment climate have assumed a central position in the reform agenda, the Government has noted the need
for closer cooperation within the World Bank Group to reap the complementarities provided by the different
instruments at the WBG's disposal"8 . Donor coordination by the Bank is also being enhanced at Government
request.
83. The ability to provide timely and relevant policy advice and analysis will be critical for the WBG's
impact on the reform process. With limited resources, selectivity will be key. In many areas, the policy
dialogue is quite intense with strong demand from the Government and good prospects for the Bank to deliver
high quality products and services (e.g. fiscal management). There are other areas where there is a weak policy
framework and/or weak institutional cooperation (e.g. in the environment sector), or limited demand for our
services (e.g. macroeconomic management). Here the Bank will maintain a more limited engagement and do
due diligence as needed. In selected areas, such as coal, oil and gas, where the Bank no longer has a
comparative advantage, IBRD would offer no further assistance, although IFC investments may continue. The
measures described below provide a framework for exercising selectivity in the Bank's activities in Russia.
18 Day to day collaboration between the Bank, IFC and EBRD will be facilitated in the forthcoming move of the Bank and
IFC to an office building which already houses the EBRD.
23

84. Strengthen analytical work: Given the increased emphasis on supporting the reform program, the Bank
will place greater emphasis on demand-driven advisory services at different levels of the government. The
highly varied intensity of the dialogue calls for a range of AAA products. We anticipate two broad categories
of deliverables (Annex B4): (a) policy and technical notes delivered on a just-in-time basis to meet the
demands of the reform timetable. The shift in staff to Moscow, noted below, will assist this effort; (b) more indepth analytical work tailored to key long-term policy issues, which arise in the three strategic pillars of the
CAS (par. 58-60). Many of these deeper analytical studies will be positioned within the framework of a CEM
which covers a large part of the CAS cycle.
85. Of increasing importance in meeting the challenges of timely and well informed policy advice are those
AAA activities which cut across traditional sector boundaries. Several of them have been carried out or are
under preparation, such as the Bank's new regular economic report, a computer model calculating the
economic costs of HIV/AIDS, an assessment of the financial sector, and several policy notes. These products
will be disseminated in a variety of forms, from "quick response" policy papers to background studies or
surveys, more typical for the CEM. They also include new, flexible non-traditional ways of using technical
assistance in response to the Government's demands for non-lending services (see Box 5).

Box 5:

Monitoring and evaluation of non-lending services

Over the past year the demand for the Bank's non-lending services has increased as have requests
for quick turnaround and "on-the-ground" engagement. The Bank is responding with a variety of
non-lending instruments. These include the more traditional pieces of economic and sector work such as the CEM and Public Expenditure Review - but also intensive technical assistance (TA)
programs in the areas of civil service reform, anti-poverty work and WTO accession (see Annex
B4 for a summary of non-lending services) and short, focused policy notes in other priority areas.
In response to these demands, the Bank is exploring new methods for monitoring and evaluating
the effectiveness of our programs. For example, in the past year the Bank has provided TA in the
area of civil service reform. This work has included: provision of materials on international best
practice, development of a Russian language Public Administration Reform website, development
of a functional review methodology, policy notes on key issues and involvement in coordination
of donor activities. Progress in this work is being evaluated through quarterly review meetings.
Ultimately, however, progress will be measured against the degree to which key benchmarks
have been met. In the civil service reform example, these benchmarks include: i) publication of
the Civil Service Reform Action Plan by end 2002, ii) publication of the Federal Targeted
Program for Civil Service Reform for the period 2003 to 2005 by end 2002, and iii) allocation in
the budget for implementation of this program. Lack of movement on these key benchmarks
would lead to a significant reduction or termination of the Bank's efforts in this area.

86. Develop monitoring capacity: The Government has also requested the Bank Group to play a stronger
role in monitoring implementation of the reform. Tracking implementation across government agencies and
the regions will help to identify local bottlenecks in implementation, and strengthen transparency and
accountability for outcomes at different levels of Government. Our work will include monitoring of outcomebased indicators in number of areas.

24

87. Select effective lending instruments: As noted previously, lending for budget and balance-of-payments
support is not required now. Other financial products (investment loans, guarantees, equity, and GEF finance)
will continue to be relevant: (i) where they can have a large impact on federal policy (e.g. tax administration,
customs reform); (ii) as signals to the broader capital markets (e.g. guarantees, equity, enterprise investments)
and (iii) as demonstration projects that can later be scaled-up or replicated (e.g. regional operations). With the
envisioned greater engagement of the regions, IBRD will need to develop instruments to work effectively at
the Tegional and municipal levels, given its role as a sovereign lender, as well as the Federal Government's
concerns about direct lending to the sub-national level. The approach to sub-national lending, using a
competitive approach piloted through the Regional Fiscal Federalism project, has enjoyed strong govermnent
support and could be adapted for future sub-national operations.
88. Improve outreach: The Bank Group will explore mechanisms to improve discussion and dissemination
of our analytical and knowledge output to ensure both a cohesive approach and broad dissemination. This will
also lower reputational risk by improving understanding of the Bank Group's activities. In addition, it will
support transparency and the increasingly active role of civil society by raising difficult issues in line with the
Bank's mandate (e.g. HIV, poverty, environment). More effective use will be made of the Bank's existing
materials, both Bank-wide and Russian such as the scheduled CEM, new ones such as the new quarterly
Russian Economic Report and the Policy Notes will be developed, and the use of external affairs channels
(including the Bank's websites, conference participation, and press coverage) will increase. In defining priority
areas as well as new approaches to the WBG's operational program, the preparation of the CAS has already
benefited from extensive consultations with civil society as well as a variety of key figures from the
government, Duma, academia, and the business community (Box 6). The Bank will continue to discuss and
disseminate the strategy in key regions during the period of the new CAS in order to extend further the
outreach in this vast country.
89. WBI will play a key role in these efforts, with WBI knowledge products supporting the CAS priority
areas and WBI expertise assisting the dissemination of WBG AAA products. Policy services will target
govemment officials and bring worldwide best practices to contribute to public discussions and to reach the
necessary critical mass for social consensus. The WBI program for Russia will target areas where knowledge
based constraints hamper effective policy reform and project implementation. Using traditional face to face
techniques through courses, senior policy seminars and workshops as well as internet and distance learning
tools, WBI will focus on topics such as fiscal decentralization, urban and municipal management, corporate
governance and business ethics, media development for increased transparency, social safety net - pension
reform, and improving the management of SMEs.
90. Continue decentralization: To strengthen the capacity to implement the CAS, the decentralization will
continue with a further selective shift of World Bank Group staff to Russia. To make support timely and
effective will in turn increase the quality of analysis and the success of project preparation and
implementation. In this context, and continuing a process which started in 2001, Headquarters based WBG
staff will be assigned to the field for flexible durations, depending on the task in question. IFC will also move
additional staff to Moscow to support their increased engagement. These staff will focus on investment
promotion, and client service in specific sectors, namely general manufacturing, financial markets, oil, gas and
chemicals, and agribusiness.
BUILDING PARTNERSHIPS
91. Close collaboration between MIGA, IFC, IBRD, the donor community and Russian institutions is a
prerequisite to addressing the priority areas defined in the CAS, and to make use of the full variety of
instruments available. To be successful, the policy dialogue, AAA work and outreach proposed in the CAS
will require expanded partnerships with other donors and Russian institutions. The CEM and the companion
Policy Notes Series planned for FY03-04 will be an important mechanism to maximize the benefits of
cooperation between the international donor community and Russian institutions, such as the state statistical
25

agency, academic institutions or private research institutes. Some of these activities have already been
financed and developed in partnership with other donors, such as a model on the economic costs of HIV in
Russia (with DFID), or the Russia-wide surveys designed to monitor implementation of the "deregulation
package" (with USAID).
92. The Bank's planned Global Development Learning Network (GDLN) will be an important tool for
expanding the Bank's outreach and sharing knowledge through enhanced partnerships. The Russian Academy
of Public Administration became the first GDLN affiliate center in Russia in January 2002. Other institutions
in Novosibirsk, St. Petersburg and Vladivostok are expected to become affiliates in the near future. The British
council plans to open a new Knowledge and Learning center in St Petersburg next year which will be affiliated
with the GDLN. Building on this, the Bank will draw on its extensive analytical work, including WBI
resources to work with donors, Russian institutions and the private sector to develop course materials in key
target areas, such as municipal finance.
93. The opportunity to work with bilateral and other international donors is especially important to
maximize the impact of assistance programs. A key area has been private sector development where there has
been extensive collaboration in small and medium enterprises (EBRD, USAID, EU/TACIS), accounting
reform (EU/TACIS), corporate governance (EBRD, OECD) and regulatory reform (OECD). Many partners
have also contributed to the Public Expenditure Reviews in Russia. The Bank, DFID, CIDA and other partners
are collaborating in supporting civil service reforn. The Bank's efforts in poverty and the social sectors are
also benefiting from extensive collaboration; e.g. poverty analysis (DFID), and TB/AIDS (WHO, DFID).
Annex B 11 lays out in more detail the various activities and the division of labor among donors.
94. Cooperation is also strong with the IMF and EBRD. The Bank will continue to rely largely on the IMF
for macro monitoring in Russia, and the two institutions are working closely in many areas, such as structural
reforms and public expenditure management. A joint FSAP is currently in progress. The EBRD is a key
investor in Russia with a strong private sector focus, as well as an increasing role in sovereign and nonsovereign lending for infrastructure. It plays a lead role among donors in a number of related areas, such as
corporate govemance, small and medium enterprise development, municipal finance and the Northern
Dimension Environmental Partnership. The Bank and EBRD carry out regular consultations, for example on
infrastructure related topics, and the Bank's planned St. Petersburg Economic Development loan (FY03)
builds on the municipal finance reforms supported under an earlier EBRD credit. The CAS envisages
continued WBG collaboration with the EBRD, particularly in private sector development, small and medium
enterprises, and regional development.
95. Strategic consultations with govermment, Russian institutions and civil society have evolved relatively
slowly in the past decade. The preparation of this CAS, however, represents a marked change in that process.
For the first time the Govermment prepared its own strategy for Cooperation with the Bank Group, laying out a
planned borrowing program and establishing ambitious implementation targets. This program and the explicit
targets are incorporated in the CAS and will be jointly reviewed each year by the Government and the Bank. A
gradual opening to Russian institutions (NGOs, academics, business leaders and politicians) has also taken
place and has helped identify the proposed changes in the way the Bank conducts business in Russia, in
particular highlighting the need to offer a range of products in Russia tailored to the implementation of the
reform program. The new efforts at outreach described in the CAS will look to strengthen this dialogue with
stakeholders in Russia.

26

Box 6:

CAS consultations and dissemination

This CAS represents the first effort to move CAS consultation beyond key ministries in central
government. Russia's huge size and the associated high costs present a particular challenge for
any consultation process, and consultation therefore has had to be targeted selectively. To
facilitate early discussions on the Bank Group's strategy in Russia, Bank staff visited a number
of Russian regions including Siberia, the Urals and North West Russia for discussions with
local government officials, the business community and civil society. Following these
meetings, a preliminary CAS paper was discussed with many leading representatives of the
Russian political, academic, and business communities in a series of meetings and seminars in
Moscow, which culminated in a high level workshop in February 2002 involving key policy
makers in the Government and think-tanks.
The three priority areas outlined in the CAS received strong support. The steps proposed in the
CAS to modify the way the Bank Group does business in Russia derive from these
consultations. In particular, increasing the focus on advisory services, shifting projects to the
regional level, decentralizing more Bank staff to the field to allow for effective project
preparation and implementation and just-in-time advice, and a more visible participation in the
debate about economic reforms, were issues which were proposed frequently.
The process of consultation will continue throughout the CAS period, to obtain feedback on the
Bank Group's services, to enable us to make mid-course corrections and to improve outreach.
The dissemination process is targeted to engage key stake holders in the three CAS priority
areas, and to explore enhanced cooperation at the regional level. Participants will include
business associations and regional NGO networks.
On-line Internet Consultations/Discussions on the Moscow Office Web Site will supplement
the regional consultations and provide regular feedback on the CAS process. Interested parties
can post their comments, and participate in a dialogue with Bank experts and other Russian
organizations and institutions on CAS issues.

CHOOSING THE WORLD BANK GROUP'S INSTRUMENTS

96. The Bank program for FY03-05 includes a variety of instruments designed to assist the Government in
meeting the challenges of sustaining growth and reducing poverty. Table 5, and Annexes B3, B4 and B9 set
out the planned Bank lending pipeline and non-lending services in support of the program. As noted
previously, the lending pipeline for FY04 and FY05 will be confirmed during annual meetings with the
Government, with the first meeting scheduled for the summer of 2002. Annex Bl l summarizes key
development partner activities in CAS priority areas and highlights areas of planned and ongoing cooperation
with the WBG. The selective choice of instruments was based on four guiding principles: client demand, WBG
comparative advantage, coordination of efforts with other development partners, and most efficient use of
limited resources. The following sections describe the proposed activities under each strategic area.

27

Improving the business environment and enhancing competition
97. Removing administrativebarriersto business activity. As discussed above, the removal of administrative
barriers has a critical role in inducing the new investment and improved diversification of the economy that is
necessary to support sustained growth. The Bank Group has accumulated significant knowledge through past
sector work, and will now focus more intensively at the regional level. The Bank will utilize FIAS and other
diagnostic instruments to assess impediments to business activity in particular regions and to build a
longitudinal data base on the investment climate. FIAS will also administer a pilot survey of potential, but
deterred, investors to determine reasons why investors have hesitated to invest in particular regions. We have
begun to design monitoring systems to track the impact of reforms on the investment climate. In particular, the
Bank has started a three year project, financed by USAID, to monitor the impact of the "deregulation package"
(a bundle of four laws to improve various aspects of the business environment), using semi-annual surveys of
representative enterprises. The Bank has also been asked to provide advice and policy input in support of
Russia's WTO accession, which is of key importance to a further improvement of Russia's investment climate.
The Bank will focus on specific areas such as the social costs of accession, where we have a comparative
advantage. The Bank will also help to develop monitoring systems that will help track changes and evaluate
the impact of reform measures. Two lending operations are being considered for the CAS period; a Regional
Private Sector Development Guarantee and an Economic Development Infrastructure project in FY04. Using
competitive mechanisms to select regions, both will aim to promote the conditions for an improved investment
climate that will support diversification of the economy, development of small and medium enterprises, and
new firm growth more broadly.
98. Restructuringpriority sectors: infrastructuremonopolies and agriculture. As noted above, distortions in
these key sectors have limited their contribution to Russia's economic progress. The Bank has long experience
in infrastructure in Russia, with past and current operations in oil, energy and the communal sectors (water,
heat and housing). With the renewed impetus for sectoral reform in the natural monopolies, the Bank plans
AAA work (railways, energy and infrastructure) as well as possible lending in FY05 (Railways Restructuring
APL). Reforms are also underway in the provision of communal services, such as heat and water which are
critical for efforts to mitigate urban poverty, and which will have important ramifications for municipal and
intergovernmental finance. Bank sector work will be directed at improving social protection, increasing
competition among service providers, and developing access to long-term financing by service providers. This
work would provide the input to Communal Services APL (FY05) and Housing Markets (FY05) operations,
which will likely be structured as regional operations. These would be tailored to support efficient delivery of
public services, adequate design of subsidy programs for the poor and of fiscal transfer mechanisms, and long
term financing improvements. Finally, rural reform remains an overarching issue for the government. Tackling
it will require restructuring of agricultural enterprises, developing non-farm businesses (such as food
processing), improving service delivery and infrastructure, and develop efficient land markets in rural areas.
The Bank has recently completed a comprehensive rural sector strategy that was recently discussed with the
Government. It also has a project nearing completion that has piloted innovative rural land registration
systems. A follow up land registration project (LARIS II) is planned for FY04, with an agricultural sector
operation planned for FY05.
99. Enhancing the protection of property rights, contract enforcement and corporate governance.
Weaknesses in these fundamental conditions for an effective market economy continue to impede confidence
in the Russian economy, especially on the part of foreign investors. In addition to the judicial reform project,
the Bank Group will support improving both the legislative framework and the institutional capacity necessary
to enforce property and contract rights. MIGA will continue to be critically important to this effort. The Bank
Group has been actively involved in the development of a voluntary corporate governance code by the Federal
Securities and Trade Commission, and has also collaborated with the OECD to prepare a recent White Paper
on corporate governance. Financial assistance will continue to be provided through the ongoing Capital
Markets Development project. The ongoing FSAP is likely to identify further priority areas for our work in
28

this area. The WBI Corporate Governance program and the learning program on improving governance in
local print media planned for FY03 will strengthen the capacity building and dissemination effort.
100. Enterprise Support. At the enterprise level, IFC will continue working with foreign investors and large
Russian companies to improve corporate governance and other business practices in Russia's key service and
manufacturing sectors. Through the Private Enterprise Partnership (PEP), IFC will provide investment-linked
technical assistance to Russian companies-in particular selected small and medium-size enterprises-that
pursue modern corporate governance practices, helping them to implement better corporate governance and
environmental practices, technology, management information systems, and accounting standards. This will
contribute to improving companies up and down the supply chain, securing long-term relationships with
foreign investors, and possible future financing from IFC. The PEP teams will be working directly with
companies in the St. Petersburg, Samara and two other regions. In coordination with Bank work on corporate
governance, IFC will foster private sector support for corporate governance reforms by continuing to provide
technical assistance in the corporate governance area. The IBRD will prepare a policy note on facilitating SME
start-ups in FY03, which may be followed, with IFC support, by a loan to support SME development in
specific regions in FY05.
101. Improving financial intermediation. With recent signals that financial sector reform is moving up the
Govemment's policy agenda, the Bank Group will continue to support strengthening of the regulatory regime
for banking and the financial sector and developing instruments for enterprise financing. In particular, the
Bank, in partnership with the IMF will continue to provide analytical support and technical assistance to the
Central Bank of Russia and the Government to strengthen the banking system, by supporting the planned
introduction of international accounting standards, improvements in banking supervision and the appropriate
design of deposit insurance. Further work will be considered following conclusion of the FSAP. The Bank
Group will also offer assistance directly to enterprises (in particular startups and SME's), and to financial
intermediaries in the form of loans, equity investments, provision of guarantees and other innovative financial
instruments, and technical assistance. In particular, MIGA will continue to seek opportunities to support
foreign investors in Russia's emerging private sector, with special emphasis on privatizations. IFC will further
expand its activity in the financial sector by investing in a number of private, independent, medium-sized
banks, particularly those that can support Russia's emerging SME sector. IFC has already committed
investments to private banks in Moscow and Nizhny Novgorod and is processing several others. IFC will also
introduce more advanced financial products such as subordinated debt and partial guarantees of local currency
bonds. The approach is to combine investment with technical assistance in order to promote institutional
development and help to build confidence in the sector. This strategy will extend to the leasing sector (with its
strong positive impact on SME development), housing and trade finance. As the regulatory situation improves,
IFC will also seek ways to support private pension funds and insurance companies.
102. Strengthen Russia's role in the global knowledge economy. Despite it's impressive legacy of world class
scientific research, much of Russian manufacturing industry is technologically obsolete and the country lags
behind many in commercializing technology developed in Russian civilian research laboratories. Thus, Russia
is missing out on two opportunities for supporting sustained growth -- employing its scientific resources to
increase its global competitiveness and generating new high-tech start-ups that can help to diversify the
economy. This will require reforming the system of government spending on research and development,
establishing incubators to nurture the development of new high tech enterprises and help them establish
strategic alliances with other high-tech fimns, clarifying the ownership of intellectual property created with
government budget resources, reforming the telecommunications system to maximize competition and ensure
universal access, and developing and implementing the Government's eRussia and eEducation programs. The
IFC and IBRD have begun jointly to address these issues via a program of AAA focusing on Russian science
and technology policy and Russia's strategy for competing in the Global Knowledge Economy. Following up
on this, the Bank proposes to develop an FY05 Science and Technology project, which would pilot projects to
establish incubators and technology transfer offices at Russian universities and research institutes, as well as
generate closer linkages between the supply of research from Russian laboratories and the demand for research
29

generated by Russian enterprises. It would also promote the commercialization of Russian technology by
supporting the introduction of venture capital and new high-tech SMEs.
Improving public sector management
103. Strengthening and modernizing civil service, public administration andjudicial systems. As discussed
above, the Government is developing a strategy and an action plan to secure an effective and corruptionresistant public administration based on proper clarity of roles, elimination of duplication and overlap in
governmental structures, professionalization, advancement by merit and accountability. Comprehensive pay
reform is planned to address recruitment and retention difficulties. The Bank will support these efforts through
policy advice and technical assistance in the area of governance and federal civil service reform, and as a
central part of the policy dialogue, will complete in-depth analytical work such as surveys of senior public
officials, service delivery, and pay and benefits. This will be complemented by policy advice and pilot work in
areas of self-governance and civic engagement in rural areas that will help to instill accountability and
transparency on the part of the lowest levels of government. A follow-up Judicial Reform project planned for
FY04 will help to address the weaknesses in the current system by supporting improved information flows,
caseload management, judicial selection procedures and training.
104. Improving publicfinance. Strengthening public sector management also calls for continued emphasis on
measures to support improvement in the use of public resources. The current positive macroeconomic
environment presents continued opportunities to strengthen fiscal management, and to introduce a coherent
framework for intergovernmental finance. The WBG has a number of lending operations in preparation, or
awaiting effectiveness, to address these public finance issues, including operations combining analytical and
financial support to improve institutional capacity in the Treasury System (FY02), Regional-Fiscal Federalism
(FY02), Tax Administration (FY03) and Customs Modernization (FY03). A common feature of a number of
these projects is the introduction of modern information systems to increase transparency and accountability.
The St. Petersburg Economic Development Loan (FY03) will improve fiscal management at the regional level,
as well as support critical reforms to improve the business climate and regional land use. Additionally the
Bank will complete the analytical work to support the Government's implementation of a public expenditure
efficiency concept, assessing fiscal sustainability under a volatile environment and the fiscal costs of structural
reform. WBI will assist with the dissemination of best practice through the learning program in
intergovernmental fiscal relations and urban and city management capacity building.
Mitigating social and environmental risks
105. Improve health status, services andfinance. With the potentially very high social and economic costs
associated with Tuberculosis, HIV/AIDS and other infectious diseases, and the high burden of noncommunicable disease, health sector reform and reduction of infectious diseases will be a high priority over
the CAS period. Lending for TB/AIDS control and Health Reform is planned for FY03. The Bank's existing
analytical work and continued dialogue will play an important role in formulating evidence-based policies and
raising public awareness about key health risks. New analytical work will focus on improving financial
management and resource allocation in the health care system at the federal and the regional levels by (i)
increasing the financial sustainability of moving to outpatient and generalist care, (ii) developing sound
national and regional financing systems, and (iii) piloting new approaches for contracting and financing health
care workers. Parallel knowledge sharing and WBI training activities will support policy seminars, analysis
and donor coordination to assist in the development of large-scale programs of disease prevention and control.
106. Improving relevance and delivery of modern educational services. With two projects under
implementation, the WBG will continue to support the Government's education reform strategy to address the
quality, relevance and equity of access of modern educational services. Analytical work is supporting the
introduction of information communications technology in the school system. A further loan is planned for
30

FY04 to assist with integrating information communications technologies in education for general schools and
for initial vocational education - the first and more neglected level of Russia's two tier vocational education
system, as part of a focus on the problem of improving access, quality and equity. The Bank will also support
the Ministry of Education's efforts to monitor and evaluate the ongoing education reform program. WBI will
assist with the dissemination and capacity building effort.
107. Mitigating income insecurity, vulnerabilityand minimizing the risk ofpoverty. The growth of vulnerable

and at-risk populations as a result of the economic and social transformation in the 1990s requires an effective
and efficient social protection system. Bank support in this area will continue to focus on these difficult issues.
A Labor Market Review was recently completed,' 9 and the Bank is now providing advisory services to assist
with the implementation of pension reform. In cooperation with DFID, the Bank will provide technical
assistance aimed at enhancing poverty measurement, monitoring and analysis in Russia to be completed in
FY04. As the transition has progressed, new social problems have emerged. A series of policy notes will focus
on issues such as mitigating redundancies, social protection for enterprise restructuring, preserving indigenous
peoples of the North, local social welfare and social protection implementation. Drawing on a Child Welfare
Study (FY02) now under discussion with the Government, a follow-up loan is being considered for FY04.
WBI learning programs in social protection and poverty analysis will help disseminate best practices to policy
makers throughout Russia.
108. Mitigating environmental risks and improving the environment. By virtue of its size and resource

endowments, Russia plays a very important global role in the environment, especially in global climate
change, forestry, and biodiversity. The dialogue (both sector work and lending) in this area has often been
difficult, but because of the global issues involved, we will continue to maintain a reasonable level of activity.
The IBRD has ongoing forestry and environmental management projects and the Environmental Capacity
Assessment scheduled for FY03 will provide a vehicle for new discussions with the Govemment on this topic.
GEF finance will provide additional financing depending upon the interest of the Russian authorities and
availability of GEF resources. These will be linked to operations supported by IBRD loans, other financing
agencies or NGOs, or broader regional programs, particularly the Baltic and Black Seas. The GEF has assisted
Russia in meeting its commitments to the intemational biodiversity and climate change conventions and in
protecting its intemational waters. GEF support is planned for fire management in fragile, globally significant
forest ecosystems in the Russian Far East, linked to the ongoing Forest Loan; to environmentally friendly
farming practices in Krasnodar and wastewater treatment in Rostov as part of the Regional Black Sea Nutrient
Reduction program; and to energy efficiency and renewable energy demonstration projects, related to GEF's
climate change initiative. The Govemment, with the support of the World Wildlife Fund, may request
additional support for biodiversity conservation, focusing on creating regional networks of protected areas. A
possible GEF/PCF renewable energy facility is also under discussion. Further GEF support will depend on the
availability of GEF resources, and the interest and capacity of the Govemment to process projects.
LENDING SCENARIOS AND TRIGGERS

109. The base case. The program of activities described above represents the base case lending scenario,
which is designed to assist the Government to improve the climate for investment and competition, strengthen
the effectiveness of the public sector and support the human and environmental development necessary to
sustain further growth and poverty reduction. This case is consistent with the base case macroeconomic
scenario (para. 52) in which the Govemment continues to implement its program of structural and institutional
reforms and pursues prudent macroeconomic policies, thus ensuring economic stability and good prospects for
future growth. The base case comprises lending and guarantees of up to US$ 600 million per fiscal year. The
lending program would include five projects in FY03, six projects in FY04, and six projects in FY05, all
addressing the CAS strategic priorities (Table 5). This compares to an annual average of five to six projects
presented to the Board over the period of the Bank's involvement in Russia.
19 The World Bank (2002), The Russian LaborMarket. From Crisis to Recovery

31

110. The low case. If one or both of the triggers discussed below is not met, the lending program will be
limited to one project per year in the priority area of social risk mitigation, with commitments limited to
US$150 million per fiscal year.
111. Triggers. The base case is contingent upon two set of triggers which both need to be met for lending
activities to continue at the envisaged level. The first relates to portfolio implementation: Consistent with the
2001 CAS update, the share of satisfactory projects in the portfolio would not drop below 70 percent. In
addition, the processing time of new operations from Board approval to effectiveness would be reduced from
the current average of 12 months to eight months for all projects presented to the Board in FY03 and beyond.
For the "portfolio" trigger to be met, both conditions have to be fulfilled.
112. The second set of triggers relates to the continued implementation of the Government's structural reform
agenda. As discussed in the section on macroeconomic scenarios, continued implementation of structural
reforms, together with prudent macroeconomic policies, are pre-conditions for the base case, given their
importance for sustainable growth and for limiting the adverse impact of possibly deteriorating external
conditions, in particular a decline in commodity prices. The Government's reform agenda is an integrated one.
However, implementation of a set of key measures has been identified that, taken as whole, serves as a
"reform" trigger for the Base Case lending scenario. These include measures in each of the three priority areas
that form the strategic pillars of the CAS. If in aggregate the pace of reforms in the areas outlined below is
insufficient, the Bank would move to the Low Case lending scenario. The following areas will be monitored:
113. Improving the business environment and enhancing competition will be monitored using a Russia-wide
enterprise survey developed at the request of the Government to monitor the implementation of four laws
designed to improve deregulation for private companies, especially start-ups. The four laws comprising this
"deregulation package" (on inspections, licensing, registration and certification) are scheduled to become
effective in the summer of 2002. A benchmark survey, to establish conditions at the enterprise level prior to
the effectiveness of the four laws, is underway. The survey will be repeated at six-month intervals over the
next three years. Progress will be monitored by assessing whether implementation of the four laws causes
effective transaction costs for licensing, registration, certification and inspections to decline over time, starting
from the benchmark survey currently in progress. In addition, acknowledging the vital role efficient financial
intermediation for investment and sustained growth, the Bank will monitor the implementation of the program
for financial sector reform agreed upon between the Government and the Central Bank.2 0
114. With respect to strengtheningpublic sector management, the Bank will monitor implementation of the
most important step forward in this regard, Civil Service Reform. The authorities have announced publication
of a Civil Service Reform Action Plan by end-2002 which, to be implemented, requires adequate budgetary
support during 2003-2005. The Bank will monitor over the CAS period whether Civil Service Reform remains
on track as scheduled in the Government's Action Plan and whether sufficient budgetary provisions are made.
In addition, the Bank will monitor a key area in fiscal management, namely whether unfunded mandates (fiscal
mandates given to the regions without the provision of adequate funding by the Center) continue to decrease.
The benchmark for unfunded mandates will be those of the year 2002 Budget, approved on December 3 1 t,
2001, with unfunded mandates monitored over the CAS period.
115. Within the social and environmental risk mitigation area, better measurement of poverty is critical to
improved targeting of social protection. Cost-effective targeting is presently severely hampered by ignorance
as to the number and distribution of the poor, and the consequent difficulty of measuring accurately the effects
of different policy measures in this area (see Attachment 3). To rectify this situation, the Bank recently agreed
to a four year program designed to improve the measuring, monitoring and the analysis of poverty in Russia.

20
21

The program is entitled Joint Programfor the Reform of the Banking Sector (see par. 31-32)
The joint program is entitled EnhancingPoverty Measurement, MonitoringandAnalysis in Russia (see attachment 3).
32

A Coordination Council has been established by ministerial order, and a detailed work program covering the
period 2002-2005 is under preparation. The Bank will monitor implementation of this program.
116. Although unlikely, a severe deterioration in the extemal environment caused by a sharp decline in oil
and gas prices, could create a need for quick disbursing resources. Provided that the Government remains on
track in its program of structural reforms, and a satisfactory macroeconomic framework and an appropriate
policy response are in place, the Bank would consider moving toward quick disbursing loans in order to ensure
the continued implementation of reforms. Coordination with the IMF, policy dialogue and agreement on the
financing gap, given other financing sources, would be the standard preconditions. In this case, a Progress
Report would be presented to the Board.

Table 5 The planned Bank lending program, FY 2003 - 2005

Low Case. Exclusive concentration on projects addressing poverty alleviation, social risk mitigation or global public goods up to 150
million dollars
*TB/AIDS Project*
*Social Protection/Child

Welfare

Base Case. Support of the Govemment Reform Program, up to 6 IBRD projects with total new annual commitments of up to 600
million dollars per fiscal year, including guarantee operations. In addition to the low case, projects would include:
1. >70% portfolio satisfactory and * St. Petersburg Economic
* Information and
*Housing Markets Reform
elapsed time between Board and
Development*
Communication
*Science and Technology
effectiveness < 8 months
. Health Reform Implementation
Technologies in Education *SME Project
a Customs Modernization*
* Judicial Reform
*Agriculture Reform
2. Implementation of the structural a Tax Administration
* Economic Development
*Regional Communal
reform agenda in the three priority
Modernization iI
Infrastructure
Services APL
areas, monitored as (i)
* LARIS II
*Railways Restructuring APL
improvements in deregulation and
* Regional Private Sector
continued financial sector reform
Guarantee
(enhancing business environment);
(ii)budgetary provision for civil
service reform 2003-05 and decline
in unfunded fiscal mandates
(strengthening public sector
management); (iii) implementation
of program on poverty
measurement, monitoring and
analysis (social and environmental
risk mitigation) (see paras 113-115)

* Currently under preparation; ** The FY04 program is subject to final confirmation in June 2002. The FY05
program is tentative and subject to agreement with the Government by June 1 of the preceding year.

CREDITWORTHINESS
117. While debt sustainability issues loomed large in the previous CAS, the situation has since improved
dramatically (Table 6). Public debt (domestic and external) of the Russian Federation has fallen from 118
percent of GDP in 1999 and is projected to decline to 44 percent by 2004. The composition of this debt
33

remains reasonably stable, with domestic public debt as a share of total public debt projected to increase to
about 17 percent of the total through 2004, from 13 percent in 2001. The share of foreign debt service to
exports is projected to peak in 2002 (at 17.8 percent) and then to decline, following the lower debt levels, and
indicating the significant improvement in the sustainability of the Government's position.
118. More broadly, Russia's international liquidity situation has improved significantly since the 1998 crisis,
and is expected to improve further over this CAS period. The extemal debt/GDP ratio is expected to decrease,
from 90 percent in the aftermath of the crisis to 35 percent by 2004. Reserves have increased continuously
while Russia serviced its external obligations in full in 2001. Russia is not expected to encounter debt
servicing problems over the CAS period, even in an unfavorable external environment. Russia's external
position appears sound, with debt repayments scheduled for the CAS period, including the peak year of 2003,
well on track and debt management capacity in the MoF considerably improved. Its creditworthiness is
expected to continue to gradually solidify, with sovereign and, increasingly, private credit ratings improving.
119. Loan outstanding to IBRD are expected to remain at just under US$7 billion -- about 4 percent of total
loan outstanding. The slight increase in debt service ratios indicates rapid repayments of other public debt
and, for preferred creditors, mostly of IMEF loans. IBRD's exposure to Russia on average is expected to
decrease over the CAS period, signaling that repayments will exceed new disbursements in the base case.
Table 6 Key exposure and burden sharing indicators, 1999-2004
(Base Case Lending Levels, US$ million)
1999
2000
2001
External debt outstanding and disbursed
(TDO) a
TDO/GDP (%)
IBRD DOD/Total TDO (%)
Memo: total public debt
of which domesticd

175,001
90.4
3.8
207,720
32,719

162,023
62.4
4.2
199,017
36,991

Total debt service (TDS) (US$ m)a
TDS/XGS (%) b
IBRD DS/public DS (%)
IBRD DS/Preferred creditor DS (%) c

9,761

11,512

11.5

9.9

5.9
9.4

Memo: IBRD TDO (US$ m)

6,707

2002

2003

2004

157,727 152,157 145,416 141,424
50.9
45.3
39.1
34.9
4.4
4.6
4.5
4.4
182,241 177,219 174,833 171,192
24,514 25,062 28,917 29,268

6.2
15.7

16,490
14.4
6.0
27.4

18,489
16.0
7.1
24.1

19,367
16.7
8.3
27.8

16,141
13.5
8.3
36.8

6,844

6,891

6,708

6,235

5,864

a. Includes public and publicly guaranteed debt, private non-guaranteed, use of RMF credits and net
short- term capital. All debt in this table is to the Russian federation
b. "XGS" denotes exports of goods and services, including workers' remittances.
c. Preferred creditors are defined as IBRD, the regional multilateral development banks, the IME, and the
Bank for International Settlements.
d. Converted at end-year exchange rate

34

RISKS AND RISK MANAGEMENT

120. Despite the Russian Federation's improved performance and increased creditworthiness, the Bank Group
continues to face macroeconomic (including commodity price), political and portfolio implementation risks.
Each of these could affect the Bank's development impact, reputation and credit standing. The strategy aims to
mitigate these risks to the maximum extent possible.
121. The economy of the Russian Federation is dominated by the natural resource sectors and highly
influenced by commodity prices. A sharp drop in the price of oil could significantly influence growth
prospects. By accumulating reserves and reducing its outstanding debt, the Government has protected itself
against the most immediate short-term effects of such an eventuality. As long as prudent fiscal management
remains in place, it is estimated that the oil price could fall to US$13.51bbl (Urals) before a significant finance
gap emerges. While it is impossible to mitigate entirely the risks of exogenous shocks, the current CAS is
aimed at reducing this macroeconomic vulnerability by supporting key structural reforms which will minimize
Russia's susceptibility to commodity price shocks over time.
122. There is also a risk of poor macroeconomic management, e.g. not maintaining the necessary fiscal
discipline, or failure to manage the real exchange rate appreciation, given the limited tools for sterilization.
With the Government's recent good track record, this risk is judged low. Nevertheless, the Bank, in close
cooperation with the IMF, will continue to monitor macroeconomic policies, in particular fiscal management,
measured by the success in containing public expenditures, avoiding deficits and streamlining further the
revenue system; monetary policies, measured by success in lowering consumer price inflation and maintaining
rational and predictable exchange rate management; and debt management, by avoiding any delays in debt
service.
123. With regard to political risk, Duma and Presidential elections, in 2003 and 2004 respectively, increase
slightly the risk of weakening controls across the different branches of government and between the federal
authorities and the regions. The elections, combined with "reform fatigue", could also produce a more populist
economic program and backsliding in structural reforms. Risks of backsliding at the central government level
appear to be low, although, as noted above, there are powerful local interests that could present significant
obstacles to the implementation of reforms in the regions. The CAS addresses the risk of policy reversals
through the triggers specified above. Should progress on reforms in the three priority areas deteriorate
significantly, the Bank would move into the low case. To mitigate the risk of regional interests derailing the
reform agenda, the CAS emphasizes the importance of increased involvement at the regional level in order to
support sustained reforms.
124. There continue to be risks with respect to portfolio implementation. The portfolio could deteriorate due
to processing delays of new loans, poor implementation, or lack of political ownership. The Bank has several
tools to mitigate portfolio deterioration and lending inefficiencies. Two key indicators, the share of satisfactory
projects in the portfolio and time from Board to effectiveness, have been included in the strategy as Base Case
lending triggers. In addition, quarterly reviews at a senior level of Government and the Bank, plus an annual
decision making process on new lending and an annual portfolio review, have been scheduled. Implementation
will be safeguarded through the joint Bank-Government Working Group (par. 77) and by ongoing fiduciary
assessments, e.g. the annual assessment of financial and procurement capacity of the project implementation
units (PIUs), an annual certification of audit firms, and provision of training in project implementation issues
(e.g. procurement) specifically for implementing agency staff.
125. The Bank Group continues to face a reasonably large reputational risk. The Bank is closely associated
with the Govermment's econornic reform efforts and failure in this regard will affect the Bank's reputation.
There is still significant reputational risk from implementation of the Bank's portfolio, which has been the
subject of intense scrutiny by the Chamber of Accounts, the Duma and the press. This scrutiny has focused on
the perceived high administrative costs and extensive use of foreign consultants in Bank-fmanced operations.
35

A number of reforms are under implementation, which are designed to improve the effectiveness of TA, while
reducing the costs of project management. The CAS is designed to maximize the Bank's leverage while
minimizing these types of reputational risks. It proposes several ways in which we will adapt the way we do
business to keep pace with the rapidly changing environment in Russia, including new reporting arrangements
and high level reviews, as well as portfolio performance criteria and continued reform implementation as
preconditions for staying within the base case lending scenario.
James D. Wolfensohn
President

By:
Shengman Zhang

Peter Woicke

Washington D.C.
May 14, 2002

36

Attachment 1, page I of 4

Attachment 1 Russia's development priorities and program of cooperation with the World
Bank
The government's medium term strategy
The timeframe of this CAS coincides with the implementation period for the Govemment's Medium Term
Programof Social and Economic Development of the Russian Federationfor 2002-2004, enacted in July
2001. The Medium Term Program (Program) identifies the following six priority objectives for structural
reforms:
*
*

*
*

*

*

To reduce poverty levels and income differentials by providing incentives for wage and
employment growth, and by strengthening the targeting of social assistance;
To achieve economic modernization and improvement in enterprise efficiency, which will require
eliminating the subsidization of the economy imbedded in low tariffs (simultaneously with
increasing the efficiency of the infrastructure monopolies and of housing and communal services);
To improve the economy's innovative and technological potential;
To create an institutional environment favorable for investment into the real sector, and to develop
financial intermediation. This implies the introduction of effective protection of property rights
and the development of competitive markets for goods, services and capital (including land), and
to increase the role of small and medium businesses;
To improve fiscal efficiency by focusing budget expenditures on the priority targets of social and
economic policy, by improving control over the assets and liabilities of the state, by streamlining
the budgeting process, and by ensuring an effective tax system;
To reduce regional differentiation in social and economic development, and to strengthen the
economic foundations of the Russian Federation by ensuring conformity of federal and subnational legislations, and by introducing clear functional divisions of authority and financial
resources between the federal and the sub-national levels.

In essence, the Program is a successor to the "Gref plan" - a long-term strategy for Russia's development
which was prepared by a team of reformists at the request of President-to-be Vladimir Putin in early 2000.
The Program is a comprehensive document that covers a large range of macroeconomic and structural
goals to be achieved by 2005, together with the reforms required to achieve these goals. Two issues were
not addressed, namely civil service and judicial reforms. For legal and administrative reasons, these
exceptions were made the responsibility of the President Office, and hence excluded form the Government
Program.
The Program does not discuss the sequencing of reforms. On the one hand, this followed from the urgent
nature of many reforms, and from their inter-dependence and the economic complementarities which can
be gained from exploiting this interdependence. On the other hand, an attempt to advance simultaneously
on all fronts inevitably involves the risk of exceeding the physical capacity of the Government even under
the best of circumstances, let alone the necessity to struggle with vested interests in many areas at once. A
resulting risk is that, given the interdependence of reforms, slower implementation of some would prevent
others having the desired impact on the ground.

37

Attachment 1, page 2 of 4
The Action Planfor 2000-2001: Success in implementing thefirst stage of reform, challenges at the
second stage.
To operationalize the Program, the Government developed the Action Plan for 2000-2001, which contains
119 measures in the areas of economic modernization and social development. 2 2 Most of these measures
included more than one output, ranging from a report to the Government, to normnative acts by the
Government, its agencies or the President, to draft laws. The legislative agenda was particularly
impressive, and, to the Government's credit, most of these laws -- including some that had been blocked in
the Duma for years -- successfully passed parliamentary approval between late 2000 and 2001. Those
goals of the Program for which a Federal Targeted Investment Program (FTIP) already existed, were not
included in the Action Plan (In 2002, 47 FTIPs are under implementation.)
On the Government's count, 22 out of 57 measures planned for 2001 were completely implemented by the
Spring of 2002. The implementation of a further 22 measures was nearing completion and the draft
documents to implement the remaining 13 were under review. It is worth noting that, continuing an old
practice, the Government considered a measure completely implemented immediately upon effectiveness
of the envisaged legislative or administrative acts. This process-based monitoring does not necessarily
reveal whether there has actually been any progress in achieving developmental goals.
Several important pieces of legislation issued over the 2000-01 period are bound to have a significant
impact on Russia's economic environment. These are in particular, the Tax Code (Part I and several
chapters of Part II), the Labor Code, the Land Code (so far covering only non-agricultural land), the law
on State Social Assistance, and a set of laws enacting the Pension Reform. Two other legal packages
approved in 2001 and critical for further development are the Deregulation Package, which comprises four
laws - on registration, licensing, inspections, and certification - and a Strategy for reforming RAO
UES, the national electricity monopoly.
A flat income tax of 13 percent, and a reduction of the corporate profit tax from 35 to 24 percent are the
crucial components of the new tax system. The Labor Code has introduced greater flexibility for
employers to stimulate labor mobility. The Land Code made non-agricultural land available for sale, thus
setting the necessary preconditions for the inter-enterprise redistribution of assets, and for developing a
mortgage system. The law on State Social Assistance has enacted a gradual substitution of targeted
assistance for the current socially unjust and extremely inefficient system of categorical privileges. The
Pension Reform legislation has signaled a beginning of a shift to the fully funded pension system. The
Reform of RAO-UES has set a precedent for de-monopolizing those segments of huge conglomerates
which are classified as natural monopolies in Russia (UES, Gazprom and MPS - the national railways),
that may potentially be subject to competition.
The Deregulation Package deserves special attention, not just because it has been the single best
coordinated and most explicit attempt by the Government to improve the business climate, but also
because it is illustrative of the problems in implanting the reforms. First, the four areas targeted by the
Govemment in the Deregulation Package did not cover all the potential administrative barriers to business.
Second, there was an implementation risk. In Russia, this risk was amplified because weak institutional
capacity at the federal level is not the sole impediment to successful implementation of reform. Equally

22 GoR Resolution No. 1072-R of July 26 2000, later amended by GOR Resolution No. 933 of July 14, 2001.
Resolution No. 933 contained 57 measures: 46 of the original 119 measures had been considered implemented at the
time this resolution was passed, some measures had been dropped and about 20 new ones were added.

38

Attachment 1, page 3 of 4

important is the discretionary political behavior of sub-national authorities. Finally, there was the risk that
slower implementation of some other and seemingly unrelated reforms would compromise the success of
the Deregulation Package.
All these problems have materialized to some extent. First, the procedures for approval of investment
projects and issuing construction permits, as well as the remaining discretion on the part of public servants
in the areas of taxation and land allocation, can also impede business activity, and in particular the
emergence of start-ups, and are reported to have substituted seamlessly in some cases for the old
regulations abolished by the Deregulation Package. The unreformed civil service has remained one of the
biggest stumbling blocks for successful deregulation. In addition to poor institutional capacity, the basic
incentives in the civil service push it towards erecting administrative barriers to business. Third, and also
noteworthy, new impediments to business are substituting for those that could previously be exploited, and
which are currently being outlawed by the federal government. These new impediments have emerged
primarily at the sub-national level, and with varying intensity by regions. Finally, the slow pace of
financial sector reform impedes the achievement of the ultimate goal - sustained growth of investment and
business start-ups - even if all other impediments were to be eliminated.
Taking into account that similar difficulties are faced by almost all reforms in the Program as well as the
civil service and financial sector reforms, the Government needs to develop efficient mechanisms for
implementing federally-mandated reforms at the sub-national level. In addition, the design of other
reforms which have been initiated needs to be completed (in particular, natural monopoly, housing and
communal services reforms, as well as the accompanying shift toward targeted social assistance). In
parallel, the efficiency of fiscal policy -- both on the revenue collection and the side of targeting
expenditures - needs to be increased so as to allow the government to bear the cost of these envisaged
structural reforms. The necessary reform of the judicial system and the implementation of internationally
acceptable standards of corporate governance can then complete constructing the basis for a level playing
field, and eventually a thriving market economy.
The Government's Program of Cooperationwith the WBG.
During the time in which the CAS was prepared and its strategic core discussed with the government,
parliament and civil society, the Government discussed for the first time at the Cabinet level its own
program of cooperation between the Russian Federation and the World Bank. The Program of
Cooperationbetween the Russian Federationand The World Bankfor 2002 - 2004 was approved by the
Government on February 21, 2002.
The Program of Cooperationlists three priority areas, where the Russian Federation would like the Bank
Group to concentrate its various assistance instruments (loans, guarantees, grants, AAA, IFC investment,
etc.). These areas correspond to the Bank's priority areas as developed in this CAS:
*
*
*

Strengthening public sector management, in particular legal and judicial reform;
Improving business environment and enhancing competition;
Mitigating social and environmental risks.

In addition, the Cooperation Program addresses exposure issues and the instruments of cooperation
preferred by the Russia's government. On the former, three possible scenarios of working with the Bank
are reviewed:
*
*

Large scale borrowing, mainly for infrastructure investment projects, up to a scale of US$ I billion
per calendar year;
Limited borrowing for projects and Guarantees supporting the implementation of structural
reforms, of about US$ 500 million per calendar year and supplemented with technical assistance
and advisory services;
39

Attachment 1, page 4 of 4

No borrowing and utilizing the Bank's technical expertise for advisory services and technical
assistance instead.
The Government document stresses that actual cooperation might involve a mixture of all three scenarios,
but proposes option (b) for the 2002-2006 period. To cite the Cooperation Program, this includes "loans
in support of sectoral reforms (public administration, including public finance management, judicial,
education, natural monopoly reforms, etc.), with relatively small borrowings from the Bank facilitating
institutional development of the respective sectors, and implementation of pilot models". In designing this
framework of technical assistance, the Government also emphasized one of the main proposals put
forward in the current CAS, namely that new projects are likely to include considerable advisory services
with a more limited role for the traditional investment components. This emphasis on an increasing role
for technical assistance is of particular importance, as it confirms the government's desire for this type of
Bank support against a background of recently intensified criticism of the merits of foreign advisory
services.
Moreover, the Programof Cooperation envisages purchasing such services from the Bank at a later stage,
when borrowing for investment projects will cease. Again, this is indicative of the value the Government
attaches to the Bank's advisory services, as long as the latter are appropriately adjusted to Russia's needs.
In the same spirit, the Government note stresses the necessity to improve coordination with respect to
establishing priorities for the Bank's AAA program.
Finally, the Programof Cooperation calls for establishing a formal mechanism for initiating and promptly
monitoring Bank project preparation and implementation. The Government would develop by end-May of
each year a comprehensive list of projects for potential Bank financing for the Bank's consecutive fiscal
year. This list is envisaged to include both lending operations and agreement on priorities for AAA
undertaken by the Bank. The agreed program would subsequently be closely monitored both by the
Government and the Bank, in order to tackle early on the type of implementation delays which have
become too characteristic.
The Development objectives stipulated in the Government's Mid-Term Program, and the specific
measures needed to achieve them, as delineated in the Government's Action Plan coincide with the Bank
Group's understanding of Russia's reform priorities and implementation challenges. This lays a sound
basis for developing jointly a lending program which can provide substantial support to the timely
implementation of the key structural reforms envisaged in the program, thus helping to achieve Russia's
development objectives. The concrete mechanisms developed in the Programof Cooperation,i.e. to agree
jointly on a list of projects in annual reviews, to design jointly its major components, and then to ensure
timely implementation and effectiveness, are a welcome first step at improving the performance of the
Bank's portfolio.

40

Attachment 2, page I of 2

Attachment 2 CAS consultations prior to upstream review
To facilitate discussions on the Bank Group's strategy in Russia, discussions on CAS priorities started in
the summer of 2002 with visits to Siberia, the Urals and North West Russia. A draft CAS concept paper
was then discussed with leading representatives of the Russian political, academic, and business
communities in a series of meetings and seminars. In addition, in-depth discussions were held with senior
representatives of the Russian Govemment and Parliament, and an abridged version was sent to the
Minister of the Economy and Trade and from there to the Prime Minister for consideration. Finally, a high
level workshop on the draft CAS was organized in February.
In general, the three priority areas outlined in the CAS received wide support, as well as the new
approaches to the Bank's business in Russia - in particular, moving the focus to advisory services, shifting
projects to the regional level, decentralizing more Bank staff to the field to allow faster project preparation,
and just-in-time consultancy. Some skepticism was expressed regarding the Bank's comparative advantage
in providing timely policy advice in response to the more rapid and intensive pace of client demand.
A summary of suggestions and recommendations arising from these discussions is presented below. In
particular, there were many suggestions as to potential areas for Bank assistance, including:
Assisting SME creation:
* Facilitating access to financing for SMEs;
* Developing information networks and other infrastructure for SMEs (incubators, leasing, etc.);
* Assisting in designing an industrial policy of a new type;
* Developing special economic zones to facilitate new start-ups.
Creating integrated information systems:
* Facilitating the "new" ("soft") economy through increased TA;
* Assisting the government in designing management information systems (especially through TA
for systems analysis, as opposed to hardware procurement).
Priority sectors for restructuring:
* Aviation;
* Automotive industry;
*R&D
* Sectors likely to be affected by WIO accession.
Priority sectors for institutional/structural reforms:
* Mitigation of social consequences of military reform;
* Judicial system;
* Natural monopolies (UES and Railways, in particular), and regional (local) infrastructure
monopolies;
* Rent-capturing taxation,
* Debt management,
* Pension system;
* Banking system and non-banking financial institutes;
* Housing/communal services;
* Anti-trust regulation;
* State procurement system;

41

Attachment 2, page 2 of 2

*
*

Regional reform implementation capacity;
Education in particular retraining for public officials at the sub-national level.

Key recommendations for doing business in Russia:
* TA should be very specific and more relevant to Russia's particular environment.
Consultants/Bank staff should be mobilized to be more responsive to rapid pace of client demand.
* Though TA has been among the most successful components of the Bank's program in Russia,
some government officials have a very negative perception of borrowing for TA. Increased
dialogue and more effective external affairs efforts will be necessary to sustain the TA program.
* Projects targeting a narrow development objective have generally been more successful than
operations with a broader mandate .
* Project preparation should be dramatically accelerated to prevent projects from becoming obsolete
before they are realized..
* The Bank should make greater efforts to maximize the demonstration effects of projects across
regions and sectors.
* Investment in institutional development is more important than investment in physical
infrastructure.
Greater efforts should be made to establish an effective relationship with the Duma.
Further Consultations
In order to obtain further feed back and input for WBG programs in the outer years of the CAS, a series of
round tables are planned for cities in most of the seven federal districts during the summer of 2002.
Representatives of sub-national governments, NGO's and business associations will be invited to
participate. In addition, on-line Internet discussions will supplement regional consultations and provide
regular updates on the CAS process by posting minutes from relevant meetings and consultations,
summaries of the feedback already received, as well as key documents with regards to the CAS and other
Bank's projects. The public and all interested parties will be able to post their comments, and participate in
a dialogue with Bank experts and other Russian organizations and institutions on all CAS issues.

42

Attachment 3, pagel of 3
Attachment 3 Poverty in Russia
Reasons for Different Poverty Estimates
Poverty estimates for Russia vary widely, ranging from 7.3 to 49.0 percent of the population in 1998 (Table 1).
These wide, and seemingly irreconcilable, differences in poverty rate are caused by differences in data source,
welfare variable, and the definition of the poverty line. All of the poverty data for Russia come from two basic
surveys: the Household Budget Survey (HBS), carried out by the Russian State Statistical Agency (Goskomstat),
and the Russian Longitudinal Monitoring Survey (RLMS), carried out by the Institute of Sociology of the Russian
Academy of Science with technical assistance from the University of North Carolina (UNC). These two surveys
differ considerably in their size, accessibility and degree of representativeness. Goskomstat collects HBS data
continuously from a large sample (49,000 households) that is nationally and regionally representative.
Unfortunately, the HBS data is not available to other institutions, including the World Bank. The RLMS data
come from a series of 9 multi-purpose household surveys that are collected from a small but nationally
representative sample (3,600 households). While the RLMS data are open to all researchers, the smaller size of
this sample means that it cannot give representative results at the regional level. The HBS data provide a
continuous basis for poverty monitoring while the RLMS data are collected once every year or two, usually in the
Fall.
Table 1. Russian Poverty Rates for 1998, Various Sources
1998
Based on official national poverty line
Goskomstat official poverty incidence'
Goskomstat revised survey methodology 2
RLMS (World Bank)
RLMS (UNC) 3
RLMS (Lokshin and Ravallion)

23.8%
37.8%
49.0%
37.7%
32.6%

Based on $ 2.15 per day in 1996 PPP
Goskomstat official survey (World Bank analysis) 4
Goskomstat revised survey (World Bank analysis) 5
RLMS (World Bank) 6

7.3%
9.6%
18.8%

1 Based on "money income" indicator of welfare.
Based on "disposable resources" indicator of welfare.
3
Based on incomes, not on consumption, and on region-specific poverty lines valued at survey generated prices.
4
Bank estimates based on grouped data and $2.15 per day poverty line converted to local currency poverty at
average annual prices using national CPI.
5 Based on published consumption decile grouped data.
6
World Bank estimates based on unit record data with national CPI data used to convert poverty line into local
currency.
2

43

Attachment 3, page2 of 3

In calculating poverty figures, Goskomstat and RLMS use different welfare indicators. Goskomstat poverty
figures are based on a measure of "money income" since 1992 and "disposable resources" for the period 19972000. The survey-based "disposable resources" variable includes an estimate of total income (cash income,
consumption of self-produced goods, in-kind transfers and benefits) and financial savings when positive. The
"money income" variable is a measure of total income, corrected for consistency with observed measures of
household income from the national aggregated regional data (retail trade statistics, net change in deposits, net
household purchases of foreign currency). The aggregate regional figures are compared with what is reported
by households for the same items in the Household Budget Surveys, and the latter is adjusted upwards to match
the former. The difference is distributed across households based on a log normal distribution. These adjusted
numbers result in lower poverty counts than the raw data from the Household Budget Surveys. Goskomstat
claims that these adjustments are essential to overcome underreporting by respondents in household surveys.
The RLMS poverty estimates are based on consumption expenditure or income.
Goskomstat and RLMS also use different methodologies for defining the poverty line. The difference lies in
how they calculate the cost of food and nonfood goods that constitute the minimum consumption basket.
Goskomstat uses price data from urban price surveys to cost the minimum consumption basket. This produces
regionally specific poverty lines that reflect prices in urban areas (where the price data are collected). RLMS
instead uses the prices reported by the households themselves to price the cost of the minimum consumption
basket. In practice, these two different approaches to determining the cost of the poverty basket yield different
estimates of the number of households living in poverty. Also, as of 1999, the official "subsistence minimum"
has been revised upward, and various states of the Russian Federation are federally mandated to adopt their
own subsistence minimum basket and level within federal guidelines. This situation has created a transitional
problem of discontinuity in poverty indicators over time, and of comparability in poverty measures across
states, as states have adopted the subsistence minimum levels at different speeds, with some states not having
adopted their own subsistence minimum as of the summer of 2002.
Need for a Consensus on Poverty

Clearly there is a need to move to a more broadly accepted set of poverty estimates for Russia, a move that is
expected to enrich the policy debate on attacking poverty. These estimates should be based upon common and
agreed-upon approaches to data source, welfare variable, and the definition of the poverty line. These estimates
should also be based upon improved techniques of poverty measurement and methodology for Goskomstat. At
present, Goskomstat's Household Budget Surveys - by virtue of their size and coverage - represent the best
potential source of poverty data in Russia. Access to these HBS data needs to be broadened and new analytical
tools need to be applied to these data in order to help users converge to a more broadly accepted set of poverty
estimates in Russia.
New Bank Program on Poverty in Russia
The Bank is supporting processes that should lead to improvements. In April 2002 the Bank signed a
Memorandum of Understanding with Goskomstat, the Ministry of Labor and Social Development and the UK
Department for International Development (DFID) for a joint program entitled "Enhancing Poverty
Measurement, Monitoring and Analysis in Russia." The program envisions a four-year partnership among
Russian government agencies, Russian scholars, intemational experts, and the World Bank. Five expected
outcomes of this program are: (1) to develop an improved poverty measurement methodology for Russia by

analyzing the available Household Budget Surveys from 1997 onwards; (2) to establish a poverty monitoring
system based on an improved Household Budget Survey; (3) to provide external users with unit-record data
from the Household Budget Surveys; (4) to prepare a sequence of analytical and policy reports based on a
detailed analysis of poverty level, profile, and dynamics as soon as access to Household Budget Survey is
established; and (5) to prepare a final poverty assessment report containing concrete policy recommendations
for poverty reduction based on analysis of the improved 2003-04 Household Budget Survey data and other data
sources.

44

Attachment 3, page3 of 3
While the emphasis of this new collaborative program is on improving poverty methodology, measurement and
analysis in Russia, a key output of this work will be to develop policy recommendations on how to reduce poverty
and to improve social protection of vulnerable households. For example, a number of new government initiatives
in the fields of targeted social assistance, tax reform and wage policy are likely to have a large impact on the poor.
This program, which is based on joint work between the Bank and various Russian government ministries and
independent researchers, will be able to generate new and timely information on the impact on these policy
initiatives on the poor. Training and building analytical capacity in poverty reduction are also intrinsic features of
this program.
Benchmarks for Joint Poverty Program
May 2002 - Establishment of a Coordinating Council by a joint ministerial order of Minister of Labor and Social
Development and Chairman of Goskomstat. Coordination Council will oversee the program, which will include
representatives from all the main program participants (Ministry of Labor and Social Development, Goskomstat,
Ministry of Finance, Ministry of Economic Development and Trade, World Bank, DFID, and independent
researchers)
June 2002 - Preparation of a detailed work program of activities specifying the outputs, inputs and dates for
specific components of the work program. Approval of Matrix of Activities by Coordination Council.
September 2002 - Task Forces are appointed by Coordination Council for program sub-tasks.
January 2003 - Preparation of a report of recommendations on improving administrative data of MLSD on social
assistance and privileges.
February 2003 - Goskomstat will provide open access to the unit-record data from the 1997-2000 HBS Surveys,
following improvements to the technical aspects of these surveys.
July 2003 - Preparation of reports on how to improve the HBS information resources. Adoption of poverty
monitoring indicators, and a new HBS survey design.
September 2003: Preparation of analytical notes and reports on poverty levels, profile, and dynamics using HBS
1997-2000 datasets.
March 2004 - Goskomstat will provide open access to the unit-record data from the 2003 HBS Survey.
April 2005 - Goskomstat will provide open access to the unit-record data from the 2004 HBS Survey.
December 2005 - Preparation of a final joint report containing a detailed analysis of poverty and poverty profile in
Russia, as well as poverty policy recommendations using the 2003-04 HBS databases.

45

Annex Al- Russian Federation
Key Economic & Program Indicators - Change from Last CAS

Economy (CY)
Growth rates (%)
GDP
Exports
Imports

Igggb

Forecastin Last CAS
2000 b
2001 b
2002"

1997C

1998'

Actual
1999'

2000C

2001 a

Revised CAS Forecast
2002b
2003b
2004"

2005 b

1.8
-2.3
-20.5

0.5
1.7
10.0

1.0
2.0
3.0

1.0
2.3
3.0

0.9
3.0
14.1

-4.9
-1.2
-15.8

5.4
1.9
-31.1

9.0
2.1
15.6

5.0
2.6
16.5

4.0
2.6
4.2

4.0
2.7
0.8

4.5
2.7
1.1

4.5
2.7
1.7

GDP Inflation (period average, %)

55.5

30.0

25.0

20.0

14.5

16.3

65.0

40.5

17.9

17.7

12.5

11.5

10.4

National accounts (% GDP)
Current accountbalance
Gross investment

8.6
14.3

8.4
12.9

6.7
14.9

6.1
14.9

0.2
22.8

0.2
16.1

10.5
14.7

16.1
16.6

9.5
18.1

8.5
20.5

6.9
22.5

6.5
23.2

5.9
24.8

Public finances (% GDP)
Fiscal balance
Foreign financing

-5.2
1.4

-2.0
2.4

-1.9
-1.8

-1.7
-1.9

-8.0
2.2

-7.9
5.4

-3.6
3.0

2.9
0.3

0.6
-1.5

0.1
-1.4

0.1
-1.6

0.6
-1.2

1.0
-1.6

International reserves
(asmonthsofimports)
Program(Bank's FY)

2.0

1.9

1.6

2.0

2.1

1.7

2.3

4.5

5.8

6.5

7.6

9.5

11.5

FY99b

FYoob

FY01 b

FY02"

FY97c

FY98 C

FY99 c

FY00 c

FY014

FY02 b

FY03b

FY04 b

FY05b

...

180
900

300
1,080

300
720

1,816
2,085

1,629
2,172

1,930
657

90
606

398
455

352
469

570
465

550
448

550
500

Lending ($ million)e
Gross disbursements ($ million)
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.

Estimated year.
Projected year.
Actual outcome.
General government.
Board approvals including guarantees.

...

CAS Annex A2- 1 Russian Federation at a glance
Europe &

POVERTY and SOCIAL

Lower-

Russian
Federaton

Central
Asia

middleIncome

145.5
1,660
241.6

475
2,010
956

2,046
1,140
2,327

-0.3
0.0

0.1
0.6

1.0
1.3

2000
Popufation. mid-year (millions)
GNlpercapita(Atlasmethod, USS)
GNI (Atlas method, USS billions)

Development diamond*
Llfe expectancy

Average annual growth, 1994-00
Population (%)
Labor force (%)
Most recent estimate (latest year available, 1994-00)
Poverty (%of population below national poverty line)
Urban population (%of total population)
Life expectancy at birth (years)
Infant mortality (per 1,000 live births)
Child malnutrition (%of children under 5)
Access to an improved water source (%of population)
lliteracy (%of population age 15+)
Gross primary enrollment (%of school-age population)
Male
Female

30
73
66
15
3
99
1
109
109

90
3
100
101

42
69
32
1
80
15
114
116

108

99

114

67
69
21
..

G
GNI
per taprimary
capita

K

Gross
enrollment

Access to improved water source
-Russian Federation
Lower-middle-Income group

KEY ECONOMIC RATIOS and LONG-TERM TRENDS
1980

1990

1999

2000

1,100.1
30.1
18.2
30.3

193.6
16.0
43.9
31.2

259.6
18.0
44.0
37.0

..

25.3

33.0

.
..
..

10.5
1.1
90.4
11.5

16.1
1.1
62.4

GDP (US$ billions)
Gross domestic investment/GDP
Exports of goods and services/GDP
Gross domestic savings/GDP

..

Gross national savings/GDP

..

Current account balance/GDP
Interest payments/GDP
Total debt/GDP

..
..
..

Total debt service/exports
Present value of debt/GDP
Present value of debt/exports

..

..

..

..

..

..

..
.
..

Economic ratios'
Trade

Domestc
Savings

/0
Investment

9.9

67.7
153.5

Indebtedness
1980490
(average annual growth)
GDP
GDP per capita
Exports of goods and services

..
..
..

1990400

1999

2000

200044

-4.8
-4.6
-0.9

5.4
5.8

9.0
9.6

5.3
5.8

-2.9

35.9

7.3

1980

1990

1999

2000

16.6
48.4

7.4
35.5

7.1
37.0

Russian Federation
Lower-middle-income group

--

STRUCTURE of the ECONOMY

(%of GDP)
Agriculture
Industry

..

Manufacturing

..

..

Growth of Investment and GDP (%)
20


.
g.

..

Services

..

35.0

57.1

56.0

-20

Private consumption
General govemment consumption
Imports of goods and services

..
..
..

48.9
20.8
17.9

52.1
16.7
27.4

47.9
13.8
24.8

.40

199040

1999

2000

Growth of exports and Imports (%)

-6.0
-7.6

10.7
9.8

5.0
11.8

40-

1980.90
(average annual growth)
Agriculture
Industry
Manufacturing
Services

..

-3.3

2.2

2.9

Private consumption
General govemment consumption
Gross domestc Investment

..
..
..

2.0
0.3
-18.4

-1.6
3.0
5.7

8.2
12.9
17.3

Imports of goods and services

..

-7.4

-28.4

17.5

..

GDP

GDI

20.

..

95

9r

0

r7

-204
-40

-

Exports

CImports

Note: 2000 data are preliminary estimates.
The diamonds show four key Indicators Inthe country (in bold) compared with its income-group average. If data are missing, the diamond will
be incomplete.

Russian Federation

CAS Annex A2-2
PRICES and GOVERNMENT FINANCE

Domestic prfces

1980

1990

change)
(%
Consumer prices

..

5.6

Implicit GDP deflator

..

15.9

1999
85.7
64.7

2000
20.8

40.5

200
100

Government finance
(%of GDP, includes current grants)

0

Current revenue

..

..

33.5

37.1

Current budget balance

..
..

..
..

1.3
-3.6

7.8

Overall surplus/deficit

Inflation (%)
400
300

95

96

97

99

Ss

GDPdeflator

-

00

CPI

2.9

TRADE
(US$ mfilIons)

1999

2000

..
..

75,666
14,101
11,352

105,566
25,319
16,644

..
..

..
..

8,500
41.757

10,000
47.192

Food
Fuel and energy

..
..

..
..

8,100
419

7,400
471

Capial goods

..

..

10,500

10,600

..
..

..
..

..

..

82
85
96

112
82
136

Total exports (fob)

1980

1990

..

..

..
..

Manufactures
Total Imports (cif)

Crude oil
Natural gas

Export price index (1995=100)
Import price Index (1995=100)
Termsoftrade(1995=100)

Export and Import levels (USS mill.)
125.000
100.000
75,00t

soo0,00
0.
25.00( _
0

*

0

94
U

*

0

oo

97
98
99
1 Imports

95
96
Expots

BALANCE of PAYMENTS
(US$ millIons)

1999

2000

Exports of goods and services

..

..

84,738

115,200

Imports of goods and services

..

..

52,970

62,290

Resource balance

..

..

31,768

52,910

15 -

Net Income
Net current transfers

..

..

-11,900

-11,154

.

..

..

542

90

Current account balance

..

..

20.410

41,846

s

Financing Items (net)
Chianges In net reserves

..

..

-16,583

-23.432

o

..

..

-3,827

-18,415

..

..

..

..

12,456
24.6

27,972
28.1

1999

2000
162,023

Memo:
Reserves induding gold (US$ millions)
Conversion rate (Offlclal, IocalSS)

1980

1990

Current account balance to GDP (%)
20--

;
94

95

96

97

98

99

00

EXTERNAL DEBT and RESOURCE FLOWS

1980
(USS mililons)
Total debt outstanding and disbursed
IBRD
IDA
Total debt service paid
IBRD

IDA

1990

ComposIton of 2000 debt (USS mill.)
..

..

175,001

..

..

..

..

6,707
0

..

..

9,761

..

..

520

0

..

..

..
..

.o,
..

577

..

..

-176

..

..

1,348

..

..

-200

Commtments

..

..

430

Disbursements
Principal repayments

..

..

..

..

538
10

Net flows
Interest payments
Net transfers

,,

,,

..

..

..

..

6,844
0
G 17953

11,510
679

A: 7.06j311.613
D 251

0

Compositon of net resource flows
Official grants
Official creditors
Private creditors
Foreign direct investment
Portfollo equity

(JE

\

_

388
370
18

183
540
267
274
412
-139

B -IDA
C - IMF

64,90

E -Bilateral

A -iBRD

Worid Bank program

Development Economics and Country Team.

392

-688
-330
-347
-100

D - Other mulllateral

F - Private
G - Short-term

9/6/01

CAS Annex B2 - Russian Federation
Selected Indicators* of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
Indicator

1999

2000

2001

2002

35
3.5
62.9
88.4
68.6
92.5
12.5

33
4
27.3
47.6
36.4
53.5
9

34
4.2
8.8
6.4
23.5
22.6
12.5

35
4.8
22.6
22.8
41.9
34.4
11.8

Yes
4,311
123.2

Yes
4,218
127.8

Yes
3,469
102

Yes
3,418
97.7

Portfolio Assessment
Number of Projects Under Implementation a
Average Implementation Period (years) b
Percent of Problem Projects by Number 8' c
Percent of Problem Projects by Amount 8 ' c
Percent of Projects at Risk by Number a d
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount 8 ' d
Disbursement Ratio (%) e

Portfolio Management
CPPR during the year (yes/no)
Supervision Resources (total US$000)
Average Supervision (US$000/project)
Memorandum Item
Proj Eval by OED by Number
Proj Eval by OED by Amt (US$ millions)
%of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Number
(Outcome-based)
%of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt

Since FY 91 Last Five FYS
15
13
5,040
3,840
57
72

67
95

a. As shown inthe Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY).
b. Average age of projects inthe Bank's country portfolio.
c. Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) andtor implementaton progress (IP).
d. As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
e. Rato of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the
beginning of the year: Investment projects only.
' All indicators are for projects active in the Portfolio, with the excepbon of Disbursement Ratio,
which includes all actve projects as well as projects which exited during the fiscal year.
* The sharp increase in the number of problem projects in 2002 is caused by effectiveness
delays - most projects approved in 2001 and still awaiting effectiveness were downgraded only in 2002.
However, the overall portfolio ratng remains close to a reasonable 80% of satisfactory projects
and could improve further, if and when these projects were back on track.

CAS Annex B3 - IBRD/IDA Program Summary - Russian Federation

Proposed IBRD/IDA Base-Case Lending Program a
Fiscal year

Proj ID

US$(M)

Strategic Rewards b

Implementation b

2002

REG. FISCAL FEDERALISM
TREASURY DEVELOPMENT APL
Result
HEALTH REF IMP
TAX ADMINISTRATION II
ST. PETERSBURG ECON DEV
CUSTOMS MODERNIZATION
TB/AIDS CONTROL

120.0
232.0
352.0
30.0
100.0
150.0
140.0
150.0

H
H

M
M

H
H
M
H
H

H
M
M
H
M

Result
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT INFRASTRUCTUR
JUDICIAL REFORM
ICT IN EDUCATION DELIVERY (APL)
LARIS il
SOCIAL PROTECTION/CHILD WELFARE
REG. PRIVATE SECTOR GUARANTEE
Result
RAILWAYS RESTRUCTURING (APL)
SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY
SME DEVELOPMENT
HOUSING MARKETS
AGRICULTURE SECTOR
REG. COMMUNAL SERVICES (APL)

570.0
150.0
60.0
100.0
30.0
100.0
200.0
640.0
100.0
50.0
50.0
150.0
100.0
100.0

M
H
M
H
H
M

H
M
M
M
M
M

H
H
H
H
H
H

H
M
M
M
M
L

Result

550.0

Result

2,112.0

2003

2004-

2005'

Overall result

(H/MIL)

Risks (HAMIL)

Subject to final confirmation in May 2002.

*

**Tentative.

a. This table presents the proposed program for the next three fiscal years.
b. For each project, indicate whether the strategic rewards and implementation risks are expected to be high (H), moderate

(M), or low (L).
Template created on 5/14/2002.

CAS Annex B3 (IFC & MIGA) for Russian Federation
Russian Federation - IFC and MIGA Program, FY 1999-2002
1999
IFC approvals (US$m)

2000

2001

2002

38.72 44.52 171.30 118.90

Sector (%)
COLLECTIVE INV VEHICLE
FINANCE & INSURANCE
FOOD & BEVERAGES
HEALTH CARE
INDUSTRIAL & CONS PROD
INFORMATION
NONMETALLIC MINERAL
OIL, GAS AND MINING
PULP & PAPER
TRANSPORTATION & WAREH
WHOLES. & RETAIL TRADE

Total

9
26

1
18

9
3
9
I
32

65

48

34

8
6
0
15
18

100

101

101

79
21
0
0

67
17
12
3

87
9
4
0

100

99

100

60

5
35

100

Investment instrument(%)
Loans
Equity
Quasi-Equity
Other

Total
MIGA guarantees Outstanding (US$m, gross)
Sector (%) (for FY02 only
Agriculture
Financial Services
Manufacturing
Mining
Oil & Gas
Information
Total

60
1
5
34

100

304.14 289.26 263.50 265.50

0
60
5
0
0
35
100

CAS Annex B4: Russian Federation
Summary of Nonlending Services
(As of May 13, 2002)
Completion FY

Cost (USS 000)'

Audiencea

Objective'

02

225

G/B/PD

K

02
02
02
02
02

150
430
140
330
200

G/PD
G/PD
G
G/PD
G/PD

PS
PD
K
K
K

Core AAA and Policy Dialog
Country Monitoring, Policy Dialog, Macro
Monitoring, Fiduciary Work
Quick-response Notes
Development Policy Review
Poverty TA
Poverty Assessment
Country Economic Memorandum

03-04
03-04
03
02-04
04
04

860
530
150
1,500
300
400

G/B
G
G/B
G/D/B
G/B
G/B/PD

K
PS
K
K
K
K

Improving the Business Environment and
Enhancing Competition
FIAS Studies of Administrative Barriers to
Investment in Various Regions
WTO Accession Policy Notes
Knowledge Economy
Science &Technology
SME Development
Financial Sector Assessment Program

02-04
02-04
03
03
03
03

750
300
300
160
300
700

G/PD
G
G/D/PD
G/D/PD
G/PD
G

K
PS
K
K
PS
K

02-04
02
02

350
90
265

G
G
G

PS
K
K

03-04
03
04
04

300
250
300
250

G
G
G
PD

K
K
K
PD

02
02
02
02-03
03
03

95
80
30
170
120
300

G
G
G/PD
G
G/PD
G

K
K
PS
PS
K
K

04

150

G

K

Product
Recent completion
Agricultural Policy for Russia
Improving the Efficiency of Public
Investment Expenditure
Unleashing Russia's Business Potential
Budget Management
Russia Labor Market
Child Welfare Study
Underway and Planned

Improving Public Sector Management
Civil Service Reform TA
Railways Restructuring PN
Energy and Infrastructure Strategy
Policy Notes on Communal Services
Ref., Energy Efficiency, Tariff Policy, etc.
Public Expenditure Review
Governance and Anti-Corruption
Self Governance and Civic Engagement
Mitigating Social and Environmental Risks
ICT in Education
Environment Capacity Assessment
Modeling of AIDS Epidemic
Pension Advisory Services
Health Advisory Services
Policy Notes on Public Social Services
Social Protection for Enterprise
Restructuring
a.
b.

Govermnent, donor, Bank, public dissemination
Knowledge generation, public debate, problem-solving

Cost reflect total expenses including those funded by other partners.

CAS Annex B5 - Russian Federation Social Indicators
Same regionlincome group

Latest single year
1970-75

1980-85

1993-99

Europe &
Central
Asia

Lowermiddleincome

134.2
0.6
66.4
2.0

143.9
0.7
71.9
2.1

146.2
-0.3
77.3
1.3

474.4
0.1
66.5
1.6

2,093.0
1.1
42.9
2.1

2.160
182

1,200
137

2.3
4.8

8.6

4.0
5.1
8.8

98
98
98

92
93
92

99
100
99

99
100
96

90
95
82

80
94
69

98
97
3

97
97

87
87
9

69
64
74

66
60
72

69
64
73

69
67
72

21

16
20

21
26

32
40

341
120

382
138
50
99

289
127

191
133

POPULATION
Total populabon, mid-year (millions)
Growth rate (%annual average for period)
Urban populabon (%of populaton)
Total fertility rate (births per woman)

POVERTY
(%of population)
National headcount index

29.9

INCOME
GNI per capita (US$) ^ in 2000
Consumer price Index (1995=100)

1,660*
402

INCOMEICONSUMPTION DISTRIBUTION
Share of income or consumption
Gini index
Lowest quintile (%of income or consumpton)
Highest quinble (%of income or consumpton)

40.0
4.4
53.7

SOCIAL INDICATORS
Public expenditure
Health (%of GDP)
Education (%of GNI)
Social security and welfare (%of GDP)

4.6
3.9

3.2

3.5

Net primary school enrollment rate

(%of age group)
Total
Male
Female
Access to an Improved water source

(%of population)
Total
Urban
Rural
Immunization rate

(%under 12 months)
Measles
DPT
Child malnutriton (%under 5 years)

Life expectancy at birth
(years)
Total
Male
Female

Mortality
Infant (per 1,000 live births)
Under 5 (per 1,000 live births)
Adult (15-59)
Male (per 1,000 populabon)
Female (per 1,000 population)
Matemal (per 100,000 live births)
Births attended by skilled health staff (%)

278
102

Note: u or u.u means zero or iess mnan nait te unit snown. Net enroliment ratios exceecing iuu inaicate aiscrepancies
between the estimates of school-age population and reported enrollment data. Latest year for access to improved water
source data is 2000.

CAS Annex B6 - Key Economic Indicators - Russian Federation

lndicator

Actual
1997
1998

1996

.
199.9

Esiima:
2q"0

20_1

Projected
2003
2004

20112

2005

National accounts (as % of GDP)
100

100

100

68
19
5
14

68
20
5
15

68
20
5
15

67
21
5
16

37
24

34
22

30
21

29
20

27
19

33
30

32
29

32
29

32
30

33
31

100

100

100

100

100

8

7

5

7

7

Industry

37

34

36

35

37

Services

56

58

58

57

56

Total Consumption
Gross domestic fixed investment
Govenmuent investment
Private investment

71
21
7
14

75
19
8
11

79
18
6
12

69
16
5
11

63
18
5
12

67
17
5
12

Exports (GNFS)b
Imports (GNFS)

25
21

24
21

31
26

44
27

44
24

Gross domestic savings
Gross national savingsc

29
27

25
23

21
16

31
25

37
33

Gross domestic producta
Agriculture

Memorandum items
Gross domestic product
(US$ million at current prices)
GNP per capita (US$, Atlas method)

100

100
..

..

418617 428464 282429 193615 259595 309935 335604 371863 405231 439795
2610

2300

1780

1670

1750

2130

2430

2690

2970

Real annual growth rates (%, calculated from 1997 prices)
-3.4
0.9
Gross domestic product at market prices
Gross Domestic Income
-2.5
1.5

-4.9
-7.2

5.4
5.5

9.0
16.7

5.0
3.3

4.0
4.1

4.0
2.5

4.5
3.8

4.5
4.0

Real annual per capita growth rates (%, calculated from 1997 prices)
1.2
-4.6
Gross domestic product at rnarket prices
-3.1
3.3
3.3
-2.0
Total consumption
Private consumption
3.9
5.7
-3.3

5.8
-3.1
-4.9

9.6
15.4
20.0

5.4
4.9
8.9

4.7
4.3
4.7

4.5
2.8
3.1

5.0
4.1
4.1

5.0
3.5
3.3

Balance of Payments (US$ millions)
Exports (GNFS)b
Merchandise FOB
Imports (GNFS)b
Merchandise FOB
Resource balance
Net current transfers
Current account balance
Net private foreign direct investment
Long-term loans (net)
Official
Private
Other capital (net, incl. errors &onunissions)
Change inreserveS
Memorandum items
Resource balance (% of GDP)
Real annual growth rates ( YR97 prices)
Merchandise exports (FOB)
Primary

Manufactures
Merchandise imports (CIF)

2350

103847 103087
90564 89008
86730 91980
68093 71982
17117 11107
72
-360
9589
1047
1657
-2822
2229
-5051
-13545

87258
74883
74443
58014
12815
-409
506

84738 115200 113242 112887 112952 115951 119094
75666 105566 103042 104300 105700 107300 108900
52970 62290 74090 74694 77995 81103 84670
39536 44862 53390 55743 58206 60526 63057
31768 52910 39152 38193 34958 34848 34423
440
542
90
-305
-336
-372
-405
20410 41846 29495 28516 25796 26173 26156

1679
3494
3033
461

1496
1348
-347
1524
2014
9636 -2347
-5562
-4592 -4593
577
-688
-3437 -3893
2010
7626 -2924
-4873
-1155
-700
-5292 -22402 -15584 -17523 -12125 -13191

2975
-5827
-4061
-1766

4052
-4724
-3748
-975

4398
-7017
-3421
-3597

-9735

-7020

-2745

5121

-928

10764

-3827

-18415

-10119

-6240

-5321

-3215

-2154

4.1

2.6

4.5

16.4

20.4

12.6

11.4

9.4

8.6

7.8

7.5

3.0

-1.2

1.9

2.1

2.6

2.6

2.7

2.7

2.7

7.8

..

..

..

8.6
12.8

14.4
14.1

2.7
0.8

2.7
1.1

2.7
1.7

..

-3.4
-15.8

..

-8.5
-31.1

..

20.2
15.6

22.8
16.5

2.6
4.2

(Continued)

CAS Annex B6 - Key Economic Indicators -Russian Federation
(Continued)
iAcua]
Indicator

6

Public finance (as % of GDP at market prices)'
Current revenues
32.7
Current expenditures
34.3
Current accountsurplus (+) or deficit(-)
-1.6
Capital expenditure
8.1
Foreign financing
1.3

1997

.

1998

.

1999

Estimate
2000

2001

2002

Projected
'003
2004

2005

35.5
36.1
-0.6
9.1
2.2

31.6
33.9
-2.3
6.9
5.4

33.5
32.2
1.3
5.4
3.0

37.2
29.5
7.7
5.7
0.3

34.4
28.9
5.6
5.3
-1.5

34.0
28.7
5.3
5.4
-1.4

33.5
28.1
5.4
5.5
-1.6

33.5
27.4
6.1
5.5
-1.2

33.5
27.0
6.5
5.5
-1.6

17.0
32.1
18.1

18.4
24.9
49.5

24.5
47.6
52.3

20.9
48.1
71.3

21.4
57.2
158.3

25.5
47.1
85.8

26.1
25.7
80.2

27.2
21.6
77.1

28.1
20.5
12.2

29.0
18.9
-30.8

104.8
107.5
97.5

100.0
100.0
100.0

85.2
96.3
88.5

84.5
96.0
88.1

115.5
94.1
122.8

109.9
92.9
118.2

108.4
96.4
112.5

107.0
99.8
107.1

105.7
102.7
102.9

104.5
105.2
99.3

Real exchange rate (US$/LCU)f

91.7

100.0

72.0

47.0

58.9

71.1

73.1

75.2

76.2

77.3

Consumer price index (%change)
GDPdeflator(%change)

47.5
44.2

14.8
14.5

27.7
16.3

85.7
65.0

20.8
40.5

17.7
17.9

14.2
17.7

12.8
12.5

11.5
11.5

10.4
10.4

Monetary indicators
M2/GDP
Growth of M2 (%)
Privatesectorcreditgrowth/
total credit growth (%)
Price indices(
Merchandise
Merchandise
Merchandise

a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.

YR97 =100)
export price index
inport price index
terms oftrade index

GDP at factor cost
"GNFS" denotes "goods and nonfactor services."
Includes net unrequited transfers excluding official capital grants.
Includes use of IMF resources.
Consolidated central govermnent.
"LCU" denotes "local currency units." An increase in US$/LCU denotes appreciation.

CAS Annex 57 - Key Exposure Indicators - Russian Federation
Actual
1997
1 )98

1999

125044

157187

178741

175001

Net disbursements (US$m)a

6707

7224

16380

Totaldebtservice(TDS)
(US$m)a

6931

7700

119.2
29.9
6.6

150.7
36.7
7.4

..

Indicator
Total debt outstanding and
disbursed (TDO) (US$m)a

Debt and debt service indicators
(%)
TDO/XGSb
TDO/GDP
TDS/XGS
ConcessionaVlTDO
IBRD exposure indicators (%)
IBRD DS/public DS
Preferred creditor DS/public
DS (%)C
IBRD DS/XGS
IBRD TDO (US$m)
Of which present value of
guarantees (US$m)
Share of IBRD portfolio(%)
IDA TDO (US$m)d

Estimate
2000

Projected
2003

2001

201)2

162023

157727

152157

-4193

-4352

-4412

9100

9761

11510

..

203.0
63.3
10.3
0.0

205.3
90.4
11.5
0.0

1.9
21.3

2.5
18.9

4.4
24.9

0.1

0.2

2509

1996

2
0

2004

2005

145416

141424

135631

-5570

-6741

-3992

-5793

16490

18489

19367

16141

17654

139.9
62.4
9.9
0.0

137.8
50.9
14.4
0.0

132.0
45.3
16.0
0.0

125.4
39.1
16.7
0.0

118.2
34.9
13.5
0.0

109.7
30.8
14.3
0.0

5.9
63.1

6.2
39.8

6.0
22.0

7.1
29.7

8.3
29.8

8.3
22.5

7.3
16.8

0.4

0.6

0.6

0.7

0.9

1.1

5053

6337

6707

6844

6891

6708

6235

0.9
5864

0.8
5513

5
0

5
0

5
0

6
0

6
0

5
0

5
0

5
0

5
0

a. Includes public and publicly guaranteed debt, private nonguaranteed, use of IMF credits and net shortterm capital.
b. "XGS" denotes exports of goods and services, including workers' remittances.
c. Preferred creditors are defined as IBRD, IDA, the regional multilateral development banks, the RMF, and the
Bank for International Settlements.
d. Includes present value of guarantees.
e. Includes equity and quasi-equity types of both loan and equity instruments.

CAS Annex B8 (IFC) for Russian Federation
Russian Federat
Statement of IFC's
Held and Disbursed Portfolio
As of March, 2002
(In US Dollars Millions)
Disbursed

Held
FY Approval
1996/98
1997/99
1996/98
2001
1999
1999
1998
1995
1994
2000
1998
2002
2001
2001
1996
2001
1994
1998/01
2001
2002
1995
1995
2002
2002
2002
1996/00
1998/01

Loan
Equity Quasi
Company
0
13.49
Alpha Cement
Aminex
0
6.22
0
15
Borsteklo
15
0
BVF
5.47
0
Campina
0
0.6
DLV
DreVo
0
0.9
5.7
First NIS Fund
0
Framlington Fund
0
8
0
15
IkeaMOS
16.86
0
Mosenergo
NBD
2.5
0
0
NMC
2.1
10
0
OMGC
4
Pioneer First
0
0
Probusiness Bank
0
0
7.5
RTDC
Ramstore
53.9
0
13
0
Ruscam
0.1
0
Rus Standard Bank
RussTechFnd
0
1
0
1.5
Russia Registry
SCF Restructured
0
1.1
Sonic Duo
30
0
Swedwood Tichvin
5.69
0
UNEXIM Bank
5.28
0
1.5
ZAOStoraenso
5.4

Total Portfolio:

165.3

81.51

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
5
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

Loan Equity Quasi Partic
0 13.49
0
0
0
0
0
6.22
0
0
15
0
0
0
0
5.64
0
0
0
0
0
0 5.47
0
0
0
0
0.6
0
0
0
0
0.89
0
0
0
0
5.7
0
0
0
0
8
0
0
0
15
0
0
0
0
0
0
0 16.86
0
2.5
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
10
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
4
0
0
0
0
5
0
7.5
0
0
0
0 53.9
0
0
0
6.5
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1.5
0
0
0
0
0
0
1.5
0
0
1.1
0
0
10 18.71
0
0 5.29
0
0
0
0
0
0 5.28
0
0
0
0
5.4
1.5
0
0

5

10 139.6

Partic

Approvals Pending Commitment
Baltiski Leasing
BemaGold
Center-Invest
Delta Leasing
DLV
Egar Technology
Ford Russia
Pakenso- RI
Volga-Dnepr

Loan
2
0
2
10
3
0
55
0
25

Equity
0
1
0
0
0
1.5
0
0.2
0

Quasi
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

Partic
0
0
0
0
0
0
55
0
25

Total Pending Commitment:

97

2.7

0

80

2002
2001
2002
2002
1999
2002
2001
2001
2001

72.64

5

5.29

CAS Annex B8 - Russian Federaton
Operations Portfofo ()BRDfDA and Grants)
As06 Date031SM02
Closed Projects

IBROIDATot DOhbund
(Ads)
0f,ht

hb. teen
wrqpd

Tetal04b1an;d(Cled)
afwhlthha beenrpe
TOtW
Dsburnad
(Adtos Closd)
Ofwhicdhasbcee repaid
TotalUndrlltoed (ACo)
TOtalUrdboel (Cbsed)
TotalUrd _thbos
(AdI
Clood)

22

1231.20
229.77

6,735.00
650.40
7,999.18
889.14

1,399.37
0.00
1,399.37

Ache Prolects

Dffsr4nie Between
Expected andActual

last PSFt
SupervIsion Rating
Project ID
P00B801
P035764
P044200
P042822
P045622
P035761
P008825
P050474
P008803
P050891
P040409
P036973
P008839
P008821
P008828
P050469
P008814
P008827
P034579
P008831
P046061
P038551
P008832
P064238
P008800
P008823
P058587
P046496
P050487
P053830
P008806
Overall result

Pject Nanme

Dw4onment
lmplementatlon
9-411101:1111
Pronamss
BIODIV CONSV (GEF)
S
S
BRIDGE REHAB
S
S
BUREAU OF ECON POL S
S
CAP MRKT DEV
S
S
COAL IAP
S
S
COMMUNITY SOC INF
S
S
EDUC INNOV
S
S
EDUC REFORM
S
S
EGY EFF
U
U
ELEC SECTR REF
S
S
EMG OIL SPILL M)TIGATIC S
S
ENT HOUSING DIVST
S
S
ENTERPRISE SUPPORT S
S
ENVMGMT
U
U
FIN INSTS
S
U
FISC FED &REG FISC RE n/a
n/a
HEALTH REFORM PILOT S
S
HOUSING
5
5
LAND REF IMPL SUPPORS
S
LEGAL REFORM
S
S
MOSC URB TRANS
S
S
MUN HEATING
U
U
MUN WATER &WW
S
U
N RESTRUCT
U
U
ODS CONSMP PHASEOU' S
S
PORTFOLIO DEVT
S
S
REG FISC TA
5
5
SOC PROT IMPL
S
S
STATE STATS SYST
S
S
SUST FORESTRY PILOT-4 U
U
URBAN TRANSPORT
S
S

a. Intended diSbursements to date minus actual disbursements to date as projected at appraisal.

Odtlnal Aount In USSMtltlons
Fiscal Year
1996
1996
1997
1996
1996
1996
1997
2001
1995
1997
1995
1996
1994
1995
1994
2002
1997
1995
1994
1996
2001
2001
2001
2001
1996
1995
2000
1998
1999
2000
1995
Result

IBRO

IDA

GRANT

Dt bursementr
Cancel.

20.1
350
22.6
89
25
200
71
50
70
40
99
300
200
110
200
120
66
400
s0
58
60
85
122.5
s0

195.3
33.8
56.5
3
40

122.7

59.5

150.7

60
40
30
28.6
30
60
329
3415.7

6.9

80.1

77.6
746.1

Undlsb.
2.1
13.5
4.7
31.4
7.4
49.2
51.5
50
9.9
37.6
1.4
126
150.6
46.2
65.2
120
41.8
60.9
21.2
28.6
58.3
85
122.5
80
14.6
7.9
25.8
13.1
27.7
59.4
2.6
1416

Orig. Fnn Revd
4
208.8
3.4
65.1
7.4
86.4
29.1
4.3
86.4
37.6
1.4
228.7
150.6
46.2
124.7
33.3
211.6
21.2
28.6
13
4.1
20.4
1
21.7
14.9
9.1
13.1
11.1
5.9
80.2
1573.2

-5.5
50.8
0.4
9.8
7.4
11.2

-0.1
37.6
1.1
42.3
16.6
-0.6
27.2

60.9
-11.5
19.1
0.8

-12.8
12.8

2.4
1.2
271.1

Annex B9, Page 1 of 7

Annex B9
Country Assistance Program Matrix
Key Development
Objectives

Financial

I _________________________________________
l.Improve business
environment and enhance
competition
Remove administrative
barriers to business activity
and investment

Regional Private
Sector Guarantee (FY
04)
Economic
Development
Infrastructure (FY04)

Bank Group Products
1
AAA
1
|Il

Key Progress Benchmarks

Partners

Knowledge/
L earn ing

WTO Accession TA
(FY 02-04)

WBI WTO program

FIAS studies of
administrative barriers
to investment in various
regions (FY 02-04).

Monitoring systems to
track changes and
evaluate impact of
reform measures

Assessment of potential
burden of EA
requirements and
practices at local level

Joint IBRD/IFC
assistance to regional
and local governments

Significant progress towards WTO
accession
Subsidies to natural monopolies
decrease significantly
Share of FDI and SMEs in GDP and
employment increases significantly

IMF
EBRD
USAID
TACIS
DFID
CIDA
British Council
OECD

Volume of commercial bank lending
to SMEs increases significantly

.

.~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Annex B9, Page 2 of 7

Enterprise Support

SME Development
Project (FY 05)
IFC investments

Policy Notes on
facilitating SME startups
(FY03)

IFC Private Enterprise
Partnership

Share of manufacturing and services
in GDP increases

MIGA programs

Deregulation package improves
regulatory environment as measured
in enterprise survey

National Pollution
Abatement Fund
(ongoing)

Government/ Central Bank program
financial sector reform program on
track

GEF ODS
consumption and
production phaseout
grants to enterprises
(ongoing)
Potential GEF
renewable Energy
Facility

2

Annex B9, Page3 of 7

Restructure priority sectors,
Privatize agricultural land

Ongoing operations to
restructure conmunal
housing, heating and
water supply
Railways
Restructuring APL
(FY 05)
Communal Services
APL (FY05)
Agric. Sector Loan
(FY05)
Housing Markets
(FY05)

Railways Restructuring
Policy Notes (FY02)
Energy and
Infrastructure Strategy
Note (FY02)

Dissemination using
seminars, internet,
quarterly economic
reports, WBI

Agriculture Sector
Update (FY02
Policy Notes on
communal services
reform, energy
efficiency in public
sector, tariff policy, etc.
(FY 03-04)

LARIS H (FY04)
IFC Investments

Enhance protection of
property rights, contract
enforcement and corporate
governance

Ongoing Capital
Markets Development
Project
Ongoing LARIS
Project

Improve financial
intermediation

IFC investments

IFC Private Enterprise
Partnership

WBI Corporate
Governance program

Ongoing support to
Securities commission

WBI Learning Program
on improving
governance in local
print media (FY03)

Ongoing TA to Central
Bank
FSAP (FY03)

3

Annex B9, Page4 of 7

Strengthen Russia's role in
the global knowledge
economy

Science and
Technology Project
(FY 05)

Science &Technology
(FY02)
Knowledge Economy
and eRussia (FY03)

Dissemination using
seminars, internet,
quarterly economic
reports, WBI

2. Improving Public Sector
Management

Strengthen and modernize
civil service and governance
capacity

Judicial Reform
Support Project (FY
04)

Ongoing support on
Judicial Reform
Govemance and anticorruption work (FY04)

Implementation of civil service
reformr action plan published before
end-2002

USAID
TACIS
DFID

Allowance for civil service reform
costs in 2003-05 budgets

CIDA
SIDA
OECD

Civil Service Reform
TA (FY 02-04)

Enterprise and household surveys
demonstrate significant improvement
in transparency and quality of public
services.

Self-governance and
civic engagement
(FY04)

Continued improvements in tax and
customs admninistration as measured
by tax receipts and public perception.

Assessment of civil
service participation in
EA process

Decrease in the amount of unfunded
mandates over time.

EA___
process___
____ _____ ____
_____
_ _________ ____ ____

Regional fiscal reform loan on track

4

Annex B9, Page S of 7

Improve fiscal management
at national and subnational
level

Treasury Development
(APL) (FY 02)

WBI Learning
Programs in intergovernmental fiscal
relations and urban and
city management
capacity building
(FY03)

Regional Fiscal
Reform (FY 02)
Tax Administration
Modernization Project
II (FY 03)
St. Petersburg
Economic
Development (FY 03)
Customs
Modernization (FY
03)
3. Mitigating Social and

Reduction of incidence and depth of

Environmental Risks

poverty.

WHO

Equity of access to and quality of
education and health care are
improved

USAID
TACIS
DFID
CIDA
UNICEF

Improve health status,
services and finance

Ongoing health
projects

Modeling of AIDS
epidemic (FY02)

WBI HIV/AIDS
training program

Health Reform
Implementation
Project (FY 03)

Health Advisory
Services (FY 03)

Dissemination using
seminars, internet,
quarterly economic
reports, WBI

TB/AIDS Project (FY
03)
0. .welfare/care
Improve reliance and
delivery of modem
educational services

Ongoing education
projects
ICT in Education
Delivery APL (FY 04)

Information and
Communication
Technologies in
General and Initial
Vocational Education
(FY02)

Effective steps taken to arrest further
acceleration in TB and HIV
epidemics
Development of regional/local social
services initiated

Dissemination using
seminars, internet,
quarterly economic
reports, WBI

Improved targeting and
administration of social protection
benefits

UNDP

Annex B9, Page 6 of 7

Mitigate income insecurity,
vulnerability and risk of
poverty

Ongoing social
protection projects
Social
Protection/Child
Welfare (FY04).

Poverty TA (FY02- 04)

Child Welfare Study
(FY02)

WBI Learning
Programs on social
services (Multi-pillar
Pension System, Child
Welfare System,
Support to the poorest,
etc.) (FY 03-04)

Pension Advisory
Services (FY02-03)

WBI Poverty Analysis
Initiative

Labor Market Review
(FY02)

Dissemination using
seminars, internet,
quarterly economic
reports, WBI

Poverty Assessment
(FY04)

Policy notes on Public
Social Services (e.g.
mitigating
redundancies,
preserving indigenous
peoples of the North,
local social welfare and
social protection
implementation)
(FY03)

Work program for poverty
measurement, monitoring and
analysis on track, as per MOU
between Bank, DFID, Goskomstat
and Ministry of Labor
Implementation of work program and
action matrix for poverty
measurement, monitoring and
analysis over the next four years
Progress toward sustainable pension
reform

Social Protection for
Eniterprise
Restructuring (FY 04)
Social Impact of WTO
accession (FY03)

6

Annex B9, Page 7 of 7

Mitigate environmental
risks and support global
conmmons

Ongoing forestry and
environmental
management projects
Ongoing GEF ODS
phaseout grants,
biodiversity and
habitat conservation
grants

Environmental Capacity
Assessment (FY03)

Dissemination using
seminars, intemet,
quarterly economic
reports, WBI

Improved environmental
management
Increased protection of forests and
protected areas
Decrease in energy intensity of GDP
Reduction in carbon emissions
Better access to water and sanitation

GEF projects in
regional seas,
biodiversity, land
management and
energy efficiency
(FY03-04)
Ongoing communal
reforms in water and
sewerage and district

7

Annex B10

Russian Federation
Summary of Development Priorities

Network area

Country

Major issue b

performance'a

Country

Bank priorityc Reconciliation of country and Bank

prorityC

prioritiesd

Poverty Reduction & Economic Management
Poverty reduction

Fair

Diversification of growth

High

High

Economic policy

Excellent

Sustained implementation

High

High

Public sector

Fair

Administrative reform

High

High

Gender

Fair

Gap in male-female life expectancy

Moderate

Moderate

Fair

Increasing inequity in access; inadequate

High

High

Poor

financing; outdated vocational education system
Poor health status; inequities in access to and

High

High

Fair

quality of health services; weak risk pooling
Poor targeting of benefits; inadequate financing

High

High

Human Development Department
Education
Health, nutrition & population
Social protection

admin capacity at local level; monitoring cap at federal
Environmentally & Socially Sustainable
Development
Rural development
Environment

Fair

Rural poverty, lack of ag. enterprise restructuring

Moderate

High

Ongoing dialogue through AAA

Poor

limited access to services & non-ag. employment
Weak institutional framework for environmental

Low

High

Ongoing dialogue through AAA,

management and inadequate funding

ongoing investment projects;
support of grant and demo efforts;
partnership with other donors,
NGO and civil society.

Social development

Fair

Low level of civil society engagement in

High

High

policymaking, social marginalization
Finance, Private Sector & Infrastructure
Financial sector
Private sector

poor

low level of financial intermediation to real sector
lack of competion and new firm entry

moderate

high

fair

high

high

Energy & mining

Fair to good

Regulation, power & gas restructuring

high

high

Infrastructure

Fair

Regulation, pricing, service availability

high

high

a.
b.
c.
d.

Ongoing dialogue

Use "excellent," good," "fair," or 'poor.'
Indicate principal country-spedific problems (e.g., for poverty reduction, 'rural poverty;" for education, "female secondary completion;" for environment, "urban air pollution").
To indicate priority, use "low," "moderate," or "high."
Give explanation, if priorities do not agree; for example, another MDB may have the lead on the issue, or there may be ongoing dialogue.

Annex B I I
Page I of I

Comprehensive Assistance Framework (areas ofplanned& ongoing cooperation in CAS priority areas in italics)

i

In. proring Bll'iic

'e. S,M,

[en

me nIsndJhandng olrEppctiuln

milr

-i

.-

|

-b

v

l.:

r.

,,t>

Z~~~~~~~~

..

..,

'.pr

rI.rr-

j

Iu

s; menalRisk

5,4,

Pb~

is 7

u

A

2

in
<
S

;t

0~z.

U
O.sO0

7;

'''";' '--;'-" "8-'-t;

|

> -&

U

v

=.

to

Continue dialogue with
Investments in
and assistance to key
nfraslructure sectors,
players to create level
epecially rail and air
playing field and
ansport, power and
esminate investment
gs, municipal
obstacles related to
tiilities and wirefree
weak enforcement of
tlecommunications
legal and regulatory
policy advice on
framework, tax system, sector reforms in the
accounting and auditing DOr and gas
rules and bankmjptcy
;ectors, and railways
mechanisms.
nd air navigation
coordinating donor
holicy
advice on
restructuring the
lecons sector

Investments in the
corpormte sector to
target measurable
pgrss in
transparency and
corporate governance
Policy advice on
corporate governance
including developing
corporate governance
, rating
agencies,
trengthening the
legal basis tbanugh
amndments to
company and sec
laws

-support to Russian
think tanks that develop
legislation to reduce
adnin barriers faced by
SMEs
-strengthen local
busines assoc in
selected regions
- continue work on the
national level through
Small Business
Working Group
-strengthen network of
Busioess Support
Institutions
Monitor implementation

-support adoption of - TA to select
IAS and the
commercial banks
conversion process -expand Loan Portfolio
Guarantee program for
SME
-participate in working
grp on banking
eform
Microfinsase Policy
Working Group
-continue support
leasing, credit coop,
venture cap firms

_

r7

-Investments aimed at
strengthening the role of
regional andforeign
banks ,bankr
privatization,non-bank
fin institutions inC.
insuranceand leasing.
-Rapid build up of the
small business financing
program
-TA aimed at
resructuring failed
institutions, introducing
IAS accounts, creating
deposit insurance and
swe,visory capacity.
andprivatizadon

~~~

trS

~~1

-'A

.- R

high-profile court
cases to defend its own
rights and those of other
investors.
- Use

-Pursuing an active policy
dialogue on a new
regulatory regime for
nuclear power safety.

- support to Russian

-support intergovfiscal HIV/AIDSS
think tanks: expected
reform efforts
wareness and
contribution in
-tax administration
prevention efforts
deregulation, tax and
TB controlprogram
custom code
preventive health
-tax policy assistance to
ctivities "Healthy
focus on VAT and
ussia 2020"
corporate profit tax
family planning
-facilitate bilateral
tivities: maternal
rnfessional contacts in
md child health
the judicial system and
support legal education
-local governance and
municipal reform
pmgram

-working group
on pension reform
-child
abandonment
prevention
activities

TA to eco-business
associations and replication
ofbest eavimnmental
ractices
-assistance to selected
businesses and
municipalities adopting
environ friendly practices
-strengthenforest resource
management
-replicate and disseminate
environ edu and advocacy
prgirans by NGOs

of deregulation

legis)ation
-W1 Accession:
analysis of poverty
implicationsand
I complementarypolicies
-removing
j O administrativebarriers
to invstment

so)

Water utility reform

-TA to Probusinessbank -British Council:
- Civ service reform
and on leasing
Science and
- collaboration on
Technology Initiative judidcal reform
- British Council:
cooperationon
GDLN
___________

TACIS: SME support

_

-Public erpendilureand- Communicable
budget management
iseaseprogram:
- regionalfiscalreform
IVmodel
work

__________

p

-OECD white
paper on regulation
-SIDA: Water

-EU-TACIS:
restructuring of the
banking system

7

utility reform

-OECD white paperon
deregulation
-Civi Service Reform

-IUF: FSAP

Communicable
diseaseprogram
0WHO,
bilateral

(CIDA, SIDA, other

donors)

bilaterals)
0

-Briish Council.
education policy
evelopment mgt
training initial
vocational
education,
extbookas

-pension reform -Environmental investment
collaboration
-poverty analysis;
tatistical work

-rural
developmentustainable rural
livelihoods

-SIDA: ODS production
closure

IBRD27188R

RUSSIAN FEDERATION
.K),'.

,REPUBLICS

KRAIS OBLASTS OKRUGS

I.....

:::h:a

vi

--3

5--

. II

I

- 1i -

~

~~ ~ ~

~

,

,

I

,-':

P'

i[I-

'l

-

~

.

~

~

_

~

~

-

.

.

.
_~

~

,,..~v

-

56

I8I\
VKRAe.
s

_1e R,

7~~~~~~~~..4

LAS 444

Cf r hs.

SYRAn

Us
50466S

E

R

s5 ri~
RFP

Y

|

~ ~r..rJ-

LLl. A

Y;r~

12

''7--''.>

-

j/

6'

r (&. is->-'~~~

.

56

|

''OSO M
,,Aa6 1

11.NORTHWEST
7 No,g.rod
8 Pskov
9 Le-irgroo
10 Si.Pot.rsb,rg City

-

L

18. Orol
19 Ry-za

20 Smolensk
21 Tv.,

.

it

ti

-

-.-

'
100

k

-

*

20

0

IV.CENTRAL
CHERNOZYOM
25. Belg-ied
26. Kursk
27. Lipeltk
28. Tombo29. Vr-e.h

3 .h

-

0

-

I

-Ht

62
62+

K IrMF5E

Ill.CENTRAL
12. Bryansk 22. Tula
13. vonovo 23 Vladimir
14 Kalugo 24 Yaroslovl
1. Kostroea
16 Moscow
17. M-c- CRy

g.-

.~

~~~25 -!
_-

0

28 u

9

----'41

~ ~
w
KAAHSA
\
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~EV.~~~~~~~~.
/gf
200 30600 oosoM LOS
r~
>* ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
.L;: 1 200
300 1n 00

11 Kolini-grod

_

_

~

RAI,1

3-

-

.

_.

-

A

...

I

k
I_

1 NORTH
I. Arkhongel
2. Norow
3. Korehla
4. Koai
0. Murmons6. Vologda

' l,

I

r
I

_,,~

-I

tI I l

-

.~~~~~ .

OMNIA1

i

.

ILI
0~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

_

-,L

r

V. NORTHCAUCASUS
30. Checke
31. DOgkeostoi
32. Ingush
33. Kabsrdin,o-Bolkar
34 Kre,n.d.r
35. Adygya

Vt. VOLGA
40 AW.kh..
41 Kalm,ykia
Khlmg Tangh
42. Penza
43 Samwra
44 S-1v

36 N.rth Ossetha
37. Row-a

45 Tw.,Ors.
46. V.1g.gr.d

38 Stra-ropoi
39 K
-ch-k..

47 Ulyanoosk

A~~~~6

8.
VIl. VOLGO-VYATKA
48. Chuvash
49. Kiro50. Msr E8I
51. M.r, 0
52. Nizhniy Nw-gored

VIII. URAL
IX. WESTERNSIBERIA
53. B-hk-t.m61. Alt.i
54 CheIyabinsk
62. Gorny Alti
55. Kurg63. Kemerovo
56 Orenburg
64. Navosibiruk
57 Perm
65. Omsk
58. Kami-P-iak 66. Tmk
59. Ud-ur
60. Sverdi-vk

67. Tyme
68. Kh-nt

Mansi

69 Y.maa-Ne.ets

X. EASTERN
SIBERIA
XI. FAREAST
70 Bu-y.t
80. Amur
71. Chit.
81. K-mchotha
72 Agin Boryot
82. Karyak
73. Irlkutk
83. 0hobaro-sk
74. Ust-Ordyn Buryat
84. JewishAO
75. K--y-k
85 M.udn
76. E-en
77. Khaka

78. Timir
79. Tuv

86. Chukot
87. P,i.-rk;

88 S.kk.li,
89 S-ha (Ykw)
DECEMBER1995

