Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized

Document of
The World Bank

Report No. 23633-UNI

MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENT
OF THE
INTERNATrIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION

Public Disclosure Authorized

Public Disclosure Authorized

AND
THE INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION
TO THE
EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS
ON AN
INTERIM STRATEGY UPDATE
FOR
THE FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF NIGERIA

FEBRUARY 13,2002

Macroeconomic 3 Division,
World Bank (AFTP3)
Executive Vice Presidency,
IFC (CEXVP)

CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS (May 1, 2001)
Currency Unit
US$1

=
=

I Naira

Nigerian Naira (N)
114Ns

0.0088 US$
FISCAL YEAR
January I -- December 31

ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS
ADB
ADF
ASYCUDA
CAS
CBO
CDD
CDF
CFAA
CPAR
DFID
DHS
ECOWAS
EMCAP
FDI
FGN
FTA
IAS
IASC
IDG

Jisu
LGA
MTEF
NAPEP
NEPA
NCP
NITEL
NNPC
NPC
NPV
ODA
PER
PRSP
SAP
SME
UJNPF

African Development Bank
African Development Fund
Automatic System for Customs Data Entry
Country Assistance Strategy
Community Based Organization
Community-Driven Development
Comprehensive Development Framework
Country Financial Accountability Assessment
Country Procurement Assessment Review
Department for International Development (UK)
Demographic and Health Survey
Economic Community of West African States
Economic Management Capacity Building Project
Foreign Direct Investment
Federal Government of Nigeria
Free Trade Association
International Accounting Standards
International Accounting Standards Committee
International Development Goals
Joint Interim Strategy Update
Local Government Authority
Medium Term Expenditure Framework
National Poverty Eradication Program
Nigerian Electric Power Authority
National Council on Privatization
Nigerian Telephone Company
Nigeria National Petroleum Company
National Planning Commission
Net Present Value
Official Development Assistance
Public Expenditure Review
Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper
Structural Adjustment Program
Small and Medium Enterprises
United Nations Population Fund

The World Bank
Vice President
Country Director
Task Manager

Mr. Callisto Madavo, AFRVP
Mr. Mark Tomlinson, AFC12
Mr. Jerome Wolgin, AFPG

The International Financial Corporation
Mr. Peter Woicke, CEXVP
Mr. Akbar Husain, CAFW5

THE FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF NIGERIA
WORLD BANK GROUP INTERIM STRATEGY UPDATE

TABLE OF CONTENTS

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY .......................................................

I. NIGERIA'S DEVELOPMENT CHALLENGES ...........................................

i

.

A. MANAGING THE FIGHT AGAINST POVERTY ...............................................................
2
B. MANAGING THE TRANSITION TO A PRIVATE SECTOR-LED ECONOMY ............................................................... 6
C. MANAGING THE EXTERNAL ENVIRONMENT
..
13
13......................................

II. FRAMEWORK FOR BANK GROUP ASSISTANCE .......................................... 14
A. THE GOVERNMENT OF NIGERIA'S DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY
..............................................................
B. BANK GROUP TRACK RECORD ...............................................................
C. STRATEGIC FRAMEWORK ...............................................................

III. PROGRAM FOR FY02 ..........................................

14
16
17
25

A. PROGRAM DESCRIPTION ...............................................................

25

B. DONOR COORDINATION ...............................................................
C. RISKS ...............................................................

28
29

IV. GETTING TO A FULL CAS IN CY02 .......................................... 30

TABLES:
I.
II.

III.
IV.

Progress in Meeting the International Development Goals
Structure of the Nigerian Economy, 2000
Nigeria: Ongoing Activities
Nigeria: Planned Activities, FY2001/02

ATTACHMENTS:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.

Debt Sustainability
Percentage Distribution of Poverty in Nigeria
Indices of Wealth
Procurement Reform Recommendations
Financial Management Reform Recommendations
CDF Consultations in Nigeria
Voices of the Poor
Preliminary CDF Matrix
Overview of Current Bank Group Private Sector Development Activities in Nigeria
WBI Programs for Nigeria (FY02-04)

ANNEXES:
A2.
B2.
B3.
B3.
B4.
B5.
B6.
B7.
B8.
B8.

Nigeria at a Glance
Selected Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
Bank Group Program Summary: IBRD/IDA
IFC and MIGA Program
Summary of Nonlending Services
Social Indicators
Key Economic Indicators
Key Exposure Indicators
Status of Bank Group Operations
Statement of IFC's Held and Disbursed Portfolio

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
I. On May I1, 2000 the Board discussed Interim Strategy for Nigeria for the fiscal year 2001
(IDA/R2000-49 [IFC/R2000-60]). At that time, Management planned to submit to the Board a
full Country Assistance Strategy within a year. With the development of the Poverty Reduction
Strategy Paper (PRSP) process, a full Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) would need to be
formulated on the basis of the PRSP. Developing a PRSP has taken more time than expected and
a Interim Strategy Update has thus been prepared, with a full CAS to be submitted in CY 2002.
By then it is expected that Nigeria will have completed its PRSP.
2. Nigeria is going through a difficult political and economic transition after 30 years of
military rule. The new federal government, headed by President Olusegun Obasanjo, faces an
array of complicated issues that must be overcome for Nigeria to be successful in its transition to
a democratic political system and a vibrant market economy. These include: (a) pervasive
poverty and widespread unemployment; (b) deterioration of government institutions over the
period of military rule, and consequently inadequate capacity at all levels of government to
deliver critical services effectively; (c) sporadic violence between ethnic groups; (d) a legacy of
widespread corruption; (e) an intense debate over federalism and the relationships among the
Federal Government, the state governments and local government authorities (LGAs); and (g) a
concern among Nigerians that the military could once more return to power.
3. Nigeria is in many ways two economies. Part of it is a middle-income oil-producing
economy of perhaps five million people and a per capita income of about US$2200. The other
part is a non-oil producing economy of 115 million people (about 66% of whom are in poverty)
with an average per capita income of perhaps US$200. It is clear that the fundamental cause of
poverty in Nigeria is the economic stagnation that the country has experienced for almost two
decades. Substantial poverty reduction would require around five percent annual growth in
agriculture (2.0 to 2.3% in per capita terms) and eight to ten percent annual growth (5.3% to
7.3% in per capita terms) in the non-agricultural economy (excluding government and the oil and
gas sectors).
4.
The Bank Group's program in Nigeria cannot be looked at through the lens of financial
resources alone. As the Interim Strategy document presented to the Board last year indicated, a
basic principle that guides the overall design of our strategy is that, by and large, Nigeria has
sufficient resources of its own to achieve sustainable development and that the resources brought
by the donor community including the World Bank are always going to be relatively small
compared to the resources which Nigeria has available to it. Therefore, the major role of the
Bank will be to help the Nigerians build their capacity to manage their own resources
effectively, and this theme will inform all of the Bank's activities in Nigeria.

5.
There are three sets of actors contributing to development in Nigeria - the government, the
private sector, and local communities. Accordingly, the Bank's framework for assisting Nigeria
has three pillars, each to be designed to improve capacity to contribute more effectively to
Nigerian development. The three pillars of the proposed framework are: (a) improve economic
governance, (b) create the conditions for rapid private sector-led, poverty-reducing growth; and
(c) enable local communities to take charge of their own development. Taken together, these

ii
three areas are fundamental to achievement of any poverty reduction strategy. Nigeria's
economy cannot grow, poverty cannot be reduced, and Nigeria will not meet the International
Development Goals unless its substantial public resources are used more effectively and
equitably; unless the non-oil sector exhibits strong growth; and unless there is full participation
of the Nigerian people, particularly the poor, in the development process.
6.
Nigeria is a blend country, but borrows only from IDA as it is not currently creditworthy
for IBRD assistance. IBRD lending could resume in the medium term once the government has
established a track record of appropriate policy reforms and improved governance. In aggregate,
the proposed lending program for the remainder of FY01 and FY02 is proposed to be US$700800 million provided Nigeria stays on track in its reform program (to less than US$6 per capita
per annum). The size of the actual lending portfolio will depend on the rate of progress in key
reform areas and the effectiveness with which Bank supported projects are implemented.
7.
Satisfactory reform implementation means substantial progress in the following areas: (a)
maintaining macroeconomic stability; (b) developing a fiscally sustainable FY2002 budget with
an improved poverty focus; (c) improving systems for budget formulation and implementation;
(d) overhauling public procurement arrangements along the lines of the Country Procurement
Assessment Review; (e) progress on privatization; (f) vigorous action by the Federal AntiCorruption Commission; and (g) combining the present multiple poverty initiatives into a
coherent poverty reduction strategy.

THE FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF NIGERIA
WORLD BANK GROUP INTERIM STRATEGY UPDATE

I. NIGERIA'S DEVELOPMENT CHALLENGES
1. Nigeria is going through a difficult political and economic transition after 30 years of
military rule. The new federal government, headed by President Olusegun Obasanjo, faces an
array of complicated issues that must be overcome for Nigeria to be successful in its transition to
a democratic political system and a vibrant market economy. These include:
* Pervasive poverty and widespread unemployment, coupled with a need to provide tangible
results to boost confidence in the democratic transition;
*

Deterioration of government institutions over the period of military rule, and consequently
inadequate capacity at all levels of government to deliver critical services effectively;

*

Sporadic violence between ethnic groups, particularly in the oil-producing Niger-delta. In
addition a lack of personal security in some areas related to deep pockets of unemployment;

*

A legacy of widespread corruption;

*

Some tension between the executive and legislative branches, which has slowed development
of popular confidence in the new democracy and sometimes stymied legislative action;

* Debate over federalism and the relationships among the federal government, the state
governments and local government authorities (LGAs);
* Concern among Nigerians that the military could once more return to power;
* Little growth in the non-oil private economy, with consequent little growth in overall
employment or income; and
* Limited self-empowerment among local communities, expecting the government to be the
solution to all development constraints.
2.
Nigeria remains a society rich in cultural, linguistic, religious, ethnic and political
diversity. These constituent parts of Nigerian society each feel aggrieved, in one way or another.
People from the Delta States feel they have been denied fair benefit from their region's natural
resources; traditional leaders, especially in the South, see their position and authority gradually
eroding; young people are searching for signs of hope; business people are critical of
infrastructure that doesn't work, over-regulation and rent-seeking by various government
agencies; and civil servants see their incomes eroded by inflation. The average Nigerian today
struggles hard to make ends meet, sees himself/herself as being poorer than he/she was a decade
ago, and finds it hard to be hopeful that things will get better soon.

2
A. MANAGING THE FIGHT AGAINST POVERTY

The Nature of Poverty in Nigeria
3.

According to the UNDP's Human Development Index, Nigeria ranks in the low human

development category -- 151St out of 174 countries for which UJNDP has data, and 22nd out of 45

African countries. Despite the limitations in our present knowledge, it is clear that poverty
remains widespread. The proportion of the population which lives on less than a dollar a day is at
least 50% and may be as high as 70% (in 1996 it was estimated to be 66%).1 Household surveys
describe the following characteristics of poverty in Nigeria: (a) a substantial increase in poverty
between 1992 and 1996; (b) a higher percentage of households are poor in the rural areas than in
urban areas; (c) the North tends to be poorer than the South, with the Northwest zone being the
poorest and the Southeast Zone the least poor; there are also important regional disparities in the
incidence of poverty; (d) on the whole, poverty increases as the size of the household increases;
and (e) there is a substantial decrease in poverty when the head of the household has some
primary education; increases in the education of the household head beyond the primary level
decrease poverty but not significantly.
4.
It is clear that the fundamental cause of poverty in Nigeria is the economic stagnation that
the country has experienced for almost two decades. Persistent low productivity in agriculture
has meant that most of the rural population has had limited opportunities to increase income. In
addition, stagnation of the non-agricultural economy has meant no growth in formal employment
and limited demand for informal activity. A very uneven distribution of income has meant high
demand for imported consumer goods and lower demand for goods produced domestically.
Given the nature of these constraints poverty in Nigeria will not be reduced without
substantial acceleration of growth in the non-oil, non-government sectors. Substantial
poverty reduction would require annual growth of around five percent in agriculture and
eight to ten percent in the non-agricultural economy (excluding government and the oil and
gas sectors).
5.
Population growth is estimated at about 2.8% per year. Without a substantial reduction in
the population growth rate, Nigeria will be home to 250 million people in 2025, the current
problems of providing economic and social services effectively and broadly will be multiplied,
and the problems faced by Lagos and other cities will risk becoming unmanageable.
The Quality of Education
6.
Twenty years of neglect have left great damage in a once-vibrant education system.
Where Nigeria's universities once could compete internationally and were highly regarded, many
are now barely functioning. The CDF consultations also showed that parents have little
confidence in the system of primary and secondary schools given the extensive deterioration of
buildings, lack of materials and frequent teacher strikes.
7.
Estimates suggest that about 40% of the 7-to-12 year olds are not in school, with wide
variations between states (primary enrollment ratios may be as low of 20% in some states). The
'See Attachment 2

3

combination of poor educational quality at all levels, lack of curriculum relevance, and high
unemployment of tertiary graduates (at 22%) has eroded the confidence of parents in the
education system. Moreover, the teaching force is under-skilled, is paid irregularly and appears
poorly motivated.
8.
While basic education is the constitutional responsibility of states and local governments,
recent governments significantly recentralized the system; as a result, state and local government
education offices lack the capacity, decision making authority and resources to carry out their
tasks. A major policy initiative in support of Universal Basic Education began in the summer of
2000. However, because of inadequate preparation, lack of funds, disputes among the three tiers
of government over control of the Federal Government of Nigeria's (FGN) contribution and
weak management, the initiative has not yet taken off.
9.
The quality of higher education is very low. A 1999 government course accreditation
exercise accredited just 13% of the 660 courses it reviewed. The relevance of higher education
to employers' needs, particularly in the private sector, is criticized by businesses. A recent
survey among employers of university graduates found that: (a) university graduates are poorly
trained and unproductive on the job; (b) graduate skills have steadily deteriorated over the past
decade; and (c) shortcomings are particularly severe in oral and written communication, and in
applied technical skills.
Deteriorating Health and Nutrition Standards
10. Nigeria's basic health indicators are a cause for serious concern: a maternal mortality rate
of 700 per 100,000, an infant mortality rate of 83 per 1,000 live births and a life expectancy of 47
years. Current estimates suggest that population is growing at about 2.8% per year, which puts
great pressure on the provision of social services and environmental resources. Contraceptive
use is still a low 15.3% of all women (with only 8.6% using modern methods). In the recent
past, the HIV/AIDS epidemic has exacerbated the situation with respect to all of the above
indicators. Not surprisingly, all available health indicators show dramatic differences between
the rich and the poor, both in health status and in access to health services.
The HIV/AIDS Pandemic
11. Nigeria is in the early stages of the HIV/AIDS epidemic. 1999 data suggest the HIV
prevalence rate is already at high levels (30.5%) among female sex workers. Given Nigeria's
sheer size the implications are staggering There are 2.7 million HIV infected people, half of
whom already have AIDS. About a quarter of a million people have died from AIDS and about
1.4 million children have been orphaned.
12. The government's response has been much more open and forward-looking than
elsewhere, and it has developed a sensible and serious strategy to combat HIV/AIDS. However,
Nigeria's size and diversity, the weaknesses of its health care system, the pervasiveness of
gender imbalances and its widespread poverty all make it difficult to implement this strategy
effectively.

4

Poverty and the Environment
13.
The national economy of Nigeria is critically dependent on products and services
generated by the natural environment and on oil in particular. The majority of the poorest
Nigerians depend directly on natural resources. Their livelihoods are intimately linked to soil
productivity and availability of water. Similarly, the productivity of the urban poor is closely
connected to safe access to natural resources, whether coastal and marine or groundwater
resources. Thus, sustainable use of Nigeria's natural resources is fundamental to poverty
reduction and long-term development.
14. Analytic work carried out in 1990 noted that land degradation is the most serious
environmental problem facing Nigeria. Three aspects of the problem were identified: soil
degradation, affecting 50 million people with an annual cost estimate in excess of US$3 billion,
water contamination, affecting 40 million people and estimated to cost more than US$1 billion
dollars to correct, and deforestation, affecting 50 million people, with an estimated loss of forest
resources of US$570 million annually. In aggregate, the annual costs of these and other sources
of environmental degradation were estimated to be on the order of US$6.9 billion in current
prices, or 20% of GDP. While little new data is available, the situation has more than likely
worsened since 1990.
15.
The most striking example of environmental neglect has been in the oil sector, where
natural gas flaring has contributed more emissions of greenhouse gases than all other sources in
sub-Saharan Africa combined. The energy loss associated with this flaring of four billion cubic
meters of natural gas annually is equivalent to 60% of the total thermal-based power generation
in sub-Saharan Africa. Moreover, pollution associated with oil industry activities in the Niger
Delta has been a flashpoint for political unrest in the Delta. The National Strategy for the
Environment recognizes the importance of arresting the rapid degradation of the natural
environment. An important institutional reform already carried out by the present administration
is the establishment of a Federal Ministry of the Environment responsible for ensuring protection
of the environment and conservation of its fragile natural resource base. The FGN is committed
to environmental sustainability but there are serious capacity problems, particularly at the state
and local levels.
Gender
16. The issue of gender disparities in Nigeria is as complex as the country itself. In some of
Nigeria's traditional societies, women's roles and access to wealth are narrowly circumscribed,
while other women have substantial economic independence. Despite the slow pace of economic
growth, the economy continues to modernize, and the roles of women and men are changing (see
Attachment 7, the Voices of the Poor). At the national level the government is committed to
improving the situation of women and girls, but it needs to act more forcefully to translate this
intention into action. Several areas need strategic attention:
*

Girls' education: Enrollment rates for girls (38% for elementary and secondary combined)
remain substantially below those for boys (48%);

*

Agriculture:

Studies suggest that rural women do more farm work than men-- they work

5

fourteen hours a day (nine hours in agriculture and five in other tasks) compared to a little
over eight hours per day for men. Any investment to reduce women's work burden (such as
water supply, means of transport, woodlots and labor-saving technology for household tasks)
will free up time to increase income and to allow girls to attend school. These investments
will also have important beneficial effects on health;
*

Security: The poor are particularly vulnerable to crime. This is even more so for women
where an unequal power relationship sometimes leads to sexual harassment and in the worst
cases to teenage pregnancies and the spread of HIV/AIDS. 2

*

Politicalpower: While women's roles are changing, women are under-represented at most
levels of authority. This seems particularly the case in traditional communities and at the
local government level. This has important implications for ensuring gender-responsiveness
in Community-Driven Development (CDD) work.

*

Access to Assets: Women's control of household assets varies across Nigeria's traditional
societies. Among the Yoruba, for example, women are expected to earn their own keep as
well as that of their children, and thus have substantial economic independence. This is less
true of other areas, particularly in the Muslim North. Gender imbalances in access to and
control of assets directly limit productivity and growth, and are impediments to the
realization of poverty reduction objectives.

Poverty and the International Development Goals.

17. Poverty is widespread in Nigeria and, despite its wealth of resources, Nigeria is below the
average for sub-Saharan Africa on many poverty indicators. About 66% of the population is
estimated to live on a dollar a day or less. While primary enrollment rates are currently
estimated at 78% (down from 98% in 1995), about the SSA average, regional disparities are
quite large, with as few as 20% enrolled in some states. The infant mortality rate is 83 per 1,000
live births, somewhat better than the SSA average of 92. The contraceptive use rate is 15.3%,
compared with an average of 22% for sub-Saharan Africa. Life expectancy is 47 years
compared with 50 for SSA as a whole. The maternal mortality is 700 per 100,000, lower than the
SSA rate of 1000.
18. Nigeria's indicators also show dramatic differences between the poor and non-poor, both
in education and health status and in access to these services. Deaths under the age of 12 months
and under the age of 5 years are twice as high for the poorest 40% of the population as they are
for the richest quintile. 40% of the children in the poorest groups are underweight, against 20%
for the richest. Girls aged 15 to 19 in the poorest quintile are three times as likely to have a child
as those in the richest quintile. Almost 50% of the children in the poorest half of the population
have no immunization at all, against 12% in the richest. Only 31% of the poorest pregnant
women visit a medically trained person, against 91% of the richest women.
19.
2

Not surprisingly given the above, Nigeria will require a rapid and dramatic turnaround in

This is in part reflected in the different age-sex disparities in HIV prevalence rates, where the prevalence rate for
females aged 15-24 is 5.89%, compared with 3.35% for males in the same age group.

6
growth and service delivery if it is to meet the International Development Goals (see Table I).
TABLE I.PROGRESS INMEETING THE IDGs
1990
1998
Proportion of Population in Poverty
43*
66**
Child Mortality Rate
193
151
Primary Enrollment Rate
n.a.
78.0
Gender Equality inEnrollments
n.a.
1.23
Births Attended by Trained Professional (%)
n.a.
31
Contraceptive Prevalence Rate
7.6
15.3
* 1992 ** 1996

2015 Target
21
64
100.0
1.00
90
100.0

B. MANAGING THE TRANSITION TO A PRIVATE SECTOR-LED ECONOMY

Current Situation
20. Nigeria is in many ways two economies. Part of it is a middle-income oil-producing
economy covering a small percentage of the population, with a per capita income of about
US$2200. The rest of the population is part of a very poor non-oil producing economy, of whom
as many as 75 million (about 66%) may be living in poverty, with an average per capita income
of less than US$200. Unfortunately it is difficult to say a great deal that is definitive concerning
the Nigerian economy as a whole, or its constituent parts, because of a dearth of reliable data.
Best estimates suggest that the economy grew by 3.7% per year between 1984 and 1987, by
5.9% per year from 1987 to 1993 (the SAP period) 3 and by an average of 2.9% per year since
1993. The basic characteristics of the Nigerian economy are presented in Table II below:
21. Official figures show that oil and gas production account for between one-third and onehalf of GDP, depending on the price of oil, and that in 2000 government revenues were 46% of
GDP. Macroeconomic management was reasonably good in the second half of 1999 and the first
half of 2000, but deteriorated at the close of 2000 and in the first four months of 2001. Inflation,
which had been under control in 1999 (around 6%), has now increased to 19% on an annual
basis. In addition, the exchange rate, which had stabilized, is now exhibiting a troubling 20%
gap between the official and parallel market rates. Money supply expanded especially rapidly at
the end of 2000 (42% in the third quarter).

SAP was a structural adjustment program, largely home-grown, which was supported by the Bank. It was
begun in 1987 with substantial macro reforms.

3The

7

TABLE II
STRUCTURE OF THE NIGERIAN ECONOMY, 2000
Estimates

Gross Domestic Product
Oil Export Revenues
Petroleum Sector-Related Imports
Net Private Capital Inflows
Consolidated Government Revenues
Of which: Petroleum Sector
Consolidated Government Expenditures
Of which: External Debt Service
Internal Interest Payments
Reinvestment in Petroleum Sector
Federal Recurrent Expenditures
Federal Capital Expenditure
State and Local Government Expenditure

_____

Millions of

Percentage

US Dollars
39,096
20,098
3,540
1,392
18,062
14,935
17,320
1,720
977
2,698
3,480
1.877
6,177

of GDP
IW0.0
51.4
9.1
3.6
46.2
38.2
44.3
4.4
2.5
6.9
8.9
4.8
15.8

Source: IMF

22.
Macroeconomic management is complicated by two factors: (1) the need to make
substantial investments in the oil sector (6.9% of GDP in 2000) and (2) the constitutional
provision that requires distribution of approximately one-third of all revenues to the states and
local governments (15.8% of GDP in 2000).4 The Standby Arrangement with the IMF calls for
sterilizing proceeds from oil prices above US$20 a barrel in an excess crude account. However.
sharp pressures from states to redistribute these excess funds led to a release of 158 billion Naira
to the states and local governments in April 2001 which triggered a sharp increase in foreign
exchange demand and the subsequent depreciation of the Naira. Moreover, state governments
are no longer required to bank with the Central Bank, which further complicates monetary
policy.
This pressure has been exacerbated by the dramatic expansion of the federal
government's own 2001 capital budget to 486 billion Naira. This is about twice the level of
federal capital expenditures in 2000 and almost 50% above what has been estimated to be
macroeconomically sustainable. The government believes that a capital budget of this size is
necessary to reflate thie economy and necessary also to sustain support from the National
Assembly.
23.
Moreover, there are substantial concerns about the projects included in the capital budget.
A Bank review of the federal government's 2001 capital budget. at the request of the
government, found that much of the program lacks adequate poverty focus and economic
justification. If proper procurement procedures are followed, a substantial portion of the 2001
are substantial debates concerning these distributions to the states, including whether they should include.
for example, privatization proceeds. Moreover, the federal government is required to redistribute 13% of oil
revenues to the states in which the oil resources are found. The federal government wants to exclude off-shore oil.
now almost 50% of the total. This issue is being submitted to the Nigerian Supreme Court.

4 There

8
capital budget will not be able to be spent in a transparent and non-inflationary manner in this
calendar year. Indeed only about N37 billion of the capital budget was actually spent in the first
quarter of 2001. The governent is putting in place a system to check that procurement
regulations are fully complied with before awarding contracts on large projects in the capital
budget. If fully implemented, this is likely to significantly slow spending and reduce
macroeconomic instability. However, this would provide only a short term solution to the
federal government's fiscal management problems. A more sustainable and long term solution
will require fundamental reform of budget institutions and processes, including strengthening the
budget office and adopting a medium term approach to budgeting. A permanent secretary has
recently been appointed to head the budget office in the Federal Ministry of Finance and is
expected to outline a program to reform the budget process and reorganize the office.
24. Notwithstanding the complications of macroeconomic management stemming from the
federal system, the Government has recently reached agreement with the IMF on additional
measures to be implemented before end June 2001, to redress recent macroeconomic instability
and reduce distortions in the foreign exchange market.
25. Medium-term projections for the Nigerian economy are dominated by the uncertainty of
the price of oil as well as the uncertainty with respect to the response of the Nigerian authorities
to price shocks. If the current US$25 per barrel price is sustained over the medium term,
Nigeria's main problem will be the current one of managing very large resource flows in a noninflationary way. However, a drop in the price of oil to US$15 a barrel could be accommodated
at current levels of spending only by drawing down reserves substantially, and would still require
fiscal adjustment after two years. With no change in oil prices, real GDP at 1990 factor cost is
expected to grow in 2001 by only 1.6% with non-oil GDP growing at 2.5%. Without serious
structural reform, the medium term projections for growth in the non-oil sector are less than
population growth until 2003, and quite modest in per capita terms (2.3%) through 2005.
Steadfast reform and progress in addressing major infrastructure bottlenecks will be critical to
improving growth prospects.
Progress On Reform and Challenges
26. There has been substantial progress on some fronts while action continues to be needed in
other areas. On the positive side, since the Interim Strategy was endorsed in May 2000:
*

The Government has established an anti-corruption commission;

*

The Government has approved significant reforms in public procurement practices,
substantially in line with the Country Procurement Assessment Review (CPAR) (See
recommendations in Attachment 4);

*

The Cabinet of the FGN approved the recommendations in the Country Financial
Accountability Assessment (CFAA) in January 2001 as a basis for reforms in financial
management (See recommendations in Attachment 5);

*

The Government is carrying out value-for-money- audits intended to review the effectiveness
of its recent capital expenditures;

9
*

The Government concluded an agreement with the Paris Club and has regularized
relationship with its creditors;

*

The Government is moving to privatize NITEL, the Nigerian Telephone Company, and
NEPA, the Nigeria Electric Power Authority. Recently, it sold cellular phone licenses to
three firms for over US$750 million;

*

The Government has implemented some major reforms of its university system including
licensing of new private universities and is reviewing plans for granting increasing autonomy
to individual higher education institutions;

*

The Government has adopted a new National Water Supply and Sanitation Policy that makes
privatization or private sector participation in water supply a major aspect of the policy; and

*

The Government has streamlined its poverty alleviation institutions, closing nine agencies
and merging another six. It has also set up a panel to take stock of performance under past
poverty programs and suggest ways to improve design and implementation of future
programs.

27.

On the other hand, challenges remain in the areas of:

*

Prevention of serious macroeconomic instability. Given the expected high levels of spending
by state and local governments, strong pressures on prices and foreign exchange markets will
likely persist. Corrective measures are needed urgently to avoid worsening the plight of
Nigeria's poor;

*

Improving the poverty focus of public spending. For example, fertilizer subsidies have
recently been re-introduced, despite much evidence that they rarely reach the poor but are a
source of substantial rents to better off Nigerians;

*

Greater clarity of strategic objectives in the Government's anti-poverty strategy, and further
delineation of institutional responsibilities in this area; and

*

Management of oil resources in a manner that fosters fiscal sustainability over the mediumterm. Constitutional constraints pose major problems in this regard.

Tripartite Structure of the Nigerian Economy
28. It is useful to think of the Nigerian economy as divided into three parts - the oil and gas
sector, the government sector, and the rest of the economy.
29.
Oil and Gas. The oil and gas sector has important limitations in the near term on growth
in output, although there are expectations of strong growth in gas production in the medium
term. However, the volatility in oil prices means that the sector can experience rapid growth in
value added in one year followed by an equally rapid decline in the succeeding year.
Historically, value added in the sector has shown little growth but wide swings. Moreover, the
main beneficiaries of the oil sector are foreign oil companies and the Nigerian government. As

10

yet, there has been very little direct impact of oil and gas production on the lives of Nigeria's
poor. This is an unfortunate but dramatic illustration of the present ineffectiveness with which
public resources are channeled into meeting the country's development needs.
The Public Sector. The bulk of oil and gas revenues are transferred to Federation
30.
Accounts held in the Central Bank prior to distribution to the Federal Government, the states and
the local government authorities. Thus the main mechanism by which the oil and gas sector can
affect the wider economy is through the intermediation of the public sector. Federalism in
Nigeria has meant that the level of government with responsibility for providing most primary
public services (basic education, primary health, water, rural roads, urban streets) has been the
states and local government authorities (LGAs). In 2000, the states and LGAs spent about 36%
of the total government budget, equivalent to 15.6% of GDP (US$50 per person). How much of
this was spent on basic public services is not known, but social indicators indicate that its
effectiveness is limited. Four longstanding problems with Nigeria's public sector are at the root
of the limited impact of the oil and gas sectors on the wider economy:
*

While the new administration is committed to eliminating public corruption, this has become
deeply ingrained and remains a serious problem at federal, state and local levels of
government;

*

Public expenditures are not well focused on anti-poverty priorities, reflecting dated
development paradigms, the nascent state of the government's poverty strategy and, in some
cases, a continuation of vested interests;

*

Even when the programs are well targeted and planned, implementation capacity at the state
and local government level is very limited. Consequently the development impact of public
programs has frequently proved disappointing; and

*

The distribution of benefits from public expenditures is unequal, biased toward urban areas,
with the poorest segments of society receiving a low share of benefits.

31. Thus, although roughly one-half of GDP comes to the government in revenues, very little
of it contributes to the development goals of the new administration. As a result, oil revenues
continue to have limited impact on the non-oil economy, the part of the economy that generates
the incomes for the vast majority of Nigerians and for all of Nigeria's poor.
32. Under the previous military regime, Nigeria had unfortunately acquired a reputation as
one of the most corrupt societies in the world. Corruption is a problem at all levels - public
(federal, state and local) and private (for-profit and not-for-profit). Many of the more affluent
members of society have become wealthy through control of assets in short supply - government
contracts, places in universities, price-controlled goods, while many of the less well-off trade
such influence they have to augment limited incomes. The result has been broad and deep
institutional failure. In the Comprehensive Development Framework (CDF) discussions,
Nigerians complained vociferously about the erosion of what they saw as the most important
foundation of their society - values and standards.

I1

33.
In many ways, however, corruption is a symptom of a deeper structural problem - the
pervasiveness of oil wealth. Not only has massive oil income led to "Dutch disease" problems
that undermined incentives in the traditional economy, but also the sheer volume of resources
has tended to distort behaviors in the public and private sector alike. It is highly doubtful
whether corruption in Nigeria will ever be controlled without a deep restructuring of the use of
oil and gas revenues.
34. Non-Oil Private Sector. Nigerian agriculture confronts an array of challenges common
across sub-Saharan Africa: low productivity, limited capitalization, small size of land-holdings
(more than half of the farms are one hectare or less), and declining soil fertility. There are areas
of high productive potential-mostly the Middle Belt and the riverine areas, but there are many
regions with limited potential - areas that are very densely populated or with limited rainfall or
that are distant from markets.
35. In agriculture, export production has almost ceased, because of distortions attributable to
the historic overvaluation of the exchange rate ("Dutch Disease"). Groundnuts. important in the
North, and palm oil, important in the South, are no longer exported, at least through official
channels, and cocoa production has stagnated. Aggregate food production is thought to have
increased modestly between 1995 and 1998. There is anecdotal evidence about substantial
harvests that spoil because of marketing, storage and processing problems. Moreover, while
certain areas have large surpluses, other areas have large deficits, and the marlketing system is
unable to move food cheaply from surplus to deficit areas.
36. A preliminary review of Nigeria's agriculture sector has identified the following major
challenges to improving agricultural production:
*

A persistent urban bias in policy, notably in price policy and public spending, resulting in a
highly unbalanced distribution of resources between the rural and urban sectors and within
rural groups;

*

An unstable policy commitment to improving rural living conditions;

*

Widespread public sector engagement in what should be private enterprise, and continuing
government over-regulation, throttling private sector activity;

*

Very inefficient public spending for rural development;

*

Insufficient involvement of rural people in policy dialogue and decisions which affect their
lives;

*

Low productivity because of inherently difficult natural conditions for agriculture in some
areas, exacerbated by increasing deforestation and unsustainable land use practices and
because of the high costs of transferring technology from other areas of the world; and

*

Low productivity even where natural resources are more abundant-the resuit of weak
growth in the non-farm sector, and a lack of human and physical capital investment in rural
zones.

12
37. A survey of the formal private sector (large and medium sized firms) is expected to be
completed in time to be included in the full CAS. What is already clear, however, is that the
Nigerian private sector suffers from high costs and a lack of competitiveness. Recent studies on
private sector competitiveness, including a survey of international businesses working in Africa,
noted the following major constraints to private business in Nigeria:5
*

Infrastructure: Roads, railways, ports, and airports were given the least satisfactory
assessment of twenty-four countries in Africa by the business community;

*

Customs: The average customs clearance time reported by firms is 25 days, putting Nigeria
twenty-second out of 24 countries surveyed;

*

Telecommunications: Nigeria is ranked 20 out of 24 African countries (twenty-second in
internet access and twenty-third in terms of telephone price);

*

Hidden import barriers: Lack of availability of export credit, multiple licensing and
regulation requirements and the overvalued exchange rate reduced Nigeria's rating in these
areas by businesses to 23 (out of 24);

*

Security. Negative perceptions of security and organized crime remain strongly evident
among businesses, with Nigeria ranked twenty-third out of 24 countries;

*

Education. Quality of university education is seen by businesses as among the lowest
quintile in the sample countries; and

*

Policy: Finally, Nigeria was seen as the third most problematic country in the sample in
terms of policy volatility.

38. Preliminary results from the survey also point towards other important constraints
impeding private sector growth: distorted trade and tariff policies, competition from public
enterprises; 6 high real interest rates, and concerns for personal security.
39. There was little growth in the non-oil economy in 2000 except for agriculture. Most
projections also anticipate little growth in 2001, although higher levels of government spending
may give a temporary boost to the non-oil economy. Current projections are that growth may
increase to perhaps 5% in the three years following, but even this level would not be sufficient to
reduce poverty substantially. While there is substantial room for policy change, few reforms are
likely to have a large or immediate impact on the economy. Many of the needed changes will
take time. Infrastructure illustrates the issues and the scale of the challenge perhaps best of all.
Nigeria is currently producing 2500 Megawatts of electricity (30% of installed capacity).
Because of frequent interruptions virtually every business or government institution has to
5 The

6

Africa Competitiveness Report, 2000/2001 Center for International Development and World Economic Forum,
New York: Oxford university Press, 2000.
The number of public enterprises in Nigeria is estimated at 1500. It is also estimated that the public enterprise
sector employs two-thirds of the non-governmental formal sector labor force and has, over the years, been the
beneficiary of US$90 billion in investment resources -- over 50% of total investment in the "private sector."

provide its own generating capacity at a high cost. The costs at the port of Lagos are considered
by private companies as being the highest in the world. The government estimates that repair of
Nigeria's road network will cost US$700 million per year for a decade - without building any
new roads. Telephone density in Nigeria (3 lines per thousand) is one of the lowest in the world.
40. There are good reasons to believe that a vigorous program of privatization and private
concessions in infrastructure sectors will reduce costs and help Nigerian exports and import
substitutes become competitive. It is encouraging that the government is pushing forward in this
area. The impact for the most part will be felt only in the medium-term, however. The same is
true of the institutional changes needed to reduce corruption and increase investor confidence.
C. MANAGING THE EXTERNAL ENVIRONMENT

41. There are two external economic issues that loom large in every discussion of Nigeria debt and oil. Debt has become an important political issue in Nigeria, disproportionate to its
burden on the Nigerian economy. The government is acutely aware that net transfers from
official donors are negative at this difficult time and are likely to remain so over the next few
years. It feels that either assistance should be stepped up significantly or more substantial debt
relief and forgiveness should be provided.
42. At end 2000, Nigeria's total debt as estimated by the World Bank stood at about US$32
billion (equivalent to 80% of GDP); it consists of obligations to the Paris Club of creditors
(US$24.9 billion), multilateral creditors (US$3.8 billion) and commercial creditors (US$3.6
billion). Among the multilateral institutions, the World Bank (IBRD and IDA) and the African
Development Bank (ADB) and the African Development Fund (ADF) are the largest creditors,
with debt stocks of US$2.3 billion and US$1.1 billion, respectively. Nigeria has no outstanding
credit or loans to the International Monetary Fund. While the debt service due in 2000 (US$3.1
billion) represented 14.5 % of exports of goods and services, the actual debt service payment
(which amounted to only US$1.7 billion as obligations to the Paris Club were not paid in full)
was limited to 8.1 % of exports of goods and services. A more detailed analysis of Nigeria's debt
can be found in Attachment 1. The Government has been engaged in a process of reconciling its
debt numbers with those of its Paris Club creditors. This process is helping to get a more
accurate reading of Nigeria's external debt obligations. At the end of July 2001, the Nigerian
Government's estimate of its total debt stock stood at $28.3 billion compared to $29.3 billion
estimated by creditors. This process of reconciliation is expected to be completed soon
43.
The willingness of the international community to accept Nigeria's arguments that the
country's development is strongly impaired by its debt burden is considerably reduced by the
price of oil, which through the latter half of 2000 hovered at record highs of over US$30 per
barrel, declining to US$25 by year end (still above the projected medium term price of US$22.50
per barrel) and by the limited effectiveness of Nigeria's use of oil resources. Over the period of
this price hump Nigeria has amassed US$9.2 billion in external reserves. The Nigerian
authorities have attempted to deal with the windfall gain by developing a 2000 budget based on
an oil price of US$20 a barrel. Oil revenues in excess of the US$20 price were to have been
sterilized by being deposited in international accounts.
44.

Under these circumstances it is difficult to discuss financing gaps.

From a technical

14
perspective, Nigeria is unlikely to have a financing gap in 2001 unless oil prices soften
considerably. Nigeria's reserves this year are likely to exceed five and a half months of import
cover. In the medium term, however, the position might be substantially different. If, as is
expected, the price of oil trends downwards in the medium term, Nigeria's foreign exchange
reserves would not be adequate to sustain present levels of spending. From the Nigerian
perspective, the view is very different, even with a high oil price. Nigerians see enormous needs
for economic reconstruction following the devastating neglect of economic and social
infrastructure in previous years: roads that need rehabilitation, schools that need to be staffed,
health centers which need to be furnished and supplied.
45. The critical question is the linkages among increased flows of foreign resources (in
particular foreign assistance) economic growth and poverty reduction. The main issue is that the
effectiveness with which the public sector intermnediates resources remains compromised by
weaknesses in governance and institutional capacity.
46. The Nigerian public sector received, in 2000, some US$18 billion dollars in revenues. A
large portion of those resources appears not to have been used effectively in the fight on poverty.
The challenge is to develop modes of assistance that will get resources directly to local
communities in the short term, while at the same time strengthening government capacity and
accountability in the medium term. If that can be done, then official development assistance
(ODA) and debt relief, by accelerating the economic transformation of the economy, will be
critical to the success of the democratic transition.
47. Finally, it is important to remember Nigeria's critical importance to the West African
region. Nigeria represents an important political presence that acted to reduce conflict in Liberia
and Sierra Leone. Perhaps even more important is Nigeria's economic influence. A vibrant
growing Nigeria will act as a strong growth pole for all of West Africa, and particularly for its
most immediate neighbors. Africa cannot succeed in reducing poverty and it cannot reach the
International Development Goals (IDGs) of 2015 unless Nigeria, constituting one-fifth of the
sub-Saharan population, succeeds in its own development.
II. FRAMEWORK FOR BANK GROUP ASSISTANCE
A. THE GOVERNMENT OF NIGERIA'S DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY
48. Nigeria's Vision 2010 Report, produced in 1997/98 after a broad national discussion,
articulated the country's vision for its long-term social and economic development. One of the
cornerstones of this vision is to create a "united, industrious, caringand Godfearing democratic
society committed to making the basic needs of life affordablefor everyone and creatingAfrica 's

leading economy." The new Government has not formally adopted the Vision 2010 report.
However, several elements of the Government's development strategy, articulated in various
policy documents, 7 are consistent with the broad thrust of the Vision 2010 Report.

See, for example, "Economic Policy and Strategy, the Way Forward," "Nigeria: Poverty Reduction Plan," both
prepared by the FGN in 2000 and the "Economic Blueprint," produced in 1999.

15

Vision 2010
The Vision 2010 Committee was set up in November, 1996 to develop a blueprint to transform the
country and place it firmly on the route to becoming a developed nation by the year 2010. Tlle
Committee consisted of 248 members, including 25 resident foreign stakeholders, worked for ten months,
considered 750 memoranda from the general public and held 57 external workshops and organized itself
inito 53 sub-committees. The resulting document was comprehensive and ambitious (It detailed over 400
separate actions to be taken ranging from setting aside a "recognition Day," to "agreeing on a medium
term macroeconomic strategy with the World Bank/IMF" to "liberalize expatriate quota, work visas and
permits.") The following list of global best practices cited in the report gives some sense of its content
and perspective:
* a political system based on co-operation and consensus;
* creation of opportunities for their people and support for how growth and development are to be
achieved;
* adaptation to the forces of liberalization, technology and globalization and developing a nationial
success formula to take advantage of these forces;
. designing a vision and committing the people to its success;
* existenice of a strong and effective government working in the national interest and witlh a focus on
better quality of life for all citizens;
* massive investment in lhuman capital, infrastructure and relevant technology; and
* equitable distribution of resources and opportunities.

49.
Key elements of the Government's strategy are pulled together in a document entitled
Nigeria Economic Policy and Strategy: The Way Forward--prepared in September 2000.
Central elements of the strategy include:
*

Strengthening the fledgling democracy, improving security and safeguarding political and
social stability including promoting transparency, anti-corruption measures and the rule of
law;

*

Pursuing structural reforms that redefine and reduce the role of government within the
economy and promote the private sector;

*

Rehabilitating and improving physical infrastructure to facilitate economic activity and
access by the poor;

*

Investing in education, health and other social services to lay a solid foundation for longerterm growth but also to build the capacity to fight immediate threats to the country's well
being such as malaria and the emerging HIV/AIDS epidemic.

50.
In March/April, 2000. the FGN, together with the Bank Group and U.K.'s Department for
International Development (DFID), conducted a series of CDF discussions throughout Nigeria. 8
Meetings were held with 1125 Nigerians in six regional zones plus Lagos and Abuja. Participants came from all
walks of Nigerian life, both public and private. See Attachment 6.

16
At these meetings it became clear that Nigerians saw the following four issues as critical
priorities that needed to be dealt with in any development strategy:
*

Improving economic governance;

A

Increasing private sector-led growth;

*

Providing critical services to Nigerians, both poor and non-poor; and

*

Improving education and changing values

51.
This set of priorities was confirmed in discussions the Bank held with senior Nigerian
officials in December 2000.
B. BANK GROUP TRACK RECORD
52. As a result of poor economic performance, the World Bank scaled back lending from
about US$ 1 billion per year in the late 1980s to US$200-250 million during 1992-1993.
Lending ceased altogether from 1994 until 2000. The Bank is now gearing up to provide quick
and effective support to Nigeria, as warranted by the Government's policy actions. In 1995 IFC
ceased making new investments other than to small and medium enterprises (SMEs). The
portfolio decreased to US$29.7 million by the end of FY 1999. In 1999 IFC re-opened its field
office and began to offer a full range of investment and advisory services. In FY 2000, IFC
approved over US$130 million of new investments, principally in the financial sector.
53.
The present Update does not set out a medium term strategy for the World Bank Group's
engagement in Nigeria. It would be inappropriate to do so given the nascent state of Nigeria's
poverty reduction strategy. Nevertheless, from extensive CDF discussions with the Nigerian
authorities, the private sector and civil society groups, it is possible to lay out the principles that
will guide formation of an assistance strategy when Nigeria's PRSP is completed, together with a
plan for the next fiscal year.
The Interim Country Strategy Note
54.
The Interim Strategy listed ten projects as being planned for completion over the FYOO-01
period. The four projects currently being implemented are proceeding satisfactorily. These are
in the areas of education, poverty reduction, water and economic management capacity building.
A fifth project, to support privatization, will be presented to the Board together with this Interim
Update. Projects to assist with power transmission, health systems and the fight on HIV/AIDS9
are expected to be presented to the Board early in FY02. The balance of payments support
operation which had been envisaged in the Interim Strategy has been deterrnined to not be
necessary because of the increased availability of foreign exchange due to high oil prices.

9 Details can be found in Table 111.

17

Bank Group Experience in Nigeria
55.
Historically Nigeria has been a very difficult place to implement projects and programs.
An internal study of 20 projects initiated between 1985 and 1992 found that 52% were
unsatisfactory in terms of development impact and/or sustainability. There have been manv
reasons for this: a poor and unstable macroeconomic environment, lack of government
commitment, counterpart funding problems, corruption, lack of transparency, and frequent and
disruptive changes in both project personnel and in the institutional environment. Some projects
were poorly designed (in particular, projects were too complex and overestimated Nigerian
implementation capacity), some were poorly supervised, and few had the active participation of
beneficiaries in design or implementation. A particular problem has been sustainability; 85% of
the projects reviewed had negative sustainability ratings. IFC's portfolio also performed poorly
in this period, a function of Nigeria's poor economic performance, the poor investment climate
and declining competitiveness compounded by difficulties with transparency in clients.
56.
In the late 1980s the Bank also supported a structural adjustment program (the SAP) that
proved very controversial in Nigeria. Evaluation reports suggest that the SAP led to increased
growth and reduction of poverty, particularly in the rural areas. But implementation problems,
together with erosion of urban incomes largely caused by the erosion of fiscal discipline, made
the SAP highly unpopular.10 These problems also severely damaged the reputation in Nigeria of
the Bank and the International Monetary Fund (IMF), both of which were seen by ordinary
Nigerians as the architects of these unwelcome policies.
57.
Implementation problems will take time and sustained effort to be fully addressed.
Indeed, the Bank does not intend to resume lending to the agriculture sector until recently
identified misprocurement issues are addressed. Moreover, there are some features of Nigeria, in
particular, its federal system, which tend to make project implementation complex. But there
have been some positive changes. The macroeconomic environment has improved compared to
the early nineties, and projects are being designed with the participation of beneficiaries. The
strengthening of the Bank's office in Abuja will also help improve project design and
supervision. Nevertheless, the Bank will have to be particularly vigilant to ensure that
government capacity and commitment are present, to keep projects as simple as possible, to
ensure strong fiduciary safeguards are in place and to focus on ensuring sustainability.
58.
All of the projects which were begun in the early 1990s, except one, have now been
completed. The current portfolio consists of five projects, four of which were approved in 2000.
All of these projects are currently demonstrating satisfactory progress in implementation.
C. STRATEGIC FRAMEWORK

59.
The emerging Bank Group strategy responds to strategic directions Nigeria articulated in
the CDF consultations. Virtually every area of the economy and every important institution
needs reform and strengthening. Areas selected for Bank Group engagement correspond to the
See Structural Adjustment Programs in sub-Saharan Africa: A case Study of Nigeria, (World Bank, 1993).

I'he

biggest impact was on growth, In the six years (I 980-86) prior to the SAP, GDP declined by 2%/o per year, while in
the five years after the SAP was instituted (1986-91), GDP grew by 5% per year.

18
Bank Group's comparative advantage. First, the Bank is uniquely placed to work with the
Federal Government on a reform program to improve economic governance. Second, the Bank,
IFC and MIGA are also the major institutions with the credibility and resources to help the FGN
in its privatization and private sector development efforts. Third, along with the World Health
Organization (WHO), the United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF) and the Department for
International Development (DFID), the Bank can draw on lessons learned from its sustained
presence in Nigeria, together with its evolving experience with social funds and more recently
with community driven development, to develop workable models for assistance to local
communities in Nigeria.
60. The Bank's program in Nigeria cannot be looked at through the lens of financial resources
alone. As the Interim Strategy document indicated, a basic principle that guides the overall
design of our strategy is that, by and large, Nigeria has sufficient resources of its own to achieve
sustainable development and that the resources brought by the donor community including the
World Bank are always going to be relatively small compared to the resources which Nigeria has
available. Therefore, the major role of the Bank will be to help the Nigerians build their
capacity to manage their own resources effectively, and this theme will inform all of the
Bank's activities in Nigeria.
61. This concept remains valid. Accordingly, the Bank program will be structured around
knowledge and lending activities that concentrate on building capacity, assisting with policy
change and strengthening institutions. The emphasis will be on helping Nigeria manage its own
resources better. For the most part this will mean more emphasis on human capacity, institution
strengthening, good governance, sharing global knowledge and private sector development.
There will also be a strong role for IFC to play in providing direct support, financing and
assistance to the private sector. The Bank Group's ability to influence country policy and
institutional capacity will be enhanced through successful implementation of pilot programs
which demonstrate the feasibility of new ideas to policy makers and the private sector, which has
been reluctant to partner with government.

Three Basic Pillars of the Strategy
62. There are three sets of actors contributing to development in Nigeria - the government, the
private sector, and local communities. Accordingly, this proposed framework has three pillars,
each to be designed to improve the capacity of these actors to contribute more effectively to
Nigerian development. The three pillars of the proposed framework are: (1) improve economic
governance, (2) create the conditions for rapid private sector-led, poverty-reducing growth,
particularly in the non-oil economy; and (3) empower local communities to play an active role in
their own development. Taken together, these three areas are fundamental to achievement of any
poverty reduction strategy. Nigeria's economy cannot grow, poverty cannot be reduced, and
Nigeria will not meet the International Development Goals unless the substantial resources
controlled by the government are used more effectively and equitably; unless the non-oil sector
exhibits strong growth; and unless there is full participation of the Nigerian people, particularly
the poor, in the development process.

19
63.
Moreover, the three pillars reinforce each other to help mitigate the risks inherent in
working in Nigeria. In particular, this approach enables the Bank Group to support poverty
reduction by working directly with reforming states and LGAs on the one hand and by providing
assistance to and empowering local communities on the other. Thus the CDD approach provides
balance to the other two pillars.
64.
Since the re-engagement of the Bank Group in 1999 there has been a high degree of
collaboration within the Bank Group on the Nigeria program. This will continue as programs
and projects are implemented. Joint sectoral teams have been established in all the key sectors.
This degree of joint activities has been spurred by the need to bring both Bank and IFC
instruments to bear to assist the major structural changes needed to invigorate private
investment. Currently there are joint or interrelated projects in privatization, infrastructure, the
financial sector, SME's and oil and gas, as well as a joint private sector assessment. Formulation
of this strategy update has also been a joint effort. The full CAS will likewise be a joint
Bank/IFC/MIGA effort.
65.
Improving Economic Governance. The most important area for Bank Group assistance is
improving economic governance. The Nigerian Government needs to become much more
efficient and effective in transforming oil and gas revenues into investments that help generate
income for the poor. Together with the FGN's initiative on privatization, improvement in
economic governance should result, in the medium term, in a more focused, effective federal
government, which claims a smaller share of the country's resources while providing more and
better services to the poor.
66.

Strategic objectives for the Bank Group's assistance with economic governance include:

*

Helping to reduce corruption by assisting with: reform of the procurement system, reform of
public financial management and accountability systems, strengthening the legal/judicial
system; and increasing transparency at all levels of government.

*

Helping to improve the performance and accountability of Federal Government by:
supporting improvements in economic policy formulation and coordination, supporting
improvement in the quality and transparency of economic statistics, strengthening budget
formulation, execution and follow-up in the context of a medium-term expenditure
framework, and assisting Government to rationalize its role in the economy through
privatization, eliminating administrative red tape which constrains private sector investment
and activity, civil service reform, tax rationalization, and conducting a broad public debate on
the role of government in the twenty-first century

*

Supporting State and Local Government initiatives to improve their capacity to provide
economic and social services effectively and equitably, improve their responsiveness and
accountability to local communities, and improve budget formulation and execution.

*

Helping strengthen management of oil and gas revenues for improved development impact
through rationalizing oil and gas taxation, strengthening regulatory capacity and supporting
price liberalization of petroleum products.

67.
It is proposed that much of this assistance will be provided through non-lending services.
The World Bank Group through the WBI will attempt to promote new approaches to Nigeria's

20
problems through colloquia, seminars, the use of video conferences, and the use of experts and
political leaders who have dealt with problems similar to those facing the Nigerians. In addition,
the Bank Group will substantially increase its support for training of journalists and will provide
intellectual and financial support to private think tanks in Nigeria to strengthen the momentum
for reform.
68.
The most immediate weakness lies in the capacities of state and local governments. There
are thirty-six states plus the Federal Capital and 774 local government authorities. The states
range in size from Lagos with 12 million people to Yobe with about 1.7 million. There are broad
differences in capacity, largely correlated with the length of time the state governments have
been operating. Under Nigeria's federal system, the states and LGAs have the major
responsibility for providing local services - health, education, water, secondary and tertiary
roads, markets and community development. Nigeria's constitution requires a transfer of 44% of
federation account resources (after deduction of first charges) to states and LGAs. But this
responsibility and the transfer of revenues have not translated into an effective delivery capacity
for these critical services.
69. As part of the public expenditure review (PER) exercise at the federal level the Bank,
together with other donors, will begin to develop PER processes at the state level, beginning with
the more reform-minded states. Preliminary results from phase one of the state governance study
suggest that there are issues in budget formulation and execution that are similar to those at the
federal level. DFID is considering supporting state-level PRSPs and this is an area that the Bank
may also jointly support.
70. At the national level, the centerpiece of the economic governance pillar aims to improve
budgeting and increase accountability with the objective of reducing corruption, a critical focus
of the CFAA that has been agreed to with the FGN. This will be accomplished through various
lending and non-lending activities, several supported by the existing Economic Management
Capacity Building Project (EMCAP). Activities will include:
*

An annual Public Expenditure Review (PER);

*

Support for budget planning and implementation reforms, including development of a
medium-term economic framework (MTEF);

*

Strengthening the government's auditing and accounting functions;

*

Supporting implementation of procurement and financial management reform;

*

Undertaking a corruption survey; and

*

Supporting legal and judicial reform.

71. In addition to assisting with reforms in these areas, the Bank will also work with the FGN
on governance programs in a number of sectors, concentrating on policy, information systems
and management. Sectors will likely include education, health, energy, water and transport.
72.

Fundamental to improving governance will be a variety of programs to begin shifting

21

perceptions. Nigerians consistently point out that they are handicapped by old ways of thinking
and behaving. They are interested in learning how other countries around the world are tackling
the difficult problems Nigeria faces. The World Bank Institute is making Nigeria a focus country
and is developing several programs that will help this process.) The Bank will also assist in this
effort, through the use of the internet and video-conferencing technologies, as well as through
more traditional study tours and training.
73.
Accelerating Private Sector Growth in the Non-Oil Economy.12 The second leg of an
emerging strategy for engagement is to help accelerate poverty-reducing growth in the non-oil
private sector. The Bank, IFC and MIGA have all been involved in analytic work and in
developing this strategic framework, through joint preparation (with other donors) of a private
sector assessment. This will be completed in FY02. The challenge is to help transform the
Nigerian economy, in line with the Government's stated policy goals, into a private sector led
economy that can compete globally in the twenty-first century. The Bank Group's role would be
carried out through coordinated efforts of IFC, MIGA and the Bank, to support key policy and
institutional reforms, as well as providing catalytic finance and support to the private sector.
74. Nigeria already has one of the largest formal modern private sectors in Africa, with
significant foreign investor, supplier and trading linkages. While this base provides potential for
rapid growth, private sector activity which stagnated under Nigeria's uncertain and distorted
policy environment during the past two decades, largely focused upon oil-related services,
trading, and lucrative government contracts. Meanwhile, non-oil private sector activity and
exports have stagnated or declined, even as oil prices fell in the 1980s and 1990s. Nigeria has a
diversified resource base and a large domestic market. Scope exists for expansion of non-oil
output through import-substitution and exports in agriculture, agro-processing, energy-intensive
industries and manufacturing. However, this potential remains largely under-exploited.
75.

Strategic objectives of the private sector pillar of the Bank's strategy include:

*

Assisting with reform of incentives, policies and business regulation, to restore
competitiveness and create an attractive investment climate, including for foreign direct
investment (FDI);

*

Expanding private participation and improving the public sector's effectiveness in providing
infrastructure services;

*

Supporting financial sector development, notably for term finance and mechanisms to
support SMEs:

*

Supporting agricultural intensification and diversification;

*

Helping to reduce policy and institutional constraints on small and medium enterprise
growth; and

l Attachment 10 presents a matrix of proposed WBI activities in support of the strategy.
12For a more discussion of the Bank Group's current private sector support activities see Attachment 9.

22
Supporting the rehabilitation of Lagos as the center of commerce in Nigeria.
76.
Competitiveness. Nigeria's private sector firns are disadvantaged in many ways in
competitive world markets. The Bank Group intends to complete the ongoing private sector
appraisal with a survey of Nigerian firms. This will identify in greater detail the causes of this
lack of competitiveness and to lay out steps for reducing policy distortions and other factors that
affect firm-level costs and constrain efficiency. 13 Analytical work by FIAS on the investment
climate is examining more closely the legal and regulatory barriers to investment. This work is
assessing policy and institutional barriers at the state level as well as federal level. From this
analytical work additional Bank Group support will be defined.
77. Infrastructure. The most immediate constraints to private businesses center on
infrastructural weaknesses. With the exception of roads, most infrastructure services can be
provided more effectively by the private sector. Privatization and sector reform to facilitate
private provision of infrastructure services are priorities. This is particularly true of electricity
generation and distribution, telecommunication, ports, water and airlines. All of these areas are
targets of the Bank Group's privatization projects and policy dialogue. The Bank will provide
analytical and financial support for sector reforms and the privatization program through the
proposed Privatization Support Project, and IFC will provide transaction advisory services and
potential project finance for private operators. MIGA is likely also to play a significant role.
78. Nigerian firms view electricity problems as the most important infrastructure constraint
they face, with telecommunications second. The FGN has prepared a power reform strategy that
includes both ambitious medium-term structural reforms and a short-term action plan for 200102. The latter includes concessions of generation plants to private operators, as well as
contracting out billing and collections. The Bank will submit to the Board early in FY02 a power
transmission project to rehabilitate that critical sector of the power industry. In 2001/02, a
priority area for privatization will be telecommunications - where liberalized market entry
policies have already been adopted and the national carrier (NITEL) will be privatized. The
Bank's Privatization Support project will assist the liberalization and privatization of these
critical sectors, as well as unifying procedures for privatization generally. The bank Group is also
considering support for private investments in power generation to complement the power
component of the Privatization Support Project and the Electric Transmission Project. Other
private infrastructure reforms, such as improving port management are also critical and are likely
to be targets of Bank Group assistance over the medium term.
79.
The FinancialSector. Another important area in the private sector pillar is the financial
sector. Term finance is virtually unavailable in Nigeria. IFC has taken the lead in providing
over US$188 million in term finance facilities to Nigerian banks, along with institution building
for those banks which have targeted SMEs. The Bank is working with the government on
improving the regulatory framework for non-bank financial institutions, including rural and
community banks, and rationalizing the governnent role in the sector. This could be an area of
assistance in the medium term. With the major privatizations planned for the next 3-5 years,
Nigeria will need to develop much deeper local term capital markets. In addition, the
'3The United States Agency for International Development (USAID) and several other donors are joining the Bank
Group in this effort.

23
privatization program - through its plan to place up to forty per cent of equity with Nigerian
savers and investors, will call for considerable deepening of Nigeria's equities markets.
80. Agriculture and Rural Development. There is no more vital sector to the reduction of
poverty in Nigeria than agriculture. Direct assistance to the agricultural sector is unlikely over
the JISU period. However, that does not mean neglecting rural development. In the first place,
much of what the Bank intends to do to help catalyze the growth of the non-oil private sector has
particular relevance to agriculture (the largest sub-sector of the non-oil economy.) As noted
above, improvements in marketing, processing and storage may be the most important immediate
priority. Much of this can be carried out through the work the Bank Group will be doing in
competitiveness, infrastructure and financial markets.
The IFC is seeking particular
opportunities in agribusiness, given the sector's potential. Moreover, the lion's share of the CDD
pillar will be located in rural areas and contribute directly to rural development
81. SMEs. SMEs in Nigeria have been particularly constrained from reaching their full
potential by problems in infrastructure and in the investment climate. The Bank Group SME
Department has completed a mapping exercise to define priorities, some of which are now being
implemented, with others still in the pipeline. These include supply chain support to SMEs in
the Niger Delta providing services to the oil sector, business support to microenterprises and
technical assistance to small firms, local business development service providers, and financial
institutions assisting SMEs. The Bank Group is looking to expand programs to support SMEs especially with regard to capacity building for SME support institutions and business
associations.
82. Lagos. Of particular importance is Lagos, one of the world's mega-cities. The population
of Lagos is approaching twelve million people and is larger than thirty-two African countries. In
twenty-five years the population could be twenty to thirty million. Lagos is well-known for its
congestion, pollution, security and sanitation problems. But it is also the center of the Nigerian
economy and its most vibrant, energetic and entrepreneurial locality. Making Lagos work better
is essential to rejuvenating the Nigerian private sector. The Bank Group intends to provide
assistance to Lagos State to improve municipal management, municipal transport, the living
conditions of the poorer segments of the city and help with privatization of tlhe Lagos State
Water Corporation.
83. Regional Development Issues. Nigeria is by far the most important economy in West
Africa, representing more than 50% of the population of the region and a slightly smaller
percentage of GDP. If Nigeria grows rapidly, the benefits will redound to its neighbors;
however, if it stagnates, then that will make their progress more difficult. Nigeria is a founding
member of the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS). At the end of 1999, at
a meeting of the ECOWAS Heads of State President Obasanjo proposed closer trade and
monetary integration between Nigeria and other countries as a step toward deeper integration
within the ECOWAS region. In a first phase of a two-track approach for establishing a single
trade and monetary union, Nigeria, Ghana and three other non-CFAF countries would create a
second monetary union. While much remains to be done for effective creation of a West African
common market, Nigeria will clearly be a critical actor in making it a success.
84.

The most important sectoral area for West African cooperation may be increased trade in

24
power. Two important projects under preparation with Bank support are the West African
Electricity Market, and a coastal natural gas pipeline, which should permit several neighboring
countries to benefit from Nigeria's huge energy reserves. Likewise, the significant investment in
fiber optics telecommunications within Nigeria could provide the backbone of a West Africa
telecommunications market, if Nigeria were to take the lead with neighboring countries to create
the environment that would allow this market to develop.
85. The Bank will provide support that will help Nigeria play a more active role in achieving
This will include: work with the IMF on
closer integration within the sub-region.
macroeconomic management and assistance with reforming Nigeria's trade policy, including
customs operations. The Bank may also act as a broker in helping assure Nigeria's fuller
participation in any regional energy and telecommunications markets. And, as Nigeria's program
on financial market reform develops, the Bank will seek to assure that it is aligned with the
regional imperative of closer financial sector cooperation and integration.
86. Empowering Local Communities. A critical component of the Bank's proposed strategy
will be empowering local communities to take a more active role in their own development.
This Community Driven Development (CDD) approach is consonant with what the Nigerian
people want and is reflected in the Government's own poverty program. Community-driven
development involves, among other activities, strengthening and financing accountable and
inclusive community-based organizations (CBOs) that represent the interests of the poor, and
forging functional links between CBOs and LGAs. Experience has shown from other Banksupported CDD projects, that services that are demand-driven have a greater likelihood of
sustainability and that efficiency and effectiveness are enhanced.
87. In the Nigerian context this will mean building the capacity of both the communities and
local governments and policy and institutional reform that allows communities and local
government more control of development activities in their areas.
88.
*

The Bank's objectives will be to:
Empower Communities, by providing them with untied grants in rural areas and encouraging

partnerships between local governments and their communities in urban areas to implement
micro-projects (schools, health centers, erosion control measures, road improvements) that
they themselves believe are important;
*

Improve Accountability by, among other things, supporting local participation and

transparency in communities and local governments through timely sharing of budgets, plans
and accounts with their stakeholders; and
*

Build Capacity by strengthening communities and local governments in critical skills such as

budgeting, participatory planning, financial management,
implementation.

procurement,

and project

89.
This strategy proposes to develop an innovative program for strengthening communities
and local governments. Through the proposed multi-sector CDD Umbrella Project, this program
will establish a financing mechanism that will be embedded within existing state institutions to

25
transfer resources to local governments and communities for locally determined priorities.' 4 It is
envisaged that, in the longer term, governments and donors would be encouraged to use the same
resource transfer mechanism to increase the effectiveness and accountability of government.
resources transferred to the local level. In parallel to the CDD program, the Bank will continue to
use the Social Fund (Community-based Poverty Reduction Fund) to test different financing
mechanisms for strengthening communities and local governments. Both programs will tailor
their interventions to the specific on the ground realities while moving toward the CDD vision of
empowered local communities linked with responsive local governments.
90. Alongside the CDD program, the Bank will support lending and analytic work in critical
sectors such as education, health, environment, natural resource management, transport and
water to ensure that policies provide increased opportunities for states and local governments to
effectively fulfill their constitutional mandates and improve service delivery to communities.
Sector lending will concentrate on federal and state levels in order to strengthen policies,
legislative frameworks, regulations, information systems and strategic planning. The Bank will
also explore a new emphasis on helping the government work with private service providers as
well as local communities.
91.
The Bank, working together with other donors, will also help Nigeria in its fight against
HIV/AIDS. An HIV/AIDS project in FY02 will provide critical resources to help the FGN
implement an Interim Action Plan at federal, state and community levels. The FGN has
demonstrated its commitment to this fight by providing substantial resources of its own. Every
project and activity with which the Bank assists Nigeria will also consider the impact of
HIV/AIDS on project success and the impact of the project on the spread of HIV/AIDS.
III. PROGRAM FOR FY02
A. PROGRAM DESCRIPTION

92. Nigeria is a blend country, but borrows only from IDA as it is not currently creditworthy
for IBRD assistance. IBRD lending could resume in the medium term once the government has
established a track record of appropriate policy reforms and improved governance. Table III sets
out the Bank Group's current activities, while Table IV presents the intended program for the
remainder of FY01 and for FY02. In aggregate, the lending program for FY01/02 would be
US$700-800 million, provided Nigeria stays on track in its reform program (less than US$6 per
capita p.a.) The size of the actual lending portfolio will depend on the rate of progress in key
reform areas (see below) and the effectiveness with which Bank Group supported initiatives and
investment projects are implemented. In the area of CDD, for example, early commitments will
be kept modest compared with needs (approximately US$100 million for a first CDD Umbrella
Project.) Further support could be expanded as implementation gathers pace and disbursement
mechanisms prove their effectiveness.

14 Communities would submit proposals in a list of eligible sectors which would be judged according to predetermined criteria such as the level of poverty of the target population, the community's matching resources,
sustainability, a dissemination plan, a monitoring and evaluation plan, and a financial management plan.

26
93.

Satisfactory reform progress would require substantial progress in the following areas:

*

Maintenance of macroeconomic stability satisfactory to the Bank.

*

Development of a fiscally sustainable 2002 budget with an improved poverty focus
(compared with 2000 and 2001). FGN limits actual 2001 budget expenditures to what is
macroeconomically sound, resulting in limited drawdown- of foreign exchange reserves.

*

Progress satisfactory to the Bank on improved systems for budget formulation and
implementation.

*

Progress on overhauling public procurement (along the lines of the CPAR) including the
preparation of detailed guidelines for implementation of the new system, and commencement
of implementation;

*

Progress on privatization: Uniforrn privatization regulations approved; NEPA privatization
law approived by National Assembly; and NITEL privatized.

*

Federal Anti-Corruption Commission commences work vigorously. First legal proceedings
are launched.

*

Multiple poverty initiatives folded into a unique poverty reduction strategy. Completion of an
I-PRSP and good progress on the preparation of a full PRSP.

*

If progress is considered by the Bank Group to be less than satisfactory the program will shift
and Bank lending will be scaled back. In such a "low case" scenario, the program would
give relatively more emphasis to the private sector and CDD pillars of the strategy. It is
likely that increased emphasis would be given to supporting the private sector and
community driven development in ways that do not depend on policy reform and/or
significant govemance reforms for sustainability. Investment lending would be capped at
approximately $200 million, and it can be anticipated that this would be provided to support
selected reformist states.

27

TABLE III - NIGERIA: ONGOING ACTIVITIES
BANK GROUP
COMMITMENT
1. LENDING
ECONOMIC GOVERNANCE
Economic Management and Capacity Building

US$20.0 million

PRIVATE SECTOR LED GROWTH
IFC Term Finance Facilities for
Commercial Banks
Water Rehabilitation

US$122.0 million
US$396.0 million

EMPOWERING LOCAL COMMUNITIES
Community Based Poverty Reduction

US$ 60.0 million

CROSS CUTTING ACTIVITIES
Primary Education 11
Small Towns Water and Sanitation

US$ 55.0 million
US$ 5.0 million

2. CURRENT KNOWLEDGE ACTIVITIES
Support for PRSP
Public Expenditure Review and Analysis
State Governance Capacity Study (Phase 1)
WBI Activities (Attachment 10)
IFC Privatization Advisory Services

28

TABLE IV - NIGERIA: PLANNED BANKIIFC ACTIVITIES, FY 2001/02
COMPLETION/
BOARD

BANK GROUP
COMMITMENT

1. LENDING
PRIVATE SECTOR LED GROWTH
Privatization Support Project
Electric Power Transmission Project
Lagos Upgrading Project

FY 2001
FY 2002
FY 2002

US$115.0 million
US$100.0 million
US$ 100.0 million

FY 2002
FY 2002
FY 2002
FY 2002
FY 2002

US$100.0 million
US$120.0 million
US$ 50.0 million
US$ 30.0 million
US$ 10.0 million

FY 2002

US$ 90.0 million

EMPOWERING LOCAL COMMUNITIES
CDD Umbrella Project
Health Systems Support Project
Universal Basic Education Project
Microwatershed Development Project
Community Based Urban Development Project
CROSS-CUTTING ACTIVITIES
HIV/AIDS Project
2. NEW KNOWLEDGE ACTIVITIES
Anti-Corruption Survey
State Government Capacity Study (Phase 2)
Education Sector Assessment
Private Sector Assessment (Phase 2)
Fiscal Federalism Study
SME Technical Assistance
Oil/Gas Study
Poverty Assessment
Macroeconomic Assessment
CAS

FY 2002
FY'2002
FY 2003
FY 2002
FY 2002
FY 2002
FY 2002
FY 2003
FY 2002
FY 2003

B. DONOR COORDINATION

94. The donors with major programs currently active in Nigeria are the World Bank, the IMF,
African Development Bank, the U.NDP, the European Community, UK's Department for
International Development, the U.S. Agency for International Development, and a number of
specialized UN agencies. Excluding the World Bank, it is unlikely that the total value of ODA
to Nigeria will exceed US$500 million per year. Moreover, most donors are just starting up. As
a result, there is a high level of donor coordination in Nigeria. In almost every sector, be it
economic management, community development, education, or HIV/AIDS, there is a strong
commitment for donors to work together. By and large all donors agree on the diagnosis of the
development issues which Nigeria faces, and most agree on the broad outlines of how these
issues should be addressed. The main donor activities have been mapped into a preliminary CDF
matrix presented in Attachment 8.

29

C. RISKS
95.
Working in Nigeria entails greater risk than in most other countries. The political
economy problems are deep and complex. Reforms will have to be hard fought, since many will
entail losses of rents among those benefiting from current policies. Limitations in institutional
capacity at each level of governrnent mean the fruits of reform are likely to be somewhat slow in
coming. However, given Nigeria's importance, and the commitment of its political leadership,
the risks inherent in the Bank's engagement are worth taking. For risk mitigation purposes, it is
helpful to distinguish between political risks, macroeconomic risks, risks arising from weakening
government commitment, fiduciary risks, risks from institutional capacity constraints, and
program design risks.
96.
Political Risks. Political risks remain the most pervasive and the most uncertain of all the
risks the Nigeria program faces. These risks take many forms, including the likelihood that
political issues will crowd out progress on economic and structural reform, particularly as the
next presidential election nears in 2003. The Bank has limited capability to mitigate these risks.
Some hedging is possible by balancing activities between federal and state levels of engagement.
This is in any case important for program design, as states are responsible for delivering critical
services. But balancing activities across these two tiers of government will avoid the whole
program falling into jeopardy in the event of unexpected political developments at either the
federal or the state level. To the extent that the Bank Group and other donors can help the
government provide a "democracy dividend," some of the pressures on the political system will
be eased. In addition, to the extent that the Bank can help the government explain its economic
program to Nigerians and incorporate the views of its constituencies into the reform program,
this too will ease the political risks that Nigeria and the program face.
97.
Macroeconomic Risks. There is now serious concern as to whether the Nigerian
authorities have the commitment and the tools to manage the macro economy in such a way as to
maintain low inflation. Constitutional provisions make it difficult to control spending at the state
and local level (now 16% of GDP) and political factors make it difficult to control federal
spending. The Bank is working with the IMF to assist the FGN to improve fiscal performance,
to reduce wasteful federal spending, and improve procurement and financial management, but
these risks are quite serious. Moreover, although oil prices are now high, it is unlikely that this
level will be sustained over the medium term. Sharp reductions in oil revenues will force major
contractions of government spending and return Nigeria to a boom and bust cycle. The
constitutional issues will complicate efforts to stabilize oil revenues over the medium term.
98.
Commitment Risks. There is substantial commitment to the structural and economic
reforms the Bank is supporting at the highest level of government. Nevertheless, there are also
serious centers of opposition to these changes, and reform implementation has proven more
difficult than was first hoped. Managing these risks is a matter of gauging whether political
commitment to particular reforms may ebb away or whether political intent can be frustrated by
centers of opposition. These risks have to be managed on a case-by-case basis. In each activity
the Bank's financial and reputational exposure will be matched with an assessment of what
reforms are within political grasp. Here the Bank's role as a "knowledge bank" will also help
mitigate these risks. The Bank will present the Nigerian polity with information as to the
consequences of reforming or failing to reform, and provide guidance on how implementation

30
can be managed to maximize support and mitigate potential opposition.
99. Fiduciary Risks. The Bank will need to be extremely careful in program designs to
reduce the probability that it will face malfeasance in the use of its funds. The CFAA states
clearly that "the Bank needs to build explicit risk minimization actions into all its operations in
Nigeria." The Bank is looking forward to working with the government to address the main
issues identified for improvement in the CFAA Report. The aim will be to establish Nigeria's
practices and standards on a par with international benchmarks. In the area of state and
community lending, fiduciary risks will be minimized by: (1) ensuring that financial
management specialists are part of the CDD design team; (2) developing and agreeing upon
financial management arrangements, including the flow of funds, with the Loans Department; (3)
undertaking a financial management risk assessment and implementing risk mitigating actions
such as audits as appropriate; and (4) developing measures to ensure that funds will be expended
for their intended purpose. IFC faces a similar hurdle in ensuring that the private sponsors it
works with practice transparency, business ethics and good corporate governance. Moreover,
some Bank activities, particularly those associated with community-driven development, will
involve increased fiduciary risks in the short run. These risks are worth taking because of the
potential improvement in development effectiveness and sustainability. But in the near term,
these activities will require increased vigilance and safeguards.
100. Capacity Risks. The Bank, like other donors, has frequently reduced capacity risks by
circumventing weak institutions and creating project units to implement Bank programs. This
enables the programs to be implemented in the short run but at the expense of building capacity
in the country to manage its own development in the long run. To the extent possible, this
program will focus primarily on building capacity within the institutions at each level of
government to implement the programs the Bank is supporting. Technical assistance will be
provided as necessary in the short term to assure compliance with fiduciary and safeguard
policies.
101. Program Design Risks. One of the clear messages from the evaluation of the Bank's
portfolio in Nigeria is that typically Bank staff overestimate capacity and underestimate the
difficulties of implementation. Accordingly, the programs that this strategy will support will be
as simple as the issue permits and will be limited in scope to match implementation capacity.
This represents a significant challenge given Nigeria's multi-faceted needs and its complex
governmental environment.

IV. GETTING TO A FULL CAS IN CY02
102. After many years of limited engagement the Bank Group's knowledge of Nigeria is more
limited than is desirable. This problem is compounded by the fact that many databases in
Nigeria are unreliable.' 5 Accordingly, the Bank intends to invest substantially in the coming
15A number of studies have been completed since the Interim Strategy. These include the first phase of the private
sector assessment, a rural development sector analysis, a petroleum sector review, a financial sector review, the
first phase of the state level governance capacity study, a mining sector review and a mapping of the SME sector.

31

year on economic and sector work to better understand the nature and depth of the development
issues facing the country. In addition to the continuing work on the PER, the following studies
will be conducted jointly with the Nigerian authorities and Nigerian institutions and other
partners: a poverty assessment, an anti-corruption survey, the second phase of the state
governance survey, completion of the fiscal federalism study, an education sector analysis, the
second phase of the private sector appraisal, macroeconomic analyses, and an oil/gas study. The
Bank will also spend the next year developing a monitoring and evaluation system for the full
CAS to help measure progress in achieving CAS objectives.
103. The Bank Group has recently suggested to the Nigerian authorities to host a "Nigerian
Development Forum" in country, which would, inter alia, serve to jumpstart the PRSP process
and support consensus building within Nigeria and between Nigeria and its external partners. It
would serve to better understand and discuss current key policies relevant to poverty reduction
such as health, education, economic governance, privatization and others. Last but not least such
a forum would identify the road map for the development of the PRSP. The Bank Group stands
ready to support such a forum.
104. The Bank is engaged in a process of raising awareness at the highest levels of the Nigerian
Government on the importance of the PRSP and the need to make it central to the Government's
long-term poverty reduction programs. The Government is anxious to deliver a democracy
dividend and is thus eager to proceed quickly with implementation of programs to address
pressing social concerns. In 2000, it put in place a N1O billion poverty alleviation program aimed
primarily at job creation for the unemployed poor' 6 . The track record of such programs is poor.
In February, the Government also announced the creation of the National Poverty Eradication
Program (NAPEP) under the Presidency. The Government has approached several donors to
help fund the program.
105. The Government's desire to move quickly is laudable. However, there is a real danger
that in the absence of a well thought out and coherent poverty reduction strategy, within which
poverty interventions are conceived, these specific programs may end up delivering little in the
fight on poverty. There needs to be greater appreciation for the policy issues involved in poverty
reduction. The Government has made a commendable effort to streamline poverty programs.
However significant overlaps remain. The National Planning Commission (NPC) has been the
key agency for preparation of a PRSP. However, the respective roles of the NPC and the
NAPEP, for poverty policy and programs need to be clarified. There is still the perception in
Nigeria that a poverty reduction strategy is a collection of specialized programs intended to
provide jobs, credit and social services to the poor. Moreover, there is a tendency to focus on the
creation and financing of these programs and not on the implementation problems associated
with them.

16

While no formal assessment of this scheme has been carried out, the public perception is that it had little success
and was subject to considerable political interference.

32
106. The Nigerian authorities have set out an ambitious timetable that sees completion of an
Interim PRSP by September 2001 and a full PRSP by June 2002. The staff's judgment is that
while an I-PRSP can be delivered in the next six months, a full PRSP is unlikely to be completed
before December 2002. As the PRSP proceeds, the Bank intends to use the CDF framework
already in place to further extend the already good coordination among donors.
James D. Wolfensohn
President
By:
Shengman Zhang

Washington, DC
February 13, 2002

Peter Woicke

33

ATTACHMENT 1
DEBT SUSTAINABILITY
1.

Debt composition

*

At the end of 2000, Nigeria's external medium- and long-term debt was estimated at
US$32.3 billion (equivalent to 83 percent of GDP) and consisted of obligations to the Paris
club of creditors (US$24.9 billion), multilateral creditors (US$3.8 billion), and commercial
creditors (US$3.6 billion).

*

Among the multilateral institutions, the World Bank (IBRD and IDA) and the African
Development Bank (ADB and ADF) were the largest creditors, with debt stocks of US$2.3
billion and US$1.1 billion, respectively. Nigeria has no outstanding credit or loans to the
Fund.

*

The debt to commercial creditors was composed of US$2 billion of Brady bonds and US$1.6
billion of promissory notes.

*

For the most part, these obligations were not contracted on concessional terms. At the
discount rate of 6.8 percent, and taking into account the Paris Club rescheduling of December
13, 2000 (see below), the net present value (NPV) of Nigeria's public and publicly
guaranteed debt was estimated at US$31.5 billion (77 percent of GDP) at end-2000.

*

The NPV of debt-to-export ratio (three-year average of exports of goods and non-factor
services) and the debt-to-government-revenue ratio (consolidated government) reached
respectively 209 percent and 169 percent in 2000.

*

While the debt service due (US$3.1 billion) represented 14.5 percent of exports of goods and
services in 2000, the actual debt service payment (which amounted to only US$1.7 billion as
obligations to the Paris Club were not paid in full) reached 8.1 percent of exports of goods
and services.

2.

2000 Paris Club agreement and possible future rescheduling

*

On December 13, 2000, the Nigerian authorities reach agreement with the Paris Club of
creditors. The agreement consolidated Nigeria's arrears at end-July 2000 (US$21.3 billion),
fully capitalized moratorium interests on the rescheduling (US$1.4 billion) and deferred postcutoff date arrears as of end-2000 (US$616 million). Rescheduled amounts (pre-cutoff date)
are payable on Houston terms; 20-year maturity and 10-year grace for a small ODA amounts
(US$250 million).

*

Overall, the agreement requires payments to the Paris Club of US$700 million in 2000 and
US$1 billion in 2001. An additional US$300 million was paid in 2000 in advance of the
Paris Club agreement.

34

3.

Macroeconomic scenario and debt sustainability

*

The baseline economic scenario assumes the implementation of sound economic and
financial policies, continued structural reforms, and a stable external environment. Consistent
with the World Economic Outlook projections, the oil price is expected to gradually decline
from its peak of US$28.8/bbl in 2000 to its medium-term value of about US$20/bbl. Oil
revenues are thus projected to decline sharply in the short run (2001-03) and to stabilize over
the medium term. In contrast, non-oil exports are expected to pick up sharply, though from a
very low base. As a result, GDP growth is projected to grow by only 1.6% in 2001 and to
gradually increase towards the medium growth rate of 5 percent, reflecting the diversification
of the economy.

*

Under these conditions, before assuming any further debt relief, Nigeria's external debt
indicators could not be significantly improved before the second half of the decade.

*

After the assumed debt flow rescheduling and treatment of private claims, Nigeria's external
debt indicators would improve significantly. In NPV terms, the stock of debt would decline
to below 60 percent of GDP by 2006. As a ratio of exports of goods and nonfactor services,
the NPV of debt is projected to decline to below 150 percent in 2002 and to continue to
gradually decline to less than 100 percent by 2009. In terms of government revenues
(excluding grants), the NPV of debt would also decline sharply, from 170 percent in 2001 to
137 percent in 2005 and 87 percent in 2010.

*

Debt service ratio would remain stable at around 13 percent during 2001-04 both as a ratio to
exports of goods and nonfactor services and as a ratio to government revenues. After the
period covered by the assumed flow rescheduling from the Paris Club, debt service ratio are
projected to increase to the 17/18 percent range.

4.

Conclusion

In the light of these ratios, a preliminary conclusion is that Nigeria's debt dynamic appears
sustainable over the medium term. Before the full use of traditional Paris Club mechanisms, i.e.
a stock-of-debt operation with a 67 percent NPV reduction on pre-cutoff date and commercial
debt, Nigeria's debt ratios are projected to be close or below the HIPC thresholds after three
years of flow rescheduling and treatment of commercial claims. However, in all scenarios, debt
service payments are expected to increase significantly after the three year flow rescheduling, up
to 19.5% of exports in 2005 in the scenario with the lowest NPV reduction. Conditions
permitting, a further multi-year flow rescheduling in 2005 would help prevent this hike in debt
service payments while better insulating from the vicissitudes of international oil prices.

35

ATTACHMENT 2
PERCENTAGE DISTRIBUTION OF POVERTY IN NIGERIA' 7
Year

Non-Poor

Moderately Poor

Core Poor

1980

72.8

21.0

6.2

1985

53.7

34.2

12.1

1992

57.3

28.9

13.9

1996

34.4

36.3

29.3

Sources: Nigeria: Poverty in the Midst of Plenty, The World Bank, (May 31, 1996); Canagarajan,
Ngwafon and Thomas, The Evolution of Poverty and Welfare in Nigeria 1985-1992, The World Bank,
(January 1997); and Poverty profilefor Nigeria: A Statistical Analysis of 1996/97 National Consumer
Survey, Federal government of Nigeria, Federal Office of Statistics (April, 1999).

7 The overall levels of poverty presented in this table are probably broadly correct.

However, the dramatic
increase in poverty indicated by the 1996 survey (from 42.7% of all households to 65.6%--the sum of moderately
poor and core poor) is probably inaccurate. The 1996 survey depicts two facts - an improvement in the
distribution of income and a dramatic decline in mean household expenditures of almost 50%. There does not
seem to be any macro level phenomenon - drought, depression, terms of trade shock, war, or political unrest which can be associated with such a large decline. Moreover, the data themselves depict the share of food
expenditures per household declining, which is not consistent with declining overall expenditures. It is likely that
poverty increased over the 1992-96 period, but not nearly as much as the poverty data indicate.

36
ATTACHMENT 3
INDICES OF WEALTH' 8

URBAN

RURAL
TOTAL
(Percentage of population)

HOUSING CHARACTERISTICS' 9
Electricity
Source of Water
Pipe
Well
Borehole
Spring, river, etc.
Tanker truck or vendor
Sanitation facility
Water Closet
Pit latrine
Other
Floor Material
Earth/sand/traditional
Cement
Other Modem
Persons per Sleepin,g Room
1-2
3-4
>4
HOUSEHOLD DURABLE GOODS

84.3

27.9

44.9

49.8
26.5
12.4
5.5
4.0

13.2
34.9
9.1
40.9
2.4

24.2
32.4
10.1
28.6
2.9

30.6
45.2
24.2

4.3
61.9
28.8

12.2
60.2
27.6

11.5
67.1
20.2

49.7
45.6
3.4

38.2
52.1
8.5

59.0
25.5
13.8

67.5
23.3
7.2

65.0
24.0
9.2

Radio
Television
Telephone
Refrigerator
Bicycle
Motorcycle
Car
Gas Cooker
Electric Iron
Electric Fan
None (Radio through Car)

77.6
52.7
5.3
33.6
9.8
13.9
14.9
10.2
50.1
65.0
16.4

55.3
13.9
0.2
7.4
30.5
13.3
4.5
2.3
13.3
16.3
33.9

62.1
25.6
1.8
15.3
24.2
13.5
7.7
4.7
24.4
31.0
28.6

data was taken from The Nigeria Demographic and Health Survey, 1999, pp. 1 9 and 21.
Presence of public infrastructure such as piped water does not necessarily mean that there is water in the pipe.

is This
19

37
ATTACHMENT 4
PROCUREMENT REFORM RECOMMENDATIONS
Sound procurement policies and practices are among the essential elements of good governance.
Getting public procurement systems on the right footing, at both federal and state level, is one of
the highest priorities for controlling corruption and obtaining value for money in public
procurement. The Government (Federal and State), in collaboration with the Bank, has just
completed a review of the public procurement systems. The review identified a number of
weaknesses in the system:
*

There is no law or other act of parliament regarding public expenditure or procurement in
Nigeria. The Ministry of Finance, with the authority vested to it by the Constitution, issues
"Financial Regulations" (FR) which regulate and delegate the responsibilities of public
procurement and financial management at federal level.

*

The Financial Regulations are deficient in a number of areas creating opportunities for
bribery and corruption. These areas include:
(a) Lack of Procurement Planning: The current procurement system does not require

preparation of procurement plans for goods, works or consulting services. This leads to ad
hoc actions where procurements are made without competition under the guise of emergency
requirements.
(b) Lack of transparency in the solicitation, opening and evaluation of bids: Many of the

bidding opportunities as well as supply contracts seem to be open to only a restricted list of
registered suppliers and contractors who are directly invited to bid. After the bids are
received, opening is normally done in closed sessions, often several days after the bids
submission date. Existing procedures do not require the evaluation criteria to be spelt out in
the bidding documents and therefore the evaluation process could be non-transparent and
riddled with corruption.
(c) Delays in the award of contracts, effectiveness of contracts and late payments: Long

delays in awarding contracts and late payments to suppliers, contractors and consultants seem
to be the rule rather than the exception.
*

There is a proliferation of tender boards that are seen by the private sector as a source of
delays and non-transparency. In addition, these tender boards appear to have a limited
mandate, with power to decide major contracts de facto resting with the
Minister/Commissioner.

*

Customs and Excise have a poor performance record in Nigeria. The customs systems and
procedures are cumbersome and a major cause of delay in clearing goods at the port, and
hence a source of corruption.

*

The procurement profession has been relegated to a low level, with procurement functions
being carried out by non-professionals. As a result, inadequate attention has been given to
building capacity in the public procurement system leading to uneconomic and inefficient
procurement.

38
From the above it is evident that the system is inefficient, easy to manipulate, difficult to control
and not transparent to bidders and the public. The following are the major recommendations to
reform the system.
*

Establishment of a public procurement oversight body, the Public Procurement Commission
(PPC), independent of the tender boards with responsibility for the efficiency and
effectiveness of the procurement function across the public sector.

*

The practice of using registration lists as eligibility for tendering should be discontinued
immediately. Bidding should be open to all qualified eligible bidders irrespective of their
registration status

*

All bids valued more than Naira 5 million must be advertised in the Government Gazette and
at least two papers of wide circulation in Nigeria.

*

Bids evaluation criteria should be clearly defined in the bidding documents. Negotiations of
contracts in open competitive tenders should be discontinued immediately and all major
contract awards should be published including description of the contract, name of the
contractor and the contract price.

*

Tender boards should be streamlined and empowered to approve tenders. These boards
should be chaired by Accounting Officers. The Departmental and Federal Tender Boards
should be abolished.

*

There is a need to restore and strengthen the professional procurement cadre and allow them
to practice their profession. The procurement function should be carried out by these
professionals.

*

The Government should fully implement and use the customs clearing system - Automatic
System for Customs Data Entry (ASYCUDA). The system provides accurate processing of
import, export and transit declarations leading to reduction of time for clearing commodities
and increased revenues.

*

Reputable Procurement Agents should be hired as a short-term measure to complement the
available procurement capacity and also as a way of restoring credibility in public
procurement.

39
ATTACHMENT 5
FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT REFORM RECOMMENDATIONS
(From the CFAA)
DIAGNOSIS
1.
The Federal Government of Nigeria retains the vestiges of good systems for planning,
budgeting, managing and controlling public resources. But their performance has deteriorated to
such an extent that they provide negligible assurance that resources are used entirely for their
intended purpose. The same is true at the state level. To return to an acceptable level of
financial accountability will require sustained action over several years. In the interim, risks of
waste., diversion and misuse of funds are assessed as high. This has clear implications for both
Government and the Bank: the former needs to improve financial accountability along the lines
outlined in this report; and the latter needs to support this process and in the meantime to build
explicit risk minimization actions into all its Nigerian operations.
2.
Budgeting and accounting systems and those responsible for them require significant
upgrading. Expressions of intent, studies, reviews and commissions of enquiry have an
appropriate place in the reform process. But more important at present, is serious follow up on
the message from the political leadership that financial indiscipline will not be tolerated. To be
credible this message has to be supported by relevant actions including serious enforcement.
Short-term actions might include: reissue of the key texts on financial management and
accountability, communicating to all public servants new expectations concerning their behavior.
ensuring that all senior positions (e.g. director of finance) are filled and occupied by suitable
persons; and preparation and implementation of action plans to strengthen compliance with
financial controls. An encouraging start has been made with the enactment of the Anti
Corruption Act and the publication of a booklet explaining its implications for civil servants.
3.
Of particular importance is a realistic budget process. Realistic budget aggregates.
realistic expenditure programs, realistic budget allocations and hard budget constraints would go
a long way to bring discipline back to public resource management. There is a parallel need for
improved government accounting, internal control, record-keeping and effective auditing both
internal and external. These form the foundation on which public accountability rests.
4.
Two conspicuous governance weaknesses are apparent in the Nigerian public sector:
lack of appropriate legislative control and lack of transparency.
The first problem is
constitutional: nothing prevents the legislatures at Federal and State levels from proposing
expenditure plans at significant variance with those of the executive and no effective means as
yet exists for reconciling resultant conflicts; and the newly re-established public accounts
committees are yet to demonstrate their effectiveness. At the same time little is publicly known
about government finance. All key public finance documents (for instance the budget document.
monthly government accounts, annual financial statements, auditor-general's reports, public
accounts committee reports etc.) should be posted on the world-wide web to ensure maximum
dissemination of information in the interests of fiscal transparency.

40

5.
A plan is proposed to address such problems. If it is to be effective, remedial action
has to go beyond the traditional financial management issues into matters such as:
*

The calculation, control, management, protection, reporting and disclosure of national oil
revenues.

*

The adequacy of procedures for drawing money from the Consolidated Revenue Fund and
for ensuring that transactions on accounts held at the Central Bank are properly authorized,
managed and audited.

*

The legal provisions requiring the public disclosure of assets and other valuable interests of
public officials and politicians; the recovery of public sector assets illegally acquired.

*

Implementation and enforcement of the Anti-Corruption Act.

*

The legal provisions and enforcement arrangements for combating money laundering
including the adequacy of central bank controls over commercial banks.

6.
Financial management reform in isolation from the environment in which financial
management processes are located is likely to be ineffective. Therefore attention also has to be
given to issues of standards of public behavior, the adequacy of judicial processes, civil service
management and the governance context.
7.
Responding to the needs of a more dynamic private sector is an important challenge.
Clearly regulatory regimes and the country's capacity to make those regimes work, need to be
improved. The current program of privatization and the steps taken to revitalize the capital
market will have profound and positive implications for the Nigerian economy, if taken to their
logical conclusion. Emerging models of corporate governance as evidenced by the Cadbury
Report in the United Kingdom and the King Report in South Africa are relevant to addressing
Nigeria's problems. A dynamic private sector implies:
*

Greater demand for financial services and expertise.

*

Increased emphasis on legal and regulatory regimes.

*

Pressure on companies and their financial advisers to respond to the needs of investors.

*

Need for a complete set of accounting standards consistent with international accounting
standards and for a monitoring and enforcement mechanism for ensuring compliance with
standards.

*

A more important role for auditors in their attestation role and a need for them to demonstrate
due diligence.

8.
Successfully tackling the many issues raised in this Report represents a daunting
challenge for Nigeria. However, through sustained political commitment to change, and
determined collective efforts, the challenges of today can become the reality of tomorrow.

41

RECOMMENDATIONS
Public Sector

*

Ensure that a clear message goes out that financial indiscipline will not be tolerated and
support this with relevant actions.

*

Concentrate on improving the following aspects of the budgeting system in the first place:
achieving realistic budget forecasts, a hard aggregate budget constraint and budget discipline
during implementation.

*

Resolve the legal ambiguity regarding the executive's role in setting the budget expenditure
ceiling.

*

Adopt a medium-term program to improve all aspects of financial management and improve
training.

*

Address the following issues: the calculation, control, management, protection, reporting and
disclosure of national oil revenues; the adequacy of procedures for drawing money from the
Consolidated Revenue Fund and for ensuring that transactions on accounts held at the
Central Bank are properly authorized, managed and audited; the legal provisions requiring
the public disclosure of assets and other valuable interests of public officials and politicians
and the recovery of public sector assets illegally acquired; implementation and enforcement
of the Anti-Corruption Act; the legal provisions and enforcement arrangements for
combating money laundering including the adequacy of central bank controls over
commercial banks.

Private Sector

*

Conduct a review of corporate governance and private sector financial accountability along
the lines of the King Committee in South Africa.

*

Update the Companies and Allied Matters Act so that it reflects such principles and
strengthens company audit.

*

Accelerate the issuance of accounting standards in areas where there are none at present but
are available under International Accounting Standards (IASs) promulgated by the
International Accounting Standards Committee (IASC).

*

Establish monitoring and enforcement mechanisms to ensure that all listed companies
comply with national and IASs. In this regard, there is need to sufficiently strengthen the
NASB's technical and professional capabilities.

*

Ensure that the procedures for filing company information and providing public access to it
are adequate.

42
ATTACHMENT 6
CDF CONSULTATIONS IN NIGERIA
The CDF consultations were held in March/April, 2000 at eight different venues throughout
Nigeria. At each site there were five one-day meetings with the broad spectrum of Nigerian
leadership. Of necessity, the discussions were quite general, and concentrated more on what was
wrong than how things could be fixed. Nevertheless, the following statements are broadly true
as representing the majority opinions across all sites:
*

Nigerians still look to the Federal Government as the answer to all problems;

*

But they also realize that the Government does not work very well;

*

The participants were enthusiastic, energetic and largely committed to a better Nigeria; they
were committed to fighting corruption and ethnic and religious intolerance;

*

They distrust politicians (and the military), and think that most, if not all politicians are
purely self-interested;

*

They are searching for a rekindling of patriotism and national identity;

*

They believe in expanded private participation in key sectors but are wary of full
privatization because they think the properties will be given away well below their real value;

*

Nigerians, in almost every discussion we have had, complain about policy implementation
and lack of continuity in policy formulation;

*

They see corruption as a complex issue, coming from poverty and from greed; many
Nigerians see corruption as a major moral issue;

*

Nigerians speak a lot about the lack of patriotism and the tendency of their compatriots to see
themselves in ethnic or religious categories rather than one in which identification is
fundamentally national;

*

The people in the Delta refer back to the "legitimate" constitution of Nigeria which gave
each of the regions 50% of their revenue base; they said that before the discovery of oil,
when the sources of revenues were cocoa, oil palm and groundnuts, there was no push to
divide the pot equally;

*

Education is a huge issue, not only for development, but for the preservation of the nation;

*

Nigerians are very cynical about the new programs the Government announces because they
have seen so many failures;

*

They believe that the system does not provide any accountability for LGAs;

*

There is a deep sense that the last thirty years have resulted in an erosion of values; people
felt that greed, lack of trust, high regard for wealth, erosion of traditional cultures and values
characterized Nigerian society;

*

Consequently, there is strong belief in the value of "enlightenment campaigns."

43

ATTACHMENT 7
VOICES OF THE POOR
The World Bank, UK's Department for International Development and the National Planning
Commission of the Federal Government of Nigeria undertook in 1999 a study entitled "Nigeria,
Consultations with the Poor," as one of the inputs into the Bank's global study, Voices oJ the
Poor. The major conclusions were:
In all the urban sites participating in the study and seven out of eight rural communities there was a
general consensus that poverty had increased compared to ten years ago.
... participants widely associated poverty in their communities with a lack of dignity, status,
security and hope. In addition to material deprivation characterized by poor, insecure housing,
food insecurity and limited access to utilities and services, the poor were described as wretched and
lacking in any opportunity to change their situation or provide their children with greater
opportunity. They were commonly identified as unable to educate their children above primary
school if at all. Tlheir livelihood strategies are highly limited by a narrow asset base with income
commonly derived from casual laboring or petty sales, often accompanied by indebtedness.
The powerlessness of the poor was further manifested in a lack of access to justice when wronged
and an exclusion from the benefits of local political patronage and corruption. Cumulatively, this
analysis often gave rise to perceptions that poverty is inherited from generation to generation.
Social breakdown accompanies poverty. Community crime and violence were frequently cited
along with the serious threat to cohesion of gossiping and a breakdown of trust. Withill
households, stress and the undermining of male roles as providers througll unlemploymneiit and job
insecurity were seen to be contributing to conflict and violence. Traditional coping mechanisms
had been stretched to the breaking points, increasing the burden at the family level and forcing both
men and women to take on a greater variety and number of income earnilg activities.
... people believe that social and economic gaps between men and women are closing up and the
roles are changing-particularly due to empowerment of women through education and changing
economic situations. The political power relations, however, remain the same.

44
ATTACHMENT 8
PRELIMINARY CDF MATRIX
DONOR

ECONOMIC
GOVERNANCE

AFDB

*

Support for Economic
Governance, Capacity Building
and Poverty Reduction*

PRIVATE
SECTOR
*
*

*
CIDA

*

*
*
DFID

.

*
*
*
EU

Economic reform, debt
management, poverty
monitoring*
Human Rights/Democracy
State Capacity Building
Local police services and justice
Economic Governance
Democracy support

*

Rivers State Irrigation
State Level Water Supply
Studies and Projects
Rural Electrification
Gas Flaring
Desertification
Gully Erosion
State level water supply

CDD/SOCIAL
SERVICES
.

*
*

Health Systems Development
Project
Community Based Poverty
Reduction Project*
Primary health care
Roll Back Malaria
HIV/AIDS*
Health reform*
HIV/AIDS*
Community Education
Education Sector Analysis*

*
*
*
*
*

.

*

Infrastructure, probably water

*

Micro projects

FAO

*

*

Special programs for food
security

IFAD

*

Quality assurance in fishing
sub-sector
Root and tuber expansion

JICA
UNDP

*
*

*

Primary education
Non-formal education
Early child care
HIV/AIDS*
Family Planning
Health Systems
Polio Immunization
Roll Back Malaria
Educational Sector
assessment*
State Education Support
Roll Back malaria
Health sector
Community Based Urban
Development
Health Systems Support
HI/AIDS Project
Education Sector Assessment
Micro-watershed
CDD project
Universal Basic Education

*

*

program

*
*
UNICEF

*

Rural electrification
Streamline environmental law
and ag practices
Agricultural policy
User managed irrigation
Water and sanitation

*
*
USAID

*

*
*
*

Support for Economic Policy
Coordinating Committee*
EMCAP support*
Domestic Debt Management*
Judicial Assistance

*
*
*

Privatization
Microfinance
Agricultural research
Rural development Sector
Strategy*
Private sector Assessment*
Investor's Roadmap
Energy

*
*
*
*

Privatization Support
Private Sector Assessment
Lagos Water/Upgrade
Electric Transmission

*

IFC Support to SMEs,
privatization, investment

*
*
*
*

WHO

*

*
*
*
*
*
*
*

*
WORLD
BANK
GROUP

*
*
*

*
*

EMCAP
PER
Support for PRSP
State/Local Governance Study
WBI Activities

*
*
*

*
*
*

*
*

Co-coordinated with WB activities

45
ATTACHMENT 9
OVERVIEW OF CURRENT BANK GROUP PRIVATE SECTOR DEVELOPMENT
ACTIVITIES IN NIGERIA

Joint Bank Group Approach to Private Sector Development
IFC, MIGA and the Bank are proceeding jointly on all areas related to private sector
development, infrastructure, and the financial sector. This degree of joint activities has been
facilitated by the need for both to re-engage fully, the creation of the joint global product groups
at the time much work was initiated, and the need for major structural changes to enable private
investment. The most immediate priority is assistance with privatization and sectoral reform to
encourage private participation in infrastructure and key sectors such as oil and gas. Financial
sector development, SMEs, and improving the investment climate are also a priority for IFC. A
Joint Private Sector Assessment, intended to guide Bank Group actions in the future, is currently
under preparation; these priorities will most likely remain, but would be supplemented by more
strategic work on the policy and institutional framework at the national and state levels, and
attacking more broadly the constraints to competitiveness.
Given successful efforts to combat corruption and improve governance, adherence to a reformn
program, privatization of infrastructure, and consistent support for private sector development,
Nigeria's private sector can make a significant contribution to reducing poverty and diversifying
the economy and a meaningful Bank involvement will be much broader. The current activities
now underway as part of the re-engagement are summarized below.
Privatization/Infrastructure.
*

WB Privatization Support Project. This project, intended to be the vehicle for Bank Group
assistance on key privatizations focusing on power and telecommunications, was delayed due
to lack of government actions, but is now scheduled for Board Presentation in June 2001. It
will provide support for key sectors of power and telecommunications, support the IFC
advisory mandates, and provide institutional support to the Bureau for Public Enterprises.

*

Nigeria Airways. PSAS is advising the government on the sale of Nigeria Airways, intended
to be an early and high-profile privatization. The advisory contract between FGN (through
the National Council on Privatization -- NCP) and IFC was signed by President Wolfensohn
on his October 1999 trip. The team submitted its strategic options report in May 2000; the
NCP agreed to pursue the privatization route. However a number of government actions, in
particular the signing of the "open skies" agreement with the U.S. in September, designation
of other key international routes, and pursuit of options other than privatization have
complicated IFC's role as advisor and called into question the viability of the privatization.

*

Lagos Water. PSAS is advising the Lagos State government on privatization of its
water/sewerage service provider. The Interim and Options reports have been presented,
and the Governor has issued a letter agreeing to the recommended strategy which was

46
presented on 29 June 2000; with the Options Report being presented two months later.
The diagnosis concludes that the water corporation is close to collapsing; immediate. action
is required, at an estimated cost of around US$10 million; huge investments are required to
provide and improve services, and to meet future demand for both drinking water and
sanitation; and a fully-fledged regulatory framework is to be developed. The advisory
project is proceeding to the second phase, with support for emergency investments and
consultants provided by the Bank privatization project.
*

Power. Resolving the acute and deteriorating power situation remains a major priority. IFC
has participated with the Bank in joint missions and advice to the government on the
Emergency Power Program and the Rehabilitate-Operate-Transfer (ROT) scheme. Sector
reforms are a key element of the Privatization Support Project.

*

Transmission Development Project. The aim of this project is to establish a transparently
regulated, financially viable and commercially operated transmission company that can
deliver reliable and efficient services for power transmission, dispatch, and system operation.
The proposed credit is for US$100 million scheduled for Board presentation in July, 2001.

*

Telecommunications. The ICT global product group has also advised the government on
Telecommunications licensing and sectoral policy, with support for reforms coming under
the Privatization Support Project. Following the successful auction of new cellular licenses,
IFC is in discussion with new licensees on potential financing.

*

Petroleum Sector Review. Four studies conducted by the Global Oil, Gas and Chemicals
Group - on flow of funds, Nigeria national petroleum Company (NNPC) management audit,
taxation and state participation, and downstream sector reform - have now been finalized and
presented. They recommend major restructuring in the downstream sector, as well as
sweeping management changes in NNPC, and a change in the mode of state participation in
the industry. IFC will seek to support implementation of these recommendations as
appropriate.

FinancialSector
The Bank Group is playing a strong role in financial sector development in several areas. IFC
identified several short-term opportunities for strengthening the sector, which have been put in
place rapidly in the past year, complementing the Bank's analytical and policy dialogue
activities.
*

Financial Sector Review. The Bank completed a financial sector review in early FY 2001.
This review pointed out several problem areas, including the condition of rural and
community banks, and other non-bank financial intermediaries. The Bank is working on
dialogue with the government to improve regulation and supervision in these sub-sectors.
The Review will guide the Bank in developing a financial sector assistance program on
regulation and institutional development with the government.

47
*

CAPE Fund, a private equity fund and IFC's first mainstream investment in Nigeria for five
years, was approved in October 1999. IFC invested US$7.5 million in the US$30 million
fund.

*

IFC Credit Lines to Commercial Banks. IFC approved a total of US$122.5 million in term
credit facilities to 5 commercial Banks in FY 00. (Citibank Nigeria, US$40; Diamond Bank
US$20; Guaranty Trust Bank US$20; FSB International US$22.5; IBTC US$20). IFC is
working with the Nigerian banks to improve their operations, and in several cases identify
strategic partners. Three additional Bank credit lines, US$10 million to First City Merchant
Bank, US$30 million to UBA, and an additional US$30 million for Citibank (see below) are
in the current approval pipeline. Several Nigerian banks, including IFC's clients, are also
participants in the Africa Petroleum Trade Finance Facility, an US$80 million regional
project approved in FY 00.

*

SME lending Joint Venture with Citibank. IFC is processing a separate financing facility
with Citibank to support their Extended Target Market program, aimed at financing smaller
and medium sized Nigerian firms, for US$30 million. This has been a successful program for
Citibank, which will be doubled in scope with the IFC funding. IFC is examining with
Citibank the potential for expansion in the future.

*

Other IFC initiatives include establishment of a credit rating agency, capacity building via
helping banks secure technical/strategic partners, and assistance with privatization of residual
government shares in some banks.

SME support.
*

SME Map. The SME Department undertook an SME mapping exercise in early FY 01.
which identified several areas for further interventions now being implemented.

*

Oil Services Facility. IFC is working with Shell Oil and Nigerian banks on a US$35 million
financing facility to support Shell's local suppliers and contractors in the Niger Delta. IFC's
participation will be US$15 million.

*

SME Service Providers. The SME Department has pilot projects to bring established SME
service providers such as FUNDES to Nigeria to establish operations.

*

Citibank Extended Target Market Program. As noted above, the Citibank facility targets
financing for SMEs.

*

STEP. The Lagos office has initiated a pilot program with the Lagos Business School to
train microentrepreneurs - Support and Training for Entrepreneurs Project, or STEP.

*

APDF, AMSCO and ESSA. The IFC-supported facilities Africa Project Development
Facility. Africa Management Services Company, and Enterprise Support Services for Africa
are expanding their programs in Nigeria with new staff to be based in Lagos.

48

*

Direct SME Investments. IFC approved three new SME direct investments for a
bicycle/motorbike wheel manufacturer, an expansion of a bus line operator, and a fire safety
training center in FY 00. Going forward, IFC will focus less on direct investments in SMEs,
and more on financing via intermediaries.

Other Activities
*

Foreign Direct Investment. FIAS completed a project to examine constraints to FDI, and is
working with the Nigerian Investment Promotion Commission. MIGA has also participated.
A more detailed analysis of administrative barriers to investment was initiated in the spring
of 2001. This work is under the umbrella of the private sector assessment.

*

Detailed Business Survey. Under the Regional Program for Enterprise Development, a
detailed survey of over 300 Nigerian firms was initiated in spring, 2001. The survey focuses
on manufacturing, and will provide accurate data on constraints to competitiveness, and
provide a database for further analytical work. The survey is supported by DFID and
USAID.

*

Mining Sector Review. The global mining group at the request of the government
undertook a review of the mining sector. The report has been completed and recommends
sweeping changes in concession practice and privatization of existing parastatals in the
sector.

49
ATTACHMENT 10
WBI Programs for NIGERIA (FY02-04)
L
I
WBI Cross-cutting
Interest
Partners
Ongoing/Proposed WBI Activities
CAS Objectives/Activities
Themes/
Other priority Areas
Overall Bank Assistance Strategy: The government sees reduction of poverty as its primary objective and intends to do that by accelerating private sector-led
growth and improving the quality of social and economic services. The WBG will help Nigerians build their capacity to manage their own resources
effectively. Improving Economic Governance is the most important area for Bank assistance in the medium- and long-term. WBG will assist with policy
change, capacity building, institutional strengthening, good governance, and private sector development. Projects with focus on innovations, learning,
sustainability and duplication. Every project will have as part of its design a plan for scaling up from successful innovations, a difficult process in Nigeria's
federal system.
WBI will play an important role in helping the WBG implement this strategy. The thematic focus of the program will be on Poverty Reduction, Govemance,
HlV/Aids, Community Empowernent, Decentralization, and Public Financial Resource Management. Mindful of the difficulties of working in a country
where the 36 individual States retain important constitutional powers, and given the relative strength of the academic and research community in Nigeria, WBI
will rely heavily on partnerships with local training institutes. The new distance learning center (GDLN) will help support capacity building in Nigeria.
CROSS-CUTTING THEMES
Heavy reliance on To be determined
Development Debates
Reduction of poverty is primary objective of *
Poverty Reduction

Governance

HIV/AIDS

government program and WBG assistance
strategy.
WBG will help in examining impact of
government programs, of oil revenue.

*
*
*
*

Core course on Poverty
Course on Fiscal Policy for Poverty Alleviation
Other modules of the Attacking Poverty Program
Monitoring &evaluation of anti-poverty programs.

local
partners:
NCEMA,
NISER,
DPC, others

Nigeria sees improving governance as a
critical priority. The WBG will provide
assistance with:
*
Implementing good governance
*
Improving economic governance
*
Fostering a shift in perceptions in Nigeria

*

*

.

Corruption survey
Assistance with anti-corruption strategy implementation
Coalition building for anti-corruption
Strengthening parliament
Ethnic tolerance in the press
Investigative journalism (including Editors Workshops)

*
*

Media Self-regulation
Course on Effective Use of Public Financial Resources

*

*

Assist the project preparation Team build consensus on
key issues: building advocacy skills among leaders on
AIDS and its impact on development; building political
and social cohesion to instill behavior change; factoring
AIDS into-non-health sector planning and operations.
Assist in implementation of project.

To be determined

Supporting CDD program
Supporting local participation
Project management and implementation

To be determined

WBG will assist Nigeria implement its
strategy for combating the AIDS epidemic.

*
*
*
*

_

Community
Empowerment
Social Inclusion

&

through
the
prosperity
Promoting
empowerment
of
local
communities.
Preparing large CDD program across a
number of sectors. Improving accountability
and
by supporting local
participation
h
Buiding
capacity
traflsparcncv.

*
*

.

_

____

*
*

*

Nigerian Guild
of Editors
WANAD
Institute
of
Dev't Studies
NCEMA
NISER

Anti-corruption: 3
year funding from
DFID
nv. Journ.: 3 year
program funded by
CIDA
To be determined

*

tJSAID:
Project
analysis

50
WBI Cross-cutting
Themes/
Other priority Areas

Ongoing/Proposed WBI Activities

CAS Objectives/Activities

Local Training
Partners

Donor
Interest

strengthening local government in critical
skills of budgeting, financial management, and

project implementation.
To be determined

To be determined

To be determined

*
*

Supporting CDD program
Fiscal Decentralization

To be determined

To be determined

KNOWLEDGE FOR
DEVELOPMENT

OTHER PRIORITY AREAS
the
through
prosperity
Promoting
empowerment of local communities. (See
CDD).

DECENTRALIZATION,
URBAN AND LOCAL
GOVERNMENTS
MACROECONOMIC
MANAOEMENTMAND
MANAGEMENTAND

*

Improving Economic Governance

*
*
*

Course on Fiscal Policy for Poverty Alleviation (op. cit)
Course on Effective Use of Public Financial Resources
Macroeconomic modeling for Poverty Reduction

To be determined

budget
USAID:
management

*

Nigeria is very supportive of the
ECOWAS and, within that framework,
has agreed to implement ECOWAS
agreement of a regional free trade zone.
However, current trade and tariffs policy
is inconsistent and unstable. WBG will
assist and consider mechanisms for

*

Distance learning course on Global Integration and the
New Trade Agenda
Customized workshops on regional integration

DPC, University of
Nigeria

To be determined

GLOBALIZATION

I

sharing knowledge in the_region.

*

..

Annex A2
Page 1 of 2

Nigeria at a glance

5P7101

SubNigeria

Saharan
Africa

Lowincome

123.9
310
38.4

642
500
321

2,417
410
988

2.8
2.8

2.6
2.6

1.9
2.3

66
43
47
83
39
57
37
98
109
87

34
50
92
32
43
39
78
85
71

31
60
77
43
64
39
96
102
86

POVERTY and SOCIAL
1999
Population, mid-year (millions)
GNP per capita (Atlas method, US$)
GNP (Atlas method, US$ billions)

Development diamond'
Life expectancy

Average annual growth, 1993-99
Population (Ai)
Labor force (Y.)
Most recent estimate (latest year available, 1993-99)
Poverty (%of population below national poverty line)
Urban population (%of total population)
Life expectancy at birth (years)
Infant mortality (per 1,000 live births)
Child malnutrition (%of children under 5)
Access to improved water source (%of population)
Illiteracy (%of population age 15+)
Gross primary enrollment (%of school-age population)
Male
Female

Gross
primary
enrollment

GNP
per
capita

Access to safe water

Nigeria
-- Low-income group

KEY ECONOMIC RATIOS and LONG-TERM TRENDS
1979

1989

1998

1999

GDP (US$ billions)
Gross domestic investmentlGDP
Exports of goods and services/GDP
Grossdomesticsavings/GDP
Gross national savings/GDP

47.3
22.1
24.8
27.8
26.4

23.8
17.7
32.7
25.3
17.0

32.2
28.3
33.2
23.4
19.9

35.0
22.7
36.5
16.9
11.8

Current account balance/GDP
Interest payments/GDP
Total debt/GDP
Total debt service/exports
Present value of debt/GDP
Present value of debt/exports

3.5
0.5
13.2
2.2

-1.0
6.2
126.3
20.9

-9.7
1.7
94.0
11.7
91.2
261.7

-10.9
0.9
83.8
7.0

Economic ratios'

(average annual growth)
GDP
GNP per capita
Exports of goods and services

..
..

..
..

1998

1999

1999-03

2.7
0.4
5.1

1.8
-1.7
4.9

1.0
0.5
-12.2

2.5
-0.2
4.0

1999

STRUCTURE of the ECONOMY
1979

1989

1998

(%of GDP)
Agriculture
Industry
Manufacturing
Services

28.7
37.8
8.8
33.5

31.3
43.2
5.3
25.5

39.0
33.3
5.4
27.6

Private consumption
General government consumption
Imports of goods and services

58.3
13.9
19.1

64.3
10.4
25.2

63.0
13.5
38.1

68.3
14.9
42.3

1979-89

1989-99

1998

1999

2.2
-2.7
1.1
2.3

2.9
2.0
2.3
3.5

1.5
2.9
2.8
0.1

-1.6
-4.6
-10.2
-13.2
0.3

-0.1
1.6
5.8
4.4
3.4

-31
24.6
-7.4
-2.8
0.9

(average annual growth)
Agnculture
Industry
Manufacturing
Services
Private consumption
General government consumption
Gross domestic investment
Imports of goods and services
Gross national product

Investment

Domestic
Savings

Indebtedness

1979-89 1989-99
0.2
-2.7
-3.6

Trade

Nigeria

-Low-income

group

rGrowth of investment and GDP (%)
30

..
20
..
.

-20OGDI

eGDP

[ Growth of exports and imports (%)
25
20

..
..

10
s

..

.5
-x
-1s.
-15

17.6
18.6
3.00

Exports

e-Irmports

Note: 1999 data are estimates.
'The diamonds show four key indicators in the country (in bold) compared with its income-group average. If data are missing, the diamond will
be incomplete.

Annex A2
Page 2 of 2

Nigeria
PRICES and GOVERNMENT FINANCE

1979

1989

1998

1999

Consumer prices
ImplicitGDPdeflator
Government finance
(%of GDP, includes current grants)
Current revenue
Current budget balance
Overall surplus/deficit

|

nan(%

Inflation %)

Domestic prices
(%change)
11.7
11.5

50.5
44.4

10.3
-5.2

6.6
12.9

80
60
40

>_

20

o
20.7
12.0
-2.5

13.8
-1.4
-7.2

28.5
13.2
-13.4

30.5
11.1
-7.4

(US$ millions)
Total exports (fob)
Crude petroleum
Liquified natural gas
Manufactures

1979
16,767
15,655

1989
9,812
9,411

1998
10,114
9,218

1999
11,927
11,393

Total imports (cif)
Food
Fuel and energy
Capital goods

94

-20

95

9S

GDP deflator

97

-*

99

98

CPI

TRADE

.
..

..

..

322

39

140

27

15,971
1,638

6,544
425

10,269
1,397

12,176
1,583

442

46

123

158

..

..

Export and Import levels (USS mill.)
20,000

15,000
10000
sAooo

0

..

117
59
198

'107
80
133

71
94
76

94
97
97

Exports of goods and services
Imports of goods and services
Resource balance

1979
17,631
13,543
4,089

1989
9,979
7,679
2,301

1998
10,972
12,934
-1,962

1999
12,871
14,901
-2,030

Net income
Netcurrenttransfers

-2,026
-388

-2,668
118

-2,669
1,516

-3,445
1,662

0

Currentaccountbalance

1,675

-249

-3,115

-3,813

s

Financing items (net)
Changes in net reserves

1,765
-3,440

1,521
-1,272

3,000
115

2,147
1,666

-10

5,580
0.9

1,797
9.4

7,107
88.0

5,441
92.3

1979

1989

1998

1999

6,245
478
38

30,122
2,906
30

30,315
2,278
564

29,358
1,989
624

392
65
1

2,117
411
1

1,321
466
4

924
443
7

2
59
1,234
..
0

128
461
522
2,443
0

0
-1,763
-418
1,351
0

0
-1,994
0
1,494
0

182
51
21

702
450
200

0
222
314

0
119
307

31

250

-93

-189

45
-15

212
38

156
-249

143
-331

Export price index (1995=100)
Import price index (1995=100)
Terms of trade (1995= 100)

93

94
95
U Exports

9rl

97

98

99

mimports

BALANCE of PAYMENTS

(USS millions)

Current account balance to GDP (%)
15

10.
*

fl

*

-15.

Memo:
Reserves including gold (USS millions)
Conversion rate (DEC, locaKl/S$)
EXTERNAL DEBT and RESOURCE FLOWS
(USS millions)
Total debt outstanding and disbursed
IBRD
IDA
Total debtservice
IBRD
IDA
Composition of net resource flows
Official grants
Official creditors
Pnvate creditors
Foreign direct investment
Portfolio equity
World Bank program
Commitments
Disbursements
Principal repayments
Netflows

Interest payments
Net transfers
Development Economics

Composition of 1999 debt (USS mill.)

G: 6,685

624
0 1155

F: 6,003

\
E: 12,901

A - IBRD
B - IDA
c -IMF

E -Bilateral
D- Other multilateral F - Private
G -Short-term

5/7/01

Page 1 of 1

CAS Annex B2 - Nigeria
Selected Indicators* of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
As Of Date 05108/2001

Indicator
Portfolio Assessment
Number of Projects Under Implementation a
Average Implementation Period (years) b
Percent of Problem Projects by Number a"c
Percent of Problem Projects by Amount a c
Percent of Projects at Risk by Number a, d
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount a,d

1998

Disbursement Ratio (%) e
PortfolioManagement
CPPR during the year (yes/no)

1999

2000

2001

13

8

5

5

6.4

7.4

3.5

2.7

23.1
17.6

0
0

0
0

0
0

23.1
17.6

12.5
14.1

0
0

20
64.6

30.4

43.5

61.5

23.6

yes

no

no

no

Supervision Resources, total (US$'000)

1808

1106

892

694

Average Supervision (US$'000/project)

106

85

81

116

Memorandum Item
Proj Eval by OED by Number
Proj Eval by OED by Amt (US$ millions)
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Number
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt

a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
*

Since FY 80 Last Five FYs
78
18
5162
973.2
52.6
55.6
48.9
60.7

As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY).
Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio.
Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) and/or implementation progress (IP).
As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the
beginning of the year: Investment projects only.
All indicators are for projects active in the Portfolio, with the exception of Disbursement Ratio,
which includes all active projects as well as projects which exited during the fiscal year.

CAS Annex B3 - Bank Group Program Summary

Nigeria

As Of Date 05118/2001

Proposed IBRDIIDA Base-Case Lending Program

a

Fiscal year

Proj ID

2001

Privatization Support Project

115.0

Result

115.0

2002

2003c

Overall result

US$(M)

Strategic Rewards b
(H/M/L)

Implementation b
Risks (H/M/L)

H

H

CDD Umbrella Project

100.0

H

H

HIV/AIDS Response Project

90.0

Health Systems Support

120.0

H
H

H
H

Lagos Upgrading Project

100.0

Micro-Watershed Development

30.0

Electric Power Transmission Project

100.0

Community Based Urban Project

10.0

H
H
H
H

H
M
M
M

Universal Primary Education

50.0

M

M

Result

600.0

FADAMA II

75.0

H

H

Legal/Judicial

30.0

H

L/M

NG-RURAL/MICRO FINANCE Project

40.0

Rural Infrastructure Project

100.0

University Innovation (NUSIP)

100.0

H
M
M

H
H
M

Result

345.0

Result

1,060.0

a. This table presents the proposed program for the next two fiscal years.
b. For each project, indicate whether the strategic rewards and implementation
risks are expected to be high (H), moderate (M), or low (L).
c. Preliminary

Template created on 5/21/01.

Page 1 of 1

CAS Annex B3 (IFC & MIGA) for Nigeria
Nigeria - IFC and MIGA Program, FY 1998-2000

IFC approvals (US$m)

1998

1999

2000

1.43

2.52 132.18

Sector (%)
FINANCIAL SERVICES
TOURISM
TRANSPORTATION
INFORMATION SERVICES
MOTOR VEHICLES & PARTS
TECHNICAL SERVICES
SOCIAL SERVICES
MANUFACTURING

Total

0
0
48
35
0
10
0
7

0
0
0
0
0
0
23
77

98
0
1
0
0
0
0
1

loo

100

100

90
0
10
0

92
8
0
0

94
6
0
0

100

100

100

0

0

0

Investment instrument(%)
Loans
Equity
Quasi-Equity
Other

Total
MIGA guarantees (US$m)

Annex B4

CAS Annex B4 - Summary of Nonlending Services - Nigeria
Product

Completion FY

Cost (US$000)

Audiencea

Objective b

all
all
all
Gov,Bank,IMF

PD,PS
all
all
KG,PS

Recent completions
Procurement Assessment
Rural Finance
Financial Sector Review
Capital Budget Review

FY00
FY00
FY00
FY01

190.0
74.0
117.5
200.0

Underway
Rural Sector Strategy
Education Sector Analysis
Fiscal Federalism Study
Public Expenditure Review
Public Sector Reform
Private Sector Assessment
Planned

FY01
FY01
FY01
FY01
FY01
FY01

95.0
25.0
50.0
200.0
100.0
220.0

a. Govemment, donor, Bank, public dissemination.
b. Knowledge generation, public debate, problem-solving.

all
all
all
all
all
all

all
all
all
all
all
all

Annex B5
Page 1 of 1

Nigeria Social Indicators
Same region/income group

Latest single year

POPULATION
Total population, mid-year (millions)
Growth rate (%annual average for period)
Urban population (%of population)
Total fertility rate (births per woman)
POVERTY
(%of population)
National headcount index
Urban headcount index
Rural headcount index
INCOME
GNI per capita (US$)
Consumer price index (1995=100)
Food price index (1995=100)
INCOMEICONSUMPTION DISTRIBUTION
Gini index
Lowest quintile (%of income or consumption)
Highest quintile (%of income or consumption
SOCIAL INDICATORS
Public expenditure
Health (%of GDP)
Education (%of GNI)
Social security and welfare (%of GDP)
Net primary school enrollment rate
(%of age group)
Total
Male
Female
Access to an improved water source
(%of population)
Total
Urban
Rural
Immunization rate
(%under 12 months)
Measles
DPT
Child malnutrition (%under 5 years)
Life expectancy at birth
(years)
Total
Male
Female
Mortality
Infant (per 1,000 live births)
Under5(per1,000livebirths)
Adult (15-59)
Male (per 1,000 population)
Female (per 1,000 population)
Maternal (per 100,000 live births)
Births attended by skilled health staff (%)

1970-75

1980-85

1993-99

SubSaharan
Africa

61.2
2.8
23.4
6.9

83.2
3.1
30.7
6.4

123.9
2.8
43.1
5.2

642.8
2.6
33.8
5.3

2,417.1
1.9
31.4
3.7

43.0
31.7
49.5

66.0

370
5
9

260
165
259

490
131

420
138

0.8
0.7

1.7
4.1

1.2
3.3

..
..
..

420
1
..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..
..
..

..

1.2

Lowincome

50.6
4.4
55.7

..

..

36
60

57
81

55
82

76
88

..

30

39

41

70

..
..

9
9

57
59

64
70

..

..

26
21
39

..

44
43
46

47
46
49

47
47
48

47
46
48

59
58
60

117
201

90
196

83
151

92
161

77
116

605
502

444
390
700

499
453

288
258

..

535
453
,.

..

..

..

Note: 0 or 0.0 means zero or less than half the unit shown. Net enrollment ratios exceeding 100 indicate discrepancies
between the estimates of school-age population and reported enrollment data. Latest year for access to improved water
source data is 2000.
2001 World Development Indicators CD-ROM, World Bank

Annex B6
Page 1 of 2

Nigeria - Key Economic Indicators

Indicator
National accounts (as % of GDP)
Gross domestic producta

Actual
1997
1998

1996

1999

100
31
49

100
34
45

100
39
33

20

22

28

Total Consumption
Gross domestic fixed investment
Government investment
Private investment

67
14
5
9

86
17
7
10

Exports (GNFS)b
Imports (GNFS)

48
27

Gross domestic savings
Gross national savingsc

Estimate
2000

100

100

77
28
25
3

83
23
10
12

66
22
10
12

45
38

33
38

37
42

55
43

33
30

14
12

23
20

17
12

34
27

34271

35806

32249

35045

39096

240

270

260

310

Real annual growth rates (%, calculated from 1987 prices)
4.3
2.7
Gross domestic product at market prices
..
Gross Domestic Income

1.8

1.0

2.8

-1.5

0.4

Agriculture
Industry
Services

Memorandum items
Gross domestic product
(US$ million at current prices)
GNP per capita (US$, Atlas method)

Real annual per capita growth rates (%, calculated from 1987 prices)
Gross domestic product at market prices
1.4
-0.1
-0.8
4.7
4.0
-0.8
Total consumption
-5.6
Private consumption
8.4
1.8
Balance of Payments (US$ millions)
Exports (GNFS)b
Merchandise FOB
Imports (GNFS)b
Merchandise FOB
Resource balance
Net current transfers
Current account balance
Net private foreign direct investment
Long-tern loans (net)
Official
Private
Other capital (net, incl. effors &ommissions)
Change in reservesd
Memorandum items
Resourcebalance(%ofGDP)
Real annual growth rates ( YR87 prices)
Merchandise exports (FOB)
Primary
Manufactures
Merchandise imports (CIF)

16246
16117
10939
8216
5307
877
3953

15661
15539
12448
9630
3213
1841
2840

10972
10114
12934
9276
-1962
1516
-3115

12871
11927
14901
10999
-2030
1662
-3813

21329
20361
16872
12405
4457
1724
2004

760
-1102
-412
-690

1220
-487
-463
-25
2267
115

1494
-421
-275
-146
1073
1666

1392

-2353

1539
-525
-267
-258
-793
-3061

-3945

15.5

9.0

-6.1

-5.8

11.4

7.7

9.9

2.5

-10.9

..

..

..

-1258

..

..

..

-21.9

58.0

-2.4

14.6

15.7

Nigeria - Key Economic Indicators
(Continued)

Indicator

Actual
1997
1998

1996

Public finance (as % of GDP at market prices)'
Current revenues
19.7
Current expenditures
5.3
Current account surplus (+) or deficit(-)
14.3
Capital expenditure
5.2
Foreign financing
-2.1
Monetary indicators
M2/GDP
Growth ofM2 (%)
Private sector credit growth!
total credit growth (%)
Price indices( YR87 =100)
Merchandise export price index
Merchandise import price index
Merchandise terms of trade index
Real exchange rate (US$/LCU)f
Real interest rates
Consumer price index (% change)
GDP deflator(% change)

a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.

Annex B6
Page 2 of 2

1999

Estimate
2000

20.0
8.4
11.6
10.6
-1.4

28.5
15.4
13.2
26.6
3.9

30.5
19.4
11.1
18.5
-10.5

45.7
25.1
20.6
18.6
1.7

11.1
2.6

12.7
19.7

18.3
38.4

21.6
35.1

22.9
37.5

..

..

127.9
130.3
98.2
139.5

112.3
122.8
91.4
160.7

71.3
126.0
56.6
169.3

94.4
130.4
72.4
160.8

152.0
127.1
119.6
159.2

29.3
36.9

8.3
1.4

10.3
-5.2

6.6
12.9

6.9
26.1

GDP at factor cost
"GNFS" denotes "goods and nonfactor services."
Includes net unrequited transfers excluding official capital grants.
Includes use of IMF resources.
Consolidated central government.
"LCU" denotes "local currency units." An increase in US$/LCU denotes appreciation.

Annex B7
Page 1 of 1

Nigeria - Key Exposure Indicators

Indicator

1996

Actual
1997
1998

1999

Estimate
2000

Total debtoutstanding and
disbursed (TDO) (US$m)a

31407

28455

30315

29358

Net disbursements (US$m)a

-1327

-663

-269

-375

2509

1416

1321

924

1700

189.8
91.6
15.2
4.3

178.5
79.5
8.9
4.6

269.6
94.0
11.7
5.2

223.3
83.8
7.0
5.9

149.5
82.6
8.3

24.6
31.6

38.1
54.9

36.9
52.4

53.1
83.0

3.6
2762

3.3
2373

4.2
2278

3.4
1989

1.9
1625

..

..

348

410

564

624

644

Total debt service (TDS)
(US$m)'

32300

Debt and debt service indicators
(%/6)
TDO/XGSb
TDO/GDP
TDS/XGS
ConcessionallrDO
IBRD exposure indicators (%)
IBRD DS/public DS
Preferred creditor DS/public
DS (%)'
IBRD DS/XGS
IBRD TDO (US$m)d
Of which present value of
guarantees (US$m)
Share of IBRD portfolio (%)
IDA TDO (US$m)d
IFC (US$m)
Loans
Equity and quasi-equity /c
MIGA
MIGA guarantees (USSm)

a. Includes public and publicly guaranteed debt, private nonguaranteed, use of IMF
credits and short-term capital.
b. "XGS" denotes exports of goods and services, including workers' remittances.
c. Preferred creditors are defined as IBRD, IDA, the regional multilateral
development banks, the IMF, and the Bank for Intemational Settlements.
d. Includes present value of guarantees.
e. Includes equity and quasi-equity types of both loan and equity instruments.

Page 1 of 1

CAS Anne.. B - Nigeria
Status of Bank Group Operations (Operatons Pntfollo)
A. Of Date05108/2001
Ciosed Projects

IBRDADA
rot.1Dsb.r,ed Acr,
of wrh hasbeenrepa,d
ot.tlD b-d
Clo e(id)
otwc' ia eer rop d
Tolal U,rb,t,ca (ACrone
. C osed)
f wh,h tar beer
- c_ d
Tot1 UCnda,bc.tsed
(Acvel)
rota.1JMI-srC-rredGCr-d)
lota Ufdlrt<b,- (Actoe- Cos-d)

97

242BC
52 32
s 77747
4 50 ,u
609
CrCC
4.55982
14768
0
4
15235

Acte Prects

Difference Betsv.n
Last PSR

Eap-cterdand Actual

Soperviet-n Rating
ProJectID

Project Nante

P069086
P065301
P066571
P064008
P002084
Overall result

Community Based Poverty Reduction
ECON MGMT CAP BLDG
SECOND PRIMARY EDUCATION PROJECT
SMALL TOWNS WATER
WATER REHAB

DOeleprnent
Obteottes

S
S
S3
S
S

a Intended disbursements to date mtnus actual disborsemnents to date as projectdd at approvsal

ODl!o_alAmoantIni__

Millions

Orsarsements

Implementation
Pro reos

Fiscal Year

IERD

IDA

GRANT

Cancel.

S
S
S
S
S

2001
2000
2000
2000
1991
Result

0
0
0
0
256
256

60
20
55
5
0
140

0
0
0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0
0
0

Unrdsb.

5
15 4
51 5
3.9
17 3
1477

Orin. FnmRev'd

05
-1 1
13 4
-0 6
17.3
29 0

0
0
0
0
17 3
17 3

Page 1 of 1

CAS Annex B8 (IFC) for Nigeria
Nigeria
Statement of IFC's
Held and Disbursed Portfolio
As of 12/31/2000
(In US Dollars Millions)
Held
FY Approval
1997
1997
1995
1994
1964/66/89
2000
2000
1992
1981/85/88
1993
1998
1996/98
1996
1997
1994
1999
1999
1999
1996
1997
2000

Company
AEF Radmed
AEF Telipoint
AEFVinfesen
AbujaIntl
Arewa Textiles
CAPEFFUND
Diamond Bank
FSDH
Ikeja Hotel
Tourist Co Nir
AEFAnsbby
AEF Bailey Bridg
AEF Courdeau
AEF Ekesons
AEF Eterna
AEF Global Fabri
AEF Hercules
AEF Hygeia
AEF Mid-East
AEFMoorhouse
AEFOhaMotors

Total Portfolio:

Disbursed

Loan
Equity Quasi Partic Loan Equity Quasi Partic
0
0
0.26
0
0
0
0.26
0
0.1
0
0
0
0.1
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
1.75
0.71
0
0
1.75
0.71
0
0
0
0.12
0
0
0
0.12
0
0
0
7.5
0
0
0
2.25
0
0
20
0
0
0
10
0
0
0
0
0.86
0
0
0
0.86
0
0
0
0.25
0
0
0
0.25
0
0
0
0
2.5
0
0
0
2.5
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0.1
0
0.68
0
0
0
0.68
0
0
0
0.26
0
0
0
0.26
0
0
0
0.15
0
0
0
0.15
0
0
0
0.66
0
0
0
0.66
0
0
0
0.32
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1.3
0
0
0
1.3
0
0
0
0.38 0.19
0
0
0.38 0.19
0
0
0
0
0 0.12
0
0
0 0.12
1.35
0
0
0
1.35
0
0
0
0.9
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
29.21

9.63

2.62

0

Approvals Pending Commitment
2000
2000
1995
2000
2000
2000
2000

AEF Gurmeet
AEF SafetyCenter
AEF-NABEGU CO.
Citibank Nigeria
FSB
GTB
IBTC

Total Pending Commitment:

Loan
Equity Quasi Partic
700
0
0
0
500
80
0
0
1000
0
0
0
40000
0
0
0
22500
0
0
0
20000
0
0
0
20000
0
0
0
104700

80

0

0

17.89

4.38

2.62

0

