Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized

Document o f
The World Bank

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Report No. 41746 - ML

INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION
AND

Public Disclosure Authorized

INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION

COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
FOR
THE REPUBLIC OF M A L I

Public Disclosure Authorized

FOR THE PERIOD FYOS-FY11

December 12,2007

Country Department for Mali
AFCF2
Africa Region
~

has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance o f
their official duties. I t s contents may not otherwise be disclosed without World Bank authorization.

~~

~

~~

~

~~~

~

~

-

The last Country Assistance Strategy for Mali was approved on July 3 1,2003.

CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS
Currency Unit = CFA Franc (CFAF)
$1 = 45 1 CFAF (December 10,2007)
WEIGHTS AND MEASURES
Metric System
GOVERNMENT FISCAL YEAR
January 1 - December 3 1

ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS

AAA

Analytical and Advisory Activities

ACP

African, Caribbean and Pacific
countries
Accelerated Data Program
Agriculture Competitiveness and
Diversification Project
Accelerated Data Program
Agence Frangaise de Dkveloppement
(French Agency for Development)
African Development Bank
Africa Region (World Bank)
Africa Region Results and Learning
Unit
Agence Malienne pour le
de‘veloppement de I’knergie (Malian
Agency for Energy Development)
Agence de Promotion des
Investissements(Malian Investment
Promotion Agency)
Adaptable Program Loan
Antiretroviral
Association de Santk Communautaire
(Community Health Association)
Business Development Services
Banque de 1’Habitat du Mali (Malian
Housing Bank)
Banque d’lnvestissement du Mali
(Malian Investment Bank)
Bank Netherlands Partnership
Program
Country Assistance Evaluation
Country Assistance Strategy
Country Assistance Strategy
Completion Report
Capacity Development
Caisse des Dbp6ts et Consignation
(Deposit and Consignment Office)

ADP
ACDP
ADP
AFD
ADD
AFR
AFTRL
AMADER

API- Mali

APL
ARV
ASACO

BDS
BHM
BIM
BNPP
CAE
CAS
CASCR
CD
CDC

CDD
CDI
CDMAP
CEA
CENA
CEM
CERCAP
CFAF
CIDA
CMDT

CMU
CNCS

co
CPAR
CPI
CPIA
CPPR
CPS
CRM

cs
CSCOM
CSIF

Community-Driven Development
CBte d’Ivoire (Republic of Ivory
Coast)
Capacity Development in Africa:
Management Action Plan
Country Environmental Assessment
Capacity EnhancementNeeds
Assessments
Country Economic Memorandum
Centre d’e‘tudes et de renforcement
des capacitks
CFA Franc
Canadian International Development
Agency
Compagnie Malienne pour le
Dkveloppement des Textiles (Malian
Ginning Company)
Country Management Unit
Comitk National de Coordination et
de Suivi (National Committee for
Coordination and Monitoring)
Country Office
Country Procurement Assessment
Report
Corruption Perception Index
Country Policy and Institutional
Assessment
Country Portfolio Performance
Review
Cellule de PlaniJication et Statistique
(Planning and Statistics Unit)
Caisse des Retraites du Mali (Malian
Pension Fund)
Client Survey
Centre de Sante Communautaires
(Community Health Center)
Country Strategic Investment
Framework

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Development Prospects Group
Department for International
Development (Great Britain)
Demography and Health Survey
DHS
National Directorate for Statistics and
DNSI
Information Technology
Development Policy Loan
DPL
Debt Sustainability Analysis
DSA
Diagnostic Trade Integration Study
DTIS
Enterprise Benchmarking Program
EBP
ECOWAS Economic Community o f West
African States
Electricite' du Mali (Electricity o f
EDM
Mali)
European Commission
EC
Extractive Industries Transparency
EITI
Initiative
Enqugte Le'gPre Inte'gre'e des Me'nages
ELIM
(Integrated Light Househould Survey)
Enqugte Malienne pour I'Evaluation
EMEP
de la Pauvrete' (Malian Poverty
Assessment Survey)
Economic Partnership Agreement
EPA
Economic and Sector Work
ESW
EuropeanUnion
EU
Fonds d'Appui ir la Formation
FAFPA
Professionnelle (Vocational Training
and Apprenticeship Support Fund)
Foreign Investment Advisory Service
FIAS
Financial Intermediary Loan
FIL
Financial Sector Assessment Program
FSAP
Fiscal Year
FY
Governance and Anti-Corruption
GAC
Gross Domestic Product
GDP
Global Environment Fund
GEF
Government o f Mali
GoM
Growth and Poverty Reduction
GPRSF
Framework
Growth Support Project
GSP
Hectare
ha
Harmonization and Alignment
H&A
Heavily Indebted Poor Countries
HIPC
Initiative
HIViAIDS Human Immunodeficiency
VirusiAcquired Immunodeficiency
Syndrome
Investment Climate Assessment
ICA
Information and Communication
ICT
Technologies
International Development Agency
IDA
Implementation Completion Report
ICR
Institutional Development Fund
IDF
Independent Evaluation Group
IEG
International Finance Corporation
IFC
Integrated Financial Management
IFMS
System
International Monetary Fund
IMF
DECPG
DfID

IsDB
ITC

Islamic Development Bank
Improvement of Transport Corridor
Project
Kilogram
Kg
Monitoring and evaluation
M&E
Millennium Challenge Corporation
MCC
Millennium Development Goal
MDG
Multilateral Debt Relief Initiative
MDRI
Multilateral Investment Guarantee
MIGA
Agency
Memorandum o f Understanding
MOU
Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises
MSME
Mid-Term Expenditure Framework
MTEF
Non-Governmental Organization
NGO
Net Present Value
NPV
Natural Resource Management
NRM
Organisation pour 1'Harmonisation
OHADA
du Droit des Affaires en Afrique
(Organization for the Harmonization
o f Business Law in Africa)
OMATHO Ofice Malien du Tourisme et de
I'H6tellerie (Malian Tourism and
Hotel Business Office)
Office du Niger
ON
Projet d'appui aux communautb
PACR
rurales (Rural Community
Development Project)
PAGAMGFP Plan d 'Action Gouvernementalpour la
Modernisation et le Renforcement de la
Gestion des Finances Publiques
(Program to modernize and Strengthen
Public Financial Management)
Projet d'appui aux services agricoles et
PASAOP
aux organisations paysannes
(Agriculture and Producers
Organization Project)
Projet de compktitivitk et de
PCDA
diversification agricole (Agricultural
Competitiveness and Diversification
Project)
Public Expenditure and Financial
PEFA
Accountability
Public Expenditure Management
PEM
Public Expenditure Management and
PEMFAR
Financial Accountability Review
Private Enterprise Program
PEP
Public Expenditure Review
PER
Programme de De'veloppement
PDI
Institutionel (Institutional
Development Program)
Public Financial Management
PFM
Japan Policy and Human Resources
PHRD
Development Fund
Presidential Investors Council
PIC
Rural Infrastructure Project
PNIR
Project Implementation Unit
PIU
Poverty Reduction and Growth
PRGF
Facility

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance o f
their official duties. I t s contents may not be otherwise disclosed without W o r l d Bank authorization.

Poverty Reduction Support Credit
Poverty Reduction Strategy
Framework
Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper
PRSP
Private sector development
PSD
Quality Assurance Group
QAG
Regional Economic Program
REP
Structural Adjustment Credit
SAC
Special Drawing Rights
SDR
SFD
SystBmes Financiers De'centralise's
(Decentralized Financial Systems)
Socie'te' de Gestion et d'lnterme'diation
SGI
(Management and Mediation
Company)
Sustainable Land Management
SLM
Small and Medium Enterprise
SME
SNCF
Socie'te'Nationale des Chemins de Fer
(National Railways Company)
SNDS
Strate'gieNationale de De'veloppement
des Statistiques (National Strategy for
the Development of Statistics)
State-OwnedEnterprise
SOE
SOTELMA Socie'te' des Te'le'communicationsdu
Mali (Malian Telecommunication
company)
PRSC
PRSF

SSA
SSN
STEP
SWAp
Tha
TA
TI
TF-SCB

UN
UNDP
UNICEF
USAID
WAEMU
WAPP
WBG
WBI
WDI

Sub-Saharan Africa
SystBme Statistique National (National
Statistics System)
Support and Training for
Entrepreneurship Program
Sector-Wide Approach
Ton per hectare
Technical assistance
Transparency International
Trust Fund for Statistical Capacity
Building
United Nations
United Nations Development Program
United Nations Children's Fund
United States Agency for
International Development
West African Economic and
Monetary Union
West Africa Power Pool
World Bank Group
World Bank Institute
World Development Indicators

IFC

IDA
Vice President:
Country Director:
Task Team
Leaders:

Obiageli K . Ezekwesili (AFRVP)
James P. Bond (AFCF2)
Alassane Diawara (AFMML)
Sybille Crystal (AFCF2)

Vice President:
Director:
Country Manager:
Senior Strategy Officer:

Jyrki I.Koskelo (CFFVP)
Thieny Tanoh (CAFDR)
Aida der Hovanessian (CAFW3)
Frank Douamba (CAFSC)

The following World Bank Staff contributed to the preparation o f the CAS: Alassane Diawara (co-TTL), Sybille
Crystal (co-TTL), Sabine Hader, Christina Wood, Quentin Wodon, Abdoulaye Konate, Antonella Bassani, Thomas
Jeffrey Ramin, Franqois Nankobogo, Tony Verheijen, Guenter Heidenhof, Koffi Ekouevi, Olivier Durand,
Abdoulaye Tour& Yeyande Sangho, Agadiou Dama, Remi Kini, Siele Silue, William Experton, Tonia Marek, John
May, Atou Seck, Andre Ryba, Djibrilla Issa, Mahine Diop, Craig Andrews, Boubacar Bocoum, Maimouna Mbow
Fam, Taoufiq Bennouna, Franqois Nankobogo, Youssouf Thiam, Amadou Dem, Aida der Hovanessian, Frank
Douamba, Augustin Apetey, Franke Toornstra, Maiko Miyake, Guy Darlan, Fily Bouare Sissoko Mamadou Tangara,
Cheick TraorB, Deo Ndikumana, Fabrice Houdart, Sonia Plaza, Thomas Vis, Marc Lixi, Ghislaine Delaine, Kathy Li
Tow Ngow, Denise Sangara, Hawa Maiga, Safiatou Dicko Ba, Alema Siddlky, and Luis Alvaro Sanchez.

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Page
Executive summary .................................................................................................................................. i
I.
COUNTRY CONTEXT .................................................................................................................
1
A . Historical Context .................................................................................................................... 1
B. Recent Economic, Social and Poverty Developments............................................................. 2
8
I1. THE GOVERNMENT PROGRAM ..............................................................................................
A . Assessment o f First Poverty Reduction Strategy Implementation ..........................................
8
B. Mali’s Growth and Strategy Framework for 2007-1 1 ............................................................ 9
I11. ECONOMIC PROSPECTS AND CHALLENGES ....................................................................
10
A . Medium-Term Outlook and Debt Sustainability ................................................................... 10
B. Challenges to Mali’s Broad and Sustainable Growth and Poverty Reduction ...................... 11
(a) Accelerate access to local, regional and international markets..................................
12
(b) Increase provision and lower the cost of basic business services andfactors of
production ....................................................................................................................
13
(c) Build on un- or under-tapped assets as new growth sources ......................................
13
(d) Consolidate and deepen the gains in governance ....................................................... 15
(e)
Address key challenges for service delivery in social sectors ....................................
16
C . Prospects for Transformational Growth ................................................................................ 17
IV. DONOR SUPPORT TO MALI ................................................................................................... 19
A . Donor Coordination and harmonization on the Ground ........................................................ 19
B. Bank Positioning in Development Assistance to Mali .......................................................... 20
V . WORLD B A N K COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY ....................................................... 21
A . World Bank Track Record ....................................................................................................
21
B. CAS Strategic Objectives and Key Principles ....................................................................... 24
C. World Bank Group Program to Support the Strategic Outcomes ...........................................
25
D. governance and capacity development .................................................................................. 29
31
V I. DELIVERING THE BANK GROUP STRATEGY ....................................................................
A . Leveraging the Existing Portfolio ......................................................................................... 3 1
B. New Lending Program .......................................................................................................... 32
C. Knowledge program .............................................................................................................. 34
D. Monitoring CAS and GPRSF Results ...................................................................................
35
36
VI1. MANAGING R I S K S ...................................................................................................................
List of Boxes
Box 1:
Cotton reform in Mali-The issue at hand
Box 2:
Mining in Mali
Commercial agriculture-An important source o f potential growth
Box 3 :

4
10
14

List of Tables
Selected economic indicators and medium-term economic outlook. 2007-10
Table 1:
Table 2
Headcount index o f poverty
Table 3 :
Mali recent social indicators
Table 4:
Mali: Attaining the Millennium Development Goals
Table 5 :
Policy-based debt burden indicators
Selected Cost o f Doing Business indicators for Mali
Table 6:
Table 7:
Selected indicators o f Bank’s portfolio performance
Table 8:
Sectoral repartition o f active IDA portfolio

3
6
7
8
11
15
21
31

Table 9:
Table 10:

Indicative IDA program for FY08-11
Indicative knowledge program for FY08-11

List of Figures
Figure 1: Donor intervention for each GPRSP pillars in 2007
Figure 2: CAS selectivity based on the Client Survey

33
34

20
24

List of Appendixes
Country Specific appendixes
M a l i CAS Results Matrix
Appendix -1:
M a l i CAS Completion Report
Appendix 2:
M a l i Country At-A-Glance
Appendix 3 :
Trends in Poverty
Appendix 4:
Mali’s Reform Agenda and Growth-OrientedSectors
Appendix 5 :
Appendix 6:
M a l i and Aid Harmonization
Appendix 7:
Donors’ Program in M a l i
CAS Consultation Process and Communication Strategy
Appendix 8:
Regional Integration
Appendix 9:
Appendix 10: WBG Assistance for Private Sector Development
Appendix 11: Bank Approach to Capacity Development
Appendix 12: Country Financing Parameters

38
47
74
77
79
81
84
85
89
92
98
101

Standard CAS Annexes
CAS Annex B2:
Selected Indicators o f Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
IDA Program Summary
CAS Annex B3:
CAS Annex B3:
IFCMIGA program
Summary o f Non Lending Services
CAS Annex B4:
Key Economic Indicators
CAS Annex B6:
Key Exposure Indicators and Mali Social Indicators
CAS Annex B7:
Statements o f IFC’s Held and Disbursed Portfolio
CAS Annex B8:
Operations Portfolio (IDA and Grants)
CAS Annex B8:

102
103
104
105
106
108
110
111

Map No. IBRD 33443

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
i.
Mali is a vast, semi-arid, landlocked country of low population density and few natural
resources. But it does have some un- or under-tapped assets: these include the Niger River with very
considerable potential for intensive irrigated commercial agriculture; some gold; and remarkable
cultural and geographical sites with potential for high-end tourism. In addition, it has an extensive
Diaspora o f 4 million people abroad, or one in four Malians, who remit extensive financial flows o f
between $150m and $200m per year, and who bring contact with the outside world and the availability
o f scarce skills.
ii.
M a l i has opportunities to generate incomes, and a new window of opportunity is opening
up. The country has done reasonably well over the period o f the last CAS: it has a stable democracy;
i t s economic growth has been decent, sound macro-economic management has resulted in economic
and budgetary stability; and it has continued to make gains in governance. But sectoral and structural
reforms have lagged and the good performance has not translated into significantly improved human
development outcomes, in part due to a population growth rate that i s amongst the highest in the
world. Poverty has declined between 4 and 9 percentage points but remains high.
iii.
Mali’s second PRSP, the Growth and Poverty Reduction Strategy Framework (GPRSF) has
two objectives: promotion of rapid and broad-based growth, and strengthening public sector
management. I t s programs are grouped under three pillars: infrastructure development; structural
reform agenda and investment climate; and improved delivery o f social services. It also includes a
governance action plan. I t i s optimistic, projecting a growth rate o f 7 percent. Achievement o f this rate
o f growth would require a radically new way to manage the economy, but the specific actions
necessary have not been fully spelled out in the GPRSF.
iv.
If M a l i wishes to have a rapid increase in incomes, it will need to achieve higher per capita
growth, which means both higher overall GDP growth and lower population pressure. Under
current policies and macro management, the Bank and the Fund would project an average GDP growth
o f 5.5% per year. With current population growth at 3 percent per year, per capita income levels would
double in about 30 years, so M a l i would pass from $380 per capita in 2007 to $760 in 2035. This
relatively modest improvement will not substantially reduce poverty and improve the standard of
living o f the population.
How might M a l i achieve transformational growth? The country needs to address a number
o f key constraints if it wishes to generate fast, broad and sustainable increase in incomes. First, it
would need to accelerate access to the region and the rest o f the world. Second, it would need to
develop basic productive services and factors o f production. Third, it would need to develop new
sources o f growth. This would mean leveraging i t s assets better, notably dramatically improve the
irrigation potential for intensive commercial agriculture for export to the region and the rest of the
world; build on i t s outstanding culture and natural beauty to develop high-end tourism; and achieve
better investment outcomes o f the remittances and skills coming from i t s Diaspora. Currently,
obtaining better returns from i t s natural assets i s hampered by a number o f constraints, most notably
an unfriendly business and investment climate, and weak skills and capacity, which find their roots in
a suboptimal governance structure.
V.

vi.
Donor coordination and harmonization will be key to support the government achieve its
GPRSF key objectives. T o reduce i t s transaction costs, the government has created a Coordination
mechanism to ensure harmonization o f various interventions. Given the limited resources for M a l i and
increasing presence o f other partners, during the CAS period the Bank’s interventions will transition
from a global leader to a leading partner in areas o f comparative advantage and supporting partner in
-1-

areas where other donors are well positioned to support the GRPSF. Where relevant and in
coordination with other donors, the Bank will foster programmatic approaches and budget support.
K e y donors will also develop a collaborative assistance strategy which will become the foundations
for our next CAS.
vii.
The CAS overarching objective is to selectively assist the government in achieving its key
GPRSF objectives. The CAS focuses on the following strategic objectives: (a) promotion o f rapid and
broad-based growth; and (b) strengthening public sector management.
0
The first strategic objective will focus on linking M a l i to the rest o f the world; improving
availability o f factors o f production; and supporting an indigenous private sector.
0
The second strategic objective will ensure that public financial management results in better
service delivery by improving the link between the budget and sector strategies.
viii.
In assisting the government, the Bank will promote (a) selectivity, (b) aid effectiveness and
donor coordination, (c) regional integration, (d) WBG coordination with an increased IFC role in the
country; and (e) a stronger E S W program, in collaboration with other donors, to strengthen the Bank’s
advocacy role. The AAA program will focus on activities that will help tackle the constraints to
growth and feed the dialogue for reform.
ix.
Given the importance of improved governance and capacity development, the Bank is
selectively supporting key areas that will help address the challenges to growth and development.
Activities to support good governance will focus on the consolidation and further deepening o f the
overall governance reform program o f the government and a sector-based approach aimed at
improving public sector governance in selected sectors. With WBI’s support, the Bank has begun a
series o f capacity development needs assessments and selectively concentrated i t s intervention to five
key areas.

x.
The International Development Association’s indicative annual allocation during I D A 15 is
about SDR92 million. In light o f the limited indicative IDA resources, the Bank will use selectively
self-standing investment operations in the energy, agriculture and urban sectors and yearly
development policy operations. IDA also will rely on the successful deployment o f the ongoing IDA
portfolio to achieve the CAS strategic objectives. M a l i i s a good candidate for increased IDA funding
when available.
The CAS program has specijk risks going forward: vested interests may prevent doing
xi.
things differently and the country remains vulnerable to external shocks, particularly adverse political
developments in the sub region.

- 11 -

I.
A.

COUNTRY CONTEXT

HISTORICAL
CONTEXT

1.
M a l i is a vast landlocked country with a relatively limited natural resource and human capital
base, and a highly dispersedpopulation. It i s located in the heart o f the Sahel, a region threatened by
drought and desertification. The vast majority o f the people are directly dependent on their
environments for their livelihoods (herding, farming or fishing). It i s the largest among ECOWAS
countries by land area, with a population o f approximately 13.5 million, and therefore a very low
population density (1 1 persons per square kilometer).’ I t s population i s growing at a high annual rate
o f 3 percent.
2.
Mali is heir to a long historical tradition. M a l i i s located around the in-land Niger River Delta,
cradle o f several ancient civilizations- the Wagadou, M a l i and Songhai empires. The rich oral
tradition has kept alive this wealth o f culture. This history finds expression today in a wide variety o f
cultures, languages and traditions as well as multiple historical and cultural sites.
3.
Mali’s political structure promotes stable, democratic institutions. There i s a strong tradition o f
consensus in Malian politics and the country i s considered one o f the most politically and socially
stable countries in Africa. The country initiated a political transition to electoral democracy in 1992.
Since then, it has completed four presidential elections, the latest in April 2007. Mr. Amadou Toumani
Toure was re-elected President in the first round o f the elections, and the coalition that supported him
won the legislative elections in July 2007. Civil society has an important place in the national
dialogue, although the country has a history o f relatively low turnouts in poll.
4.
Mali’s adherence to market-oriented reforms and the devaluation of the CFA franc in 1994
have pushed up economic growth to a sturdy 5.7percent annual average during 1994-2006. In the
early 1980s, M a l i embarked on a successful market-oriented reform program with reforms aimed at
reducing the state’s monopoly o f economic activities. From 1987 the reforms intensified and focused
on the liberalization o f external and internal commerce, notably the liberalization o f prices and
marketing o f cereal crops. Following the devaluation o f the C F A franc (CFAF) in 1994, all product
prices were liberalized. Emphasis was placed on achieving macroeconomic stability and progressively
deepening the reforms in key sectors o f the economy, including in the social sectors.

5.
Today, macroeconomic stability has been broadly achieved. Overall government deficits
declined from over 9 percent o f gross domestic product (GDP) prior to 1996 to under 8 percent on
average subsequently. Domestic financing declined during the same period. From moderate inflation
that averaged 10 percent during the early-to-mid 1980s, M a l i experienced low average inflation o f 3
percent during 1996-2004. This lowered inflation was facilitated by prudent national fiscal policy, and
the prudent monetary policy o f the Central Bank o f the West African Monetary and Economic Union
(WAEMU), which M a l i joined in 1984.
6.
However, Mali’s social indicators remain among the lowest in the world. The positive
economic indicators have not translated into improved human development outcomes. The country
ranks 175 out o f 177 countries in the UNDP’s 2006 Human Development Index. Mali’s population
growth has remained very high entailing a slower gross national income per capita (Atlas method)
increase (at 4 percent a year during 1994-06) than average real GDP, and in pressure on frail natural

’

Mali i s the world‘s 24th-largest country. With 1.24 million km’, i t i s comparable in size to South Africa, and i s nearly twice
the size o f the state o f Texas. The next largest ECOWAS country by land area, Nigeria, covers 0.9 million square km. With a
population o f 129 million people, Nigeria’s population density i s 142 persons per km’.

-1-

resources. In addition, the country’s geographical characteristics result in high transportation costs for
agricultural inputs and other goods, high cost o f public service delivery, and difficulty in accessing
nomadic communities and some segments o f the rural population. Mali also has faced challenges due
to economic and political conditions in neighboring countries.
7.
Yet, M a l i has opportunities to generate incomes and improve the welfare of its population.
The potential to boost agricultural production around the Senegal and Niger River deltas remains
under-exploited- only 20 percent o f the Niger irrigation scheme’s potential i s developed. Mali can
supply national, regional and world markets with fruits and vegetables, and there i s potential for
import substitution especially in agro-industry. Tourism around cities that rank among the wonders o f
humankind provides ample opportunities. Remittances and skills o f Malians abroad also represent an
opportunity for productive investment. Finally, strong gold production and a further rise in
international gold prices will continue to boost revenues.

8.
A new window of opportunity is opening up. A newly elected government i s taking over with
the intent to move to a high and more equitable growth path and to improve delivery o f basic services.
This vision i s spelled out in Mali’s second Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (PRSP), the Growth and
Poverty Reduction Strategy Framework (GPRSF), adopted in 2006. The World Bank Group (WBG)
seeks to contribute to this effort with this country assistance strategy (CAS).

B.

RECENT ECONOMIC,
SOCIAL AND POVERTY DEVELOPMENTS

1.

Recent Economic Developments

9.
Despite annual variability due to repeated shocks, Mali’s recent economic growth has been
broadly favorable. Between 2003-06, Mali’s economic growth averaged 5.3 percent per year. It was
driven primarily by gold mining and trans ort and telecommunication services, as well as favorable
cereal harvests.2Following adverse shocks during 2004 and economic rebound in 2005, Mali had a
good economic performance in 2006 when real GDP grew by an estimated 5.3 percent (compared to
2.2 and 6.1 percent in 2004 and 2005, respectively). Mali’s economy has performed less well so far in
2007 but i s expected to do better in 2008. Real GDP growth i s projected to reach 4.1 percent in 2007
due to shortfalls in cotton and gold output4, and 4.8 percent in 2008.

P

10. Other macroeconomic indicators (inflation, external balance and terms of trade) also
improved. Inflation f e l l from 6.4 percent in 2005 to 1.5 percent in 2006 due to adequate cereal
supplies, and i s expected to remain low in both 2007 and 2008 at approximately 2 percent (table 1).
Higher gold exports and improved terms o f trade (owing to rising gold prices that more than offset
increased fuel prices) strengthened external balances. The trade balance improved by 5.2 percentage
points o f GDP in 2006, while the current account improved more modestly due to repatriated gold
profits. Gross international reserves remain comfortable, covering six months o f imports. After the
Multilateral Debt Relief Initiative (MDRI) in July 2006, Mali’s external debt f e l l from 48 percent o f
GDP in 2005 to 20 percent in 2006.

Gold mining represents approximately 12% o f GDP, transport and telecommunication 5%, and cereals (including rice)
14.2%
Adverse shocks included: natural disasters in the form o f drought and locust invasion; commodity price shocks, notably a
decline i n international cotton prices and an increase in international oil prices; currency appreciation against the dollar,
which lowered the local currency value o f cotton exports since the latter are denominated in dollars; and the persistent crisis
in CBte d’Ivoire which resulted in higher transport costs due to the need to access farther ports and in significantly lower
remittances from Malians formerly working in CBte d’Ivoire.
Cotton output fell short o f expectations due to late rains, while lower gold output stemmed from technical difficulties at a
few mining sites where rock formations and lower ore content were encountered.
-L-

11. Recentfiscal performance also wasfavorable and implementation of the 2007 budget suggests
continued fiscal prudence. Bolstered by improved revenue collection, revenue windfalls and
precautionary spending restraint, the authorities met all the IMF-supported Poverty Reduction and
Growth Facility (PRGF) fiscal targets for 2006. The overall fiscal deficit’ in 2006 was 7.7 percent o f
GDP. Buoyant customs duty revenues6 and higher payments from the mining sector resulted in higher
overall fiscal revenues than targeted. In 2007, total revenues are projected to remain at approximately
17 percent o f GDP. Overall current expenditures were kept within the program levels, and the
authorities met all quantitative performance criteria and targets for the end o f March 2007. Provided
the authorities resist any requests for transfers to state-owned enterprises (cotton, energy),’ the overall
fiscal deficit for 2007 i s projected to be 9.1 percent o f GDP (equivalent to $689 million) and to be
financed from committed external sources.

12. Despite Mali’s recentfavorable performance, its recent average economic growth was slightly
lower than the average experienced over the last decade, although underpinned by similar factors.
Mali’s economic growth averaged 5.7 percent a year over the period 2003-06. Growth was driven by
gold production (for export), transport and communications services, rice (for domestic consumption),
and cotton (for export). Mining code revisions in the early 1990s underpinned the gold sector’s boom
through foreign investment; and agriculture reforms including cereal market liberalization, enabled
substantial increases in productivity o f irrigated rice. In contrast to rice, cotton yields stagnated, and
the agriculture sector grew less than overall GDP, reflecting the continued subsistence nature o f most
o f Mali’s agricultural production. Progressive, although sometimes slow, implementation o f reforms
has so far helped sustain Mali’s above-5 percent average growth over a 13 year period since the
devaluation.
T a b l e 1. Selected economic indicators and medium-term economic outlook, 2007-10
1999-03

2004

2005

2006

Est.

Prel.

2007

2008

2009

2010

Projections

(Annual % changes, unless otherwise indicated)
National income and prices
Real GDP
Consumer price index (annual
average)
Terms of trade

4.7
1.4

2.1
-3.1

6.1
6.4

5.3
1.5

4.1
2.0

4.8
2.5

4.8
2.5

5.4
2.5

-1.3

1.5

-10.7

15.7

1.1

6.7

-0.5

6.9

(in YOof GDP, unless otherwise indicated)

Investment and saving
Gross domestic investment
Government
Non government
Gross national saving
Gross domestic saving
Government
Non government
Central governmentfinance
Total revenue and grants
Total expenditure and net lending
Current expenditure
Capital expenditure
Overall balance (payment order

*’

20.8
1.3
13.8
13.3
13.5
0.4
13.1

21.1
1.4
14.3
13.4
13.5
1.1
12.4

22.3
1.6
14.7
14.1
13.7
0.5
13.2

22.4
8.4
14.0
17.7
19.4
0.4
19.0

22.9
8.6
14.2
16.5
16.6
1.0
15.6

23.3
8.3
15.0
11.5
18.1
0.1
18.0

22.9
8.2
14.8
17.8
19.2
1.4
17.8

22.5
8.1
14.4
18.3
19.5
1.3
18.2

19.3
22.1
11.9
9.1
-7.1

21.4
24.0
13.4
9.3
-6.6

22.0
25.2
13.3
9.5
-1.3

51.4
25.4
13.1
10.9
-1.7

22.4
26.0
13.5
12.6
-8.9

22.1
26.4
13.5
11.1
-8.6

21.7
25.5
13.3
10.9
-7.4

21.2
25.1
13.2
10.8
-1.4

(payment order basis, excluding grants)
(including unexpected compensation from WAEMU for lost customs revenues from previous years)
In 2001, the combined losses of the cotton ginning company CMDT and EDM could exceed 1% o f GDP. The 2 companies
have identified substantial investments needs.

’

-3-

1999-03

2004

2005

2006

Est.

Prel.

2007

2008

2009

2010

Projections

(Annual % changes, unless otherwise indicated)
basis, excluding grants)
External sector
Current external balance, including
-7.5
-8.3
-8.2
-4.7
official transfers
Current external balance, excluding
-9.4
-10.3
-10.4
-6.7
official transfers
Debt service to export ratio after
8.5
6.4
7.4
3.7
debt relief
Gross international reserves
($ mil)
455
861
942
1,182
(in months o f next year's imports)
4.9
6.4
6.1
6.1
External public debt
86.2
48.8
47.9
20.0
Sources: Malian authorities; and IMF staff estimates and projections.
Note: 200610 data is after adjustment for MDRI (IDA, AfDB and I M F )

2.

-6.4

-5.8

-5.1

-4.2

-8.1

-7.0

-5.6

-4.7

3.4

3.4

3.6

3.5

1,267
6.3
22.6

1,351
6.6
24.4

1,424
6.8
26.5

1,482
7.1
27.9

Recent Social and Poverty Developments

13 . Despite advances in establishing a democratic system, limited progress in creating effective
accountability systems continues to constrain economic and social development. In the medium
term, opportunities for growth are dependent on improved government performance, in particular
(a) deepening expenditure management reforms including public procurement, (b) improving the
delivery and the quality o f public services, and (c) addressing corruption and conflict-of-interest
issues. In the long term, economic competitiveness will strongly depend on improved performance in
the education and health sectors. Analyses in the Independent Evaluation Group (IEG) o f the previous
CAS and in the C A S completion report (CASCR) highlight lack o f government effectiveness, weak
accountability systems, and conflicts o f interest among the key factors affecting progress in
implementing reforms in these key sectors.
14. I n agriculture, cotton sector reforms continue to be negatively affected by vested interests. I n
addition, M a l i has not realized the potential for intensive commercial agriculture by harnessing the
Niger River., The establishment o f and compliance with an internal pricing mechanism o f cotton
(based on the tracking o f international prices) has reduced the financial exposure o f the Compagnie
Malienne pour le De'veloppement des Textiles (CMDT), the State-owned cotton monopsony.
Nevertheless, in 2007 the government s t i l l needs to recapitalize C M D T by 1.4 percent o f GDP. A
strategy, agreed amongst stakeholders, to split C M D T into four regional cotton companies and then
privatize them should be completed by 2008 (box 1).
Box 1. Cotton reform in M a l i - The issue at hand
I n 2001 the government undertook a comprehensive reform to enhance the sectors competitiveness and
performance. AAer an unsuccessful attempt in 2003 to privatize part o f the parastatal, CMDT, the government
in November 2005 adopted a revised plan to restructure the cotton sector by 2008. Given the tough cotton
market conditions ensuing from stagnant world cotton dollar prices and unfavorable exchange rate
movements, advancing on these reforms i s all the more urgent. In addition, the cotton sector remains a crucial
source o f income for a large share o f the rural population and therefore plays a key role in poverty reduction.

A price mechanism was adopted in January 2005. The mechanism formula l i n k s the producer price to
international market and covers three years. It has been implemented successfully so far including an endseason additional payment to farmers in the 2005-06 and 2006-07 campaigns.

-4-

Despite some delays, other reform components and implementation benchmarks are broadly on track. In
March 2006, the Council of Ministers decided that CMDT’s operations will be divided into four balanced
zones and privatized. The capital o f the privatized companies will be shared by private owners (61%),
producers (20%), the State (17%) and ex-CMDT workers (2%). The drafting o f bidding documents and their
adoption by the government and Parliament should be finalized before the end o f 2007. The launching o f the
bidding process i s expected in January 2008 and the start up o f the privatized companies activities during the
second semester o f 2008.
During the 2008 transitional year, two sector issues will need special attention: (a) implementing an interim
price setting mechanism to replace the current mechanism in place; and (b) reviewing the credit system to
ensure access to commercial bank financing of inputs and cotton commercialization.
Expected outcomes of the reforms are: (a) greater efficiency throughout the value chain; (b) substantial
reduction o f periodic financing o f sector deficits from the government’s budget; and (c) increase in producers’
revenues.
A fundamental building block of the sector reform is the more direct involvement of organized cottonfarmers
in decisions afecting the sector. In May 2007, an organizational fiamework was established comprising the
creation o f cotton producer cooperatives, from the village level to a national federation, as legal entities with
statutory roles in key sector decision-making bodies, including the boards o f directors o f the new ginning
companies. Buildingthe capacity o f these cooperatives will be critical to the success o f the overall reform.
Because cotton prices are quoted in dollars, cotton producers in the CFA fvanc zone increasingly are
confronted with export prices that are significantly lower in Euro/CFA franc than the price in dollars. This
disparity depresses farm gate prices and will add to the potential fiscal cost o f any scheme to stabilize farm
prices or provide financial assistance to poor farmers. However, the disparity also reflects the declining
relative cotton prices driven by new technologies (Bt cotton) employed by new competitors such as Brazil,
China and India, but also by China, EU and U S subsidies to their own production.

Development partners, including IDA, are active in supporting capacity enhancement o f producers’
organizations. AfDB, AFD, USAID, the Dutch, the EU, and the Bank also are supporting a program to boost
cotton production technology generation and transfer that covers varieties, pest resistance, soil fertility, cotton
quality, and diversification o f cropping systems.

15. Other state-owned enterprises (SOEs) continue to pose risks to public finances and, in a
larger sense, to growth perspectives. In the electricity sector, following the failed attempt to manage
the State-owned electricity company, Electricite‘ du Mali (EDM), through a concession arrangement
with the private sector, the firm i s expected to run losses in 2007 with no visible improvement in the
coverage o f electricity. Following the decision to manage r a i l transport through a concession
arrangement, performance issues continue to affect the Soci6te Nationale des Chemins de Fer (SNCF).
The restructuring/privatization o f Banque d ’investissement du Mali (BIM) has registered some delays.
The c i v i l service pension fund (CRM) continues to accumulate unfunded liabilities that will require a
transfer o f up to 2 percent o f GDP a year by 20 15.
16. Overall progress on governance reforms is mixed. The government i s implementing a farreaching public finance reform program with regard to the preparation o f sectoral medium term
expenditure frameworks (MTEFs), the modernization o f the expenditure management system, the
strengthening o f internal and external controls, and the reform o f the public procurement system. In
addition, the ongoing institutional reform program (PDI) i s in the process o f rationalizing the
administrative machinery o f the central government. However, corruption and conflict-of interest
issues remain a key concern. Mali’s ratings under the Transparency International (TI) Anti-corruption
Perception Index declined between 2003 and 2007 to a Corruption Perception Index (CPI) score o f
2.7. There i s little coordination o f governance reforms at the policy level which could contribute to a
more dynamic reform process.

-5-

17. Given the level of per capita income growth, poverty has fallen roughly in line with
expectations. The two sets o f poverty estimates' in table 2 for the years 2001 and 2006 are provided
on the basis o f household surveys carried out in these two years. Both sets o f estimates show a decline
in poverty. Overall, the drop in poverty o f between 4 and 9 percentage points i s roughly consistent
with the annual average rate o f economic growth o f 5.3 percent during the same period (appendix 4).
Table 2. Headcount index of poverty (% of population in poverty)

r-

Urban
Rural

~

population

Method2
(cost o f
basic
needs)

100

100

64.4

47.5

26.2
73.8

31.7
68.3

31.8
79.5

25.5
57.6

30.2
18.4
31.9
8.8
10.7

29.4
18.0
33.9
8.5
10.2

61.5
81.7
75.2
57.9
11.0

44.7
80.8
48.7
29.0
7.9

population

National
Areas:

2006

Method 1
(PRSP
method)

Y
O

(PRSP
method)

(cost o f
basic
needs)

Regions:

Kayes-Koulikoro
Sikasso
Mopti-SCgou
Tombouctou-Gao-Kidal
Bamako

18. While progress toward poverty reduction was acceptable, it is uneven, and spatial differences
in poverty are widening. Nationally, inequality levels remained stable between 200 1 and 2006, so that
growth does not appear to have favored either the poor or the better off. Depending on where the
poverty line i s set, the decrease in poverty appears to be either primarily urban (under a high poverty
line) or rural (under a lower poverty line). However, there have been important differences in poverty
dynamics according to geographic areas. The share o f the population in poverty f e l l substantially in
Bamako from an already l o w base, while it remained very high (and substantially higher than
elsewhere in the country) in the Sikasso area. The drop in cotton producer prices i s the primary
explanation why poverty levels for cotton farmers remain unchanged since 200 1.

19. Despite progress in the use of public services, spending is not pro-poor. For services such as
public primary schools, primary health care, and vaccination campaigns, the level o f usage by the poor
i s similar to that o f the population as a whole. However, for a range o f other services, such as
secondary and tertiary schooling, and hospital care, the poor tend to benefit much less than the
population as a whole from public spending. In some areas in which public subsidies are implicit, as i s
the case for electricity and water tariffs that do not enable proper cost recovery, the poor benefit 10
times less than the general population from the existing subsidies. In addition, as in other countries,
evidence from public expenditure tracking surveys shows that only a minority o f funds allocated to
certain services in education and health reach the poor. In sum, weak targeting and leakages o f funds
undermine the impact o f public spending on poverty and social indicators.
20. The economic growth has not translated into much improved social indicators. Current
achievements will not be sustainable unless the growth in per capita income accelerates. M a l i lags
behind the region in social indicators with mixed progress in improving social indicators during the
last CAS (table 3). Since 2001, the incidence o f AIDS has been reduced from 1.7 per 1,000 in 2001 to
The poverty line i s higher in method 1 (national definition used by DNSI) than in the Cost o f Basic Needs Method (method
2) which implies higher poverty rates than method 1.

-6-

1.2 per 1,000 in 2006. However, improvements in other health outcomes have been less notable. Child
mortality has declined, but nutrition indicators remain stagnant, and the fertility rate i s one o f the
highest in the world. Primary education enrollment increased from approximately 6 1 percent in 2003
to 75 percent in 2006. M a l i ranks below the Sub-Saharan Africa (SSA) average o f 92 percent for
primary enrollment rate. The enrollment rate for girls at slightly above 50 percent ranks below the
SSA average. In addition, the quality o f education remains a concern and the literacy in the country
(24 percent) i s one o f the lowest in the world.
2 1. High levels of population growth also make it difficult to rapidly improve social indicators
and have a number of other consequences. Mali’s high population growth rate i s due to persistently
high rates o f fertility: 6.6 children per woman. This rate i s combined with a young population, close to
half o f which i s under the age o f 15 today, leading to less than favorable dependency ratios. The UN
estimates that by 2050 Mali’s population would triple. Population growth, particularly the increase in
the working age population, has helped stimulate economic growth in the past, a characteristic o f
Mali’s high growth experience since the 90’s. However high population growth translates into a lower
per capita DGP growth relative to GDP growth- Mali’s per capita GDP growth has stayed below 3
percent per year. High population growth entails more costly human development policies (e.g.,
education and health services). Furthermore, Mali’s malnutrition indicators are today among the worst
in SSA, with no substantial improvement over the last decade.
Table 3. M a l i recent social indicators
Indicators

2003

2004

2005

2006

SSA2005
average

229

229

Nia

191

163

113
582
79

582
90

96
582
68

96

582
85

42
46

46
47

51
50

49
51

44

Health:
Child mortality rate (per 1000 under 5
years)
Infant mortality (per 1000 live births)
Maternal mortality (per 100,000)
DPT3 vaccination coverage for children
under 1 year of age (%)
Childbirth assisted by trainedpersonnel

YOpopulation living within a radius o f 5
km o f an operating health center
Fertility rate (%)
HIV prevalence rate (“41)

6.7
1.7

6.6
1.2

5
6

Education:
Gross primary enrollment rate
61
72
74.5
75
Gross female primary enrollment rate
46
52
65.1
53
54
53
Studenuteacher ratio
Source: Mali data provided by the Country team. SSA data extracted from the 2007 WDI

95
89

22. Even though the current economic growth rate is quite good, M a l i is not likely to meet all the
MDGs if the current pattern of economic growth and State effectiveness r,emains unchanged (table
4). It i s probable that the country will meet the drinking water and HIV/AIDS targets if it maintains
recent momentum on these two fronts. M a l i also could meet the targets for extreme poverty, primary
school enrollment, and donor coordination-but only if the country and i t s partners increase their
efforts in these areas. A key problem i s access to remote rural areas, in which the indicators are
remarkably low. Last, M a l i i s not likely to meet the MDGs on health: child and maternal mortality and
nutrition. M a l i has just adopted a national action plan for reaching the MDGs.~
A donors’ roundtable
The 200615 national action plan aims at (a) identifying key actions to put in place by the country as well as the required
adjustments to the existing sectoral strategies to meet the MDGs, and (b) evaluating the available financing needs and the
supplemental envelop to ensure the implementation o f actions.

-7-

will be organized early 2008 to mobilize more resources for achieving the MDGs. Total financial
needs over the 2006-15 period to meet the MDGs challenges have been estimated at CFAF884.866
billion, equivalent to an average o f $130 per habitant per year until 20 15.

MDG Indicator
Goal 1: Eradicate Extreme Poverty

Ilr

Goal 2: Achieve Universal Primary Education

a

Goal 3: Promote Gender Equality and Empower Women

0
0
0

Goal 4: Reduce Child Mortality
Goal 5: Improve Maternal Health
Goal 6: Combat HIV/AIDS, Malaria and Other Disease
Goal 7: Ensure Environmental Sustainability
Proportion ofpopulation having access to safe drinking water

11.

e
e

a

Other:
Donor Coordination

A.

Achievement

I

THE GOVERNMENT PROGRAM

ASSESSMENT
OF FIRSTPOVERTY REDUCTION STRATEGY IMPLEMENTATION

23. Implementation of Mali’s first Poverty Reduction Strategy (PRSF 2002-06) was mixed.
Growth and poverty reduction fell short o f the authorities’ objectives during the PRSP period. Growth
averaged 4.9 percent annually compared to a target o f 6.7 percent. Poverty f e l l from 68.3 percent in
2001 to 64.4 percent in 20061° compared to a target o f 47.5 percent over the 2001-06 period. At the
sector level, if current trends continue, M a l i i s likely to meet the targets on extreme poverty and
primary school enrollment. However, it will not meet the MDG targets in the areas o f health
(particularly child and maternal mortality and nutrition), gender equality, and empowerment of
women.
24. Nevertheless, thanks to prudent fiscal policies and positive external developments,
macroeconomic stability and fiscal sustainability strengthened under the PRSF. The objectives o f the
2002-06 medium t e r m expenditure framework were met in terms o f allocation o f resources to priority
sectors. The composition o f spending improved, with poverty-reducing spending reaching 60 percent
in 2006.
25. Lessons learned during PRSF implementation have shaped the design of the new PRSP. Key
obstacles to satisfactory implementation o f the PRSF included no link between the PRSF and the State
budget; an inadequate monitoring and evaluation (M&E) mechanism; l o w institutional capacity in
terms o f the methods, instruments, and indicators; and weak statistics. These obstacles prompted the
shift o f focus for the new PRSP from direct measures to improve social indicators to more emphasis
on accelerating economic growth for poverty reduction. The new PRSP also recognizes the necessity

loThe poverty line used for these estimates i s based on the food energy intake methodology adopted by the government for
the first PRSP. Use o f a lower poverty line based on the basic needs methodology preferred by Bank staff, results in a larger
poverty decline, from 55.6 to 47.5%.

-8-

to fine-tune the poverty analysis and monitoring system to better anchor the strategy’s objectives,
particularly regarding the level o f access to basic social services.

B.

MALI’S
GROWTH
AND STRATEGY FRAMEWORK
FOR 2007-1 1

26. Mali’s second poverty strategy, the GPRSF, provides the foundation for the government’s
development and poverty reduction strategy for the period 2007-11. The GPRSF was prepared
through intensive consultations with all stakeholders, and submitted to the National Assembly in
December 2006 as an input for the discussion o f the draft 2007 budget. The GPRSF i s designed as the
first phase o f the 10-year action plan to achieve the MDGs, and i s embedded in the government’s long
t e r m vision “Mali 2025”.
27. The GPRSF has two overarching objectives: (a) promote strong growth o f 7 percent through
wealth generation and employment creation; and (b) strengthen public sector performance through
deepening o f ongoing reforms covering the decentralization and de-concentration o f the public sector,
governance, economic and social sectors.
28. To attain its objectives of rapid growth and stronger public sector performance to better
support productive sectors, the GPRSF is articulated around three strategic pillars. It also focuses
on cross-cutting issues that require multi-sector collaboration. These include gender, territorial
development, population, and peace and security.
Pillar 1: Developing infrastructure and strengthening productive sectors: The objective i s to
improve productivity o f factors o f production and economic growth. This pillar will concentrate
on the four priority areas: (a) food security and rural development; (b) development o f small and
medium enterprise; (c) sustainable management o f the environment and natural resources; and
(d) infrastructure development.
Pillar 2: Consolidating the public sector structural reform agenda: This pillar aims at
strengthening existing structural reforms and the functioning o f government institutions. Key
focus areas are (a) consolidating public administration reform, (b) reforming the business
environment, (c) strengthening the viability, reach and performance o f the financial sector,
(d) promoting governance and public freedoms, (e) building the capacity o f the civil society, and
(0 strengthening regional and sub-regional integration.
Pillar 3: Strengthening the social sector: This pillar focuses on (a) creating and promoting longterm jobs, (b) developing access to basic social services, and (c) controlling HIV/AIDS.

29. While the GPRSF presents a reasonable framework for the reform program, significant
challenges must be addressed to meet its objectives. The GPRSF has set an annual growth objective
o f 7 percent. I t s main focus i s rapid and more distributive economic growth for poverty reduction.
Such transformational growth would lead to sustained and rapid reduction in poverty and
improvement in social and human development indicators. The GPRSF makes private sector growth
the cornerstone o f i t s accelerated growth strategy and i s a clear improvement on the previous strategy
with i t s increased emphasis on growth, the productive sectors, and public service delivery. It also
incorporated lessons learning during the implementation o f the previous strategy. However, it does not
specify in detail all the reform measures that will be needed to achieve the growth target o f 7 percent
nor provides details on how to foster private sector productivity growth, greater public sector
efficiency and better delivery o f public goods. Government’s challenge will be to draw up an action
plan detailing prioritized and time-bound reform and other actions to accelerate economic growth.

-9-

111. ECONOMIC PROSPECTS AND CHALLENGES
A.

MEDIUM-TERM
O U T L O O K AND DEBTSUSTAINABILITY

30. Mali’s medium-term macroeconomic outlook appears favorable, but there are risks of lower
rainfall, unfavorable terms of trade, and slow implementation of structural reforms. Based on the
latest Bank and Fund assessments, M a l i could average 5.1 percent annual growth in the medium term.
This growth assumes broadly unchanged terms o f trade, n o major extended supply shocks, and
continued prudent macroeconomic policy reform performance (table 1). All key sectors-agriculture,
mining, and services-are expected to contribute to medium-term growth to varying degrees. High
international gold prices resulting in favorable performance o f gold mining (box 2) and granting debt
relief have recently strengthened the medium-term outlook. O n the policy front, this scenario assumes
a continuation o f the recent pace o f gradual structural reforms, notably (a) in the performance o f
infrastructure utilities (electricity, water, and telecommunications), (b) improved productivity in
agriculture, and (c) improvements in the investment climate, including financial deepening, that would
support a diversification o f economic activities. High gold prices bode well for Mali’s export earnings
and fiscal revenues, but because o f i t s enclave nature, the gold sector alone i s unlikely to contribute
significantly to poverty reduction.
Box 2. Mining in Mali
I n the past I 5 years Mali has witnessed a signijkant development of its industrial mining sector. The
liberalization o f the economy in the late 1980s resulted in the introduction o f a new mining law in 1991
(supported by the WBG). Improvements in the enabling environment, with initial exploration programs
funded by the UnitedNations and other donors, led to a substantial influx o f private mining companies, which
developed large scale industrial gold mines.
I t is important to take measures to sustain exploration activities, such as updating the legislation to provide for
incentives for exploitation companies to reinvest. In addition, the sector’s contribution to the overall economic
development can be enhanced by improving government’s capacity for revenue collection and management
and by addressing some o f the negative social and environmental impacts at the community level. Mali has a
very large artisanal mining sector for which the government needs to improve health, safety, and
environmentaland social conditions.
Finally, of critical importance for the sector is improved governance. In February 2007, Mali joined the
Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative (EITI). Since then, the country has made good progress in
implementing it. Mali has met 3 o f the 4 criteria used to assess progress and i s diligently working to achieve
the fourth (publication o f a work program). EITI i s an important, but not the only, element of good
governance. The government also needs to improve mining title issuance and surveillance, disclosure and
management o f geosciences information, and its oversight capabilities. The restructuredmining component of
the Growth SUDDO~~
Proiect will address these critical issues.

3 1. While the balance of risks is currently favorable, M a l i faces competitiveness pressure and
potential downside risks of exogenous shocks. While M a l i has experienced the lowest appreciation
within WAEMU since the 1994 devaluation, the current tendency o f the Euro, to which the CFA franc
i s pegged at a fixed rate, to appreciate relative to the U S dollar i s putting pressure on the country’s
competitiveness, particularly in the cotton sector. In this context, preserving competitiveness w i l l
require both a prudent fiscal policy to safeguard macroeconomic stability and reforms to address longstanding structural obstacles, such as inadequate infrastructure, constraints to doing business and low
productivity. In addition, vulnerability vis-a-vis rainfall, desertification, and terms o f trade shocks
(notably fluctuations in the price o f cotton, gold and oil), are perennial challenges to Mali’s economy.
In view o f the importance o f animal resources in Mali’s economy and the current national capacity on
surveillance, early detection and rapid responses o f major animal diseases constitute an important

- 10-

threat for livestock, trade and public health. The budget does not contain provisions for the fiscal
impact o f exogenous shocks.
32. Mali’s debt service indicators have improved markedly since the MDRI was implemented in
2006. A joint IMF-IDA debt sustainability analysis (DSA) indicates that, in the baseline scenario,
Mali’s external indicators would remain below the indicative thresholds throughout the period o f
projections (2006-26). Given that domestic debt i s currently minimal and not expected to increase in
the foreseeable future, total public debt indicators also would remain moderate. M a l i borrowed Euros
65 million on terms that are not fully concessional from the Islamic Development Bank (IsDB) to fund
emergency power generating capacity, for which it received a waiver from IMF and the Bank. The
Bank exception for the IsDB loan was granted within the framework o f the Non-Concessional
Borrowing Policy (NCBP) aimed at strengthening incentives for appropriately concessional borrowing
in light o f access to IDA grants and MDRI. This has had no material impact on i t s favorable debt
ratios. Overall, the assessment i s that, following MDRI and other favorable economic developments,
M a l i has improved from a moderate to a l o w risk o f debt distress (table 5). Nevertheless, in light o f
large future borrowing requirements, productive public investments financed by highly-concessional
assistance would remain critical to maintain Mali’s debt sustainability over the long run.

’’

Table 5. Policy-based debt burden indicators
Thresholds”

NPV o f external debt-to-exports
NPV o f external debt-to-GDP
External debt service-to-exports
NPV o f debt-to revenue
Debt service-to revenue

150
40
20
250
30

M a l i Baseline Scenario Ratios
2006
2007-112/ 2012-26”
(in percent)
40.0
51.3
88.7
11.8
14.3
22.9
3.7
3.5
3.8
67.5
80.7
122.9
6.1
5.6
5.4

Notes:

”Policy indicative thresholds for a medium policy performer. ” Simple averages.
Excluding grants.

3’

B.

CHALLENGES TO MALI’S

BROAD
AND SUSTAINABLE GROWTH
AND POVERTY REDUCTION

33. Mali’s slightly lower average growth in the recent past relative to the longer 13-year period
underscores its challenges in sustaining growth and in raising growth to the government’s GPRSF
target level of 7percent. Over the past decade, M a l i benefited not only from progressive reforms but
also from improved rainfall and the 1994 devaluation. The recent growth slowdown indicates that the
impact o f past reforms, rainfall and devaluation are beginning to taper o f f as profitable investments
become more difficult to find. The key problem i s that total factor productivity has been nearly
stagnant, and most o f Mali’s growth has come from investment. The 2006 Country Economic
Memorandum (CEM) analysis showed that, to sustain Mali’s growth, the reform process must be
deepened and accelerated, and emphasized addressing the most binding constraints to private sector
growth.
34. To generate faster, broader and sustainable increases in incomes, M a l i needs to address a
number of key constraints. Consistent with the GPRSF objectives, our assessment o f Mali’s

” The factors taken into account in granting an exception to IsDB loan under the Bank’s NCBP include the urgent need for
electricity generation capacity and potential high rate o f return on the proposed project, lack o f domestic and alternative
concessional financing sources, the size o f the loan and its limited impact relative to a manageable macro economic
framework and debt sustainability.

- 11 -

situation12 have shed light on the nature and the dimension o f five challenges. The Bank’s
recommendation i s that M a l i will need to:
a. Accelerate access to all markets: local, regional and international

b. Increase provision and lower the cost o f basic business services and factors o f production
c. Build on un- or under-tapped assets as new growth sources
d. Consolidate and deepen gains in governance
e. Address key challenges for service delivery in social sectors
(a)

Accelerate access to local, regional and international markets

3 5. While Mali has recently made significant gains in the transport sector, road and air transport
are still limited and expensive. Despite recent significant gains,I3 as a large land-locked country
Mali’s transport challenges continue to be enormous. M a l i i s not only landlocked; it also i s vast and
distant from the ocean. The capital i s at or over 1,000 km from regional ports, resulting in significant
transport and transit costs for imports and exports. Airfares in the sub region are estimated to be 50
percent higher than the world average due to a de facto monopoly for carrier service. The state o f
Mali’s airports i s poor by regional and international standards and not conducive to a large expansion
o f tourism and air logistics industries.
36. Continued progress is required in Information and Communications Technology (IClJ to
increase service penetration, particularly in rural areas. Following a gradual liberalization policy, in
recent years, the ICT sector experienced important progress. Mobile density in M a l i i s close to 15
percent up from 2 percent in 2003. The fixed density remains very l o w compared with regional
standard^'^ but i s expected to improve following the sale o f the telecommunications parastatal, Socie‘te‘
des Tde‘communications du Mali (SOTELMA). The sector’s primary constraints are: (a) a marked
disparity o f access to telecommunications services between rural and urban areas; and (b) very low
internet penetration and excessive prices for broadband services. Progress remains to be achieved
toward modernizing the legal and regulatory telecommunications framework.
37. Mali needs to takefurther advantage of economic integration to increase its share of regional
markets and reduce costs of exporting to the rest of the world. Mali’s prosperity depends on higher
economic integration within West Africa and internationally. Important regional organizations already
in place regarding monetary, financial, and business regulations have benefited M a l i by providing a
concrete framework for Mali’s continued reform agenda. M a l i also could benefit from trade
agreements, such as the European Union’s Economic Partnership Agreement (EPA)” negotiated with
i t s regional organization ECOWAS/WAEMU. One o f Mali’s main challenges i s to ensure that the
trade negotiations contribute to i t s development.I6 But M a l i has to benefit more from the region too
through the potential market for Mali’s products, increased competition and access to lower cost
electricity, banking and transport and facilitation services.
l2Analytical work undertaken during the last CAS period such as the CEM, the IEG’s review o f Bank assistance over the
period 1996-2005 and the last CASCR.
l3Mali dealt skillfully with the consequences of the crisis in CBte d’Ivoire, i t s traditional and more direct route to coastal
ports. Mali now has good access to the sea through three alternative routes-Senegal, Mauritania and Ghana. To access
Senegal, Mali has sought to strengthen rail transportation, mainly by a concession with a private operator. In addition, the
government created a self-financing Road Fund that initiated work on road maintenance and repair.
14
I n 2003, fixed/mobile access was, 78% in Senegal and 91% in Cote d’Ivoire. In Mali, the price o f international calls
remains high and there i s still an acute need to improve services.
The EU’s EPA, being negotiated with regional groupings o f ACP countries, seeks to establish a free trade zone between
the EU and ACP countries for a period o f 12 years starting January 2008, ECOWAS negotiates on behalf o f its 15 member
countries (inclusive o f the 8 WAEMU countries) plus Mauritania.
l6The reciprocity condition under negotiation indicates that prior to 2020 ECOWAS countries must open their economies to
imports from the EU countries. Some countries have expressed concerns regarding trade diversion, trade creation, loss of
trade revenues and de-industrialization.

- 12-

(b)

Increase provision and lower the cost of basic business services andfactors ofproduction

3 8. High energy costs hinder new investment and constrain diversijication. West Africa i s
structurally short o f generating capacity, and M a l i i s no exception. Only 16 percent o f the general
population has access to electricity; in rural areas, less than 5 percent. Moreover, electricity has weak
reliability and very high cost.” Improving delivery o f electricity requires significant attention to
institutional reform. Past efforts to improve coverage and quality relied on the privatization o f EDM,
the electricity and water company, in 2000, but the process failed in 2005 and the government now i s a
majority shareholder.
39. Despite sound macroeconomic policies and a strong regional regulatory environment, Mali’s
financial sector remains small, and access to credit remains limited and costly. While financial depth
(M2) increased from 21 percent o f GDP in 1996 to 31.5 percent in 2004, it remains below the SSA
average (39 percent in 2004). More importantly, high intermediation margins (approximately 10
percent) lead to high lending rates. A high percentage o f nonperforming loans (comprising 29 percent
o f bank portfolios) partly explains the high intermediation margins. The lack o f guarantees, the weak
judicial system to enforce contracts, and the low number and quality o f bankable loan requests explain
the limited access to credit. The continued State involvement in two major banks (BIM and Malian
Housing Bank-BHM) further contributes to the present situation. Reform o f these two major state
banks has been slow.
40. Urban areas w2ll require special attention to meet prospective growth needs. M a l i i s less
urbanized than other countries in the region (3 1 percent in M a l i compared with the SSA average o f 36
percent in 2006). However, the urban areas are growing rapidly and the urban population i s expected
to double by 2024. The urban population already produces more than 50 percent o f the country’s GDP.
However, the lack o f roads, drainage and basic services (water, sanitation and electricity) lies at the
heart o f Mali’s urban development problems and constrains enterprise development and labor
productivity. While cities play an increasing role in creating wealth, public investment in urban
infrastructure represented only 6 percent o f public investment in recent years.
41, Low labor productivity resultingfrom low education and skill levels also is a major constraint
to Mali’s development. As the economy grows, scarcity o f skills i s emerging at the higher end
(secondary and post-secondary education levels), constraining diversification o f the economy and
limiting opportunities in areas such as tourism, light industry and agro-industry. The low literacy and
skill levels further isolate the country, as they limit the extent o f business collaboration with foreign
firms potentially interested in investing in Mali.
(c)

Build on un- or under-tapped assets as new growth sources

42. Untappedpotential for commercial agriculture based on small and large scale irrigation and
new market opportunitiesfor domestic and export markets. Only 12 percent o f irrigated lands are
actually exploited. Through the OfJice du Niger (ON) large scale irrigation scheme”, many other
smaller irrigation schemes, M a l i holds great potential for private commercial agriculture (both importsubstituting and export-oriented (box 3). In addition to the traditional rainfed staple food sector, the
horticulture, agro-forestry, and livestock sectors offer under-exploited opportunities for agriculture
diversification and market-oriented production for smallholders, and potential sources o f economic
Recent value chain analysis of Mali’s textile industry shows the extent to which high-cost public electricity handicaps
Malian industry. For example, for cotton yarn, energy costs for Malian firms represent 30% o f production costs compared to
15% in Kenya, which has similar yarn production cost as Mali; and 4% in Bangladesh, whose yarn production costs are 80%
lower than Mali.
The ON irrigation scheme was created in 1932 to harness the Niger River for intensive irrigated agriculture, with a planned
development o f 1 million hectares over 50 years.

- 13 -

growth. Foreign f i r m s and investors are showing an interest (including from South Africa, Saudi
Arabia, and the US).
Box 3. Commercial agriculture - An important source o f potential growth
Commercial irrigatedfarming is one of the major potential sources of growth in Mali. Meanwhile, subsistence
farming still represents 80percent of thefarming systems. Mali’s agriculture sector has substantial potential to
accelerate economic growth by linking its production not only to domestic markets but, more importantly, to
neighboring, sub-regional and international markets. The promotion o f commercial farming targeting sub
regional and international markets i s therefore one of the most promising sources o f agricultural growth.
The CEM underlined that the factors of success of Mali’s agricultural sector fall into four broad areas:
(a) control over water; (b) access to reliable markets; (c) access to quality information on improved
technology, agricultural production systems, and regulatory environment; and (d) improved institutional and
incentive fiamework. It would include flexibility to take advantage of cropping opportunities, stronger land
tenure and property rights, access to credit, and organized input supply and input credit mechanisms. The
promotion o f large scale commercial farmers and agro-processors to be promoted through public-private
partnerships arrangements i s the major challenge to overcome these constraints.
The irrigation sector offers a unique opportunity to develop commercial farming because of the extended
availability of land and water. Only 19% of the 2.2 million ha of irrigation potential are actually irrigated. The
ON, the large-scale irrigation scheme in the Niger central delta, st ill presents potential for development with
87,000 ha currently irrigated out o f 200,000 ha planned to be irrigated before 2015. Over the go’s, ON went
through an important reform process leading to more than double rice yields (fiom 2,5 T/ha to 6 T/ha in 2006).
Less expensive to create and more profitable for smallholders under rice cultivation, many other small-scale
irrigation schemes deserve particular attention for further infrastructure investments: only 13% of lowland
areas and less than 3% o f rainfed small scale irrigation schemes have been developed for irrigation. The Bank
i s supporting the government in piloting a public-private partnership financing mechanism to develop
irrigation infiastructure and help small and large-scale commercial farmers settle on 800 ha in ON.
Access to quality and reliable agricultural input is another key constraint. The distribution network for
fertilizers i s characterized by weak professionalism, both fiom providers and producer organizations, in
procurement. For seeds, numerous varieties have been developed by local and regional research for different
crops, such as the NERICA rice variety and drought and disease resistant cowpea varieties that double local
yields. Distribution networks s t i l l need to be organized and linkages between research, extension and
producers strengthened.
To facilitate the emergence of commercial farmers, advisory services still need to be strengthened to provide
eflcient assistance to: (a) producers to help them meet market demands and sanitary and phyto-sanitary
requirements; (b) producer organizations to become more professional in creating and managing a wide range
o f marketing and technical services; and (c) private service providers to better answer producer and farmer
associations’ needs in terms of technology information and market intelligence services. Beyond rice and
cotton production, horticulture and livestock are very promising sub-sectors for the development o f
commercial agriculture, with great opportunities for producers in terms o f diversification and growth.

43, Underdeveloped potential for high-end tourism services and handicraft. M a l i has significant
potential to establish M a l i as a diversified tourism destination by promoting existing and potential
cultural and historical sites, desert and Niger River attractions and wildlife reserves, and i t s handicraft
industry. However, the development i s hindered by a limited number and quality o f accommodations
and restaurants (and absence o f rating system); shortage o f trained qualified tourist guides; l o w
availability, reliability and high cost o f transportation and weak professionalism and business skills o f
crafts persons.

44. Under-leveraged Malian Diaspora. Mali’s Diaspora are strong supporters o f their communities
back home, with remittances estimated at $150 -$200 million per year. However, their support flows

- 14-

mainly through informal channels. As a result, transactions costs are high and investments often o f
l o w return. Furthermore, the country does not benefit adequately from the skills and market access that
these foreign resident nationals possess. Through sending economic missions to European and other
capitals, the M a l i government has started to promote the return to M a l i o f members o f the Diaspora to
invest in irrigated commercial agriculture in the ON irrigation scheme. There has been some initial
success, with Malians returning from France (financed by France’s Co-Development Fund) and from
Southern Afiica to launch agribusiness schemes.

(d)

Consolidate and deepen the gains in governance

45. Despite recent reforms,19 Mali’s business and investment environment does not favor the
creation of formal businesses. The quality o f the Mali’s business environment ranks low in
comparison with other countries in Africa and worldwide. Table 6 shows Mali’s rank in the Doing
Business Indicators for 4 key processes in 2006.20Understandably, trading across borders ranks the
lowest, the result o f being a land-locked country. Starting a business also ranks low, with an overall
cost higher than the region. The cost o f obtaining licenses likewise exceeds the cost in the region.
Only with respect to the registering o f a business does M a l i rank better than the region. In addition, the
weakness o f the judicial sector represents a major constraint to contract enforcement, which affects the
financial sector in particular.
Table 6. Selected Cost of Doing Business indicators for Mali
Indicators
Starting a business
Procedures (Number)
Time(days)
Cost (% of income per capita)

Mali 2006
rank (out of 175)
163

Region

13
42
201.9

11.1
61.8
162.8

15
209
1,813

17.7
230
1,024

5
33

7
109.9

10

8.2
40
1,561
1,947

122

Dealing with licenses

Procedures (number)
Time (days)
Cost (% of income per capita)
Registering property

93

Procedures (number)
Time (days)
Trading across borders

0

0

Mali

167

Documents for export (number)
Time for export (days)
Cost to export ($ per container)
Cost to import ($ per container)

66
1,752
2,680

46. M a l i has not progressed sufficiently in building an effective and accountable governance
system Mali’s gains in building a democratic political system have not translated into effective.
delivery o f basic social services, business environment or control o f corruption. Although significant
19

In 2006, the government initiated reforms of the business environment. Parliament enacted a law eliminating four
procedures for starting a business by creating a single identifier. The new tax code eliminated the fee collected by the tax
administration on the first year operation o f new businesses. The 2006 tax code reduced the property tax on property transfers
from 15% to 7% o f the asset value. The number o f days to register a property was reduced.
2o The CEM, trade diagnostic study and investment climate survey expand on the regulatory burden that companies face in
Mali.

-15-

progress has been made in establishing a democratic system o f governance, the quality o f governance
practices remains a challenge to Malian authorities. 21 The July 2007 WBI governance indicators
highlight a decline in both indicators, as well as in the rule o f law. On T I rankings, M a l i i s lagging
behind on i t s objective to achieve a significant improvement o f the T I ranking.22 Weaknesses in the
governance system contribute to l o w levels o f administrative effectiveness and regulatory quality,
flawed accountability, and continued instances o f conflicts o f interest, particularly in state-owned
enterprises. These weaknesses reflect (a) the sub-optimal state performance in the health and education
sectors, (b) unsuccessful management o f concessions in the railway and electricity sectors, (c) high
cost o f business regulation, (d) progress on road transport sector reform, (e) limited progress on cotton
sector reform and diversification o f agricultural production, and ( f ) cases o f re-nationalization of
privatized assets, particularly in the electricity and banking sectors.
47. Intertwining interests between politics and public enterprise management provide
opportunitiesfor corruption and constrains private sector investment. Critical reforms, particularly
in the cotton, electricity, transport and financial sectors have been difficult. Privatization agendas have
been delayed, and progress has been slow. The suboptimal concession arrangements o f EDM and rail
privatization, slow pace o f restructuring and reform in the cotton sector, and cases o f renationalization
in the banking sector pose major risks to Mali's short-term macroeconomic stability, and to mediumt e r m development and growth prospects. A strategy o f further disengagement must be accompanied by
strengthening the government's capacity to negotiate management contracts and concessions, and to
steer privatization processes. The resulting arrangements must be credible to avoid reversals that
weaken the government's capacity to commit.
48. Weak public sector management hampers Mali's long-term economic competitiveness. Longt e r m economic competitiveness will require upgrading the quality o f the country's human capital by
improving service delivery in the education and health sectors. Better delivery in these sectors will
require closer linkage among public financial management (PFM), sector strategies and
decentralization. Despite recent improvements in PFM, further progress i s required, as noted by the
Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability program (PEFA).23 The revisions o f the sector
strategies should enhance the MTEF as an instrument to turn the budget into an effective development
instrument. In addition, greater cooperation between the Ministry o f Finance (MoF) and sector
ministries i s needed during budget preparation and execution.
(e)

Address key challengesfor service delivery in social sectors

49. Inadequate and underperforming education system. In the primary education sector, the
recruitment and training o f qualified teachers are not adequate; the construction o f classrooms and the
provision o f textbooks can hardly meet the growing demand; and there are no tools to monitor
performance and allocation o f resources according to school mapping. Equity in access to education
constitutes a major concern. Approximately 18 percent o f primary students go to community schools
where all costs are borne by households, with the exception o f a State subsidy for the teacher's salary
that represents one quarter o f the salary paid to contractual workers in public schools. These primary
students often are from the poorest families, usually living in rural areas. Overall, both the boy/girl
enrollment ratios (65 percent for girls and 85 percent for boys in 2006 compared to 45.6 percent and
68.9 percent respectively in 2000) and completion rates at the primary education level (43 percent for

Various sources rank Mali high on indicators measuring democracy and democratic governance. Mali also rates well on
country performance and institutional assessment (CPIA), which, at 3.7, i s among the highest in SSA. Significant progress
also has been made on reforming the PFM system, including the creation o f the office o f the Ve'rificateur Gkne'ral.
22 The GPRSF foresees an improvement o f the T I rating from 2.9 in 2005 to 4.6 in 201 1. In 2007, the rating declined to 2.7.
23 The PEFA assessment indicated that key remaining weaknesses are procurement, internal controls, timely audits of budget
execution, tracking grant-financed activities and extra budgetary funds.
2'

- 16-

girls and 53 percent for boys in 2006 compared to 23.7 percent and 39.4 percent respectively in 2000)
have improved but the issue remains, particularly at higher levels.
50. Existing capacities for technical and vocational education are insufficiently developed to
facilitate entry into the labor market. At the post-primary level, the education system faces very highcost curricula that offer too many subjects, leading to l o w student teacher ratios, high level o f
repetition, and numerous non teaching staff. University enrollment i s spiraling out o f control with a
high cost per graduate and an increasing mismatch between the growth in some disciplines and the
labor market needs. Private higher education i s quickly expanding without the regulatory framework
and incentives to ensure i t s quality and development,
51. Low Health outcomes. Despite increased access to health services, their use remains low.
Promotion o f community health risk sharing mechanisms such as health mutuals, cover only 1.5
percent o f the population. The funding o f the health sector i s l o w and resource allocation within the
sector to allow better reach to the poor i s not efficient enough. Finally, despite a growing number o f
private health providers that are used largely by the poorest segments o f the population, the Ministry
o f Health does not have an overview o f the whole system and does not include the private sector in i t s
plans and activities.
52. Mali needs to develop policies aimed at benefiting from the ‘demographic dividend’. The high
fertility rate contributes to the high maternal and child mortality rates. In addition, such rapid
population growth boosts the social demand for schools and health, and therefore the costs o f
providing for those services. The impact on this dimension on the environment and on agriculture
remains to be studied.
53. Mali needs to adopt clear measures to expand access to potable water. Meeting the
government’s potable water target, that i s providing 82 percent o f the population with safe drinking
water by 2015, represents a major challenge. Rural water supply sector investments in M a l i have
declined steadily over the past years, resulting in stagnation in the level o f access to potable water.
Only 68 percent o f the rural population has access to potable water. Currently about 1800 villages
have no potable water point and approximately 3 1 percent o f the 25,000 water points are broken as a
result o f insufficient cost-recovery, poor operation and maintenance (O&M), and an overall lack o f
sound management practices. Financial resources to support the rural water supply sector development
are available, but the disbursement rate needs to be increased.

c.

PROSPECTS FOR TRANSFORMATIONAL
GROWTH

54. To implement the GPRSF, M a l i will need a more ambitiousproductivity-enhancing structural
reform agenda. Raising economic growth will entail accelerating ongoing reforms and deepening the
reform program, so as to enable substantial increases in both investment and productivity. Reforms
will need to (a) include actions to accelerate linkages to internal, regional and global markets,
(b) improve the delivery and reduce costs o f business services and factors o f production, and (c) focus
on the development o f economic activities with high potential for growth and poverty reduction. This
should go hand-in-hand with a deepening o f the governance reforms to remove administrative
bottlenecks for the delivery o f public services and to address corruption in the public sector. Based on
the challenges described above, the Bank proposes to focus i t s intervention in M a l i to assist the
government:
Prepare a growth strategy action plan to accompany the GPRSF, detailing prioritized and
time-bound reform actions. Mali’s growth strategy needs to provide more detail on how to
foster (a) private sector productivity growth, (b) better access to credit, (c) greater public sector
efficiency, and (d) better delivery o f public goods.

- 17-

Improve the investment climate. To improve the Doing Business indicators, the Bank
recommends tackling key issues that pertain to business start-up, property registration, licensing,
labor market flexibility, and contract enforcement. M a l i also could leverage existing publicprivate sector consultative mechanisms, including converting the implementation capacity o f the
Presidential Investors’ Council (PIC) to the new investment promotion agency and i t s one-stopshop unit. To foster formalization and competitiveness o f private sector activities, M a l i needs to
upgrade sector-specific legal and regulatory framework and the tax regime.
Strengthen public sector operations, by boosting public spending efficiency, improving
spending composition, and increasing the eflectiveness of service delivery. I t i s important to
accelerate the public sector reforms focusing on (a) decentralization and de-concentration o f
administrative services, particularly in the social sectors, (b) judiciary reform to reinforce the
rule o f law, (c) anti-corruption measures, and (d) improvement and modernization o f P F M based
on the 2005 action plan. To complement the P F M action plan and to ensure better impact on
social sector outcomes, M a l i should identify sector-specific policy measures to improve
expenditure efficiency, particularly in the social sectors.

5 5 . Transformational growth will also require that the government (a) address challenges in the
energy sector while pursuing the medium-term investment program, (b) move towards market-oriented
commercial agriculture, (c) boost investment in urban infrastructure and services, and (d) reduce road
transport costs.
In the energy sector, EDM needs to be restructured to become financially viable and
operationally efficient. T o reduce production costs and increase reliability, existing
infrastructure needs to be refurbished and to enable purchase o f lower cost electricity,
significant progress i s required to interconnect Mali’s power grid with Cate d’Ivoire, Burkina
Faso and Ghana, while benefiting from additional hydroelectricity from the Felou dam (on
Senegal river) under construction.
In agriculture, M a l i must move towards market-oriented commercial agriculture. To accelerate
the development o f i t s irrigation potential, M a l i must (a) proactively attract successful foreign
agribusiness enterprises, (b) adopt public-private partnership approaches for development o f
competitive agro-industrial and agro-pastoral product lines, and (c) strengthen the supply chains
o f existing products so as to better link those products to markets.
In view o f rapid urban growth, strong government commitment to the urban sector i s needed,
particularly in urban roads, transportation services, water and sanitation, land management, and
property rights. Rapid urbanization should be built on creating a strong fabric o f SMEs and a
radical overhaul o f the land titling system to increase availability o f land.
In transport, M a l i needs an integrated transport and transit facilitation reform program. This can
be done through (a) measures to strengthen management, efficiency and service quality o f
existing infrastructure, preferably through public-private partnerships, and (b) fiscal measures to
foster formalization and competitiveness o f road transport operators. The construction o f a third
bridge across the Niger River for vehicle, and possibly rail traffic would facilitate traffic flows
between the freight depots and the main internal and international transit corridors in Bamako.

56. I t is also important to implement the updated financial sector strategy24 through
(a) consolidation o f bank restructuring, treatment o f the large nonperforming portfolio, and increased
role o f the private sector in the banks, (b) strengthening o f microfinance supervision, (c) reform o f the
social security system, and (d) measures to improve access to financial services, including medium
Mali i s one o f six pilot countries in Africa under the Lispky-Daboub initiative whereby governments elaborate a financial
sector development strategy with the joint assistance o f the I M F and the Bank. Both institutions are expected to assist with
the implementation o f the strategy, which i s expected to be presented to the Council of Ministers before year end.

24

-18-

and long-term resources. In addition, increased financial sector development, complemented with
improvements in the regulatory environment directed toward promoting secure and low-cost
remittance services, would facilitate the inflow o f remittances through formal channels. The
privatization o f BIM should be completed and banks with significant nonperforming loans such as
BHM should be provided with greater authority to recover such loans.
57. To increase ICT penetration and affordability, M a l i could encourage further competition in
the sector, in addition to completing the ongoing sale of SOTELMA. The I C T regulatory framework
will need updating to reflect new options and developments, and efforts should be deployed to
increase access in rural areas, particularly for virtually isolated areas. A major increase in internet
penetration also i s desirable, through connection to the West African submarine fiber-optic cable
rather than through the relatively more expensive satellite-based connectivity.
58. M a l i needs to address the skills gap facing the modern private sector. Rapid results on
education and skills can be achieved in the short-term by calling on the Malian Diaspora. Drawing on
the Diaspora could be achieved by organizing informal networks through Mali’s embassies abroad to
obtain better access to markets and economic intelligence, and to maintain a roster o f skills. In the
longer term, to accelerate skills enhancement, M a l i will need to expand literacy programs, increase
education quality, and promote private delivery o f vocational training. M a l i also could foster training
programs to address market failures that limit the ability o f SMEs to obtain the necessary skills and
business services for productivity enhancement and competitiveness.

59. Mali needs to play a key role in strengthening regional organizations to which it belongs.25It
i s important for M a l i to accelerate transit facilitation reforms in coordination with i t s neighbors and in
line with the regional integration framework. M a l i also shares important river watersheds with i t s
neighbors which are already exploited for regional electricity production at the Manantali
hydroelectric plant, but could be further developed. M a l i also would benefit from a greater
specialization in production patterns within the region.
60. M a l i needs to study the impact of its high fertility rate, assessing what policies should be
enacted to use this demographic dividend as a stimulus for growth instead of a deterrent. The
impact o f high fertility rate on economic development and on the social sectors should be assessed and
policy options provided.

IV.
A.

DONOR SUPPORT TO M A L I

DONOR
COORDINATION AND HARMONIZATION
O N THE GROUND

6 1, As a recipient of large aid inflows, Mali needs to focus on increased donor coordination and
harmonization. M a l i has attracted many donors, with disbursements o f $675.4 million in 2006. The
nine key donors26were responsible for 80 percent o f this disbursed amount. Aid to M a l i i s likely to be
scaled up from a growing number o f sources. Some traditional bilateral partners (Belgium, Canada,
Denmark, the Netherlands and Sweden) have selected M a l i as a focus country for their external aid in
the coming years, and non traditional partners (the Millennium Challenge Corporation, China and
India) are increasingly present in the country. Thus, M a l i i s faced with the challenge to unite donors
around a joint donors’ strategy and to use aid more effectively through stronger donor coordination
and harmonization and a better rationalization o f aid.

*’Transporters and exporters suffer many annoyances from informal roadblocks and arbitrary administrative diktats which
add to their costs.
African Development Bank (AfBD), Canada, European Commission (EC), France, Millenium Challenge Corporation
(MCC), The Netherlands, Sweden, United States Agency for International Development (USAID), and the Bank.

26

- 19-

62. The government, in collaboration with its partners, has decided on a sector-specific
coordination approach in key sectors. Conditions for coordinated donor interventions are in place
through sector strategies and MTEFs, and a joint Memorandum o f Understanding (MOU) for budget
upp port.^' Donors also are moving to sector wide approaches (SWAP). T o implement the ambitious
harmonization and alignment (H&A) agenda and strengthen donor collaboration during the CAS
period, donors are working on (a) establishing a clearer division o f labor2*, (b) continuing support for
sectoral MTEFs, (c) jointly preparing projects, Analytical and Advisory services (AAA) products, and
supervision and (d) developing a collaborative assistance strategy which will become the foundations
for our next CAS.
63, The government recently established an H&A Secretariat and adopted an H & A action plan.
A l l donors agreed on a roadmap to support this action plan. A quarterly government-donor meeting i s
organized and co-chaired by the M o F and the chair o f the donor coordinating group to discuss
progress on key policy issues supporting the government’s reform program. In addition, the donors
created a technical pole to assist the chair to prepare the dialogue with the government, and to assist in
monitoring the H&A action plan. The technical pole i s partially staffed by the Bank and based in the
Bank Country Office (CO). The CAS will support the reinforcement o f the technical pool capacity.
Sectoral coordination i s organized around five sector groups,2gwhich are aligned with the GPRSF.

64. This CAS has been prepared in very close coordination with other donors and the next CAS
will be prepared jointly with key donors. The CAS process was launched in October 2006 with a
government- World Bank workshop in which the other partners participated. This close consultation
process will continue during the CAS consultations and implementation and culminate with the
preparation o f a collaborative assistance strategy to support the country’s next GPRSF.
B.

BANKPOSITIONING IN DEVELOPMENT
ASSISTANCE
TO MALI
Figure 1. Donor Intervention for Each GPRSP Pillars in 2007
Netherlands
Germany
Denmark
Canada
France
USAID
MCC

EC
WB
AfDB
0%

10%

20%

30%

40%

50%

60%

70%

80%

90%

100%

%
Pillar 1

Pillar 2

Pillar 3

EC, France, The Netherlands, Sweden and the World Bank signed a M O U to
coordinate their efforts in providing budget support to Mali.
A donors’ retreat was held in September 2007 to further discuss complementarity and division o f labor issues.
Subsequently, a matrix o f assistance to support the GPRSF i s being prepared.
29 Macroeconomic and financial framework issues; governance and institutional development; infrastructure development
and productive sectors; sustainable human development and population issue; and GPRSF M&E.
” In March 2006, six donors including AfDB,

’’

- 20 -

65. During the CAS period, the nine key donors should increasingly channel their aid through
budget support and sectoral approaches. In 2006, the share o f budget support to total disbursements
stood at 33 percent. Parallel and cofinancing so far i s limited and concentrated on support to the
education, health, agriculture, and rural infrastructure and environment sectors.
66. Given lower IDA amountsfor M a l i following the MDRI and the increasing presence of other
partners, the Bank is no longer the principal partner in financial terms. Over the coming period,
WBG assistance will evolve to work more selectively with other partners and the private sector so it
can bring its expertise to bear as i t s share o f overall financing declines.
67. The Bank will continue to play a catalytic role to promote aid effectiveness and to implement
the Paris Declaration. The CAS will progressively bring the Bank’s portfolio in line with the guiding
H&A principles. The CAS will call for greater selectivity and movement toward programmatic
approaches through policy lending and harmonized sector approaches. During the CAS, the operations
in education, transport, energy, agriculture will rely on joint sector reviews and pave the way for
increased harmonization where it i s less advanced. The Bank also will push for common sets o f
procedures and a harmonized M&E framework and system for budget support, SWAP-type operations
and joint reviews. In sectors whose MOUs have not been signed yet (such as the transport sector), the
Bank will play an active role to define clear principles for donor intervention and finalize MOUs.

V.

WORLD BANK COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY

A.

WORLDBANKTRACKRECORD

1.

Portfolio Performance under the Last CAS

68. Overall portfolio performance improved over the last CAS period. Portfolio quality i s good,
with only one project rated unsatisfactory. During the last CAS period, portfolio riskiness decreased,
with a sharp drop in projects at risk both in terms o f number and amount (table 7). In addition, the
portfolio i s disbursing well with ratios consistently above the Bank-wide and regional ratios during
FY04-07. The good level o f disbursements is attributed primarily to infrastructure, agriculture,
financial sector, and education projects. The country financing parameters were approved in February
2005 (appendix 12). Since then, they have been consistently applied for new operations.
Table 7: Selected indicators o f Bank’s portfolio performance
Indicator
Number of projects under implementation
Average implementation period (years)
Percent o f projects at risk by number
Percent o f projects at risk by amount
Disbursement ratio (%)
Proactivity ratio
Realism ratio

2004
11
3.5
27.3
31.3
26.5
100
67

2005
11
3.0
36.4
25.4
28.9
50
75

2006
13
3.6
23.1
8.8
31.2
67
100

2007
14
3.3
7.1
0.8
27.6
100
100

69. Concerted and proactive management of the portfolio by the government and the Country
Office contributed to the improved trend in portfolio quality andperformance. The CO instituted an
internal monitoring system to tackle systemic issues, and convened regular meetings o f the
government, project implementation units (PIUS), and relevant operational and sectoral staff to discuss
-21 -

and address implementation issues. In addition, results-based country portfolio reviews (CPPR) were
held more frequently with increased leadership o f the government and stakeholder participation. The
M a l i team i s increasingly decentralizing fiduciary and sectoral specialists to the field to carry out
fiduciary responsibilities and day-to-day coordination and supervision.

70. Since FY04, IEG has rated 7 projects. M a l i rated above the region’s average on most indicators.
Institutional changes in the configuration o f ministries (merger o f ministries) during the projects’
lifetime have weakened the institutional development impact o f some o f the projects in the rural
development sector and private sector development (PSD). The Bank’s quality assurance group
(QAG) carried out one quality at entry assessment since FY04. The overall rating for the fourth
structural adjustment credit (SAC IV) was satisfactory. The assessment highlighted the importance o f
country economic work, especially to identify a growth strategy, and was consistent with the Q A G
AAA assessment, which recommended relying less on cross-country comparisons and more on
developing a M a l i specific growth strategy.
2.

Longer Term Track Record - Findings of the Country Assistance Evaluation

7 1. The Bank played a major role in Mali’s development eflorts over the past decade, but the
institution’s performance was uneven. During FY95-05, the period covered by IEG’s Country
Assistance Evaluation (CAE), IDA’S financing averaged $80 million per year. The Bank’s strategy
focused on poverty reduction through (a) broad-based growth, (b) human resource development, and
(c) public finance management and governance. The Bank contributed to at least four important
achievements: macroeconomic stability, strengthened public finance management, higher primary
school enrollment rates, and more transparent and efficient institutional framework in the road sector
leading to the creation o f a road maintenance fund. However, there were shortcomings in the Bank’s
strategy regarding the financial sector, electric power and cotton sector reforms, education quality, and
efforts to reduce the high rate o f population growth.
72. Given the increased emphasis on social sector development, Mali’s progress towards human
resource development was disappointing. The C A E assessed that the Bank had insufficiently focused
on the importance o f quality in education and o f the importance o f affordability in health care, as
opposed to physical access. Some policy proposals in education (double-shift teaching) adversely
affected quality, and the overall literacy rate i s s t i l l exceedingly low. In health, financial barriers to
access remain severe, and the rate o f utilization o f health services low. Therefore, the population’s
gains in health status have been modest. In addition, while the Bank did help increase awareness o f
family planning issues, the total fertility rate remains very high.
73. The CAE noted that the economic and sector work (ESWJ program has been limited and had
hampered the Bank’s capacity to provide timely, targeted advice. While E S W efforts intensified
during the FY99-05 period, there was no comprehensive review o f education or health until the end o f
the period. In addition, no C E M was prepared during the 1990’s, weakening the basis for a clear
growth strategy. In addition, despite the significant gender disparities in Mali, the Bank’s strategy did
not benefit from a sound analysis o f gender issues. Finally, the C A E noted that the Bank’s governance
program seemed insufficient, and the reforms supported have yielded limited results.
74. Goingforward, the CAE recommends tackling six specific issues. They are the quality o f the
education system, affordability o f health services, policies to reduce the rapid growth o f population,
rural development including conclusive cotton sector reform and agricultural diversification, provision
o f cost effective electric power, and financial sector reform. The C A E also indicates that a key
challenge for IFC will be to promote growth in the non mining sector and to provide technical
assistance (TA) for reforming the business climate to support the private sector.

- 22 -

1 5 . The CAE draws two major lessons: First, given the country’s capacity constraints, the Bank’s
strategy may have been attempting too much at once. A more focused strategy i s likely to be more
effective to lay the basis for long-term sustainable growth. Second, major shortcomings occurred when
the proposed strategy did not get full government support (financial, energy and cotton sector reforms)
or when the strategy was only a partial solution to a problem (education and health sectors).
3.

Findings o f the CAS Completion Report

76. The CASCR concluded thatperformance under the last CAS was uneven. M a l i made gains in
public expenditure management, transport, telecommunications, water and sanitation, rice
productivity, and selected social indicators (AIDS incidence and child mortality declined, and primary
education enrollment increased). In addition, the Bank contributed to the establishment o f key
institutions in agriculture to be in charge o f research and extension services, and to much improved
access from Bamako to the sea. However, progress has been slow in (a) advancing the cotton reformthe sector s t i l l poses a fiscal risk, and productivity i s stagnant, (b) strengthening microfinance,
(c) developing financial markets, and (d) facilitating private sector access to financial services.
Coverage and quality o f electricity, and high electricity costs also remain a challenge. In addition,
overall social indicators lag behind the region. The very high rates o f fertility and maternal mortality
and the low quality o f education and l o w literacy level remain major concerns.

71. The CASCR concurs with the CAE on areas of focus for future WBG assistance and
underscores six necessities for the new Bank strategy to address. These are to: (a) adopt a realistic
and results-oriented approach; (b) improve understanding and underpinnings o f shared growth,
especially in the rural sector; (c) create better synergies among Bank programs to leverage W B G
efforts; (d) better sequence analytical work to inform design o f lending operations and policy advice;
(v) align Bank’s and government’s performance monitoring systems; and (g) further develop
coordination with partners and work toward alignment o f operations with sector strategies and MTEFs
by harmonizing procedures and reducing parallel PIUs.
4.

Mali FY07 Client Survey

1 8 . The results of the Client Survey (CS) highlight an overwhelming support for Bank’s
involvement in Mali. Stakeholders in M a l i recognized a significant role for the Bank in areas that they
consider high priority (figure 2). They f e l t that the Bank’s greatest value was lending where others
would not and i t s financial resources and policy and economic advice. They felt that the Bank’s
greatest weaknesses were imposing technocratic solutions without regard to the political realities and
being too bureaucratic in i t s operational policies and procedures.

79. Many CSfindings resonate well with the proposed Bank strategy. Stakeholders agree that the
top development priorities are growth, governance, financial sector, agriculture, education and
infrastructure. They value the Bank’s advice and guidance and assessed both as highly relevant and
aligned with key priority development challenges. They felt that the Bank’s knowledge would be most
valuable if focused on education, agribusiness, enhanced business environment, and governance.

-23

-

Figure 2. CAS selectivity based on the Client Survey

perceived to be a priority

Agricultural Developmenl*
*Financial System

Public Sector*

*Foundation of Modern Society
*Social Protection Sector
33

Bank not so good, but issue
not perceived to be a priority

Bank not so good on priority issues

80. The Bank is refining its communication strategy to strengthen its outreach through increased
use of local outlets. The CS indicated that less than 50 percent o f respondents were familiar with the
WBG and that the Bank’s website and i t s public information center received little attention. The M a l i
communications team i s developing a new initiative to increase the Bank’s familiarity among
stakeholders, assist the government to make informed policy decisions, and support a more strongly
engaged civil society (appendix 8). The communications strategy also will emphasize key stakeholders
(Parliament, academia, youth, and local organizations) through the small grants program. In addition,
to the extent possible, the Bank will ensure that AAA work i s prepared jointly with other development
partners and i s widely disseminated among all stakeholders.

B.

CAS STRATEGIC OBJECTIVES AND K E Y PRINCIPLES

1.

CAS Strategic Objectives

8 1. The overarching CAS objective is to selectively support key GPRSF objectives. The proposed
CAS strategic objectives are to (a) promote rapid and broad-based growth, and (b) strengthen public
sector performance for service delivery. The first CAS strategic objective i s aligned with the GRF’SF’s
first and second pillars and the second CAS strategic objective with the third GRPSF pillar. Within the
two CAS pillars, the Bank will focus on (a) private-sector-led growth by addressing key constraints
such as energy and finance and by linking the country to the rest o f the world, (b) governance, and
(c) capacity development.

- 24 -

2.

CAS Principles

The CAS will be guided by the following set o f principles:
82. Selectivity. This CAS will aim to be more selective than in the past. The WBG intervention will
target a few selected GPRSF themes in which it has a comparative advantage and can add value. It will
meet this principle gradually as the government and donors are putting in place the basis for their
coordinated effort to support the GPRSF. First, it will combine fragmented operations under their
common sector umbrella (notably agriculture sector) and confine new lending interventions to a
limited number o f sectors. To that effect, the country’s portfolio will gradually decrease in terms of
number and more concentrated in terms o f sectoral intervention. Second, the WBG will position itself
in relation to the other donors’ interventions while encouraging more sector program approaches.

83. Promote aid effectiveness and donor collaboration. As aid to M a l i i s likely to be scaled up
from a growing number o f sources, M a l i i s faced with the challenge o f uniting donors around a
donors’ strategy and to use aid more effectively through stronger coordination and harmonization
efforts.
84. Support regional integration. As a small landlocked economy, M a l i has a keen interest in
regional integration. Addressing some o f the key challenges will require the country to further develop
a regional outlook, especially when development opportunities can be unlocked through regional
approaches. The Bank assistance to M a l i in i t s support to regional integration will be fully aligned
with the regional PRS and U E M O A regional economic program (REP) prioritie~.~’
In addition, the
Bank will pay special attention to ensure close alignment between regional and sectoral interventions
at the country level. Alignment will best leverage Bank interventions to tackle sectoral constraints to
Mali’s economic growth (appendix 9).

85. Strengthen WBG coordination. Based on recent assessments, the Bank will work to leverage all
the expertise o f the WBG through improved collaboration. The goals are to enhance the efficiency o f
WBG assistance to additional private-sector-led growth in the country and to improve the Bank’s
readiness for rapid response to support the country’s implementation o f i t s GPRSF. Private Enterprise
Program (PEP) Africa and Foreign Investment Advisory Service (FIAS) will increase their roles to
enable a stronger skills mix to support the country’s development objectives.
86. Develop a knowledgeprogram for advocacy role. The C A E found the effectiveness o f the AAA
weak. The Bank will work to mobilize other donors to co-finance just-in-time policy notes and core
AAA diagnostics and will open i t s diagnostics to other partners and key stakeholders. Combined with
a better sequencing and dissemination o f AAA products, the WBG and key stakeholders will be better
positioned to advise the government for policy formulation and informed decision-making.

c. WORLD BANKGROUPPROGRAM TO SUPPORT THE STRATEGIC OUTCOMES
STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE I:
PROMOTE RAPID AND BROAD-BASED GROWTH

87. T o assist M a l i to diversify i t s economy. The Bank will focus i t s assistance to help (a) link M a l i
to the rest o f the world, (b) reduce the deficit o f basic services and increase the availability o f critical
factors o f production, and (c) make targeted sector interventions to ensure effectiveness.

The regional PRS led to the preparation o f the UEMOA REP currently under implementation. ECOWAS i s finalizing its
medium term action plan to implement the regional PRS.
30

-25

-

(A) Accelerate the integration of M a l i with the regional and global markets

88. The WBG will focus i t s assistance on transport sector, telecommunications and better leveraging
o f remittances.
89. Increase the efficiency of transport operators in roads, railway, and air. The Bank will aim to
reduce by at least 10 percent the cost o f accessing the key ports in CGte d’Ivoire, Ghana, and Senegal
from Bamako. Building on the two ongoing investment projects and PRSC, the Bank will continue to
support linking M a l i to the regional road network, simplifying regulatory norms that increase
transportation costs, and building the capacity o f the Road Fund to collect resources and finance road
maintenance. The Second Transport Project will fund connecting rural to urban areas. The EU and
IDA will sign a MOU to guide their collaboration in transport. For air transportation, the WBG,
through the ongoing Growth Support (GSP) and regional projects, will support improving the
efficiency and security o f the Bamako airport by providing assistance on i t s concession to a private
sector operation and on i t s security. MIDA will facilitate the participation o f a private operation.
90. Increase connection to the world through ICT and telecommunications. T o expand the
economic base and diversification, the CAS will support reforms in the telecommunications and I C T
sectors to foster access and reduce the cost o f connectivity to global I C T infrastructure through the
GSP.

91. Remittances. In collaboration with the AfDB, the WBG i s undertaking a comprehensive study
o f migration and remittances across 12 countries, including Mali. The study will determine the impact
o f migration and remittances on development. Based on the outcomes o f the study, IDA will discuss
with the government how best to leverage the potential o f remittances to foster growth. A Malispecific ESW on remittances i s programmed for FY09.
(B) Reduce the deficit of basic services and increase availability of critical factors of production
92. The WBG will selectively concentrate i t s support to the energy and financial sectors and
improving the business environment.
93. Increase power system reliability. The Bank, through i t s ongoing and new energy projects, w i l l
support (a) the installation o f additional thermal capacity, (b) interconnections to the regional network,
(c) the restructuring EDM to achieve financial viability and operational efficiency, and (d) complete
the decentralized energy access expansion programs in rural and periurban areas. The regional
program will provide complementary financing through two West AJi.ica Power Pool (WAPP)
Adaptable Program Loans (APL) that help develop the Felou Hydropower Project and the
construction o f the Laboa-Segou transmission lines to establish a strong interconnection with CBte
d’Ivoire.

94. Increase the efficiency of the financial sectors and the share of private sector credit. The
ongoing Financial Sector Development Program will continue reforms to restructure and privatize the
main public banks, strengthen banks portfolios and the microfinance supervisory unit, and reform the
social security institutions. IFC will continue to support the expansion o f coverage through the Credit
Enhancement Facility to enable f i r m s to raise medium- and long-term funding. IFC i s exploring the
introduction o f a Trade Finance Enhancement Facility, which would provide guarantees through the
banks. The WAEMLT Capital Markets Development Financial Intermediary Loan (FIL) and joint
Bank-Fund regional Financial Sector Assessment Program (FSAP) will aid capital market integration
throughout the region.

- 26 -

95. Improve the quality of business environment and Mali’s capacity to mobilize foreign
investment. IFC will respond to government’s request to improve the business environment by
developing a Solution Design Program which will coordinate technical assistance (TA) among FIAS,
PEP Africa, MIGA, IDA and other donors. The program will focus on taxation, deregulation, and
putting in place a regulatory framework for the industrial zone. Going forward, areas o f attention will
include business start-up, labor market flexibility, and contract enforcement. The assistance also
includes strengthening institutions that oversee improvements in the business environment (Agence de
promotion des investissements- API-MALI). These efforts should improve Mali’s compliance with the
Organisation pour I ’Harmonisation du Droit des Affaires en Afiique (OHADA) business regulatory
framework and thus improve i t s capacity to compete in the region.
96. Increase productivity of targeted micro, small and medium enterprises (MSMEs) and skills
enhancement. IFC will support micro-enterprises through the Support and Training for
Entrepreneurship Program (STEP). The Skills Development Study will identify areas where skills
scarcity i s arising or i s likely to arise and provide options on how to meet demand. In addition, the
lessons learned from the implementation o f the FAFPA will be used to assist the government in
designing a skills development strategy and program in relation with other donors. An update o f the
Investment Climate Assessment (ICA) will be the first step to support the preparation o f a
comprehensive competitiveness strategy.
(C) Undertake targeted sector interventions to accelerate growth

97. To help leverage Mali’s assets, the WBG will support (a) the development o f a market-oriented
agriculture, (b) broad-based improvements in the cotton sector, (c) the development o f the mining,
tourism, and light manufacturing sectors, and (d) reversing environmental degradation. To improve
donor coordination3’, the Bank will prepare an Agricultural Productivity Project as a S WAp-type
operation and will propose to develop an agriculture support fund to channel donor assistance.
98. Increase agricultural productivity, improve competitiveness of selected supply chains,
increase irrigation capacities, and improve availability of agricultural credit. Complementing the
ongoing support which aims to enforce the competitiveness o f both traditional and nontraditional
products to improve productivity and efficiency and to build organizational and institutional capacity,
the new Agricultural Productivity Project will emphasize the promotion o f a more productive and
market-oriented agriculture. The new operation also will help the government implement i t s recently
adopted Agricultural Framework Law. Complementary assistance will be provided through the Second
Transport Project, which will finance the construction o f rural roads with priority on connecting areas
o f high potential productivity.

99. Accelerate cotton sector reform. The CAS will continue i t s support to improve productivity,
diversify production, and reduce poverty in cotton producing areas. The cotton strategy builds on the
lessons from M a l i and other cotton economies and supports the government’s program o f privatizing
the C M D T with transparency and timeliness. The CAS will support the creation o f a simple but
effective regulatory framework for cotton to oversee the temporary regional private monopolies that
will emerge after C M D T . Ongoing analytical work will gather the cotton reform experiences on the
continent to inform the process in Mali. Attention will concentrate on the implementation o f the
strategic framework for the cotton sector which aims at restoring cotton productivity and
competitiveness while diversifying cotton farmers’ incomes through the introduction o f new crops,
technologies and production techniques, and investments in infrastructure.

3’

The Danish, Dutch, and French governments also are actively involved in the sector.

- 27 -

100. Increase factor productivity through sustainable natural resource and environmental
management. Assistance on reducing land degradation impacts will be channeled through the
agriculture operations, including a fully blended GEF/IDA operation under the GEF Strategic
Investment program (GEF-SIP). The Bank also w i l l deliver advisory services3’ on S L M expenditure
and institutional review and cost benefit analysis. Under the TerrAfrica partnership, the Bank and
other donors will support the preparation o f a SLMcountry strategic investmentJi.amework (CSIF) that
will stress priority areas for intervention. The Bank will prepare a Country Environmental Assessment
(CEA) to evaluate the environmental status o f the main cities and provide recommendations to
improve the urban environment. The findings will inform future operations.
STRATEGIC

OBJECTIVE11: STRENGTHEN PUBLIC SECTOR PERFORMANCE

101. The objective i s to ensure that public financial management results in better service delivery by
improving the link between the budget and sector strategies and supporting effective decentralization
and building local administrative capacity. In addition, IDA will focus i t s assistance on emerging
gender and population and development issues.
(A) Advance the public expenditure reform agenda

102. Improving the weak points of the PFM system and strengthening the MTEF to improve
quality of service delivery to the population and governance. The CAS will support improvements,in
P F M that will build on priority areas that the recent PEFA report found weak. Priority will be placed
on the implementation o f procurement legislation to reduce costs and opportunities for corruption. The
CAS also supports sustained efforts to improve the internal and external budget controls and increase
the transparency o f budget. With the new GPRSF in place, the CAS supports further strengthening the
MTEF as an instrument to guide strategic allocation o f resources.
103. To enhance selectivity, the PRSC will be the preferred instrument to channel resources to the
central government for service delivery. Assistance to the social sectors will be transferred through
the budget by complementing budgetary allocations within an MTEF framework. Support to education
will move to the budget once the present project ends. Only the H I V / A I D S support will remain outside
the budget. The approach implies that the government and the donors share the GPRSF results targets
and therefore the need to strengthen the capacity to monitor and evaluate results. T o sustain efforts to
improve the capacity o f the public bodies responsible for PFM, the CAS proposes a TA operation to
increase capacity to ensure that efforts to link all the components o f an effective public expenditure
practice prove sustainable.
(B) Support decentralization

104. Increase resources available to local governments and communities. The CAS supports the
GPRSF commitment to increase the transfers o f resources to local administrations and empower them
with greater responsibility in service delivery. The Bank will encourage the development o f a pilot
budget transfer mechanism to local governments for key specific items in the health, education, and
rural water supply sectors within the PRSC framework to further strengthen P F M effectiveness.
105. Build capacity of local administrations and support community development to address ruralurban migration. The CAS supports the institutional development o f the urban centers building on
previous efforts and analytical work. A proposed Urban Project will provide TA to urban centers to
improve their capacity to mobilize resources and implement projects. In addition, it will provide
resources to the central government to contract key infrastructure works with local governments. The
32

They will be funded through trust funds, TerrAfrica leveraging fund, and GEF.

-28-

Rural Community Development Project seeks to develop local government capacity in targeted regions
and to strengthen producer associations and other cooperative mechanisms in rural areas.

(C) Deliver results in key social sector strategies
106. Improve access to education and its quality, and provide more balanced opportunities across
genders and economic groups. During the CAS period, the Bank will assist through i t s PRSCs the
government in improving the effectiveness o f schools with more decentralized school construction,
improved teacher management, improved public financing o f community schools, reinforced
community development, in-service and pre-service training to help recruit new teachers. Bank
assistance will be provided to (a) strengthen institutional capacity in public sector intervention, and
(b) promote strategies to address gender gap disparities as well as urban and rural disparities.

107. Increase use of health services. Ongoing and future PRSC programs will continue to support
the PRODESS and help the government to increase the use o f health services. Particular attention i s
given to the efficiency o f public health spending and the intra-sectoral allocation o f resources. The
WBG also will explore the possibility o f a pilot IDA/IFC operation to support the private delivery o f
health services.
108. Improve quality of HIV/AIDS-related services. The ongoing multisectoral HIV/AIDS Project
will be the main assistance instrument to fight H N / A I D S . Special efforts will be deployed to raise
awareness o f behavior change within the overall population, particularly the high-risk segments,
including youth. Improving access to and quality o f HIV/AIDS-related services will be supported
through strengthening the relevant health sector infrastructure and involving the private sector in
providing services. The Bank will assist M a l i to expand the network o f drug dispensation centers
through involving the private pharmacies.

109. To address the high population growth rate, we intend to improve understanding of
demographic patterns. A Demography and Economics Study will help better understand the
determinants and implications o f current demographic patterns. The results will enrich the dialogue
with the government around the PRSCs on the economic, social and health consequences o f the high
fertility rate. The CAS will explore with other donors the feasibility o f a comprehensive package o f
service delivery at the family level to address the malnutrition issue in a systematic manner.
110. Advocacy on Gender Equality. Based on the Gender Assessment, the Bank will support gender
equality through (a) bringing boys’ and girls’ primary education completion rates closer together;
(b) reducing maternal mortality by improving health; (c) providing greater information on a high
fertility rate’s consequences on women and children’s health; (d) strengthening the economic role o f
women through community development; and (e) supporting, the integration o f gender-responsive
actions into country and Bank strategic documents, programs and projects.

D.

GOVERNANCE AND CAPACITY DEVELOPMENT

1.

Approach to Governance

111. The Bank proposes to provide cross-cutting and sector-based support in the area of
governance and corruption. Cross-cutting activities will focus on the consolidation and further
deepening o f the overall governance reform program o f the government. A complementary sectorbased approach will aim to improve public sector governance in selected sectors.33This approach i s in
33 Mali i s 1 of the 4 global pilots in the enhanced governance initiative (Mali, Mongolia, South Sudan, and Zambia are the
pilot countries) funded by the Bank-Netherlands Partnership Program (BNPP). This trust fund assists governments to

- 29 -

line with the principles o f the Governance and Anti-Corruption (GAC) Strategy, adopted by the
Bank’s Board in March 2007 (and with the G A C Implementation Plan, presented during the Annual
Meetings in October 2007).
112. At the cross-cutting level, in close collaboration with other development partners, the Bank
will continue to build on governance and anticorruption initiatives underway. Bank activities w i l l
focus on deepening public expenditure management reforms (building on the results o f the recently
completed PEFA exercise) and on removing administrative bottlenecks that negatively impact the
delivery o f public services. For instance, Bank actions will support the improvement o f the
environment for business creation and operation and will include some targeted assistance for legal
and judicial reforms. In addition, Bank activities will seek to assist the government to improve service
delivery based on a systematic implication o f the users and the beneficiaries o f public services. The
Service Delivery TA project will be a main vehicle for such support. In addition, the Bank w i l l
strengthen the policy dialogue around corruption and conflict-of-interest issues.
113. To support the government’s Action Plan for governance, the Bank will conduct sectorrelated diagnostic work on governance to inform i t s policy dialogue and to integrate governance
elements in i t s sector projects. An analysis o f the political and economic forces and institutional
arrangements that shape sector decisions and behavior will be conducted in early FY08. The identified
measures will be integrated in the design o f Bank operations to enhance their development impact.
Specific attention will be devoted to sectors and areas that pose particular risks o f corruption, notably
natural resource management.34 Specifically, for gold extraction, the priority will be to support the
implementation o f the national EITI agenda launched in early 2007.
114. The international community has keen interest in advancing governance in Mali. In
supporting the government, the WBG will work with the EU and other donors. Harmonization i s
highly relevant in the area o f justice reform, which has received limited support from the donor
community. Most o f the donors who are or will provide budget support to M a l i are involved in
economic governance and corruption issues (Canada, EU, France, and the Netherlands), Belgium,
Canada, Denmark, Sweden, the Netherlands, UNDP, UNICEF, and U S A I D also are supporting the
government’s strategy on democratic governance through central and local governments and civil
society.

2.

Approach to Capacity Development

115. The WBG proposes to increase its support to capacity development (CD) to produce
measurable results. M a l i i s a target country for the Capacity Development in Africa: Management
Action Plan (CDMAP) actions.35 Recently, three institutional development grants (IDF) have been
extended to M a l i to strengthen audit institutions, PFM, and PRSP M&E. A new TA operation to
improve social service delivery i s being considered to support GPRSF objectives. T o better target
capacity weaknesses, and in line with C D M A P Actions 13 and 15,36WBI i s preparing selective needs
assessments in support o f the government’s P D I (appendix 11). The formulation o f follow-up C D

enhance the quality o f governance by identifying and introducing specific reform measures in priority sectors. These reforms
can be scaled up depending on thematic support provided by other donors.
34 Mali i s a pilot country in the ongoing regional Extractive Industries Governance work on institutional vulnerabilities.
35
CDMAP actions for Mali: A l - Public expenditure management and financial accountability, including procurement; A5
Support to justice sector institutions; A6 Public service reform, particularly pay reform; and AS - Retention o f doctors and
nurses.
36
CDMAP Action 13 relates to “helping countries undertake needs assessments and build outcome-driven capacity sensitive
strategies” and Action 15 relates to “aligning CASs to PRSPs including explicit focus on capacity development”.

-

-

- 30 -

actions will be undertaken during the CAS in close coordination with other donors and with the
logistical and pedagogical support o f local training institutions such as the CERCAP.37
116. I n addition, program M&E and the National Statistical System (SSW will receive special
attention. C D activities will be developed to improve M&E o f policies and programs in the sector
ministries involved in the PRSP and the CAS through training line ministries’ staff in the Cellules de
planijkation et des statistiques. The WBG will coordinate the funding to implement the recently
approved National Strategy for the Development o f the Statistics (SNDS) with the donor community
(Sweden) and will provide TA through the Accelerated Data Program (ADP) and other grant facilities
(Belgium, DfD, TF-SCB). The Bank also will assist the government in setting up a PRSP- and MDGs
results-based management system.

VI.
A.

DELIVERING THE BANK GROUP STRATEGY

LEVERAGING
THE EXISTINGPORTFOLIO

117. Successful implementation of the IDA portfolio will be key to achieve the CAS outcomes. As
o f December 2007, the IDA portfolio consists o f 14 operations3* totaling $622.4 million in net
commitments, o f which $353.5 million remains undisbursed. I t s implementation i s satisfactory.
Including the regional operations, the portfolio amounts to $723.8 million (appendix 9). Close to 47
percent o f the IDA portfolio i s concentrated in the rural development sector and more than 22 percent
in the transport sector showing an already high degree o f degree o f selectivity in lending (table 8).
Moving forward with this CAS, the portfolio will become more focused.
Table 8. Composition of active IDA country portfolio
Sector

YO Net commitments
($ mil)

Rural DevelopmentiEnvt.
Transport
Energy
PSD
Education
Health (HIV/AIDS project)
Finance
Total

47
22
6
9
9
4
3
100

290.5
138.7
39.2
55.0
52.5
25.5
21.0
622.4

Undisbursed
Amount ($ mil)
124.3
109.9
8.2
48.5
49.2
8.1
5.3
353.5

118. Strengthenedporqolio monitoring will enable addressing remaining challenges. Past efforts
have improved portfolio performance and quality, reduced effectiveness delays, and improved
financial management. However, challenges remain, especially in procurement and M&E.
Procurement issues persist, as evidenced by weak procurement capacity at project level, procurement
delays, and deficiencies in projects’ activities planning. The majority o f projects have an adequate
M&E system in place. Nonetheless, more effort i s needed during project preparation and supervision
to ensure that all projects have a formal M&E framework and an operational monitoring system.
Fiduciary and sectoral skills have been reinforced in the C O to ensure prompt implementation o f the
portfolio.

37

The MoE’s CERCAP i s the Centre d’e‘tudes et de renforcement des cupucitks. I t i s co-financed by the government and
ACBF.
38 This number includes a stand-alone GEF for Gourma Biodiversity Conservation ($5.5 m) and a blended GEF for the
Household Energy Project ($3.5 m). Investment operations and additional credits approved in FY06-07 amount to $266.4 m.

-31

-

119. The Bank and other donors are supporting the procurement reform through the PRSC series.
The Comite‘ National de Coordination et de Suivi de l a rdforme du systime des m a r c h b publics3’ i s in
charge o f implementing the revised 2006 action plan of the Country Procurement Assessment Review
(CPAR). The procurement code and key texts are expected to be adopted in early 2008 and the control
and regulatory bodies to be operational in late 2008.
120. Efforts are being made to strengthen results-based portfolio monitoring. The Bank will work
closely with the authorities to ensure clearly defined baseline indicators, targets, and outcomes; as well
as planning and accountability mechanisms to collect data and analyze each project. A training
program on M&E will be developed for the government staff. In addition, the C O and the government
jointly will conduct regular results-based CPPRs to ensure that portfolio monitoring includes regional
projects and AAA products. Project teams also will intensify the focus on results during mid-term
reviews and make greater use o f quality enhancement reviews.
12 1. While financial management of the portfolio improved, oversight functions at the country
level need to be strengthened to mitigatefiduciary risks. In the last three years, M a l i achieved 100
percent fiduciary compliance on audited reports submitted and improved the timeliness o f audit
reports submission. In Mali, all Bank-financed projects are audited annually by external auditors.
Through i t s IDF grant implemented by the newly appointed Verificateur General’s Office, WB i s
working closely with all stakeholders involved in country-level audit oversight functions to support
the government in implementing i t s P F M reform action plan.
122. As internal and external oversight institutions are strengthened, the use of country FM
systems will increase. Country systems are not much used. Approximately 35 percent o f Bank PIUs
are integrated within the government’s ministries, departments, and agencies, which are partially using
country financial management (FM) systems (mainly accounting staff and internal auditors). The
major FM risk o f using Country FM systems i s in relation to the weak internal audit function and weak
supreme audit institutions. Implementation o f the P F M Reform Action Plan relating to audit w i l l help
mitigate this risk.

B.

NEWLENDING
PROGRAM

123. The available FY08 allocation will be $42 million, and the indicative annual IDA15 envelope
is projected at $138 million (SDR92 million equivaleni). Table 9 summarizes IDA’Splanned lending
program for M a l i during the CAS period. Due to the frontloading under I D A 1 4 in FY06-07, the FY08
IDA allocation i s limited to $48 million o f which $6 million i s already committed. In addition, under
the MDRI,40M a l i will benefit from debt relief in amounts ranging from $41 million to $56 million per
year during the CAS period. The initiative has implications for Mali’s IDA envelope since the
country’s forgone IDA debt service in any given year will be deducted from i t s performance-based
annual IDA a l l ~ c a t i o n . ~ ~
124. Actual I D A allocations for M a l i will be determined annually and will depend on (a) the
country’s performance as assessed annually based on the Country Policy and Institutional Assessment
indicators and implementation performance o f Mali’s Bank portfolio, (b) Mali’s performance relative
to the performance o f other IDA countries, (c) overall resources available to IDA during the IDA15
The steering committee created to coordinate and monitor the implementation of the procurement reform.
MDRI started in July 2006. IDA money freed up during the CAS period i s $41.1 million in 2007, $43.8 million in 2008,
$46.6 million in 2009, $49.4 million in 2010, and $55.8 million in 201 1.
4 1 While the MDRI netting out mechanism may lower countries’ new IDA allocations in terms o f overall resource transfers,
no MDRI recipient i s worse o f f as a result o f debt r e l i e f The overall assistance package by I D A - comprising new I D A
allocation plus the debt relief initiative itself- i s unaffected. Further more eligible countries also benefit from some additional
resources in the form of their shares (proportional to their relative performance) o f compensatory donor resources.

39
40

- 32 -

replenishment period, (d) changes in the l i s t o f active IDA-eligible countries, and (v) lending terms
(grants and/or loans) for which M a l i qualifies under the IDA15 grant eligibility and allocation
framework. With a continued good track record on macroeconomic and fiscal management,
governance, portfolio quality, and absorptive capacity relative to other countries, the country should be
able to benefit from increased resources if available and from additional resources (such as the Africa
Growth Catalytic Fund). Should additional resources become available during the CAS period, any
standby operations would be presented to the Bank’s Board o f Executive Directors by the end o f the
previous FY and the Bank would scale up financing for i t s budget support and proposed sectoral
operations.
Table 9. Indicative IDA program for FY08-11
Project name

PRSC I1 to V (pillars I & 2 )
EnergyElectricity project (pillar I )
TA for Service Delivery (pillar 2 )
Agriculture Productivity I1Project (pillar I)
Urban project
(pillars
I & 2)
.
Investment operation (sectodamount to be confirmed)
Regional operations
Total

2011
50-60

70 (9

I

-_

42
6
48

Total country operations

Amount by FY ($ mil)
IDA 15
2009
2010
40
50-60
75 (9
15
70 (S)

I D A 14
2008
42

I

130
8
138

120-130
8-18
138

120-130
8-18
138

GEF
6.3

Sustainable land mgmt operation
WA Biosafety Project

25

125. The country’s performance-based allocation under IDA will be adversely affected if policies,
especially governance and other structural reform policies, deteriorate during the CAS period. The
quality o f the IDA portfolio, particularly with regard to procurement, also will be a key determinant o f
the IDA allocation during the CAS period.

126. I n light of the indicative I D A resources, the Bank will rely on annual development policy
loans (DPL) to support the government in key structural reforms and to carry out key policy
dialogue. Gains made in public expenditure management enable M a l i to absorb budgetary support.
Mali’s budget i s credible and comprehensive, and sector allocations follow the GPRSF development
priorities. In addition, the rate o f execution i s high and MTEFs in critical sectors are in place enabling
the government and donors to coordinate work through Action Plans updated yearly. To ensure
selectivity, the policy dialogue under the PRSC series will focus on PFM, social sectors, specific
growth policy, and development issues that cannot be handled in sectoral operations, as well as
governance issues that hamper service delivery in social sectors. In addition, the PRSC series will be
the appropriate vehicle for conducting the growth strategy dialogue, encouraging elaboration of the
government’s growth strategy, and facilitating consistency between the sectors strategies and action
plans and the overall growth strategy and action plan.
127. Self-tanding investment operations will be used selectively and M a l i will continue to benefit
from regional programs and one fully blended GEF operation. IDA will focus i t s self-standing
investment operations in the three sectors key to deliver the CAS strategic objectives: energy,
agriculture, and urban. Mali’s participation in and share o f the proposed regional projects have not yet
been defined since the projects are at an early preparation stage (appendix 9). When these proposed

- 33 -

regional operations are firmed up, the M a l i country team will discuss the relevance o f Mali’s
participation in them and their complementarity with the country’s operations
128. I n addition, I D A will emphasize the use of SWAP-type operations. In the past, IDA has
delivered assistance in coordination with other donors around national strategies for health, education,
and agriculture. During the next CAS, IDA will push for SWAP-type operations, which will pull donor
resources into single-sector support funds. Implementation o f this approach will commence with the
upcoming operation in support o f agricultural productivity and S L M up scaling.

C.

KNOWLEDGE
PROGRAM

129. The Bank will focus its knowledge program to tackle constraints to growth and service
delivery and will pay greater attention to their strategic focus and dissemination. While the latest
client survey recognized knowledge and technical expertise as valuable types o f Bank assistance, the
C A E found n o clear evidence o f how the AAA program influenced lending activities and supported
the country’s formulation o f sectoral policies. Therefore, the proposed knowledge program will gear
up to enhance the understanding o f underlying economic challenges and to strengthen the evidencebased policy dialogues. In addition, special attention will be paid to ensure better sequencing and
dissemination o f AAA key findings.
130. The AAA program will shwt from formal reports to briefer, more targeted notes that tackle
constraints to growth. The proposed knowledge program will focus on growth, service delivery, and
fiduciary-related challenges (table 10). From 2009, growth PER notes will be prepared annually. The
focus i s only indicative and may change depending on emerging issues related to the achievement o f
the GPRSF. Other themes could be commercial agriculture, regional development, and State enterprise
reform. Finally, to the extent possible, AAA will be carried out jointly with the government and
stakeholders, and WBI will have an enhanced role during the CAS period.
Table 10. Indicative knowledge program for FYOS-11
FY08

FY09

FYlO

FYll

Growth related ESWITA
Rural Finance Study

Growth note on mining
Remittances
ICAupdate*
Country Environmental
Assessment*
SLM advisory service*

Growth note on tourism

Growth note on light
manufacturing
TBD

Service delivery ESWITA
Demography and
Economics
Poverty and PRSP
Brief (TA)

Skills Development
Study

Social Protection*
Mali Poverty and PRSP
Brief follow-up (TA)

TBD

Fiduciary related ESW
~

*

PEMFAR
Governance
Diagnostic Study*

PEFAupdate
CAS Progress Report

Governance followUP*

Annual PRSP II Progress Report (TA)
Note: Economic work and TA carried out under Bank-financedprojects are not listed in this table; TBD: To be determined;
* For AAA to be trust funded.

- 34 -

13 1. IMF interventions will continue to be complementary to the WBG. The IMF takes the lead on
macroeconomic stabilization, including macro fiscal policy, monetary policy, exchange rate policy and
financial stability and risk management. The Bank and the IMF collaborate in assessing performance
o f HIPC resource use and in monitoring progress on budgetary and public expenditure management.
The Ih4F focuses on fiscal management, expenditure management, revenue-enhancing measures, and
audit capabilities and provides the government with TA and policy advice. The IMF also i s supporting
the government’s reform program aimed at strengthening actions underpinning macroeconomic
management. I t s financial assistance under the 4‘h PRGF will be completed end o f October 2007, and
negotiation o f a new PRGF is planned for early 2008.

D.

MONITORING
CAS AND GPRSF RESULTS

132. The CAS results framework developed by the government and the Bank selectively supports
the GPRSF objectives. The CAS results matrix (appendix 1) ensures close alignment o f the CAS with
selected country objectives and results. The matrix also summarizes the GPRSF objectives that the
CAS seeks to support, results that the WBG expects from i t s interventions, instruments that the Bank
will use to implement i t s proposed program, and support that other partners will provide. The results
framework does not reflect possible acceleration o f outcomes to fully achieve the 7 percent growth
envisaged in the GPRSF. If additional resources become available, the results framework will be
revisited in the CAS progress report.
133. CAS implementation progress will be reviewed regularly with all key stakeholders. A technical
group responsible to monitor Mali’s portfolio recently was establishedU4*The group’s two primary
functions are to (a) promote results-based management in all Bank-financed projects, and (b) ensure
that results data from Bank-supported projects are made available to the PRSP monitoring unit and to
the technical ministries. This group also will work on harmonization and alignment issues. The
monthly “portfolio group” will update project indicators and ensure data integrity. The quarterly
portfolio report will include an appendix on CAS implementation and be discussed during miniCPPRs. Each year, a results-based CPPR will focus on CAS results and execution. In addition, the CO
working group on Harmonization will monitor Paris Declaration objectives on aid effectiveness with
support from the Harmonization unit in Washington.
134. Increased civil society participation in the CAS monitoring process. T o respond to feedback
during the G A C consultations to strengthen civil society involvement, the Bank will actively involve
the civil society in monitoring. This approach will require agreement from implementing agencies to
(a) produce and disclose inputs, outputs, and results for all Bank-financed projects, (b) contract with
NGOs/academic institutions to monitor grassroots inputs and outputs against targets, and (c) disclose
and widely disseminate information and progress on projects.

13 5 . Various initiatives will strengthen capacity to create demand for data and produce data for
results monitoring. Mali’s ongoing weakness and tardiness in producing national statistics makes
tracking results difficult, whether for the GPRSF, MDGs, or CAS. The Bank i s working with UNDP,
UNICEF, DNSI, and the GPRSF monitoring unit to establish a GPRSF monitoring system that uses an
existing database known as MaliKunafoni. Bank support i s being provided via an IDF grant; the other
partners in this initiative also have committed substantial financial and technical resources.
136. The Bank will mobilize partners to fund the government’s National Strategy for Development
of the Statistics (SNDS) to improve timely statistical production. Available facilities at the Bank
42 The technical group consists of representatives from the PRSP unit, M&E staff from each Bank project, and representatives
from the planning and statistics units (CPS) of the technical ministries.

-35-

include the PHRD and Trust Fund Statistical Capacity Building (TF-SCB) grants. These concentrate
on producing essential statistics under well-defined quality norms and on ensuring the sharing o f
statistics through regular publication and wide dissemination. Sustainability o f funding will be
addressed in collaboration with other donors through possible direct budget assistance and the
government’s improved capacity to implement the country household survey program. The Bank also
will provide TA through the A D P and other grant facilities (Belgium, DflD, and TF-SCB).

VII. MANAGING R I S K S
137. The political environment represents a limited risk to the program. M a l i i s likely to maintain
i t s stable political arrangements based on democratic rule and extended civil society activity. Local
communal organizations provide strong bases from which to disseminate welfare improvements
nationwide. The recurrent crisis in the Northern region o f Kidal i s being addressed through greater
empowerment o f local communities. The newly re-elected president has committed to continue
decentralizing. The WBG jointly with other donors will support this effort.
13 8. Internal vested interests may slow reforms and prevent removing critical constraints to
economic growth and service delivery. In the past, delays and setbacks in the structural reform agenda
contributed to lower-than-expected economic performance. Mali’s sustained accelerated growth will
not be reached if the investment climate i s not improved by removing critical constraints. Does the
political economy provide the basis for the government to undertake such far-reaching and ultimately
disruptive reforms? Moving from a GDP growth rate o f 5.1 percent to 7 percent, accompanied by an
inflection o f the demographic trend line, would transform M a l i and accelerate the sustainable
reduction o f poverty. However, the reforms required would be difficult and politically sensitive. The
Bank will assist the government in the timely implementation o f i t s action plan for structural reform
being developed under the GPRSF. It i s important for the Bank to engage the new government in
dialogue on the challenging timely implementation o f the agenda reform.
139. On the sectoral level, critical reforms in energy, cotton, and service delivery require addressing
several institutional constraints that have prevented progress in the past. The government has
committed to undertake measures that depart from i t s previous policy stance. For instance, in energy,
the government has initiated interconnectedness with neighboring countries and i s bringing in private
generators to complement the State enterprise. In service delivery, too, the emphasis on
decentralization signals a departure from the past. For cotton, given the multiplicity o f players, the
path i s less uncertain. To assist these processes, the CAS will assist the government through greater
emphasis on understanding and dealing with the political economy uncertainties and in engaging in
public-private partnerships.
140. Another risk is that donor coordination will not work as well as expected and thus will lead to
uncertain and decreasing assistanceflows. At present, donors have a great degree o f commitment to
harmonize their approach. The CAS will contribute to the basic infrastructure o f cooperation.
However, the CAS takes a cautious stance regarding increases in external financing flows, including
mechanisms to ensure predictability o f aid. At the time o f the progress report, the Bank will take stock
o f the progress made in donor harmonization and introduce any necessary modifications.
141. Regionally, political developments pose additional but limited risks. As a landlocked country,
M a l i i s highly exposed to the political uncertainties o f i t s neighbors. During the conflict in CGte
d’lvoire, M a l i strengthened alternative trade routes. The experience also strengthened Mali’s
preparedness for future such risks. To minimize the risk o f future disruptions, the Bank i s supporting
government to increase the menu o f available trade routes.

-36-

142. Finally, M a l i remains vulnerable tofluctuations in commodity prices (gold, cotton, and oil). A
fall in international gold prices would have a drastic impact on Mali’s economic growth, which over
the last decade has been driven largely by this sector. Because cotton i s i t s main export, fluctuations in
this commodity price also affect Mali’s economy and the incomes o f approximately three million
persons in rural areas, where most o f the poor live. High o i l prices drain international reserves and
increase petrochemical, electricity, and transportation costs, thus harming the overall economy. The
government i s implementing a three-part strategy to address i t s vulnerability to external shocks. The
government i s (a) implementing i t s updated cotton producer price-setting mechanism to ensure
adequate pass-through o f world prices and better risk sharing between producers and ginning
companies, as well as enhancing the productivity and competitiveness o f i t s cotton sector. In addition,
the cotton company should use hedging instruments against a drop in the price o f cotton and a decline
in the dollar, and (b) lowering energy costs through connecting with lower-cost regional producers;
and (c) supporting economic diversification through reforms o f the investment climate and promotion
o f promising new product sectors. The government i s accompanied in i t s reform efforts by IDA’S
series o f PRSCs, IDA’S GSP, the recently approved MF-supported PRGF, plus support from other
development partners.

- 37 -

-W!d I1 dSHd3

5.

...

B
C
0

c)

B

s
I

. . .

L

a

e .

.

0

.

. .

.

0

.

.

n
3

2
0

&B

EM

e

a
VI

a

U
h
n

Bu
8a

2

. . .

I

B

s

U
*

6

P

U

E

a

s

.

.

.

. .

0

Y

..

i:
b
P

e

m

. . . . .

. .

.

.
I

m
d

c
0

0

Y

%
3

*.
.-we

M

8

m

8c

43
5

..

VI
L

> ..

. .

0

U

.-C

0

e

U
L

6 .

k

E

0
*

M

I

E

9XE.

.

. .

M
M

-5

I

m

f,
L

0

5

.

. . .

0

W

d

APPENDIX 2: MALI CAS COMPLETION REPORT

Date o f CAS: July 30,2003
Period covered by CAS: July 2003 - June 2007 (FY04-07)
CAS Completion Report prepared by: Alema Siddiky, (Consultant)

I.INTRODUCTION
1.
This CAS Completion Report (CASCR) evaluates the effectiveness o f IDA’S FY04-06
Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) for Mali’ in achieving its intended outcomes and draws
lessons to guide the design of the new country strategy for FYOS-11. The report reviews the Bank’s
strategic objectives, program o f support and their relevance to the government’s development goals.
The report also assesses to what extent the Bank was successful in meeting these objectives and
presents a set o f lessons for future Bank assistance.
2.
The report i s based on reference documents’ and discussions with the country team,
government counterparts and various stakeholders. The assessment has benefited from a recent
evaluation o f the Bank’s performance in M a l i over the period 1995-2005 by the Independent
Evaluation Group (IEG). IEG consulted the Bank’s team during the preparation o f their report.

3.
The CASCR assesses CAS implementation from the perspective of the Bank’s new
results framework. Given that the timeframe dates back to 2003 when the Bank’s focus on managing
for results was not articulated, the CAS did not explicitly identify core measurable results. I t only
stated key development outcomes with no clear baseline and targets (Annex 9). Moreover, the CAS
concentrated on inputs and processes rather than on outcomes. Thus, significantly, this CASCR had to
retrofit the intended objectives from a broader perspective
4.
An important conclusion o f the present evaluation i s that overall performance under the
FY04-06 CAS i s rated as moderately satisfactory. Progress toward most o f the sectors during the
CAS period has been uneven. Even though the country maintained an average growth rate o f 5% and
poverty declined moderately, both were uneven. As a result, the growth did not translate into overall
poverty reduction in rural areas due to poor service delivery. The Bank was moderately successful in
assisting the government to strengthen public finance management, create a road maintenance fund,
and increase telecommunication services and primary school enrollment. However, some goals were
not achieved in the energy, transport, financial, and cotton sectors. Improvement in the productivity
area was not fully achieved, particularly in agriculture. Last, investment in human development did
not result in sufficient progress, particularly in the poor quality o f primary education and low rate o f
health services use and overall health outcome.
11. MALI’S
LONG
TERMDEVELOPMENT
OBJECTIVES

5.
Mali’s development objectives are spelled out in the original Poverty Reduction Strategy
Framework (PRSF)3 for the period 2002-2006. In addition to a pre-requisite pillar (accelerated and redistributive growth), Mali’s PRSF consists o f three strategic pillars:
0
0
0

Strengthening institutions, governance and participation;
Developing human resources and improving access to quality basic services; and
Developing basic infrastructure and productive sectors.

’ Although the CAS period ended in FY06 due to the delay in new CAS the progress during the FY07 i s included.
CAS, Project Appraisal Documents; Implementation Status and Results Reports; Supervision reports (Aide mtmoires, back
to office reports); ICRs; ESWs and IEG reports. During the CAS retreat in November 2006 in Bamako, main findings o f
CASCR were discussed with government counterparts.
The government has changed the name from PRSP to GPRSF.

- 47 -

6.
The three core PRSF pillars target poverty reduction by identifying specific measures needed
to integrate the poor and to reduce gender, rural, and urban disparities. While the PRSF acknowledges
growth to be a prerequisite o f poverty reduction and a specific GDP growth was targeted, the PRSF
did not provide a concrete strategy for accelerating growth. The government started the process o f
translating the ambitious and comprehensive PRSF agenda by the preparation o f the first health sector
medium-term expenditure framework (MTEF) in 2004.4 The PRSF represents the government’s
unified framework o f the medium-term policies and strategies and i s the main document for alignment
and harmonization with donors. The first progress report, prepared in April 2004, summarized
achievements o f the first year o f implementation (2002-03) and outlined policy objectives for 200406. The second progress report was prepared in August 2005 covering PRSF implementation during
2003-04. Mali’s new poverty strategy, the Growth and Poverty Reduction Strategy Framework
(GPRSF) was submitted to the national assembly in December 2006. GPRSF covers 2007-1 1. GPRSF
i s similar to the previous strategy but places much more emphasis on economic growth. GPRSF
focuses on three main pillars: (i)
developing infrastructure and strengthening productive sectors, (ii)
strengthening the public sector structural reform agenda, and (iii)improving delivery o f social sector
services.
111. BANK’S
STRATEGIC OBJECTIVES

7.
The primary focus o f the overall Bank’s strategy was to support PRSF targets. The FY04-06
CAS was organized around three broad themes which supported PRSF pillars and several key
development objectives. The Bank’s program supported a majority o f these objectives in different
sectors.
Figure 1. CAS supported PRSF pillars and key sectors

Pillar
Accelerated and

Promoting Growth

Lf

K e v Sectors Supported
bv C A S
Transport
Energy
Private Sector and
Financial Sector
Agriculture & Rural
Development
Urban

J

PRSF Pillar 3

Develop basic infrastructure &
productive sectors

PRSF Pillar 2

K e y Sectors Supported by
CAS
Health
Education
HIV/AIDS

-

CAS Theme 2
Develop human resources &
access to social services

Developing Human

PRSF Pillar 1
CAS Theme 3

Public Finance Management

\

In 2005 an education sector MTEF was prepared.

-48-

K e v Sectors Supported by
CAS
Public Finance
Management
Procurement
Democratization and
decentralization

-

Promote Institutional
Development, Governance and
Participation

IV. MALI’S
PROGRESS
TOWARDS
ITS
GOALS
A.

Macroeconomic Stability & Growth

8.
Despite the adverse shock during 2004, Mali’s overall macroeconomic performance in
the last few years has been respectable. Initially, in 2004, the locust invasion, drought, commodity
price shocks, currency appreciation in dollars, and persistent instability in neighboring CBte d’Ivoire
slowed the economic growth to 2.2%. However, ftom 2004-07, due to strong agricultural production,
improved terms o f trade, and gold export, the economy recovered at an average rate o f 5.4%. Rice and
cereal production in particular increased due to favorable rainfall. These increases led to lower food
prices and a decline in the average annual inflation to 2% in 2007. During the same period, the overall
fiscal deficit (excluding grants) increased, slightly, averaging 7.5%. Revenue performance improved,
especially in customs duties. On the policy side, in the face o f difficult economic circumstances, M a l i
pursued prudent macroeconomic policies. It adopted and appropriately implemented the new cotton
producer price mechanism to minimize the fiscal risk o f cotton sector losses.’ While Mali’s growth in
recent years has been commendable, it did not noticeably reduce poverty.
9.
During the FY04-06 CAS period, both the Bank and the Fund supported the government in
structural and macroeconomic reforms under the agreement overseeing division o f responsibilities.
The Fund took the lead on macroeconomic stabilization. The Bank focused more on institutional
aspects underpinning the macroeconomic framework and on social and structural areas that impact
growth. The Ih4F’s macroeconomic dialogue and the Bank’s technical support at the policy level and
budget support contributed to growth in Mali.
Table 1: Key macroeconomic indicators
Indicators
Real GDP growth (YO)
Inflation (%)
Fiscal balance, payment order basis excluding grants
(% o f GDP)
Current acct balance (YO o f GDP) incl official
transfers
Gross official reserves (months o f imports)

2002
4.3
5.0

5.2

2003
7.2
-1.3
-5.7

2004
2.1
-3.1
-6.6

2005
6.1
6.4
-7.3

2006
5.3
1.5
-7.7

2007
4.1
2.0
-8.9

-8.3

-8.3

-8.2

-4.7

-6.4

6.9

6.4

6.1

6.1

6.3

Source: M a l i a n authorities and IMF staff estimates.

10.
On the analytical front, the Bank’s Country Economic Memorandum (CEM) identified
constraints to growth and put forth recommendations that included (i)
maintaining macroeconomic and
financial stability; (ii)improving the investment climate; (iii)attracting experienced investors;
(iv) facilitating organization and coordination o f private sector participants in product value chains,
particularly sectors having many small economic actors; and (v) using public-private partnerships
where warranted. The C E M built on earlier analytical work, particularly the multi sector Diagnostic
Trade Integrated Framework (FYO4), Transport and Growth study (FYO4), Investment Climate
Assessment (FyO5), Financial Sector Development Project studies (FYOO), Agricultural
Diversification and Competitiveness Project (FYO6), and the Growth Support Project (FY06). These
analyses fed into the policy dialogue and sector-specific, growth-oriented strategies. Nonetheless, the
C E M was completed in the later part o f the CAS period. Thus, a fully integrated growth strategy had
not been articulated during the CAS period.

See cotton sector reform details under pillars 1 and 3.

- 49 -

B.

Poverty

11.
Mali’s national poverty fell from 55.6% in 2001 to 48.4% in 2006.6 However, the
distribution of poverty was quite uneven. Poverty remained stagnant in the key cotton and rice
areas, which are mostly rural. Although Mali’s poverty declined in the last five years, the CAS had not
articulated a clear strategy to reduce poverty in Mali. It was written more in general terms that all
lending operations would contribute to poverty reduction. In addition to the above preliminary
estimates, the Bank prepared a poverty assessment (FY04) comparing 2 household data surveys for
1988-89 and 2001 showing that the poverty headcount had decreased from 63.8% in 1989 to 56.5% in
200 1. This work was not sufficient to measure poverty reduction because the comparison years were
too outdated to show any significant progress. However, the 2006 Household Survey’s preliminary
estimate gives a much better result to identify whether the decline in poverty made any significant
changes in Mali’s overall condition.

v. ASSESSMENT
OF CAS OUTCOMES
12.
The following sections analyze the country’s progress and the Bank’s assistance toward the
CAS objectives. Mali’s CAS was organized around the government’s PRSF development objectives
instead o f outcomes, and highlighted strategiedactions and the partner program. The Bank’s
instruments aligned with these objectives. The objectives were clustered around 3 PRSF pillars, which
were aligned with the 3 main CAS themes. The CASCR analyzes each pillar in terms o f the pillar’s
main objective, i t s supportive assistance instruments, and i t s achievements or shortcomings related to
the CAS goal. However, most o f the objectives lack baseline or target data. Appendix 1 provides a
more detailed assessment o f progress against the FY03-06 CAS Program Matrix.
CAS Theme: Promotinp Growth

..

The above CAS theme i s supporting the following two PRSF pillars:
PRSF Prerequisite Pillar: Accelerated and Re-distributive Growth
PRSF Pillar 3: Develop Basic Infrastructure and Productive Sectors‘

13.
The Bank’s strategy focused on helping Mali: (a) develop and diversify sources o f growth by
improving financial and business environment for increased private sector development and increase
agriculture productivity in the rural sector; (b) build and maintain necessary infrastructure sector; and
(c) involve decentralized government, deconcentrated services and local populations to build capacity.

A.
Transport
14.
The Bank’s assistance focused on transport infrastructure and services in the areas o f urban
and rural roads and railway through two main projects: Transport Corridor and Investment Project
(FY04) and Rural Infrastructure Project (FYOO). These projects concentrated on publidprivate
investment and viability in transport infrastructure, maintenance o f transport infrastructure assets and
rehabilitation o f rural roads. Bank further supported regulatory environment in the transport sector
through Economic Policy and Public Finance Management Credit (FY06) and the PRSC-1 (FY07).
15.
Progress in the transport sector was uneven. Institutional reforms were undertaken to make the
road sector more effective and transparent. However, the high cost o f transport put pressure on poor
management and maintenance in the transport infrastructure. The transport sector i s considered the
main vehicle for other sectors. However, it was noticed that most o f the infrastructure projects (for
example, Urban Development and Decentralization, Rural Infrastructure) operated separately without
taking into consideration the transport dimension o f any projects in other sectors. For example, the

Based on 2006 Household Survey using the cost o f basic needs method.

- 50 -

rural infrastructure project had a rural development (ARD) component. However, limited collaboration
occurred with the ARD team during project preparation and supervision o f ARD projects.
16.
In the road sector, road maintenance improved and the new implementation agency set up in
2005 i s operational. The budget allocation for road maintenance was increased and the collection for
road user charges on petroleum products imports was formalized in December 2006 through an
explicit line for the petroleum structure in the budget. The government’s contribution increased from
FCFA 994 million to FCFA 7.522 billion. A rural roads strategy was prepared, and implementation
has been initiated on a pilot basis. Since then, only 25% o f the rural road maintenance work has been
completed in 2006 out o f a 2007 target o f f 40%. More urban roads (122.6 km) were reconstructed,
rather than rehabilitated, under the Bank-supported Urban Development and Decentralization Project
(FY97) because existing roads were in an advanced stage o f degradation.
17.
The Bank also helped strengthen public and private sector capacity to implement a new
demand-driven delivery strategy for irrigation and drinking water infrastructure. The strategy
enhanced the participation o f beneficiaries in the design, management, and maintenance o f the
infrastructure. The two main rural roads (272 km, with a target o f 473 km by 2007) were rehabilitated,
facilitating the connection o f rice production to urban markets and rice exports to Mauritania.
18.
Progress in the railway concession was disappointing. The railway investment plan was not
executed, and the arrears payments by rail users in Senegal did not make any progress. From the
Bank’s perspective, executing some o f the policy reforms had complications, including difficulties in
financial resources o f Transrail. The cumulative length o f the slowdown increased due to the delayed
execution o f the investment plan to rehabilitate track and to increase the availability o f engines o f
wagons. These factors significantly increased derailments.
19.
The Bank also provided assistance in improving the regulatory environment o f the transport
sector. Institutional measures operationalized the customs information systems and extended them to
the customs office at the Bamako rail station. Under PRSC-1 (FY07), key policy measures were taken
that included lowering the transport operating costs, faster customs clearance o f shipments, which
released trucks, and elimination o f extra-legal fees collected at road blocks, thus increasing the
profitability o f trucking. The Bank’s CEM (FY07) and Transport Support to Sustainable Growth
(FYO4) reports provided recommendations on transport and trade facilitation to strengthen existing
reforms and the future reform program. Overall, Mali’s transport strategy needs to ensure adequate
financial and human resources to maintain infrastructure and to increase efficiency by implementing
sound fiscal policies and supporting cross-sectoral initiatives in competitiveness, road safety, rural
poverty, HIV/AIDS prevention, and health service accessibility. Most o f these recommendations will
be implemented in the next transport project, which will be aligned with the next CAS.

20.
Remedial measures need to be taken in future Bank operations to achieve results, notably the
restructuring o f the railway component in the ongoing transport project. The Bank teams need to work
together to achieve results on the ground. Regarding working on a multi-sector team, the future
transport strategy needs to involve sectors that have an interest in the selection transport investments.
For example, to take into account i t s sector’s needs, the agriculture team needs to be engaged in the
selection o f a rural road network. There i s a real necessity for better communication, harmonization o f
operations, and linkage among sectors.

B.

Energy

2 1.
The energy sector in M a l i operates below its potential. Only 12% o f the population has access
to electricity. Urban and rural access i s 30% and 2%, respectively. Underinvestment in the sector has

-51

-

led to continuing shortages and interruptions o f electricity service, causing l o w productivity in
industries.
22.
The Household Energy and Universal Project (FY04) concentrated on the policy, institutional,
and financing frameworks to increase access to energy services in rural and periurban areas. The
project included empowering community development with the participation o f private entrepreneurs.
Progress was made on energy service delivery. Approximately 14 private operators were committed to
electrify approximately 25 communities, and approximately 132 wood energy markets were under
rehabilitation. Additionally, 2566 small solar home systems and 30 institutional systems were
installed. The Bank’s C E M recommended the improvement o f the energy sector, I t called on the
government to be more proactive in addressing short- and medium-term electricity supply
requirements and to aggressively pursue all feasible supply options to reduce the cost o f energy.
23.
While progress was made on energy service delivery, achievements in institutional and energy
sector reform were disappointing. The power and utility company, Energie du Mali (EDM),
experienced difficulties with i t s strategic partner, SAUR International. They disagreed on tariff
formula, tariff-setting mechanisms, and the level o f implementation o f the agreed investment plan. The
Bank and other donors helped the government and SAUR organize contract renegotiations in
November 2004 and July 2005. However, in October 2005, the parties decided to separate. In March
2006, the government adopted a restructuring plan for EDM SA to improve i t s financial and technical
performance. Under PRSC-1 (FY07), the Bank continued to support the financial and operational
efficiency o f EDM t o minimize the negative impacts o f power shortages. In the long term, more work
i s needed to strengthen the regulatory environment to foster a competitive environment that will attract
private investors and operators. In addition, the interconnection with neighboring countries i s needed
to increase Mali’s electricity supply.

C.

Urban Development and Decentralization

24.
The Bank through i t s Urban Development and Decentralization (FY97) Project, the Bank
responded in a timely manner to Mali’s urban issues. They are characterized by rapid growth o f the
urban population, limited access to basic infrastructure, deteriorating infrastructure due to lack of
maintenance, and insufficient municipal financial resources. Progress was made in providing urban
services, preserving historic monuments, and the functioning o f the urban land market. Access to
potable water services benefited 179,000 additional people in Bamako and Mopti vs. the 165,000
anticipated, and electricity services were improved, benefiting 55,000 inhabitants in the 7 poorest
neighborhoods o f Bamako. The impact o f sanitation services also improved in Mopti, where cholera
cases were reduced from 675 per year before the project (FY97) to 326 during the project. Twenty-five
km o f water distribution networks including 77 stand-pipes were built in the poorest neighborhoods o f
Bamako. The Bank’s intervention also created short-term employment o f 123,000 person-months
compared to 100,000 person-months targeted.
25.
However, implementation o f water supply in Bamako and M o p t i areas was not successful due
to the water tariff’. The government decided to reduce the tariff by 10% in 2003. This threatened the
financial sustainability o f Energie du Mali (EDM). Municipalities have not been able to generate
sufficient local government revenue. Overall, the financial sustainability o f the municipalities did not
improve; most continue to operate in fiscal deficit. However, the achievements made may not be
sustainable due to lack o f human and financial resources, weak programming and financial
management capacities, and poor economic infrastructure at the local level.

’ Water tariff increase was lower than expected in 2001 and 2002 and in 2003 government decided to reduce the tariff by
10%.

- 52 -

26.
The analysis, Development of the Cities of Mali: Challenges and Priorities (FY06), confirmed
that the lack o f local resources and capacity hindered the Bank's intervention in decentralization. The
report recommended that continued efforts were needed by the individual cities through targeted
activities managed by municipalities and at the macro level through cross-cutting measures.
D.

Agriculture and Rural Development

27.
Progress in agricultural and rural development (ARD) was mixed. Some progress was made in
reforming institutions, improving agricultural research and extension, and empowering producer
organizations. However, the cotton sector policy dialogue was difficult. Reform in the Rural
Development Ministry and the government's weak institutional capacity delayed the cotton sector
reform. Although the Bank's rural agenda was aligned with government's strategy, the former was too
ambitious and hampered agricultural productivity and growth.
28.
The Bank supported the implementation o f the government's rural development strategy
within the framework o f i t s overall poverty reduction strategy through four projects*. During the CAS
period, the key guiding principles were:
Reforming public institutions,
Promoting more demand driven services (research and extension),
Empowering producer organizations:
Supporting rivate sector development and focus on agricultural supply chain
organization,' and
Integrating grassroots communities and community-based organization" through
decentralization.
29.
The Bank-supported Agriculture and Producer Organization Project (PASAOP) (FYOI)
helped establish an institutional framework to efficiently deliver agricultural services to producers.
The split o f the former Ministry o f Rural Development into four entities delayed the institutional
transformations. Nevertheless, progress was made in refocusing public services on four key functions:
(i)the agricultural/rural development policy was elaborated and the agricultural law strengthened;
(ii)research institutions are more responsive to producers and international collaboration. Agronomic
researchers are conducting 92 research programs (compared with 37 in 2002) and have developed
almost 40 new varieties o f rice, groundnuts, sorghum, and cowpeas; (iii)extension services were
provided through performance contracts with civil servants and private providers to producers (1 0,178
performance contracts with 720 civil servant extension agents and 275 contracts with private agents in
the 5 pilot areas); and (iv) the legitimacy and credibility o f producer organizations have improved, and
they have been empowered to effectively participate in policy dialogue and strategy formulation. They
also have set up a financing mechanism for small-scale projects undertaken by grassroots
organizations.'2 An additional financing was approved by the Board in M a y 2007 to continue key
institutional reforms.
30.
In addition, PASAOP indirectly supported policy dialogue on cotton sector reforms through
analytic work on (i)sector organization and management, (ii)price-setting mechanisms, (iii)advisory
services for cotton producers, and (iv) communication strategies. The project also helped develop a
training program for cotton producer leaders and provided the national cotton producer association
with two high-level advisers to support them in their dialogue with the government, donors, and
Agriculture and Producer Organization (PASAOP), Rural Infrastructure Project (PNIR), Rural Community Development
Project (PACR) and Agriculture Competitiveness and DiversificationProject (ACDP).
Agricultural Services and Producer Organization project (PASAOP).
lo
Agriculture Competitiveness and Diversification Project (ACDP).
I' Rural Community Development Project (RCDP).
1600 projects financed for $2.8 million; 40% o f women groups as beneficiaries.

- 53 -

ginning companies. However, the recommendations from these studies did not have the expected
impact in facilitating and speeding up the privatizabion o f the cotton company. Capacity building
programs for producers were slow to start and did not reach as many farmers as expected and required
to significantly impact policy dialogue by increasing producers’ weight in the decision-making.
3 1.
In the irrigation sector, the Rural Infrastructure Project (PNIR) (FYOO) strengthened capacity
both in the public and private sectors to design and implement irrigation and drinking water
infrastructure strategies. The project trained 500 drinking water maintenance teams and 1,500
irrigation user associations. Approximately 8,900 ha in the Office du Niger (ON) and 930 ha o f new
land have been developed to increase irrigation production. In the main season in 2007, farmers were
able to produce some 532,000 tons o f rice on the newly developed irrigated land. The provision o f 525
additional safe drinking water supplies under the project provided access to potable water to
approximately 3.1 million people.
32.
An irrigation financing mechanism study was completed, and the decree on the installation o f
private operators was signed. In addition, under PRSC-1, a comprehensive organizational audit o f O N
was undertaken. The audit enhanced producer capacities and built a balanced relationship in water
management between the O N and producers. A new strategy for small-scale irrigation development
was elaborated and i s under implementation. Seventy percent o f the investment program was achieved
(720 ha o f 1000 targeted). With the participation o f the main stakeholders, the government prepared a
comprehensive master plan that outlines the vision and strategy to develop the O N zone, including the
integration o f decentralization aspects.
33.
In addition, the Bank’s Economic Policy and Public Finance Management Credit (FY06)
supported the signing and implementation o f the irrigation sector contract agreements (2005-07)
among ON, producers, and external aid partners. The Bank’s Agricultural and Competitiveness and
Diversijication Project (FY06) includes investment in communication and marketing infrastructure for
commercial agro supply chains o f a range o f agricultural and livestock products for which M a l i has
strong comparative advantage. However, as this project became fully operational only recently (June
2007), initial results are yet to be achieved. In commercial agriculture, the mango task force has been
established and i s active in managing the fruit export facility in Bamako.

E.

Rural Community Development

34.
The Bank was successful in working in small communities for service delivery in health,
water and sanitation, and gender promotion through i t s Grassroots Hunger and Poverty (FY98) and
Rural Community Development (FY05) Projects. These instruments directly increased production and
income and improved health, water and sanitation, and access to education. Achievements in service
delivery include small-scale health centers, which were established in 19 villages for all community
members and benefit more than 100,000 people. Access to drinking water and sanitation was provided
to 98 villages. Access to drinking water especially benefited children and women: access to education
and increase in school attendance, especially for girls, was i m p r ~ v e d . ’The
~ availability o f water for
irrigation increased both in quantity and duration. The Bank’s assistance also helped create community
organizations and capacity building supports (185 village development committees, 80 parent
associations for education, 19 community health associations, and 188 infrastructure management
committees). These activities empowered villagers by giving them full responsibility to implement the
project. Gender promotion i s another major impact o f the project. Women gradually increased their
participation in community meetings and on village management committees. Their working
conditions improved significantly because some household tasks now require less time and are less
exhausting.
~

l36,000

pupils attended classes. With time to get water and other chores reduced, girls now are approximately 40% o f pupils.

- 54 -

35.
The Bank and other development partners met regularly to coordinate these efforts and to
agree on a charte de collaboration des PTF (technical and financial partners), which was reached
between the main donors supporting the ON.

3 6.
While agriculture and rural development operations were aligned, they had an ambitious
agenda which made it difficult to achieve results. The Bank’s future ARD support needs to identify
critical issues such as research and extension linkages and commercial agriculture products (supply
chain coordination and producer competitiveness). Agricultural productivity and growth should be the
main focus o f the next CAS.

F.

Cotton Sector

37.
The cotton sector reform proposed under the Bank’s program14 was not achieved with regard
to adhering to the timetable for privatization o f the cotton company and limiting the fiscal risk to the
budget. In the first phase o f reforms, the Bank supported the government in adopting a reform strategy
comprising improved financial management and partial privatization o f Compagnie Malienne des
Textiles (CMDT).” Implementation o f the reform stalled in 2004, and the government officially
postponed the privatization. Instead, the government set up a new price-setting mechanism for which a
protocol was signed between the GoM, producers, and C M D T in January 2005.
38.
In November 2005, the government adopted a revised plan to finalize reforms by 2008. A
privatization scheme was adopted by the Council o f Ministers in March 2006. However, farmers are
s t i l l poorly organized and lack bargaining capacities to participate in a fair dialogue with other
stakeholders’ in the future privatized subsector. GoM i s implementing a comprehensive capacitybuilding and communications program to support the establishment o f viable producer economic
organizations. Almost all village associations have been transformed into cooperatives and federated at
the commune level. Under PRSC-I (FY07), the Bank continued the dialogue on cotton sector reform.
The government took a few selected measures and implemented the cotton producer price mechanism,
outlined the C M D T zones to be privatized, adopted the final privatization operational plan, and bid to
recruit a privatization advisor.

39.
Overall, the Bank’s accomplishment in the cotton sector was mixed due to an overly ambitious
program and slow implementation o f reforms. GoM also had weak capacity. However, the Bank was
able to maintain a solid policy dialogue despite difficulties experienced in the implementation o f the
reform. Experience shows that institutional reforms require time and strong government commitment.
Supporting measures such as training and communication are also necessary to accompany
institutional reforms and facilitate their implementation.
G.

Private and Financial sector

40.
The Bank’s progress in private sector development (PSD) has been modest and slow. The
government articulated PSD policies rooted into the GPRSF and undertook a number o f reforms to
improve the investment climate and foster competition and transparency.

4 1.
The Bank-supported Growth Support Project (FY06) and Economic Policy and Financial
Management Credit (FY06) focused on increasing the productivity and supply o f mining, tourism and
crafts, telecommunications, and investment climate, In the telecommunications sector, telephone
services were expanded. Teledensity jumped to 12% by the end o f 2006, much higher than the West

l4WB

supported SAC 111 and IV.
The strategy, negotiated with all stakeholders over 3 years was endorsed by the Council o f Ministers in November 2003,
following completion o f the first phase o f the cotton sector reform.

- 55 -

Africa regional average o f 7%, and tariffs for domestic and international calls were reduced by more
than 10%.
42.
The government undertook reform of the business environment, with Bank support mainly in
business start-ups, licenses; property registration, and handicrafts export taxation. The costs and
number of procedures (from 13 to 9) to start a business were reduced; the tax on property transfer was
cut by half; and the number o f days to secure a construction license was reduced. Reducing the
handicrafts tax i s expected to enhance the export performance o f the craft sector. Since 2005, an
estimated 2,200 new jobs in the private sector have been created in the project areas. However,
improvement o f the Bamako airport and development o f the industrial zone have been slow due to
mixed messages from the government regarding the role o f IDA and the Millennium Challenge
Corporation (MCC). In the mining sector, M a l i declared i t s adherence to the Extractive Industries
Initiative, thus confirming i t s commitment to transparency and improved governance. In addition, the
joint IDA-IFC Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises (MSME) initiative improved access to finance,
mainly through the partial credit guarantee.
43.
Several analytical studies were prepared: a supply chain analysis, investment climate
assessment, and integrated trade diagnostic study that highlighted concrete micro-level constraints to
Mali’s growth, including regulatory and non price barriers that increase the time and monetary costs o f
doing business. Additional cross-cutting constraints stemmed from the transport, transit facilitation,
and finance sectors. These studies underpinned discussions at the President’s Investors Council, and
consultations have laid the foundation for strengthened government commitment to improve the
investment climate and remove other unnecessary impediments to private sector growth.

44.
PSD was further supported by improving the soundness, performance, and competitiveness o f
the financial sector. The Financial Sector Development Program (FYOO), Economic Policy and
Financial Management Credit (FY06) and PRSC-I (FY07) improved Mali’s financial sector. In the
commercial banking sector, an audit o f nonperforming loans was completed. It has helped the
government to develop a clean-up strategy to strengthen the financial institutions. In the insurance
sector, implementation o f the recommendations o f the diagnostic study on domiciliation o f insurance
policy in Mali’6 increased business activity, particularly in the mining sector. For the pension system,
the government launched a study o f i t s debt to the private sector social security institutions. It also
launched actuarial studies o f the private and public sector institutions to modify the main parameters
and reduce imbalances. The supervision and promotion o f microfinance activity were separated in two
separate entities. The promotion activities are expected to encourage new entrants, particularly in the
geographical areas with a minimal presence o f microfinance institutions. The units have been
adequately staffed. In 2005 the housing bank (BHM) was recapitalized and the new management team
appointed to respond to the emerging financial crisis. However, BHM s t i l l faces a high level of
nonperforming loans. In addition, the privatization o f the investment bank (BIM) was launched with
the hiring o f the privatization adviser. T o date, 40% o f nonperforming loans has been collected, and
the information system has been changed. Therefore, reforms supported by the financial sector remain
incomplete.
45.
Overall Pillar Assessment: The above two pillars have been rated as moderately satisfactory.
M a l i was able to maintain prudent macroeconomic stability in the last few years despite exogenous
shocks. While the growth rate averaged 5% and poverty also declined in line with growth, income
distribution remains largely uneven. The government’s budget was aligned with PRSF’s priority needs
in key poverty-reducing sectors to achieve growth and poverty reduction objectives. Moderate
progress was made in providing basic infrastructure. In the transport sector, road maintenance has
l6 Domiciliation o f insurance policies indicates that insurance has been purchased. In Mali, there i s a legal obligation to
insure policies in sectors like mining, automobile and import.

- 56 -

improved, but railway services have not. Access to rural electrification and telecommunications has
improved, but progress in institutional reform in the power sector was disappointing. Progress in the
private sector policy dialogue including investment climate reforms has been extremely slow, and
financial sector reforms were not completed. Some improvement was noted in the agriculture pricesetting mechanism, irrigation scheme, and empowerment o f producer organizations, but agricultural
productivity was low. Insufficient progress was made in the cotton sector reform.

CAS Theme: Develouinp H u m a n Resources

.

The above CAS theme i s supporting the following PRSF pillar:
PRSF Pillar 2: Develop H u m a n Resources and Access to Basic Social Services.

46.
The Bank’s strategy in this pillar focused on (a) intensifying the necessary framework for
sustainable human development; (b) improving access to quality o f services; (c) working with donors
to strengthen capacity o f the education and health sectors; and (d) working with NGOs, civil society,
and the private sector to reduce the risk o f the HIV/AIDS epidemic.
47.
M a l i will not reach most o f the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs), particularly in
maternal and child mortality and nutrition. In the education sector, M a l i made progress in primary
gross enrollment ratio, but this improvement i s s t i l l below the GPRSF target o f 83%. However, M a l i
has the potential to achieve primary school enrollment. For health indicators, progress i s also very
limited for infant, child, and maternal mortality. The HIV/AIDS prevalence rate has improved
significantly and most likely will be achieved (table 2).
Table 2: Mali Progress in Health and Education Indicators
Indicators

2003

2004

2005

2006
Actual

2006
GPRSP
target

MDG
Target
(2 015)

Child mortality rate (per 1000 under age 5)
Infant mortality (per 1000 live births)
Maternal mortality (per 100,000)
DPT3 vaccinarion coverage for children
under 1 year of age PA)
Childbirth assisted by trainedpersonnel (%)

229
113
582
79

229

nla
582
90

210
100
450

83

582
85

191
96
582
68

42
46

46
47

51
50

49

50

1.3

<1

1

83

100

Health:

Percent o f population living within a radius o f
5 !an o f an operating health center (“h)
Fertility rate
HIV prevalence rate (%)

6.7
1.7

145

6.6

Education:
Gross primary enrollment rate (YO)
Gross female primary enrollment rate
Studentkeacher ratio

A.

72
46
53

74.5
52
54

Health

48.
Moderate improvements in health outcomes were evidenced in geographical access to a health
center, vaccination coverage, and prenatal care services. Health sector budget was aligned with
Medium-Term Expenditure Framework (MTEF), which i s consistent with Mali’s 10-year program in
health (PRODESS). However, slow progress was made in reducing infant, child, and maternal
mortality. Human resources availability, which i s essential for optimal provision o f healthcare
services, remains low. The government did not take the initiative to include the non state sector in i t s
activities to increase health coverage and to improve quality o f health care in the country.

- 57 -

Furthermore, the share o f health expenditure in GoM’s recurrent budget increased slightly from 7.25%
in 1998 to 7.90% in 2006. It was insufficient to improve health service delivery.
49.
The Bank supported Mali’s health program through the Health Sector Development
Programme (PRODESS) (FY98). Access to health care services within a 5 km radius improved from
34% (1998) to 50% (target 45%), and within a 15 km radius from 40% (1998) to 75% (target 65%) in
2006. Health coverage reached 753 community health centers, which are operational. Prenatal care
and immunization coverage have reached respectively 75% and 91% o f the population. Medically
assisted childbirth increased somewhat from 40% in 1998 t o 53% in 2006. Although the Bank
achieved the above health outcome, the overall project outcome was not achieved. Little progress was
made in lowering fertility or maternal and child mortality. The quality o f services remains poor and
use o f health services very low.

50.
The Bank had an overly ambitious health target that was not consistent with the GPRSF target.
The Bank’s target for infant mortality rate was to decline from 123 to 90 per 1000 live births, whereas
the PRSF target was 100 by 2006. Although the CAS supported the PRSF target, the project did not
later retrofit i t s objective to be consistent with CAS. Therefore, the CAS document had inconsistencies
between supporting the overall PRSF targetI7 and supporting the key intermediate indicator o f PRSF.
These indicators are milestones not outcomes, hence there were inconsistencies in target indicators
between the CAS document and the Bank-supported project.

’*

51.
The Bank’s Multi-Sector HIV/AIDS Program ( U P ) (FY04) made a major contribution in
designing and putting in place adequate institutional framework for the implementation o f the M A P .
Mali’s HIV/AIDS prevalence declined from 1.7% in 2001 to 1.3% in 2006. The project helped
increase the number o f distribution facilities and access to free antiretrovirals (ARVs). In the public
sector, 11 ministries completed action plans, and implementation agreements were signed with the
Executive Secretariat. Training and integration o f HIV/AIDS issues in school curricula, condom
distribution, and blood safety are being continued. However, progress in monitoring and evaluation of
indicators has been slow due to lack o f specialized skills and resource^.'^ In the private sector,
business coalition membership expanded from 24 f i r m s in 2006 to 33 in June 2007. As a result,
HIV/AIDS-related campaigns also increased. Overall, preventive and counseling services are in place,
and a nationwide Information, Education and Communication (IEC) campaign i s underway.
Coordination with other development partners including the Global Fund, UNAIDS, the African
Development Bank, and other bilateral donors was satisfactorily initiated during the CAS period.

52.
The Bank prepared an ESW Health Service Utilization Study, which examined the causes of
the low utilization rates o f primary health care services in Mali, specifically for reproductive health
services. The research showed that if a person belongs to a mutuelle (a local insurance scheme), s/he
will utilize services more, mainly because the mutuelle can bargain for better services with the health
center with which it contracts. Data also showed that poor Malians also seek care in the non-State
sector, which i s not well regulated. The study provided recommendations to increase use o f health that
were incorporated in the PRSC-I operation (FY07), in which in 2007 the government planned to
increase the coverage o f health mutuelles in the poor zones.

17

2003 CAS document (Report No. 25663): p. 42, attachment 1, and Annex B9.
WB facilitated a broad-based communication campaign leveraging the local knowledge of private communications firms.
Various segments o f the Malian population have acquired the basic knowledge o f HIV/AIDS that i s likely to trigger
behavioral changes.
l 9 Demographic and Health Survey (DHS) carried out in 2006.

- 58 -

B.
Education
53.
M a l i has been working toward i t s 10-year Education Sector Program. The Bank supported this
program through an adaptable program loan (APL) o f 3 phases, Education Sector Expenditure
Program (ESEP).20 Progress was achieved in access and enrollment. Gross primary enrollment rate
increased from 56.6% in 1999-2000 to 75% in 2005-06. Girls’ gross enrollment increased to 52%
during the same period. 57% o f the educational budget (including salaries for contractual teachers) and
28% o f non salary budget were decentralized. Moderate progress was made in supplying and
distributing textbooks and improving classroom teaching. Education as a share o f GDP improved from
3% in 2002 to 5% in 2006. This rise i s comparable to other low income SSA countries but s t i l l below
the 3.8% o f the best performing ones.21The MTEF for education was implemented under the Bank’s
Structural Adjustment Program (SAC I11 and IV), which was consistent with the education sector
po1icy.
54.
Progress on education quality has been slow. Achievement scores in reading and mathematics
are among the lowest o f francophone African countries. The 2005 Learning Achievement Assessment
showed that only 5 1.5% o f grade 2 students achieved the average score in languagetreading and 48.5%
achieved the same in mathematics. As a consequence, the literacy rate remained very low. K e y reasons
are the severe lack o f qualified teachers, leading to a very high student-teacher ratio (84 to 1 in urban
areas and 53 to 1 in rural areas), insufficient provision o f textbooks (1.4 books per student), and an
ineffective performance monitoring system for the sector. The l o w completion rate in primary
education (43.1%) and persistent regional and urban disparities have further hindered the overall
education program. The Bank-supported expansion o f building schools had been below expectation
with 3,000 new classrooms built, although 6,000 new classrooms were programmed. Furthermore, 620
teachers were trained every year while 2,500 were required. Considerable efforts are needed to
strengthen the institutional capacity o f local administrations and municipalities to handle the unmet
demand for education and to ensure an efficient delivery o f education services. T o improve the quality
o f primary education and efficient use o f resources, the Bank i s supporting the second phase o f the
Education Expenditure Project (PISE 11- FY06).22The government has started implementing some of
the activities, but it i s too early to assess the overall implementation and outcome o f the project.
55.
The government and the Bank jointly prepared an Education Country Status Report (FY07),
which focused on access, efficiency, and equity, with emphasis on local service delivery mechanisms.
The report identified the main obstacles toward full expansion and improvement o f the sector. The
recommendations are to be implemented in future CAS and other Bank-supported lending
interventions.
56.
For future operations, the Bank’s objectives should focus on quality and equity in primary
education. At the post-primary level, more emphasis should be given to (a) the efficiency and
relevance o f education to better respond to skills needs and (b) promoting complementarities between
education and training, formal and informal learning, and public and private provision.
57.
Overall Pillar Assessment: The above pillar has been rated as moderately unsatisfactory.
Mali’s progress toward the implementation o f basic services (education, health) has been
disappointing in the last few years, Progress was made in free antiretroviral treatment, geographical
access to health services, school enrollment, and women’s participation at the community level.
However, the quality o f services, l o w literacy rate, low utilization of health services, and capacity
constraints remain key challenges in both the health and education sectors.

ESEP, ESEP 1, and ESEP2.
Mali dedicates 35% o f its education budget to primary, 43.7% to secondary, and 16.3% to higher education. The primary
education amount i s still lower than the average francophone African country spends (49.3%).
” An additional $15 million was approved in May 2007.
’O

- 59 -

CAS Theme: Public Finance Manapement and Governance

This CAS theme supports PRSF pillar one:

.

PRSF Pillar 1: Promote InstitutionalDevelopment, Governance, and Participation.

5 8.
The Bank’s assistance focused on the public sector financial accountability mechanism
covering public expenditure management to improve the efficiency and transparency o f budget
management, procurement and the financial management system.
A.

Public Finance Management

59.
The Bank supported structural reforms to strengthen the macroeconomic framework and
public finance management through the Structural Adjustment Credits (SAC III and I y ) and Economic
Policy Public Finance Management Credit (FY06).
60.
Public expenditure management reforms have achieved their objectives. Budget preparation
was improved moving toward a system that links public resource allocation to the poverty reduction
objectives in the country’s development program. Starting with the 2003 budget, the government
introduced a 3-year budget allocation for all sectors, compatible with the macroeconomic framework.
The budgets for 2004-07 were successfully executed and were consistent with the PRSF objectives.
Sectoral MTEFs for health, education, transport, and rural water and sanitation were prepared and
implemented to better align sector policies with budget. A new budget classification system was
implemented that enables budget consolidation across all governmental levels, providing a better
monitoring system.23

61.
The government adopted a medium-term action plan to strengthen and modernize Mali’s
public finance management (PFM). The institutional framework for the 2007 phase was implemented.
This will help increase aid flows through budget support for GPRSF implementation. The Public
Expenditure and Fiduciary Accountability (PEFA) exercise was completed in early 2007. PEFA
established a baseline o f Mali’s P F M performance and identified policy measures to strengthen the
action plan. The foundation laid by PEFA will facilitate monitoring the impact o f the government’s
PFM action plan.
62.
The efficiency and effectiveness o f budget execution has improved significantly in the last few
years. Interconnected information systems and databases for key departments (budget, treasury, and
financial control) o f MEF were established in 2004. Interconnection at the sub-national levels was
initiated in 2006. It has strengthened the management and internal control system o f the budget.
63,
Budget transparency and accountability were improved by the strengthening the capabilities
o f the General Accounts Office o f the Supreme Court. MEF made significant progress toward
reporting and disseminating economic and financial information. In addition, MEF has produced a
quarterly note on budget execution data for priority sectors for the last few years.

B.

Procurement

64.
The Bank supported the improvement o f the procurement system under the structural
adjustment program and recent DPL. The government prepared the terms o f reference to design and
implement a database on the different phases o f procurement. In December 2005, a tripartite national
committee was established to coordinate and monitor the implementation o f procurement reform
(Comite‘ National de Coordination et de Suivi, or CNCS). Strengthening the national procurement
This budget classification system uses budget nomenclature for the local level that i s compatible with the national
nomenclature.

23

- 60 -

committee enabled the government to focus adequately on procurement reform issues. This focus gave
rise to the P F M action plan (2006-08), which included procurement, an essential element in the
government’s dialogue with donors. Moreover, this reform will lay the groundwork to move toward
increased budget support as well as harmonized donor support for the future reform program.
65.
Under the PRSC-1 (FY07) key measures included adoption o f sound regulatory measures
operations in line with WAEMU guidelines, creation o f the control and regulatory body, and
strengthening the capacity o f contracting authorities.
66.
On the analytical front, the government, the Bank, and other development partners worked to
assess the effectiveness o f public spending and public finance management through the preparation o f
the CFAA, Country Procurement Assessment Report (CPAR), WB-IMF, Assessment and
Implementation o f Action Plans to Strengthen Capacity o f HIPC (HIPC AAP) reports, and IMF
Report on the Observance o f Standards and Codes (ROSC). These studies helped the government’s
two key action plans: (a) modernizing and strengthening public financial management and
(b) developing the institutions to support the implementation o f a decentralization policy.

C.

Democratization and Decentralization Process of Government and Public Administration

67.
The Bank’s decentralization effort was supported through various operations in selected areas
such P F M reform, health, education, and agriculture and rural development. The other development
partners were heavily involved in institutional capacity building o f local governments.
68.
The Bank supported the government’s action plan to consolidate de~entralization.~~
The plan
had two complementary objectives: to align government services with local preferences and build
local capacity to manage public resources. The water, health, and education sectors were identified as
priorities for decentralization. An institutional framework for decentralization was put in place in
sectors including education, health, water supply, and PFM. However, the government faced multiple
constraints including slow progress in transfer o f resources to the local administrations, weak
mobilization o f local resources, poor coordination between local governments and sector ministries,
and incomplete and inadequate legislation. Capacity i s particularly weak in M&E and quality control
(QC) systems. Weak capacity contributed to serious weaknesses in service delivery efficiency. As a
result, in October 2004, to validate the diagnostic study, the government organized a national
workshop at which a transfer o f resources and responsibilities was adopted and implemented in the
2007 budget. The resource transfer was supported by the interconnection o f the de-concentrated units
o f MEFs treasury, budget, and financial control departments.
69.
Overall Pillar Assessment: The above pillar has been rated as moderately satisfactory. Public
finance management in M a l i has improved during the last four years and, despite Mali’s weak
institutional capacity, the planned reforms were fully implemented. In particular, the Bank-supported
operations helped M a l i improve i t s budget planning and execution, transparency, and accountability;
and strengthened the P F M system. As a result o f this support, G o M has been able to carry out i t s own
public expenditure reviews (PERs) and build ownership o f the system. However, efforts are needed to
improve coordination among central and local governments to improve the decentralization process.
Cross Cutting Issues

70.
Regional integration. M a l i has been an active member o f the construction o f the regional
economic space under the WAEMU and ECOWAS frameworks. During the CAS period, the
ECOWAS Secretariat, WAEMU Commission, and member states intensified their efforts to build the
physical and financial infrastructure needed for the common market. Significant progress was
24

SAC I V (FY05), Economic Policy and Public FinancialManagement Credit (FY06).

- 61 -

achieved in establishing and installing a well-functioning payment system (WAEMU), and clearing
and settlement system in WAEMU to expand trade and investment within and among member
countries. In response to the region-wide locust plague in 2003-05, M a l i successfully participated in
the Africa Emergency Locust Project along with 6 other West African countries. Thus, M a l i i s
prepared for future infestations and i s coordinating risk management and environmental issues
associated with locust control in a regionally integrated manner.
7 1.
In addition, the Bank successfully provided capacity building for regional bodies charged with
developing basins-Organisation p o u r la Mise en Valeur du Fleuve Se‘ne‘gal (OMVS) and Niger
Basin Authority (NBA)-for
better planning and management o f land and water resources across the
basins.
72.
Monitoring and evaluation. The CAS did not have a clear results-monitoring plan. N o
comprehensive M&E system linked the contributions o f individual projects to the overall CAS and
GPRSF outcomes. This made it difficult to align project outcomes with CAS outcomes. M&E capacity
issues were not well addressed by the Bank’s team during the project preparation. On the
government’s side, M&E capacity issues were either vague or overlooked.
73.
Gender. In FY06 the Bank completed a Gender Assessment to promote gender equity to the
government and development partners. The assessment recommended a two-pronged strategy:
(a) establish an enabling socio-cultural, legal, economic, and institutional environment that would
promote gender equity; and (b) mainstream gender issues in national policies and sectoral
development programs and projects. The National Gender and Development Program will be financed
with local revenues from the National Budget. The comprehensive assessment will need coordination
within the Bank’s sector program and with government and other development partners. G o M has
prepared a pamphlet to disseminate the assessment results.

VII. ASSESSINGTHE BANK’S
PERFORMANCE
A.

Quality of Products and Services

74.
Lending. By the end o f the CAS period, 9 o f the 10 operations planned under the CAS basecase scenario and the SAC I11 supplemental were delivered. In addition, 2 GEF operations were
approved (total $9 million), as well as 7 regional operations from which M a l i benefited. In total, new
IDA commitments during the 3-year CAS period approximated $339 million,25 as compared with $390
million foreseen in the CAS base-case lending scenario. This lower level o f new IDA commitments i s
due mainly to the postponement o f the second phase o f the Transport Sector APL.
75.
The Bank has been flexible in i t s assistance to M a l i to respond to the country’s needs in the
face o f the negative impacts o f the C8te d’Ivoire crisis and unfavorable world price o f cotton on the
Malian economy. The Bank adapted the second tranche conditions o f the SAC I11 and provided a
supplemental grant o f $15 million within an additional one-year implementation period. Given the
sharp drop in the world cotton price and the need to support an urgent country financing gap, a SAC
IV was quickly prepared. I t s design was kept simple because o f the difficulties in implementing the
cotton sector reforms under SAC 111. SAC IV also was envisaged as a transitional instrument toward
the start o f programmatic Poverty Reduction Support Credits (PRSCs) and therefore was designed as a
one-tranche operation with a limited number o f objectives. SAC IV was followed by an Economic
Policy and Public Finance Management Credit (DPL), which built on it and focused on a limited
structural reform agenda.

O f which $94.4 million in grants were provided to Mali. Since FY06, Mali has had a “green light,” which translates into
100% credits for new IDA commitments.

25

- 62 -

76.
The Bank coordinated i t s structural adjustment operations, macroeconomic dialogue, and
preparation o f key strategic and policy documents (joint staff assessment o f the PRSF and PRSF
annual progress reports) closely with the IMF, which approved i t s second PRGF program in June 2004
(period covered 2004-07). The Bank also worked closely with other development partners in key
areas o f the structural policy dialogue (ADB, AFD, Canada, EU, France, the Netherlands, Sweden,
and USAID) and the implementation o f the policies in the cotton sector and Office du Niger irrigation
reforms. At the sectoral level, the Bank and other development partners have supported program-based
approaches in education, health, and rural water and sanitation.
77.
The CAS was implemented under the base-case scenario. The key CAS instruments in support
o f these themes were (i)budget support (through structural adjustment credits and development
support credits); (ii)community-driven development (CDD) operations supporting productive sectors
and the fight against HIV/AIDS; (iii)
traditional investment operations targeting social sectors as well
as growth-enhancing activities such as agriculture, infrastructure, and PSD to enhance Mali’s
economic competitiveness; and (iv) a wide-ranging AAA program focused on building the knowledge
base for the three main themes. The CAS concentrated on capacity building and strengthening the
framework for programmatic support to Mali.
78.
The choice o f instruments during the CAS period was adequate in most sectors. However, the
Bank’s overall approach was not consistent. For example, in the rurallagriculture sector, a very
traditional project approach was used; and, although the portfolio was aligned, there were s t i l l too
many operations in the same sectors. The Bank’s future lending needs to be more consistent with i t s
new results framework.
79.
Due to the government’s weak institutional capacity and political difficulties in implementing
structural reforms in the agreed period, there were considerable delays in implementingreforms in the
ongoing and newly approved projects. Furthermore, non harmonized donor programs and multiple
donor procurement processes left government staff insufficient time for implementation.

80.
Analytical and Advisory Activities (AAA). In addition to the AAA tasks mentioned earlier in
the report, the Bank also completed the C F M , Macroeconomic Impact of Climate Assessment, CPAR,
Integrated Framework for Trade Diagnostic Study, and Investment Climate Assessment. These
analytical underpinnings helped identify the strengths and main shortcomings in Mali’s fiduciary
system and helped the government prepare two key action plans on public expenditure management
and decentralization policy. The Bank also assisted with the development o f medium-term expenditure
frameworks (MTEFs) for health, education, and transport. MTEF support i s envisioned for the
agriculture, livestock, and fisheries sectors.
8 1,
During the CAS period, several pieces o f analytic work (poverty assessment, HNP country
status report) had been initiated and discussed to some extent either at a workshop or with government
and development partners, but never finalized for further dissemination. For future CASs, the Bank’s
AAA program needs to be strengthened, particularly by actual delivery o f final products and
dissemination.
82.
Portfolio management. Both the performance o f the active country portfolio and the
percentage o f project commitments at risk improved. At the beginning o f the CAS period, 3 1.1% o f
commitments were at risk vis-&vis 0.8% as o f end-FY07 (table 3). On the other hand, the
disbursement ratio improved significantly-from
17.7% annually prior to the CAS period to 27.6 %
per year during the CAS period. The disbursement amount was $107 million during FY04-06,
compared with $75 million per year prior to this period. In addition, 5 o f 11 operations in the portfolio
had satisfactory outcomes as well as satisfactory ratings for the borrower and the World Bank
performance as rated by IEG (table 4). This improvement compared to a performance record over the

- 63 -

prior five years during which, according to IEG, more than one-third o f closed World Bank operations
in M a l i had had unsatisfactory development outcomes.

83.
To better support the country program, the World Bank Country Office has put in place
several mechanisms to follow up closely on project implementation. The government and CO meet
and conducted portfolio performance review (CPPR) on a regular basis. More Headquarters staff have
been relocated to the CO, so a growing number o f portfolio functions are managed by country-based
staff.
T a b l e 3. Portfolio Trends (FY03-07)
FY03

Active Portfolio

10
518.2
1
21.0
4.1
1
10.0
284.2
100
100

Number o f Projects
Net Commitments ($m)'
Number o f Problem Projects
Commitments At Risk
% Commitments at Risk
Number o f Projects at Risk
YOat Risk
Total Un-disbursed Balance ($m)
Proactivity Ratio
% Realism

FY04

FY05

11
525.5
2
163.5
31.1
3
27.3
310.2
100
67

FY06

11
441.0
3
112.2
25.4
4
36.4
266.0
50
75

13
547.4
3
48.0
8.8
3
23.1
289.4
67
100

FY07
14

613.2
3
5
0.8
1
7.1
358.7
100
100

Source: World Bank Business Warehouse.
Notes: The active portfolio includes GEF, IBRD, IDA, Montreal Protocol, and Special Financing operations.

'

Table 4. Portfolio Trends (FY03-07)
Project

m

poo1746
poo1755
PO58770

PO35617
PO4665 1

Project Name

Irrigation
Promotion
Vocational
Education &
Training
Consolidation
Agro-processing
TRD
Improving
Learning in
Primarv Schools
Grassroots Hunger
Poverty
HUNE'OVT
Regional Power

Exit
date

Outcome

Sustainability

ID Impact

05/30/1997

2003

unsatisfactory

unlikely

negligible

unsatisfactory

03/14/1996

2003

unsatisfactory

unlikely

modest

unsatisfactory

06/01/1995

2003

likely

Modest

unsatisfactory

01/21/2000

2003

satisfactory

likely

substantial

Satisfactory

04/07/1998

2004

~~~~~~;

06/26/1997

2004

-

modest

unsatisfactory

satisfactory

likely

substantial

Satisfactory

likely

modest

Satisfactory

~ likely ~

~substantial~

~Satisfactory
~

unlikely

modest

Satisfactory

PO72785

SAC I11

1211112001

2004

satisfactory

PO01730

Transport Sector

05/26/1994

2005

s

PO01750

Urban
Development and
Decentralization

12/13/1996

2005

Marginally
unsatisfactory

12/17/1998

2006

Marginally
unsatisfactory

3/22/05

2006

Satisfactory

PO40652
PO83272

Health Sector
Development
Program
SAC I V

Bank

date

!

unsatisfactory
likely

modest

Notes on IEG ratings: Outcome: Two thirds satisfactory or marginally satisfactory (satisfactory represents one third);
Sustainability: Likely just over half; ID impact: Substantial one third; and Bank performance: satisfactory just over half.

In sum, half o f the existing portfolio i s satisfactory, and only one-third i s really strong projects.

- 64 -

~

84.
As o f March 2007, the I F C portfolio stood at $6.7 million with a total o f $4.8 million s t i l l
outstanding. Sadiola Gold project i s the single largest IFC investment (equity investment) in Mali,
followed by various smaller investments including $1.47 million investment in the hotel industry. The
balance o f IFC strategy i s constituted in the pulp, paper, and plastic sectors.
85.
MIGA’s portfolio consisted o f 1 project with an outstanding gross exposure o f $16.2 million.
Guarantees were issued to a Senegalese company-against the risks o f expropriation, breach o f
contract, and war and civil disturbance-in
support o f i t s investment for the provision o f
telecommunications services including fixed lines, wireless, internet, and satellite communication
services, and public pay phones. M a l i i s 1 o f 9 African countries that participated in MIGA’s
Enterprise Benchmarking Program (EBP). MIGA i s implementing a multiyear program to advise the
G o M on establishing an investment promotion agency to help the country disseminate information
about i t s investment opportunities and guide i t s investment efforts.

B.

Aid Coordination

86.
Mali made goodprogress on its aid effectiveness agenda. M a i l has become a pilot country to
implement Paris Declaration on Harmonization and Alignment. A thematic working group on
harmonization was put in place in 2004 which focused on defining the mechanisms for implementing
common budget support framework by Mali’s donors. In addition, the government put in place an
active program-based approach in education and health. It also coordinated support to (a) public
finance management reform, (b) ongoing Public Expenditure Fiduciary Assessment (PEFA) exercise,
and (c) memorandum o f Understanding (MOU) framework for budget support operations with
discussions on the performance matrices. The government i s committed to improve aid effectiveness
both at the government level and with the main development partners (Canada, Denmark, EU, France,
the Netherlands, Sweden and WB). A key milestone in aid coordination was the signing in March
2006 o f a MOU on the budget support framework with AfDB, Canada, EU, France, the Netherlands,
Sweden and WB. The Bank has fully participated in all harmonization activities and was the driving
force behind the budget-support M O U and joint PEFA exercise. Bank’s support to the health sector
has been integrated in the PRSC series.

C.

CAS Consultations

87.
The CAS was prepared through a consultative process with a wide range o f stakeholders
across the country. During 2000-03, several workshops and a retreat took place. They centered on: a
general CAS retreat, rural development strategy discussion, client survey feedback workshop, country
portfolio performance review, gender and decentralization and the deconcentration process.
Discussion on the CAS implementation took place during the yearly CPPRs and during the preparation
o f PRSC-1 which covered key sector reforms underpinning the growth agenda.

D.

The Role of IFC

88.
The FY04 CAS was not a joint WBG strategy; however, IFC was involved in various aspects
o f the M a l i CAS implementation. IFC’s strategy focused on (i)
integrating the IFC/IDA micro-, smalland medium-sized enterprise (MSME) program; (ii)improving the enabling environment for SMEs
and provision o f business development services to SMEs; and (iii)
contributing financial support with
IDA and other donors to the energy sector.
89.
The joint I D N I F C M S M E program included the Sources o f Growth project, which focused on
SME development. Through this project, selected commercial banks will benefit from IDA/IFC’s
partial guarantee on a new portfolio o f loans to SMEs. The TA provided will help banks undertake
operations profitably. Two banks have been selected and are being appraised by IFC, and the TA
provider has been pre-selected. The IFC also supported the Training Entrepreneurship Program

- 65 -

(STEP) for hands-on capacity building to micro and small enterprises. The program assisted more than
4,000 entrepreneurs in 7 regions (Bamako, Kati, Koulikoro, Sikasso, Segou, Mopti, and Koutiala). The
program i s integrated with IDA’SGrowth Support Project and the Ministry o f Investment Promotion,
with a plan to expand to Timbuktu and other regions o f Mali. IFC was involved in the West African
Capital Markets, and it issued a 22 billion CFA franc denominated bond in the WAEMU countries.
The IFC issue was distributed in all o f the 8 countries and WAEMU, and the bond’s proceeds were
invested in 4 projects in the region, including 1 in Mali.

nII.

LESSONS
LEARNED
AND RECOMMENDATIONS

A. Lessons Learned
The following lessons have been drawn from the sector assessment
90. Ambitious targets. The CAS supported a program that posed significant challenges. Given the size
o f the program, most o f the targets set were extremely ambitious. Some targets under different
objectives were taken directly from the government’s PRSF targets, which are very broad and difficult
to influence and to achieve during the CAS period. For example, PRSF’s target date to reduce poverty
(2006) was more ambitious than the MDG target date (20 15).
91.
Not a results-based CAS. The CAS was not results focused and had no instruments for
monitoring and evaluation. Some performance indicators lacked baseline data; therefore, it was very
difficult to monitor and measure progress made during the CAS period. PRSF progress reports and
Joint Staff Assessments (JSAN) were prepared; however, no progress on CAS benchmarks was
monitored or reported.
92. Lack of synergy among operations. Some projects had multi-sector components, but the Bank’s
sector staff worked largely independently. There was lack o f coordination o f joint missions and
meetings to achieve set targets. Lack o f coordination was due to insufficient incentives and leverage to
work in cross-sectoral teams. For example, both the rural development and transport sectors had a
rural infrastructure component in their projects.
B. Recommendations

93.
The Bank needs to adopt a realistic and results-oriented approach. The CAS did not have
a clear agenda for supporting the government’s PRSF, which had broader objectives. The Bank’s
future strategy should focus o n results that are feasible based on the country’s condition and IDA
resources. The Bank‘s program needs to become more effective and more focused through selectivity,
consolidated investment operations, pursuit o f program-based approaches, better alignment with
country policies and institutions, and stronger collaboration with government and other donors on
ESW. The CAS outcomes need to be responsive to the client’s capacity and institutional and political
contexts.
94.
Synergies need to be created among the Bank’s sector programs and within the World
Bank Group, Even though many o f the Bank’s objectives in the FY04-06 CAS were multi sectoral
and cross-cutting, sector staff worked within silos. One exception i s the synergies which have
developed between the PRSC program and specific TA and some investment lending operations.
However, between sector activities, there was very little synergy. Further strengthening i s essential.
There i s a need to create strategic links among the Bank’s instruments, particularly among the sector
operations. IDA also needs to work more closely with IFC and MIGA to promote private sector
growth, and with WBI to build capacity.

- 66 -

95.
T o create optimal results, the analytical work needs to sequence better with lending
operations (investment and programmatic) and policy dialogue. The new CAS needs to align well
with disseminated analytical work and policy dialogue needs to support a well-defined CAS program.
Analytic work could be launched jointly with GoM, research institutions in the country, and
development partners. Thus, the Bank’s analytical work can be enhanced by continuing to strengthen
outreach and dissemination.

96.

Create a CAS performance monitoring system and align with Government’s GPRSF
monitoring system. The CAS did not have a results framework that could be monitored to take timely
corrective actions and ensure results on the ground. The future CAS needs to select a limited number
o f core medium-term outcomes supporting the government’s GPRSF and the Bank’s proposed lending
and AAA work. The Bank must put in place a monitoring system that enables the government and
development partners to jointly monitor progress on the program.

97.
The Bank needs to continue to work closely with development partners in fostering the
harmonization and alignment agenda. The Bank should introduce the norm that analytical work i s
planned and done jointly with national actors and other development partners in the sector and that the
results are shared with the widest possible range o f stakeholders. Comparative advantage and
selectivity have become key criteria for the Bank’s business model. Thus, the Bank should foster
collaborative assistance strategies, both at the country level and in the sectors, which will be important
tools for the division o f labor among the development partners.
98.
Understanding o f the underpinnings of shared growth must be improved, especially in
the rural sector. The CAS did not address enough key issues that hamper agricultural growth. A clear
strategy in this sector i s imperative.

- 67 -

9
e,

0

a

a

a

a

a

a

a

a

a

a

a

a

a

a

a

a

a

I

0
I
I

. .

*.

. .

.

0

.

.

I

Appendix 2 (a): Planned vs. Delivered Program
Planned I D A Lending Program and Actual Deliveries (FY04-07)

CAS Planned Lending

$m

HIV/AIDS*
SAC-3 Supplemental*
Interim Transport**

15
15
38.7

Global Distance Learning *
Household Energy
SAC-4
Total

2.5
35.8
55
162

Actual Lending
FY04
HIViAIDS MAP*
SAC-3 Supplemental*
Transport Corridor**

Sources o f Growth

55

Development Learning Center*
Household Energy
Postponed to FY05
Total
GEF - Household Energy
FYOJ
Growth Support**

Rural CBD
Agricultural Diversification &
Competitiveness

50
35

Postponed to FY06
Postponed to FY06

Total

140

Transport Sector 2
PRSCl

63
25

Total

88

SAC-4 (changed from multi-year operation to
single operation and split into two operations,
SAC I V and EPPFMC)
Total
GEF Gourma Biodiversity Conservation
FY06
Postponed to F Y 0 7
Postponed to FY07
Economic Policy & Public Finance
Management
Rural Community Development
Agriculture Competitiveness &
Diversification
TotaI

$m

25.5
15
48.7
(15.9 grants)
2.5
35.7
127.4
3.5
55
(35.5 grants)

25

80
5.5

25
60
46.4
131.4

PRSC 1
45
Education Sector Investment Program
35
Transport Sector 2
90
N o indicative lending for F Y 0 7
20
PASAOP Supplemental
15
Education Sector Investment Supplemental
Total
205
*: Operations planned to be f i l l y financed by IDA Grants; **: Operations planned to be partially financed by IDA Grants.

- 71 -

Appendix 2 (b): Planned AAA Program and Actual Deliveries (FY04-07)
FY

CAS Plan

Actual

FY04
FY04
PRSP Progress Report 1 Review
IDF Support to Min. Women
CEM/Sources o f Growth with Equity
JSDF Support to NGOs
UNDP Roundtable Preparation

Support to PER (CNS)/MTEF (TA)

Economic Sector Work
Delivered in June 2004
Dropped
Slipped to FY07
Slipped to FY07
N o information found
Private Sector Strategy Note Delivered in March 2004
Transport Support - Delivered in April 2004
HNP Country Status Report - Delivered in April 2004
Trade DTIS I F Study - Delivered in June 2004
CPAR - Delivered in June 2004
Macro Economic Impact o f Climate Assessment - Delivered
in June 2004
Technical Assistance (including TFs)
Delivered in June 2004
Mopti Area Biodiversity (IFAD) - Delivered in June 2004
Improving Public Finance Management and Preparing the
Government’s Action Plan- Delivered in June 2004

-

FY05
HealthEducation
Urban
PRSP Progress Report 2 Review
Strategic Gender Assessment
CPPR
STATCAP

Economic Sector Work
Health Service Utilization Study Delivered in October 2004
Slipped to FY06
Delivered in December 2005
Slipped to FY06
Delivered in January 2005
No information found
Poverty Assessment Delivered - 12/3 1/04
Inv. Climate Assessment Delivered - 6/16/05
Niger River Basin Support Delivered - 6130105
Technical Assistance (including TFs)
JSDF Legal Aid NGOs (Delivered in April 2005
Mali-Integration & Comp. Study Delivered in January 2005
Senegal River Basin - Delivered in June 2005

-

-

-

-

-

FY06
Economic Sector Work
Delivered in December 2004 (FY05)
Poverty Assessment
Delivered in June 2005 (FY05)
Niger River Basin Support
Slipped to FY07
PRSP 2 Review
N/A
Regional Program Traditional Energy Sector
Support to PRIS Delivered in September 2006
Urban Sector Stocktaking Delivered in May 2006
Gender Assessment Delivered in February 2006
Education Country Status Report - Delivered in May 2006
CPPR Delivered October 2005 and May 2006
Technical Assistance (including TFs)
Integrated Framework (IF) Follow-up - Delivered in June

-

-

2006

PER- PEMFAR
PRSP 2 (JSAN)

Economic Sector Work
Moved to FY08
Slipped to FY08.

- 72 -

-

Appendix 2(c): Mali Regional lending FY04-07

M a l i Regional Project
,

...

.'.f
. .

.ii . 3 . '

J

L

. *,

"

,

,

~

GEF - Senegal River Basin

Total Committed Amount

IDA Amount Disbursed for Mali

($ mil)

($ mil)

NO4
5.3

0

The entire amount was lent to
Banque Ouest Africaine de
DPvelovement

W A E M U Capital Markets
Development Project

96.4

Africa Emereencv Locust Proiect

10.2

4.0

West and Central Africa Air
Transport Safety and Security

5.5

0.537

Senegal River Basin Multi-purpose
Water Resource Development Project

30.8

2.6

75

0

West Africa Power Pool APL2

- 73 -

APPENDIX3

Mali a t a glance

10116/07

Key D e v e l o p m e n t I n d i c a t o r s
Mall

SubSaharan
Africa

Low
income

2,403
29,215
1.8
30

Age distribution, 2006

(2006)

Female

Population, mid-year (millions)
Surface area (thousand sq. km)
Population growth (56)
Urban population (% of total population)

13.9
1,240
3.0
33

770
24,265
2.3
36

GNI (Atlas method, US$ billions)
GNi percapita (Atlas method, US$)
GNI per capita (PPP, international $)

5.5
400
1,130

648
842
2,032

1,562
650
2,698

5.3
2.3

5.6

8.0
6.1

72 '
72
41
122
33

41
72
47
96
29

Adult literacy, male (Oh of ages 15 and older)
Adult literacy, female (Oh of ages 15 and older)
Gross primary enrollment, male (% of age group)
Gross primary enrollment, female ( O h of age group)

33
16
66
50

69
50
98
86

72
50
108
96

Access to an improved water source (Oh of population)
Access to improved sanitation facilities (% of population)

48
45

56
37

75
38

GDP growth (%)
GDP per capita growth (%)

3.2

1

17&74
60-64
50-54
40-44
30-34
20-24

10-14

I

0-4

30

20

10

10

0

30

20

oarcent

(most recent esUmate, 200&2008)
Poverty headcount ratio at $1 a day (PPP, %)
Poverty headcount ratio at $2 a day (PPP. %)
Life expectancy at birth (years)
Infant mortality (per 1,000 live births)
Child malnutrition (% of children under 5)

r
Under-5 mortality rate (per 1,000)

59
75

l9sO

1995

(US$ millions)
Net ODA and official aid
Top 3 donors (in 2005):
France
Netherlands
United States
Aid (Oh of GNI)
Aid per capita (US$)

1980

1990

zoo0

2006

262

479

359

69 1

45
13
23

129
35
30

98
43
56

90

14.8
38

19.9
54

14.9
31

13.6
51

Growth of GDP and GDP per capita (Oh)

-

15

66

58

Long-Term Economlc T r e n d s

10

1
90

Consumer prices (annual % change)
GDP Implicit deflator (annual % change)
Exchange rate (annual average, local per US$)
Terms of trade index (2000 = 100)

16.3

4.9

-0.7
5.6

211.3
102

272.3
144

705.0
100

0.6

2005

OSub-Saharan Afnca

OMall

Net A i d F l o w s

20W

1.5
4.1
522.9
114

95

--O-GDP

00

-GDP

05

per capita

1980-90 1990-2000
2000-06
(average annual gmwth X )

Population, mid-year (millions)
GDP (US$ millions)

7.0
1,787

8.9
2,421

11.6
2,446

13.9
5.866

2.4
0.8

2.7
4.1

3.0
5.7
5.0

Agriculture
Industry
Manufacturing
Services

48.3
13.2
6.5
38.5

("A of GDP)
45.5
15.9
8.5
38.6

41.6
20.6
3.8
37.9

36.9
24.0
3.1
39.1

3.3
4.3
6.8
1.9

2.6
6.4
-1.4
3.0

6.3

Household final consumption expenditure
General gov't final consumption expenditure
Gross capital formation

87.4
11.6
15.5

80.3
13.8
23.0

79.4
8.6
24.6

67.4
9.9
22.9

0.6
7.9
3.6

3.2
3.2
0.4

1.1
21.9
6.3

Eqorts of goods and selyices
Imports of goods and services
Gross savings

14.7
29.1
1.2

17.1
33.7
15.1

26.8
39.4
15.6

32.1
40.2
14.1

4.8
6.6

9.9
3.5

6.6
4.1

Note: Figures in italics are for years other than those specified. 2006 data are preliminary. .. indicates data are not available
a. Country poverty estimate is for earlier period. b. A d data are for 2005.
Development Economics, Development Data Group (DECDG)

- 74 -

4.8
5.3

Mali
Balance of Payments and Trade

2000

2006

Governance indicators, 2000 and 2006

(US$ miliions)
Total merchandise exports (fob)
Total merchandiseimports (cif)
Net trade in goods and services

547
595
-324

1,570
438
-142

Voice and accountability

Current account balance
as a % of GDP

-227
-9.3

-245
-4.2

Regulatory quality

73

155

381

977

Workers’ remittances and
compensation of employees (receipts)
Reserves,including gold

Political stability

Rule of law
Control of corruption
0

02006

Central Government Finance

n2ooo

(% of GDP)
Current revenue (including grants)
Tax revenue
Current expenditure

15.7
13.1
11.6

51.8
15.6
13.4

Overall surplusldeficit

-6.6

29.2

25

50

75

100

Country 5 percentile rank (0-100)
higher value^ rmply bsllar rtllingr

Source Kaufrnann-Kraay-Msstrupi World Bdnk

Highest marginal tax rate (%)
Individual
Corporate

Technology and Infrastructure

2000

2005

Paved roads (% of total)
Fixed line and mobile phone
subscribers (per 1,000 people)
High technology exports
(% of manufacturedexports)

12.1

18.0

5
10.3

External Debt and Resource Flows
Environment
(US$ millions)
Total debt outstanding and disbursed
Total debt service
Debt relief (HIPC, MDRI)

2.980
94
667

1,436
80
985

Total debt (“h of GDP)
Total debt service (% of exports)

121 8
13.0

24.5
42

82

0

0

0

Foreign direct investment (net inflows)
Portfolio equity (net inflows)

Agricultural land (% of land area)
Forest area (% of land area)
Nationally protected areas (% of land area)

32
10.8

32

..

3.7

..

4,438

Freshwater resources per capita (cu. meters)
Freshwaterwithdrawal (% of internal resources)

10.9

C 0 2 emissions per capita (mt)

0.05

0.04

GDP per unit of energy use
(2000 PPP $ per kg of oil equivalent)
Zornposition of total external debt, 2005
Short-term 17
private

Energy use per capita (kg of oil equivalent)

5

1424

LIMF.109
J S I millions

Private Sector Development
Time required to start a business (days)
Cost to start a business ( O h of GNI per capita)
Time required to register property (days)
Ranked as a major constraint to business
(Oh of managers surveyed who agreed)
Access to/cost of financing
Corruption

2000

2006

-

42
201.9
33

..

63.6
48.7

..

Stock market capitalization(% of GDP)
Bank capital to asset ratio (Oh)
Note: Figures in italics are for years other than those specified. 2006 data are preliminary
., indicates data are not available. -indicates observationis not applicable.
Development Economics, Development Data Group (DECDG)

- 75 -

10/16/07

Millennium Development Goals

Mali

With selected targets fo achieve between 1990 and 2015
(estimate closest to date shown, +/- 2 years)

Goal 1: halve the rates for
-___-._____

$1 a day poverty and malnutrition
Poverty headcount ratio at $1 a day (PPP, % of population)
Poverty headcount ratio at national poverty line (YOof population)
Share of income or consumptionto the poorest qunttile (%)
Prevalence of malnutrition (% of children under 5)

Goal_2: ensure that children are able to complete primary schooling
-

-

Primary school enrollment (net, %)
Primary completion rate (% of relevant age group)
Secondary school enrollment (gross, %)
Youth literacy rate (76 of people ages 15-24)

Goal 3: eliminate gender disparity in education and empower women
__--

Ratio of girls to boys in primary and secondary education (%)
Women employed in the nonagriculturalsector (% of nonagriculturalemployment)
Proportion of seats held by women in national parliament ( O h )

Goal 4: reduce under-5 mortality by two-thirds
Under-5 mortality rate (per 1,000)
Infant mortality rate (per 1,000 live births)
Measles immunization (proportion of one-year olds immunized, %)
Goal 5: reduce maternal mortality by three-fourths
Maternal mortality ratio (modeled estimate, per 100,000 live births)
Births attended by skilled health staff (% of total)
Goal 6 : halt and begin to reverse the spread of HIV/AIDS and other major diseases
Prevalence of HIV (% of population ages 15-49)
Contraceptive prevalence (% of women ages 15-49)
Incidence of tuberculosis (per 100,000 people)
Tuberculosis cases detected under DOTS ( O h )
Goal 7 : halve the proportion of people without sustainable access to basic needs
Access to an improved water source (% of population)
Access to improved sanitation facilities (% of population)
Forest area (% of total land area)
Nationally protected areas (% of total land area)
CO2 emissions (metric tons per capita)
GDP per unit of energy use (constant 2000 PPP $ per kg of oil equivalent)
Goal 8: develop a global partnership for development Fixed line and mobile phone subscribers (per 1,000 people)
internet users (per 1,000 people)
Personal computers (per 1.OOO people)
Youth unemployment (% of total labor force ages 15-24)

tducation indicators (%)
75

1

$2

Jleasles immunization (% of I-year olds)

3 1 indicators (per 1,000 people)

100,

201

75

w

i
I

i
' I

O

L

.

,

20w

,
2002

,

1

,

~

2005
1990

-+-Primary

:

1995

2000

2005

20w

2002

2005

net enrollment ratio

-4%Ratio of girls to boys in primary 8

DMali

:1 Sub-Saharan Africa

secondary education

Note: Figures in italics are for years other than those specified. .. indicates data are not available.
Development Economics, Development Data Group (DECDG).

- 76 -

fl Fixed + mobile subscnbers
nlnternet users

10116/07

APPENDIX 4: TRENDS
IN POVERTY
1.
This appendix analyzes poverty trends in M a l i from 200 1 to 2006. This period was marked by
good growth performance, in part linked to large private and public investment flows as well as an
increase in exports (gold and cotton). In 2002, the real GDP growth rate reached 4.4 percent. In 2003,
thanks to a record crop year, growth soared to 7.7 percent. The year 2004 was marked by an invasion
o f locusts and low rainfall, causing a fall in growth to 2.8 percent and a large food deficit, as well as
inflation in the following year. Recently, the economy has suffered from fluctuations in the price o f
oil, unstable prices for the main export products and the continuing crisis in CBte d’Ivoire. These
factors contributed to a growth estimated at 5.3 percent for 2006 compared to 6.1 percent in 2005. In
total, taking into account an estimated population growth rate o f about 2.5 percent per year for the
period 2001-2006, the Malian economy witnessed an aggregate cumulative GDP growth rate per
capita o f 12.4 percent between 2001 and 2006. We can therefore expect poverty to have fallen
significantly.
2.
Two methods were used to calculate the poverty thresholds. The first method was based on
previous work by the D N S I using the EMEP with the poverty threshold determined using the caloric
energy method. This method gave a poverty threshold o f 144,022 CFAF per person per year in
2001/02 and a poverty headcount o f 68.3 percent (share o f the poor in the total population). In light o f
the evolution o f the cost o f living (according to data for the consumer price index), the comparable
poverty threshold was 157,920 CFAF per person per year in 2006. Estimations based on the E L I M
suggest a fall in the share of the poor population to 64.4 percent according to this first method for
measuring poverty.

200 1

2006

population

Poverty
incidence,
method 1

population

Poverty
incidence,
method 1

National
Place of residence

100

68.3

55.6

100

64.4

47.5

Urban
Rural

26.2
73.8

37.4
79.2

24.1
66.8

31.7
68.3

31.8
79.5

25.5
57.6

30.2
18.4
31.9
8.8
10.7

76.2
81.8
71.4
51.3
27.5

65.1
80.1
51.9
30.8
17.6

29.4
18.0
33.9
8.5
10.2

61.5
81.7
75.2
57.9
11.0

44.7
80.8
48.7
29.0
7.9

YO

Poverty
incidence,
method 2

YO

Poverty
incidence,
method 2

Grouped regions

Kayes-Koulikoro
Sikasso
Mopti-Sdgou
Tombouctou-Gao-Kidal
Bamako

3.
However, in light o f the poverty estimations carried out in other West African countries, the
poverty incidence o f 68.3 percent in 2001/02 was relatively high. Indeed, this rate would mean that
M a l i i s the poorest country in the franc zone, a finding which i s unrealistic given the fact that some
other countries have per capita GDP levels which are significantly lower than in Mali. Using the
2001/02 data, a new poverty threshold was calculated according to the cost o f basic needs method. The
~

Poverty estimates are based on two household surveys carried out by the Direction Nationale de l a Statistique
et de I’Informatique (DNSI): the EMEP 2001/02 (“enqubte malienne pour l’dvaluation de la pauvret6”) and the
ELIM 2006 (“enqubte legere intdgrke auprks des mdnages”). These two surveys differ somewhat from one
another, but the data are sufficiently comparable to enable us to analyse the poverty trends.

- 77 -

resulting poverty threshold was lower than that obtained in previous works (130,458 CFAF per person
per year in Bamako) and it varied according to the geographic location o f the households. According
to this new poverty line, the headcount of poverty fell more significantly between 2001 and 2006.
While 55.6 percent of Malians had been living below this alternative poverty threshold in 2001, the
headcount fell to 47Spercent by 2006. Still, even with these alternative estimates, the number ofpoor
people continued to rise over time due to population growth. Specifically, the number o f poor people
rose from 5,687 million in 2001 to 5,841 million in 2006.

4.
Although the national poverty trend would seem to be reasonable and heading in the right
direction, we are less conJident with regard to poverty trends among sub-groups of the population, in
particular with respect to the place of residence. The results obtained using the two different methods
differ in some cases. The first method suggests that poverty has fallen mostly in urban areas, whereas
the second method suggests a fall primarily in rural areas. With regard to regions, the fall in poverty o f
between 15 and 20 percentage points recorded in the Kayes-Koulikoro regions seems to be very high.
Generally, a fall o f this magnitude i s observed when a regional economy experienced fundamental
changes and recorded very high growth levels, which i s not the case in Mali. The fall in poverty i s just
as significant in Bamako, whereas in MoptilSegou, Tombouctou/Gao/Kidal and Sikasso, it i s much
lower or even negative depending on the type o f measurement used. More generally, the fact that
certain poverty trends concerning the region or area of residence (urban or rural) depend on the
method used indicates that a large part of the population lives close to the poverty threshold. This
conclusion suggests that, even if the poverty incidence has fallen, the households that have become
non poor probably are s t i l l highly vulnerable to economic fluctuations in their sectors o f activity or
area o f residence.

5.
The evolution of the incidence of poverty according to regions and household occupations can
be linked to GDP trends per sector. The case o f agriculture i s particularly important as the majority o f
the population s t i l l depends on this sector o f activity. In 2005, the primary sector recorded a growth in
volume o f 5.1 percent. Food crop production totalled 3,367,200 tonnes (millet, sorghum, paddy rice
and corn), representing an increase o f 18.4 percent in 2005-06 versus the previous year. These good
results can be explained by favorable climatic conditions, government’s anti-locust measures,
implementation o f irrigation projects, and distribution o f improved varieties o f rice and corn.
According to the cost o f basic needs approach (method 2), these good results seem to have lowered
poverty in rural areas. The exception i s the poorer performance o f the cotton sector, as noted by high
rates o f poverty in the Sikasso area. Probably due in part to lower prices paid to producers, cotton
production fell from 585,014 tonnes in 2004 to 534,000 tonnes and 410,370 tonnes in 2005 and 2006,
respectively. These are declines o f 8.7 percent and 23.1 percent, respectively. Cotton’s lower producer
price helps explain the absence o f a fall in poverty in the Sikasso region.
6.
Generally, the growth recorded in Mali in recent years has led to a fall in poverty, and has
been more or less neutral with regard to inequality trends. The consumption growth rate o f the poor
population has been similar to that o f wealthier people. With regard to future reduction in poverty, the
Bank has prepared four scenarios, each based on a hypothetical GDP per capita growth rate. The
underlying assumption i s that growth in GDP per capita will be more or less reflected directly in
changing levels o f household consumption but will not change inequality. A growth rate in GDP per
capita o f 3 percent i s slightly above the rate observed in the country over the past 5 years. Under such
a growth rate, the poverty headcount would be approximately 37 percent in 2015 (based on a rate of
47.5 percent in 2006) (table 4.1). In contrast, a per capita growth rate o f 4 percent would lower the
poverty incidence to approximately 30 percent in 2015. Nevertheless, WB must remain prudent in
using such simulations. For example, due mainly to low world cotton prices, the cotton sector i s
experiencing difficulties that may slow poverty reduction. In addition, the country i s s t i l l dependent on
a range o f exogenous factors, including unforeseen climatic events, which can cause a fall in growth
for certain years, and thereby slow poverty reduction.

- 78 -

APPENDIX 5. MALI’S REFORM AGENDAAND GROWTH
-ORIENTED SECTORS
1.
The GPRSF is supported by a reform program and key traditional growth-oriented sectors as
well as new areas for future growth engines. The following reform program will need to be more
explicit regarding private sector productivity growth, public sector efficiency, and improvement in
service delivery o f public goods. N e w sectors identified with strong potential to increase Mali’s
growth if necessary measures are taken are industry, trade, tourism, fruits, vegetables and oil plants,
handicraft, culture, and youth and sports.

2.
Development of infrastructure and productive sectors. The main sources to accelerate growth
are the rural production subsectors,’ mining, trade, tourism, handicraft and culture. In particular,
increases in agricultural productivity are expected to play a critical role in achieving poverty reduction
targets. The government will work to (a) increase the private sector’s role in public enterprises,
(b) promote financial sector development, (c) improve access and reduce the cost o f electricity by
strengthening the management o f EDM and by investing in transmission and generation, and
(d) improve the investment environment. With regard to the Financial Sector Development Strategy,
M a l i envisages consolidating the bank restructuring and privatization, strengthening microfinance
supervision and institutions, and reforming the social security system and other measures to increase
access to financial services.
3.
The public sector reform includes (a) decentralizing and deconcentrating administrative
services to bring the administration closer to the people, (b) reforming the judiciary to reinforce the
rule o f law, (c) adopting anticorruption measures, (d) improving and modernizing P F M based on the
comprehensive action plan adopted in 2005, and (e) reforming the financial sector to enhance business
efficiency.
4.
Social sectors. K e y actions in the education sector aim to (a) reduce regional and gender
inequality and strengthen education quality, (b) take measures to increase education opportunities, and
meet the needs o f the labor market, and (c) proceed to further decentralize education management. The
second five-year Health and Social Development program focuses on (a) improving geographic access
to essential health services and availability o f qualified human resources, (b) reducing health expenses
for poor, and (c) reforming hospitals and other research health structures.
5.
The mining sector will continue to play a key role in the Malian economy. It will focus on
researching gold and o i l with expectations o f increased revenue as a share o f GDP, creating
employment for youth, increasing incomes o f traditional gold exploiters, and developing the gold
exploitation area.

6.
The transport sector i s expected to contribute to internal and external accessibility through
efficient and sustainable transport management and facilitation. Proposed transport measures include
building capacity among the transport sector stakeholders, modernizing o f the public transport vehicle
fleet, and implementing transport laws and safety. In air transport, the strategy proposes to improve air
freight, heighten security to meet international standards, abolish export duties on meat, f r u i t s and
vegetables, and evaluate the airport’s refrigeration facilities.

Growth in the rural sector will be achieved through developing agro ecological and pastoral skills, emphasizing the
development o f dry cereals, rice, cotton, fruits, vegetables, and beef, Cotton will continue to be an important sector during the
CAS period. The National Development Strategy Framework i s expected to increase productivity in this sector.

- 79 -

7.
In the telecommunications/ICT sector, the proposed strategy concentrates on access to the
telecommunications and I C T network in rural and remote areas. The government will formulate a legal
and regulatory instrument for a universal access fund. The I C T strategy will be implemented first
through a pilot project before extending the I C T universal access program nation-wide.
8.
The industrial sector i s expected to contribute to Mali’s growth by processing both traditional
and nontraditional products such as fruits and vegetables, oilseed crops, cattle and meat, hides and
skin, and textile fibers. Measures include creating an investment promotion fund, developing industrial
zones, improving road infrastructure, and restructuring and upgrading industrial enterprises.

9.
The key objective in the trade sector i s to better integrate M a l i in the regional and
international markets, particularly through market diversification and product compliance with
international standards. M a l i produces several exotic fruits and vegetables for which there i s a great
demand in the European market. The strategy proposes to raise the quality o f these products to meet
international requirements.
10.
For tourism, the strategy focuses on strengthening institutional mechanisms, diversifying
tourist sites, coordinating investments to improve infrastructure, improving product quality, and
strengthening stakeholders’ activities. Additional emphases are to develop cultural sites for tourism,
increase revenue from cultural activities, and promote cultural enterprises and creative art.
11.
Measures in the handicraft sector will include establishing a mechanism for monitoring and
evaluation o f activities, establishing a legal, regulatory and fiscal framework conducive to investment,
and mobilizing local initiatives.

12.
For Youth and sports, the strategy will focus on reducing youth unemployment in rural and
urban areas and integrating youth in the society. Proposed measures will include educational
supervision, socioeconomic integration, capacity and institution building for youth supervision
structures, construction o f sports infrastructure, and training.

- 80 -

APPENDIX 6: MALI AND AID HARMONIZATION

What i s the context?

1.
M a l i signed the Paris Declaration in 2005. Recently, the government has taken several
measures to move the Paris agenda forward. A Harmonization Secretariat has been established in the
Ministry o f Finance, and a Harmonization and Alignment Action Plan has been developed with the
donor partners, which was recently adopted by the government. The secretariat will have a key role in
the programming, allocation, and monitoring aid and will coordinate the implementation o f the action
plan. The secretariat also will steer the capacity building in the concerned ministries needed to use aid
more effectively. On the donors’ side, a technical pole has been established to prepare the dialogue
with G o M and to support the development o f joint assistance tools including collaborative assistance
strategies, joint financing agreements, joint analytic work, and joint missions M a l i i s one o f the focus
countries in which the World Bank intends to move the Paris agenda forward and in which country
management has taken up the challenge, making harmonization and alignment a special priority in the
CAS. A Harmonization and Alignment unit also has been created in the Bank’s M a l i office.
Intensifying harmonization efforts also i s in line with FY03-06 CASCR recommendations.
How does the CAS intend to respond to the Paris agenda?

2.
The Paris agenda i s summarized in 5 chapters: ownership, alignment, harmonization,
management for results, and mutual accountability. The CAS addresses these chapters in multiple
ways. Ownership i s stimulated by helping the government through analytic studies and TA to improve
the poverty reduction strategy and resource allocation mechanisms, develop sector strategies and
medium-term expenditure frameworks, and build monitoring and statistical capacity. The Bank also
will support the newly created Harmonization Secretariat, but the exact terms are not yet defined.

3.
The CAS i s fully aligned with the priorities set in the GPRSF, which i s supported by the
Bank’s PRSC. Efforts are undertaken to harmonize the conditionality framework with the indicators
developed by the government. In the water and sanitation and education sectors, the sector strategies
as a whole are supported by program-based mechanisms. The Bank uses the PRSC to contribute to the
water and sanitation and health sector strategies. The education sector strategy i s s t i l l supported by a
parallel operation, to be merged into the PRSC from the next phase. For agriculture and SLM, the
Bank supports G o M to develop the sector strategy and to establish a public-private sector-wide
investment fund. During this CAS period, the Bank’s agriculture operations gradually w i l l move from
project funding to sector-wide funding through this new investment fund. At the end o f the PASAOP
(FY09), support to agricultural reforms will be merged with the PRSC. The transport sector has tried
to limit the number o f parallel PIUs by establishing one P I U for all operations.
4.
The CAS reflects the Bank’s intentions to step up i t s efforts to harmonize i t s operations with
those o f the other development partners and to be more selective by focusing on fewer sectors. These
intentions have been prepared in discussions with government and other donors while looking at the
Bank’s comparative advantage. An important decision has been made by the development partners to
prepare a collaborative CAS, which could be put in place at the end o f this CAS period. A staff
member o f the M a l i office, seconded by the Danish government for the Paris agenda, will have a key
role. As part o f the collaborative CAS process, government’s Harmonization Secretariat will lead
exercises to better divide the development partners’ support, spreading it over all relevant GPRSF
sectors based on the comparative advantages o f each donor.

5.
The Bank will lead the efforts o f the budget-support donors to put in place a joint budgetsupport framework, defining common conditionalities and setting the rules for joint reviews and joint
disbursement mechanisms. This framework should be in place from PRSC-3.

- 81 -

6.
The Bank tries to harmonize i t s transport program with E C support to this sector with three
objectives: to do joint ESW, to execute joint supervision missions, and to develop a common
performance assessment framework. In the health and education sectors, donor support i s fully
harmonized in a SWAp. In the agriculture sector, donors meet quite regularly to coordinate the parallel
activities. Although E S W in this sector i s not yet jointly done, reports are discussed, and there i s
generally a buy-in o f the results.

7.
As the Bank’s operations are very much aligned with government’s priorities, mutual
accountability i s generally a crucial guiding principle for the way the Bank operates. In the sectors
with SWAPS, joint operations, and whose operations’ results and conditionality frameworks are very
much grounded in the government’s results frameworks, conditions have been created to reach fully
mutual accountability.
What are the challenges for this CAS-period?

8.
The Bank’s biggest challenge in particular for the agriculture, transport, energy, and financial
sectors, i s to strengthen the capacity o f permanent country institutions and the country’s financial
management mechanisms. The objective i s to increasingly use these systems while moving away from
parallel implementation units and specific procedures. Supporting sector ministries to develop
program-based approaches can be very helpful in this respect. Both limiting the number of parallel
implementation units and stimulating program-based approaches are key Paris Declaration principles
for the WBG.

9.
The specific challenge for the agriculture sector i s to gradually transfer implementation
responsibility to the public and private actors in the sector, and to the newly created investment fund.
The transport sector must accomplish harmonization with a not yet fully cooperative EC, prepare the
integration o f the P I U into the Ministry o f Transport, and reflect on how to align ongoing operations
with GoM’s sector strategy. The energy sector needs to support GoM in developing a sector strategy
and should work on a harmonized approach with the other donors in the sector, particularly with
respect to capacity and institution building. The financial sector i s demonstrating the implications o f
the Paris agenda for i t s operations.
10.
Another crucial challenge for all sectors i s the alignment o f the conditionality (PRSC) and
results (sectors) frameworks with government’s results frameworks. Ideally, the Bank’s matrices
should be extracted from the government’s matrices. For this reason, it i s so important to help G o M
formulate i t s policy outcomes and strategies and develop i t s monitoring frameworks and databases.
Merging the E C approach for general budget support-based on multiple tranches and a results
matrix-and the Bank’s approach-based on a single tranche and a policy and action matrix-will not
be an easy task, but has been done in other countries including Burkina Faso, Cape Verde, and
Mozambique.

11.
A challenge for the Bank, as much as for the government, i s the alignment o f the Bank-funded
regional operations with national priorities and sector programming. In the financial sector and in the
energy sector, the Bank could invest more in donor coordination and harmonization based on agreed
clear outcomes.
12.
Last, but not least, joint AAA (ESW and TA) i s a key Bank principle, and the sectors need to
invest more in it. Joint AAA includes studies and TA jointly executed or financed by different donors;
and studies and TA financed a single donor, but jointly designed upfront by government, development
partners, and other actors in the sector. It i s important that the results are accepted by the engaged
stakeholders to thus drive their actions. It could be very stimulating for the government and donors to

sit down together in the beginning o f the fiscal year, assess the AAA done, and design the work
needed in the coming year. Common visions and partnerships can be created in this way, leading to
more harmonization and alignment down the road.'

~~~

' AFD, CIDA and USAID participate in the rural finance study led by the Bank.
- 83 -

APPENDIX 8: CAS CONSULTATIONPROCESS AND COMMUNICATION STRATEGY

A.

CAS Consultations

1. CAS preparation retreat

1.
In October 2006, the Bank initiated the CAS preparation with a 2-day brainstorming session
with the government and key stakeholders (private sector, civil society and donors) to discuss what
should be the areas o f Bank’s intervention based on its comparative advantage and positioning vis-avis o f other donors.
2.
The ten ministers in attendance’ and the PTFs shared their views on the Government strategy
(GPRSF) in the next four years, areas o f focus and what would be Bank’s role in support o f the
government’s GPRSP and in relation with other donor engagement. Three working groups also were
organized based on the pillars o f the GPRSF: (a) development o f productive sectors; (b) pursuit and
consolidation o f the public sector reforms; and (c) strengthening o f social sectors.

3.
The participants concluded that the Bank should (a) stay engaged in growth-oriented sectors
and continue to accompany the government’s structural reforms for accelerated and shared growth and
improved social indicators, (b) continue to support key structuring investments in infrastructure and
agriculture, and (c) continue to play a critical role in PTF coordination.

4.
The retreat was also the opportunity for to strengthen team work within the Bank team and to
decide on the composition o f the core CAS team and o f the sectors o f focus during the CAS
preparation.
2. Consultations on the proposed CAS
5.
Following the appointment o f the new government, in mid-November 2007 the Bank carried
out regional and national consultations to discuss the proposed new CAS, i t s principles, approach and
program and to receive feedback from all the Malian stakeholders on the relevance o f the strategy visa-vis o f the growth and poverty reduction challenges spelled out in the GPRSF. Participants to the
consultations included representatives from the local and national level o f the civil society, private
sector, experts and members o f the government, and donors. Discussions have mainly centered on four
themes: growth issue, the role o f the private sector, governance and capacity development.
6.
Participants broadly agreed on the strategic orientations o f the proposed CAS and found the
proposed Bank program appropriate to support the government in i t s objective o f 7% annual growth
during 2007-1 1. The participants also expressed interest that the Bank look at the informal sector, be
involved in the justice area, and assist to develop capacity o f the government, private sector and civil
society.

7.
The regional consultation took place in Segou with representatives from the government,
private sector and civil society coming from the Kayes, Koulikoro, Mopti, Sikasso, Segou and
Tombuctu regions. The discussions focused on the new CAS and the proposed capacity development
approach. Participants express satisfaction that the Bank consulted actors at the regional level and
shared their views on the following themes: energy, urban sanitation, agriculture and environment,
IFC role in Mali, sustainability of Bank supported activities, the role o f civil society in governance
issues, country human resource deficit, and the need for capacity development.

’

Ministers o f Economy and Finance, Planning and Land Management, Transport and Equipment, Works and City Planning,
Health, National Education, Communication and New Technologies, Energy, Hydraulics and Mines, and Agriculture.

- 85 -

8.
Discussions during the national consultation with the private sector centered on the
constraints faced by the private sector to play a key role in economic growth. Constraints mentioned
related to: (a) an administrative framework not conductive to PSD - i.e. inadequate tax structure poor
public administration performance; (b) lack o f transparency/information on public management;
(c) high cost o f factor o f production; (c) poor business environment and weak judicial system;
(d) limited access to financing for SMEs; (e) weak M&E, control and audit functions; (f) poorly
qualified labor force entailing l o w productivity; and (g) high corruption and weak governance.

9.
Participants expressed the need to tackle these issues in order to improve the business
environment, create the opportunity for the informal sector to become formal and to contribute to an
accelerated and shared growth. Given the weak M&E capacity o f the government, participants insisted
on the need that the Bank assists the government in the monitoring o f the GPRSF and suggested to put
in place a clear set o f progress and results indicators. They discussed the poor quality o f the human
resources and the need to reassess higher education programs to better align them to the evolving
requirements o f the j o b market. They also emphasized the need to accompany the privatization process
and accelerate it. Tourism and agriculture were cited as key growth sectors for which the government
should heavily invest in. The place o f commercial and subsistence agriculture was discussed. For
tourism, it was noted that the sector was lacking a coherent strategy. Finally, participants agreed that
capacity building programs for SMEs should be further developed (Le. for microfinance, long term
financing) and welcomed a tripartite dialogue among the government, private sector and civil society.
The role that IFC could play in M a l i also was discussed.
10.
The discussions during the consultation with civil society organizations (SCO) focused on the
need for SCOs to get better organized and develop capacity to be a key player in strategic discussions
with the government on reform programs and be watchful o f government’s action vis-a-vis o f
governance matters. Participants raised the importance o f better access to information and the role the
Bank can play in that effect. Following the governance presentation by the Bank, the participants
raised the importance to tackle security, corruption and transparency issues as well as the judicial
system. During the discussion on capacity development, participants stressed the need to take into
account the regional differences to best tailor any Bank’s support to capacity development. They
agreed with the key themes that the Bank proposes to work on and with the relevance o f this crosssectoral theme in the CAS to support the accelerated growth agenda o f the government.
11.
A consultation with experts o f the government was organized in preparation o f the national
consultation with the government and donors. The consultation centered on four themes: proposed
CAS and transformational growth, PSD, governance and capacity development. Following the
introductory remarks by the Minister o f Economy, Commerce and Industry which put emphasis on the
three broad objectives o f the government (annual growth o f 7%, tax burden o f 17% starting in 2008
and strong poverty reduction to reach the MDGs) and the need to tackle capacity development, weak
statistical capacity, and to strengthen partnership among PTFs, AFD discussed Mali’s economic
situation and key challenges for an accelerated growth.
12.
0

K e y comments on the proposed CAS were:
Bank intervention: the proposed Bank’s interventions were assessed as relevant. Participants
requested the Bank to pay special attention to: (a) education: need for strong support to the
education system to raise quality o f education and create better adequacy between higher
education and the j o b market; (b) private sector: need to tackle the informal sector issues for
PSD to become a key vehicle for accelerated growth; (c) rural development: tackle productivity
issue and support agriculture, fisheries and livestock; and (d) justice sector. The participants
indicated that population, environmental and regional integration issues were o f key importance.
The country manager indicated that the selectivity in the Bank program will be reflected through

0

0

0

0

13.
0

0

0

0

0

0
0

the lending pipeline which proposes a PRSC to accompany reforms in key sectors and one
sectoral investment operation per fiscal year.
Governance, capacity development and donor coordination for increased aid effectiveness are
considered key challenges
Monitoring and Evaluation: participants asked for Bank support to help develop national
capacity to monitor programs and results and that the support to statistical capacity be
highlighted.
Paris Declaration agenda: it was noted that the PTFs were in a transition phase with the start o f
the process toward a joint country strategy which need a joint adaptation on how to better work
and complement all the interventions in the country.
Areas where Bank intervention should be better spelled out in the CAS or proposed to be
considered for Bank intervention: (a) gender promotion - activities/programs at the project
level; (b) culture: importance o f capacity development in the sector - Bank involved in arts and
crafts, tourism. AFD, EU, and the Netherlands involved in the culture sector; (c) regional
economic programs o f WAEMU and BCEAO.
Comments on PSD centered on:
Informal sector and value chain: need to put in place the appropriate legal and regulatory
framework to encourage informal sector to become formal. Participants highlighted the
importance o f the informal sector in the economy and the role o f women in this sector.
Value chain and intra industry cooperation: need to improve value chain for efficient gain o f the
chain and better (valorization) o f local products (i.e., artisanal mining).
Decentralized financial systems: need to develop new instruments to increase access and to
strengthen microfinance institutions.
ICTs: need to accelerate ICTs in all sectors to contribute to increased service supply and
economic activity
Human resource capacity: weak HR capacity contributing to l o w productivity and constraint to
PSD. Need to develop a 10-year employment and vocational training program.
N e w growth-oriented sectors: look at new growth-oriented sectors like solar energy and bio fuel.
Areas where Bank intervention should be better spelled out in the CAS or proposed to be
considered for Bank intervention: (a) Doing business: operationalize reforms to improve
investment climate; (b) look at possibilities for IFC financing and for guarantees from MIGA;
(c) support to legal and judicial framework, in particular property rights; (c) boost dialogue
between public and private sector.

After a brief presentation on governance by the Bank, the M o F clarified key governance
14.
actions taken by the Authorities in different areas like the financing o f political parties, Parliamentary
control, “verificateur general”, EITI adherence. Emphasis was put on the importance to develop a
strong working relationship between the government and donors to support implementation o f the
reforms taken (analysis o f constraints and priority areas, capacity development actions) to get tangible
results in public financial management and quality o f public services. On top o f economic
governance, the government expressed i t s interest that the Bank be involved in the justice area, public
administration restructuring (deconcentration and decentralization), capacity development in M&E for
the administration, e-governance (technology infrastructure development).

15.
Following WBI presentation on capacity development, participants expressed the importance
to link initiatives from donors on capacity development initiatives with the government’s framework
(PDI, CDI) and for the government to fully internalize (appropriation) capacity development activities
from donors. It was noted that the Malian Diaspora could play a key role by better mobilizing i t s
competencies. The proposed areas o f focus for Bank intervention were deemed appropriate. The
government also would like the Bank to pay special attention to capacity development for statistics,

- 87 -

the monitoring o f the GPRSF and Paris Declaration, secondary and higher education and private sector
and civil society. It was also suggested to include capacity development components in Bank projects
and programs.

16.
The Bank team provided responses on how the proposed strategy would address critical issues
that all stakeholders agree the Bank i s competent for. Participating donors shared their views for
complementary actions in sustaining the government's GPRSF.
B.

Communications strategy

17.
In addition to the consultation and dissemination efforts directly tied to the CAS, the Bank
proposes to undertake a pilot program in M a l i that will use radio to build public understanding o f
some o f the critical issues underlying the CAS. The activities will be designed to advance a culture o f
evidence-based debate on development issues. The program will be piloted through partnerships with
broadcasters that will air a series o f interactive discussions o f development issues. The Bank would
support the efforts with provision o f a basic framework, the preparation o f fact-sheets on key issues,
identification o f subject experts in and outside the Bank, and capacity-building for the participating
broadcasters. The Bank also will support monitoring and evaluation efforts that will assist a process o f
capturing the benefits and impact o f the programs, as well as ways they might fall short o f their goals.
18.
The goal o f the program i s to advance a more informed debate on development issues. Client
surveys indicate that certain gaps and misunderstandings often cloud the debate around certain policy
choices. Thus, we will be supplementing the basic communication on Bank-financed projects and
strategies, with a broader effort to build awareness o f the underlying development realities in Mali,
and the tradeoffs and policy choices that face decision makers. The challenge for the Bank and the
Government i s that o f developing the capabilities to learn from these debates.
19.
The approach will address the findings o f the 2007 M a l i Client survey which indicated that
(a) there i s an imbalance in familiarity with the Bank's work between local/regional level o f public
administration, trade unions and academia and the central level o f administration as well as between
residents in rural areas and Bamako; and (b) there i s need to promote a shared vision o f the country
development priorities beyond government circles as NGO, labor unions and academia do not consider
the priorities o f the CAS to be the right ones. The approach relies on knowledge sharing where the
Bank will partake i t s knowledge on the various aspects o f development and learn from the various
constituents o f society as well as be informed from operations and practices undertaken by the various
development actors, from the local community all the way to central government departments.

20.
The communication strategy will promote the emergence o f a self-sustaining culture o f lively
and facts based debates on issues of concern to citizens. Sustainability entails relying on organizations
/ individuals that have an incentive to organize debates on an ongoing basis. Those incentives might be
economic in nature: increased audience for media entities that run talk shows, recognition by peers in
the case o f individuals, institutional prestige or the fulfillment o f institutional goals in the case of
associations, think-thanks, research groups, etc. Providing a space for citizens to participate in the
discussion o f issues that affect their life, capturing and sharing this knowledge will advance the cause
o f development.
2 1.
The program will be carried out through existing media organizations whose capabilities to
schedule and run, on an ongoing basis, debates on a variety o f topics that are well researched and
documented will be strengthened. As the program takes root and the media profession comes to
appreciate the benefits inherent in the new approach, we will see the emergence o f a specialized press
that covers sector specific, facts based reporting/programs.

- 88 -

APPENDIX 9: REGIONALINTEGRATION
A.

Current Assistance

1.
As a small and landlocked economy, M a l i has a keen interest in regional integration. Most o f
the ongoing Bank-supported regional initiatives in which M a l i participates relate to the accelerated and
shared growth agenda. They aim at improving the country’s competitiveness and at diversifying its
production base. These programs complement and strengthen national actions.
2.
Programs from which M a l i benefits include connection to the West Africa (WA) Power Pool,
harmonization o f country policies and regulatory frameworks (telecommunications, agriculture, and
financial services), water resource development o f the Niger and Senegal Rivers, strengthening road
transport corridors, and strengthening the regional payments system.

3.
Most o f these initiatives are in their early implementation stages. Some o f these regional
programs are part o f the WA Economic and Monetary Union (WAEMU) REP and are implemented
under the coordination o f either WAEMU or the Banque Ouest Africaine de Developpement (BOAD).
Other fall under the Organisation de M i s e en Valeur du fleuve Senegal (OMVS) and Niger Basin
Authority (NBA) programs and are coordinated by these institutions. Programs whose implementation
o f a Mali-specific component i s coordinated by national authorities include the locust project, the
aviation safety and security program, and the WA agricultural productivity program.
4.
The M a l i Regional portfolio i s composed o f 10 projects, 6 o f which are adaptable program
loans (APLs). Total commitments are $626 million; o f these, $101 million correspond to direct M a l i
components. Overall implementation o f the regional portfolio i s satisfactory. The WAEMU capital
markets project, implemented by the BOAD, i s unsatisfactory and being restructured. The portfolio i s
relatively young (averaging less than 2 years) and, due to long effectiveness delays, disbursements
amount to only $40 million.
4.
Six key results are expected for Mali: (a) safe and secure environment for air transport in M a l i
by improving the country’s compliance with international safety and security standards; (b) significant
increase in access to secure, quality, and low-cost electricity through the rehabilitation and
development o f Kainji and Jebba (capacity o f 900 M W by 2013) and Felou (102 Gwh) hydropower
plants; (c) development o f road infrastructure; (d) improvement o f productivity in rice and cereals
through access to improved technologies; (e) improvement o f the living conditions in the Niger and
Senegal River basins through better planning o f the water resource for multipurpose use and better
watershed management; and ( f ) improved access to financial markets.
Current Regional Portfolio

WAEMU Capital Markets De\t FILJ
Afnca Emergent) Locust Project
2006 HeSf &Central Afnca Air Transpon (TAL)
Sew@ k \ e r Basin hliulafement Water Res h p t (APLj
West A h a P o w Pool 2 (OUVS Felou HEP)
2007 West Afnca A p c Prod Prgm (APL)
Afnca Stockpiles I-.Mali, Morocco,Tanzarua (GEF)
2008 Uiger Basin Water Resources

I O 28 2003
05202004
02262004
12 162001
09 08 2005
04 27 2006
06 08 2006
06 29 2006
03292007
07 03 2007

- 89 -

07 31 2008
08312009
09302009
06302009
II 30 2009
12 31 2009
09 08 201 I
06 30 2010
06302012
01 31 2013

-

s
s

s
s

-

L

U

5 1
I 6
30
00
00
03
00

s

s

MS

\.IS

964
59 5
336
II O 0
750
450
135
1860

12
263
45
15 2
04
00
04
00

10 I
38
30 I
250
150
26
180

s

s

S

S

-

.

s

s

-

B.

Regional Pipeline

5.
M a l i will participate in more regional projects that focus on infrastructure and agricultural
productivity. The planned regional activities and projects are part o f the UEMOA and ECOWAS
regional programs. They are: (a) promotion o f economic competition through connectivity to quality,
infrastructure services at a competitive cost for the energy/electricity, transport, transit facilitation, and
telecommunications sectors; (b) promotion o f agricultural productivity through regional cooperation in
agricultural research to generate improved technologies and to build biosafety capacity; (c) promotion
o f rural development through effective multipurpose water resource planning and management and
development o f the Niger and Senegal Rivers; (d) promotion o f a friendly business environment
through the improvement and harmonization o f OHADA’s legal environment for business;
(v) increased access to financial services through the promotion o f financial integration in the sub
region; (f) improvement o f public procurement through conformity o f Mali’s procurement regulations
with WAEMU regional directives; and (g) macroeconomic convergence.
6.

Special attention will be needed to ensure close alignment between regional and sectoral
interventions at the country level to best leverage the Bank’s interventions t o tackle the sectoral
constraints to Mali’s economic growth.
Indicative Regional Pipeline (FYOS-11)
Project Name

WA Regional Biosafety
Program
WA Transport and
Trade Facilitation

WA Power Pool
(WAPP APL3)

WA Multi-Disease
Surveillance

Senegal River Basin
Multi-Modal Project

Senegal River Basin
Multi-Purpose Water
Resource Development
Project-APL2

Project Description
FY08
Establish and implement a Regional Biosafety
Regulatory Framework.
FY09
Facilitate trade and transit facilitation
development along the corridor by reducing
physical and nonphysical barriers and
improve road corridor.
Improve access to stable and reliable
electricity supply through a cooperative
power- pooling mechanism for integrating
national power system into unified regional
electricity market Construction o f the LaboaFrkessedougou-Sikasso-Segutransmissions
l i n e to establish a robust interconnection
between Cote d’Ivoire and Mali.
Strengthen capacity o f beneficiary countries
to implement their Integrated Disease
Surveillance and Response Strategies.

FYlO
Promote physical integration o f transport
through connectivity of modal l i n k s among
OMVS countries. This will enhance transport
on Senegal River and ensure l i n k s with road
and rail transport.
Enhance regional cooperation among Senegal
River riparian countries through OMVS for
multipurpose water development to foster
growth, including improved community
livelihoods.

Participating
Countries

WAEMU countries

Overall
Amount ($ mil)
25

Ghana, Burkina Faso,
and Mali

135

Burkina Faso, Cote
d’Ivoire, Ghana, and
Mali

120

ECOWAS countries
plus Mauritania

60

Guinea, Mali,
Mauritania, Senegal

130

Guinea, Mali,
Mauritania, Senegal

200

Project Name

Project Description

WA Regional
Communication and
Information Program

Improve efficiency and reduce cost o f
connectivity in ECOWAS region.
Improve cross-border terrestrial connectivity,
particularly between region’s fragile States,
where gaps are most significant.
Promote efficient regional trade through lower
cost communications.

Niger Basin Water
Resources Development
and Sustainable
Ecosystems
Management ProgramAPL2

This second phase o f program would focus on
rehabilitation, optimization, and development
o f regional infrastructure as well as
sustainable management of selected degraded
areas.

Participating
Countries

ECOWAS countries

Overall
Amount ($ mil)
80

FYll

C.

Niger River Basin

200

Authority Member
Countries

AAA program

7.
M a l i stands to benefit from planned regional analytical work in a number o f areas. In Fiscal
Year 2008, the Bank will carry out a study on “assessing the impact o f introducing biotechnologies in
the WA cotton belt,” which will directly affect Mali, WA’s leading cotton producer. A Pan-African
study on climate change also will take place in FY08. In FY09, a WA Minerals Sector Strategic
Assessment (WAMSSA) and a Mobilizing the African Diaspora for Development study are planned.
The objective o f W A M S S A i s to identify key environmental and social issues associated with mining
growth in the WA countries including Mali. The results will be used to formulate specific policy,
institutional, and governance recommendations and interventions to be included in a potential W A
Regional Mining Sector Project (WARMSP). The latter i s intended to ensure the environmental and
social sustainability o f mining growth. The Bank also i s looking to the potential o f members o f the
Diaspora to contribute to Mali’s development. A strategy for regional cooperation w i l l be to develop
networks o f researchers, professionals, scientists, and technology experts from within the Diaspora.
Other aspects that will be included in the study are the universityhndustry linkages to develop skills in
specific areas; mitigating brain drain (or enhancing brain circulation); and learning lessons from other
countries, perhaps through South-South networks. Also in FY09, the Bank plans to develop jointly
with ECOWAS a study on removing behind-the-border barriers o f individual countries including Mali.
D.

Regional Strategies

8.
The UEMOA Commission, BCEAO and BOAD have prepared a program which i s broadly
aligned with the R I A S and the regional PRSP. The regional PRS builds on four pillars: (a) improve
governance, including conflict prevention and management; (b) deepen market integration through
harmonization o f macroeconomic policies, trade liberalization and integration o f factor markets;
(c) develop and interconnect infrastructures; and (d) develop human resources. The reform agenda
included in the REP emphasizes the same themes as the regional PRS.
9.
A large investment program (mainly oriented towards the establishment o f economic
infrastructure with 78.1% o f i t s total financing, more than 90% o f which i s meant for road and rail
transport) i s proposed in the REP. In November 2006, The Bank attended the U E M O A Economic
Regional Program (ERP) Sponsor‘s Roundtable in Dakar and indicated i t s strong support of
UEMOA’s initiative and its current and planned programs in support o f Regional Integration in the
sub-region. The Bank also started discussions on the identification o f a direct engagement with
UEMOA to support the implementation o f the ERP.

-91 -

APPENDIX

10: IFC AND MIGA: ASSISTANCE
FOR PRIVATE SECTOR DEVELOPMENT

1.
Mali’s GPRSF underscores a private-sector-led growth strategy. While this strategic stance i s
very appropriate, the key challenge i s the private sector’s ability to meet this expectation. The Malian
private sector i s s t i l l dominated by the informal sector and accounts for most o f the country’s GDP and
employment. It i s estimated that, o f a labor force o f 1.5 million, the public sector accounted only for
48,267 jobs in 2005, compared to the total o f 1.18 million jobs. The private sector contributed to
approximately 64 percent o f total investment in 2004.

2.
Following the 1994 devaluation, there was an expansion in foreign direct investment (FDI),
which rose from -0.3 percent in 1986-93 to 12.5 percent o f Gross Fixed Capital Formation (GFCF) in
1994-2001. Since then, the mining and gold ores sectors have attracted the most significant amount o f
FDI.’ The private sector, particularly the manufacturing subsector, remains vulnerable and
insufficiently diversified. The service industry i s gradually developing, particularly in
telecommunications, in which competition has generated significant dynamism, and in tourism.
3.
M a l i needs to develop diversified and nontraditional sources o f growth. Cotton and gold are
unlikely to sustain the country’s past growth rate. For the future, it i s essentially the ability o f the
private sector to generate growth that will change the country’s outlook and reduce poverty. For
instance, improved output and competitiveness o f Mali’s industrial sector will be critical to reduce
dependency on traditional exports. The industrial sector i s an important source o f revenues, a provider
o f modern sector employment, and a major player in easing the constraints linked to high-cost
imported intermediate or final goods. However, the share of manufacturing in Mali’s GDP and exports
has been limited so reforms are needed to stimulate improvement.
4.
The World Bank Group, through IFC and MIGA in addition to IDA, i s working closely with the
G o M to address the main challenges hindering private sector development and to integrate the country
in the global economy.
K e y Private Sector Development Challewes

5.
Mali’s private sector has numerous challenges. The ones most urgent to achieve the PRSP
objective o f making the private sector the engine o f growth are (a) inadequate investment climate,
(b) limited access to finance, (c) weak private sector institutions, and (d) narrow private sector base
and untapped potential in various sectors. T o address these challenges, M a l i intends to articulate a new
integrated sector vision and strategy, under the aegis o f the Presidential Investors’ Council (PIC).
Moreover, the private sector i s expected to expand i t s role in service delivery, leveraging publicprivate partnerships as needed, including in the health and education sectors.

*

- A n investment climate needing major improvements. Based on the WBG’s 2005 Investment Climate
Assessment and the annual Doing Business reports, M a l i has an important agenda to take on to
improve i t s business environment. With the push from PIC, M a l i has already made substantive
reforms in business start-up procedures, property registration, and licensing. More needs to be done to
increase investment and productivity levels.

’

Between I987 and 2001, the largest mergers and acquisition deals involved the following companies: Randgold
Resources Ltd. and Baroya Project, in the gold ores sector, and BHP-Syama Gold Mine and Consolidated
Mining Corp in the mining sector.
The Presidential Investors’ Council, composed o f 10 international and 5 domestic investors, started in October
2004. I t has been instrumental in making investment climate reforms.

‘

- 92 -

- Limited access to termfinance. Most bank financing i s short term, and small enterprises have almost
no access to financing. N e w capacity needs to be built and new financial instruments need to be
introduced to provide t e r m financing to the private sector.

- Weak skills and weakprivate sector institutions. M a l i has limited availability o f skilled workers who
can operate modern equipment and technology, reach high productivity levels, and link up with
external markets. To mitigate the limitations related to poor formal education, on-the j o b training
schemes are necessary. Adherence to voluntary mechanisms t o set and agree standards for private
sector conduct i s an important role that private sector institutions can play. M a l i has a range o f private
sector organization^.^ Strengthening these organizations will not only help them improve their
advocacy effectiveness but also improve the overall governance agenda.

- Narrow private sector base and untapped potential in various sectors. In spite o f meaningful
progress over the last decade, Mali’s formal private sector remains small, particularly in the
manufacturing sector, in which competitiveness requires strengthening. Informality s t i l l represents
almost half o f the economy, and commercial activities remain the most common form o f private sector
initiative. Income generation and jobs creation hinge on the ability to expand the private sector and to
strengthen its competitiveness in global markets.
Key Instruments o f Intervention

6.
For IDA, the main instrument to assist M a l i will be the GSP which will help tap into the
potential o f key sectoral entry points in which the private sector can foster economic diversification
and reduce vulnerability to external shocks. These sources o f growth include mining,
telecommunications, tourism, and handicraft.

7.
IFC’s intervention will focus on (a) proactively seeking investment opportunities in various
sectors including finance, agribusiness, manufacturing, tourism, and mining; (b) developing Private
Enterprise Partnerships (PEP Africa) programs to foster a business-enabling environment, and
tourism; (c) supporting S M E development in the context o f the joint IDA/IFC M S M E Initiative,
particularly through improved access to finance; and (d) extending advisory services for privatization
transactions as needed.
8.
As o f September 30, 2007, IFC’s investment portfolio in M a l i amounted to $6.64 million. With
a total o f $4.8 million s t i l l outstanding, the Sadiola Gold Project i s the single largest IFC investment
(equity investment) in Mali. It i s followed by smaller investments, including a $1.45 million
investment (senior debt) in the hotel industry (Grand Hotel, through the “Socie‘te‘ Malienne de
Promotion HbteliBre, ” and Rabelais Hotel). The balance o f IFC’s committed and outstanding portfolio
in M a l i comprises small investments in pulp and paper (Graphique Industries), plastic bag, and bottle
production (Socie‘te‘Industrielle d’Emballage et de Conditionnement or SIECO).

9.
During the CAS period, MIGA will assist overall private sector development through providing
political risk guarantees in all sectors as requested and considered appropriate. Regarding i t s TA
program, MIGA’s work with investment promotion agencies recently was merged with FIAS. It thus
i s expected that MIGA will actively participate through FIAS’s interventions. Additionally, MIGA’s
Small Investor Program will issue guarantees o f less than $5 million to respond to the needs o f smaller
investors.

The most prominent being the Chamber o f Commerce, the Employers’ association, and the national chapter o f
the West Africa Enterprise Network.

- 93 -

Stratepic WBG Interventions

A. Improving investment climate

10. The Bank will help strengthen PIC’S implementation capacity through the support to the new
investment promotion agency and i t s one-stop-shop unit. IFC, through FIAS and PEP Africa, will be
actively engaged, along with the Bank, in providing support to improve the investment climate. In the
short t e r m (FY08), the program will focus on (a) corporate taxation by conducting a marginal effective
tax rate study, (b) licensing, and (c) regulatory framework for industrial zones. A regional investment
climate team (FIASIPEP Africa) i s being recruited in Dakar to ensure support to the day-to-day
implementation o f programs, including in M a l i (Phase 2, FY09 and beyond).

B. Fostering private sector access tofinance.
11.
Within the GSP, the Bank and F C are implementing the I D M I F C M S M E program that aims
at boosting finance for the development o f this underserved market segment. The assistance consists
o f a risk sharing facility, including a partial guaranty on a new portfolio o f loans to SMEs by 2
selected banks and a SME banking TA program to support their activity in a secure and profitable
manner. In addition, IFC i s offering to banks i t s Global Trade Finance Program to boost Mali’s
international trade activity. The trade finance facility i s intended to increase the confirmation lines
available to local Malian banks by providing guarantees to confirming banks, thereby eliminating cash
collateral required. With products similar to the IDA/IFC M S M E program, LFC will seek to encourage
lending in underserved sectors, including agribusiness, health and education, and women
entrepreneurs.
15.
Housingjnance has attracted much attention in West Africa lately, with both private and
public sector players seeking appropriate approaches to develop the sector. IFC has been working
closely with the World Bank in this regard with a view to introducing guaranty and liquidity
institutions to work on a regional basis within the West African Monetary and Economic Union. In
addition, IFC will develop a technical assistance program to support selected commercial banks
interested in increasing their housing finance activities.

17.
I F C also has started to develop West African capital markets through a CFA Francdenominated bond issue within WAEMU countries. The December 2006 bond issue o f CFA Franc 22
billion included 3 Malian banks participating in the syndicate. The proceeds were invested in 4
projects in the region, 1 o f which i s in Mali. With this issue, IFC introduced international standards
and market practices, and provided institutional investors with the opportunity to invest in A a d A A A rated securities. As a result o f the success o f this issue, the Conseil Rkgional will allow IFC to bring to
market selected client issuers with only partial guaranty by IFC with the aim o f further market
liberalization.
C. Enhancing skills and sector institutions
18.
IFC and IDA are, through the GSP, providing support to address market failures that limit
SMEs’ ability to obtain the necessary skills and business services to raise their productivity and
competitiveness. Business development services (BDS) for firm-level consultancies are provided
through a matching grant to enhance the capacity o f MSMEs, with a focus on the growth sectors.
Training i s provided for access to market, quality enhancement, management, marketing, and access to
loans. Focusing on micro enterprises, the Support and Training Entrepreneurship Program (STEP) has

- 94 -

been integrated in the GSP. It i s being implemented in six regions and an expansion to more areas i s
planned.

19.
Moreover, IFC-GBI (Grassroots Business Initiative) i s involved in an innovative technical
assistance project: The Business Angel Club in M a l i - N Club des Investisseurs Maliens pour I ’
Entreprenariat (CIME) Officially formed in December 2006, the club started meeting in January
2006. GBI has been assisting them having a consultant organizing the club’s meetings, help develop
the project pipeline for the Club and perform any necessary follow-up work on projects or new Angel
members. The objective o f the Angel Club i s to support the growth and development o f youth and
social entrepreneurs in Mali.
20.
In addition to the support provided by IFC, the Bank i s developing the capacity o f private
sector institutions such as the Chamber o f Commerce, the WA Enterprise Network, and other business
associations. It i s in this context that the Mediation and Arbitration Center, a scheme for alternative
dispute settlement under the regional legal framework, OJ!IADA,~ housed in the Chamber o f
Commerce, i s being supported. The Bank also will support M a l i through the private sector liaison
officers’ network (PSLOs), a mechanism that should improve local businesses’ access to opportunities
offered by Bank-financed activities.

D. Expanding private sector base and unleashing key sectors ’potential
21. Private investments are likely to be triggered by a better investment climate and access to
finance. Additional expansion o f the private sector base could stem from specific interventions in key
sectors in which the growth potential could be unleashed. These include particularly agribusiness,
mining, telecommunications, tourism and crafts, and infrastructure.
22.
Agribusiness. Agroprocessing and food i s one o f the main areas in which the private sector
could grow in M a l i and add value to the large variety o f crops that are grown. The IDA-financed
Agriculture Competitiveness and Export Diversijkation Project (FY06) i s supporting improved
competitiveness o f both traditional and nontraditional agricultural products, increasing the prospects o f
further development o f agroprocessing activities. IFC i s exploring with the Agriculture Development
Bank (Banque nationale de dkveloppement agricole, or BNDA) how to better meet agribusiness
financing needs. I F C i s considering investing in a one o f Mali’s leading agribusiness companies,
involved in the flour and rice milling as well as in the animal feed sector. These investments would be
linked with the provision o f TA services.

23.
Manufacturing. With respect to heavy industry, IFC has expressed to G o M and potential
investors i t s willingness to consider financing a cement project, which would be important for the
development o f the housing and infrastructure sectors. In 2004, the government granted an exploration
permit to West African Cement S.A. (Wacem), an IFC client in Togo, to explore the feasibility of a
cement project in Mali. Upon completion o f the study, Wacem applied for an exploitation permit,
which was awarded by the government in September 2005. However, final agreement on the
convention i s s t i l l pending government approval. This would be a $100 million project for which IFC
could arrange financing. There are also companies interested in setting up a grinding or full cement
production facility in Mali; and IFC has also expressed i t s willingness to consider financing the
investment plan o f any suitable sponsor selected by the government provided project feasibility and
sufficient market demand.

4

OHADA i s a 16-member organization. The Democratic Republic o f Congo i s expected to join OHADA soon.

- 95 -

24.
Mining. In the extractive sector, gold mining contributed to spurring Mali's growth over the
last decade. IFC has an equity investment in the Sadiola gold mine, and additional investments may
arise on stream over the coming years. However, the sector's contribution to growth needs to be
sustained and possibly increased by undertaking a series o f activities that the Bank i s supporting.
These are the (a) improvement o f the sector incentive framework through revising the existing mining
code, in particular to address the needs o f small-scale mining; (b) formulation o f a policy on mining
revenue management; (c) strengthening sector management capacity; (d) design and implementation
o f mining investment promotion activities; and (v) implementation o f the EITI.
25.
Telecommunications. In telecommunications, activities supported by the Bank include
(a) reviewing the existing legal and regulatory frameworks to ensure greater visibility for the
investors; (b) proposing new amendments, legislation, or secondary legislation as deemed appropriate
to account for new developments in I C T and the convergence o f technology and services. The GSP
also i s supporting the privatization o f the telecommunications incumbent, SOTELMA, along with
Malitel, i t s cellular subsidiary. I F C has expressed willingness to provide financing and technical
assistance to the privatized company.
26.
In September 2002, MIGA issued a guarantee coverage to Socie'te' Nationale de
Te'le'communications du Se'ne'gal (Sonatel) for i t s $18 million equity investment in Ikatel SA o f Mali.
The 15-year coverage provided protection against the risks o f expropriation, war and civil disturbance,
and breach o f contract. MIGA also provided coverage for an 8-month bridge loan o f $26 million, for a
total initial coverage o f $44 million. The project i s s t i l l under guarantee but with an exposure o f $16
million. The project has helped provide various telecommunications services, including fixed lines,
wireless, internet, and satellite communication services, as well as public pay phones. Owing to the
positive impact o f competition in the sector, the teledensity (fixed and mobile phones) increased by
11% in on three years.

27.
Tourism and crafts. Through PEP Africa, IFC will include Malian small hotels in a regional
program o f electronic booking, including related training that directly links these institutions with their
clients. The project i s an e-market place that will aim at developing sustainable tourism, benefiting
local entrepreneurs and communities. In this project, IFC wishes to ensure local Small and Medium
Enterprise (SME) owners and operators o f accommodation facilities and other tourism services in the
region are provided with an opportunity to access the growing independent traveler market using the
Internet to plan and book travel. IFC has already financed hotel projects in M a l i and i s developing a
regional expansion o f one o f i t s clients.

29.
Inpastructure. With respect to inpastructure for private sector development, FIAS will
participate in developing a regulatory framework for industrial parks. The Bank also intends to support
the improvement o f the passenger and cargo terminals at the Bamako airport to facilitate the flows o f
goods and passengers and to enhance the supply chain. In concessionning the airport, IFC advisory
services may be consulted by the government to seek the most suitable operator. IFC could also
finance the investment program o f any suitable private sector concessionaire.
Partnerships in Private Sector Development

30.
Donor interest in private sector development in M a l i has gradually increased. WBG and
U S A I D have been the long-standing providers o f assistance for PSD. Other donors including EU,
France, Sweden, and Switzerland have made limited interventions. With the signing o f i t s compact in
November 2006, the Millennium Challenge Corporation (MCC) has become the most important
private sector donor in dollar terms. It i s focused on the Bamako airport and industrial park. A private
sector donor coordination mechanism was recently set up in M a l i to harmonize and optimize the
donors' interventions.

- 96 -

Summary Table
Areas of
Intervention
Investment climate

Access to finance

Manufacturing,
agribusiness, and
SMEs

Activities

IDA

IFC

Public-Private Sector
Dialogue,
Investment Climate
Assessment, and Ease of
Doing Business Index
Introduction o f new
instruments for term
finance
Productivity and quality
improvement;
diversification o f private
sector activities

Presidential Investors’ Council:
ICA Update; Technical
Assistance for improvement o f
“Doing Business Indicators”

PEP-AfricdFIAS
program to improve
“Doing Business
Indicators”

Partial Credit Guarantee and
associated TA in commercial
banks (2 participating banks)
Capacity building for
productivity enhancement
through a matching grant
facility; Quality management

Partial Credit Guarantee
Trade Finance
Housing Finance
Potential investment in
cement, rice milling and
floor production; GBI
traning services for
MSMEs (STEP)
FIAS TA in tourism,
including e-marketplace;
IFC investment in hotels

Tourism

Strategy and advisory
services; sector
investment

Mining

Sector regulatory
framework,
transparency and
governance, and
diversification.

Telecommunications

Sector liberalization;
regulation; and
increased access

Airport

Infrastructure
improvement and
private sector operation

Industrial zones

Access to industrial land
and services to investors

Sector strategy preparation,
institutional strengthening and
capacity building through
training, sector promotion,
rehabilitation o f monuments,
airport facilities and transit
procedures
Mining code improved and
regulatory framework for smallscale mining, EITI
implementation support, support
to the National Geology
Directorate and i t s laboratory
Privatization o f the incumbent
(Sotelma and Malitel); Capacity
building for the regulator;
Expanding access through rural
telecommunications
Rehabilitation o f the passenger
terminal as well as the cargo
terminal; concession contract
with a private operator
Development o f a 50 ha
industrial zone; Set-up of an
investment promotion agency
with one-stop-shop center for
investors

- 97 -

Potential additional
investment in SEMOS

IFC investment

IFC Advisory Services
may be asked to assist the
Government
Legal framework for
industrial zones (FIAS)

APPENDIX
11: BANKAPPROACH
TO CAPACITY DEVELOPMENT

1.
The implementation o f Mali’s development program i s affected by capacity weaknesses that
generally relate to: (a) poor utilization o f the institutional and organizational arrangements that have
been adopted to facilitate and carry out development action; (b) weak implementation culture
exacerbated by the discrepancy between the informal behavior o f government actors and formal rules;
(c) lack o f incentives to trigger the necessary behavior change; (iv) lack o f clarity o f the mandates and
roles o f key development actors, particularly public agencies in transition and civil society; and
(v) acute shortage o f trained and experienced personnel. In the past few years, the government o f M a l i
has taken a series o f measures to address capacity weaknesses in the administration. A policy
document (PDI, Program for Institutional Development) has been adopted, and a high-level
government body, the Commissariat for Institutional Development (CDI) and a National Committee
for Capacity Building have been established to coordinate P D I implementation. However, the
government’s program i s having l i t t l e impact so far.
Concentrating on implementation

2.
The government realizes that it must now concentrate i t s efforts on the implementation o f
existing policy and regulatory frameworks and refrain from establishing new ones. The absence o f
policy and regulatory frameworks i s not the problem in Mali. In fact, there i s clear evidence that the
country’s ability to generate formal institutions without concomitant commitment to implementation i s
contributing to further paralysis while creating the illusion o f action. T o further complicate matters,
the adoption o f new policy and regulatory frameworks often leads to the proliferation o f new
organizations or the rearrangements o f old ones, without a clear breakaway from old to new. This
tends to generate further inertia and confusion regarding the responsibilities o f overlapping agencies
and adds strain on the limited resources. The decentralization program i s making the problem more
acute.
3.
Several situations illustrate the problem and will need to be addressed. First, the PRSP i s
frequently mentioned by government officials as the sole frame o f reference for all o f Mali’s
development strategies and programs. But in reality it has not yet acquired the characteristics o f an
institution meant to guide collective development action. Second, the national statistical system
continues to be in disarray even though diagnostic studies have been carried out and a sound remedial
master plan exists. The master plan has been endorsed but i s not being implemented. Third, with
regard to decentralization, even though the official policy and organizational framework has been
approved and promulgated since 2002 with regard to education, health, and water, very little has
happened. In particular, the government has yet to effectively implement the framework, which would
have translated into real transfer o f responsibility and resources, both financial and human, to
municipalities and other decentralized entities. And fourth, the National Committee for Capacity
Building produced a capacity building policy that has not been disseminated outside the ministry in
charge o f planning even though it was endorsed by the government in September 2005.
4.
The government agrees that putting an end to this situation can be done by: building stability
and credibility in the institutional framework; adopting a rigorous process for transitioning from policy
and master plan formulation to implementation; learning to carry out organizational reform and skills
upgrading with a view to adapting to changes in the regulatory framework; and providing incentives
for behavioral change when necessary.
Building credibility in the policy and regulatory frameworks

5.
Although sound policy frameworks are usually available, they have yet to fully play the role
o f “rules o f the game” by which actors must play and that are critical for capacity to develop. One of
-98-

the reasons for that i s their instability due to the radically different policy options that have been tried
in rapid succession over the last 40 years while M a l i was in a state o f constant reforms. This i s
particularly visible in the health and education sectors. It makes it difficult for government
implementers to understand and learn their roles, and develop their skills. In these conditions, there i s
no opportunity for adjustments and for learning from lessons. Worse, stakeholders do not fully trust
the government’s ability to stay the course in the face o f the many challenges that consensual policy
making, though laudable, inevitably create. Having been used to frequent changes in policy directions
in the past, be it as a result o f internal factors or external pressures, stakeholders come to expect s t i l l
further changes. This behavior promotes inertia. Hence, bringing stability to the current policy and
regulatory framework i s essential.
Providing incentives for behavioral change

6.
Once the policy framework i s stabilized and i s truly considered as the reference, the remaining
problem will be to find the right incentives for behavioral change o f government implementers and
other stakeholders. With regard to civil servants, the government’s intention to reduce the number o f
staff and simultaneously increase wages i s a step in the right direction but will take time to implement.
In the meantime, other incentives can be used to motivate civil servants, including adopting career
plans, providing opportunity for advancement through merit, linking training and promotion, using
more modern methods and equipment in the administration, identifying and eliminating reverse
incentives, fighting corruption aggressively, and depoliticizing the civil service.
Designing training as a step in the capacity development process

7.
As the institutional framework i s made to work better, focus must also be placed on
knowledge and skills. Given that all development actions are collective actions, this means ensuring
that individual actors acquire a better understanding o f their roles on the team. In Mali, the number o f
trained and experienced staff in the public sector i s low, even when compared to other SSA countries.
Many positions in key agencies are not filled because o f the lack o f qualified candidates and positions
o f responsibility must often be filled with candidates fresh out o f school. The needs created by
decentralization policy are accentuating the problem. Also, the country faces a shortage o f training
facilities. However, training i s not a panacea and must not be considered as an end in i t s e l f as it
currently often is. The relatively recent focus on “capacity building” has led to the multiplication o f
workshops, seminars, and knowledge exchange forums with l i t t l e tangible results, to the point that
Malian authorities and donors are now openly critical o f the “workshop culture” that has resulted. The
first step toward addressing this situation i s to make a clearer distinction between training and capacity
development. The second step i s to make sure that knowledge and skills enhancement activities are
designed as an intermediate step toward stronger performance and undertaken primarily with a view to
giving life to the regulatory framework and organizational arrangements that have been set up with the
intention o f guiding and carrying out development action. Only then could technical skills fully have
the desired impact.
Implications for the Bank

8.
Results and impact drive the Bank’s assistance strategy. This requires changes in the way the
Bank approaches capacity development in Mali. First, the Bank must articulate i t s C D assistance
strategy. This CAS represents the first attempt at a concerted effort to formulate a C D strategy as an
integral part o f the Bank’s overall assistance strategy in Mali. Second, the Bank must actively support
the country’s CD agenda, which means encouraging the client to develop, carry out, and monitor that
agenda so as to make it a visible and critical part o f the overall poverty reduction strategy. Third, the
Bank must do i t s share to mobilize donor support for C D in line with the donor community’s
alignment and harmonization commitments. And fourth, the Bank must strengthen i t s own capacity to

- 99 -

support the client’s C D agenda; this will not only require staff sensitization and training but also
making use o f tools capable o f providing effective support to the government as it carries out the C D
agenda. With W B I ’ s support, the Bank will carry out i t s assistance in the designated areas through a
series o f C D needs assessments and follow up activities using the C E N A Approach. The logistical and
pedagogical support needed to sustain this effort will be provided by local training organizations such
as CERCAP-a training and research institute under the oversight o f the Ministry o f Economy and cofinanced by the African Capacity Building Foundation (ACBF) and the government.

9.
The Bank will be selective with regard to the areas where it will concentrate i t s CENA-driven
support, namely: PRSP Monitoring and Evaluation (including strengthening o f the national statistical
system), Public Procurement, Regulation in the energy sector, Public revenue administration, and
Access to health services. These areas reflect the Bank’s current involvement and comparative
advantage. This l i s t was vetted during the CAS Consultations by the government and donors, but it
was agreed that other areas may be added to it in the course o f the CAS period.
10.
Government commitment to the proposed approach and i t s support through CERCAP or other
local training organizations are essential. The approach requires putting in place a coordination
mechanism involving the government (the Commissioner for Institutional Development), CERCAP,
the Bank, and the other donors concerned. This team will provide support through the series o f CENA
workouts organized by CERCAP and WBI. The Bank’s sectoral specialists involved will make the
necessary adjustments in relevant Bank-funded operations as it has already been done in the case o f
the IDF that provides support for PRSP Monitoring and Evaluation. The C D I will ensure that the
lessons learned in the selected areas will be applied in other areas where government needs to
strengthen i t s capacity as a matter o f priority.

11.
The five Capacity Development Action Forms under finalization provide an outline o f the
capacity issues and possible remedial action plan in each selected area. Validating these assumptions,
and developing detailed remedial action plans and monitoring their implementation will be done
through the series o f C E N A exercises.

- 100 -

APPENDIX 12: COUNTRYFINANCING PARAMETERS
Date: February 17,2005
The country financing parameters for M a l i set out below have been approved by the Regional Vice
President, Africa Region, and are being posted o n the Bank’s internal website.
~~

Item

~

Parameter

Cost sharing. Limit on
the proportion o f
individual project costs
that the Bank may
finance

100%

Recurrent cost
financing. Any limits
that would apply to the
overall amount o f
recurrent expenditures
that the Bank may
finance

No
countrylevel limit

Local costfinancing.
Are the requirements for
Bank financing o f local
expenditures met,
namely that: (a)
financing requirements
for the country’s
development program
would exceed the public
sector’s own resources
(e.g., from taxation and
other revenues) and
expected domestic
borrowing; and (b) the
financing of foreign
expenditures alone
would not enable the
Bank to assist in the
financing of individual
projects
Taxes and duties. Are
there any taxes and
duties that the Bank
would not finance?

Yes

None

Remarks / Explanation

The Bank may finance, on a selective basis, up to 100% of project costs.
The Bank’s financing proportion in individual projects will be
determined taking into account: (a) the overall I D A envelope for Mali;
(b) the importance of the project to the PRSP and i t s poverty focus; and
(c) the prioritization of the project in the CAS. The Mali program i s
increasingly focused on SWAPSwhich include financing from several
other donors. In these cases, Bank financing will likely be a relatively
small share of project cost. I t i s expected that cost sharing will apply to
projects with contributions from other non-governmentsources such as
donors and beneficiaries (particularly for CDD-projects). Cost sharing
also will likely be the rule for projects with revenue generating entities.
Given Mali’s fragile financial situation, the Bank will continue to
monitor the aggregate fiscal and debt situation and i t s implications for
recurrent cost financing. In all cases, recurrent cost financing will be
applied after consideration of the sector and project sustainability issues
including: (a) institutional arrangements to allow for greater emphasis
on sustainability through result-basedM&E systems and strengthening
of capacity at national and local level; and (b) implied future budget
outlays.
The two requirements are met. The Bank expects to finance local costs
in the proportions needed for individual projects, up to 100%.

The Bank may finance the costs of taxes and duties associated with
project expenditures, since these have been judged to be reasonable and
non-discriminatory. At the project-level, the Bank would consider
whether taxes and duties constitute an excessively high share o f project
costs. Local tax regimes will be monitored as decentralizationbecomes
more advanced and will be assessed on a case-by-case basis.

- 101 -

CAS Appendix B2 -Mali
Selected Indicators* o f Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
As Of Date 11/26/2007

Indicator
Porffolio Assessment
Number of Projects Under Implementation a
Average Implementation Period (years)
Percent of Problem Projects by Number a r c
Percent of Problem Projects by Amount a,
Percent of Projects at Risk by Number a , d
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount a,
Disbursement Ratio (%) e
Porffolio Management
CPPR during the year (yesho)
Supervision Resources (total $)
Average Supervision ($/project)

Memorandum Item

2005
11
3.0
27.3
24.9
36.4
25.4
28.9
Yes
1,225
94

Since FY80

Proj Eva1 by OED by Number
Proj Eva1 by OED by Amt ($millions)
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Number
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt

57
1376.4
40.4
32.0

2006

2007

2008

13
3.6
23.1
8.8
23.1
8.8
31.2

14
3.3
7.1
0.8
7.1
0.8
27.6

13
4.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
8.7

Yes
1,468
113

Yes
1,550
103

Yes
1,306
100

Last Five
FYs

8
355.3
25.0
30.0

a. As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY).
b. Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio.
c. Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) and/or implementation progress

(W.

d. As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
e. Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the
beginning of the year: Investment projects only.
* All indicators are for projects active in the Portfolio, with the exception of Disbursement Ratio,
which includes all active projects as well as projects which exited during the fiscal year.

- 102 -

CAS Annex B3 - IBRDADA Program Summary Mali
As o f Date 11/26/2007
Proposed I D A Lending Program a

Proj ID

$(M)

Strategic Rewards Implementation
(H/ML)
Risks (H/WL)

2008 PRSC 2
Result
Regional Operations

42
42
6

H

M

2009 Energy Sector Support (S)
PRSC 3
T A for Service Delivery
Result
Regional Operations

75
40
15
130
8

H
H
H

M
M
M

70
5 0160
120/130
8/18

H
H

M
L

70
50

H
H

M
L

2010 Agriculture Productivity 2 (S)
PRSC 4
Result
Regional Operations

201 1 Urban Sector (S)
PRSC 5
Investment Operation
Result
Regional Operations

120/130
8/18

Overall Result
Regional Operations

4121432
30/50

--

-

-

a. This table presents the proposed program for the next three fiscal years pending CAS discussions.
b. For each project, indicate whether the strategic rewards and implementation risks are expected t o be high
(H), moderate (M), or l o w (L).

- 103 -

CAS Appendix B3 (IFC & MIGA) for M a l i

-

M a l i I F C and M I G A Program, F Y 2004-2007
2004

2005

2006

2007

0

2.31

0

0

Pulp & Paper

-

Total

0

100
100

0

0

Loans
Equity
Quasi-Equity
Other

-

100

Total

0

100

0

0

25.22

0

0

0

IFC approvals ($m)

Sector (%)

Investment instrument(%)

MIGA guarantees ($m)

- 104-

CAS Appendix B4
Summary o f Non-lending Services
As o f Date 11/26/2007

Product

Completion FY

Recent completions
CEM/Sources o f Growth

07

Underway
PER-PEMFAR
Rural Finance Study
Demography & Econ.
Governance Diagnostic
Debt Sustainability Analysis

08
08
08
08
08

P1anned
Growth notes
Rural Finance
Poverty and PRSP Brief (TA)
PRSP I1FY07 Progress Report
Country Environmental Assessment
Skills Development Study
Remittances
I C A Update
SLM Advisory Services (TA)
PRSP I1FY08 Progress Report
PEFA Update
Social Protection
CAS Progress Report
Poverty and PRSP Brief (TA)
PRSP I1FY09 Progress Report
PRSP I1FY 10 Progress Report

08-1 1
08
08
08
09
09
09
09
09
09
10
10
10
10
10
11

a. Government, donor, Bank, public dissemination.
b. Knowledge generation, public debate, problem-solving.

- 105 -

$ '000

525

Audiencea Objectiveb

G,B,D

CAS Appendix B6

-

Mali Key Economic Indicators
~~

Indicator
National accounts (as YOo f GDP)

Actual
2004
2005

2003

Estimate

2006

2007

Projected

2008

2009

100
39
24
38

100
36
24
40

100
37
24
39

100
37
24
39

100
37
24
39

100

Total Consumption
Gross domestic fixed investment
Government investment
Private investment

87
24
7
17

91
22
7
14

89
22
8
15

77
22
8
14

Exports (GNFS)b
Imports (GNFS)

26
37

25
38

26
37

Gross domestic savings

13
14

14
13

14

280

Real annual growth rates (“h,calculated from 87 prices)
Gross domestic product at market prices
7.4
Gross Domestic Income
14.9

Gross domestic producta
Agriculture

2010

37
24

100
36
24

39

40

24
40

83
23
9
14

75
23
8
15

69
23
8
15

70
23
8
14

32
40

28
38

27
29

21
25

23
26

17
17

18
18

19
18

20

15

19
18

350

380

400

650

1350

2.2
0.4

6.1
5.2

5.3
7.1

4.1

1.8

4.8
12.9

4.8
1.9

5.4
0.8

Real annual per capita growth rates (%, calculated from 87 prices)
Gross domestic product at market prices
4.3
-0.8
Total consumption
7.4
5.2
Private consumption
-5.9
3.1

3.0
-1.0
1.1

2.3
-2.1
-9.9

1.1
4.7
-0.5

1.8
3.1
2.1

1359
1100

1751
1414
2132
1489
-381
240
-389

1870
1508

1620
1620

2315
1567
-445
224
-490

1637
1637
-18
182
-137

1731
1731
1702
1702
29
194
-9 I

Industry
Services

Gross national savingsc

100
36

18

Memorandum items

GNI per capita (US$,Atlas method)

Balance o f Payments (US%millions)

1153
928
1470
988
-317
208
-270

1237
977
1646
1094
-409
193
-411

1773
1246
-413
228
-392

1916
1570
2058
1414
-142
239
-245

Net private foreign direct investment
Long-term loans (net)
Official
Private
Other capital (net, incl. mors & ommissions)

131

58

61

39

55

60

0

0

160

103

86

36

-8

-39

-65

-86

Change in reservesd

146

-180

-462

95

148

47

-1164

0

Exports (GNFS)b
Merchandise FOB
Imports (GNFS)~
Merchandise FOB
Resource balance
Net current transfers
Current account balance

- 106-

CAS Appendix B6

-

M a l i Key Economic Indicators
(Continued)

Indicator

2003

Actual
2004
2005

2006

Estimate
2007

2008

Projected
2009

2010

Public finance (as % o f GDP at market prices)e

Current revenues
Current expenditures
Current account surplus (+) or deficit (-)
Capital expenditure
Foreign financing

17.2
12.5
4.7
8.5
6.7

17.3
13.6
3.7
9.1
5.6

17.9
13.5
4.5
10.4
6.6

51.8
13.4
38.4
9.2
-26.6

17.8
14.4
3.5
10.2
6.9

17.4
14.0
3.4
10.6
5.9

31.0
25.5
330.1

29.8
-2.4
106.0

30.0
9.5
-48.7

30.4
10.9
-1691.4

31.0
8.0
171.1

30.4
8.4
44.8

-1.3
1.3

-3.1
-0.6

6.4
2.4

1.5
4.1

2.0
1.7

2.5
5.4

16.6
13.2
3.4
11.4
6.8

18.2
14.2
4.0
12.3
7.5

2.5
4.6

2.5
0.0

Monetary indicators

M2IGDP
Growth o f M 2 (%)
Private sector credit growth I
total credit growth (%)
Real interest rates
Consumer price index (% change)
GDP deflator (YOchange)

a.
b.
c.
d.

GDP at factor cost
"GNFS" denotes "goods and nonfactor services."
Includes net unrequited transfers excluding official capital grants.
Includes use o f I M F resources.
e. Consolidated central government.
f. "LCU" denotes "local currency units." An increase in US$/LCU denotes appreciation.

- 107 -

CAS Appendix B7
Mali - Key Exposure Indicators

2003

Indicator

3114

Total debt outstanding and

Actual
2004
2005

3320

2006

3025

1436

Estimate
2007

2008

Projected
2009

1525

disbursed (TDO) (US$m)"
Net disbursements (US$m)a

18

Total debt service (TDS) (US$m)a
Debt and debt service indicators %

270.2

268.4

222.5

75.0

87.1

Concessional/TDO

92.4

93.4

94.9

96.2

95.9

IDA TDO (us$rnld

1322

1441

1424

282

322

TDO/XGS~

IFC (US$m)

2.31 ..

1.47

Loans
Equity and quasi-equity /c
MIGA

25.22

MIGA guarantees (US$m)

a. Includes public and publicly guaranteed debt, private nonguaranteed, use of I M F credits and net shortterm capital.
b. "XGS" denotes exports of goods and services, including workers' remittances.
c. Preferred creditors are defined

as IBRD, IDA, the regional multilateral development banks, the IMF, and the

Bank for International Settlements.
d. Includes present value o f guarantees.
e. Includes equity and quasi-equity types o f both loan and equity instruments.

- 108 -

2010

M a l i Social Indicators
Latest single year

1990-95

1999-05

SubSaharan
Africa

7.9
2.4
21 .o
7. I

10.1
2.6
26.9
6.7

13.5
3.0
33.0
6.4

741.4
2.3
35.2
5.5

2,353.0
1.9
30.0
3.7

150
67

230
93

380
112

745
127

580
128

3.4

3.1

1980-85

POPULATION
Total population, mid-year (millions)
Growth rate (% annual average for period)
Urban population (% of population)
Total fertility rate (births per woman)

Same regionlincome group
Lowincome

POVERTY
(% of population)
National headcount index
Urban headcount index
Rural headcount index
INCOME
GNI per capita (US$)
Consumer price index (2000=100)
Food price index (2000=100)
INCOMElCONSUMPTlON DISTRIBUTION
Gini index
Lowest quintile (% of income or consumption)
Highest quintile (% of income or consumption)
SOCIAL INDICATORS
Public expenditure
Health (% of GDP)
Education (% of GNl)
Net primary school enrollment rate
(% of age group)
Total
Male
Female
Access to an improved water source
(% of population)
Total
Urban
Rural
Immunization rate
(% of children ages 12-23 months)
Measles
DPT
Child malnutrition (% under 5 years)
Life expectancy at birth
(years)
Total
Male
Female
Mortality
Infant (per I , 000 live births)
Under 5 (per 1,000)
Adult (15-59)
Male (per 1.000 population)
Female (per 1,000 population)
Maternal (per 100,000live births)
Births attended by skilled health staff (%)

50.5
4.6
56.2

2.3

80
83
77

20
25
15

44
50
39

34
50
29

48
76
35

56
80
43

75
88
70

19
8

52
49

68
69
33

64
64
29

63
67
39

43
43
44

44
43
45

41
40
42

47
47
48

58
58
59

176
300

131
233

122
220

100
168

80
122

454
362

434
35 1

518
446
1,200
41

489
467
921
42

298
244
684
41

10/16/07
CAS Annex 85. This table was produced from the CMU LDB system.
Note: 0 or 0.0 means zero or less than half the unit shown, Net enrollment rate: break in series between 1997 and 1998 due to
change from ISCED76 to ISCED97. Immunization: refers to children ages 12-23 months who received vaccinations before one
year of age or at any time before the survey.

- 109 -

0 0 0 0

0 0 0 0

0 0 0 0

o o o q
t

Y

k

0 0 0 0

Y

0 0 0 0
I

0

0 0 0 0

ooom

v

o w t o

L??Z

n

n
CI,
VI

d

5

't-wwmm8888gggg
3
8888800000000
N N N N N N N N N N N N N N

al

5

2

c

.-ee

n

MAP SECTION

IBRD 33443

MALI
SELECTED CITIES AND TOWNS

MAIN ROADS

PROVINCE CAPITALS

RAILROADS

NATIONAL CAPITAL

PROVINCE BOUNDARIES

RIVERS

INTERNATIONAL BOUNDARIES

5°W

0°
0

o
To
Chenachane

100

0

50

200

100

300 Kilometers

150

300 Miles
25°N

MALI

To
o
El Mreîti
Mre

S a h a r a
To
o
El Mreîti
Mre

ALGERIA

D e s e r t

Taoudenni
Taoudenni
To
o
Poste Maurice
Cortier
Cor
tier

TOMBOUCTOU

To
o
Abalessa

20°N

20°N

Tessalit
Tessalit

KIDAL
du Tilemsi

M A U R I TA N I A

Kidal

Va

ll é e

Araouane

Nara

O

Nioro
du Sahel

15°N

AY E S
K AY

Kenieba

O

B

Kolokani

K

g
fin
Ba

To
o
Kédougou
dougou

lé
aou

UL

IK

Kayes
To
o
Goudiry
Goudir

Kita

BAMAKO

Hombori
Tondo
Tondo
(1,155 m)

Lac
D
Débo
ébo

Nampala

MOPTI

Mopti
Niono

Ségou
Ségou

Ba n i
San

Koulikoro

Bougouni

SIKASSO

GUINEA

Ansongo

Douentza

To
o Niamey

o
To
Nouna

BURKINA
FASO

To
o
Bobo
Dioulasso

BENIN
10°N

TOGO

GHANA

CÔTE D’IVOIRE
10°W

15°N

Sikasso

To
o
Korhogo

SIERRA
LEONE

To
o
Abala

NIGER

To
o
Kankan

10°N

ak
ou
za

To
o
Ouahigouya

Koutiala
To
o
Siguiri

Menaka

Bandiagara

SÉGOU
r
ge
Ni

GAO

Gao

Lac Niangay

Niafounke

To
o Néma
N ma

RO

To
o
Kifa

Bourem

r
Nige

de
L’A

To
o
Ayun
yun
el ’Atrous
Atrous

Gourma
Gourma
Rharous

Vallée

Tombouctou
Tombouctou
(Timbuktu)
(Timbuktu)

5°W

0°

This map was produced by
the Map Design Unit of The
World Bank. The boundaries,
colors, denominations and
any other information shown
on this map do not imply, on
the part of The World Bank
Group, any judgment on the
legal status of any territory,
or any endorsement or
acceptance of such
boundaries.

NOVEMBER 2004

