Public Disclosure Authorized

DOCUMENT
OF
THEWORLD BANK
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Public Disclosure Authorized

REPORT
No: 41474-ZR

INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION

Public Disclosure Authorized

COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
FOR
THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF CONGO
FOR THE PERIOD FYOS-FY11
VOLUME 1

Public Disclosure Authorized

NOVEMBER 16,2007

AFCCZ
AFRC
I A REGION
This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance
o f their official duties. I t s contents may not otherwise be disclosed without W o r l d Bank
authorization

DATE OF LAST BOARD DISCUSSION: FEBRUARY
26,2004
CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS
CURRENCY UNIT = CONGOLESE FRANC
= US$1
US$ = SDRl

FISCAL YEAR
- DECEMBER^^

JANUARY1

ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS
AAP
ABR
ADB
ANAPI
APL
ART
BCECO
CAF
CAP
CAS
CDR
CEEC
CENI
CFAA
CG
CIDA
CMFK
CNAEA
COPIREP
CPIA
CPRCD
DDR
DflD
DGI
DGRAD
DRC
EC
EFA
EIR
EITI
EMIS
EPI
EPSP
ESW
FARDC
FDI
FEC
FEDECAME
FIAS
GDP
GEF
GER
GIBS
HIM0

Africa Action Plan
Area-Based Recovery
Afiican Development Bank
National Investment Promotion Agency
Adaptable Program Loan
Anti Retro-Viral Treatment
Bureau Central de Coordination
Country Assistance Framework
Complementary Activity Package
Country Assistance Strategy
Centrales de Distribution RBgionales
Centre d’Evaluation, d’Expertise et de Certification
L a Commission Electorale Nationale Indkpendante
Country Financial Accountability Assessment
Consultative Group
Canadian International Development Agency
Chemin de Fer du Katanga
ComitB National d’ Action de 1’Eau et de 1’Assainissement
ComitB de Pilotage de la RBforme des Entreprises Publiques
Country Policy and Institutional Analysis
Commission Permanente de Reformes du Droit Congolais
Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration
Department for International Development
Direction GBnBrale des Imp6ts
Direction GBnBrale des Recettes Administratives et Domaniales
Democratic Republic o f Congo
European Commission
Education For All
Extractive Industries Review
Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative
Education Management Information System
Equipement de Protection Individuelle
Enseignement Primaire, Secondaire et Professionnel
Economic and Sector Work
Army o f the Democratic Republic o f Congo
Foreign Direct Investment
FBderation des Entreprises des Congo
FBdBrationdes Centrales de Distribution des MBdicaments Essentiels
Foreign Investment Advisory Service
Gross National Product
Global Environment Facility
Gross Enrollment Rates
Groupe Inter Bailleurs Santd
Haute Intensit6 de Main-d‘ceuvre

HIPC
HMIS
HSSS
IASC
ICA
ICAO
IDA
IFC
IGF
IMCI
IMF
INERA
INT
ITM
LDF
LLIN
LNME
MAP
MDG
MDRI
MDRP
MDTF
M&E
MEG
MIBA
MIGA
MONUC
MSME
MTEF
NGO
NPV

occ

ODA
OFIDA
OHADA
OMIKO
ONATRA
PALU
PCPI
PEFA
PEP
PER
PETS
PFM
PHC
PIU
PLWHA
PMTCT
PNA
PNC
PPA
PPG
PPP
PPRD
PRGF
PRSP

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Heavily Indebted Poor Countries
Health Management Information System
Health Systems Strengthening Strategy
Inter-Agency Standing Committee
Investment Climate Assessment
International Civil Aviation Authority
International Development Association
International Finance Corporation
Inspection Gknkrale de Finances
IntegratedManagement of Childhood Illness
International Monetary Fund
Institut de 1'Environnement et de Recherches Agricoles
Institutional Integrity Department (World Bank)
Institut Technique Mkdical
Local Development Fund
Long Lasting Insecticide-TreatedMosquito Nets
Liste Nationale de MCdicaments Essentiels
Minimum Activity Package
Millennium Development Goal
Multilateral Debt Relief Initiative
Multi-Country Demobilization and ReintegrationProgram
Multi-Donor Trust Fund
Monitoring and Evaluation
MCdicaments Essentiels Gknkriques
Minikre de Bakwanga
Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency
Mission des Nations Unies en Rkpublique Dkmocratique du Congo (UN peacekeeping mission)
Micro Small and Medium-Size Enterprises
Medium Term Expenditure Framework
Non-Governmental Organization
Net Present Value
Office Congolais de Control
Official Development Aid
Office des Douanes et Accises
L'Organisation pour 1'Harmonisationen Afiique du Droit des Affaires
Office des Mines d'Or de Kilo-Mot0
Office National de Transport
Parti Lumumbiste Unifik
Post-Conflict Performance Indicators
Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability
Post-Exposure Prophylaxis
Public Expenditure Review
Public Expenditure Tracking Surveys
Public Financial Management
Primary Health Care
Project Implementation Unit
People Living with HIViAIDS
Prevention of Mother-to-Child Transmission
Programme National Assainissement
Police Nationale Congolaise
Participatory Poverty Assessment
Public and Publicly Guaranteed
Public-Private Partnership
Parti du Peuple pour la Reconstruction et la Dkmocratie
Poverty Reduction Growth Facility
Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance o f
their official duties. I t s contents may not be otherwise disclosed without W o r l d Bank authorization.

PSIA
REGIDESO
RVA
RVF
RVM
SALW
SEA
SENASEM
SIDA
SISA
SME
SMI
SMIG
SMP
SNCC
SNEL
SNHR
SOE
SRSS
STI
SWAP
TSS
TTL
TVET
UDEMO
UK
UN
USAID
VCT
WBG

Poverty and Social Impact Analysis
Water DistributionAuthority
Regie des Voies ABriennes
Regie des Voies Fluviales
RBgie des Voies Maritimes
Small A r m s and Light Weapons
Superviseur de L’Eau et d’Assainissement
Service National des Semences
Swedish International Development Agency
Systkme d’Information SCcurite Alimentaire
Small and Medium Size Enterprises
Structure Militaire Intkgre
Salaire Minimum Garanti
Staff-MonitoredProgram (of the International Monetary Fund)
Societe National de Control de Congo
Societe National &Electricit&
Societe National d’Hydraulique Rurale
State-OwnedEnterprise
Systkme du Reseau de Soins de Sante
Sexually Transmitted Infection
Sector Wide Approach
Transitional Support Strategy
Task Team Leader (World Bank)
Technical and Vocational Education Training
Union des Democrates Mobutistes
United Kingdom
UnitedNations
United States Agency for International Development
Voluntary Counseling and Testing
World Bank Group
Vice President:
Acting Country Director:
Task Team Leaders:
Former Country Director:
Former Task Team Leader:
CAS Core Team:

Obiageli K. Ezekwesili
Judy M. O’Connor
Marie-ChantalUwanyiligira
Jean-Michel Happi
Pedro Alba
Xavier Devictor
Abdou Salam Drabo
Alain L. Labeau
Angela Khaminwa
Deborah Davis
Craig B. Andrew
Franck Bousquet
Franck Armand D. Douamba
Elena Kastlerova
Elizabeth Small
Elysee Kiti
Emilie Mushobekwa
Gilles Marie Veuillot
Giuseppe Topa
Guillemette Sidonie Jaffrin
Hinh T. Dinh
Ivan Rossignol

Jean-Michel Happi
Jean-Pierre Manshande
John Elder
Keiko Kubota
Laurent Debroux
Mahine Diop
Natalie Ford
Philippe Charles Benoit
Pierre Morin
Pierre Pozzo di Borgo
Quentin T. Wodon
Samuel A. O’Brien-Kumi
Susan Opper
Thomas A. Vis
Tony Verheijen
Victoria Gyllerup

TABLE OF CONTENTS

....................................................................................................................................................... j
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY ..........................................................................................................................
I1
PART A. THE COUNTRY ASSISTANCE FRAMEWORK ...................................................................
1
PREFACE

PART A. 1. COUNTRY CONTEXT .......................................................................................................... 3
A. Political Background
B. Economic Background....................................................................................................................... 5
C. Social Background .............................
D. Donor Activities .................................
PART A.2. KEY CHALLENGES AND MEDIUM-TERMPROSPECTS ..............................................
13
A. Country Vision and Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper ...................................................................
13
..... 14
C. Medium-Term MacroeconomicOutlook.......................................................................................... 22
PART A.3. MANAGING RISKS ............................................................................................................ 24
Overall Approach.................................................................................................................................. 24

PART B. WORLD BANK GROUP COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY

....................................

..........................................................................

PART B.1. REVIEW OF PAST BANK ASSISTANCE
A. The Second Transitional Support Strate
B. Overall Assessment and Results of TSS
..................................
C. Review of IDA Activities.
D. Review of IFC Activities ......................
E. Review of MIGA Activities ............................................................................................................
F. Lessons Learned and Recommendations for IFC and MIGA .......

25

25
25

31

E. Instrumentsfor Bank Group Assistance
G. Expanding MIGA activities .................................................................

PART B.3. MANAGING RISKS - THE WORLD BANK GROUP

.......................................................

49

List o f Charts

Chart 1: Economic Growth & Inflation ..............:. .................................................................................
Chart 2: DRC Donor Activity Trend 2003-2005...
.......
Chart 3: DRC Donor Activity: Share per Sector (fo
....................................................
Chart 4: Disbursement Rates for Bank Portfolio in DRC compared to Regional Average

-

-

.7
11
12
28

List o f Boxes

Box 1: Targets and Current Status of MDGs in DRC...............................................................................
Box 2: Managing Decentralization.....................
Box 3: The Forest Reform Agenda.....................
..........................................
...........................................
Box 4: ReformingPublic Enterprises ..................
Box 5: The Post-Conflict Economic Rebound in DR
Box 6: Challenging in the Health and Education Sectors...........................................................................
......................
Box 7: Challenges in Combating HIV/AIDS ..........................
......................
Box 8: Key Features of the Ongoing Portfolio .......................
Box 9: Early Results o f Ongoing Projects.................................................
Box 10: Supervision Difficulties in DRC .............................................................................................

10
16
17
20
21
.27
29

List o f Tables

-

Table 1: Medium Term Macroeconomic Projections Selected Indicators, 2006-2011....................................... .23
Table 2: IDA'S Proposed Program of Analytic and Advisory Activities.. ....................................................... ..40
Table 3: Proposed IDA Operations..................................................................................................... 44
Table 4: Key Risks for Donors and the Bank Group in DRC, and Corresponding Risk Management Strategies.,....... .50
List of Annexes
Annex 1: Poverty Profile Analysis.. ...........................................................................................
Annex 2: Progress Status of Triggers fo
Annex 3: External and Public Sustainability Anal
Annex 4: Achievements of the 2004-2006 TSS ...
Annex 5: Results Framework and Monitoring ......................................................................................
Annex 6: Country at Glance..............
Annex 7 : Map ofDRC ........................................................................................................................

47

PREFACE
1.
This document presents both the multi-donor Country Assistance Framework (CAF) and the
World Bank Group’s Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) for the Democratic Republic o f Congo
(DRC). The CAS i s derived from the broader CAF, which i s designed to harmonize donor support to
DRC’s recovery effort and the Government’s Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (PRSP). The other
donors participating in the CAF’ are expected to present the CAF document as a framework for their
respective assistance programs.

2.
The CAF, derived from the Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (PRSP) and presented in Part
A, articulates donors’ common strategic approach to economic assistance for DRC in the post-election
period (2007-2010). The CAF i s a first step toward harmonization o f donor assistance, which, as
donors have agreed, i s important to rationalize their support for the recovery effort. Part A1
summarizes recent developments in DRC. Part A2 diagnoses the key challenges facing the country as
outlined in the PRSP, and articulates how those challenges will be addressed under each PRSP pillar.
Part A2 also presents the medium-term outlook for the country. Part A3 discusses seven key risks
common to all donors operating in DRC, and the corresponding risk management strategies.

3.
The CAS, presented in Part B, i s the World Bank Group’s program o f support for DRC. I t
lays out a coordinated strategy for the Bank Group’s three key entities - the International
Development Association (IDA), the International Finance Corporation (IFC), and the Multilateral
Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA). In a country with a strong potential for private sector
development and where private investment i s key to complementing relatively meager flows o f
Official Development Assistance (ODA), the articulation o f a coordinated strategy, including
complementary actions by these three entities, i s critical. Part B 1 reviews past assistance by IDA,
IFC, and MIGA, including the Transitional Support Strategy (TSS), and summarizes lessons learned.
Part B2 lays out the Bank Group’s strategy for FY07-FY11, and Part B3 discusses risks that are
specific to the Bank Group, along with proposals for how they are to be managed within the context of
the overall CAF risk management framework.

4.
The CAS was prepared against the backdrop o f the Bank’s growing experience in postconflict countries. The proposed strategic direction reflects recent analytical work by the Bank’s
Development Economics Vice Presidency Group (DEC),* as well as lessons and good practices
from the Africa R e g i ~ n . ~

The 17 CAF donors are the World Bank Group (WBG), the European Commission (EC), the International
Monetary Fund (IMF), the African Development Bank (ADB), the United Nations (UN) system - and key
bilaterals: Belgium (Belgian Cooperation), Canada (Canadian International Development Agency, CIDA),
France (French Cooperation), Germany, Japan, China, the Netherlands, Italy, Spain, Sweden (Swedish
International Development Agency, SIDA), the United Kingdom (Department for International
Development, DFID), and the United States (US Agency for International Development, USAID).
2
See, in particular, Breaking the Conflict Trap: Civil War and Development Policy, Collier, Paul; Elliot, V.
L. Hegre, Havard; Hoeffler, Anke; Reynal-Querol, Marta; Sambanis, Nicholas; A World Bank Policy
Research Report, May 3 1,2003,
See, in particular, Post-conflict recovery in Africa: An Agenda for the Africa Region, Michailof, Serge;
Kostner, Marcus; Devictor Xavier; Africa Region Working Paper series; no 30, April 30, 2002; and Fragile
States: Good Practices in Country Assistance Strategies, World Bank, Decemberl9, 2005.

DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF CONGO: COUNTRY ASSISTANCE
STRATEGY FYOS-FY11

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
1.
With the gradual return to peace and a new, democratically elected Government in place,
the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC) has a strong opportunity to reduce poverty and promote
broad-based, sustainable, and pro-poor growth, provided the authorities strengthen the institutional
framework and improve governance. DRC i s endowed with a wealth o f natural resources which, if
managed properly, can help the country recover from the devastation created by years o f conflict and
mismanagement that have made it one o f the poorest countries in Africa.
DRC’s Human
Development Index declined by more than 10 percentage points in the last ten years - and DRC
now ranks 167 out o f 177 rated countries, with the great majority o f the population without access to
the most basic human services. About 70 percent lives below the poverty line, and in some parts o f the
north and east, poverty levels are above 80 percent. Given their experiences over the past few
decades, the Congolese people place renewed hope in the ability o f the new Government to improve
their living conditions.

2.
The Government strengthened policies and institutions over the period 2001-2006, leading
to D R C attaining the HIPC Decision Point in 2003. Since 2001, with the support o f the Bretton
Woods institutions and others, the Government has implemented a solid program o f economic
reforms, including new investment, labor, mining, and forestry codes designed to make these
traditionally opaque sectors more transparent, able to attract reputable foreign investors. DRC recently
joined the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative (EITI), as a further effort to increase
transparency in the mining and forestry sectors. Private investment has been relatively high, mainly in
the natural resource sector (about US$2.7 billion in new investments since 2003), and now constitutes
a significant share o f the overall private capital flows to Sub-Saharan Africa. Better management o f
public finance has helped break hyper-inflation and stabilize the exchange rate. As a result, economic
growth returned in 2003, after a decade o f decline, and i s estimated to have been about 6 percent
between 2003 and 2006.
3.
The challenges ahead remain daunting. The Government recently adopted a Governance
Compact with the people o f DRC, under which it promises to work on a broad front. In the short-term
the focus i s on reforming the security sector, strengthening the judiciary, strengthening political
governance (through decentralization and the increased role o f the women in public life), and
improving economic governance (through public finance management and anti-corruption efforts).
The key challenge will be to implement this ambitious program - a long-term effort for which a
substantial amount o f external support will be necessary.
Ensuring shared and sustainable growth. The country’s history suggests that economic
4.
growth alone will not necessarily translate into better living conditions for the majority o f the
Congolese people. The country’s abundant natural resources make it particularly important to ensure
better governance o f these sectors. In the short term, DRC will also need to make further progress in
economic management and maintaining key infrastructure. This will help to reestablish i t s credibility
with i t s population, as well as externally, and allow it to negotiate a new Poverty Reduction Grant
Facility (PRGF) with the IMF. Significant investments coupled with policy and institutional reforms
are required to rehabilitate and expand key transport and energy infrastructure, and improve the

.. - 11

business environment. In addition, a significant increase in public spending in support o f key social
sectors i s necessary to alleviate dismal social conditions. If these challenges are not met, DRC will
have little chance o f even coming close to achieving the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) by
2015.
Performance o f the Bank Group’s 2004 -2006 Transitional Support Strategy (TSS)

5.
Performance under the 2004-2006 TSS is rated as moderately satisfactory. The TSS aimed
at consolidating the transition and restoring the foundation for effective poverty alleviation efforts,
in close collaboration with other donors. The TSS program was highly relevant to DRC’s needs and
aligned with the Governments’ priorities, as expressed in the I-PRSP and the economic program. It
had four strategic elements: security and social stability, high and shared growth, governance and
institutional strengthening, and social development. The period was characterized by a strong dialogue
between the Bank and Congolese authorities, as well as with non-government stakeholders. The Bank
played a major role in donor coordination, and together with other donors initiated a move toward
greater harmonization o f donor activity. Implementation was overall satisfactory; however, it was
hampered by mis-procurement and project management issues. Results, as measured against the TSS
indicators, were mixed. The results framework consisted o f 19 performance indicators, o f which 11
were partially or completely achieved as elaborated in para. 48.
Planned Country Assistance Strategy (CAS)

6.
This CAS aims to define the business plan for World Bank Group’s support to D R C and is
part of the multi-donor Country Assistance Framework (CAF), an effort through which 17 donors
have developed a common strategic approach for economic assistance to DRC. The CAF provides a
framework for each donor’s assistance strategy for DRC. The Bank Group’s assistance strategy, the
CAS, was designed through extensive consultation with the Government, civil society, and private
sector actors. Building on Bank experience working in post-conflict and transitional countries, it
proposes an agenda that includes: (i)effective management o f the existing World Bank Group
portfolio; (ii)analytical work; (iii)I D A financing; (iv) scaling up the activities o f the International
Finance Corporation (IFC); and (v) expansion o f the activities o f the Multilateral Investment
Guarantee Agency (MIGA). The main anticipated outcomes - adherence to good governance
principles and improved emphasis on poverty reduction - are expected to lead to improvements in
governance, better management o f natural resources, better procurement o f public goods and services,
improved health and education indicators, and improved rural incomes.

7.
The CAS will focus mainly on three o f the five pillars o f the Government’s Poverty
Reduction Strategy Paper (PRSP):
Promotion of good governance and consolidation of peace. The Bank Group’s efforts in
support of the Governance Contract will focus on natural resources management, public
financial management, and public administration reform, through the full range o f its support
- advisory and analytical work, technical assistance and capacity building, and financing.
Achievement of sustained and shared economic growth, through infrastructure
rehabilitation and expansion; and private sector development to foster economic
diverszjication. I D A also expects to provide the full range o f its support to this pillar, IFC
will provide advisory services and financial support; and MIGA will provide advisory
services and guarantees.

Improved implementation of poverty alleviation programs, with emphasis on health,
education and HIV/AIDS; underserved communities, including indigenous communities; and
the rural sector.

Other donors are expected to take the lead in supporting the remaining two PRSP pillars - combating
HIV/AIDS and promoting community dynamics, although ongoing IDA activities will continue.
8.
Theproposedprogram is complementary to the activities of other key donors and builds on
the Bank’s strength in delivering advisory and analytical activities within the multi-donor
assistanceframework. The Bank expects to take the lead in:
0

0

0

0

public expenditure management (together with the IMF);
public administration and civil service reform, and local governance apd decentralization
(together with EC);
investment climate, public enterprise reform, and natural resources management (with
increased support from IFC and MIGA, and with the IMF and EC); and
Infrastructure sectors4 (together with EC and AfDB).

Risks

9.
World Bank Group engagement in DRC has high risks. I t potentially has even higher
returns not only for the Bank but also for other countries of the sub region. Research and
experience have shown that external assistance can play a key role in promoting the type of
governance reforms needed for consolidating economic growth and political stabilization, and hence
for escaping the conflict trap. Through consultations with all stakeholders and donors, Bank staff have
identified the following main risks: (i)political instability and resurgence o f armed conflict; (ii)
fragile
macro-economy; (iii)obstructed or slowed implementation o f critical economic and governance
reforms; (iv) corruption; (v) centrifugal tendencies that could result from mismanagement o f the
decentralization process; (vi) poor donor coordination; (vii) operational risks to the portfolio; and
(viii) reputational risk. To help donors and the Bank manage these risks, the CAS focuses on
improving governance, decentralization, public expenditure management, natural resources
management, and the effective delivery o f shared growth and poverty-focused projects, including
infrastructure and rural development.
Results

10.
Expected results. The CAF and CAS provide a framework to assist the Government in
creating the conditions for improved governance and shared growth. The main expected outcomes
from the CAS are adherence to good governance principles, shared growth and access to improved
social services.

The Bank Group’s assistance to the infrastructure sectors might need to be adjusted in view o f the recent
protocol o f understanding that the Government o f DRC signed with the Government of China, reportedly
up to $5 billion o f financing for transport infrastructure, mining concessions, and other investments.

- iv -

PART A. THE COUNTRY ASSISTANCE FRAMEWORK
1.
The Country Assistance Framework (CAF) is a process by which a number of donors have
developed a common strategic approach for economic assistance to Democratic Republic of the
Congo (DRC) in the post-elections period. The CAF i s derived from the priorities articulated in the
Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (PRSP) and covers the period 2007 to 2010. It i s expected that it
will provide a solid basis for harmonizing approaches and programs.

2.
The CAF is born from the recognition that the issue of aid harmonization is at the core of
the recovery challenge in DRC. Assistance to DRC i s characterized by the paradoxical combination
o f a relatively large number o f donors (with more than 20 agencies providing assistance through a
broad variety o f operational partners, both governmental and non-governmental), and a relatively
limited total amount o f assistance (about US$SOO million in annual disbursements). Aid i s inadequate
given the scale o f challenges that DRC faces (about US$15 per capita per year). This situation carries
significant risks with regard to the actual capacity o f aid agencies to effectively contribute to stability
and recovery: (i)by absorbing limited Government capacities in the dialogue with a large number o f
partners; (ii)by making the achievement o f synergies difficult, in a context where individual projects,
even if each one i s successful, may not be enough to yield an impact at the countrywide level; and
(iii)by disconnecting economic assistance from other international efforts (political, security,
humanitarian) and hence limiting its potential impact on the overall stabilization agenda.

3.
The CAF has generated intense interest among donors as an effort to coordinate and
harmonize approaches. Starting from a small core group, participation has rapidly expanded to 17
members, including both multilateral organizations - the World Bank Group (WBG), the European
Commission (EC), the International Monetary Fund (IMF), the African Development Bank (ADB),
and the United Nations (UN) system - and key bilaterals: Belgium (Belgian Cooperation), Canada
(Canadian International Development Agency, CIDA), France (French Cooperation), Germany,
Japan, China, the Netherlands, Italy, Spain, Sweden (Swedish International Development Agency,
SIDA), the United Kingdom (Department for International Development, DFID), and the United
States (US Agency for International Development, USAID).

4.
The CAF process aims to harmonize donor approaches and instruments at a minimum
transaction cost. As in many harmonization efforts, the C A F challenge has been to overcome
bureaucratic complexities and differences o f institutional cultures to reach a consensus around key
priorities. Potential bureaucratic issues stem from the multiplicity o f review and approval mechanisms
across institutions, which can easily result in adding layers upon layers o f complexity to any joint
decision-making. Differences o f institutional cultures are sometimes as basic as different meanings
for what an assistance strategy i s (e.g., for the World Bank Group it i s essentially a set o f decisions
guiding the allocation o f existing resources, while for the United Nations it i s an effort aimed at
mobilizing new financing - which calls for different approaches). The C A F hence consists o f a light
and pragmatic process aimed at ensuring a consensus on the substance o f the strategy, while leaving
ample flexibility to each participant on process issues.
5.
The C A F has focused to date on building consensus around three key elements of any
strategy: a joint diagnosis, coordinated programming, and a common results matrk. In practical
terms, this has translated in the production o f a series o f “joint chapters” that will be incorporated into
each donor strategy. C A F donors have committed to incorporate these chapters verbatim in their
respective strategies, although it i s agreed that some participating agencies may add to these chapters
complementary material (to meet their institutional requirements). The joint chapters are: (i)country

context; (ii)key challenges and medium-term prospects; (iii)risks; (iv) thematic annexes for each o f
the five PRSP pillars (Governance, Growth, Basic Social Services, HIV/AIDS, and Community
Dynamics); and (v) a results matrix.
6.
The CAF was a complexprocess. The work has proceeded through a series o f several day
long meetings, interspaced with regular and intense consultations among donors in Kinshasa.
Working groups developed common chapter and common annexes after in-depth consultations with
the Government. Discussions helped to sort out differences in approaches. While challenging to
manage, the process was quite successful, in that participants have remained enthusiastic (with new
participants joining in) despite the number o f actors, institutional needs, and differences in operating
modes, and in that a strong consensus has been forged on key pieces o f the CAF. The election o f the
new Government has spurred consultations between the Government and the donors, and donor
coordination has been added to the docket o f the Ministry o f Planning. The CAF was prepared
through in-country joint consultation with the new authorities and other stakeholders (private sector
and civil society) that took place in Kinshasa in September 2007.

7.
Looking forward, next steps in the donor harmonization process include discussions
regarding joint mechanisms for supporting project implementation (a joint monitoring and evaluation
matrix), on the most effective way for further harmonization o f donors in DRC; and on strengthening
o f the Government’s own coordination capacities.

-2-

PART A.1. COUNTRY CONTEXT

8.
The situation in D R C exemplifies many of the challengesfaced by post-conflict countries.
DRC i s endowed with a bounty o f natural resources that give it the potential to grow quickly in a
sustainable manner out o f i t s post-conflict state - provided that the resources are managed properly.
Significant progress has been made over the last years, but the challenges remain daunting. Physical
and social devastation caused by decades o f mismanagement and conflict in one o f the most richlyendowed African countries i s extreme. Living conditions for most o f the 58 million Congolese are
extremely difficult, and the sharp deterioration o f social indicators jeopardizes the prospects for
Africa as a whole to make decisive progress towards the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs)
(see Annex 1). The contrasts are stark, in a country the size o f Western Europe, between districts
where the situation i s comparable to other African countries and areas where extreme violence and
urgent humanitarian needs persist. The political environment remains complex and fluid - and the
regional stakes are high, with seven out o f DRC's nine neighbors having experienced a major conflict
over the last decade.
A. Political Background

9.
D R C is emerging from a dreadful period of mismanagement, political instability, and
conflict. After about eighty years o f colonial rule, several secessionist conflicts in the postindependence period, and a long period o f corruption and mismanagement under President Mobutu
Sese Seko, DRC entered the 1990s in a state o f quasi-collapse. That decade was marked by
successive episodes o f increasing violence: looting by the armed forces in 1991 and again in 1993, a
first conflict in 1997 (with the involvement o f seven foreign countries and a number o f militias), and
a second conflict between 1998 and 2003 during which a reported 3.5 million people died, and many
more were displaced.
10.
The recent elections mark the culmination of the peace and reconciliation process. Since
2001, and the appointment o f President Joseph Kabila, considerable progress has been made, within
the context o f the 1999 Lusaka ceasefire agreement and the inter-Congolese dialogue. Large-scale
military activity ceased in early 200 1. Foreign forces formally withdrew in 2002. The United Nations
(UN) peacekeeping mission (Mission des Nations Unies en Rkpublique De'mocratique du Congo,
MONUC) has deployed more than 17,000 troops in the country. The pace o f progress accelerated
after June 2003 and the establishment o f a Transitional Government (and a Parliament) o f national
unity: communications were re-established between areas which had long been divided along
frontlines, key technical institutions were re-unified, exchange rates were harmonized across the
country, and a new constitution was approved by referendum in December 2005. Despite formidable
logistical challenges (and localized episodes o f violence), general elections took place in a
satisfactory manner on July 30, 2006 (first round o f Presidential election and Parliamentary elections)
and October 29, 2006 (second round o f Presidential elections and local elections).
For thefirst time since 1960, the Government, Parliament, and local authorities have been
11.
selected through democratic elections, and new institutions are now in place. President Joseph
Kabila won the presidential elections with 58 percent o f the vote against his challenger Jean-Pierre
Bemba who obtained 42 percent o f the vote. President Kabila announced the composition o f his
government on February 5, 2007. Led by Prime Minister Gizenga, this government comprises 60
members, including six ministers o f state, 34 ministers and 20 deputy ministers. I t i s a coalition
representingthe broad political platform which supported President Kabila during the 2006 elections
and it includes the Presidents party (Parti du Peuple pour la Reconstruction et la De'mocratie,

-3-

PPRD), the Prime Minister’s party (Parti Lumumbiste Unifie‘,PALU), and the Union des De‘mocrates
Mobutistes (UDEMO). The Parliament and Senate are in place as well as Provincial Assemblies.

12.
Still, much remains to be done to further consolidate the peace and reconciliation process.
There i s insecurity in the East due to remaining militia activity. In Ituri, approximately 4,500 militia
members are s t i l l harassing the civilian population and fighting with the weak army and the overstretched MONUC. In North Kivu, negotiations between rebel leader Laurent Nkunda and the
Government o f DRC resulted in an agreement to mix brigades loyal to Nkunda with regular army
brigades. Localized riots sporadically affect other parts o f the country (e.g., in Bas Congo, at the end
o f January) and deadly clashes occurred in Kinshasa in March between Senator Bemba’s guards and
government forces. While a major reversal o f the achievements o f recent years seems unlikely, major
challenges remain ahead. Efforts will be needed to prevent the disenfranchisement of key
constituencies and political leaders. Regional differences may have been crystallized by the elections
process, including between the Western and Eastern parts o f the country. Violence that s t i l l affects
several districts along the Eastern borders, including widespread human rights abuses, will need to be
contained to avoid i t s spreading to neighboring countries, and eventually reduced. The demobilization
and reintegration o f former combatants, the unification o f all armed forces, through the integration o f
the Government’s and rebel armed forces into a restructured national military will be key to restoring
stability throughout the country.

13.
Overall, the political context i s fluid, and external partners will need to monitor the situation
closely, to best adjust their programs to the evolving circumstances. The elections have transformed
the environment in which assistance will be provided in many ways, but the new political landscape i s
only starting to take shape. For donors, the key issue i s whether the new political context will be one
where ambitious reforms can be implemented - or not. In this context, donors will pay particular
attention to monitoring developments in the following four areas:
First, the Government’s commitment to reforms. Both the President and the Prime Minister
have emphasized the importance o f good governance since the elections. In February 2007, the
Prime Minister prepared and presented a government program to Parliament which included a
Governance Contract between the authorities and the people o f DRC. This contract, which
covers March-December 2007, i s an important first step in outlining much-needed reforms in a
broad range o f areas: security sector reform, transparency, public finance management, the
management o f natural resources, public administration reform, local government, and the
investment climate and public enterprise reform. The key challenge will be to implement this
ambitious program - a task for which a substantial amount o f external support will be
necessary. In i t s first few months in office, the Government took important steps towards the
implementation o f the Contract, in particular in the area o f decentralization, but much remains
to be done.
Second, the effectiveness of the decision-making structure. The years o f transition have been
marked by complex decision-making arrangements. While this has facilitated consensus around
key decisions, it has also translated into delays and second-best compromises. The challenge
w i l l be to find ways to strengthen the decision-making process, without losing the ability to
reach broad support on key decisions.
Third, the Government’s actual authority over specific constituencies. The issue i s whether
the Government will be in a position to break with the constant need for compromises that has
characterized the last years and to take on powerful constituencies which may have vested
interests in the status quo.

-4-

And fourth, the role of the opposition. As the political environment develops, the constitution
o f political alliances (or the permanence o f divisions) between opposition groups, and their
commitment to due process (e.g., challenging the Government in Parliament rather than in the
streets), will be key factors to watch. The March 2007 clashes in Kinshasa are evidence that the
social situation remains tense in many parts o f the country and the need for the Government to
deliver peace dividends i s critical. Particular attention will also be needed to ensure the stability
o f those areas which voted massively for the opposition. In addition, it will be important to
watch the ways in which the political environment created by the Government fosters
engagement with the opposition in the nascent democracy. In both the short and medium terms,
it will be necessary to review the way in which the opposition functions, the space they have to
operate, and the relationship they have with the Government.

B. Economic Background
14.
D R C is one of the poorest countries in the world, with a Gross Domestic Product (GDP)
per capita of at about US$139 in 2006. Despite i t s rich endowments in natural resources and the
dynamism and entrepreneurship o f i t s population, DRC has been affected by a series o f economic
crises since independence, which were exasperated during the years o f conflict. GDP per capita
dropped from US$380 in 1960 to US$224 in 1990 to the current US$139 (in constant dollars).
15.
The decade of conflict, compounded by the legacy of sustained mismanagement, has had
devastating effects. Prior to the conflict, the Congolese economy was dominated by extractive and
export activities (mining, agriculture, forestry, energy), which fueled a system o f poor governance
and large-scale corruption. The vast majority o f the population remained poor, and derived i t s income
from traditional agriculture and informal activities. War and civil disturbance have taken a high toll
on the country. Infrastructure has suffered from lack o f maintenance and considerable physical
damage. Many institutions are in shambles. Millions o f people have lost their assets, including
buildings, livestock, and tools. Many enterprises have lost assets, staff, and commercial networks.
Overall, the economy has been transformed, and i s now centered on subsistence agriculture and
informal activities, with a collapse o f export and value-adding activities.
Since April 2001, the Government has implemented a solid program of economic reforms,
16.
supported by the Bretton Woods Institutions. This program aims both to spur private-led economic
growth and to tackle some o f the deep-rooted structural issues which have hampered DRC’s
economic development in the past. International Monetary Fund (IMF) support was provided through
a Staff Monitored Program (SMP), between June 2001 and March 2002; access to the Poverty
Reduction and Growth Facility (PRGF) for the period April 2002 to March 2006; and a new SMP
between April and December 2006, renewed until end June 2007. Bank support was provided through
a series o f budget support and investment operations, as well as substantial analytical work and policy
advice.

17.
Overall, implementation was satisfactory until about mid-2005. I t deteriorated during the
pre-election period, but recovered again in early 2007 following the appointment of the new
Government. Four perioals can be distinguished

-5-

Throughout 2001, vigorous measures were taken to break hyper-inflation, stabilize the
exchange rate (following the decision to float the Congolese Franc in April 2001), restart
revenue collection, and launch key structural reforms.
From early 2002 to mid-2005, efforts succeeded in further stabilizing the macroeconomic
situation - with 12-month inflation at about 12 percent; a relatively stable exchange
(although with substantial short-term fluctuations, in a largely dollarized economy, where the
monetary basis i s very small); and a gradual increase o f fiscal revenues, from about 5.9
percent o f GDP in 2001 to about 11.4 percent o f GDP in 2005. Parallel efforts were made on
the structural side, with significant achievements in a broad range o f areas, including the
strengthening o f the chain o f expenditure; the adoption o f new investment, mining, and
forestry codes; and the completion o f public enterprise audits.
From mid-2005 to end-2006, performance deteriorated, largely as a result o f political
uncertainties and the absence o f a functioning executive during the election period. End-ofyear inflation reached 2 1.3 percent at the end o f 2005, and declined slightly to 18.2 percent at
the end o f 2006. The Congolese Franc registered 17 percent depreciation during 2006. Still,
significant efforts were made by the authorities to manage this difficult period, including
enforcing a moratorium on key transactions by public companies.
Since early 2007, after the elections were held successfully and the new Government
appointed, macroeconomic stability has been restored. The Government has prepared i t s
program, including a Governance Contract, expressing i t s determination to fight corruption
and implement strong governance policies. An IMF mission will visit Kinshasa during
December 4-18 to initiate discussions on a three-year arrangement under the Poverty
Reduction and Growth Facility (PRGF).

18.
These actions have elicited a strong private sector response. About US$2.7 billion in new
investments (a significant share o f private capital flows to Sub-Saharan Africa) have been registered
by the Government since early 2003, which reflects the private sector’s interest in the country’s
immense natural resources and provides an indication o f i t s growth potential. Investment to date has
been focused on rapid-return activities, mostly in Kinshasa and Katanga, in a broad range o f sectors
(e.g., telecom, services, agro-business, construction, and natural resource exploitation).
19.
As a result, economic growth returned in 2002 after ten years of contraction. While the
available statistical data have limited reliability, all indicators give a convergent picture o f progress.
Growth has been pulled by the resumption o f economic activity which followed the re-establishment
o f security and the reunification o f the country (a pattern typical o f post-conflict countries), especially
in the trade, transport, construction, and agriculture sectors; by a boom in selected manufacturing
(agro-business, construction materials); and by the restart o f mining activities (from a very low basis).

-6-

8.0

in %

Chart 1. D R C -Economic Growth & Inflation, as of September 23,2007
600.0

6.0

500.0

4.0
400.0

2.0

0.0

300.0

-2.0

200.0

-4.0
100.0

-6.0
-8.0

0.0
2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

I

20.
DRC’s track record also facilitated the country’s access to the Highly Indebted Poor
Countries (HIPC) initiative. In 2002, the Government cleared i t s arrears to key creditors (including
to the Bank, the IMF, and the African Development Bank), and resumed timely service o f i t s debt,
after almost ten years o f interruption. In September 2002 the Paris Club granted significant bilateral
debt relief, and in July 2003 DRC reached i t s HIPC Decision Point - with total r e l i e f estimated at
US$6.3 billion in N e t Present Value (NPV) terms (for a total stock o f outstanding external debt
estimated at US$7.9 billion in N P V terms and US$10.7 billion in nominal terms at end-2002). The
Boards o f the Bank and the IMF agreed on a floating Completion Point, with triggers related to: (i)
completion o f a full PRSP and i t s satisfactory implementation for one year; (ii)satisfactory macroeconomic performance; (iii)effective use o f budgetary savings resulting from debt r e l i e f for povertyrelated programs; (iv) improvements in public expenditure management; (v) enhanced service
delivery and governance in priority sectors (health, education, rural development, and infrastructure);
(vi) adoption o f satisfactory sectoral strategies and related implementation plans for health, education,
and rural development; and (vii) improvements in public debt management. The date for reaching the
Completion Point will depend on the new Government’s commitment to reform and i t s
implementation performance. The debt relief effort will need to be completed by an agreement with
the London Club for the about US$900 million public debt from the private sector. A status o f
implementation o f the HIPC Completion Triggers i s attached in Annex 2.

21. According to the recently completed Joint Debt Sustainability Analysis (Annex 3)’ the
Democratic Republic of the Congo is in debt distress. At end 2006, all debt burden indicators
exceeded their policy-based thresholds.’ Further, the DRC has not serviced any o f i t s debt service

’

The World Bank’s Country Policy and InstitutionalAssessment (CPIA) rates DRC as a low performer. Under
the joint World BanW IMF debt sustainability framework, the corresponding thresholds are 30 percent for the
NPV o f external PPG debt to GDP ratio, 100 percent for the NPV o f external PPG debt-to-exportratio,
200 percent for the NPV o f external PPG debt to revenue ratio, 15 percent for the external PPG debt service to

-7-

obligations t o Paris Club creditors since July 2006. Even if the security situation stabilizes and
macroeconomic and structural policies improve substantially, as assumed under the baseline scenario,
external debt indicators will remain above these thresholds for many years to come and even worsen
in the event o f adverse exogenous shocks. The country’s large rehabilitation and reconstruction needs
necessitate considerable foreign capital inflows. Any such inflows should be managed judiciously,
through either market forces or a transparent and participative public decision-making process, so that
it i s allocated t o the most productive purposes, the returns t o which (financial, economic, and social,
as applicable) justify the cost o f capital.2 D R C should strengthen i t s track record o f policy
implementation with a view to reaching the Completion Point under the enhanced HIPC Initiative as
soon as possible, which would allow it t o benefit from substantial debt relief under this initiative as
well as under the Multilateral Debt Reduction Initiative. DRC’s debt burden indicators are projected
to fall below their thresholds if it benefits from these two initiatives. Even after the Completion Point
i s reached, however, the DRC’s debt sustainability i s likely t o remain vulnerable to adverse
exogenous shocks.
22. Severe governance problems and corruption continue to hamper DRC’s development prospects.
Corruption remains widespread and i s taking a heavy t o l l on public service capacity t o deliver key
services. D R C i s ranked 158 o f 163 countries by Transparency International. Corruption in D R C i s
largely a legacy o f the Mobutu era o f rapid enrichment and impunity. At the higher level, it has been
aggravated by the conflict and political transition, during which the lack o f a strong executive
prevented the imposition o f effective sanctions while many high-level officials tried to rapidly take
advantage o f their positions in a context fraught with uncertainties. At the lower level, the problem i s
compounded by the extremely l o w level and s t i l l irregular payment o f salaries. There i s a consensus
that unless decisive action i s taken in this area, the odds are l o w that D R C will be able to break the
cycle o f poverty and conflict.
23. The deterioration of infrastructure has also reached proportions that make economic
development almost impossible in many areas. In a country the size o f Western Europe, there are
less than 600 km o f paved roads. Out o f ten provincial capitals, only one can be accessed by land
from Kinshasa, three can be accessed from abroad, and six can only be accessed by plane.
Electrification rates are the lowest in Africa. Short o f a major infrastructure reconstruction program,
complemented by reform o f the dysfunctional operations and maintenance systems, the potential for
economic growth and private sector activity may not materialize in most provinces.
24. Overall, the situation remains very fragile: assuming a 6 percent economic growth, on average, it
would take until 2029 for the country to reach the level o f GDP per capita it had in 1990. The
exports ratio, and 25 percent for the external PPG debt service to revenue ratio. (Operational Framework for
Debt Sustainability Assessments in Low-Income Countries - Further Considerations, SM/05/109, 3/29/05 and
IDAlR2005-0056). Assuming that DRC reaches the HIPC Completion Point by mid-2008 and benefits from
debt relief under enhanced HIPC and the MDR initiatives, debt burden indicators would fall below policy-based

thresholds.
* The authorities o f DRC announced their intention to enter into an arrangement with China involving loans and
equity investments, o f a magnitude o f U S $ 5 billion or more. At the time o f writing, the details o f the
arrangements were not known, including the concessionality o f the loan. As long as the borrowing i s on highly
concessionalterms, the funds are used for productive purposes in line with the Government’s priorities, and the
disbursements are in line with the country’s absorptive capacity, this arrangement could be beneficial to the
country, triggering a higher growth rate and accelerating export growth, at least initially.

-8-

Government should strive to contain inflation and avoid exchange rate depreciation, and generally
maintain macroeconomic stability through prudent monetary and fiscal policy. I t could help revive
economic activities by improving the security situation, and by providing a stable and transparent
regulatory and legal environment to encourage private investors to come in. The mining sector i s
expected to be the engine o f growth in the near future, but providing a nurturing environment for the
agricultural sector development i s likely to be critical in the medium term.

C. Social Background
25. Progress toward peace and recovery is taking place within the context of an acute social crisis,
which constitutes a major risk for the country’s recovery. While political progress, economic reforms,
and the return o f growth have produced some visible results, the social situation remains appalling. A
large number o f Congolese communities have been forced into autarky and are living in dreadful
conditions, due to the collapse o f the transport system and widespread insecurity. Women and girls
have been disproportionately affected by violence and poverty and their numbers among the poor
have increased. Although detailed data are missing, specialized agencies report a large number o f
victims o f sexual violence and a growing number o f orphans and street children. Overall, an estimated
16 million people have critical food needs, and the vast majority o f the population consumes less than
two thirds o f the daily calories needed to maintain good health - with 71 percent o f the people living
on less than one dollar a day.
26. Part of the impact of the conflict is not directly visible, but nonetheless devastating. Large-scale
displacements, violence, and human rights abuses, as well as impoverishment have caused
tremendous psychological suffering and a deterioration o f the social fabric, breaking up families and
other solidarity networks. As a result, many traditional safety nets are no longer functioning
effectively, and some o f the social networks which are key for economic recovery have been severely
disrupted. The deterioration o f education and health services during the war years have dealt a
powerful and lasting blow to the well-being o f the population and i t s capacity to recover.

27. Overall, D R C is likely to miss most of the Millennium Development Goals by 2015 (see Box 1).
While detailed statistical information i s lacking, available indicators suggest that the conflict has
caused “development in reverse” in the social sectors. L i f e expectancy stands at 43 years, under-5
mortality above 205 per thousand. DRC’s Human Development Index declined by more than 10
percentage points in the last ten years - and DRC now ranks 167 out o f 177 rated countries. Progress
made between independence and the early 1990s has largely vanished.

-9-

Box 1. Targets and Current Status o f MDGs in DRC

- 10-

D. Donor Activities
28. The main donors (see Chart 2 and Chart 3) are the World Bank, European Commission, the UN
Agencies, IMF, AfDB and some key bilaterals (the UK, the United States, Belgium, and the
Netherlands). Other bilaterals intervening in DRC are Canada, Sweden, France, South Africa, Japan,
Germany, Italy, Switzerland, China, and Spain.
29. Since 2001, DRC has received a growing inflow of external economic aid - with annual
disbursements increasing from less than US$200 million in 2001, to about US$SOO million a year in
2004 and 2005 each. This i s only a fraction o f international assistance to DRC - which also includes
the financing o f a sizable peacekeeping force (over US$3 billion a year), support to the political
process (the 2006 elections cost over US$450 million), as well as humanitarian assistance (about
US$300 million a year).

400
350
300
250
200
150
100
50
0

2003
2004

n 2005
Belgium

ADB

Source: World Bank.

30. External assistance, however, has been concentrated only in a few sectors and has left wide
gaps. Support has been directed towards emergency (non-humanitarian) aid (25 percent), health and
other social services (14 percent), budget support (12 percent), community development (1 1 percent),
demobilization and reintegration (9 percent), democracy (8 percent), and capacity building (7
percent). Support to infrastructure and the productive sectors has been negligible compared to the
needs. Looking forward, indications are that a significant portion o f funding will be channeled to
growth-related activities (e.g., the extractive industries) and to areas that will support growth such as
power and roads.

- 11 -

C h a r t 3. DRC Donor Activity: Share per Sector 2003-2005

i

Others5Yo
r

iI

Hum./
Emg.aid

r

Agriculture
2%

I f
j 1

25%

Transport
2%

infrastructure
EO/.
u 1-

,i

)p-

Capacity
building
7%
Dernocraa

14%

CDD
11%

Budget
support
12%

Source: World Bank.

3 1. The Bank represents a significant share of donor support in some key economic sectors. The
Bank i s the main donor in all infrastructure sectors (transport, energy, and water). Until now, it has
provided a large proportion o f budget support (although the relative share o f the Bank’s contribution
in this area has been decreasing as other donors moved to this area), and it plays an important role in
capacity building.
32. Aid harmonization remains a challenge. Donor coordination has significantly increased since
2002. The scale o f needs in DRC and the challenges o f fulfilling those needs have necessitated an
increased level o f coordination in funding and programming to ensure the best use o f available
resources. Consultative Group meetings organized under the leadership o f the Government and the
Bank (five since 2002) have helped to mobilize funds and create a consensus within the international
community. Coordination has been further enhanced through the preparation o f the joint CAF.
Within the coordination framework that the CAF represents, the Bank will continue playing a leading
role in building stronger partnerships with donors and working towards the harmonization principles
o f the Paris Declaration, including identifying joint projects and project implementation
arrangements, joint analytical work, and joint monitoring structures.

- 12-

PART A.2. KEY CHALLENGES AND MEDIUM-TERM PROSPECTS
A. Country Vision and Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper

33. The Congolese leadership has set out an ambitious vision for the country’s development. This
vision i s articulated in the PRSP, which was presented in July 2006. It emphasizes the need to break
with past practices and to ensure a dramatic improvement o f living conditions throughout the country,
as a condition for sustained peace and eventual economic recovery. The PRSP builds on the 2001
Interim PRSP, and like the Interim PRSP (which was endorsed by all Congolese political forces at the
onset o f the peace process) it enjoys broad support among all key constituencies.
34. The PRSP was prepared through a genuine and extensive consultation process. Each district
prepared a district-level PRSP through an extensive grassroots consultation process managed by
specialized non governmental organizations (NGOs). These documents were consolidated into
provincial-level PRSPs, and eventually into the national PRSP. C i v i l society (including faith-based
organizations, labor unions, NGOs, women groups, youth associations, and community
representatives), the private sector, public institutions (national and local), and political
representatives - in total, about 35,000 people - participated in this exercise. This process increased
ownership o f the reform agenda by a broad part o f the population.

35. I n a post-conflict environment, this process has provided a framework for refocusing the
national dialogue toward a forward-looking agenda. The breadth o f the PRSP consultation process
made it possible not only to develop ownership o f the poverty reduction agenda among all key
constituencies, but also to mobilize the country’s energy in support o f a socially oriented, fonvardlooking agenda - which i s essential as the country moves away from the years o f conflict and
mismanagement which have left a legacy o f acute political and social tensions.
36. I n the face of a formidable set of constraints, the Congolese have articulatedpriorities around
five strategic pillars: (i)promoting good governance and consolidating peace; (ii)consolidating
improving access to social services and reducing
macroeconomic stability and economic growth; (iii)
vulnerability; (iv) combating HIV/AIDS; and (v) promoting community dynamics. These pillars are
closely related and inter-dependent, and progress in one area i s conditional to advances in others e.g., between growth and state reform; among social services delivery, state reform, and community
dynamics. While the articulation o f key priorities around these themes provides a useful analytical
framework, they need to be understood as complementary parts o f a single, holistic strategy.
37. The PRSP sets an ambitious development policy agenda, to be implemented with public capital
and pro-poor spending estimated at US$3.4 billion for the first three-year period (2006-08). Public
investment i s projected to increase from US$236 million (3 percent o f GDP) in 2005 to US$1.3
billion (13 percent o f GDP) in 2008. Even with financing o f this magnitude, however, it i s not clear
that the country has the capacity to absorb such a rapid expansion in public investment. The
Government now needs to develop a working plan with specific prioritized actions, costing, timing,
and definition o f the entity in charge at least for the first year, and preferably for the first few years.
The plan should be developed by the existing entities for planning and budgeting, so as to integrate
the poverty reduction process into the country’s national and local systems. This plan should: (i)
take
into account the realistic amount o f financial and human resources available, which means that the
reform agenda included in the PRSP should be prioritized and properly sequenced; (ii)assign
priorities even among the actions included in this plan, so that less urgent programs can be postponed,
should the available financing fall short (the Government has already started this prioritizing
exercise); (iii)clarify the links among the overall goals, proposed programs, macroeconomic

- 13 -

framework, and progress indicators; (iv) develop a matrix o f goals, programs, progress indicators, and
the entity in charge, which the PRSP does not have currently; and (v) include an external debt
management strategy in anticipation o f potential additional space for borrowing postHIPCMultilateral Debt Relief Initiative (MDRI). Preparing the working plan will also help prioritize
the needed capacity reinforcement program.

B. Key Challenges
The five pillars set out in the PRSP together articulate most o f the major challenges facing DRC:

3 8. Pillar 1. Promoting Good Governance and ConsolidatingPeace
Achieving the goals of Pillar 1 involvesjlve major sets of challenges:
Reforming the security sector (militayy, police, justice system), by:
- completing the integration o f all armed forces (former regulars and rebels), and the
demobilizationheintegration process;
- ensuring a regular payroll, strengthening professionalism and discipline o f both the
military and the police, and initiating civilian oversight;
- Strengthening the organizational and institutional capacity and professionalism o f the
judiciary, including through pay reform.
Improving the management ofpublic resources, by:
- improving the transparency o f budgeting and contracting, strengthening watchdog
entities, building mechanisms for public participation, and sanctioning fraud through
judicial action;
- increasing government revenues, focusing on revenue sources such as the mining sector
and customs, broadening the tax base, and reinforcing the tax administration for small
and medium enterprises;
- enhancing the composition and execution o f public expenditure, by decisively increasing
pro-poor budget allocations; improving execution o f the budget; and strengthening public
financial management systems and the capacity o f the second tier o f government, in light
o f decentralization.
Reforming the public administration, by:
- beginning the long-term process o f rebuilding an effective public service, to include the
creation o f a civil service register, a functioning payroll management system, and a highlevel civil service;
- managing the decentralization process, with priority focus on improving the
implementation and monitoring capacity o f local governments (see B o x 2).

- 14-

Box 2. Managing Decentralization

The new Constitution allocates 40 percent o f domestic fiscal revenues collected in each province to provincial
authorities, and also defines the responsibilities o f provincial and other sub-national authorities, including major
service aspects o f public service delivery in primary and secondary education and primary health care.
However, the PRSP does not reflect these fiscal transfers in the macroeconomic framework or discuss how the
devolution o f responsibilities would be carried out. Whereas key legal acts regulating fiscal and administrative
decentralization had been scheduled for adaptation before the 2006 Presidential and Parliamentary elections,
this proved to be impossible due to a lack o f political consensus. This subsequently led to a situation in which
provincial assemblies and governors were elected in early 2007 in the absence o f the necessary legal framework
for the operation o f provincial institutions.
Risk mitigation measures introduced by the central government around the provincial elections reduced fiscal
transfers to the provinces from a previous level o f 15 percent to 6 percent. Democratically elected provincial
institutions were therefore expected to function without the necessary legal framework or fiscal resources,
generating political tensions between provincial and central government authorities.
The urgency brought about by the rapid implementation o f political decentralization created a highly politicized
decentralization debate in the first half o f 2007, focused around the issue o f fiscal resource allocation, pitting
elected governors and heads o f provincial assemblies against the central government. The former insisted on the
immediate and direct application o f constitutional principles while the latter argued that more technical work i s
required to ensure the equitabIe allocation o f resources as well the effective management o f competency
transfers.

The debate finally culminated in a compromise between central and provincial authorities, c o n f m e d at the
National Decentralization Forum, held from 3-5 October 2007, which brought together all stakeholders in the
process. It has been agreed that January 2008 i s the target date for the implementation o f constitutional
provisions on decentralization, in particular those regarding the provinces. However, technical arrangements,
notably the broad architecture o f intergovernmental relations, including clear revenue and expenditure
assignments and fiscal transfers, as well as key legislation remain to be adopted, putting this target date at risk.
With the compromise reached on the implementation o f constitutional provisions, the next immediate objective
i s to ensure that the decentralization process does not further weaken public expenditure management and
services delivery. The Government w i l l therefore need to rapidly formulate an action plan to build personnel
and financial management capacity at provincial level, which w i l l require significant donor support.
Furthermore, it i s important to note that the decentralization o f functions and finances to provincial level i s only

the f r s t step in the decentralization process. Elections for decentralized authorities to be established at subprovincial level are scheduled for 2008. Administrative-territorial reforms to divide the existing 11 provinces
into 26, mostly new provinces are to be implemented in 2010, following constitutional provisions.

Decentralization i s therefore a theme that w i l l affect reforms in all key sectors throughout the CAS period.
Whereas in principle the process could generate significant benefits in improved public service delivery, as well
as in enhanced political accountability, the process also poses serious risks (fiduciary as well as political) in
view o f the capacity constraints and provincial and local level.

Reforming the management of natural resources (both mining andforestry), by:
- in the mining sector, developing and implementing a n Extractive Industries Transparency
Initiative (EITI) action plan; strengthening oversight o f the sector; ensuring due process
f o r the award o f m i n e r a l rights, consistent with the n e w M i n e Law; addressing pressing
issues relative to artisanal and small-scale mining; r e f o r m i n g p u b l i c enterprises
(including GECAMINES); and transferring exploitation responsibilities t o the private
sector;

-15-

-

in the forestry sector, implementing the more equitable policies in the new Forest Code;
building basic institutional capacity; securing forest people’s traditional user rights;

fostering public participation; enforcing forest management plans; rehabilitating key
protected areas; engaging in emerging markets that reward carbon storage and forest
protection; enforcing the moratorium on new forestry concessions and canceling those
that are invalid; and curbing illegal logging (see Box 3).
Box 3. The Forest Reform Agenda

The DRC harbors the second largest rainforest in the world. These forests are a vital source o f food, income,
medicine, fuel, and shelter, and they fulfill cultural needs for millions o f rural poor, including indigenous
peoples. They harbor unique biodiversity and store large amounts o f carbon, and provide valuable ecologicial
services.

In 2002, 43 million hectares, i.e. half the country’s rainforest had been awarded irreguraly and without due
process with no local consultation, no environmental measures, and no consideration for alternative uses. The
risk o f an unregulated expansion o f logging with the return o f peace and improved infrastructure, in a context o f
institutional collapse needed to be addressed uregtnly and forcefully. Under the TSS, the Government addressed
this legacy o f mismanagement to lay the foundation o f more equitable and sustainable models. Since 2002, with
support from the international community, the government has:
1

1
1
1

1
1

Cancelled 25 million hectares o f non-compliant logging concessions, in 2002;
Established a moratorium on new concessions in 2002, raised at Presidential level in 2005;
Increased the annual area fee to dissuade further speculation on forests lands, in 2004;
Launched a legal review o f all concessions including those awarded in breach o f the moratorium, engaged
an international independent observer with the active participation o f local community representation ongoing;
Established an independent logging monitoring system to help fight illegal logging, in 2007.
Adopted a Forest Code that replaces the 1949 colonial rule, protects local peoples’ traditional rights, and
introduces the principles o f benefit-sharing, management plans, and environmental services.

Although this reform agenda faced resistance from many vested interests, the area under concessions dropped
fiom 43 million hectares in 2002, to 21 in 2007. This work helped restore forest people’s rights, and fieed up
space to implement community-based management, create new protect areas, and develop innovative models
that reward the DRC for carbon storage, biodiversity conservation, and other services their forests provide to the
global community. Since 2004, public debate about forest management in DRC has intensified with broad and
lively stakeholder participation. The consensus that emerged around this forest agenda i s reflected in the
Brussels Declaration o f February 2007 and in a report “Forest in Post-Conflict DRC” coauthored with 14 civil
society and research organizations.
Looking forward, the priority will be to consolidate the initial achievements and provide continued support to
reformers. The Bank will: (a) continue to support the reform agenda especially the moratorium and the legal
review as core-elements to any effort to reduce poverty and improve governance in DRC; (b) continue to help
develop innovative forest management and protected area models; and (c) help strengthen the capacities of
public institutions, civil society, and local communities to implement, enforce, and monitor the new policies in
the field. These progressive policies have attracted international support from a wide range o f donors including
the Bank in the context o f country as well as regional intiatives such as the Congo Basin Forest Partnership,
through two IDA and GEF grants and a Multi-Donor Forest Trust Fund that i s being established with the
European Union, Belgium, France, United Kingdom, Germany and Luxembourg and innovate ve landscape
management planning processes supported by the U S and NGO partners.

Reforming public enterprises (see Box 4) by:
designing a strategy for the management o f the public enterprises’ social liabilities (Le.
retrenchment plans);

- 16-

establishing an adequate legal and regulatory system (Le., privatization law, investment
protection law, regulatory agencies etc.),
- settling public debts and negotiating commercial debts,
- establishing a professional and independent management structure ahead o f the
privatization,
- undertaking inventories o f public enterprises' assets and other liabilities,
- identifying the most suited methods o f state disengagement for each public enterprises
commercial activities, or alternative options where private sector involvement does not
appear as a viable option.
Box 4. Reforming Public Enterprises
Public enterprises are the cornerstone o f the DRC economy: in particular, they dominate the mining
sector (GECAMINES, MIBA), they control the transport (airports, railways, ports), water and power
sectors. They represent the vast majority o f formal employment in DRC. In the transport sector alone
they employ 33,000 persons and s t ill generate in excess o f U S $ 250 milliodyear in revenues despite
an outdated and derelict infrastructure. Likewise, they are responsible for providing a very large
portion o f the health and education services o f the country.
As public monopolies, they have not been subjected to adequate oversight for many decades resulting
in huge losses to the community at large both in terms o f misdirected investment, s k y high tariffs,
revenues leakages, etc. SNCC (the railway company) provides an illustration o f the conditions o f the
public enterprise sector: SNCC counts over 13,000 employees, only 500 km o f railways are
operational (out o f 3,600 km) and - on average - one out o f three trains derail.
As o f today, public enterprises represent both a burden and a liability to the State and potentially
important tools for economic development as they are active in the areas that are the most likely to
attract investments and/or generate revenues in the foreseeable hture (including power, extractive
industries and transport).
Since re-engaging in DRC, the World Bank came to the conclusion that public enterprise reform i s a
critical element to ensuring sustainable and equitable economic development. As such, assistance to
these enterprises has been tied to a clear reform agenda whereby investment i s subordinated to reform
steps to ultimately allow for private sector participation.

Pillar 2, ConsolidatingMacroeconomic Stabilitv and Economic Growth
Pillar 2 encompassesfour major sets of challenges:
Sustaining the economic rebound and achieving macroeconomic stabiliiy, by bringing down
inflation, building up international reserves, and exercising tighter fiscal discipline and better
control o f budget execution (see B o x 5).
Ensuring sustained growth in the agriculture sector, by improving security in rural areas; and
deploying a large-scale investment program to, among other things, reopen roads (in

- 17-

particular, between provincial capitals and surrounding rural areas) and help reconstitute
farmers' assetsa3

Restoring pre-war production levels in the mining sector, and improving management of
revenue stream^,^ by attracting major private investment, which in turn i s conditional on
improved governance; the repair o f transport infrastructure; ensuring that artisanal miners are
taken into account in plans t o develop the sector; and increasing transparency o f the budget,
as a way t o ensure that revenues from the sector are fairly distributed.

Laying the groundwork for divers9cation of the economy through private-led growth, by
significantly improving the business environment; making massive investments in the
transport and energy sectors; restoring access to credit; and reforming public enterprises that
are an obstacle to growth.
Box 5. The Post-Conflict Economic Rebound in DRC
A n economic rebound i s typical in post-conflict countries, and i s linked to the resumption o f economic
activity, improved security, access to services, and renewed confidence. In most countries, the rebound
translates into an average growth rate o f 6 percent a year for a period o f 7 years, before starting to subside.
In DRC, though the medium-tern macroeconomic objectives in the PRSP are based on this average, they
may be overly ambitious, since real GDP grew by only about 5 percent in 2006, and i s projected to grow by
6.5 percent i s 2007. As a result, the average growth rate for 2006-08 i s unlikely to be more than 6.5 percent.
The Government needs to put greater emphasis on stabilizing the macroeconomic situation in the short
term, to lay the foundation for growth.

Pillar 3, Imvrovina Access to Social Services and Reducing Vulnerabilitv

5

Pillar 3 involves three sets of challenges:
In the education sector: achieving universal primary education, aligning secondary and higher

education with the country's workforce needs, and strengthening the institutional and financial
capacity o f the sector (see Box 6) by:

Promoting universal primary education by: sequentially removing a l l fees for primary
education services.

Improving strategic and operational management, by:
o supporting the implementation o f critical reforms t o revamp the sector's legal
framework;

Agriculture, at about 42 percent o f GDP, has the potential to be a key engine o f poverty reduction, as well as a
source o f well-distributed growth across provinces.
Extractive industries, which currently represent about 13 percent o f GDP, have the potential to be a key source
o f both fiscal revenues and foreign exchange.
The PRSP identifies four categories o f population which should be primary targets o f social protection
programs: vulnerable women and children; disabled persons; the elderly; and the displaced. A series of
targeted social protection measures w i l l be introduced for these groups aimed at reducing risk and promoting
their economic and social integration into society.

- 18-

o
o
o
o

improving public finance mechanisms including validation o f the teachers
payroll and introducing a simplified, more equitable and transparent pay system;
developing a realistic and costed long-germ strategic plan for the education
sector;
undertaking a school mapping exercise to ensure equitable overage;
improving accountability at all levels o f the education systems.

Increasing the levels ofpublicjnancing for the education sector, by:
o developing an education financing strategy and aligning budget allocations with
sector priorities;
o increasing the share o f the state budget to education to 10 percent immediately
and at least 20 percent within three years;
o developing budget monitoring systems to ensure that public funds reach intended
beneficiaries.
Formulating proposals to reform secondary education, including vocational training,
andfor rationalizing and revamping tertiary education.
I n the health sector (see B o x 6):
0

Increasing access to effective health services by progressively reducing barriers that
inhibit poor and vulnerable people from accessing services, notablyJinancia1 barriers;
Improving the coverage and quality of services, by:
o Rationalizing the existing health facilities network on the basis o f Government's
Health Systems Strengthening Strategy (HSSS), particularly in rural and poor
urban areas, where most o f the poor live;
o Rationalizing and developing health human resources.
o Implementing measures to ensure acceptable and consistent standards o f service
delivery, both by state and non-state partners;
o Ensuring drug supply and investing in infrastructure rehabilitation and equipment
in order to extend coverage o f the packages o f health services provided by Health
Zones at both health center and general referral hospital levels.
o Developing management capacities o f the central and intermediary levels o f
health administration taking into account the upcoming decentralization;
Mobilizing adequatejnancing, both internal and external,for all Health Zones within
the context of a medium-term expenditureframework, including those not currently
supported, through results-based service contracts.

I n the water sector:
Improving strategic and operational management,,by:
o Preparation o f REGIDESO institutional reform and a road map for the sector
reform;
o developing national standards for water quality;
o Development o f an action plan to reduce and control water consumption by
public institutions

- 19-

o

strengthening the capacity o f Government ministry in charge o f water, in the

area o f management contract planning, regulation, and monitoring, as well
as the development o f a financing and rate adjustment strategy
Expanding access to water and sanitation in rural and urban areas, by:
o Expanding the national rural water and sanitation programme throughout the
o
o
o

o
o

country;
Establishing a specific national budget for a national rural water and sanitation
program;
Implementing a national training program o f Health Zone-based water and
sanitation supervisors;
Developing a national standard for the organizational structure o f community-run
water systems and a standard tariff system that targets access for all (life-line
tariffs);
Rehabilitating REGIDESO-managed water systems;
Providing REGIDESO with management and technical training.
Box 6. Challenges in the Health and Education Sectors

Health
The crisis o f the past decades have severely affected the health status o f the population and degraded the health
system. More than 1,200 people dying per day, most from preventable diseases such as malaria and respiratory
diseases. In 2001, under-five mortality was estimated at over 200 per 1,000 live births, and maternal mortality at
greater than 1,200 per 100,000 live births, among the highest in the world. Such rates, combined with the country’s
population o f 64 million which i s the third largest in Sub-Saharan Africa, means that DRC represents a significant
proportion o f the burden o f illness and mortality on the continent. While overall health status and service utilization
i s poor, there are also significant disparities between the poor and better-off. Barriers to health service utilization
include lack o f geographic access, poor functionality and quality o f services, and the cost to households. The focus o f
health service development has been on the Health Zone system, which integrates a network o f primary health
services with a referral facility. Based on a history o f public-private partnership with church-based providers, nongovernmental organizations have a significant role in sector development. Since 2002, combined with greater social
and economic stability in most parts o f the country, significant improvement in health sector financing levels, both
domestic and international, are expected to have improved the health status o f the population. However, many areas
remain with low or no external supports, so that adequate financing for all Health Zones, from domestic and
international sources, i s needed to expand coverage o f service and reduce barriers to care. With limited government
capacity, particularly at the provincial level, this could be achieved through the financing and supervision o f resultsbased contracts with governmental and non-governmental providers, as well as support for basic high-impact
preventive interventions such as family planning and anti-malaria bednets. Measures for ensuring acceptable
standards o f service delivery and the consistency o f standards in diagnosis and treatment -particularly by non-state
partners - also need to be implemented.
Education
A key objective in the education sector i s to move systematically and as rapidly as i s feasible towaid achieving the
constitutional commitment to universal, quality primary education. At the same time, the higher education system
also needs to be developed, to produce the professional class that DRC needs for its future development. During the
PRSP cycle, the Government i s expected to decide on a financing plan and align the budget allocation.with sector
priorities; and also to adopt measures to ensure that allocated funds reach their intended recipients. External partners
are prepared to step up their support to meet the financing gap in the sector, provided that the financing plan i s
credible and that there i s evidence o f improved efficiency. The recently completed Education Sector Review, and
ongoing analyses o f teacher financing and the elimination o f school fees, will provide guidance on how to prioritize
among the many objectives.

- 20 -

Pillar 4, Combating HIV/AIDS
Pillar 4 addressesfour sets of challenges:
Reducing the transmission rates of HIV/AIDS and Sexually Transmitted Infections (STI),
particularly among women and youth, by promoting behavior change; and adopting a national
strategy to make anti-retroviral therapy universally available;
Speeding up treatment and improving the quality of life ofpersons living with HIV/AIDS;
Attenuating the negative socioeconomic impact of HIV/AIDS on individuals, families, and
communities; and
Strengthening the mechanisms for coordinating all stakeholders and partners working on
HIV/AIDS, and for monitoring and evaluation o f activities (see Box 7).
Box 7. Challenges in Combating HIV/AIDS

With prevalence estimated at 4 percent and less than 3 percent of men and women (age 15-24) knowing how
HIV/AIDS i s transmitted and what can be done to avoid exposure, the HIV/AIDS epidemic poses a huge public
health problem. Prevalence among pregnant women i s particularly high in urban areas (5.2 percent) and in
conflict-affected areas where specific studies indicate that infection rates o f victims of sexual violence can reach
20 percent. The number of persons infected i s estimated at 1.23 million in 2006, and the number of those
affected, including orphans and other vulnerable children i s relentlessly rising, creating more social distortions.
Counseling and testing i s s t i l l llimited to a few hundred sites, and anti-retroviral therapy (ART), provided fiee of
charge through several donor-financedprojects, i s only available to 10 percent o f the 220,000 who are eligible
for treatment. Further, there i s no national policy to make ART universally accessible.

Pillar 5. Promoting Communi& Dvnamics6
Pillar 5 encompassesfour sets of challenges:
Facilitating the effective involvement of communities in preparation, implementation, and
monitoring that may affect them;
Consolidating peace and laying the groundwork for recovery, through community-level
projects focused on income generation, local governance, community security, infrastructure
and reconciliation.
Promoting area-based development in impoverished communities, in order to jump-start microeconomies and build social capital; compensate for insufficient public goods; empower the poor
and vulnerable, particularly women; and strengthen democratic practices; and

Over the last 40 years, strong grassroots organizations have emerged in many communities, largely as a
response to the absence of a functioning public sector; but successive Governments have not included them in
the dialogue and decisionmaking on key development priorities. The current Government aims to harness the
collective contributions o f these organizations to help implement poverty-reduction activities at the local
level.

-21 -

Ensuring the efJicient dispersion and use of scarce resources, by developing criteria for
community activities, including ownership, sustainability, efficiency, and complementarity
with country-wide programs; and for allocating external resources to community activities.

C. Medium-Term Macroeconomic Outlook
3 9. The baseline scenario? assumes that prudent macroeconomic policies and structural reforms
will continue to attract strong foreign-direct investment and financial support from the
international community. As a result, real GDP growth i s expected to increase from 6 percent p.a.
between 2002-2006 to 7.3 percent p.a. on average over the 2bO7-2011 period (see Table l),
fueled by
strong private investment driven by FDI. High FDI growth o f about 25 percent, mostly to the mining
sector, i s expected to be sustained over the same period. These high FDI growth projections are
plausible, given that DRC has Africa’s largest deposits o f copper, cobalt, and coltan, as well as
significant reserves o f diamonds and petroleum. The long years o f mismanagement and insecurity
caused mining sector activities to grind to a halt, reducing the share o f the mining sector in GDP from
25 percent o f GDP in the mid-1980s to less than 10 percent in the early 2000s. However, with the
stabilization o f the security and macroeconomic conditions, the recent successful transition to
democracy, and high commodity prices, investors have already began to flock back to DRC. The
authorities estimate that total investments in copper and cobalt projects could reach US$3 billion
through 2012, allowing output to return to levels not recorded since the 1980s.
40. Under this scenario, the current account deficit including official transfers is expected to
increase from lpercent of GDP in 2006 to 1 0 percent of GDP in 2011, reflecting DRC’s need for
external capital. DRC i s expected to reach the HIPC Completion Point in 2008. Accordingly, it i s
assumed to benefit from debt r e l i e f under the HIPC and MDR initiatives, leading to a significant
decline in i t s debt-to-GDP ratio, from 120 percent in 2007 to 38 percent in 201 1. Debt service i s also
expected to decline as a result o f these initiatives. I t i s assumed that the Government will use the
fiscal space gained through debt r e l i e f and improved revenues for pro-poor programs, which could
take the form o f reduced fees for school and basic health care. Even with these transfers, the fiscal
balance i s projected to reaching a deficit o f only 1 percent o f GDP on average between 2007 and
201 1. Government’s recurrent spending i s projected to increase from 16 percent o f GDP in 2007 to 18
percent in 2011 as public consumption increases, while capital spending i s expected to more than
double from 3 percent o f GDP in 2006 to 8 percent as the share o f GDP over the same period.

’The macroeconomic analysis presented here uses a dynamic general equilibrium model (MAMS) to explore
the effects o f different scenarios on debt burden and other macroeconomic indicators.

- 22 -

Table 1. Medium-Term Macroeconomic Projections - Selected Indicators, 2006-2011
actual Droiections
Real GDP growth (%)
Inflation (end-of-period, %)
Growth o f exports (US$ terms, %, constant prices)
Growth of imports (US$ terms, %, constant prices)
Current account balance (including grants, % o f GDP)
Revenues (excluding grants, % o f GDP)
Total expenditure (% o f GDP)
Overall fiscal balance (% GDP)

2006
5.1
18.2
12.0
10.8
-7.0
13.2
22.1
-0.7

2007
6.7
12.0
8.4
10.7
-7.5
14.9
19.4
-0.6

2008
6.8
8.0
9.0
10.3
-8.1
15.6
21.6
-0.2

2009
7.7
8.0
9.7
8.2
-8.7
16.1
22.5
-0.4

2010
7.7
8.0
9.5
6.5
-9.5
17.4
24.6
-1.4

2011
7.7
8.0
9.4
6.7
-10.4
18.0
26.4
-2.4

Source: World Bank, InternationalMonetary Fund.
4 1. Alternative scenarios have been analyzed to assess the risk of adverse circumstances. These
projected scenarios have been produced using MAMS. Under the no reform scenario, average real
GDP growth i s assumed to be i t s historic average (1 percent), FDI inflow will be much lower
(growing at about 10 percent), and debt relief will not be attained. The government will not gain any
fiscal space, and the scope for implementing poverty-reducing programs i s severely compromised.
DRC will run into a debt crisis, as i t s public access to external financing i s severely limited and i t s
debt-to-GDP ratio reaches an unsustainably high level (141 percent). Moreover, under this scenario,
private consumption in real terms will be about half o f the corresponding amounts under the baseline
at the end o f the projection period; even if the government manages to pay i t s employees, there will
be discontent among the population at large.
42. Another scenario assumes borrowing on less concessional terms. This scenario obviously leads
to a substantial deterioration in DRC’s public debt indicators. Debt service payments to the rest
would increase, leading to an increase in recurrent spending, which would need to be financed by
additional new borrowing. Unless the return on the investments financed with less concessional
foreign loans i s high, this strategy risks that the government will allocate more resources to servicing
i t s debt rather than on i t s priority programs
43. Finally, an alternative scenario assumes large borrowing on concessional terms (China scenario).
Under this scenario, a $3 billion borrowing on concessional terms accompanied by a $2 billion FDI
(‘joint venture) i s assumed, in line with the recent announcement by the authorities o f their intension
to enter into such an arrangement. As long as the borrowing i s on highly concessional terms, the
funds are used for productive purposes in line with the government’s priorities, and disbursements are
in line with the country’s absorptive capacity, this arrangement could be beneficial to the country,
triggering a higher growth rate, accelerating export growth, and larger fiscal space, at least initially.
In the medium term, the government saving would decline substantially as the increase in net interest
payments on foreign debt outpaces the increase in recurrent receipts. I t should also be noted that
DRC’s debt stock would increase substantially reaching 94 percent o f GDP by 2026 even if the loan
i s concessional.

- 23 -

PART A.3. MANAGING R I S K S - CAF DONOR GROUP
Overall Approach

44. Engagement in apost-conflict context is a high-risk, high-gain enterprise, but the risks of nonengagement exceed the risks of engagement. The situation in DRC remains difficult, but experience
has shown that external assistance can yield disproportionate benefits in post-conflict countries,
provided it i s well targeted and efficiently provided. Consistent with the donor strategies since 2001,
the approach suggested here is based on pro-active risk management rather than risk avoidance. The
risk management strategy i s three-fold: (i)warning mechanisms, to detect problems at an early stage;
(ii)response mechanisms, to mitigate their immediate impact; and (iii)risk reduction mechanisms, to
gradually reduce their likelihood and potential impact over time. It should be emphasized, however,
that in a post-conflict environment such as DRC, external assistance is aimed first and foremost at
addressing the broader risk of renewed conflict and instability. Risks should not be seen as external
factors that may affect performance o f donor programs, but rather as the justification for and the focus
o f such programs. In other words, reducing risk i s not only a way to improve performance; it i s the
main objective of donor support. I t should also be emphasized that the key to effectively managing
risk i s a constructive relationshipbetween donors and the Government.
45. Donors participating in the CAF will be responsible for managing the risks to their own
assistance programs. While the CAF provides a joint analysis of key risks and a coordinated
definition of the risk management strategies, each donor will implement i t s own risk management
strategy, in terms o f defining what events or conditions may trigger a response and what exactly such
a response would entail. CAF donors would engage in extensive consultations prior to making major
decisions; however, the option of a joint action by a l l CAF donors has been deemed impractical in
view o f their different decision-making and reporting arrangements. Table 4 in Part B.3 lays out the
risks, response actions, and risk reduction mechanisms common to a l l donors under the CAF, as well
as those specific to the World Bank Group under the CAS.

- 24 -

PART B. WORLD BANK GROUP COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
PART B.l. REVIEW OF PAST BANK ASSISTANCE
A. The Second Transitional Support Strategy

46. Since reengaging with DRC in 2001, the Bank has provided assistance within theframework of
two successive Transitional Support Strategies (TSS). The first, covering the period 200 1-2003,
focused on stabilizing the fragile peace.8 The second strategy, which directly preceded the CAS,
supported four key areas o f the Government’s program to consolidate peace and economy recovery:
(i)security and social stability, (ii)j o b creation through economic growth and diversification; (iii)
governance and institutional strengthening; and (iv) social development. While the program
originally covers FY04-06, due to elections, which slowed down donor funding, the TSS effectively
extended to also cover FY07.
B. Overall Assessment and Results o f TSS (Annex 4 for a detailed evaluation)

47. Implementation o f the second TSS was rated moderately satisfactory. The program was highly
relevant to DRC’s needs and aligned with the Government’s priorities, as expressed in i t s I-PRSP and
economic program (see Annex 4.1). The Bank completed 11 out o f 13 Analytic and Advisory
Activities (AAA) during the period (see Annex 4.2), covering a broad range o f sectors. Out o f 10
projects, 2 are already closed and 8 are ongoing. The planned FY06 program was postponed beyond
the TSS horizon because o f the elections. The current portfolio stands at US$1.7 billion, o f which
US$891 million has yet to be disbursed. The second TSS was also characterized by strong dialogue
between the Bank and the Congolese authorities, as well as with civil society and private sector
stakeholders. The Bank also played a major role in donor coordination, and together with other
donors initiated a move toward harmonization.
48. With regard to results, performance against the TSS indicators was mixed (see Annex 4.3).
The TSS proposed a results framework consisting o f 19 performance indicators. Results were
achieved partially or completely for 11 o f them. In the absence o f reliable statistical data, most
indicators were defined in such as way that made quantification difficult, many results are
nevertheless noteworthy, including macroeconomic stability throughout the period; a substantial level
o f private investment; a moratorium on forestry concessions and a legal review o f those awarded in
the past; the reopening o f key roads; and successful HIV activities. These results are likely to be
sustainable, but their eventual impact will depend on the success o f the peace process and the
commitment o f the new Government.
49. The Bank Group’s engagement has also had significant indirect results. As in other postconflict countries, the return o f donors and the launch o f large-scale assistance programs have sent a
strong signal to the private sector about investment opportunities, to the protagonists in the conflict
about possible peace dividends, and to the population at large about the possibility to hope again.
These developments have contributed to the stabilization o f the social situation and to the resurgence
o f economic activity.
See the 2004-2006 TSS for an evaluation o f the f i r s t TSS (2001-2003).

- 25 -

50. Particular efforts have been devoted to livelihood and cultural issues facing people living in
DRC forests, including Pygmies. The Bank began outreach efforts in 2004 and has expanded them
since then. The Bank team regularly: (i)meets with Pygmy groups to exchange information and seek
their advice; (ii)invites Pygmy representatives to events in which issues that affect their social and
cultural situation are discussed; and (iii)
promotes the inclusion o f Pygmy groups in relevant forest
regulations, institutions and decision-making bodies. Starting in 2005, Bank teams visited Pygmy
communities in Beni, Mutsora, Epulu and Rumangabo in the newly reunified eastern provinces, in an
effort to establish direct lines o f communication. In 2006, the Bank facilitated the collaboration o f
DRC Pygmy representatives in a forest sector review in neighboring Republic o f Congo. In April
2007, the Bank helped organize the First International Central African Indigenous Peoples Meeting,
in Brazzaville, Congo, and facilitated the participation o f Pygmy representatives from DRC at this
event. As part o f the Bank’s enhanced engagement with Pygmy communities, a special study was
undertaken in 2007 that will support integration o f these concerns into the overall program o f the
Bank.

5 1. The Bank has worked closely with the Government to ensure that the new Forest Code recognizes
and protects traditional rights o f local communities, including the Pygmies, in all production forests.
With the encouragement o f the Bank, the Government has included Pygmy representatives in the
Inter-ministerial Committee in charge o f the legal review o f concessions. This participation aims to
help guarantee preservation o f the rights o f Pygmies in production forests and ensure that boundaries
and management plans take into account their social, economic, and cultural needs. Bank efforts are
intended to defend the interests and rights o f the Congolese people, including Pygmy populations, by
canceling illegal concessions, strengthening the moratorium, supporting the services o f independent
observers in the legal review and in field controls, and promoting the participation o f Pygmy
representatives in the legal review. This i s particularly important in a country with serious
institutional and policy weaknesses.
C. Review o f I D A Activities
Major Achievements o f the TSS

52. The IDA program has had three objectives - reconstitute the country’s knowledge base,
support the preparation of key sector reforms, and provide the analytic underpinning for
financing. The Bank has delivered most o f the lending and AAA program proposed in 2004. Some
delays were caused by problems typical o f a post-conflict environment, including capacity constraints
on the Borrower’s side, the formidable logistical challenges associated with the size o f the country,
and the slow-down o f activities in the political environment leading up to the 2006 elections. Delays
have also been caused by IDA allocations constraints, especially in FY05.

- 26 -

53. The program has been satisfactory in strategic relevance (clear objectives, good alignment with
TSS); internal quality (good analytic quality); coherence and integration (strong integration with
lending); likely impact (effective reconstitution o f the knowledge base and ownership of
recommendations by the authorities); dialogue (strong engagement with clients); and dissemination
(with substantive managerial
Box 8. K e y Features o f the Ongoing Portfolio
attention).
~~

54. The preparation of new
projects has been satisfactory
overall. QAG reviews have
been positive, and projects
have been generally more
ready for implementation at
the time of Board approval
than
the average Bank-funded
emergency project or Africa
Region project.
5 5 . Overall, the quality of the
portfolio
during
the
TSS period
has
been moderately satisfactory
(see Box 8 and Annex 4.1).
However, Bank performance
for
the
project
closed
during the TSS period
(Post-reunification Economic
Recovery
Credit)
has
been rated unsatisfactory,
with poor prioritization and
weak assessments o f the
environment, among other
cited reasons.

The ongoing portfolio includes 10 projects (as o f end September
2007: total commitment: $1, 7 billion, undisbursed:$89 1 million),
o f which 7 are rated satisfactory or moderately satisfactory on
implementation performance and development objectives.
However, the remaining 3 projects are problem projects: the
Emergency Demobilization and Reintegration Project has been
weakened by procurement and project management difficulties';
the HIV/AIDS project has had some misprocurement and ineligible
expenditures'; and the Health Sector Rehabilitation Project has had
management difficulties3
Projects have resulted in improved economic and social conditions.
Road rehabilitation in both rural and urban areas has
served to reduce congestion, reduce the cost o f transport o f
goods and food supplies, and has played a critical role in
fostering national integration.
Quality in agriculture production has increased,
Health and education services have improved and resulted
in increased enrollment in schools and increased access to
safe drinking water
Major economic reforms have been embarked on which
are improving business laws and reforming the legal,
administrative, and judiciary environment.
Major steps towards security have been taken with the
demobilization o f over 100,000 ex-combatants having
occurred.
Remedial actions are being taken, and the project i s rated satisfactory on

'

implementation.
Reimbursement has occurred and the project i s currently rated
satisfactory.
Project management issues have been resolved, about 80 percent o f the
project i s committed, and the project i s likely to be upgraded.

56. Disbursements are in line with projections. Active and ongoing project during the period FY0407 were $1.7 b i l l i ~ n o, ~f which $891 billion i s undisbursed. Disbursements in DRC are significantly
higher than the Africa regional average (see Chart 4 and Box 9), and are comparable with Bankfunded emergency projects worldwide.

9

This amount does not include Regional Power Sector operations for DRC (totaling about $475 million).

- 27 -

Chart 4. Disburseineiit Rates for Bank Portfolio in DRC Compared to
Regional Average

0 Budget

support

Health & social
Services

4

Infrastructure

I-I?.,

Source:

57. There has been significant interestfrom civil society organizat.,ns o n issues related to natural
resource management. Civil society supported the reform agenda in the forestry sector, especially the
moratorium and the legal review; but some groups have raised concerns about the strength o f the
moratorium, the legal review process, and opportunities for local communities (especially indigenous
communities) t o participate in decision-making,
These concerns have generated continuing
engagement among the Government, the Bank, other donors, and c i v i l society organizations.
Box 9. Early Results of Ongoing Projects

O f the 10 ongoing projects in the portfolio, one i s yet to become effective, and the remaining 9 have an
average age o f 3.2 years. O f those 9 projects, one - the Emergency Demobilization and Reintegration
Project - i s 99 percent disbursed, and 3 others - the Emergency Multisector Rehabilitation and
Reconstruction Project, the Private Sector Development and Competitiveness Project, and the Emergency
Reunification Project - are more than 70 percent disbursed.
These projects, based on monitoring and supervision reports, have had the following early impacts:
Infrastructure - rehabilitation o f the main road, feeder roads, schools, and water treatment facilities;
improved quality and coverage o f health services; reduction in environmental impacts fiom soil erosion.
Private sector development - reform o f legal, administrative, and judicial environment; adopting o f
Investment Code and establishment o f commercial courts.
HZV/AZDS - capacity development for the preparation and implementation o f projects by public,
private, faith-based, NGOs, and community organizations.
Demobilization and reintegration - , more than 92,000 o f the targeted 150,000 ex-combatants
demobilized since January 2006.
Social action - more than 40 micro-projects by poor communities have been approved.

-28-

58. The Bank has worked closely with other donors to ensure coordination in assistance. Toward
the end o f the period, this coordination transitioned to harmonization, with the development o f a joint
strategy and programming document, the CAF, the basis o f donor funding in DRC for the coming
years. The Bank has also worked collaboratively on the project level - on demobilization and
reintegration under the Multi-Country Demobilization and Reintegration Framework; and forestry
sector reform under the Multi-Donor Trust Fund framework. This pooling o f resources and expertise
has proven essential in complex projects.

59. Based on its increasing knowledge of operational issues in conflict-affected countries, the
Bank has put in place a number of mechanisms to scale up assistance in countries in recovering
from conflict. DRC has benefited, in particular, from the Bank’s alternative set o f indicators for
measuring the performance o f conflict-affected countries (Post-Conflict Performance Indicators PCPI); i t s mechanisms for arrears clearance; pre-arrears grants; and from access to the enhanced
HIPC initiative. IFC and MIGA are also developing instruments to scale up their activities in conflictaffected countries. These have been highly effective in DRC. Continued engagement i s necessary,
especially as DRC moves into a post-conflict stabilization period.
Difficulties and Challenges under the TSS

60. Despite these achievements, 70 percent of the portfolio is assessed as “at risk. ” All projects in
DRC automatically have two flags (for
country environment and country record),
Box 10. Implementation Support is a challenge in DRC
and it only takes a single project-specific
Project implementation support, particularly outside the
flag for that project to be assessed as “at
Capital, Kinshasa, is difficult.
risk.” One project has no project-specific
The Country Office has increased staff and capacity
to support implementation, although further
flags; two projects have one project-specific
strengthening i s essential, particularly on fiduciary
flag; and four have more than two projectmatters and infrastructure.
specific flags, with the result that more than
The main focus i s on Kinshasa-based work, due to
50 percent o f the active portfolio has three
relatively weak national institutions, leaving limited
time for additional field missions.
or more flags (country environment and
Oversight o f the portfolio receives normal Bank
record, plus fiduciary risks and/or weak
Budget resources. On average, there are two
capacity for monitoring and evaluation; see
implementation support missions per year per
project, which i s within the average for the region.
Box 10 and Annex 4.3).
Field missions are complicated by high logistical
costs in such a vast country, with very few paved
roads, no safe air transport, and security issues.

61. Fiduciary risks are high. Although
special efforts have been made to manage
There is a dearth of reliable statistics and statistical capacity.
fiduciary risks, ensuring adequate fiduciary
Collecting data i s problematic because of logistical
oversight in DRC remains a major concern.
and security constraints.
All investment projects are implemented
This has led to weak M&E systems in which
baseline data are weak or not available,
through ring-fenced mechanisms with
This has led to a focus on easily measurable output
relatively low thresholds for procurement
performance indicators rather than measurements o f
prior reviews, and stringent financial
outcomes and the long-term impact o f a project.
management and audit arrangements. They
are subjected to annual audits by reputable external auditors, reviews o f Statement o f Expenditures by
Bank financial management specialists, and procurement post-reviews, in addition to the traditional
Bank oversight. These mechanisms are understandably piece-meal rather than focused on building

- 29 -

strong and sustainable government systems and procedures, and while they have been somewhat
effective, a number o f issues have been brought to light by a M a y 2007 report by the World Bank’s
Institutional Integrity Department (INT) o f a project implementation agency (Bureau Central de
Coordination, BCECO). As a result, the authorities have already taken steps to strengthen BCECO,
and further efforts are expected from a management audit o f this institution, being carried out by the
authorities on the advice o f INT. A portfolio review i s planned in early 2008 to ensure that the
transition i s being made from emergency to more streamlined and sustainable implementation
arrangements -the unintended result o f donor efforts to provide assistance to DRC during a period o f
institutional fragility has been to create a multiplicity o f implementation arrangements that have, in
retrospect, not provided the intended benefits on the governance and implementation front, and at the
same time not focused on building the necessary long term institutional capacity. Discussions with
the authorities on both the planned BCECO management audit and the draft Public Expenditure
Review are expected to focus on how to further improve management and oversight o f public
finances. In addition, the portfolio review will address the systematic country-related risks.
62. The evaluation of the three projects closed during the TSSperiod was mixed One project (the
Post-Reunification Economic Recovery Credit) was rated unsatisfactory for quality at entry, Bank
performance, and Borrower performance. The Emergency Early Recovery Project was rated
satisfactory across the board; and the Transitional Support for Economic Recovery was rated
unsatisfactory.

63. A number of projects have come under scrutiny from the Bank’s Inspection Panel. An
inspection was carried between 2005-2007 with regard to compliance with safeguards related to
indigenous peoples and emergency projects. Environmental and social safeguards guidelines have
been developed for the existing portfolio.’o
64. The sensitive nature of certain sectors in D R C - particularly forestry and mining - have
created reputational risksfor the Bank, and brought heavy scrutiny from outside stakeholders. In
the mining sector, IDA and IFC have been encouraged to be much more forceful with regard to
transparency. In MIGA, there have been two internal investigations. After a rebellion against DRC
authorities in the town o f K i l w a (in Katanga Province), during which about 100 Congolese were
killed, several NGOs alleged that A n v i l Mining S.A. - the beneficiary o f a MIGA guarantee - was
complicit in these deaths by allowing the use o f mining vehicles by the FARDC (DRC’s army) to
help put down the rebellion. Two internal investigations took place to consider MIGA’s involvement
in the project; one investigation found no wrongdoing by MIGA, and the other investigation has not
yet been closed.

D. Review o f IFC Activities
65. IFC’s reengagement in D R C has been in line with its Strategic Initiative for Africa, with a
particular focus on mining, financial markets, improvement o f the business climate, and initiatives to
support small and medium-size enterprise development. As o f September 30, 2007, IFC’s cumulative

lo
An Inspection Panel was carried out for the following two operations funded by I D A in DRC: Emergency
Economic and Social Reunification Support Project (CR 3824-DRC and GR H064-DRC), approved in
September 2003; and Transitional Support for Economic Recovery Grant, approved in December 2005.

- 30 -

commitments in DRC totaled US$83.58 million. In addition, IFC has been providing support to
ANAPI, the national investment promotion agency.

E. Review o f M I G A Activities
66. MIGA’s engagement in DRC has been relatively limited, but this will likely change in the near
term. Since 200 1, MIGA has supported only one project, with US$15 million in guarantee support to
Anvil Mining SA, a copper-cobalt facility in Katanga province. With the project’s commercial
success, MIGA now has a strong pipeline o f mining projects going forward. MIGA has also been
asked to support projects in the IT, real estate, and heavy equipment sectors. In addition, MIGA
through FIAS (which now includes the ex-MIGA technical assistance team) has been complementing
IDA’Sfinancial support to ANAPI, DRC’s investment promotion agency.
F. Lessons Learned and Recommendation for IFC and MIGA

67. The lessons learned through the implementation of the TSS program point to a series of
recommendations, which have been discussed extensively by the country team and are incorporated
in the proposed strategy. These recommendations are:
Early engagement is critical. The Bank’s quick engagement in 200 1 sent a strong message to the
Government, responsible investors, and to the Congolese population at large that there i s hope for
a better future. The speed with which the first Emergency project was prepared (two months)
was essential to ensuring stability. That project showed that progress can be made even in the
early stages o f engagement.
Engagement must be sustained. Consistent engagement at the sector level provides support to
reformers, necessary to overcome inertia and prevent policy reversal. In-and-out interventions
may inadvertently send a message that a critical sector is, in fact, not an important priority for the
Bank and thus need not be a priority for the country. Bank support o f governance reforms has
been critical, especially in naturaVpublic resources management. However, reforms in these areas
take time, vested interests are strong, and progress in a post-conflict context i s fragile.
Implementation is possible. Despite significant challenges, projects can be implemented in a
difficult post-conflict environment.
Strong dialogue with Government is vital. Bank-Government dialogue has been vital to
launching the reform agenda. Hands-on policy advice has been essential in helping Congolese
authorities to define and implement in-depth economic and governance reforms despite their low
administrative capacity. Having staff present in-country i s important to solidify the relationship.
Donor collaboration and coordination are imperative. Due to the wide range o f pressing
concerns and the vast amount o f resources required, it i s necessary to work closely with other
development actors on strategic planning, to ensure that resources are consolidated and that
donors provide support in areas in which they have a comparative advantage.
There needs to a gradual shiftfiom donor coordination to harmonization, in order to improve aid
effectiveness in an environment where administrative capacity i s limited.
Collaboration with civil society is important. Civil society and local communities are the ultimate
beneficiaries o f Bank interventions. Engagement with civil society can be very productive, and
often civil society has expertise and access that the Bank does not have. In DRC, it has been
important to tap into this knowledge base in complicated sectors such as mining and forestry to

0

counterbalance vested interests and strengthen the political determination for reforms. It i s also
critical that information on the Bank’s processes be shared among and well-understood by
different stakeholders. A proactive communication strategy i s key, especially in complex and
sensitive sectors.
I n post-conflict countries, MIGA should deploy resources earlier, in order to contribute to the
peace dividend. IFC should also coordinate more closely with IDA and M G A , especially as
private sector activity increases over the coming years.
Special efforts are needed to manage fiduciary risks in a post-conflict environment. Except in the
very early stages, the Bank needs to begin to use and strengthen the key government financial
management, procurement and oversight systems needed for the longer term. W h i l e there will
always be projects requiring stand alone fiduciary arrangements, most projects need to have an
agreed plan o f action to mainstream these arrangements for successor activities and programs. As
the amount o f resources deployed on the ground increases, Bank capacity to provide
implementation support outside Kinshasa also needs to keep pace, recognizing the special
logistical and security challenges this presents.
Focus on results is always useful, but not always as easy to predict in apost conflict environment.
While the Bank team has consistently demonstrated a strong commitment to results, these results
have been somewhat disconnected from the performance indicators against which TSS
implementation has been measured. The CAS Results Matrix has been designed to more closely
reflect the expected results from our combined analytical work and financing and as a means o f
monitoring progress.
Capacity constraints remain a major barrier to development in DRC. T o maximize the effective
use o f scarce government capacity, a review o f the portfolio i s planned in early 2008, and any
necessary adjustments and related capacity development and technical support will be proposed
as a result. Donor harmonization around sector wide approaches and strategies will also help
make more effective use o f government’s institutional capacity.
Better data gathering capacity is required. Efforts must be made to increase data-gathering
capacity across implementing agencies, to facilitate policy making and program implementation.
The World Bank Group intends to enhance i t s focus on results by supporting development o f a
National Strategy for the Development o f Statistics with a Trust Fund for Statistical Capacity
Building. This will be coordinated with other Bank Group efforts (e.g. technical assistance, both
freestanding and through projects) and with other donors (e.g. African Development Bank.
Joint implementation support together with other donors is being explored This i s particularly
important for resumption o f budget support, and also for key sector programs - where bilaterals or
other development partners may have greater access or capacity. This can help also increase the
leverage from bank staff and budget resources.

- 32 -

PART B.2. BANK STRATEGY FOR FYOS-FY11
A. Objective and Expected Results

68. The overall objective of the proposed Bank Group’s program is to lav the foundation for a
medium-term Dover& reduction effort, with a strong focus on governance and shared growth.

69. The CAS has been articulated around a results framework derivedfrom the joint CAF results
framework (see Vol. 2, Annex 5). The results-based approach i s designed to help focus the Bank
Group’s efforts and i t s dialogue with the authorities and other partners on a clear set o f measurable
objectives. A major challenge i s to select adequate performance indicators in a country where there i s
no reliable statistical system. In this context, the CAS proposes a set o f second-best indicators
selected on the basis o f their simplicity and easy measurability, combining outcome and output
measures. Progress against these indicators will be assessed on a regular basis through consultations
with the Government, key Congolese stakeholders, and donors, to ensure that Bank Group programs
are managed for results and focused on making a measurable difference on the ground.
B. Key Principles

70. The CAS is derived from the PRSP, and actions proposed under the CAS are closely aligned
with PRSP priorities. The CAS proposes to focus on activities with the highest potential impact in
areas in which the Bank Group has a mandate and expertise.

71. The CAS is part of the multi-donor Country Assistance Framework, a broader international
effort that has clear objectives and monitoring indicators. This will provide increased leverage for the
Bank effort, allow for the efficient use o f limited resources, and help mitigate the risks to the Bank.
72. The CAS is based on an assessment of the Bank Group’s comparative advantage in DRC,
which consists o f a combination o f analytic strength, financing capacity, and convening power.
73. Finally, the CAS is prepared in the broader context of the Africa Action Plan (AAP), which
defines an outcome-base strategic framework built around three principles - improve governance and
build capable states; accelerate economic growth; and ensure that the poor and women are able to
participate in and benefit from growth. CAS i s based on these same three principles.
C. Planned Activities by Other Donors

74. Not all donors have confirmed their funding for the CAF. However, it appears that the Bank,
together with the African Development bank, the European Commission, the Republic of China
and the UK will be key donors. India and South Africa may provide support to the forestry, mining,
energy and infrastructure sectors. Humanitarian assistance i s expected to continue at least through
part o f this period from the Netherlands, Sweden, the UK, and the United States.

75. Funding estimates are about US$3 billion over the CAF period, including some ongoing
projects. This assistance s t i l l falls short o f the country’s needs, but with increased coordination,

- 33 -

available funds are likely to be used more cost effectively in a more efficient and cost-effective
manner."

D. Strategic Elements o f the Bank Group Program

76. Given its comparative advantages, the Bank Group will play a lead role, jointly with other
donors, in three of the five core areas outlined in the CAF - good governance, shared and
sustainable growth, and improved social services. On governance, this will be together with the EC
and UNDP; on the macro-economy, together with the IMF; and on facilitating private sector
development (investments in transport and energy, access to credit, institutional and regulatory
reforms), this will be together with EC and ADB. The Bank Group will play a supportive role in
other areas, such as basic social services, HIV/AIDS, and community dynamics, although help lead
and coordinate donor efforts toward development o f sector wide approaches (SWAps) in education
and health.

77. Although the Bank will focus mainly on three pillars, we have outlined Bank Group assistance
aroundfive strategic elements that reflect the five pillars of the PRSP. All five areas are closely
inter-related,so that progress in one area depends closely on progress in the others. While the Bank's
ongoing portfolio covers all five pillars, the new program will focus more selectively on three pillars
going forward.
Strategic element I: Promote good governance and consolidate peace.

78. The Bank Group will support implementation of the Governance Contract, by helping to
improve transparency, strengthen public finance management, reform the public service and assist the
government in the decentralizationprocess.
Help improve transparency. IDA will focus on: (i)enhancing transparency in public
financial management, through regular publication o f budget execution data; (ii)building
open and inclusive systems o f provincial level governance, through capacity building,and
financing a series
advisory support; and as an element of public sector enterprise reform; (iii)
of audits (e.g. of public enterprises) and surveys; and (iv) assist in developing and
implementingthe EITI action plan for DRC.
Strengthen public finance management. IDA i s expected to share the lead with the IMF,
focusing in implementing the recommendations o f the 2007 Public Expenditure Review,
especially: (i)strengthening the expenditure chain; (ii)introducing a Medium Term Budget
Planning system, including capacity building in line ministries; (iii)building systems and
strengthening capacity for public financial management at provincial level; (iv) strengthening
the capacity of revenue agencies, and; (v) completing the ongoing procurement reform. In
this area activities will be implemented in close cooperation with DfID and the French
Cooperation.
Support public service reform. IDA, together with the Belgian Cooperation and South
Africa, intends to focus on: (i)supporting wage system reform, to enhance transparency and
predictability of public sector wages; (ii)creating a roster of civil and public servants; (iii)
l1The Bank Group's assistance to the infiastructure sectors might need to be adjusted in view o f the recent
protocol o f understandingthat the Government o f DRC signed with the Government o f China, reportedly up to
$5 billion o f fmancing for transport infiastructure, mining concessions, and other investments.

- 34 -

implementing and rolling out the new payroll system, including in the provinces; (iv)
redefining the roles, mandates, and organizational structures o f selected key public
institutions; (v) assisting with development of mechanisms and systems for the transfer o f
public servants to provincial and sub-provincial level, and; (vi) developing effective
personnel management systems at provincial level.
Help manage the decentralization process. I D A in close collaboration with the EC, UNDP
and bilateral donors will focus on: (i)helping to develop the legal, financial and regulatory
framework for a successful decentralization process, including for the planned administrativeterritorial reorganization process; (ii)building capacity at provincial level, especially as
regards public expenditure management; (iii)creating a professional and effective public
service system at the provincial and local levels, and (iv); supporting provinces in the design
and implementation o f development projects at provincial level, under financing by the
Caisse Nationale de Pe're'quation.

79. The Bank Group will continue to support demobilization of ex-combatants and their successful
reintegration into civilian life.
Strategic element 2: Help consolidate macroeconomic stability and economic growth.

80. The Bank Group will support efforts to achieve high, sustained, and shared economic growth,
by helping to:
Improve debt, inflation andfiscal management. I D A working closely with the IMF, will
focus on increasing revenues and strengthening fiscal discipline in spending ministries;
Ensure that the ground is laid for medium-term growth in the agriculture sector. The
African Development Bank i s taking the lead in this area. IDA'Sassistance will focus on (i)
reducing insecurity (through reintegration o f former combatants); (ii)providing targeted
support to farmers, including inputs and assets, to help increase production and productivity;
the delivery o f key agricultural services. IFC may also provide investments in agroand (iii)
business.
Improve natural resource management - in the forestry sector, through support to
government policies and agencies for enforcement o f strong environmental standards for
logging and the involvement o f communities in monitoring forestry activities; and in the
mining sector, by support for implementation o f a sound regulatory framework, improving
transparency, reform o f GECAMINES, and defining a strategy and implementing a pilot
program to deal with artisanal mining.
Ensure that economic growth is not achieved at the expense of the long term environment
damage. IDA will manage a multi-donor trust fund to support forest governance, and support
Government in i t s implementation o f the Forest and Nature Conservation Sector Program, in
order to bring more transparency and public participation to forest management and ensure
more equitable sharing o f benefits.
Rehabilitate transport infrastructure. IDA will focus first on the physical rehabilitation o f
roads to major urban centers, and on export corridofs from mining areas; and then on
reforming the transport state-owned enterprises (SOEs), in coordination with ADB, AFD, the
Belgian Cooperation, as well IFC, MIGA, and the Republic o f China.

- 35 -

Increase the availability of electricpower. The Bank Group will play a prominent role in the
rehabilitation and expansion of generation, transmission and distribution systems and the
reform o f the state-owned power company. IDA will also support central DRC’s role within
the development o f regional networks, and IFC and MIGA will support private investment in
the sector.
Increaseprivate investment. IDA, with advisory support from IFC and MIGA, will focus on
modernizationof the legal and regulatory framework, and working with business associations
to identify and remove regulatory or enforcement bottlenecks.
Increase access to financial services. IDA will support completion of the ongoing financial
sector reform; and will also set up transitional mechanisms to provide credit to the private
sector in the interim period. IFC and MIGA will provide support to private banks interested
in investing in DRC.
Support private sector-led growth in manufacturing and services. The Bank Group i s
expected to play a prominent role, to help leverage private finance for the massive
investments needed. IDA will focus on key infrastructure and regulatory constraints to private
sector activity; IFC will continue to provide financial support to reputable private investors,
with a view to significantly scaling up its interventions; and MIGA will continue to offer
guarantees to reputable private investors.
Reform of public sector enterprises. Many o f these enterprises have not been subject to
adequate oversight for many decades and a well designed and implemented public enterprise
reform program i s central to ensuring sustainable and equitable economic development, and
for crowding in the necessary private investment. As such, Bank Group assistance to this
reform, including to individual enterprises, would be tied to a clear reform agenda whereby
investment i s subordinated to reform steps that introduce commercial practices, and envisage,
if possible, public private partnership.
Strategic element 3: Help improve the provision of social services and reduce vulnerability.

8 1. The Bank Group will support the social developmentpriorities articulated in the PRSP, by
helping to increase public spending in support o f key social sectors. In particular, IDA will help to:
Improve the overall education system in Congo, with support to Government to articulate
its overall education strategy, and to identijy efforts in secondary, technical and tertiary
education that complement the continuedfocus on primary education quality and coverage
by strengthening the institutional and financial capacity of the sector and designing a resultsoriented and fundable strategy for sector development.
Increase access to health care by contracting independent service providers to oversee the
delivery o f essential health services in targeted health zones; and developing a system to
monitor and evaluate the performance of service providers. IDA will also help to identify
financing options for the health system, strengthen the capacity of provincial and district
health authorities, support malaria control interventions in coordinationwith the Global Fund,
and help the Government promote family planning.
Increase access to clean water and sanitation in urban areas, by supporting reforms to
strengthen the performance, accountability, and financial viability of the state-owned water
company; and by financing the rehabilitation o f damaged systems in selected cities.

- 36 -

0

Stabilize the social situation and improve the lives of vulnerable populations in urban
areas, by financing the rehabilitation, development, and upgrading o f key municipal
infrastructure; enhancing the delivery o f basic services in the poorest urban areas; supporting
improvements in municipal management; and providing employment opportunities for urban
poor through labor-intensive activities.

Strategic element 4: Help combat HIWAIDS.

82. Other donors will take the lead in this area I D A will work closely with the Global Fund to
ensure effective implementation o f its operations, with a focus on supporting prevention efforts;
improving the quality o f l i f e o f infected persons; and mitigating the impact o f the epidemic on

vulnerable populations. Bank support will be provided through the ongoing IDA-funded HIV/AIDS
Project.
Strategic element 5: Help promote community dynamics.

83. The Bank Group will support the work of other institutions with more experience in this area,
such as the UN agencies. The Bank Group, through the ongoing IDA-funded Social Fund Project,
will focus on ensuring the effective involvement o f communities in the preparation and
implementation o f Bank Group activities that may affect them; and on helping to prevent the
dispersion o f donor efforts, through active IDA participation in donor coordination mechanisms.
84. The Bank group is giving special attention to Indigenous Peoples.'2 As part o f this broader
effort to reach Pygmy populations, the Congolese authorities, together with the Bank, have been
analyzing the Emergency Social Action Project's experience in providing access o f poor and
vulnerable groups to social and economic services - this i s being implemented through the Social
Fund. During the first phase o f the project (2002-2006) it had become clear that Indigenous Peoples
were hardly benefiting from these investments. Consultations were undertaken with 655 Indigenous
Peoples and representatives from NGOs in the context o f 19 workshops all over the country. The
project i s now putting in place an outreach and capacity-building program to assist Indigenous
Peoples' communities access and utilize project funds to obtain schools, health clinics, rural roads,
and water points, based on their demands. I t i s also analyzing ways in which the project can
strengthen the voice and participation o f Pygmy communities.
85. The forthcoming IDA-financed Forest Project, GEF Grant for National Parks, and the MDTF will
seek to ensure that Pygmies enjoy equal access to rights and socio-economic opportunities resulting
from the new Forest Code, such as the right to manage community forests and to benefit from social
responsibility contracts. The forthcoming Agriculture Project i s expected to include similar provisions
with regard to agriculture rehabilitation, while the new Road Sector Rehabilitation Project i s expected
l2This i s in line with the Management Action Plan set forth in the November 5,2007 Management Report and
Recommendation in Response to the Inspection Panel Investigation Report No. 40746-ZR, dated August 3 1,
2007. The Action Plan includes ongoing and future efforts for addressing Indigenous Peoples issues in the
Congo Basin; remaining engaged in the forest sector o f the DRC; and continuing outreach about Bank sectoral
work and lending.

- 37 -

to include an Indigenous Peoples Framework that builds on and expands work initiated under the

Emergency Recovery Project.

E. Instruments for Bank Group Assistance
Managing the existing I D A portfolio

86. Achieving better synergies with the existing Bank porifolio. Most o f the ongoing projects are
multisector emergency operations prepared under OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and
Emergencies). Under this CAS, IDA expects to fully transition from emergency to more standard
financing and institutional arrangements. In this context, early on in the CAS period, IDA staff will
work with the authorities to restructure the portfolio, with the objective of strengthening capacity
utilization, putting in place fiduciary controls that increasingly rely on government systems and
institutions. This should help streamline project and program implementation, and free up both
government and Bank resources to support new analytical activities and operations, and intensify
IDA’Sadvice and technical support to mainstreamed government institution^,'^ in order to build more
sustainable capacity for effective implementation.
87. Supportfor implementation of ongoing activities will remain thefirst andforemost priority for
IDA. With about US$1.7 billion in commitments, the DRC program i s the third largest in Africa, and
i t s effective implementationi s critical to getting results in the CAS period (projects already underway
provide the most scope to translate into results on the ground in the coming years). As for other postconflict countries in Africa and elsewhere, the portfolio i s being implemented in an environment
where intense hands-on implementation support i s essential to achieve results and ensure
transparency. Efforts will focus on improving overall portfolio performance and helping turn-around
problem projects. While efforts to coordinate this work with other donors may lead to reduced IDA
administrative costs over time, donor collaboration i s not expected to produce any net savings over
the CAS period.
88. Particular attention will continue to be paid to fiduciary issues, including during the planned
portfolio restructuring exercise. Bank management will highlight governance and corruption in its
dialogue with the authorities, including ensuring that agreed recommendations from both the draft
Public Expenditure Review and the INT report and the planned management audit o f BCECO are
implemented in a timely fashion. The Bank takes a zero tolerance approach to misuse of i t s
resources, and would ask the Congolese authoritiesto severely sanction cases of fraud.

89. I n this context, during the porifolio restructuring exercise I D A expects to review how best to
mainstream project implementation, while safeguarding fiduciary oversight. To date, all IDAfinanced projects are implemented through PIUs. One of these, the Bureau Central de Coordination
(BCECO), has played a major role in implementationand in providing project implementationadvice
to other units. Line ministries have been involved in the design phase and as beneficiaries, but so far
have been granted very limited fiduciary responsibilities during implementation. While the transfer o f
responsibilities to line ministries i s desirable in principle, their current capacity i s generally
13

We will be experimenting, in some o f the new projects (e.g., Pro-Routes, Education), with the use o f PIUs
integrated within the ministries.

- 38 -

inadequate to provide sufficient comfort on fiduciary issues. In an environment where the
overwhelming priority i s to maintain fiduciary integrity, the CAS recommends a continued reliance
on skilled and ring-fenced structures for all fiduciary matters. To the extent possible, line ministries
should benefit from capacity building programs and gradually play a stronger role (e.g., for technical
aspects o f design or supervision, on a case-by-case basis) - but no fiduciary responsibility should be
transferred before sufficient capacity i s in place.

90. IDA also intends to increase its implementation support in DRC, especially outside of
Kinshasa. With a growing number o f activities underway in the provinces, regular field visits are
critical to ensure proper oversight o f IDA-financed activities. This is, however, no minor endeavor in
a country with formidable logistical constraints. As indicated above, while direct Bank oversight i s
feasible o f large contracts (typically road works), it i s much less practical for either central
government or financing agencies to oversee implementation o f a multiplicity o f relatively small
contracts (e.g., rebuilding a school in a rural district). Therefore, IDA will leverage oversight in a
number of ways, including agreement with the authorities on financing independent technical audits;
mobilizing the provincial authorities’ support in making sure projects in their provinces deliver
results; reaching out to other donors for joint oversight and providing support to networks such as
religious organizations capable o f channeling feedback from beneficiaries.

9 1. I n parallel, IDA will strengthen its Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) systems. In line with the
AAP recommendations, I D A intends to update the M&E frameworks for ongoing projects during the
planned portfolio restructuring exercise in 2008, with a view to making use o f new information,
processes and performance measurement, since their approval. IDA will continue to pay attention to
improving the reliability o f the results framework o f new operations, bearing in mind that data and
data gathering are not optimal and system wide improvements will take time.

92. Effective portfolio management requires a strong presence in the jield. The Country Office i s
playing a key role in this respect. Finding the right internationally- and locally- recruited professional
staff for the workprogram, based in Kinshasa, has proven difficult. While there has been progress,
more can be done to get more high qualified staff, and ensure they have the authority and the support
to do their work. IDA i s committed to a three-tier approach: locating in Kinshasa the Country
Director, along with additional experienced technical staff, eg in infrastructure, portfolio
management, financial management, share technical staff already in the region within easy travel
distance from DRC, and maintain a strong support capacity at Headquarters. The CAS evisages that
the DRC office staffing will grow gradually along these lines and with due attention to maintaining
the quality o f the team.
Carrying out IDA analytical work

93. As recommended in the AAP, IDA will deepen its analytical and advisory work in DRC,
together with development partners, to support strengthened, result-oriented national strategies.

- 39 -

94. The CAS proposes a shvt in the focus of IDA’s analytical work. In the immediate reengagement period, the focus was rightly placed on rebuilding a knowledge base and agreeing with
the authorities on broad strategic approaches for each sector. A key focus o f IDA’s analytical
resources will be devoted to governance-related work in FY08, specifically finance public
management and decentralization (see Table 2). Starting also in FY08, IDA will broaden the
analytical focus to general economic work, to help the country update i t s medium-term development
strategy, with an average o f three deliverables per year, comparable to the average o f three for past
three years.

Fiscal Year
FY08

Proposed Program
Financial Sector Assessment Program (FSAP)
Public Expenditure Review (PER)I4
Programmatic Governance: Phase 1
Youth Education Study
Country Financial Accountability Assessment (CFAA)
Programmatic Governance: Phase 2
Public Enterprise Review
Risk and Vulnerability Assessment Study
Country Economic Memorandum

FY09

FYI0

InfrastructureReview
Health Country Status Report
Export Crops Study

FYI1

Poverty Assessment

95. An indicative list of the proposed AAA is provided in Table 2. This l i s t may be adjusted during
the CAS implementation period, especially for the outer years, to respond to evolving Government
priorities and needs, in a rapidly-changing environment:
Rebuilding the knowledge base:
The Youth Education Study (FY08) i s first phase o f a study on education and skills
training opportunities for youth in DRC. This first phase consists o f an analysis of
statistics on formal secondary schooling, together with discussions with key informants
on the education and skills requirements o f new entrants to the labor force.
The Health Country Status Report (FY09) will examine changes in health indicators and
determinants since 2000, with a view to forging consensus on a sector wide approach to
support for the sector. HIV prevalence data will be closely examined to inform
programming in that sector.
Risk and Vulnerability Assessment Study (FY09) will analyze the constraints - social,
geographic, economic, and legal - that hinder the participation o f vulnerable groups
(including pygmies, women who experience violence and the handicapped) in economic
growth and make recommendations on how best to address them.
~~

A Public Expenditure and FinancialAccountability (PEFA) w i l l be repeated yearly.

l4

- 40 -

Supporting governance reforms:
Public Expenditure Review (FY08). This i s designed t o engage the authorities in a
substantive dialogue o n ways to improve the use o f Government’s resources to finance
poverty reduction programs and ensure effective use o f potential future budget support’’.
Governance (Phase I) (FY08). This i s designed to assist the Government build a
governance system to deliver key public services effectively. This will be an input to
implementation o f the Governance Contract by providing analytical input on the four
priority cross-cutting governance issues - public service reform, decentralization,
transparency, and public financial management.
Financial Sector Assessment Program (FY09). This will take stock o f progress in
implementing early reforms in the sector and chart a course o f action to re-establish
effective financial intermediation in at least some parts o f the country.
Country Financial Accountability Assessment (FY09). This will look at progress since
the FY05 report and identify areas for priority action.
Governance and Public Service Delivery (Phase I .(FY09). It will continue to assist the
Government in addressing key challenges to building a governance system in line with
their Governance Contract.
General economic work:
0
Poverty Assessment 11 (FYI 1) aims t o provide a detailed overview and understanding o f
poverty in DRC and a solid statistical baseline and trends over the C A S period.
Public Enterprise Review (FY09). This will take stock o f recent public enterprise
reforms, and recommend further action, as necessary. This will address questions posed
in the ESW published in 2003.
0
Country Economic Memorandum (FY 10). This will focus o n shared growth challenges
and opportunities for DRC as it moves farther from the post-conflict period.
Infrastructure Review Report (FY 10). This will review infrastructure services, evaluate
performance and institutional arrangements, and recommend policy changes to help
improve infrastructure services. Sub-sectors that may be included: telecommunications,
electricity, water and sanitation, roads, airports, aviation, ports and shipping.
The Export Crops Study (FY 11). This will provide a diagnosis o f key elements o f the
DRC’s efforts to enhance agriculture performance.

IDA financing
96. The preferred strategic choice is to continue to provide a high level offinancial assistance to
D R C consistent with IDA rules. Alternative options could emerge as a result o f backsliding on
governance or o n economic management, or an alternative development strategy pursued by
l5 Timing o f budget support operation depends on authorities’ progress in improving fiduciary controls and
strengtheningpublic fmancial management, as demonstratedby concrete reform results. The draft PER (08)
provides useful milestones over an 18 - 24 month period for this purpose: (i)
compliance with budget calendar
and preparation o f realistic budget reflecting sector priorities; (ii)
removing manual steps to expenditure circuit
(la chaine de la dkpense) to reduce the processing time for normal expenditures; and (iii)
limiting the use of

emergency procedures to true emergencies.

-41 -

mortgaging i t s future natural resource revenues. Depending on the seriousness o f the backsliding,
this could result in the WBGroup’s partial or full disengagement. Absent significant backsliding,
partial disengagement i s not a recommended option, as it would reduce IDA’S leverage and impact,
without substantially reducing i t s exposure in the short-term (since there i s a large portfolio under
implementation). It could be seen to contribute to weakening the peace process and regional stability.
Full disengagement would send a strong signal o f disconnect between the authorities and the Bank on
i t s development strategy and performance, something not warranted by the economic reforms and albeit limited - progress, and also unnecessarily weaken a yet untested Government. I t would likely
have a significant impact on private sector behavior and on other international partners who would be
hard pressed to understand such action. It would significantly weaken what has been an
internationally-supported and relatively successful political process at a critical moment. The risks
associated with this approach are very high for DRC as well as for the Bank’s reputation. Neither
option i s recommended.
97. As recommended in the CAS, the appropriate level o f IDA support during this period would
strictly adhere to the IDA allocation rules. As a post-conflict country, D R C receives exceptional
financial support from IDA, above what it would receive under IDA’SPerformance Based Allocation
System. Beginning in FY07, however, exceptional support started to be phased out. In FY08, IDA i s
providing around SDR 148.5 million to DRC, after accounting for some front-loading o f resources
under IDA 14. Going forward, IDA post-conflict supplemental allocation to DRC will continue to be
phased out, to reach normal performance-based allocations during the CAS period.l6 Finally, since
DRC i s in debt distress, it will receive i t s allocation in the form o f grants. T o the extent DRC became
eligible for additional forms o f IDA financing under IDA 16, the financing envelope would be
adjusted accordingly.

98. A second strategic choice is to adjust thefinancing instruments used in DRCgoing forward, on
the basis o f lessons learned and changes in the overall environment. Firstly, all new IDA-financed
programs and projects i s expected to incorporate a strong reform component (beyond reconstruction
activities). As a consequence, it i s expected to have few or no multi-sector operations beyond the
possibility o f general budget support, and focus on sector specific programs and projects. Secondly,
there appears to be no foreseeable rationale for new emergency projects processed under OP8.0 (on
rapid response to crises and emergencies), unless the situation in eastern Congo deteriorates
significantly. Adaptable Program Loans (APLs) may be used, with care taken to avoid major
implicit commitments for the post-CAS period when the IDA allocation will be reduced. Also, to
build on success, additional financing will be systematically considered for well-performing
operations in need o f follow up. Thirdly, in order to focus limited Bank administrative resources, it i s
unlikely that small grants (under the Post-Conflict Fund or the Institutional Development Fund) w i l l
be used. And finally, project and program design will make full use o f the flexibility allowed under
the new Country Financing Parameters, and place a strong emphasis on promoting transparency and
accountability.
99. Overall, I D A expects to finance a series of operations in the years FYO8-FYI1 in support of the
CAS strategic objectives. A l i s t o f these operations i s provided in Table 3, which may be adjusted
16

Under IDA 15, the post-conflict phase-out period may be extended from the current three to six years. If this
happens, DRC may receive exceptional support fiom IDA for another three years, in line with i t s performance.

- 42 -

during the CAS implementation period, especially in the outer years, in order to respond to evolving
Government priorities and needs.
A series of sector investment and Development Policy operations will focus on key sectors and
economic policies in areas o f major Bank engagement. In addition to a strong economic and
sector policy component, each o f these projects i s expected to incorporate governance concerns,
as relevant. Planned operations include the following:
- Governance Capacity Enhancement (FY08). This will support the Government in
addressing four cross-cutting governance issues by: (i)enhancing accountability at
central and provincial government level, (ii)strengthening public financial management
and public service management at central government level; and (iii)establishing
functioning public financial management and public service management systems at the
provincial government level.
- Roads Rehabilitation and Maintenance (FY08). This complements a large DflD-funded,
Bank-administered Trust Fund. I t supports re-establishment o f viable road maintenance
systems, and re-opening o f sections o f the primary road network.
- Additional financing/Repeaters (FY08):
Disarmament, Demobilization, and
Reintegration (DDR); Electricity (notably to increase access and generation capacity);
private sector development; and South Power Pool Project.
- Forest Sector (FY09). This expects to finance technical assistance and capacity building
efforts to support effective implementation o f reforms, and sustainable forest use, and
seek to ensure Pygmies enjoy equal access to rights and socio-economic opportunities
resulting from the new Forest Code, including the right to manage community forests and
to benefit from social responsibility contracts.
- Water Sector Rehabilitation (FY09). This supports reform o f the water company
(R6gid6so) and finances key investments required to improve clean water access rates.
- Mining Sector (FY09). This supports technical assistance and capacity building efforts to
ensure effective implementation o f reforms, and i t s design will benefit from the
Economic Sector Work on the Mining Sector completed in FY08.
- Economic Management Technical Assistance (FY09). This i s designed to help
strengthen capacity o f the Central Government to manage the economy. This capacity,
low in D R C prior to the war, was further eroded by years o f conflict and neglect.
Specifically, the project aims at strengthening the Central Government capacity to: i)
collect and manage statistical systems on national income accounts and provincial data on
poverty and consumption patterns; ii)undertake studies on macroeconomic management
and structural reforms; iii)manage public finances and administrative system; and iv)
undertake public procurement reform.
- Multi-modal Transport (FY 10). US$180 million to support restructuring o f key public
sector transport enterprises, to reduce obstacles to economic activity (including
ONATRA, which needs to significantly improve management o f DRC’s only sea port,
Matadi; and SNCC, which operates vital rail links in the southeastern part o f the country).
This operation i s expected to be coordinated with other donors such as the ADB (SNCC)
and’the AFD (N’djili airport), and could undergo significant adjustment also in light o f
planned Chinese investments in the transport sector.
- Agriculture (FY10). This i s designed to a) help restart production in selected areas,
mainly hinterlands o f major cities, and b) prepare for medium-termreform o f the sector.

- 43 -

Urban Rehabilitation and Development (FY 10). This aims to improve living conditions
and access to services in key urban areas.
Budget Support (FY 10) i s expected to support implementation o f the two key pillars o f
the PRSP with which the World Bank Group i s engaged - governance and shared growth.
Prior to an assessment o f the status o f public expenditure management reforms
recommended in the draft PER, provision o f budget support would entail significant
fiduciary risk for the WB, notwithstanding clear financial needs.
Power Expansion Project (FY 11) will be a follow-up to the Regional and Domestic
Power Market Development.
An Education SWAP (FY 11) to further improve the performance o f the sector while
enhancing harmonization among donors. The Bank contribution will mainly focus on
vocational and tertiary education.
A Health SWAP (FY 11) to improve performance o f the sector while enhancing donor
harmonization and the capacity o f government institutions.
A series of additionally financed activities (FY 11) in critical sectors, tentatively in
governance and Social Fund, subject to the performance o f the corresponding projects.
Table 3. Proposed IDA Operations FYOS-FY11

*Tentative amountsfor IDA 16period (FY09 -FY11), to be adjusted on basis ofIDA allocations.

F. Scaling Up IFC activities
100. IFC’s new growth strategy in Sub-Saharan Africa is to increase significant@ the
Corporation’s reach and sustained impact in more frontier countries where the private sector can
perform a crucial role in job creation, restoration o f infrastructure, stabilization and economic growth.
IFC i s well-placed to be a catalyst for accelerating private sector involvement in the critical early
years following conflict, by introducing innovative ways to mitigate risk, helping improve the

- 44 -

investment climate, building micro, small and medium enterprises (MSME) capacity and mobilizing
local and foreign investors. T o this end, IFC, after funding approval by the Board in June 2006, i s
launching a pilot post-conflict initiative in the DRC following joint WBG diagnostic missions. The
outcome i s an action plan for increased IFC involvement through combined advisory, technical
assistance and investment operations. The DRC post-conflict initiative encompasses all three pillars
o f the IFC Strategic Initiative for Sub-Saharan Africa approved by the board in August 2003, namely:
(i)improving the investment climate, (ii)pro-active project mobilization, and (iii)
enhanced support
for micro, small, and medium-sized enterprises (MSMEs). I t s main features are as follows: (i)
launching quickly, but staying for the longer term; (ii)
improving access to finance through MSMEs
and Trade Finance Programs; (iii)
working through partnerships and collaboration with donors, NGOs
and other partners to build synergies and minimize overlaps, to attract investors.
The post-conflict initiative has three phases. Phase I, which i s completed, consisted o f
101.
identifying short, medium and longer term priorities and actions to rebuild the private sector with
joint scoping missions undertaken by sector teams in infrastructure, financial markets, mining,
general manufacturing, MSME development, investment climate and advisory services. Phase 2 has
begun with the formation o f a new government and will involve, security permitting, a small IFC
team located in W B offices in Kinshasa with the primary objective o f refining the proposed initiative
and judging timing to move into the next phase. Phase 3 will involve the actual posting o f an IFC
team to fully implement programs resulting from opportunities identified in Phase 2.

102. A number of opportunities have been identified by joint scoping missions and the following
programs are currently at an advance stage o f preparation and/or being implemented:
An airport advisory project has been approved by IFC’s corporate investment committee,
paving the way for I F C to seek an advisory mandate for private-public partnership (PPP) in
management o f Kinshasa’s airport facilities. This will form part o f broader Bank Group
support to the sector, particularly the IDA-financed Multi-modal Transport Operation, which
aims to renovate the country’s transport infrastructure through public-private partnerships
(PPPs). IFC’s advisory team,’ drawing on specialist expertise from the World Bank as
needed, will provide advice on transaction structuring issues, while at the same time
coordinating with donors and consultants working on related areas such as regulatory reform
and physical rehabilitation o f the facilities.
0

0

0

An MSME development project consisting o f capacity building, access to information and
advisory services aimed at supporting micro, small and medium size enterprises has been
approved for launch by I F C and i s awaiting recruitment o f staff before implementation.

A trade finance facility to support the operations o f Rawbank, a local Congolese bank, has
been approved by IFC, committed and i s being implemented.
A subordinated facility (Tier I1 Capital) currently being committed, has been approved to
enhance the networth o f Stan bic (local subsidiary o f standrard Bank o f South Africa)

103. I n the implementation of this initiative, IFC anticipates synergies as well as cooperation to
enhance Bank Group assistance to DRC in a number o f areas, including: (i)pursuit o f joint World

-45

-

Bank, IFC and MIGA collaboration to support the energy sector; (ii)consolidation o f work being
undertaken by the World Bank, IFC PEP-Africa, FIAS and MIGA with ANAPI and to expand WBG
coordination in the financial
scope with a joint effort to help improve the business environment; (iii)
sector and MSME development assistance by consolidating work undertaken under IDA’S private
sector enterprise support project and IFC’s PEP Africa and Financial Markets operations to support
investment and non investment activities in the two sectors; (iv) consolidation of joint IDA and IFC
support to the mining sector with focus on implementationof the mining code and the EITI initiative,
and the development of a supply chain program; and (v) pursuit of,joint IFC and MIGA promotion in
the telecommunications and mining sectors to support planned investments by mobile phone
operators and mining companies.

G. Expanding MIGA activities
104. I n the 2008-2OI1 Period M I G A will need to step up its activities in the areas of both
guarantees and technical assistance. In terms of guarantees, MIGA has spent much o f the last year
putting together a growing pipeline o f potential future projects. Prominent sectors o f likely guarantee
support are infrastructure (power, telecommunications), mining, agribusiness, manufacturing, and
services.
MIGA hopes to supports i t s first project in the infrastructure sector (power,
telecommunications) in FY08. The largest part of MIGA’s growing pipeline is, however, in the
extractive area (specifically mining). Experience to date in this sector i s mixed. Going forward,
MIGA will be working very closely with the Bank and IFC on mining projects to ensure that all
aspects o f the Extractive Industries Review (EIR) and EITI initiatives are met before bringing such
projects to Board for consideration. On the technical assistance front, MIGA will be stepping up i t s
engagement with ANAPI to increase foreign investment in the country. MIGA will do this through
working with ANAPI to expand i t s capacity as well as improve i t s on-line services to potential
investors.
H. Strengthening Donor Coordination
105.
The CAS proposes that I D A continues to play a leading role in efforts aimed at donor
mobilization and harmonization. Such efforts are key to ensuring adequate financing can be
provided to face the challenges o f economic recovery, and deployed in ways that make synergies
possible, and hence enhance effectiveness. IDA’S role includes organization and co-chairmanship of
annual Consultative Group meetings, participation in various donor groups (including sector and
thematic groups) in Kinshasa, as well as contributing to the institutional mechanisms that may be put
in place by the Government to follow up on implementationo f the Governance Contract.

106. The CAS envisages IDA support to the Government to strengthen its capacity to coordinate
donors. The shift o f coordination responsibilities from external partners to the Government i s an
objective o f the overall assistance program, and i s critical to the eventual success o f the recovery
process - in this context the mainstreaming of PIUs i s a necessary if insufficient step. Additional
efforts are needed to strengthen and consolidate the Government’s policy analysis, program design,
budget implementation and monitoring and evaluation capacity. IDA support, while expected to
remain modest in size, i s designed to help build the necessary skills and institutional mechanisms for
the Government to take over the coordination of external partners in a professional and effective
manner.

- 46 -

107. Finally, the CASproposes that I D A make a determined effort to harmonize activities at
both the general budget and sector levels. At the strategic level, this could be realized by building
on the CAF process to help deepen the definition of Government-led, common strategy around which
donors would align their sector support, as well as eventually and potentially, general budget support.
At the operational level, it could be achieved through development and generalized use o f SWAPS,
joint financing mechanisms, including Trust Funds (as i s already the case in the forestry sector, and i s
expected to be developed also in the roads sector), joint implementation and oversight activities and
joint reporting mechanisms. In addition, the joint CAF results matrices will be used as a monitoring
tool throughout the CAF period. The specifics o f the monitoring processes are expected to be
decided, collaboratively, in coming months.
I.Monitoring and Evaluation: The Results Agenda

108. The focus of this CAS on governance reforms should result in significant improvements in
the management and transparency o f natural resources and other public revenues. The focus on shared
growth and poverty reduction should lead to enhanced income opportunities and access of
disadvantaged groups to social services. As i s usual in post-conflict countries, time inconsistencies
and lags, and the lack o f a strong monitoring and statistical framework, make the choice of
quantitative outcome indicators quite difficult.
109. Taking these factors into account, progress in these two strategic elements during the CAS
period will be monitored as follows:
Improving Governance. Improvements in the management and transparency o f natural
resources will be measured by the increase o f revenues from the natural resources,
improvement o f transparency in the management o f natural resources (e.g. publication of
mining/forestry concessions titles), a restructured public service (delivers public services in
key sectors), increase o f functioning decentralized entities, functioning of public enterprises.
Progress on public expenditure management will be evaluated by yearly Public Expenditure
and Financial Accountability (PEFA) assessments, using the review completed in 2007 as the
baseline.
0

Shared growth. Progress in this area will be measured through a combination o f output and
outcome indicators. Among the most important will be the proportion of government
resources used for pro-poor programs, using 2008 budget execution figures as a baseline;
access to health services in targeted areas; primary school enrollment and completion rates,
using 2005 data as the baseline; and data on access to services in rural and urban areas, using
the 2006 Poverty Note as baseline. Progress will also be assessed on the basis of functioning
infrastructure systems (e.g., roads, ports), increased in the level o f investment from the
private sector (including in the mining and forestry sectors)

110. Tracking these results indicators will depend on the existence of a robust monitoring and
evaluation system in the key ministries and sectors responsible for implementing the development
interventions. The monitoring framework of the PRSP i s being strengthened and Bank support to
improve the country’s currently weak statistical capacity i s envisaged. The CAS results framework i s

- 47 -

closely aligned with the PRSP objectives and indicates the C A F outcomes that the Bank intends to
contribute to. The C A S results framework (see Annex 4) has been designed bearing in mind the
difficulties in obtaining reliable data. At the CAS progress report stage, the results framework will be
reviewed to ensure that it remains relevant and that the indicators selected are indeed effective in
monitoring progress.

- 48 -

PART B.3. MANAGING R I S K S - THE WORLD BANK GROUP
PART B.3. MANAGING R I S K S - THE WORLD BANK GROUP
111. As noted in Part A.3, engagement in DRC is a high-risk, high-reward strategy, and though
the same set of risks is common to all donors under the CAF, each donor will manage the specific
risks to its own assistance program In the case o f the Bank Group, risk management w i l l be
proactive and integrated into the design o f every operation. Risks will be mitigated through strong
supervision and fiduciary controls; an increased presence o f Bank Group staff on the ground,
intensive and ongoing dialogue with stakeholders; participatory decision-making in project design
and implementation; and attention to the needs traditionally marginalized groups that could be a
source o f social unrest, including small-scale operators in forestry and mining. Table 4 shows the
Bank’s risk management approach in relation to that o f other donors.

- 49 -

s.&

.
I

t

-l

L

0
*

B

.-

Y

g

I

m
IA
I

I

I

'

I

d

IA
I

ANNEX 1: POVERTY PROFILE ANALYSIS - Summary
POVERTY IN THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF CONGO @RC)

.

1.
This summarizes a report by Bank staff as a contribution to the Poverty Reduction Strategv
of the D R C government. The DRC authorities have made a substantial effort over the last few years
to collect data at household level in order to provide information on poverty and other MDG-related

indicators and thereby inform the PRSP. The Bank has prepared a poverty diagnostic building on
those data. Five key findings emerge from this analysis.

2.
First, the report confirms that poverty is massive in DRC. Poverty measures based on the
123 survey implemented in 2004-2005 indicate that close to three fourth o f the population i s poor
(Table 1). International comparisons also show that the DRC i s one o f the poorest countries in the
world, with most people in rural areas not only poor, but also likely to suffer from low levels o f
education and high health risks. Data on food consumption circa 2000 are strikingly low, even if one
would expect the situation to have improved somewhat in recent years, at least outside conflict-prone
areas. Another indication o f mass poverty i s the fact that health and education indicators have been
fairly flat across the bottom three or four quintiles, particularly in rural areas, suggesting a similarly
bad socio-economic situation for the overwhelming majority o f the population. Even some indicators
in the highest quintile are s t i l l low by any international standard. Given that poverty i s much more
likely if heads o f household or spouses are working in agriculture (versus self-employment or salaried
work), one cannot escape the conclusion that rural poverty i s highly generalized.
Table 1: Poverty Measures at the National Level and by Area, 2004-2005
Population
share
(YO)
National
100
Urban
31
Rural
69
Source: World Bank, Afristat and UPPE, based on 123 survey for 2004-2005.

Headcount
index
(%)
71
61
75

3.
Secondly, although poverty is massive, there are differences between geographic areas in
terms of its intensity. Regional differences in indicators are presented in several places in the report.
The analysis o f wealth conducted with the 2001 MICS2 survey suggests that households residing in
Kinshasa and Bas-Congo were better-off than the rest o f the country , which i s in line with most
perceptions and other data. Rural areas o f the Kivus in the MICS2 survey also seem to be better-off
than at least some other rural areas.
4.
Thirdly, lack of education and employment are key determinants of poverty. Employment
and education are two main determinants o f the wages or earnings o f individuals, and o f the overall
consumption level o f households. However, the returns to education appear to be low, especially in
rural areas. In addition, most o f the population i s self-employed, due to the weaknesses o f the formal
sector, both in public administration and in private firms. Unemployment i s high, especially in urban
areas and among young workers, and i s a source o f concern both for poverty and social stability.

5.
Fourthly, the impact of the conflict (and of the prolonged economic decline of the last few
decades and the lack of security) has been large. As expected, the population has been severely
affected by the war, both in terms o f past economic, social, and health effects, but also in terms o f

current psychological wellbeing and perceptions of the future. Ending the war i s one o f the most
frequently-cited ways poverty can be reduced, and increasing security i s one o f the more frequently

cited priorities for the state.

6.
Fifihly, both the high private cost of education and health services and the lack of quality
warrant government intervention. The private costs o f education and health are high, especially for
the poor. Affordability repeatedly comes up as the main reason for not sending children to school,
not maintaining them in school regularly, or having them drop out. This does not mean that
affordability i s the only issue as important questions are raised about quality as well. The findings for
health are similar: affordability comes up as the main reason for not seeking care, or not following up
on prescribed medical treatment. Again, there are also quality issues, but improving affordability i s
essential for households in poor areas. Better affordability could also yield large externalities in
terms o f other benefits, given the negative impact o f bad health on a range o f other outcomes.
7.
Future analytical work and monitoring and evaluation of PRSP implementation will need
continued efforts in terms of data collection and analysis. The Bank’s report on poverty provides a
basic diagnostic and an analysis o f the perceptions and priorities o f the poor that has been used in the
PRSP. The analysis remains limited however. While the available sources o f data provide clear
pointers, additional efforts need to be implemented to improve the information base on poverty,
vulnerability, and the social and productive sectors. Two Poverty Assessments are planned over the
CAS period, one to be published in FY09, the other in F Y 11.

-2-

ANNEX 2: PROGRESS STATUS OF TRIGGERS FOR REACHING
THE FLOATING COMPLETION POINT
(As o f November 2007)

Triggers

Progress status

1. PRSP
Completion o f a full PRSP through a
participatory process and i t s
implementation for one year, duly
documented in the DRC’s annual
progress report, and confirmed as
satisfactory by a joint staff advisory note
(JSAN).

Ongoing. The full PRSP was completed through a
participatory process, and was adopted by the government in July 2006. The
PRSP and the JSAN were presented to the Bank Board in May 2007 and the
Fund Board in September 2007. The document i s being disseminated: flyers
in four local languages are being prepared; dissemination workshops were
held. The implementation plan for the strategy was endorsed by sectoral
ministries, NGOs, and civil society. A priority action program (PAP) 200708 was developed in collaboration with development partners and sectoral
ministers. to start imdementingthe PRSP.
Improving. Macroeconomic stability deteriorated during the
period leading up to and after the elections. After the duly-elected
government took office in early 2007, macroeconomic indicators improved
as the new government tightened the fiscal discipline. However, the State
Budget 2007 (promulgated mid-2007) used unrealistically high revenue
projections to justify higher expenditures, notably for Parliamentarians’
salaries. Even though the government announced i t s intensions to stick to
the more realistic budget that was agreed with the IMF, the fiscal discipline
started to weaken in the second half o f 2007 as social pressure mounted. The
government i s working to improve the situation, and i s discussing the 2008
budget with the Fund team, with the possibility o f starting negotiations for a
new PRGF arrangement as earlv as December 2007.
Satisfactory. The use o f budgetary savings fiom the enhanced
HIPC Initiative i s aligned with the priorities expressed in I-PRSP and PRSP.
The government continues i t s efforts to use HIPC savings to finance
spending in the areas o f health and education. These social sectors have
received a large share o f the pro-poor spending since 2003 : the budget
executed for these sectors has increased from 0.7% o f GDP in 2003 to 2.6%
in 2006. An external audit o f the HIPC account was completed recently.

2. Macroeconomic stability
Continued maintenance o f
macroeconomic stability after reaching
the decision point, as evidenced by
satisfactory performance under a program
supported by an arrangement under the
IMF’s PRGF.

3.
Use of budgetary savings
resulting fiom enhanced HIPC Initiativerelated debt service r e l i e f during the
interim period for poverty-related
expenditures in accordance with the IPRSP, with supporting documentation
satisfactory to the staffs o f IDA and the
IMF.
4. Public expenditure management
(a) Implementation o f a modernized
budget-executionsystem, providing
information fiom commitment to
payment, and allowing for the monitoring
of arrears:

Ongoing. (a) The budget-execution system i s improving. A
modernized budget execution system capable o f providing information from
commitment to payment i s in place. Monitoring for arrears will be possible
once the accounting system i s f i l l y functional, and Treasury accounts,
describing the financial flows and account balance, are produced
automatically in real time. Currently, the Treasury accounts are produced
monthly but s t i l l manually, and are not yet exhaustive or reliable. Ministry
o f Finance needs to redouble the efforts meet this trigger.

(b) The double-entry system i s being implemented. The staff have

-3-

Triggers

Progress status

(b) adoption and implementation o f a
double-entry government accounting
system and a new chart o f accounts; and
(c) Production o f quarterly budget
execution reports using economic,
administrative, and functional
classifications.

been trained, equipment purchased, and software developed. Ministry o f
Finance, Central Bank, and the Tax agencies need to redouble their efforts to
make the system fully operational.

~

~

~~~

5. Governance and service delivery in
priority sectors

0 (a) Completion o f a budget-tracking
exercise on health, education, rural
development and infrastructure
monitoring
expenditure, consisting o f (i)
the execution o f poverty-related public
evaluation by user
expenditure; (ii)
groups o f the quality o f related public
services, and (iii)
evaluation by serviceproviders of constraints to effective
provisioq; and

(b) Adoption and implementation o f a
new procurement code and key
implementing decrees.

6. Social and rural sectors
Adoption o f sectoral development
strategies and related implementation
plans for health, education and rural
development, which are satisfactory to
IDA.
7. Debt management
Installation and full activation o f a
computerized debt-recording system,
covering public and publicly-guaranteed
debt that can (a) produce monthly debtservice projections, and incorporate actual
disbursement and debt-service payment
execution data; (b) produce advance
monthly debt-service projections that w i l l
be published quarterly; and (c) support
the centralization o f debt information into
a single center.

(c) International standard classifications have been adopted. The
quarterly budget execution reports are produced using economic,
administrative, and functional classifications. However, line ministries do
not prepare sectoral budget execution reports systematically. Ministry o f
Budget prepares the general budget execution reports @tats de suivi
budgetaire, or ESBs) automatically using the Budget-Treasury's unique
database. For this reason, and because the accounting system i s still not
fully operational, the production o f ESBs remains irregular and o f uneven
a ualitv .
0

~~~~

~~

Partially done, possible problems. (a) A n evaluation by user
groups o f the quality o f public services on health and education has been
user fees (ii)
poor quality
conducted (World Bank: IGR 2005), and found (i)
o f the service (iii)
inaccessibility due to lack o f roads and distance to the
nearest facility as major problems. In particular, user fees were found to
cover not just the service providers (e.g. schools and clinics), but also to
subsidize the (extremely low) remunerations and operating costs o f local
administrations. A budget tracking exercise for these two sectors are
planned to be completed in 2008. However, neither the user surveys nor
budget tracking exercise has been conducted or even planned for rural
development and infrastructure sectors: possible need to review what
exactly would be useful and feasible for these sectors.
0

(b) The draft procurement code was adopted in April 2006. The application
laws were validated in October 2006. The fmal version o f the code and the
laws need to be adopted by the Council o f Ministers, then by Parliament.
After adoption, the last step i s to put in place institutions compatible with
the new code, and to make them operational.
Almost complete. Sectoral development strategies and related
implementation plans are adopted for health and education. An agriculture
sector review was completed in May 2006. The rural development strategy
i s under preparation.
0

Partially done. A computerized debt-recording system covering public and
publicly guaranteed debt (DMFAS) was installed, and relevant staff has
been trained. The database o f public debt compiled using the system s t i l l
contains errors (as o f September 2007), and it does not cover publiclyguaranteed debt. The debt management agency (OGEDEP) does not yet
publish the debt service projections. OGEDEP also does not play the role o f
the single debt information center. Ministry o f Finance must exert further
efforts to sensitize all parties involved in any matters concerning public and
publicly guaranteed debt to treat OGEDEP as the single information center
(or to designate another entity to fulfill this task).

-4-

ANNEX 3: EXTERNALAND PUBLIC SUSTAINABILITY
ANALYSES (DSA)
I N T E R N A T I O N A L M O N E T A R Y FUND AND
INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION

DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE CONGO
Joint FundNorld Bank Debt SustainabilityAnalysis 2007l
Prepared by the staffs o f the International Monetary Fund
and the International Development Association
Approved by Robert Corker and Mark Plant (IMF),
and Sudhir Shetty and Vikram Nehru (IDA)

August 2007

1.
The Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC) is in debt distress. At end 2006, debt service
on public and publicly guaranteed (PPG) external debt amounted to 26 percent o f exports while the
net present value (NPV) o f PPG external debt exceeded 300 percent o f exports, 90 percent of GDP,
and 700 percent o f government revenue. As a result, most debt burden indicators substantially exceed
their policy-based thresholds under the baseline scenario.2 Further, the DRC has not serviced any o f
i t s debt service obligations to Paris Club creditors since July2006. Even if the security situation
stabilizes and macroeconomic and structural policies improve substantially as assumed under the
baseline scenario, external debt indicators will remain above the relevant policy-based thresholds for
many years to come and even worsen in the event o f adverse exogenous shocks. Accordingly, the
DRC should seek external financing mainly in the form o f grants. It should strengthen i t s track record
o f policy implementation with a view to reaching the completion point under the enhanced HIPC
initiative as soon as possible, which would allow it to benefit from substantial stock-of-debt relief
under this initiative as well as the Multilateral Debt Reduction Initiative (MDRI).
1

This i s the first debt sustainability analysis for the DRC prepared under the joint World Bank/IMF Debt
Sustainability Framework for Low Income Countries. Bank and Fund staffs also completed a HIPC DSA
jointly in July 2003 when the DRC reached i t s decision point under the enhanced HIPC Initiative.

-

(“Democratic Republic of the Congo Decision Point Documentfor the Enhanced Heavily Indebted Poor
Countries (HIPC) Initiative EBSl031267 and IDA/R 2003-0059) This is, however, the first DSA that
’I,

establishes a debt distress rating for the DRC.

* The World Bank’s Country Policy and Institutional Assessment (CPIA) rates the DRC as a low performer.

Under the joint World Bank/ IMF debt sustainability framework, the corresponding thresholds are 30 percent
for the NPV of external PPG debt to GDP ratio, 100 percent for the NPV of external PPG debt to exports
ratio, 200 percent for the NPV of external PPG debt to revenue ratio, 15 percent for the external PPG debt
service to exports ratio, and 25 percent for the external PPG debt service to revenue ratio.
(“OperationalFramework for Debt Sustainability Assessments in Low-Income Countries - Further
Considerations”, SMl05/109,3/29/05 and IDNR2005-0056). Assuming the DRC reaches the HIPC
completion point by mid-2008 and benefits from debt relief under enhanced HIPC and the MDR initiatives,

debt burden indicators would fall below policy-basedthresholds.

-5-

Background

2.
Three decades of economic mismanagement, culminating in civil strye, led to the
accumulation of a large stock of external arrears3 At end-2001, the DRC’s arrears on PPG external
debt amounted to US$10.6 billion. Clearance of close to US$2 billion o f arrears to multilateral
institutions and progress in stabilizing the macroeconomic situation, followed by the approval of a
PRGF arrangement in July 2002, paved the way for the HIPC decision point in 2003. At the decision
point and based on the outstanding stock o f debt at end-2002 o f US$8.4 billion in NPV term^,^ HIPC
debt relief to the DRC was estimated at US$6.3 billion in NPV terms.

3.
At the time of the decision point, it was assumed that the DRC would reach the completion
point shortly afier the end of the PRGF arrangement, in the third quarter of 2006. However,
substantial policy slippages towards the final phase o f the democratic transition prevented the
completion of the last review under the PRGF arrangement, which had been extended to endMarch 2006. Since then, Fund staff has helped the authorities design and monitor two Staff
Monitored Programs ( S M P s ) ’ , with a view to strengthening economic policy implementation and
allowing for the development o f a credible medium-term program to be supported under a successor
PRGF arrangement. The DRC also completed and adopted officially a full PRSP in July 2006 and has
made progress towards meeting the HIPC completion point triggers. Completing the first review
under a new PRGF and satisfying the HIPC completion point triggers would pave the way for the
DRC to reach the completion point, possibly by mid-2008, and hence the delivery o f the remaining
HIPC and MDRI debt relief.

~~

4

’

The DRC faced negative growth rates over 13 consecutive years, leading to a dramatic decline o f GDP per
capita (in constant 2000 U S dollars) from US$400 at independence in 1960 to US$lOO in 2001.

“Democratic Republic of the Congo - Decision Point Documentfor the Enhanced Heavily Indebted Poor
Countries (HIPC) Initiative”, EBS/03/267 and IDA/R2003-0059.Detailed information on clearance o f arrears
to multilaterals i s also provided in this document.
Covering the periods April-December 2006 and January-December 2007, respectively.

-6-

4.
At end-2006, the DRC’s public and I
Fieure 1: Nominal Debt Stock as o f end 2006 bv Creditor
publicly guaranteed debt is estimated at
US$11.5billion, including US$4.6 b i l l i o n to
multilateral institutions and more than
US$6.0 billion to Paris Club creditors (see
Figure 1).6 During the interim period, the D R C
i s benefiting from substantial interim HIPC
debt relief provided by major multilateral
creditors. While IDA continues to disburse
ther Multllaterals
interim H I P C debt relief,’ interim assistance
from the Fund was disbursed until June 2006,
based o n the decision taken upon the completion o f the fifth review under the PRGF arrangement.
Further interim assistance from the Fund would require approval o f a new PRGF arrangement. The
D R C has signed debt relief agreements with a number o f commercial creditors. I t has also benefited
from a f l o w rescheduling o n Cologne terms and debt relief beyond H I P C assistance by Paris Club
creditors. However, the D R C has been unable t o meet i t s debt service obligations to Paris Club
creditors since July 2006. The Chairman o f the Paris Club indicated to the authorities that the
treatment o f the resulting arrears would have to await an agreement o n a new PRGF arrangement.

External Debt Sustainability Analysis

5.
The baseline scenario of this DSA assumes the stabilization of the security situation and
adoption of prudent macroeconomic policies and structural reformsespecially those aimed at
strengthening governance. These include enhancing transparency in the mining sector, reducing the
costs o f doing business, strengthening tax collection, improving budget preparation and execution,
and reforming the c i v i l service. The implementation o f prudent policies and reforms, together with a
recovery o f the mining sector, i s projected to lead to strong economic growth through 2012
(see Box l).9
6.
Consistent with current guidelines,’o the baseline scenario assumes only HIPC interim
relie$ Multilateral creditors provide interim HIPC debt relief according t o the debt relief agreements.
For the Paris Club, debt service in the interim period i s calculated assuming a Cologne f l o w treatment
6

These estimates exclude amounts o f penalties and late interest due to London Club creditors. The DRC i s
working on a World Bank financed buy-back operation for i t s debt to London Club creditors.
The DRC would reach i t s one-third limit o f IDA interim debt relief in August 2009.
The external debt sustainability analysis provides information only on the NPV o f PPG external debt, as
information on private external debt i s not available. For the NPV calculation, a 5 percent discount rate i s
used. Debt service payments are converted to U S dollars using WE0 exchange rate projections consistent
with the requirements o f the joint World Bank/IMF L I C Debt Sustainability Framework. (“Operational

’

Framework for Debt Sustainability Assessments in Low-Income Countries

-

Further Considerations”,

SM/05/109, 3/29/05 and IDA/R2005-0056).
’The baseline i s consistent with the macroeconomic framework envisaged for the period 2007-2012 in the
context o f the 2007 consultation under the Article I V o f the I M F articles o f agreement. However, the latter
reflects the impact o f the debt stock reductions under the enhanced HIPC and MDIU initiatives that would
result ftom the DRC reaching the completion under the enhanced HIPC Initiative.
lo
“Staff Guidance Note on the Application of the Joint Fund-Bank Debt Sustainability Framework for Low-

Income Countries”, April 2007, SM/O7/131,4/17/07 and IDA/No. 39748.

-7-

and debt relief beyond H I P C assistance. For non-Paris Club creditors or commercial creditors
comparable treatment t o the Paris Club has been assumed, unless debt relief agreements have already
been signed.”

7.
Under the baseline scenario, all external debt burden indicators breach their thresholds
(Table la). In 2006, a l l debt stock indicators, Le., the NPV ratios o f debt to GDP, export and revenue,
markedly exceed the policy-based thresholds, and are projected to converge towards their thresholds
only at the end o f the 20-year projection period. The gradual decline o f these ratios largely reflects
the projected rebound o f exports and real GDP growth, together with the assumption that external
financial support mainly takes the form o f grants, with new loans contracted o n highly concessional
terms. A broadly similar trend applies if principal macroeconomic variables assume their 10-year
historical average, as captured in the historical average scenario.
8.
While the long-term macroeconomic projections in this DSA are in line with the decision
point DSA,” the medium-term growth prospects have improved. The recent political transition and
high commodity prices have sparked investor interest in the mining sector. N e w investments in the
sector are expected t o significantly increase, boosting mineral production, especially copper and
cobalt, over the medium term. This i s expected to raise real G D P and export growth rates for 2008-12
relative to projections in past DSAs.13 Imports related to the investment in the mining sector also lead
to a relative widening o f the current account deficit during the same period, largely financed through
foreign direct investment.

9.

These baseline macroeconomic projections are subject to significant risks. Poor
governance, unresolved security issues, weak implementation capacity and lower than envisaged
donor support may hinder the consistent implementation o f sound policies and reforms as w e l l as the
impacts o f these measures. Moreover, given the DRC’s high dependence o n mining exports, it
remains vulnerable t o adverse terms o f trade shocks. Finally, the current security tension especially in
the eastern provinces could escalate.

All debt burden indicators are projected to exceed their thresholds under the stress tests
(Table lb). If the DRC contracts loans o n less concessional terms i t s debt stock indicators would
deteriorate substantially. The NPV o f debt to GDP ratio and NPV o f debt to revenue ratio, for
10.

11

The NPV o f debt in this DSA also differs fkom decision point data as a result o f methodological differences
between the joint Bank-Fund LIC DSA framework and the HIPC methodology. These are using: a) a fixed
5 percent discount rate instead o f currency-specific discount rates under HIPC; b) WE0 exchange rate
projections instead o f fixed exchange rates as o f end-of the base date; and c) annual exports instead o f a threeyear average o f exports in the NPV o f debt to exports ratio. Moreover, debt relief simulations in the current
DSA have been updated reflecting the change in the expected HIPC completion point date and updated
information on commercial debt.

l2“Democratic

Republic of the Congo - Decision Point Document for the Enhanced Heavily Indebted Poor
Countries (HIPC) Initiative”, EBSl031267 and IDA/R2003-0059
l3 The decision point DSA assumed an average real GDP growth o f 6 percent during 2008-2012, while the
current baseline has an average growth rate o f 8.2 percent. The I M F published a DSA for the DRC in 2005
(EBS05/374), which projected an average real GDP growth o f 6.7 percent during 2008 2012. The improved
growth projection in the current DSA i s based on more recent information on commodity prices and mining
sector output projections. However, the long-term projections in both DSAs are in line with the current LIC

-

DSA.

-8-

example, would reach 56 percent and 285 percent, in 2017, respectively. Similarly, a slump in export
growth in 2008 and 2009 would significantly and adversely affect the DRC’s debt to export
indicators, raising i t s N P V o f debt to exports ratio to 3 10 percent and i t s debt service to exports ratio
to 23 percent in 2017.
11.
The DRC’s debt burden indicators are projected to fall below their thresholds if it benefits
from debt relief under the enhanced HIPC and the MDRZ initiatives. Under an alternative scenario,
which assumes the D R C reaches the HIPC completion point in mid-2008, the N P V o f government
and government-guaranteed external debt would fall to the equivalent o f 16.0 percent o f GDP,
48 percent o f exports, and 114 percent o f government revenue by 2008.
12.
Even after the completion point is reached, the DRC’s debt sustainability is likely to remain
vulnerable to adverse exogenous shocks. Applying the stahdardized stress tests to the postcompletion point scenario, it can be shown that under the most extreme stress tests all debt stock
indicators would breach their thresholds, two o f them over sustained period o f time.14
Public Debt Sustainability Analysis

13.
The DRC’s domestic debt is estimated to be relatively low following its restructuring in
2005. Identified government domestic debt15was equivalent to 0.5 percent o f GDP at end 2006 and i s
expected to be paid o f f by end-2007. Thereafter, the baseline fiscal framework assumes zero net
domestic borrowing.
14.
As a result, the above sustainability analysis for external debt broadly applies for total
government and government-guaranteed debt (Tables 2a and 2b). Under the baseline scenario, the
N P V o f public debt to GDP ratio decreases only gradually to the relevant policy thresholds towards
the end o f the 20-year projection period.
Conclusions

15.
The DRC is currently in debt distress. Even if the security situation stabilizes and
macroeconomic and structural policies lead to robust recovery, as assumed under the baseline
scenario, the external debt indicators would breach policy-based thresholds. Moreover, even after
reaching the HIPC completion point and benefiting from debt relief under the enhanced HIPC and
MDRI initiatives, the DRC remains vulnerable to shocks that could lead to lower exports and
economic growth. It i s therefore essential that the DRC adheres to prudent macroeconomic policies
and implement significant structural reforms far reaching structural reforms, while seeking external
financing mostly in the form o f grants or loans on highly concessional terms. I t should also strengthen
i t s track record o f policy implementation with a view to quickly reaching the completion point under
the enhanced HIPC Initiative.

14

A combination o f different shocks leads to the largest increase in NPV of debt to GDP and NPV o f debt to
exports ratio. The most extreme shock for the NPV o f debt to exports ratio i s the shock on export growth.
Excluding debt vis-&vis the central bank.

-9-

Box 1: Democratic Republic o f the Congo - MacroeconomicAssumptions Underlying the Baseline
Since 2002, real GDP growth has averaged 5.5 percent. Construction and telecommunications
contributed significantly to growth, reflecting a recovery of economic activity after years o f civil strife.
Aggregate demand rebounded on the back o f large international support for reconstruction and the political
transition and favorable terms of trade.

Assuming that the DRC maintains security and strengthens its record of policy implementation, including
major improvements in governance, real GDP growth i s projected to increase to 8 percent a year during
2007-12 led by a mining rebound and a continuation o f the reconstructionefforts of the past years. Large
investments in copper and cobalt are expected to increase their output to historical production levels by
2012. Consequently, the mining sector i s expected to grow at on average 17 percent between 2008 and
2012 in real terms.u Over the long run, real GDP i s projected to stabilize at around 5 percent a year as the
strong recovery tapers off over time.
Inflation i s projectedto decrease from 18 percent at end 2006 to 8 percent in 2008 and i s projectedto
remain at that rate over the long run. With a view to reducing the DRC’s vulnerability to external shocks,
gross international reserves are projectedto be gradually rebuilt from the equivalent of 3 weeks o f nonaid related imports in 2006 to about 9 weeks in 2012. The nominal exchange rate relative to the US dollar
i s assumed to depreciate in line with the inflation differential between the DRC and the United States.
However, potentially large capital inflows that the DRC could attract if the security situation and
governance improve, could lead to a real appreciation of the currency, which in turn could lead to lower
than projected debt burden indicators.
Exports o f goods and services are projectedto increase on average by 11.4 percent per year in 2007-12
and by 6.0 percent over the long run. The initial export boom reflects the coming on stream o f important
projects to rehabilitate the DRC’s large mining sector. The rehabilitation of the DRC’s infrastructure could
also contribute to the development of other exports, including agricultural products. Imports are expected
to increase sharply in 2008 relatedto large mining and infrastructureprojects, continuing to grow at
10 percent till 2012 before assuming a long-term growth rate of 5 percent.

The non-interest current account deficit was estimated to be equivalent to 4.9 percent of GDP in 2006
and projected to peak at about 9.0 percent o f GDP in 2011. The fluctuations o f the current account balance
reflect the lumpiness of imports relatedto mining projects. Thereafter, it will gradually narrow as exports
pick up and imports decline. The widening current account deficit during the 2008-12 period i s assumed to
be financed mainly by foreign direct investment, with net FDI inflows averaging 9 percent of GDP
between 2008 and 2012.
The overall fiscal deficit (including grants) i s projected to shift from near balance in 2006 to a deficit o f
some 2.8 percent of GDP by 2012. This assumes the execution of reforms to widen the tax base, strengthen
tax and customs administration, which would help raise revenue by some 3 percentage points o f GDP over
the next five years. On that basis, public expenditure could increase by 7 percentage points, particularly to
help address the DRC’s substantial social and infrastructurerehabilitation needs, on a non-inflationary and
sustainable basis.
Donor support i s assumed to increase subject to significant improvement in governance and
macroeconomic policies. Under the baseline, external grants would increase, as a share of GDP, from
2 percent in 2004 to 6 percent in 2012 and remain at around this level going forward.
Achieving the macroeconomic objectives will, however, be a challenge. Beyond the fragile security and
political situation, risks include: (i)
fiscal slippages that could destabilize a fragile economy; (ii) significant
adverse terms of trade shocks; (iii) slower than projected private-sectorled growth; (iv) lower-thananticipateddonor support if governance does not improve markedly; and (v) slow progress in structural
reforms, possibly due to limited implementation capacity.

1/ The DRC has Africa’s largest deposits o f copper, cobalt and coltan, and significant reserves of diamonds and oil.
After years o f economic mismanagement, poor governance and conflict, the contribution of the mining sector to
GDP declined from 25 percent of GDP in the mid-l980s, to less than 10 percent of GDP in the early 2000s.

- 10-

.

.. .. .. ..

.. .. .. ..

12

Figure 1. Democratic Republic of the Congo: Indicators of Public and Publicly Guaranteed External Debt Under Alternative Scenarios,
2007-2027
(Percent, unless otherwise indicated)
i.-n

Debt Accumulation

,

a6

~

(right scale)

55
25
45

4

2

::1
-6

I

35

0

I\

2007

Rate of debt accumulation
(Percent change of NPVI GDP)

l5
5

(left scale)

2012

2017

2022

2027

-5

NPV of debt-to-exDorts ratio

600

140

,

120

-

100

-

80

-

60

-

40

-

20

-

NPV of debt-to-GDP ratio

.-.
-

.......... ..........

04
2007

201 2

2017

2022

2027

1000
900 -

500

-

800

700

400

600 -

300 200 100 -

300

500

400

200

............ :.-.
.......... .........
................

100
0

2007

2012

2017

- .....
-_.

ci.

2022

Debt-service-to-exportsratio

50 I

2007

2027

i

60

2017

2022

2027

Debt-service-to-revenueratio

90

70

2012

-

50 40

-

30 -

.....................
"

20 -

...... ...........

2007

q7

I

2012

-

2017

2022

2027

Baseline

-Most extreme shock: Combination
. . I . .

...... ........... ....................

10

8

After HlPC and MDRl

0

2007

2012

2017

2022

- - - Historical scenario
Threshold

Sources:World Bank and IMF Staff projectionsand simulations:

' Assumes that DRC reaches its HlPC Completion Point in June 2WB. Includes additional bilateral debt relief provided by Paris Club creditorson a voluntaly basis
Historical average scenario is based on past 5 yean, covering the DRC's post-conflict period

2027

Tabla 1b Dmosnec R.pMk of Uw Congo Sonslb*tfAnalyus for Key Indimtom of Publk snd Publicly GuamnUld Exurnel Debt, 2037-27
(P.rrmt)
2011

2Q27

57

82

51

32

67
76
15

79
70
15

75
65
15

49
56
22

13
43
24

105
87
107
1W
133
114

85
89
96
92
122
104

87
62
09
86

112
95

50
75
82
79
104
87

e5
Bo
67
82
82
71

41
34
42
34
47
49

274

242

21 3

158

1-

I52

%

2%
276

274
246
46

251
215
43

222
195
42

XI1
176
43

1 4

4a

e5

3s
126
71

274
4w
274
3M
358
274

242
497
242
287
380
242

213
u 3
213
266
347
213

169

309
158

155
353
165
212
278
165

152
310
152
185
244
I52

171
85
1w
1%
E5

649

e56

49%

417

376

257

145

e97
8U
114

829
583
104

548
475
93

.Iw
430
93

450
392
96

2%
285
110

58
193
1oQ

737
693
761
710
532
81 1

717
884
734
582
91 1
760

Bw
561
615
578

654

537
507
e51
522
884
585

485
480
496
474
829
526

332
305
310
313
418
361

187
153
182
154
212
204

18

24

16

15

12

10

10

14
12
5

29
25
5

21
17
4

20
15
3

18
13
3

13
11
4

9
13
7

12
17
12
12
15
12

25
44
25
26
36
25

17
31
17
18

25
17

15
28
15
17
22
16

13
24
13
14
19
13

10
23
10
14
16
10

11
21
11
13
17
It

43

55

36

32

28

16

16

21
21
21

32
28
14

67
58
11

46
38
5

44
36
7

39
29
7

22

14

18

6

2Q
11

21
21
21

3

a
35
41

75
69
77
59
62
51

46
40
49
40

56
52

44
39
45
37
50
49

38
31
39
31
43
41

22
23
23
23
31
24

21
19
22
18
28
23

?a

30

30

30

30

30

30

2MB

2W9

82

51

74

sa

82
82
15

104

IC4
101
118
I28

83
16

ea

3m
3w
303

8

8
8

?a

- 13 -

P,oj.caon.
2010
2011

2012

XQ7

a
34

no

396
159
237

<€a

%

14
Y

r

k
r

15

Figure 2. Democratic Republic of the Congo: Indicators of Public Debt Under Alternative Scenarios, 2007-27
(Percent)
160
140

-

120

-

80

-

60

-

100

40
20

2007

NPV of debt-to-GDP ratio
/

-Baseline
-Most

2009

extreme stress test

2011

600
500

-

400

-

300

-

200

-

100

-

'

2013

2015

2017

2019

2021

2023

2021

2023

2025

2027

NPV of Debt-to-Revenue Ratio

-

Baseline
extreme stress test

-Most

0
2007

2009

2011

2013

2015

2017

2019

2025

2027

I "

Debt Service-to-Revenue Ratio

60

50
40

-

30

-

20

Baseline
-Most
extreme stress test

10

2007

2009

2011

2013

2015

2017

2019

2021

\

2023

2025

2027

Sources: World Bank and IMF Staff projections and simulations.

' Most extreme stress test is test that yields highest ratio in 2017; the no reform scenario projects debt burden
indicators on the basis of the estimated 2007 primary balance; since this a surplus, the scenario implies a
decline in debt burden indicators.
Revenue including grants.

Table 26. DemocraticRepublicof the Congo: SensitivityAnalysis for Key indicators of Public Debt 2007-2027

2007

2008

2009

Projections
2010 2011

2012

2017

2027

NPV of Debt-to-GDP Ratio
Baseline

98

95

84

76

69

64

52

33

98

96

86

79

74

70

70

93

98
98
98
96
96

109
98
107
141
104

114
89
107
127
92

108
61
96
117
84

103
74
86
108
77

100
69
76
100
72

108
57
59
62
60

135
40
33
58
42

513

469

400

347

310

281

227

136

513

473

408

359

326

302

298

376

513
513
513
513
513

520
464
514
697
514

501
426
479
609
442

456
371
413
535
385

426
332
363
462
345

407
302
324
439
315

453
249
248
357
261

543
164
134
240
174

31

33

40

26

24

21

14

15

31

33

40

27

26

23

25

42

31
31
31
31
31

36
33
35
36
33

50
45
49
46
55

36
32
34
33
32

37
26
28
30
27

35
22
22
27
23

39
19
18
23
19

62
19
15
22
21

A. Altematlve scenarlo'
A l . Permanently lower GDP growth

B. Bound tesls
81. Real GDP growth is at historical average minus one standard deviations in 2006-2009
82. Primary balance is at historical average minus one standard deviations in 2008-2009
83. Combinationof 81-82 using one half standard deviation shocks
84. One-time 30 percent real depreciation in 2008
85. 10 percent of GDP increase in other debt-creating flows in 2008

NPV of Debt-to-Revenue Ratio'
Baseline
A. Alternative scenario'
A l , Permanently lower GDP growth2

B. Bound tests
81, Real GDP growth is at historical average minus one standard deviations in 2008-2009
82. Primary balance is at historicalaverage minus one standard deviations in 2008-2009
83. Combination of 81-82 using one haif standard deviation shocks
84. One-time 30 percent real depreciation in 2008
85. 10 percent of GDP increase In other debt-creating flows in 2008

Debt Service-to-Revenue Ratio'
Baseline
A. Alternative scenario'
A l . Permanently lower GDP growth

B. Bound tests
81. Real GDP growth is at historical average minus one standard deviations in 2008-2009
82. Primary balance is at historicalaverage minus one standard deviations in 2008-2009
83. Combination of 81-82 using one half standard deviation shocks
84. One-time 30 percent real depreciation in 2006
85. 10 percent of GDP increase in other debt-creating flows in 2008

Sources: Country authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections.

'

Other historicalscenarios were exduded because of poor data (especiallyfiscal)during the conflict period (1998-2001).
2Assumes that real GDP growth is at baseline minus one standard deviation divided by the square root of 20 (Le., the length of the projection period).
Revenues are defined inclusive of grants.

- 16-

ANNEX 4. ACHIEVEMENTS OF THE 2004-2006 TSS

Annex 4.1
Annex 4.2
Annex 4.3

TSS Outcomes
TSS Analytical and Advisory Activities (AAA)
Summary o f the TSS (as of Sept. 30,2007)

- 17-

b

b

b

b

.

U

8

I

2

e

rn

rn

I

e

e

I

e

.

.

e

8

.

0
P4

e

I

.

e,
m

>I

v1

c

I
I

I

!
I
I
>

z

I:
I
1

I

2

I
r

i

4

I

i
I

e,

5

I

m

c\1
I

*
W
v1

E

e
e&

00

*h:

n
I

z

e

e

e

1
I

3

\o
A

A

.
3

?

2

n

x

N
I

e

N

m

hl
~~

31

LA

LA

N
t-

8
2

i

.
ss
V,

I

00

r\l
I

Vvr

g;:

:I

$2

.

/5
W

P
f

d

3

c)

5

Yl

5

Yl

10

N

N

3
9
9

.
3

mm
;;io
3

3

IN

I

Q\
N
I

/X

c

I

0

m
I

Y l o

$1:

I
3

m
I

.5

9
e,
I

9

c1

m
I

e

e

e

e

I /

m
m
I

m

0
0
N

*
m
I

9

I

e

e

s

a

a

I

v,

m
I

sa

I

U

B

W

m
I

a

a

a

a

h

I

9

M
I

a

a

I

r

I

eo
rn
I

I

m
I

a

a

a

I

9

0
d
I

a

a

I

s

3

d
I

u

e

e

e

e

8

I

c\1
d
I

I

m
d
I

ANNEX 6: COUNTRY AT GLANCE

Congo, Dem, Rep. a t a glance

11E107

Congo,
Dem. Rep.

SubSaharan
Africa

LOW
income

59.3
2,345
3.1
32

770
24,265
2.3
36

2,403
29,215
1.8
30

GNI (Atlas method, US$ billions)
GNI per capita (Atlas method, US$)
GNI per capita (PPP, international $)

7.7
130
720

648
842
2,032

1,562
650
2,698

GDP growth (Oh)
GDP per capita growth (%)

5.1
1.9

5.6
3.2

8.0
6.1

44
129
31

41
72
47
96
29

Key Development Indicators
(2008)

Age distribution, 2006
Male

Population, mid-year (millions)
Surface area (thousand sq. km)
Population growth (%)
Urban population (% of total population)

60-64
50-54
40-44

30-34

20-24
10-14
0-4

4
20

30

0

10

r
200

81
54

69
50
98
86

72
50
108
96

Access to an improved weter source (Oh of population)
Access to improved sanitation facilities ( % of population)

46
30

56
37

75
38

150

100

50

0
1990

is95

oCongo, Dern Rep

(US$ millions)
Net DDA and official aid
Top 3 donors (in 2005):
Japan
Belgium
United States

Aid (% of GNI)
Aid per capita (US$)

Exchange rate (annual average, local per US$)
Terms of trade index (2000 = 100)

Population, mid-year (millions)
GDP (US$ millions)

'

2000

2005

OSub-Saharan Africa

1980

I990

2000

2008

426

896

177

1,828

39
170
11

44
95
32

0
27
13

376
152
141

3.1
15

10.4
24

4.5
4

27.0
32

36.7
51.4

4129.2
109.0

511.0
515.8

5.0

13.1

0.0

0.0

69.0
100

468.3
131

50.1
4,306

59.3
8,543

3.0
1.8

2.8
4.9

2.8
4.7
0.8
9.3
5.7
6.2

Long-Term Economic Trends
Consumer prices (annual 56 change)
GDP implicit deflator (annual % change)

I
Growth of GDP and GDP per capita (Oh)

95

90

28.0
14,395

37.8
9,350

+GDP

00

-GDP per capita

O5

1980-90
1990-2000
2000-06
(average annual growth %)

Agriculture
Industry
Manufacturing
Services

26.8
35.0
15.2
38.2

(% of GDP)
31 0
29.0
11.3
40.0

50.0
20.3
4.8
29.7

45.7
27.7
6.5
26.6

2.5
0.9
1.6
2.0

1.4
-8.0
-8.7
-12.3

Household final consumption expenditure
General gov't final consumption expenditure
Gross capital formation

81.5
8.4
10.0

79.1
11.5
9.1

88.0
7.5
3.5

92.8
7.8
13.0

3.4
0.0
-5.1

-4.5
-17.4
-0.7

Exports of goods and services
Imports of goods and services
Gross savings

16.5
16.4
7.9

29.5
29.2
0.8

22.4
21.4
-1.3

30.7
44.4
3.6

9.6
10.7

-0.5
-2.4

Note: Figures in italics are for years other than those specified. 2006 data are preliminary, .. Indicates data are not available
a. Aid data ere for 2005.
Development Economics, Development Data Group (DECDG).

- 44 -

30

Under-5 mortality rate (per 1,000)

59
75

Adult literacy, male (Oh of ages 15 end older)
Adult literacy, female (56 of ages 15 and older)
Gross primary enrollment, male (% of age group)
Gross primary enrollment, female (% of age group)

Net Aid Flows

20

10

percent

(most recent estimate, 2000-2008)
Poverty headcount ratio et $1 a day (PPP, % )
Poverty headcount ratio at $2 a day (PPP, %)
Life expectancy at birth (years)
Infant mortality (per 1,000 live births)
Child malnutrition (% of children under 5)

Fnrnale

70-74

7.6
22.5

I

Congo, Dern. Rep.
Balance of Payments and Trade
(US$ millions)
Total merchandise exports (fob)
Total merchandise imports (cif)
Net trade in goods and services
Current account balance
as a % of GDP

2000

2006

892
669
48

2,044
2,607
-1,002

Voice and accountability

-199
-4.6

-643
-7.5

Regulatory quality

Governance Indicators, 2000 and 2006

Political stability

Rule of law

Workers' remittances and
compensation of employees (receipts)
Reserves, including gold

Control of corruption

51

'

470

0

2006
0 2000

Central Government Finance
(% of GDP)

Current revenue (including grants)
Tax revenue
Current expenditure

5.1
4.0
10.6

25.1
9.8
11.7

Overall surplusldeficit

-6.0

5.5

60
40

50
40

Highest marginal tax rate (%)
Individual
Corporate

External Debt and Resource Flows
(US$ millions)
Total debt outstanding and disbursed
Total debt service
Debt relief (HIPC. MDRI)

Total debt (% of GDP)
Total debt service (% of exports)

292.8
2.5

Foreign direct investment (net Inflows)
Portfolio equity (net inflows)

1

12,609
25
6,875

23
0

Figure I:Nommal Debt Stock as of end 2006 by Creditor
Commercial Creditor

Private Sector Development
Time required to start a business (days)
Cost to start a business (% of GNI per capita)
Time required to register property (days)

2000

-

Ranked as a major constraint to business
(% of managers surveyed who agreed)
Electricity
Access tolcost of financing

Country's percentile rank (0-100)
higher velues imply bener rabngs

Soume Kaufmann-Kraav-Mastruzzl World Bank

Technology and Infrastructure

:

Paved roads (% of total)
Fixed line and mobile phone
subscribers (per 1,000 people)
High technology exports
(% of manufactured exports)

10
59.6

10
58.9
5.0

..

15,639

0.03

0.03

GDP per unit of energy use
(2000 PPP $ per kg of oil equivalent)

2.0

2.1

Energy use per capita (kg of oil equivalent)

295

296

IBRD
Total debt outstanding and disbursed
Disbursements
Principal repayments
Interest payments

81
0
0
0

0
0
0
0

IDA
Total debt outstanding and disbursed
Disbursements
Total debt service

1,188
0
0

2,277,000
0
0

0
0
0

14
14
5

0

16

0
0

3
0

Environment

133.4

Freshwater resources per capita (cu. meters)
Freshwater withdrawal (% of internal resources)

45.5
14.5

Stock market capitalization (% of GDP)
Bank capital to asset ratio (%)

CO2 emissions per capita (mt)

Development Economics. Deve opment Data Group (DECDG)

-45

-

0.0

(US$ milons)

IFC (fiscal year)
Total disbursed and outstanding portfolio
of which IFC own account
Disbursements for IFC own account
Portfolio sales, prepayments and
repayments for IFC own account
MIGA
Gross exposure
New guarantees

Note: Figures in italics are for years other than those specified. 2006 data are preliminary
.. Indicates data are not available. indicates observation is not applicable.

-

1.8
37

Agricultural land (% of land area)
Forest area (% of land area)
Nationally protected areas (% of land area)

155
481.1
57

2005

0

9 , 474

2006

2000

1 1/6/07

M illenn iu m Development Goals

Congo, Dem. Rep.

With selected targets to achieve between 7990 and 2075

(estimate closest to date shown, +/- 2 years)

Goal 1: halve the rates for $1 a day poverty and malnutrition
Poverty headcount ratio at $1 a day (PPP, O h of population)
Poverty headcount ratio at national poverty line (% of population)
Share of income or consumption to the poorest qunitile (%)
Prevalence of malnutrition (% of children under 5)

.I

1990

Goal 2: ensure that chlldren are able to complete primary schooling
Primary school enrollment (net, % )
Primary completion rate (% of relevant age group)
Secondary school enrollment (gross, %)
Youfh liferacy rate (% of people ages 15-24)
Goal 3: eliminate gender disparity in education and empower women
Ratio of girls to boys in primary and secondary education (%)
Women employed in the nonagricultural sector (% of nonagricultural employment)
Proportion of seats held by women in national parliament (96)
Goal 4: reduce under-5 mortality b y two-thirds
Under4 mortality rate (per 1,000)
Infant mortality rata (per 1,000 live births)
Measles immunization (proportion of one-year olds immunized, %)

1995

2000

34.4

31.0

54
46

42

39
18

26
5

5

205
129
38

205
129
27

39
22

80
12

205
129
46

Goal 5: reduce maternal mortality b y three-fourths
Maternal mortality ratio (modeled estimate, per 100,000 live births)
Births attended by skilied health staff (% of total)

205
129
64

990
61

Goal 6: halt and begin to reverse the spread of HiV/AIDS and other major diseases
Prevalence of HiV (% of population ages 15-49)
Contraceptive prevalence (% of women ages 15-49)
Incidence of tuberculosis (per 100,000 people)
Tuberculosis cases detected under D O T S (%)

133

Goal 7: halve the proportion of people without sustainable access to basic needs
Access lo an improved water source (% of population)
Access to improved sanitation facilities (% of population)
Forest area (% of total land area)
Nationally protected areas (% of total land area)
C 0 2 emissions (metric tons per capita)
GDP per unit of energy use (constant 2000 P P P $ per kg of oil equivalent)

31
42

52

iducation indicators (Oh)

Weasles lmmunlzation (Oh of 1-year olds)

25 1

100,

3.2
366
70

0.1
4.5

0.1
2.8

0.0
2.0

46
30
58.9
5.0
0.0
2.1

1
0

1
0

0
0

37
2

43
16
62.0

Goal 8: develop a global partnership for development
Fixed line and mobile phone subscribers (par 1,000 people)
Internet users (per 1,000 people)
Personal computers (per 1,000 people)
Youth unemployment (% of total labor force ages 15-24)

75

2005

59.6

CT indicators (per 1,000 people)

i

0

2000

*Primary
+Ratio
I

2002

I

2005
1SSO

net enrollment ratio (..)

of girls to boys in primary 8
secondary education (..)

1SS5

OConpo, Dem Rep

Note: Figures in italics are for years other than those specified.

2000

2005

OSub-Saharan Africa

.. indicates data are not available

Development Economics, Development Data Group (DECDG).

- 46 -

2000

2002

OFixed + mobile subscribers
Wlnternet users

1 1/6/07

ANNEX 7: MAP OF DRC

- 47 -

Akula

Lisala

Co

angui

o
ng

Ou b

ORIENTALE

Bumba

nga
Bongandanga
Lulo
Basankusu

Boende

Tshu
a

mi

Ikela

Lowa

DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC
OF CONGO

L OM AM
A MII
Kananga
KASAI
MbujiKASAÏ- Mayi
KASAÏOCCIDENTAL
Tshikapa

KWANGO

Ka
s

ai

LULUA

RIVERS
100

200

300

400 Kilometers

*The creation of 26 new Provinces was approved by the ratification of the 2005 Constitution, to take effect by February,

2009. The existing 11 Province Capitals, shown with green circles, will retain their status, with the exception of Bandundu.
Future Province Capitals are shown with white circles.

**The existing 11 Province boundaries and names are shown in dark green; future in light green.

0

100

200 Miles

m
Sandoa
Lubudi

Kolwezi

s.

Luv
ua

Pweto

L

Lake
Mweru

Kilwa

HAUTKATANGA

10°S
To
Luwingu

Likasi

Dilolo

This map was produced by the Map Design Unit of The World Bank.
The boundaries, colors, denominations and any other information
shown on this map do not imply, on the part of The World Bank
Group, any judgment on the legal status of any territory, or any
endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.

Moba

la
ba

ZAMBIA

ZA MB I A
25°E

Lubumbashi

To
Kitwe

Lake
Malawi

Sakania
30°E

IBRD 33391R1

NOVEMBER 2007

INTERNATIONAL BOUNDARIES

Kamina

To
Lucano

Lake
Tanganyika

a

PROVINCE BOUNDARIES**

TAN ZAN I A

Lu

RAILROADS

BURUNDI

Manono

KATANGA
H A U T- L O M A M I

LUALABA
0

Kalemie

Kabalo

ira
uf

lua
Lulua Lu

NATIONAL CAPITAL

MAIN ROADS

To
Bujumbura

5°S

TANGANYIKA

Mwene-Ditu

ANGOLA

PROVINCE CAPITALS*

ga
Luku

Kabinda

ORIENTAL

Kapanga

SELECTED CITIES AND TOWNS

Lake
Victoria

Lulimba

ba

To
Damba

0°

RWANDA

Kongolo

Luebo

itu

Feshi

Kasongo

ORIENTAL

M

Mbanza-Ngungu

Matadi

Idiofa

Malela

Lusambo

K AS AÏ
A

Lake
Edward

To
Kibuye

Bukavu

Kalima

Lom
am
i

Boma

Kikwit

o
ang
Kw

ATLANTIC
OCEAN

To
PointeNoire

BAS-CONGO
KO N
NG
GO
O CEN T R AL
AL

ilu
Kw

CABINDA
(ANGOLA)

K
WILU
KW

KASAI

Lueo

5°S

Bulungu

Kenge

Ilebo

i

KINSHASA

Mangai

Margherita Peak
(5,110 m)

To Ruhengeri

nd

BANDUNDU

Lake
Albert

Lake Kivu

SUD
KIVU
Uvira
SUDMANIEMA
Kama
KIVU
MANIEMA

SANKURU

uru
Sank

UGAN DA

Bunia

Kindu

Lodja

Lukenie

Kasa
i

Ul
i

Congo

Betamba

Buna

Lubutu

a

ela

MAI-NDOMBE

Bandundu

NORD
KIVU
NORDKIVU Goma

lab

ka

pa

Kutu

KINSHASA
KI N S
HA S
A C
CII TY
TY
SHA
SA

Beni

Lua

Yumbi

Bafwasende

Wanie Rakula

om

Inongo

ITURI

Butembo

a

Lu

ila

imi

Kisangani

TS H U APAL

Bikoro

To
Pakwach

Wamba
Mongbwalu

Yangambi

L om

C ON G O

Aruw

Banalia

TSHOPO

EQUATEUR
É Q U AT E U R
Mbandaka

Kiba
li

Watsa

Isiro

Aketi

MONGALA

0°

HAUT-UELE

Titule

Buta

I

Imese

Businga

M A L AW

SUDUBANGI

Faradje

Uele

.

DEM. REP.
OF CONGO

Gemena

BAS-UELE

Bondo

NORD-UBANGI

Mts

Libenge

Gbadolite

ba

Zongo

5°N

To
Juba

tum

To
Bangui

SUDAN

To
Bangasso

To
Kembe

Ubang
i

30°E

Mi

5°N

G AB ON

25°E

CENT RA L A FRICA N REPUBLIC

t

15°E

M

10°E

