Public Disclosure Authorized

DOCUMENT
OF
THE WORLD BANK
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Public Disclosure Authorized

REPORT
No: 41474-ZR

INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION
COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY

Public Disclosure Authorized

FOR
THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF CONGO
FOR THE PERIOD FY 07-FY11
VOLUME 2

-

TECHNICAL ANNEXES

Public Disclosure Authorized

NOVEMBER 16,2007

AFCC2
AFRICA REGION
This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance
o f their official duties. I t s contents may not otherwise be disclosed without World Bank
authorization.

CURRENCY EQUIVANENTS

CURRENCY U N I T

= CONGOLESE FRANC

US$?? = SDRl
FISCAL YEAR

JANUARY

1

-

DECEMBER
31

ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS
ADB
ART
CAP
CDR
CEEC
CENI
CFAA
CIDA
CMFK
CNAEA
COPIREP
CPRCD
DDR
DfID
DGI
DGRAD
EC
EITI
EMIS
EPI
EPSP
FARDC
FEC
FEDECAME
GDP
GER
GIBS
HIM0
HIPC
HMIS
HSSS
IASC
ICAO
IGF
IMCI
IMF
INERA
ITM
LLIN

African Development Bank
Anti Retro-Viral Treatment
Complementary Activity Package
Centrales de Distribution Re'gionales
Centre d'Evaluation, d'Expertise et de Cert$cation
La Commission Electorale Nationale Inde'pendante
Country Financial Accountability Assessment
Canadian International Development Agency
Chemin de Fer du Katanga
Comite' National d 'Action de I'Eau et de 1'Assainissement
Comite' de Pilotage de la Re'forme des Entreprises Publiques
Commission Permanente de Reformes du Droit Congolais
Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration
Department for International Development
Direction Ge'ne'rale des ImpSts
Direction Ge'ne'rale des Recettes Administratives et Domaniales
European Commission
Initiative pour la Transparence duns les Industries d 'Extraction
Education Management Information System
Equipement de Protection Individuelle
Enseignement Primaire, Secondaire et Professionnel
Forces Arme'es Congolaises
Federation des Entreprises des Congo
Federation des Centrales de Distribution des Medicaments Essentiels
Gross National Product
Gross Enrolment Rates
Groupe Inter Bailleurs Sante'
Haute Intensite de Main-d'auvre
Heavily Indebted Poor Countries
Health Management Information System
Health Systems Strengthening Strategy
Inter-Agency Standing Committee
International C i v i l Aviation Authority
Inspection Genkrale de Finances
Integrated Management o f Childhood Illness
International Monetary Fund
Institut de 1'Environnement et de Recherches Agricoles
Institut Technique Me'dical
Long Lasting Insecticide-Treated Mosquito N e t s

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

LNME
MAP
MDG
MDRI
MDRP
MEG
MIBA
MTEF
NGO

occ

ODA
OFIDA
OHADA
OMIKO
ONATRA
PFM
PEP
PER
PETS
PHC
PLWHA
PMTCT
PNA
PNC
PPA
PPP
PRGF
PRSP
REGIDESO
RVA
RVF
RVM
SALW
SEA
SENASEM
SIDA
SISA
SMI
SMIG
SMP
SNCC
SNEL
SNHR
SRSS
STI
SWAP
TVET
UN
USAID
VCT
WBG

Liste Nationale de Me'dicaments Essentiels
Minimum Activity Package
MillenniumDevelopment Goal
Multilateral Debt Relief Initiative
Multi-Country Demobilization and Reintegration Program
Me'dicaments Essentiels Ge'ne'riques
Minidre de Bakwanga
Medium Term Expenditure Framework
Non-Governmental Organization
Office Congolais de Control
Official Development Aid
Office des Douanes et Accises
L 'Organisation pour I'Harmonisation en Apique du Droit des Affaires
Ofice des Mines d 'Or de Kilo-Mot0
Office National de Transport
Public Financial Management
Post Exposure Prophylaxis
Public Expenditure Reviews
Public Expenditure Tracking Surveys
Primary Health Care
People Living with HIV/AIDS
Prevention Mother to Child Transmission
Programme National Assainissement
Police Nationale Congolaise
Participatory Poverty Assessment
Public Private Partnership
Poverty Reduction Growth Facility
Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper
Water Distribution Authority
Re'gie des Voies Ae'riennes
Re'gie des Voies Fluviales
Re'gie des Voies Maritimes
Small Arms and Light Weapons
Superviseur de L 'Eau et d Yssainissement
Service National des Semences
Swedish International Development Agency
Systdme d'hformation Sbcurite' Alimentaire
Structure Militaire Intdgre
Salaire Minimum Garanti
Staff Monitored Program
Socie'te' National de Control de Congo
Socie'te' National d'Electricite'
Socie'te' National d'Hydraulique Rurale
Systkme du Re'seau de Soins de Sante'
Sexually Transmitted Infection
Sector Wide Approach
Technical and Vocational Education Training
United Nations
United States Agency for International Development
Voluntary Counseling and Testing
World Bank Group
-

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance o f
their official duties. I t s contents may not be otherwise disclosed without World Bank authorization.

Vice President:
Acting Country Director:
Task Team Leaders:
Former Country Director:
Former Task Team Leader:
CAS Core Team:

Obiageli K. Ezekwesili
Judy M. O’Connor
Marie-ChantalUwanyiligira
Jean-Michel Happi
Pedro Alba
Xavier Devictor
Abdou Salam Drabo
Alain L. Labeau
Angela Khaminwa
Craig B. Andrew
Franck Bousquet
Franck Armand D. Douamba
Elena Kastlerova
Elizabeth Small
Elysee Kiti
Emilie Mushobekwa
Gilles Marie Veuillot
Giuseppe Topa
Guillemette Sidonie Jaffrin
Hinh T. Dinh
Ivan Rossignol
Jean-Michel Happi
Jean-Pierre Manshande
John Elder
Keiko Kubota
Lament Debroux
Mahine Diop
Natalie Ford
Philippe Charles Benoit
Pierre Morin
Pierre Pozzo di Borgo
Quentin T. Wodon
Samuel A. O’Brien-Kumi
Susan Opper
Thomas A. Vis
Tony Verheijen
Victoria Gyllerup

TABLE OF CONTENTS

ANNEX I : SUPPORTING THE GOVERNMENT’S GOVERNANCE CONTRACT

................................

I

I.OVERVIEW........................................................................................................................................... 1
A. Background .............................................................................................................................................
B. Cross-CuttingConcerns .....................

1

11. OBJECTIVES ........................

A. Security Sector Reform .........................
B. Enhancing Transparency
C. StrengtheningPublic Fi
D. Management o f Natural Resour
E. Public Administration and Civil
F. Local Governance and Decentral
G. Investment Climate and Public E

..............................
....................

.....................................................................................

9

.................................................................................

11

....................................

ANNEX 2: SUPPORTING HIGH, SHARED, AND SUSTAINABLE GROWTH

I.OVERVIEW.........................................................................................................................................

I3
13

13
13
14
D. Macroeconomic Framework and Assistance Needs ...............................................................................
15
11. KEY TRANSVERSAL CONSTRAINTS AND PRIORITIES ............................................................
16
.......
.......16
A.
B.
.......
.......17
C.
............................................................................................................................ 18

...............................................................................................................................

111. SOURCES OF GROWTHAND SPECIFIC PRIORITIES FOR EXTERNAL SUPPORT ................19
A. Agriculture ............................................................................................................................................. 19
B. Mining.
22
C. Industry
26

ANNEX 3: IMPROVING ACCESS TO BASIC SOCUL SERVICES AND REDUCING
VULNERABILITY

.....................................................................................................................

31

I.OVERVIEW..........................................................................................................................................

31

11. SPECIFIC SOCIAL SERVICES AND PRIORITIES FOR EXTERNAL SUPPORT .........................

34

A. Background .........
....................................
B. Strategic Objective...........................................................................................................
C. Overall Approach

..........................................

.................

111. A KEY TRANSVERSAL PRIORITY- SOCIAL PROTECTION ....................................................
ANNEXI: COMBATING HIV/AIDS.........

.......................................................................

31

34

53
56

A. Background..........................................................................
B. Strategic Objective.
............................................
C. Overall Approach.............
.........
.............

ANNEX 5: REINFORCING COMMUNITY DYNAMICS AND STABILIZING HIGHLY VOLATILE
62
COMMUNITIES
I.
OVERVIEW.......................................................................................................................................... 62

.............................................................................................................

A. Background ........
B. Strategic Objectiv
C. Overall Approach

ANNEX 6: RESULTS FRAMEWORK AND MONITORING FOR THE CAF

................................

.......................................

63

69

ANNEX 1: SUPPORTING THE GOVERNMENT’S G O W m A N C E CONTRACT
I.OVERVIEW
A. Background
1.
The Government of D R C has highlighted political, administrative, and economic
governance as major determinants of poverty. I t has emphasized the need for good governance
and has, as part o f i t s program, released a Governance Contract (between i t s e l f and the people o f
the DRC) in February 2007.’
2.
The PRSP provides details of the required actions in general, while the Governance
Contract maps focal points to be addressed in the short-term The Contract focuses on the
following seven areas: security sector reform (armed forces, police, and justice); transparency;
public financial management; management o f natural resources; public administration reform;
local governance; and investment climate and public enterprise reform.

3.
During the first few months in office, the Government has taken a number of
important steps towards the implementation of the Contract, in particular in the area o f
decentralization, although a number o f critical problems remain.
4.
This annex provides guidance to donors to align between the Government’s needs and
donor efforts. W h i l e responsibility for governance reform lies with the Government, the donor
community has a significant role to play in terms o f providing financial and technical support.
This section outlines ways in which that support can be given and corresponds with the issues
raised in the PRSP and in the Governance Contract.
B. Cross-Cutting Concerns

5.
A review of the PRSP, early studies, and the Governance Contract show that institution
building, capacity development and advisory support will be the key elements of support to
enhancing the quality of governance in DRC.
0

Building institutions. Years o f mismanagement and conflict in the DRC have hollowed out
the country’s institutions. Without a solid institutional foundation, the development o f the
country i s at risk o f political volatility. Building strong and sustainable institutions i s a longterm endeavor, requiring a firm knowledge base, innovation in design, and strong links
between research and policy, as well as commitment from the top. O f particular importance i s
development o f new democratic institutions at the provincial and local level, a key element to
enhancing downward accountability. Provincial Assemblies and administrations are o f
particular importance, as well as the reinforcement o f parliamentary and oversight institutions
at central level including the Inspection Gknkrale de Finances (IGF) and the Cour
Constitutionelle, the Cour de Cassation and the Conseil d’Etat. In addition, the planned
elections at the level o f chefferies and communes, likely to be held in early 2008, would
’

Governance i s defined here as rules, processes, and behaviors by which interests are articulated, resources are
managed and power exercised, and government officials are held accountable.

-1-

‘

extend democratic governance to the lowest administrative level, thus completing the first full
free electoral process since the early 1960s.
Strengthening capacity across the spectrum All o f the recommended reforms include an
element o f capacity building. These need a step-by-step approach, balancing urgent with
mediudlong-term needs; intensive training o f a critical number o f experts may be followed
by subsequent training o f a broader audience. In some cases, capacity assessments may be
required (especially as regards the development o f new institutions at provincial and local
level). In addition, wage reforms are required to help government to attract and retain
qualified staff. Civic engagement among citizens will be necessary, to support their
participation in governance reform, particularly in light o f the imminent decentralization.
This will include disseminating information on the modalities o f decentralization.
Providing technical assistance and advisory services to move reforms forward quickly.
Implementing recommended reforms in a timely manner will require tailor-made and targeted
advisory services. Analyses such as Public Expenditure Reviews, governance diagnostics and
Investment Climate Assessments will help to build the analytical basis for reform.
6.
The donor community recognizes the scale of reforms and the funding requiredfor its
design and implementation. I t acknowledges:
The needfor consistent, long-term, andflexible support. It will be important to quantify the
costs o f the governance reforms as laid out by the Government. Some reforms are likely to
require significant resources. Many are inherently challenging (especially those linked to the
decentralization process) and require flexibility. The reform period will be long and the donor
community must be ready to provide sustained support beyond the C A F period.
The need to work closely with government and other stakeholders. Governance reform
needs to be driven and sustained by political will. The international donor community needs
to support the Government’s efforts by providing resources where required, financial or
human, and by maintaining strong ties with the Government to ensure that resource provision
f i t s within i t s agenda. Donors will work closely with a wide range o f actors including the
judiciary (on justice reform), the Presidency (on security sector reform, the national assembly
and senate (on issues o f Parliamentary oversight). In addition, donors will also work with
decentralized entities (such as provincial governments and non-governmental entities. Donor
assistance must be adequately prioritized and in line with the specific actions laid out by the
Government. Gaps in funding or in the provision o f non-financial resources will not only
slow down reform but may undermine stability.
The need to share knowledge. Many o f the governance challenges faced by D R C have been
addressed successfully in other countries, both within and outside the continent. Tapping into
these successes will strengthen local capacity and foster innovation.
The need to work together and help the Government coordinate partner interventions.
Donor collaboration should continue throughout the CAF period and should entail sharing
information on funding priorities and changes (linked to discussions with the Government) to
ensure that donors are working in their area o f comparative advantage and that available
resources are maximized.

2

11. OBJECTIVES
7.
The Governance Contractfocuses on a number of priority areas. Given the scope o f the
efforts to be undertaken in these areas, there are divided into actions to be implemented (or begin
to be implemented) in the short-term, defined as June 2007-July 2008, and those that should be
implementedor started in the period July 2008-2010.

A. Security Sector R e f o r m
8.
Police. Much o f the work in this area will rely on the completion o f the police census to
ensure a credible payroll. Based on this, the Government can build components for training,
accountability, and oversight. Completion o f the census as well as the introduction o f wage
reform in the sector (coordinated with overall public sector wage reform) are essential steps. On
accountability and oversight, essential elements include: civilian oversight by Parliament o f the
police; development and introduction o f a system o f community policing; establishment o f a
Comite' de Suivipour la rkforme de la Police; and advisory services for police decentralization.

9.
Armed Forces. Completion o f the demobilization and reintegration program i s a priority,
currently supported by the Multi-Country Demobilization and Reintegration Program (MDRP).
While much progress has been made, more needs to be done. Also important i s ensuring a clear
and functioning payroll system and reform in the management structure. This will involve
clearing up payment arrears and setting up a functional payroll system (which would include a
review o f the payment system o f the armed forces). In addition, control over the use o f state
budget resources should be clarified. At the current time, the Ministry o f Defense controls only a
small number o f budget items and cannot therefore be fully held accountable for the use o f the
defense budget. This makes even more important a review o f the possibilities to enhance salary
payments to the military based on a comprehensive review o f expenditure. At a broader level, the
Government intends to embark on creating a legal framework to support reforms, specifically
around military expenditure, the organization o f the military, and the articulation o f the functions
o f the army. Independent Parliamentary oversight institutions are needed.

10.
Intelligence Services. Properly functioning and overseen intelligence agencies are
essential in order to manage national security in accordance with democratic norms. These
agencies main role could be the provision o f information and analysis to enable decision-makers
to implement agreed national security policy. Working methods should conform to international
standards. Operations should be carefully designed to conform to the law and be overseen in
detail by the people's representatives. Agencies could rely on the police to arrest and question
suspects, on the defense forces to conduct military style operations and on politico-administrative
authorities to coordinate actions.
11.
Justice. A well-functioning justice system i s a key component o f good governance. For
that reason, justice reform i s among the top priorities in DRC. Capacity in key areas should be
developed, including: organizational and institutional capacity, judicial infrastructure and
training, service delivery and political will to fight corruption. Actions in these areas are key if
the population i s to gain trust in the judiciary. Following an audit o f the justice system in 2003,
the Government put in place a joint committee, Comite' Mixte de Suivi du Programme-Cadre de
la Justice. The Government has also identified a number o f priority actions to improve the justice
system, including the consolidation o f anti-corruption efforts, respect for international human
rights norms, the strengthening o f human and institutional capacity (including the supply o f
physical resources), the improvement o f prison conditions, and increased access to legal aid.

3

Priority Activities

12.
Donor assistance in the area of security sector reform will focus on clarijjdng the role
and responsibilities of institutions in the security sector, ensuring oversight, including of the
budgets of security institutions, by Parliament and civil society and helping the Government
implement thefollowing short and medium-term actions.
Reform and transform the Congolese National Police (Police Nationale Congolaise, PNC)
into a professional and uni3ed structure, supported by a coherent legal framework.
I n the short-term: (i)continue to identify reform priorities through the Comit.4 de Suivi
and complete the police census; (ii)
establish a payroll management system for the PNC;
(iii)establish and operationalize effective and transparent budget management systems
for the PNC; (iv) provide training, including components on justice, to PNC officers; (v)
develop the civilian oversight capacity o f Parliament in the police sector; (v) introduce a

system o f community policing; and (vi) establish advisory services for police
decentralization.

I n the medium-term: (i)
implement key priorities as outlined by the Groupe de R6flexion
and developed by the Comite de Suivi including unified police curricula and pay
structures and an organic law; (ii)
reform PNC organizational and management systems;
(iii)
strengthen strategic planning within the PNC; and (iv) expand capacity human
training.
Reform and transform the Congolese Armed Forces (Forces Armbes Congolaises, FARDC)
into a professional and uni3ed structure, supported by a coherent legal framework.
I n the short-term: (i)
develop a white paper on defense reform; (ii)
complete the FARDC
census; (iii)undertake a review o f defense expenditures and explore possibilities for
increasing salary payments; (iv) establish a payroll management system for the FARDC;

(v) establish and operationalize effective and transparent budget management systems for
the FARDC; (vi) finalize the Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration (DDR)
process and reintegrated ex-combatants into local communities; (vii) establish
mechanisms for ensuring that Integrated Brigades receive regular supplies and
equipment; (viii) develop community-based Small Arms and Light Weapons (SALW)
programs that reduce the number of arms at the local level; (ix) provide discipline and
leadership training; (x) develop the civilian oversight capacity o f Parliament over the
defense sector; and (xi) introduce training for military magistrates and lawyers on
Congolese and international law.

I n the medium-term: (i)provide technical support for the Ministry o f Defense including
the Etat Major and the Structure Militaire d'Int6gration (SMI), (ii)adopt key laws to

regulate the FARDC including laws on the supreme defense council, military expenditure
and military organization and function; and (iii)regulate military courts in accordance
with international standards.

Reform and transform the intelligence services into professional structures, supported by a
coherent legalframework.

4

I n the short-term: (i)re-define the roles o f intelligence agencies including a review o f
their powers o f arrest, questioning and detention; (ii)
develop a strategy for the financing
o f the intelligence services; (iii)adopt legislation governing the functioning o f the
intelligence services; and (iv) design a restructuring and capacity building programme for
the intelligence services enabling them to operate in conformity with international
standards.
I n the medium-term: (i)define the oversight powers o f Parliament over the intelligence
provide training for Parliamentarians and Parliamentary staff on
services; and (ii)
oversight functions.
0

Reform and reorganize the justice system in line with the new Constitution.
I n the short-term: (i)
focus on fighting impunity and applying international human rights
standards as priorities; (ii)establish the judiciary institutions foreseen in the 2005
Constitution; (iii)establish a National Commission on Human Rights; (iv) establish and
operationalize effective and transparent budget management systems for the justice
sector; (v) establish a payroll management system for the justice sector; (vi) provide
training for judicial sector personnel; (vi) improve conditions in the prison system; and
(vii) increase access to legal services and advise.
I n the medium-term: (i)restructure and strengthen the organization and management o f
judicial institutions; (ii)strengthen the capacity o f judicial officials to investigate and
prosecute cases o f trafficking in natural resources; (iii)establish a template for case
management procedure; (iv) establish a legal information-sharing system; and (v)
strengthen the Commission Permanente de Rkforme du Droit Congolais (CPRDC)
including clarifying i t s reporting lines within the Ministry o f Justice.

B. Enhancing Transparency
13.
There are two main priorities in the area of transparency: First, increasing access to
information to all non-classified government documents, both electronically and at government
information offices. This includes publishing and disseminating critical information on the
budget, annual reports o f key public sector enterprises (such as GECAMINES and SNEL), terms
o f concessions in the extractive industries, and carrying out audits in critical areas.* Second,
strengthening key review and oversight institutions that can help enhance transparency through
the accountability system and ensuring that their findings and reports are made available widely
to the general public. This would include support for institutions such as an anti moneylaundering commission, the Cour des Comptes and the Inspection Gknkrale de Finances. Also
important, but not immediately pressing, i s the need to build durable mechanisms for public
participation and engagement with the Government. The Government has already garnered
knowledge from the PRSP process, in which it carried out extensive consultations throughout the
country. Mechanisms vary and may range from large-scale public consultations (which are

*

The Government can increase access to information in a number o f ways, including regularly disseminating
information on government contracts, decisions on awarding concessions in the mining and other extractive sectors, the
publication of audit and budget execution reports, publication of the use o f HIPC savings, the tracking of expenditures
in key social sectors, reports on financial management in large public enterprises, and reports on mining and petroleum
revenues.

5

expensive and difficult to organize), to electronic mechanisms (which are not currently feasible in
DRC), to the use o f the media such as radio (which i s an efficient medium).
Prioritv Activities

14.
Donor assistance in the area of transparency willfocus on helping the Government
implement thefollowing short and medium-term actions.
Increase access to information on all non-classiJied government documents, both
electronically and at government information ofjces.
I n the short-term: (i)publish extensive information regarding public revenues and
expenditure on a bi-annual basis and gradually improve the quality o f such reporting; (ii)
submit reports assessing budget execution to Parliament on a quarterly basis, including
detailed information on revenue and expenditure; (iii)publish all future mining and
forestry contracts to which the Government or public enterprises are a party; (iv) prepare
and publish a series o f audits including on the Central Bank, budget execution by the
Cour des Comptes, use o f HIPC savings, expenditures in key social sectors, financial
management in large public enterprises, and mining and petroleum revenues; (v) publish
regularly on the Internet the l i s t o f all contracts and key procurement data financed under
the national budget and under donor projects; and (vi) prepare and publish a bi-annual
analysis o f Government-published information by the Cour des Comptes to provide a
critical review o f the quality o f data published and identify potential transparency issues.
Contribute to improved accountability and transparency by strengthening key oversight
institutions.
I n the short-term: (i)develop and adopt a three-year action plan to strengthen the
capacity o f key control institutions with an initial focus on the Cour des Comptes and the
Inspection Gknkrale des Finances and strengthen the capacity o f Parliament to play i t s
full oversight role over the executive; (ii)develop and adopt a three-year action plan to
strengthen the capacity o f external watchdogs including Parliament, the private sector,
and civil society which are in a position to apply pressure for better governance; (iii)
establish an anti- money-laundering commission; and (iv) develop a system to control
corruption investigations and ensure that their conclusions and recommendations are

published.

I n the medium-term: (i)
implement plans to enhance transparency including strengthening
formal oversight institutions, supporting, where appropriate, non-governmental oversight
structures and monitoring the handling o f corruption cases; (ii)provide training for
journalists, NGOs and national and local assemblies to develop democratic
accountability; and (iii)strengthen the capacity o f governmental and non-governmental
institutions to monitor anti-corruption efforts.

C. Strengthening Public Financial Management

15.

T h e Government seeks to strengthen its revenue system and to ensure a more
effective and efficient use of Government funds. Strengthened customs and taxation
systems will bolster revenues particularly those from the mining and forestry sectors. In

6

terms o f budget management, the Government faces an over-centralized budget
preparation system with little involvement o f the line ministries, problems in the
management o f the chaine des ddpenses, in particular regarding expenditure
authorizations; and a lack o f reliable expenditure tracking mechanisms, especially the
lack o f reporting by Ministries o n actual expenditures.
16.
Regional level financial management capacity. In view o f the eventual transfer o f
resources and competences to the provincial level, it would be important to start a similar process
o f review and analysis o f public financial management systems and capacity at the second tier o f
government. Given capacity and resource constraints, it would be important to implement this in
phases, starting with development and adoption o f a three-year action plan to strengthen fiduciary
capacity in provinces, with an initial focus on some key provinces, which could subsequently play
a role in assisting other regions. Provinces that are likely to directly manage a relatively large
amount o f resources should be given particular attention. However, it i s also important to focus
on some o f the provinces with limited resources, as these are likely to face particular problems in
covering their operational cost, solutions for which will need to be identified.
Priority Activities

17.
Donor assistance in the area ofpublic finance management willfocus on
helping the Government implement thefollowing short and medium-term actions.
Increase Government revenues and reform the budgetary process in line with international
standards.
I n the short-term: (i)implement the revenue measures agreed upon under the programme
supported by the Bretton Woods Institutions to broaden the tax base, strengthen the
capacity o f customs at key locations, including in Matadi, Kasumbalesa, Goma, and
Bukavu, and reinforce internal taxation administration including for small and mediumsize enterprises by conducting a feasibility study on contracting out the customs
administration, either temporarily or permanently, to private international operators on a
performance based fee-for-service arrangement; (ii)conduct a public expenditure review,
particularly in key sectors including education and health; (iii)increase fiscal revenues
from the mining sector; (iv) establish and meet quantified targets in the 2007 budget for
increased pro-poor and essential expenditure; (v) develop, adopt and implement a threeyear action plan t o improve budget preparation, execution, and monitoring, based on the
recent World Bank-supported fiduciary assessment (Country Financial Accountability
Assessment, CFAA) including complete unification o f the budget; (vi) consolidate the
payroll system leading to regular payments o f salaries in a transparent and effective
manner in Kinshasa and the provinces; and (vii) adopt a new procurement code,
accompanying decrees, and a two-year action plan for capacity building to ensure i t s
effective implementation.
I n the medium-term: (i)implement the reform agenda supported by the Bretton Woods
Institutions including improved budget management, new expenditure tracking systems
and capacity building, in particular, on public procurement reform.

7

D. Management o f Natural Resources

18.
The natural resource sector is a critical source of revenue for the Government.
However, it will require significant management reform (to ensure proper management o f
resources, to increase transparency, and to include community voice) so that both the national and
local governments benefit. Building transparency and accountability in this sector i s particularly
crucial in the process o f rebuilding trust in government institutions. In the section on
transparency, the need to provide open access to all key government documents related to the
management o f natural resources was already emphasized, and this i s a principle to which
commitments could be made as soon as possible by the authorities.
Prioritv Activities

19.
Donor assistance in the area of natural resources management willfocus on helping
the Government implement thefollowing short and medium-term actions.

Manage natural resources in a sustainable manner on the basis of legal codes.
I n the short-term: (i)develop and adopt an EITI action plan as required under the
initiative and establish a functional secretariat; (ii)maintain the moratorium on new
forestry concessions until agreed conditions for lifting it are met including the completion
o f the legal review o f forestry concessions and adoption o f a participatory, three-year
zoning plan for new concessions; (iii)
complete and publish the ongoing legal review o f
forestry concessions and implement i t s findings and recommendations including the
cancellation o f invalid concessions; (iv) recruit and deploy a third-party observer to assist
the forestry administration in controls on the ground; (v) continue to implement the 2004
fiscal reforms and transfer 40% o f forest revenues to local entities; (vi) adopt key
implementation decrees for the Forest Code and the new law on nature conservation; (vii)
launch participatory forest zoning with a focus on protecting traditional user rights and
the environment; (viii) rehabilitate key parks and World Heritage Sites particularly those
with endangered or endemic species; (ix) implement sustainable forest management plans
in all remaining concessions; (x) pilot new contracts and financing models that reward
carbon, biodiversity and other environmental services; (xi) publish key elements and
analysis o f existing contracts in the mining sector and revise relevant agreements in line
with international standards; (xii) adopt a business and reform plan for GECAMINES in
order to restore i t s commercial viability; (xiii) develop and adopt adequate and
transparent procedures for the award o f new mining rights for both exploration and
production; and (xiv) strengthen the capacity o f personnel in charge o f controlling the
mining sector.

I n the medium-term: (i)implement the EITI action plan and continue the reform o f
systems to award concessions in the mining and forestry sectors as well as the
restructuring o f state owned enterprises; (ii)recruit and deploy specialized f i r m s to
manage the mining cadastre and ensure mine inspections for a three-year period; (iii)
adopt decrees for implementing the mining code; (iv) adopt a reform plan for other public
enterprises in the mining sector; and (v) develop a certification mechanism for natural
resources.

8

E. Public Administration and Civil Service Reform
Building an effective public service is likely to take years, if not decades, but w i l l
critically depend on the successful implementation o f a s,eries o f prerequisites, in particular the
creation o f a reliable civil service register and payroll management system. Efforts are already
underway to rationalize the structure and human resource management systems in the public
service, and the main challenge at the current time i s to build on the work that has been initiated
to bring a sense o f order to the public service, while at the same designing initiatives to address
some o f the more fundamental problems affecting the operation o f the public administration
system, such as the need to build a strong top level civil service, and to address questions related
to the organization o f the civil service in the context o f the planned decentralization process.

20.

21.

The immediate priorities in this area are the creation o f a reliable civil service register, a
functioning payment management system, and the creation o f a core o f civil servants. The
creation o f a civil service register will be based on the results o f the civil service census, which i s
s t i l l ongoing. Linked to the census i s the retirement program for 94,000 over-aged civil servants
(in 2005 the Government identified 96,000 to participate in the retirement program) which i s also
underway. The Government also intends to review the structure o f the Government, reporting and
accountability relations between institutions, and an assessment o f the organizational and
management arrangements within sectors in order to avoid overlapping tasks and managerial
confusion. The Government will also address questions on the structure o f the c i v i l service in
light o f the decentralization process.
Prioritv Activities

22.

Donor assistance in the area ofpublic administration and civil service reform
willfocus on helping the Government implement thefollowing short and medium-term
actions.
Reform and transform the civil service into a professional structure, supported by a coherent
legal>amework.
I n the short-term: (i)
complete the civil service census the results o f which will be
reflected in the payroll and pass on any potential wage bill savings to the public service
through higher wages; (ii)review the current compensation arrangement including
benefits and bonuses for the high-level civil service to ensure transparency and fair
treatment; (iii)design and adopt an operational strategy for new recruits in the civil
service to set clear criteria and r u l e s for filling vacant positions while managing budget
constraints; (iv) revise and adopt the organic law regarding c i v i l servants; (v) support the
human resource section o f the Central Bank; and (vi) revise the status o f the customs
administration and strengthen capacity for the customs administration.
I n the medium-term: (i)implement the rationalization agenda and clarify the roles and
responsibilities o f the key institutions and entities with the highest potential impact on
economic recovery and governance including the relationship between the central and
decentralized levels o f government as well as between the Government and nongovernment service providers; (ii)
implement the public service wage reform plan which
i s currently being designed and create merit-based provincial and local public service
systems; (iii)
complete the retirement program for all eligible civil servants; (iv) design
and adopt an operational strategy for building a core high-level c i v i l service including

9

recruitment and evaluation rules and compensation arrangements; and (v) monitor closely
new recruitments and pay increases taking into account both the needs o f a functioning
public service and budget constraints.

F. Local Governance and Decentralization
I n relation to the decentralization process, the Constitutionforesees: (9 an increase in
the number of provinces, from 11 to 26, and; (io the transfer of significant revenues from the
center to the provinces. This carries both opportunities and risks. The proposed strategic
approach i s hence three-fold: (a) clarify the legal and regulatory framework; (b) strengthen
administrative capacity at the decentralized levels in key areas; and (c) limit large transfers or
retention o f fiscal resources for an interim period, until fiduciary systems in the provinces are at a
minimum acceptable level.

23.

24.
The process of building a functioning local governance system, both capable and
accountablefor the delivery of core public services has three main dimensions. First, designing
legal and fiscal frameworks for the operation o f local authorities; second, strengthening
provincial and local government institutions; and third, reviewing which exact functions can be
transferred, and how this transfer could be staged, based both on capacity, subsidiary principles
and fiscal capacity.
25.
Sequencing the implementation of these three interrelated steps is complex, and there
are different ways to achieving the overall objective o f creating a professional and empowered
regional and local governance system. However, considering the fact that provisions on revenue
are already enshrined in the Constitution, it would make sense to proceed with the design o f legal
and fiscal frameworks, while, in parallel conducting capacity audits at the regional and local
level.
26.
Embarking on this process will be challenging. Transforming a system that has for
decades functioned without clear roles or allocation o f responsibility to a rule based multi-level
governance system will be one o f the key challenges facing the authorities in the coming years.
This i s an issue recognized by the Government, which has taken important initial steps for
framing the process.
Prioritv Activities

27.
Donor assistance in the area of local governance and decentralization willfocus on
helping the Government implement thefollowing short and medium-term actions.
Establish jduciary systems at provincial and local levels and strengthen capacities to
deliver social services, supported by a coherent legal framework.
I n the short-term: (i)
initiate discussions with all relevant stakeholders to prepare key
legal and regulatory texts foreseen in the Constitution; (ii)adopt legislation on the
composition, organization, responsibilities and function o f decentralized entities; (iii)
develop and adopt a three-year action plan to strengthen fiduciary capacity in provinces,;
(iv) design and implement transitory mechanisms to limit a) the risks o f misuse o f fiscal
resources until fiduciary systems in the provinces are at a minimum acceptable level and
b) the risk o f a collapse in service delivery in poor provinces through the design o f

10

solidarity mechanisms as well as guarantees for wage payments to teachers and medical
personnel; (v) strengthen the capacity o f citizens at the provincial level to participate in
local decision-making; (vi) mainstream human rights legislation into provincial policies
and practice; and (vii) establish new administrations in the provinces.
I n the medium-term: (i)implement key legal and regulatory texts foreseen in the
Constitution on: a) the composition, organization, responsibilities, and functioning o f
decentralized entities; b) the organization and functioning o f provincial public services;
c) the nomenclature o f local taxes and their distribution modalities between the various
levels o f the Government; d) the implementation ofa revenue sharing system reflecting
the 40% allocation to local level as mandated in the Constitution while ensuring that
mitigating measures to prevent a growth in economic disparities between regions are
taken, notably on revenue sharing arrangement on custom revenues, large enterprise taxes
and mining revenues; and e) the organization and functioning o f the inter-province
redistribution mechanism to cover public investment finding (Caisse Nationale de
Pe're'quation).

G. Investment Climate and Public Enterprise Reform

28.
Although DRC has attracted significant investment recently (close to US%l billion
annually) the business environment i s p 0 0 r . ~In order to ensure growth in DRC, much needs to
be done to ensure a continued high level o f private sector interest and a diversification o f
investments beyond rapid return, l o w added-value activities. In addition, efforts are needed to
ensure public enterprises contribute to, or at least do not hamper economic growth (in a context
where privatization i s unlikely to be successful).
Prioritv Activities

29.
Donor assistance in the area of investment climate and public enterprise reform will
focus on helping the Government implement thefollowing short and medium-term actions.
Establish pro-investment legislation and frameworlcs and restructure and reform public
enterprises in line with international standards.
I n the short-term: (i)
enroll in the Organization for the Harmonization o f Business L a w in
Africa (Organisation pour I 'Harmonisation du Droit des Aflaires en Afrique, OHADA)
adopt all key implementation decrees; (ii)
publish annually reports on key regulatory and
administrative obstacles to private sector activities and corresponding recommendations,
including those from the Investment Climate Assessment and the Doing Business Report
by the Fe'de'ration des Entrepreneurs Congolais (FEC); (iii)
continue to implement the
restructuring plans for approved Banks; (iv) adopt an action plan for the reform o f public
enterprises; (v) adopt and enforce strict limits on financial transfers from and to public
enterprises; (vi) design and adopt a strategy for transferring social services currently
provided by public enterprises to relevant entities and managing retrenchments as may be
needed; and (vii) implement urgent reforms in key enterprises, including SNCC where a
management contract or lease for the railways part o f the company could be signed in an
effort to effectively restore service in Katanga, towards Kasai and Maniema, ONATRA
The World Bank's Doing Business 2008 Report rates DRC as the most difficult country to work in out of 178
countries surveyed.

11

where a management contract or lease for the port o f Matadi could be signed to remove
one o f the key obstacles to international trade, SNEL to improve corporate governance
and internal controls, and REGIDESO.
I n the medium-term: (i)implement new laws and related decrees on state divestiture,
corporate governance o f public enterprises, and transformation o f public enterprises; (ii)
prepare and implement in consultation with relevant stakeholders a comprehensive action
plan on state owned enterprise reform based on a case by case assessment; (iii)
establish
qualified boards, management teams and audit committees in all key public enterprises;
(iv) adopt laws and decrees on the divestment o f the state in public enterprises; (v)
establish a commercial tribunal; and (vi) implement an action plan to overcome obstacles
and other constraints to the development o f the private sector.

12

ANNEX 2: SUPPORTING HIGH, SHARED, AND SUSTAINABLE GROWTH
I.OVERVIEW
A. Background
1.
D R C is one of the poorest countries in the world, with a Gross National Income (GNa
per capita of about US$130. Prior to the conflict, the economy was dominated by extractive and
export activities (mining, agriculture, forestry, energy), which fueled a system o f poor governance
and large-scale corruption. At the same time the vast majority o f the population remained poor,
and derived income from traditional agriculture and informal activities. Following fifteen years o f
conflict and political uncertainty, the economy i s now largely based on subsistence agriculture
and informal activities, with a substantial decline o f exports and value-adding activities.
2.
While the conflicts have had a devastating impact on the economy, the economy was
already in decline before. The economic crisis in DRC was severe even before the conflict (per
capita GDP declined from US$380 in 1985 to US$224 in 1990), as a result o f poor governance,
misguided policies, and insufficient investment. The conflict exacted a heavy impact, which
further aggravated the situation: infrastructure suffered considerable damage; many institutions
are in shambles, assets were lost, investment came to a halt, and public debt increased
dramatically. Yet, the challenge i s not only to recover from the years o f war, but also to turn
around the legacy o f the pre-war economic system.

3.
Progress over the last years has been significant, although somewhat unsteady, in a
complex political environment. Since April 200 1, the Government has implemented a solid
program o f economic reforms, supported by the Bretton Woods Institutions. Economic growth
returned in 2002 after ten years o f contraction - mainly pulled by the resumption o f economic
activity which followed the re-establishment o f security and the reunification o f the country (a
pattern typical o f post-conflict countries, especially in the trade, transport, construction, and
agriculture sectors), by a boom o f selected manufacturing (e.g., agro-business, construction
materials), and by the restart o f mining activities (from a very l o w base).
4.
The challenges ahead, however, remain daunting. GDP today stands at about US$7.7
billion. Assuming a 5.3 percent economic growth on average (a growth rate that in Africa only
Botswana has been able to sustain over a long period), it will take until 2060 for the country to
reach the level o f GDP per capita it had in 1960. Assuming a 4 percent growth only (and a 2.7
percent population growth), it would take 200 years! These daunting challenges have to be faced
in a context o f limited fiscal resources and weak administrative capacity.
B. Strategic Objective

5.
Research and experience highlight the importance of economic growth for stability in
post-conflict situations. Faster growth empirically reduces the risk o f renewed turmoil in both the
short- and the longer-term, and research suggests that an additional 2 percent o f economic growth
sustained over 10 years reduces the risk o f civil war by about one third. Growth o n i t s own i s thus
a major contributor to DRC’s stabilization.
6.
Yet, in a situation like DRC, the quality of growth is essential. Job creation, gradual
reduction o f inter-provincial inequalities, and distribution issues are critical in a context where

13

wealth has historically been captured by narrow private interests. In a country as richly endowed
as DRC, high rates o f growth are likely to be achieved as a result o f restored political stability but the actual translation o f this economic activity into improved living conditions for the
majority o f the Congolese will require determined efforts.

7.
The proposed strategic objective is hence to achieve both a high rate and a strong
quality of economic growth in line with the PRSP objectives. As regards the level o f growth, the
PRSP set an ambitious objective o f 7 percent for 2005-2008, and 8 percent for 2009-2010,
although rates since then have been just above 5 percent. As regards the quality o f growth, the
objective i s to break with the past decades, with a focus on: (i)medium-term sustainability; (ii)
fair distribution across provinces (which i s particularly important for stability in a post-conflict
environment); (iii)effective contribution to a poverty reduction agenda; and (iv) gradual
diversification away from the primary sector.
C. Overall Approach: Accelerate post-conflict rebound and expand sources o f growth
8.
The proposed overall approach is to place a heavy emphasis on agricultural growth (as
the most straightforward vehicle for broad based poverty reduction across all provinces), on
recovery in the mining sector (as a key source o f fiscal revenues and foreign exchange), and on
laying the foundations for eventual development o f industry and services.
9.

I n this context, a number of key challenges need to befaced:

Make the best of the ‘@ost-conjlict rebound”. Such rebound i s a typical pattern in postconflict countries and i s essentially linked to the resumption o f economic activity as security,
access, and confidence are restored. Research suggests that it translates into an average
annual economic growth o f 6 percent for a period o f up to 7 years, before starting to subside.
In a country as richly endowed as DRC, and where entire provinces are yet to truly enter the
post-conflict era, the rebound i s likely to continue t o play an important role in the coming
years, provided security and access can be restored. This may facilitate the transition to a
more traditional growth path, provided the rebound period i s effectively used to lay the
ground for sustained growth across sectors.
Ensure sustained growth in the agriculture sector. Agriculture, at about 42 percent o f GDP
has the potential to be a key engine o f poverty reduction, as well as a source o f welldistributed growth across provinces. In the short-term growth will be driven by the restart and
extension o f production, in particular as access to urban markets i s restored, and over the
medium-term by an increase o f productivity (which even prior to the conflict was below the
sub-Saharan African average). Priority actions include the improvement o f security in rural
areas as well as the deployment o f a large-scale investment program to re-open roads (and
other surface transport) and to help reconstitute farmers’ assets.
Restore pre-war production levels in the mining sector and ensure proper management of
revenue streams. Extractive industries, which currently represent about 13 percent o f GDP,
have the potential o f being a key source o f both fiscal revenues and foreign exchange. They
also have the potential, however, to create major imbalances and possibly tensions between
provinces (since mineral wealth i s mostly concentrated in a few districts) and to fuel largescale corruption. Transparency and fiscal redistribution will hence be essential for this sector
to truly contribute to DRC’s development. In view o f the collapse o f the sector over the last

14

years, sustained growth rates over 10 percent for several years could be achieved relatively
easily--although with a several-year timelag corresponding to the time needed to rehabilitate
production facilities. Recovery in the sector could also provide a major boost to construction,
industry, and services activities especially during the investment phase. Such a recovery will
require, however, attracting major private investments, which in turn will be conditional on
improved governance (including cadastre and mine title management, tax administration, and
compliance to contract obligations, etc.) and the repair o f relevant transport infrastructure. It
will also require dealing with, over time, a large informal mining sector in which several
hundreds o f thousands o f people are active in artisanal and small scale mining.
Lay the ground for the diversification of the economy, through private-led growth in
manufacturing and services. Such activities are important to sustain growth over the
medium-term, and generate employment in urban areas. They can also provide some balance
across regions, although they are likely to remain concentrated in the main cities and in areas
with easy international access. They could be pulled by the need to satisfy a growing
domestic demand, in the third most populated country in Africa, by the activity generated by
large-scale mining investments, and by competitive advantages on the global market in
selected areas. Their development will require drastic improvements in the business
environment, massive infrastructure investments (especially in the transport and energy
sectors), restored access to credit, and the reform o f those public enterprises which are an
obstacle to growth. Their contribution to growth beyond the “rebound” period depends on the
intensity o f the reforms and the scale o f infrastructure repairs.
Ensure that economic growth is not achieved to the detriment of either the environment
and benefts vulnerable and marginalized groups. DRC has the second largest tropical forest
in the world and a unique biodiversity richness, which could suffer from unregulated
economic recovery. Although forestry i s not likely to become a major source o f fiscal
revenues in the coming years, it can provide significant employment and basic infrastructure
in remote areas often l e f t out o f large public investments programs - but if managed poorly
can also result in significant environmental and social damage. The focus on forestry will be
to strictly limit and regulate logging activities (which will inevitably restart), to promote
participatory processes, to ensure benefits are equitably shared with the local including the
indigenous, people, and to enforce forest management plans and environmental protection.
Efforts also need to ensure that reconstruction programs do not negatively affect vulnerable
groups, including (but not limited to) the Pygmies. Finally, efforts are needed to ensure that
all social groups benefit from renewed economic growth, and that the social changes inherent
in growth (such as increased opportunities for women to climb out o f poverty and participate
effectively in decision-making) are fostered and supported.

D. Macroeconomic Framework and Assistance Needs
10.
The Government did not tighten _fiscal discipline during the electoral period, and
inflation was hovering at about the same level at the end of 2006 as it was at end 2005.
Production in mining and manufacturing sectors slackened during 2006, which resulted in lower
than projected economic growth in 2006. With the elections over and the security situation
stabilizing, the country i s now able to resume productive activities. Strong medium-term growth
in the range o f 6-8 percent over the next few years i s realistic. As more o f the efforts in improving
governance in public sector and extractive industries begin to bear fruit, Government revenues are

15

likely to continue to increase. However, the budget deficit will remain significant due to the
enormous needs to reconstruct the country and to resume basic public service delivery.
11.
D R C is expected to remain highly dependent on foreign assistance. As in other post
conflict countries, the demand for infrastructure reconstruction programs, public service delivery,
and security efforts is very high. Despite a projected improvement in fiscal revenue partly
explained by an expected rehabilitation o f the tax mobilization capacity, the Government i s s t i l l
faced with a severe budget constraint. As a result, only 21 percent o f development expenditures
were financed with domestic resources in 2004. The estimated average financing needs for 20072010 i s approximately US$230 million.
12.
But such assistance has yet to materialize on the level necessary. While total
disbursements o f external aid stand at a relatively high US$3.3 billion for the period 2003 to
2005, this includes only US$2.2 billion in economic assistance, and such assistance i s mainly
directed to social sectors and community activities. In a country where most areas cannot be
accessed other than by air, and where most o f the population does not have access to electric
power - only US$90 million have been disbursed in support o f the transport sector, less than
US$25 million in support o f the energy sector, and support to agriculture has amounted to about
US$90 million. The challenge has been to operate in a very severely constrained resource
environment,
Looking ahead, the possibility o f much large levels o f assistance point to the need for careful
planning, to ensure it i s properly prioritized and utilized, and does not either overburden the
country in terms o f either debt or pledging future revenues for investments o f limited value to the
economy.

11. KEY TRANSVERSAL CONSTRAINTS AND PRIORITIES
A. Transport
13.
Most of the territory of D R C today is inaccessible-which has a dramatic impact on
growth prospects. O f the 10 provincial capitals, only one i s accessible from Kinshasa by road
(Matadi), three by river (Mbandaka, Kisangani and Bandundu), and six by air only.
Communications between these capitals and the urban centers o f their provinces are frequently
inexistent. Access to rural areas, even those densely populated, i s frequently impossible. Overall,
in a country the size o f the U S East o f the Mississippi, only 2,800 km o f roads were paved before
the 1990s, and since then many existing roads have fallen into disrepair. Rail traffic on those few
lines s t i l l in service i s frequently limited to two trains per week (at speeds which rarely exceed 30
kdh). Moreover, undersized as it is, the transport system i s characterized by i t s unreliability and
high cost.
The D R C transport system is multi-modal, combining river, road, rail, air and
14.
maritime transport-in
a climatic and geological environment where construction and
maintenance are very difficult. The system’s backbone i s the Congo River (particularly the
Kinshasa-Kisangani section) and i t s tributaries (particularly the Kasai River from Kinshasa to
Ilebo). Railroads extend from the navigable sections o f the Congo and Kasai rivers to the port o f
Matadi, the copper belt in Katanga, the Maniema province, Lake Tanganyika, and the Oriental
Province. Roads are connected to this network and link the major urban centers. A network o f
airports across the territory permits rapid access to all the provinces. Finally, the maritime harbors

16

at the mouth o f the Congo River open up the country to ocean traffic, although with a limited
capacity.
15.
Rehabilitation requires parallel efforts on the reform and investment fronts. The
dilapidation o f transport infrastructure since the 1990s has been aggravated by the weakening o f
the commercial (ONATRA, SNCC, Rkgie des Voies Akriennes, Rkgie des Voies Maritirnes) and
non-commercial (Rkgie des Voies Fluviales) State-owned enterprises responsible for operation
and maintenance. Given the current situation, investments cannot be delayed until reforms are
fully implemented- but investments without reforms are likely to be pointless and both efforts
must occur in parallel.
Priority Activities

16.

Donor assistance in the area of transport will aim to:
Rehabilitate the transport structure and reform state and non-state owned transport
enterprises: (i)adopt, finance, and operationalize a road maintenance system, both for main
roads and for rural roads; (ii)involve the private sector in managing key portions o f the
network (e.g., railways, port, airport, roads); and (iii)
restructure the concerned State-owned
enterprises in the transport sector.
Prioritize investments in the sector in a context of limitedfinancial resources: (i)
rehabilitate
key sections o f the road network, e.g., (a) international trade corridors, (b) connections o f
provincial centers to the core transport network, and (c) connections o f provincial centers to
their immediate hinterland; (ii)re-connect rural areas, including the rehabilitation o f rural
roads in the vicinity o f large consumption centers ,e.g., between major cities and their
immediate hinterland; (iii)
restore river navigation and railway operations where appropriate
to provide more sustainable and less expensive transport services; and (iv) develop reliable
and safe domestic air transport

B. Energy
17.
Despite the country’s enormous power potential, D R C power system is
characterized by dilapidated infrastructure and low access rates which undermine growth.
DRC’s hydropower potential has been estimated at 100,000 MW, including over 40,000 M W at
the Inga site alone. By comparison, DRC’s installed capacity i s only about 2,400 M W , with
much o f that currently inoperable. Access i s at only 7%, compared to the SSA average o f 20
percent, leaving the country in the bottom 15 o f SSA nations. Frequent blackouts hit even high
priority parts o f the network. Electricity consumption per head was 9 l k W h in 2002, down from
161 kWh in 1980. Traditional biomass fuel i s now estimated to account for 86 percent o f total
energy use in the country.

18.
D R C generally, and Inga speci@cally, lie in many respects at the center of gravity of
discussions on regionalpower in sub-Saharan Africa DRC, with notably i t s Inga site, has the
potential to play a pivotal role in meeting not only i t s domestic energy needs through
environmentally friendly hydro-power, but also the energy needs o f neighboring countries and
beyond. The Government’s other power trading arrangements include in the east where the
Ruzizi plant i s operated through a multi-country joint-venture. Power supplied from DRC can be
a critical enabling factor for the development o f a competitive power market in the region, with
reliable, low-cost power supporting industrial competitiveness, private sector investment and
regional growth and development. It also potentially represents an important source o f foreign

17

exchange and foreign direct investment for the country. As a consequence, the government has
adopted the dual objectives 03 (a) increasing access and quality of service for domestic
customers (including households, commercial and mining and other industrial clients), while
(b) developing its massive potential resources to generate foreign exchange and strengthen the
strategicpositioning of D R C within a regional context.

19.
Achieving Government objectives in the electricity sector depends on strengthening
governance within SNEL and the sector generally as a complement to increased physical
investments. While the government has allowed private participation in the sector, SNEL will
remain the key player for the near to medium t e r m and, accordingly, improvements in the sector
will depend to a large extent on improving SNEL’s efficacy. SNEL, however, has historically
faced significant governance weaknesses and failures that have underminedthe utility’s ability to
operate efficiently, weakening its financial position and preventing it from delivering key power
services to the people o f DRC. Strengthening the operations o f the utility are central to efforts to
strengthen the sector. At the same time, there i s need to improve governance within the sector
beyond SNEL, notably by ensuring transparent, sound and equitable processes for providing for
private sector participation.
Priori@ Activities

20.

Donor assistance in the area of energy will be focused on electricity and will aim to:
Rehabilitate and expand the electricity infrastructure: rehabilitate and expand generation,
transmission and distribution assets to increase the quality o f service, the amount o f power
generated to support economic development and access rates throughout the country.

0

Strengthen governance and technical capacities within the sector, notably at SNEL,
including: (a) strengthening SNEL’s financial practicies and systems, and improve financial
reporting and transparency, (b) improve SNEL’s commercial and operational capacity, and
(c) support the imjplementation o f sound transparent processes to partner with the private
sector in a manner that provides for technically and financially sound partnerships that
promote the development interests o f DRC.
Promote regional power trade by supporting government efforts to further develop the Inga
site and to strengthen i t s role as a trading partner and sponsor o f regional development efforts
in the electricity sector.

C. Business Environment

21.
The private sector has a key role to play in DRC’s recovery. The resources needed to
accelerate economic activity are far beyond the Government’s means, as well as foreseeable
donor assistance. On the other hand, in a country as richly endowed as DRC, there i s significant
interest among private investors, provided security i s restored and consolidated and the business
environment can be improved.
22.
But the business environment remains extremely difficult. Despite efforts over the last
years, it remains riddled with bottlenecks, bureaucratic traditions, and corrupt practices that
hamper competitiveness and investment. Indeed, the World Bank Doing Business 2008 report

18

presents DRC as the most difficult country to do business out o f 178 countries studied. As an
illustration, the report finds that, although down from last year, it s t i l l takes 155 days to start a
business; 14 procedures to obtain a license; 8 procedures to register a property; and 43 procedures
to enforce a contract.

23.
Significant efforts and reforms will be needed to improve the situation and allow for
the potential sustained high level of private investment to materialize. Priorities include: (i)
developing a comprehensive understanding o f the obstacles which hamper private sector
activities, whether regulations or enforcement issues, and setting priorities for their removal, in
close coordination with business organizations; and (ii)modernizing the existing legal and
regulatory framework (in particular by joining a regional framework on business law in
Francophone Africa, the OHADA); and (iii)
restoring a functioning commercial judiciary.
111. SOURCES OF GROWTH AND SPECIFIC PRIORITIES FOR EXTERNAL
SUPPORT
A. Agriculture
Backmound

24,

Agriculture constitutes the most straightforward vehiclefor shared growth. The sector
accounts for almost half o f GDP (42 percent) and i s potentially a significant source of
foreign exchange (see Box 1). Agricultural growth i s particularly important as it directly
benefits the large share o f the population which i s active in the sector (62 percent o f men
and 84 percent o f women) and has the potential to be relatively broadly distributed across
provinces.

25.

DRC’s agricultural potential has never been realized. DRC’s agricultural potential has
often been described in superlative terms: 80 million hectares o f arable land; 4 million
hectares o f irrigable land; a climatic diversity and abundance o f water that allows the
cultivation o f a large variety o f crops; enough pasture to support 40 million cattle; inland
fishery resources which could yield an annual production o f 700,000 tons; and
competitive production systems for a wide variety o f crops. Still, this promise has never
been fulfilled - largely due to the scope o f the capital investments required to develop
this potential (especially for infrastructure) and to a series o f abhorrent or misguided
policies during and after the colonial period.

26.

Indeed, the sector’s performance has been poor for several decades. Since the
“Za’irianisation” o f the early 1970s (which deterred foreign investors, with a particularly
severe impact in marketing and plantations), agricultural performance has been mediocre,
with an average annual growth in the 1980s at 2.5 percent - Le., below both the
population growth rate and the Sub-Saharan African average ( o f 2.7 percent). Yields are
lower than Sub-Saharan average. Real value-added per worker in the sector in 1990 was
two-third o f i t s 1960 level.

19

Box 1: Pre-War Agriculture in DRC

A combination of subsistence and export activities. Agricultural production comprised o f 79
percent cropping activities, 12 percent fisheries, and 9 percent livestock. These productions were
largely spread across all provinces (with some geographical specialization for selected products).
Key productions for subsistence activities traditionally include (by order o f importance) cassava,
plantain, maize, peanuts, sweet banana, rice, sweet potato, yams, beans, as well as smaller but s t i l l
significant quantities o f millet, onion, tomato, taro, potato, peppers, soybean, wheat, avocado,
citrus, mango, papaya, pineapple, etc. DRC was also home to significant animal husbandry
activities (cattle, goats, pigs, sheep, and poultry).
Key productions for exports traditionally include coffee, cocoa, rubber, palm oil, tea, quinquina,
and smaller quantities o f palm kernels, cotton, and sugar cane. These productions, however, have
declined since the 1970s and DRC stopped exporting significant quantities o f bananas in 1970, o f
cotton in 1977, o f tea in 2000, and o f palm oil in 2002. Today’s exports are limited to coffee,
cocoa, and rubber.
The predominance of small-scale farming. Following the gradual decline (in the 1970s and 1980s)
and the collapse (in the 1990s) o f plantation agriculture, food production in DRC (including for
exports) i s now almost entirely in the hands o f small-scale farmers engaged in traditional
agriculture-with an average per capita cultivated land use in the DRC estimated at 0.20 ha.

27. The conflict has further devastated the sector, due to insecurity, population movements,

collapse o f transport and marketing systems, and direct destruction. Agriculture’s
contribution to GDP f e l l from US$3.4 billion in 1990 to US$2.5 billion in 2003. Exports
collapsed, while food imports increased. Malnutrition i s now affecting over 75 percent o f the
population (with an average dietary energy supply o f 1,500 kcayday, far below the FAOrecommended 2,500 kcal/day).

Growth Potential and Key Constraints

28.

I

The growth potential i s significant across all commodities, first to return to pre-war
production levels, and eventually to exceed them. Despite continued violence in some
areas (especially in the East), agricultural land remains available throughout the country
and traditional land tenure arrangements, similar across the country, seem to work
relatively well. At this stage, the regulatory environment i s not a major impediment to
production (compared to other constraints), whether for domestic consumption or for
export. And current production i s about 35 percent below pre-war levels, which were
achieved with l o w productivity and low capital investment. In such a context, agricultural
growth in the coming years i s likely to result from three factors: (i)
enhanced access to
urban markets for a rural population who has been de facto forced into autarky; (ii)
demographic growth o f the rural population; and (iii)
improvements, however minor, in
productivity.

20

I

Box 2: Development Domains and Priority Areas
In view o f the size and diversity o f the country, no one-size-fits-all strategy will work for the DRC. In
a context o f limited resources, efforts need to be tailored to each region’s comparative advantages.
Based on previous research in Sub-Saharan Africa, the three most important factors to determine the
comparative advantages o f different production zones are agricultural potential, access to markets, and
population density. On this basis, a recent Bank analysis identified several development domains:

Domains with relatively high agricultural potential, population density, and market access - i.e.:
(i)the area extending from Bas Congo to Kabinda; (ii)the mining cities and their hinterlands in
Katanga; (iii)the Great Lakes region; (iv) Northern Equateur; and (v) the area along the Congo
River from Kisangani to Pool Malebo. These domains are most suitable for production of staple
crops (cassava, maize, etc.), perishable cash crops (vegetables), non-perishable cash crops (cotton,
rubber, cocoa, etc.), intensive livestock activities and intensive fishing. These are areas in which
interventions are likely to yield the largest impact, in terms o f both growth and number o f affected
beneficiaries.
Domains with high agricultural potential, but weak market access and low population density Le.: (i)Maniema to UBle; and (ii)Cuvette centrale. These domains are most suitable for
production o f high input cereals (e.g., maize, rice, wheat) and non-perishable cash crops.
Although interventions would have less o f an impact, they could s t i l l be key for food security at
the local level.
A domain with low agricultural potential and population density, but relatively high market access
-the Marungu Plateau. This domain may be well suited for extensive livestock activities.

29.

Key constraints for the short-term include (by order o f importance, and assuming the
consolidation o f the overall political and security environment):
Persisting insecurity in rural areas-due both to the presence o f active militias in some
regions (e.g., in the East) and to harassment by armed personnel across the country.
Poor state of transport infrastructure. Over half o f Congolese farmers live more than 8
hours away from a trading center and post-harvest losses reach up to 80 percent in some
areas. Isolation and high transport costs inhibit the integration o f farmers into the market
economy.
Sector decapitalization and lack of access to inputs. A relatively large share o f the rural
population has lost i t s (already limited) pre-war assets, whether basic tools, seeds, or small
animals. In a context o f isolation, insecurity, and extreme poverty, most farmers have not
been able to, and are not likely to be able to replace these assets, and therefore to restart their
activities (rural finance mechanisms are de facto inexistent or highly ineffective and are not
likely to play a major role in the coming period).

30. I n the medium-term, a series of structural transformations will be needed to sustain high
agricultural growth rates, especially to: (i)
reflect the changes in production and consumption
patterns which happened during the conflict (some farmers w i l l have to find new markets,
and possibly change production); (ii)
restore DRC’s competitiveness on export markets (this
w i l l require productivity increases but also a shift across productions to reflect changed world
prices); and (iii)
reverse the steady decline o f the past 3 5 years (by increasing small-farming
productivity, developing a strong private sector, and re-building an adequate marketing
system).

21

3 1. Parallel efforts will be needed to prevent uncontrolled logging and illicit exploitation of
forestry resources. As security i s re-established and transport constraints are gradually lifted,
both biodiversity and forestry resources will be at risk. The key constraint for sound natural
resource management i s the weakness o f key institutions and the presence o f strong vested
interests.
Prioritv Activities

32. I n view of the magnitude of the needs, donors’ efforts will need to be carefully targeted to
ensure an optimal use of available resources. Assuming a consolidation o f the political and
security situation, priorities for donor support are:
Recapitalize the agricultural sector and provide inputs: (i)continue and strengthen ongoing
efforts to distribute inputs, including seeds, tools and small animals to re-connected areas on
the basis o f area-specific requirements; and (ii)support farmers associations and the private
sector to rehabilitate and modernize storage and processing facilities and equipment.

Lay the groundfor medium-term growth: (i)support producer and community organizations;
(ii)
develop a regulatory framework for rural finance, including micro-finance; (iii)
support
public-private arrangements for the provision o f key services (e.g., extension, veterinary, pest
management); and (iv) collect agricultural statistics.

cr

Help manage the forestry sector: (i)design simple, enforceable regulations in line with the
low capacity o f technical institutions, including transparency, accountability and monitoring
systems; and (ii)promote innovative approaches such as the devolution o f management
responsibility to local communities, monitoring o f environmental and social compliance by
specialized NGOs, and independent certification.

B. Mining
Bacbround

33.

DRC has traditionally suffered from the “curse of natural resources”. The country’s
richness in mineral resources i s legendary - with large deposits o f copper, cobalt, diamond,
gold, coltan, tin, zinc, oil, as well as a number o f other rare metals. But mining activities
have historically fostered a system o f predation and have never translated into improved
living conditions for the population. Throughout the 1990s, the country’s mineral wealth
even became both a stake and a f u e l in the successive conflicts, with a reportedly largescale illegal exploitation o f natural resources by warring parties, including neighboring
countries.

34.

Production has collapsed since the late 1980s. Mining typically represented about 10 to 15
percent o f GDP before the war, and a very significant share o f exports. Since independence,
the sector has gone through four phases: (i)
a steady growth until 1987; (ii)
a severe decline
between 1987 and 1993 (due to the deterioration o f the overall economy, lack o f
a collapse during the conflict
investment, and a fall o f international commodity prices); (iii)
(between 1993 and 2000, mining production was at 25 to 32 percent o f the 1987 level); and
(iv) a rebound since 2001 (with a 58 percent increase between 2001 and 2005). Overall,
mining GDP in 2004 stands at only 46 percent o f the 1987 level-with three minerals

22

0

accounting for 95 percent o f production: diamond (51 percent), cobalt (34 percent), and
copper (10 percent).

35.

But there are significant variations across sectors (see Box 3). A detailed analysis o f the
sector by mineral product shows wide variations as regards: (i)production trends (and
hence growth potential); (ii)geographical concentration (and hence distribution o f
benefits); and (iii)organization o f production, with two main models: dominance by large,
often State-owned, f i r m s (e.g., for copper, cobalt, oil) or proliferation o f artisanal mining
(e.g., for diamonds, gold, coltan).
~

Box 3: A Disaggregated Picture of the Mining Sector

Copper: the collapse of the crown jewel
Production trends: production in 2004 represented only 6 percent o f the 1990 level (about
400,000 tons a year - which accounted for 6 1 percent o f DRC’s overall mining production).
Geographical concentration: the Southernmost part o f the Katanga province (around the cities o f
Lubumbashi, Likasi, and Kolwezi), which i s part o f the copperbelt; DRC’s reserves have some of
the highest grade deposits in the world, and are sufficient for exploitation over several decades.
Organization: historically, production (which started in 1906) was essentially under a Stateowned company, , GECAMINES, which holds an 18,000 km2 concession and owns complete
production facilities from mining to refining; the company, however, suffered from
mismanagement and predation, and i s today only a shadow o f i t s former self, with deteriorated
technical installations and a debt estimated at US$1.6 billion to US$2.4 billion.
Cobalt: a parallel collapsefinally remedied by private investment
Production trends: production collapsed in the 1990s (by about two thirds in volume), but since
2001 it has rebounded to roughly pre-1990 levels (at 8,000 to 11,000 tons a year); current
production levels represent about 20 percent o f global production and any significant change in
DRC’s output, whether upwards or downwards, has an impact on international prices.
Geographical concentration: same as copper (cobalt i s traditionally produced as a by-product).
Organization: traditionally all o f DRC’s cobalt was produced by GECAMINES; since 2001,
however, this structure has changed, and cobalt i s now produced by private investors (through
joint ventures with GECAMINES) for 84 percent o f production, and artisanal miners (often
under a system o f “licenses” purchased from GECAMINES) for the remaining 16 percent.
Diamond: the growing role of artisanal miners
Production trends: production fell in the 1990s (fluctuating between 13 and 22 million carats), but
has rebounded since 2002 (to about 30 million carats in 2004).
D
Geographical concentration: reserves are extensive (over 200 million carats, with major deposits
s t i l l to be explored) but quality i s relatively low with industrial diamonds carat value at US$5
toUS$20 and jewelry diamonds carat value at US$50 to US$200 and more (Angolan diamonds
sell at US$200 to US$300 a carat); reserves are spread across several provinces, primarily in
Kasai Oriental (Mbuji Mayi), Kasai Occidental (Tshikapa), Province Orientale (Kisangani), and
Equateur (Gbadolite).
o
Organization: the structure o f production has been significantly altered during the last decade,
with the decline o f industrial production, mainly by the MIBA Mines (MiniBre de Bakwanga),
from 40 percent o f total production in the 1980s to 25 percent in 2004 - and the corresponding
increase in artisanal and small scale mining; artisanal mining (which i s accompanied by organized
and criminal violence) accounts for 75 percent o f the national diamond production and hundreds
o f thousands o f jobs (up to 700,000 according to some estimates).
Gold: a case of illegal exploitation of natural resources

23

Production trends: official production collapsed from 6,100 k g in 1991 to 650 kg in 2004; there i s
no reliable estimate o f the current illegal production.
Geographical concentration: mainly near Bunia (concessions o f Kilo and Moto) in Province
Orientale, but also in other provinces.
Organization: traditionally, gold was mainly produced by the State-owned Ofice des Mines d’Or
de Kilo-Moto (OMIKO); during the conflict, gold became one o f the key mineral resources

reportedly exploited by occupying armies, and illegal small scale and artisanal mining (often
involving forced labor and militia control) proliferated in the Kivus, Maniema, Province
Orientale, and Equateur.

Oil: a relatively stable, although limited, production
Production trends: total output (at about 10 million barrels) fluctuated relatively little over the last
period, due to the production sites relative isolation from conflict; GDP and export value have
significantly increased as a result o f rising oil prices.
Geographical concentration: Bas Congo (offshore for 75 percent o f the production, onshore near
the mouth o f the Congo River for 25 percent).
Organization: Offshore wells are exploited by a Chevron-led joint venture, onshore wells by a
Petrojlna subsidiary.
Coltan and cassiterite: illegal exploitation and abuses, but a marginal economic role
Coltan and cassiterite production has substantially increased since the mid-1990s (in Maniema,
North Kim and South Kivu ), under a system o f small scale and artisanal mining. The reported
involvement o f armed militias and large-scale smuggling through neighboring countries pose a
series o f political and security problems. Still, the current and potential contribution o f these
minerals to economic growth i s negligible (quantities remain small).

0

Other ores: a largely untappedpotential
DRC’s abundant, and often largely untapped, reserves o f minerals include bauxite, cadmium,
chrome, emerald, heterogenite, iron, lead, lithium, manganese, marble, nickel, niobium,
phosphates, platinum, sapphire, silver, tin stone, uranium, vanadium, and wolfram. These ores are
mined by artisans in low quantities - but a variation o f global prices, or a sudden and significant
increase in the demand o f one o f these minerals (e.g., for a new high-tech product) could result in
impressive growth rates.

Growth Potential and Kev Constraints
36.

The growth potential is very signzpcant. Growth w i l l be driven by the recovery and
possibly expansion o f production, in a context o f relatively high global prices (and i t s level
i s likely to depend on prices fluctuations). Some new projects and investments are indeed
already underway - and copper production i s expected to increase to 200,000 tons over the
next 2 to 3 years. For other investments, the lead times may be longer (typically 5 to 7
years before significant production occurs) but the pull effect o f such large-scale
investments on construction and services should already be significant in the short-term.

37.

Growth is likely to be pulled by three products: copper, diamond, and gold. O f DRC’s
main mining products, there i s significant growth potential for copper (rehabilitate existing
mining facilities to allow for a gradual return, over time, to 1990 production levels),
diamond (upgrade existing industrial production facilities, explore potential new sites), and
gold (restart formal production in existing gold mines) - but much less for cobalt
(production has already returned to 1990 levels and any further increase could affect global
prices downwards). Other products may play an important role in specific regions, but they
are unlikely to have a significant impact on DRC’s overall economic growth.

24

38.

Growth will largely depend on private investment. The re-start and/or development o f
copper, diamond, and gold production will require significant investments in production
facilities (of about US$4 to US$5 billion). The Government has adopted over the last few
years a series o f important reforms to attract private investors (e.g., mining code,
investment code) - and there are indications that major foreign companies are interested in
investing on a large scale (the first projects have been launched, for a total in excess o f
U S $ l billion), provided the environment i s right (including politics, security, enforcement
o f key provisions o f the mining and investment codes, and international prices).

39.

I n this context, key constraints vary across products (assuming the consolidation o f the
political situation, and a relatively stable level o f international prices). For copper, the key
constraints are: (i)
business environment; (ii)
transport infrastructure; and (ii)
electric power
(for transformation). For diamonds, they are mainly related to the business environment
(neither electric power, not transport infrastructure are critical). For gold, they are: (i)
security in the K i l o and M o t 0 sites and (ii)
business environment.

40.

Social issues will also need to be addressed to prevent their becoming a major short-term
constraint to investment. In particular, specific action may be needed to regularize and

support small scale and artisanal mining, to reduce poverty in a sector that employs
hundreds o f thousands, but also to ensure that conflicts that arise between miners and the
community are mitigated and constructively resolved (this would not only avoid the
creation o f situations o f insecurity that would deter large-scale investment, but also increase
benefits to the neighboring communities). In addition, GECAMINES’ social activities (the
company provides a large share o f the available education and health services in Katanga)
will have to be effectively taken over by new providers as a key element o f the
restructuring o f the company away from productive activities.

41.

Overall, the challenge is to ensure the quality of growth. Judging from history, there i s no
evidence that growth in the mining sector will automatically translate into benefits for the
population. Specific measures are needed to prevent the development o f a new system o f
predation. These include substantial capacity building (within the Ministry o f Mines - and
i t s specialized technical services, cadastre services, as well as customs and police),
rationalization o f mining associations, and continued implementation o f the Extractive
Industries Transparency Initiative as discussed as part o f the Governance Contract.

Priority Activities
42.

Donors’ efforts need tofocus on facilitatingprivate investment. Assuming a consolidation

o f the political and security situation, priorities for donor support are:

Help the authorities improve the business environment, with a focus o n enforcement o f the
existing regulatory framework: (i)further strengthen the capacity and improve the
functioning o f key entities (e.g., the Ministry o f Mines, mining cadastre, customs, arbitration
entities, Parliamentary commissions and local authorities, commercial courts); (ii)support
efforts to review the partnerships already entered into by GECAMINES and MIBA (in terms
o f quality o f the partners and terms o f the contracts); (iii)complete the restructuring o f
GECAMINES; and (iv) help to rapidly clarify existing mining rights.
Regularize small scale and artisanal mining. Experience in other countries suggests that there
i s no easy way to regularize artisanal mining and improve artisanal miners’ living conditions

25

- especially in a context like DRC where security and political issues further complicate

the

problems. Efforts should support a broad range o f complementary activities: (i)
strengthen
Government oversight institutions; (ii)provide information and extension services to the
miners; (iii)support the organization o f miners (e.g., in cooperatives) or the rationalization
(and “legitimization”) o f existing structures; (iv) formalize a relationship between artisanal
miners and neighboring industrial exploitations; (v) improve access to artisanal mining areas;
(vi) improve control o f regional and cross border trading activities; and (vii) promote
alternative livelihoods.

C. Industry and Services
Bacbround

43.

Prior to the conflict, industry and services in DRC were relatively less developed than in
other African countries (Graph 1). Non-mining industrial activities accounted for 12 to 15
percent o f GDP (Sub-Saharan African average: 30 percent) and services for 42 percent o f
GDP (Sub-Saharan African average: 52 percent). Industry mainly included manufacturing
(8 to 9 percent o f GDP) and construction (3 to 5 percent), with some marginal addition
from water and electric power (1 percent). Services were dominated by trade (23 percent o f
GDP), and also included tradable services (7 percent), non-tradable services (7 percent),
and transport (4 percent), while financial services represented less than 1 percent o f GDP.

I-

,,-

Transport

,

,

Construction
4%

Other industry and
services

Non-tradable services
I Yo
Tradable services
1%

\

I

11

[Trade
22%

Graph 1: Pre-war composition o f GDP

44. Since the early 1990s, the overall industry and services output has significantly declined:
0

Manufacturing. Pre-war production consisted mainly o f simple goods for the domestic
markets. Output f e l l from about US$930 million in 1990 to about US$180 million in 2002,
due to the dilapidation o f industrial facilities and equipment, the collapse o f domestic
demand, and the emergence o f new competitors (e.g., China). Today, manufacturing activities
are limited to a few l o w value-adding activities in key urban centers (mainly Kinshasa, and to
some extent Lubumbashi), aimed at the domestic market.

26

Construction. Production in the sector has fluctuated widely over time, with a low in the
1980s (at a time o f overall disinvestment in the economy) and a series o f one to two-year
rebounds after each round o f violence in the 1990s. It has recorded a relatively significant
growth over the last years.
Trade and transport. These activities (which included a large informal sector) were
dominated by the commerce o f locally-produced agricultural products (about half o f the value
added), and to a lesser extent o f locally-produced manufactured goods (about a third o f the
total) - and they have therefore declined in parallel with the fall o f agriculture and
manufacturing production (aggravated by the rapid deterioration o f transport infrastructure).
The commerce o f imports has remained limited due to the overall impoverishment o f the
population.
Tradable services. Tradable services in DRC mainly included real estate, hotel management,
fuel distribution and car repair workshops, craftsmanship, liberal professions, and domestic
services. During the 1990s, activities declined, in parallel with the overall contraction o f the
economy, although a comprehensive picture o f the sector i s not available (a large part o f
these activities are informal).
Non-tradable services. As the Government saw i t s revenues collapse during the 1990s, it
ceased to provide most public services, and the delivery o f non-tradable services hence
declined by 'about 90 percent during the decade.

45. The recent surge of private investment bodes well for the future-and i s the result o f both
political stabilization and early economic reforms. At over US$1 billion a year, private
investment exceeds official development assistance received by DRC and accounts for about
11 percent o f Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) to Sub-Saharan Africa (see B o x 4).
Box 4: Trends in private investments since 2002 (excluding agriculture, forestry, and mining)
A telecommunications boom. About half o f all, investments (US1.4 billion) are in the
telecommunications sector (to set up cell phone networks). O f the remaining part, manufacturing
and services each account for about half (US$600 million each).
A gradual decrease, rejecting political uncertainties. Non-telecommunications investment has
decreased from U S 5 6 6 million in 2003 to US$385 million in 2005: the number o f projects has
been relatively stable (90 to 100 projects a year), but the median size has fallen from U S 2 . 5
million to U S l . 9 million.
A focus on rapid return, low value-added activities in an environment which remains fraught with
uncertainties (see graphs below).

27

$ap

Pharmacy
4%

Other

1 6%

Construction mat
21%

Other agro-business
11%

Com position of investments: Manufacturing (2003-05)

Other
1 Z",

1J70

Air transport

Fuel distributio

Hotels)
9%

I

Luxury residences
10%

Composition of investments: Services (2003-05)

A financing that is mostly foreign, with only about 25 percent o f (non-telecommunications)
investments financed by Congolese nationals or companies.
A focus on Kinshasa and Katanga. Over 85 percent o f non-mining, non-telecommunications
projects are in Kinshasa. Mining investments are heavily concentrated in Katanga. Bas Congo
receives about 5 percent o f non-mining investments (transport and agro-business). There are some
limited mining investments in the two Kasai, and some forestry investments in Bandundu,
Equateur, and Province Orientale. There i s very little if at all in North and South Kivu and
Maniema.

Growth Potential and Kev Constraints

46. The growth potential will largely depend on the pace of recovery of the overall economy-

Le., on progress in the agriculture and mining sectors. In the manufacturing sector, the shortterm growth potential i s determined by the investments o f the last years and may be very
significant - but medium-term growth will require a revival o f domestic demand and the

28

removal o f key obstacles to business activity. Construction activity i s likely to depend both
on the level o f external assistance for reconstruction projects and on the revitalization o f
domestic demand through overall economic growth. Growth in trade and transport activities
i s essentially linked to the opening o f the domestic market (by re-connecting o f isolated
regions) and to an increase in the supply o f traded goods growth (traditionally locallyproduced agriculture, forestry, mining, and manufacturing products). Growth in other
services will also depend on the level o f overall economic activity.
47. But constraints remain formidable-and even for labor-intensive activities, such as textile,
and on the domestic market, Congolese f i r m s find it difficult to compete with imports:
Business environment. Despite the adoption in 2003 o f a modern and attractive investment
code, DRC’s business environment i s challenging.
Infrastructure (especially transport and energy). Poor transport infrastructure makes many
parts o f the country inaccessible which has an obvious impact on the feasibility o f doing
business in most provinces. International trade from the Western half o f the country i s
severely limited by the poor functioning o f the country’s port (in Matadi), uneasy navigation
on the Congo river, and overall prohibitive transport costs. Five provincial capitals have
virtually no electric power other than for emergency needs (e.g., water pumping stations,
hospitals), three have very limited and irregular access to electric power, and only three (plus
Kinshasa) have a relatively reliable access to energy.
Credit. Despite the launch o f a vigorous reform program, credit i s de facto not available in
DRC. The total assets o f the banking sector amount to about 10 percent o f GDP (US$770
million), total credit to 2 percent o f GDP (US$l80 million), total deposit to 5 percent o f GDP
(US$400 million). There are ten commercial banks, five o f which under restructuring (nine
banks have been liquidated since 1998), there are less than 30,000 bank accounts, and one
bank branch per 2 million inhabitants.
Priority Activities

48. Donor support should focus on removing key obstacles to private sector activity. The
challenge, however, will be to set priorities to ensure that the limited financial and
administrative means available are directed towards those activities which are likely to have
the highest impact on growth. Assuming a consolidation o f the political and security
situation, priorities for donor support are:
0

Help restore access to credit; (i)support further reform o f the financial sector including
strengthening o f the Central Bank for improved sector regulation and supervision; (ii)
reform
the regulatory environment for microfinance; (iii)
recapitalize viable banks; (iv) support the
growth and professionalization o f microfinance with a focus on areas which are easily
accessible (for production to be traded); and (v) develop short-term mechanisms (e.g., credit
lines) to bridge the gap until the revival o f the financial sector with a focus on those cities
which have access to the outside world (at this stage Kinshasa, Lubumbashi, Goma, Bukavu,
and Matadi).

29

Increase availability of electric power: (i)
rehabilitate a base capacity o f 1,300 MW in Inga;
(ii)further rehabilitate and expand key parts o f the transmission network (Inga-Kinshasa,
etc.); (iii)improve distribution networks (with an initial focus on Kinshasa); (iv) support
reform o f SNEL, with a focus on accountability and transparency; and (v) gradually boost
exports (including to Southern Africa) as a source o f foreign exchange.

30

ANNEX 3: IMPROVING ACCESS TO BASIC SOCUL SERVICESAND
REDUCING WLNERABILITY
I.OVERVIEW
A. Background

1.
D R C has some of the worst social indicators in the world. The following PRSP figures,
all MDG indicators, illustrate the catastrophic situation in DRC with regards to key social
indicators:
Latest Statistic for DRC
129 deaths per 1,000 infants
205 deaths per 1,000 children
990 deaths per 100,000 live births
64%
22%
9%

Social Indicator

Infant (0- 1 year) mortality rate
Child (0-5 years ) mortality rate
Maternal mortality rate
Gross enrolment rate in primary school
Populationwith access to clean water
Populationwith access to adequate sanitation

2.
Nationally, these poor indicators show little sign of improving. During the conflicts o f
the past decade most MDG indicators have deteriorated, some, very sharply. Despite expectations
that conditions would improve markedly during the Transitional Government, there has been
virtually no progress in reversing negative social trends, in part, because o f the almost total
collapse o f state services. As a result, in the water and sanitation sector, the vast majority o f the
population s t i l l do not have access to clean water and sanitation; in education, between 5-7
million children o f primary school age do not attend school and on average, a Congolese person
visits a health facility once every 6.7 years. However, in recent years, there have been signs o f
improvements in utilization rates (including immunisation rates) in areas receiving humanitarian
and development support. The challenge facing the Government and the international community
i s how to scale up these successes so that DRC will reach the majority o f MDGs in a reasonable
period o f time.

3.
The D R C Government is committed to improving social indicators. In demonstrating i t s
commitment to achieve the MDGs and acknowledging the importance o f human capital in
poverty reduction, the Government has devoted an entire pillar o f the PRSP to developing the
social sectors. The strategy proposed by the Government focuses, primarily, o n improving access
to basic services and reducing vulnerability.
4.
Poor social indicators are due to low consumption levels of services. The causes o f
DRC’s poor social indicators are numerous and interrelated. Poor health outcomes, for example,
are the result o f high poverty rates, inadequate nutritional status, l o w educational levels and
conflict. Whilst many factors are important, a main reason that DRC’s social indicators are some
o f the worst in the world i s because most people, particularly poor people, consume so few basic
services. High child mortality rates are directly related to children not using basic curative and
preventive health services. The same i s true in education, where the decline in literacy rates i s
directly related to l o w attendance and retention rates in schools.

31

5.
People are not accessing services because they represent poor value for money. In
DRC, as i s the case throughout the world, people make decisions about whether to use services
and which provider to visit on the basis o f their perceptions o f geographical accessibility, quality
and price. Combining all these criteria into one, people often choose the service they believe
represents the best value for money. L o w utilization rates in Congo indicate that for most people
the social services o n offer are not worth the expense. Services are often geographically
inaccessible and o f l o w quality, with essential inputs frequently unavailable. Services are also
prohibitively expensive, especially for the poor. For example, rough estimates indicate that
households pay o n average 20% o f their income for each child they send to school. Both the
PRSP and PPA highlight the importance o f financial barriers in restricting access. Faced with the
combination o f limited accessibility, l o w quality and high charges, many poor people have ceased
using formal services. Instead, they resort to self-help mechanisms or informal alternatives, for
example, practitioners o f traditional medicine or auto medication with drugs and uncertain
quality. For services t o have any impact, however, they must be used. If people do not attend
school, access water and sanitation or visit health clinics, there i s no way these services can help
to reduce poverty or improve living conditions. Therefore, the priority for the Government and i t s
donor partners will be t o improve social indicators by increasing access to effective social
services.
B. Strategic Objective

6.
Extensive international research has demonstrated the importance of developing
human capital as a means to stimulate economic growth and reduce poverty. The benefits t o
economies, through improved productivity, o f healthier and better-educated workforces have
been well documented throughout the world. In post conflict countries such as DRC, higher levels
o f human capital are expected t o contribute disproportionally t o improved stability, both directly,
for example through education, and by facilitating economic growth.

Output Indicator
Gross enrolment rate in primary schools
Visits per person per year to a health facility
YOo f children fully immunized
% o f the urban population with access to clean water
% o f the urban population with improved sanitation

32

Target for 2011
85%
0.7
83%
50%
35%

C. Overall Approach:

Improve the performance of the social sectors by implementingcomprehensive and
sequenced programmes of supply side and demand side reforms
8.
The proposed overall approach is to increase access to essential services by
simultaneously tackling supply side and demand side constraints. Given the vast range o f
activities to be undertaken, it will be vital to prioritize and sequence actions in line with the
limited resources available. This will require concentrating resources on proven cost-effective
interventions and delaying activities which have a smaller impact on utilisation rates. In a lowincome country such as the DRC, where the majority o f the population i s poor, this approach will
require two essential components:
Improve the coverage and quality of basic social services to make them more readily
available and attractive to the population. This will require considerable investment to
improve the supply o f service inputs, particularly recurrent inputs, for example: medicines,
school books, teachers and health worker salaries and training. Increased capital investment
(for buildings, vehicles and equipment) will also be required but growth here should not
exceed the capacity o f the various sectors to deliver effective services. Resources w i l l be
wasted if donors build health facilities but there i s no staff to run them or there are inadequate
drug supplies.
Reduce barriers which inhibit access to services, in particular, financial barriers. Financial
barriers have been identified in the PRSP and the PPA as the major reason that people in the
DRC do not consume essential services. Eliminating barriers altogether as a way o f
increasing access to some services i s so important to society as a whole (for example treating
communicable diseases and attending primary school) that a very good case exists for
abolishing fees for these services entirely. However, given the severe constraints on public
spending in DRC and the fragility o f management systems, it i s unlikely that the rapid
elimination o f both health and education fees i s a viable option over the C A F period. If
Government and CAF donors allocate resources appropriately and implement concurrent
sector reforms there will be scope to reduce certain financial barriers in the next three years.
social services through
Donors will therefore help the Government to increase access to
the systematic reduction and eventual elimination o f financial barriers. It will be particularly
important that stakeholders implementing sector strategies support the sequencing o f these
policies with other supply side reforms to ensure that adequate inputs are available to meet
large increases in demand.
I n order to maximize the impact of social sector spending on poverty reduction, it will
be important to target resources effectively. Governments are frequently criticized for allowing
the benefits o f publicly funded social services to be captured by wealthier members o f society.
Often, the group that benefits the least i s the one that needs the services the most. From both an
efficiency and equity standpoint, it will be essential that public funding for the social sectors i s
allocated with a benefit incidence skewed towards the poor. This will require making resources
readily available at local level facilities, closer to where poor people live. Ensuring that this
occurs will be a key challenge for the Government, particularly as it embarks on a major
programme o f decentralisation.

10.
As well as obvious equity implications, targeting social services to benefit the poor will
improve efficiency. The PRSP emphasizes that the poor, as well as having lower social

33

indicators, have the worst access to services. Targeting public expenditure to meet the needs o f
the poor will therefore result in greater returns in terms o f expanding access to services and
subsequently improving social indicators. Given the considerable externalities associated with
using certain social services, for example immunizing children, the benefits o f better access for
the poor will be considerable for society as a whole. From an efficiency perspective, it makes
more sense to target resources to increase the consumption o f health, education and water and
sanitation services by the poor than making marginal differences to the lives o f wealthier
members o f society.
I n order to improve the efficiency of public spending (including Official Development
11.
Aid, ODA) the Government and CAF partners will evaluate different models of service
delivery. As the Government begins to undertake significant social sector reforms it i s apparent
that there already exists a wide variety o f sector programmes across the country. These differ in
many respects including their scale, structure, partner characteristics, objectives, beneficiary
groups and financing mechanisms. As the Government formulates i t s overall sector strategies it
will be important to evaluate these programmes (using effectiveness, efficiency and equity
criteria) and build on the learned lessons from the most successful programmes.

11. SPECIFIC SOCIAL SERVICES AND PRIORITIES FOR EXTERNAL

SUPPORT

A. Education
Backround

12.
Low enrolment rates show that education in the D R C is in a state of crisis. Present
indicators show that DRC’s performance i s extremely poor against virtually every internationally
set development goal for education. MDG 2 and the Education for All initiative (EFA) set a target
that all children should attend primary school. In the DRC, the Gross Enrolment Rate (GER) for
primary school i s estimated to be only 64 percent with the majority o f these pupils attending
public sector schools managed by religious networks. This rate i s considerably lower than many
o f DRC’s neighbors which are achieving net enrolment rates in excess o f 80 percent.
Unfortunately, in the case o f the DRC, the lack o f reliable statistics on population and
demographic growth as well as failings in the education management information system make it
impossible to calculate net enrolment rates, although these are almost certainly lower (typically
10-15 percentage points) than the gross rate.
13.
Low national enrolment rates conceal substantial inequalities between population
groups. According to the latest Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey, approximately five million
children o f primary school age are out o f school and only 17 percent o f six-year-old children
enroll in the first grade. Whereas the PRSP puts the gross enrolment rate at 64 percent (2002),
this figure conceals gender as well as regional disparities. GER for boys i s 72 percent, while for
girls, it i s only 56 percent. Disparities between regions are even starker: GER in urban areas i s
71.6 percent while in rural areas it i s only 43.6 percent. One fact i s clear from these statistics: the
majority o f children in rural areas do not go to school.
14.
Low literacy rates are an outcome of DRC’s failing education system. One o f the direct
consequences o f limited access to education, high drop out rates and l o w exam pass rates, i s a

34

very high illiteracy rate. At least 32 percent o f the adult population i s unable to read and write.
Like the gross enrolment rate, the national figure conceals large inequalities between men, 19
percent o f whom are illiterate, and women, 44 percent o f whom are illiterate; and between urban
areas where 14 percent o f the population can not read or write and rural areas where 40 percent o f
the population i s illiterate.

15.
Technical and vocational education services are not contributing effectively to
economic growth. The technical and vocational sub-sector o f the education system should be
producing large numbers o f workers with the necessary skills to re-build the economy. However,
with the exception o f some small-scale faith based organizations, this i s mostly not the case. In
the absence o f effective state financed services there has been a growth o f unregulated private
training facilities o f potentially dubious quality.
Growth Potential and Key Constraints

16.
A situational analysis of the education sector highlights many constraints affecting
current sector performance. The education sector i s characterized by low enrolment; poor pass
rates, weak institutional capacities at central, provincial and sub-provincial levels, inadequate
numbers o f poorly trained and unmotivated teachers, an inappropriately distributed workforce,
shortages o f teaching materials, inadequate learning spaces and gender-insensitive pedagogic
practices.
The PPA shows that financial barriers are the most significant reason constraining
17.
parentsfrom sending their children to school. Due to a collapse in state funding for education in
the last fifteen years, schools have become increasingly reliant on income from school fees to
cover their costs. For many parents, particularly those with l o w and irregular incomes, the cost o f
these fees i s prohibitive. Rough estimates indicate that households pay on average 20 percent o f
their income per schoolchild. As a result, parents are not enrolling their children in school or have
been forced to ration education for selected children. This rationing i s evident in the lower
enrolment rates for girls and for children living in rural areas. The fact that poor families are not
sending their children to school because o f school fees i s one o f the key messages from the PPA.
As a consequence o f this situation, the limited state funds available for the sector are
disproportionately benefiting those children who can attend school and who tend to come from
relatively wealthier families.

18.
Poor quality of services results in poor learning outcomes and is another reason
parents cite for not sending their children to school. As well as barriers caused by high fees,
parents do not send their children to school because they believe that the services on offer are o f
poor quality. School buildings are dilapidated and essential inputs such as books and motivated
and qualified teachers are in limited supply. This poor quality o f education services results in
disappointing outcomes, reflected by low pass rates for pupils and high repetition rates. These, in
turn, represent additional costs for parents, o f whom only the wealthier can afford to pay fees for
the extended time in school when children repeat grades. Many parents regard the current high
cost/low quality education system as a poor investment for their limited household resources and
as a consequence, their children exit the education system.
19.
Chronic under-funding from public sources is the primary constraint perpetuating the
current low-quality/high-fee education system. At present, only 9 percent o f the national budget
has been allocated for education, o f which less than 50 percent goes to primary education. In the

35

PRSP, education’s share o f the national budget i s scheduled to grow from 12.2 percent in 2006 to
15.5 percent in 2007 and 16.7 percent in 2008. Funding allocations f o r the current year,
however, already fall short o f the PRSP target. With only part o f all budget allocations
actually spent, execution must be improved by ensuring that spending i s effectively channeled to
intended purposes and that leakages are curtailed.

20.
At present, capacity for educational planning and management is weak
throughout the entire system, from the Ministries of Education down to the school
level. Insufficient coordination and confused accountabilities between the ministries
involved in the education sector create considerable difficulties. In the context o f the

decentralization process, the respective roles o f central and local authorities in the management o f
the sector will need to be defined, and the corresponding transfers o f responsibilities and
resources organized. I t i s also apparent that major providers o f education services, notably
religious organizations, will need to be actively engaged in overall sector management on the
basis o f clearly articulated partnership principles with the State.
As a result of a poor strategic and operational management, exacerbated by a lack of
2 1.
basic information, the education system is fragmented and inefficient. Any attempt to improve
the management o f the sector i s currently undermined by weaknesses in the education
management information system, including a lack o f equipment and inadequate capacity to
manage data. The absence o f current basic demographic data on school populations makes it
impossible to calculate reliable routine baseline figures such as gross and net enrolment rates.
Poor coordination and weak supervision also result in non-compliance with policies, for example,
wide variations in pupil charges.
’

22.

Years of conflict and instability have also taken their toll on the most important
input into the education system-human
resources. In particular, there has been a
progressive deterioration o f the quality and skills o f the teaching force. I t i s estimated that only 37

percent o f the 238,000 primary school teachers have adequate qualifications. More than a quarter
o f primary teachers nationwide are fully financed by parents through fees because the schools in
which these teachers work are not yet formally registered by the Ministry o f Education.
Monitoring and supervision are weak and pedagogic materials are in short supply. Urgent efforts
are also needed to bring all teachers under a unified and transparent pay structure, eliminate ghost
workers, clarify the status o f people informally employed over past years to f i l l critical gaps, and
arrange the departure o f pension-age staff. The decision to increase teachers’ salaries in 2005
signals the Government’s intention to improve human resources as part o f i t s emerging education
strategy.
23.
Classrooms in some urban locations are overcrowded and basic school furniture is in
short supply. Although learning spaces are inadequate all around the country, the situation i s
worse in rural areas. There are currently approximately 29,000 primary schools in the country.
School infrastructure i s dilapidated and in most places suffers from lack o f maintenance. In
conflict-affected areas, school buildings are often vandalized. A shocking 75 percent o f schools
have no water or a latrine, which, as well as creating public health risks, undermines efforts to
retain girls in school and inhibits the dissemination o f preventive health care messages.
24.
The secondary education sub-sector has similar constraints to those of the primary
sub-sector. These include limited access, poor quality teaching, un-motivated teachers,
dilapidated infrastructure, inadequate teaching-learning materials as well as curricula which have
not been updated since the 1960s. The number o f secondary schools i s estimated at 19,000, with

36

3.7 million students and 209,000 teachers. Approximately half o f the teacher force in the public
sector, approximately 95,000 teachers, i s estimated to be fully financed by parents through the
collection o f user fees.

25.
The once strong tertiary education sector has declined rapidly due to years of neglect
and under-funding. Whereas the tertiary education sector in DRC was a source o f pride for the
country in the 1980s, years o f conflict, mismanagement and under-funding have resulted in rapid
deterioration in the coverage and quality o f tertiary education services. There are approximately
430 institutions with about 10,400 teachers and 250,000 students. User fees at this level are also
high and continue to be a contentious issue in this sub-sector. There has been a noticeable decline
in the quality o f students entering the system due to the failings o f the primary and secondary
schools. Dwindling resources have also resulted in a contraction in both pure and applied research
activities.
26.
Technical and vocational education services are similarly constrained. In addition to
recurrent funding constraints, public technical and vocational education services have been
hindered by poor status, outdated equipment, obsolete methodologies and limited relevance to the
realities o f current economic life.
27.
Given the Government’s explicit commitment to developing the education sector,
growth potential is good Although both the Constitution and the PRSP call for free and
compulsory primary education, a genuine commitment to implement this policy i s not yet
demonstrated. International donors intend to help the new Government turn this policy into reality
by supporting a comprehensive package o f education reforms. This will enable the Government
to sequence, over time, the necessary supply side and demand side reforms to achieve their stated
goal o f free compulsory education. Neighboring countries are achieving net enrolment rates o f
80-90 percent to free primary education by spending around $6-8 per capita, including donor
contributions, on primary education services. These levels exceed current projected expenditure
levels in DRC where abolishing fees i s more difficult compared with other countries because o f
the extent to which households finance core service delivery. There are numerous fees, and
significant amounts charged at school level are further transferred to other levels, including the
central treasury and provinces. During the CAF period it should be possible for the Government
to move towards providing free primary education by using public resources t o include a greater
proportion o f primary teachers on the payroll, although the removal o f all fees will require an
infusion o f significantly more resources into the sector than are currently projected.
28.
I n terms of removing financial barriers, to increase enrolment rates, the immediate
priority will be to support a Government led initiative to remove the frais de fonctionnement. It
i s expected that this objective will be achieved over the C A F period. Due to the commitment o f
the Government and international donors to universal primary education, it i s hoped that in the
next three years additional public resources may be forthcoming to accelerate the phasing out o f
other fees, including thefiais de motivation. This fee i s currently used to complement (or pay in
full in some cases) teacher salaries. It i s roughly half o f the total fees charged and represents
around $5 million in revenue on a monthly basis.
29.
To sustain higher utilization rates, it will be important that the supply of education
inputs meets the rising demandfor services. If the MDGs and Education For All (EFA) goals are
to be met, there must be a significant improvement in education sector inputs to improve the
coverage and quality o f services. This will require investments in: retaining, re-training and, if
necessary, recruiting more teachers; constructing and rehabilitating learning spaces; improving
the curriculum; and providing additional learning materials, particularly textbooks and teachers’

37

guides. This will also require investments in non-formal education (vocational training) to cope
with the complex problem o f millions o f out-of-school children. Due to considerable funding
constraints resources should be concentrated on rehabilitating existing facilities, with service
coverage expanding to under-served areas as more resources become available.

30.
I n order to maximize the impact of new investments in the education sector, it will be
essential to improve the strategic management of the sector. The absence o f an updated legal
framework hampers attempts to produce a strategic sectoral plan which can be used for efficient
planning and management o f the sector as a whole. As a top priority, the Government will need to
undertake an extensive program o f sector reform involving all major stakeholders. Specifically,
the Ministries o f Education should be supported to embark on a Sector Wide Approach (SWAP)
to improve strategic management o f the sector.
31.
With tax revenues currently so low, considerable subsidization of the system by
external sources will be necessary in the short-term. Although work i s ongoing to cost the
financing requirements o f the education sector, it i s already clear that, in the short-term, these will
exceed the level o f resources available from domestic sources. Substantial predictable aid
financing will therefore be essential to subsidize proposed reforms in the education sector. To
maximize aid effectiveness, financing will need to be harmonized, aligned to the Government’s
strategy, and used to fund activities in expanding access to primary education.

32.
To improve efficiency, the public education sector should develop efficient Government
budget and payment systems. With public funding so constrained, it will be imperative to
maximize the efficiency o f the finances allocated to the education system. This will require a
complete overhaul o f the public budget and payment system. In order to facilitate strategic
planning, annual education budgets will need to be derived from a rolling Medium-term
Expenditure Framework (MTEF). The MTEF will help formulate realistic programming based on
the needs for the sector and serve as a mechanism for justifying additional resources for the sector
in order to meet i t s strategic objectives.
33.
Wherever possible, it will be necessary to pool Government and donor resources to
improve efficiency. Multiple funding channels are inherently inefficient due to heightened risks
o f inappropriate allocations (for example, some activities being over-funded whilst higher
priorities are under-funded) and unnecessary duplication o f administration costs. During the
lifetime o f the CAF, the Ministry o f Primary, Secondary, and Professional Education (EPSP) and
external donors should review the possibility o f using pooled funding mechanisms to improve the
efficiency o f government and donor education financing. Initially, this may be restricted to some
limited basket funding arrangements for specified inputs and activities but, ultimately, the aim i s
for the state budget system to accommodate direct support from donors.

34.
Reforms in operational management systems are also required. Establishing a SWAP
will help improve allocative efficiency in the sector but it will also be important to develop
effective management systems to improve operational efficiency. This will require building
capacity at the national, provincial, and school facility levels in education planning and
management systems. Specifically, investments will be needed in: human resources management;
procurement; financial management; quality assurance and information systems.
35.
I n addition to heavy investment in primary education, an effective and efficient
education sector requires targeted developments in post-primary education services. With
regard to secondary education, efforts are needed to increase retention rates to ensure that
students stay in school through the secondary level. This will require improvements in curriculum

38

and the quality o f instruction, as well as the eventual reduction and elimination o f fees. Improving
the tertiary education sub-sector will be important if the country i s to produce the quality o f
graduates to propel and sustain development in the sector and beyond. Efforts to ensure that
education programs are consistent with needs o f the country for a trained workforce also need to
be made. This will require difficult reforms and restructuring o f the higher education system.
Priority Activities

36.
Donor assistance will focus on helping the Government implement four key strategies.
If implemented, these strategies offer an opportunity to significantly advance towards the
achievement o f the education MDG in the DRC. Note that exact quantities o f inputs will need to
be finalized once Government and CAF resources are known and priorities have been set in
accordance with the total resource envelope:

Improve strategic and operational management: (i)advise Parliament on adopting a new
overall education law; (ii)update the national policy on education; (iii)improve public
finance mechanisms including validation o f the teachers payroll, and introduce a simplified,
more equitable and more transparent pay system to ensure that teachers are better and more
regularly paid in line with public sector reforms and norms; (iv) establish an education SWAP
led by the Government and involving all stakeholders in the sector; (v) develop a realistic and
costed long-term strategic plan for the education sector which allocates increasing resources
to agreed priorities and takes into account decentralization processes; (vi) train relevant
Government staff to implement sector wide approaches and develop a cadre o f education
planners and managers; (vii) improve basic statistics needed for efficient policy decisions on
education (including a census o f teachers, removal o f ghost workers); (viii) undertake a
school mapping exercise to ensure equitable coverage and inform a rationalization exercise;
(ix) strengthen capacities o f education sector stakeholders in programme design, data
collection/analysis and system management at central, provincial and facility levels; (x)
strengthen the inspectorate wing o f the EPSP at the national and provincial levels and
establish quality assurance mechanisms; (xi) increase the capacity o f the Education
Management Information System (EMIS) and educational planningmanagement at all levels;
and (xii) improve accountability mechanisms and systems, including strengthened school
management committees and parent teachers associations.
Increase the levels of public financing for the education sector and improve the management
of the sector: (i)
align the contributions from stakeholders with the education strategy; (ii)
develop an education financing strategy to support service delivery; (iii)
formulate a MTEF
for the sector; (iv) undertake an annual mapping o f donor contributions to the education
sector and those from other sources; (v) increase the share o f the state budget allocated to
education to 10 percent immediately and to at least 20 percent by the end o f the C A F period;
and (vi) develop budget monitoring systems to ensure that public funds reach intended
beneficiaries.
Move progressively towards universal access to +ee primary education: (i)sequentially
remove school fees, starting with the +ais de fonctionnement; and (ii)conduct targeted
communication and social mobilization campaigns aimed at increasing the demand for
education for girls and other marginalized and vulnerable children.
Improve the coverage and quality of basic primary and secondary education services: (i)
retrain and if necessary recruit new teachers and 1,000 new inspectors and administrators for
deployment in under-served areas; (ii)establish at least one teacher training centre in each

39

province as part o f a strategy to scale-up teacher training; (iii)establish functional literacy
centers in each province to meet the needs o f youth and adults, particularly women; (iv)
establish ‘catch-up’ classes and non formal education and vocational training centers to
address out-of-school children and youths; (v) rehabilitate and equip 4,000 classrooms yearly,
including in under-served areas; (vi) provide textbooks on a one textbook per pupil for all
core subjects at the primary level; (vii) supply basic stationery to pupils; (viii) supply
guidedmanuals and pedagogic materials to teachers; (ix) expand the secondary school system
to absorb primary school completers; (x) increase the proportion o f vocational education
within the secondary school curriculum; and (xi) develop a strategy for the including children
with special needs in schools.
Rationalize and revamp tertiary and vocational education: (i)undertake a comprehensive
review o f tertiary and Technical and Vocational Education Training (TVET) sub-sectors to
determine where returns on investment will be highest; (ii)develop a strategy for technical
education and vocational training; (iii)rationalize tertiary institutions in terms o f numbers,
location and quality o f their programs; (iv) refurbish research facilities at selected tertiary
institutions; (v) provide fee support to boost access to science and technology education for
women; (vi) establish TVET centers in each province; (vii) establish mechanisms for
industry-university partnerships to maintain relevance; and (viii) establish linkages between
‘

industry and vocational training centers.

B. Health Sector
Bacbround

37.
Health indicators in DRC are among the worst in the world and the country will not
reach the health-related MDGs. Maternal and infant mortality rates are very high: 129 children
out o f 1000 s t i l l die before the age o f one and 205 children out o f 1,000 die before the age o f five.
In 2001, the maternal mortality rate was 1,289 women/l00,000 live births, or over 36,000 women
dying each year. In addition to the many children orphaned by maternal deaths, an increasing
number become parentless each year due to HIV/AIDS. At least 16 percent o f young children are
severely malnourished.
The epidemiologicalproflle is dominated by infectious diseases. In particular, there i s a
38.
high burden o f disease affecting children, including malaria, acute respiratory infection, and
diarrhea and, among populations with low levels o f immunization, measles. Perhaps the most
effective way to reduce child mortality i s to tackle malaria, which accounts for a third to a half of
all child deaths, representing 150 to 200 thousand child deaths annually. Other infectious diseases
contributing to poor health indicators include: HIV/AIDS, tuberculos and onchocerciasis. The
country also suffers from a resurgence o f several epidemics o f formerly controlled diseases
including measles, whooping-cough, plague, poliomyelitis, bacillary dysentery, sleeping sickness
African Human Trypanosomiasis (THA), and cholera. Emerging diseases such as the
hemorrhagic fevers Ebola and Marburg as well as monkey-pox are also present and Avian
influenza could spread very rapidly if it appears.

39.
For such a high burden of disease, the population of DRC is not consuming enough
effective health care. Although many problems are known to impact on health outcomes,
including poverty, conflict, and agricultural productivity, in the case o f the DRC, a key factor

40

affecting the health status o f the population i s inadequate health services. As i s the case in the
education sector, l o w utilization rates (the current outpatient attendance rate i s 0.15 visits per
person per year) clearly demonstrate people are not satisfied with the services on offer. However,
where external support i s improving services, people are returning in larger numbers. In the rest
o f the country, instead o f visiting a health facility, sick people are choosing to self-treat in private
pharmacies or with drugs o f dubious quality purchased on the market, or to use practitioners o f
traditional medicine. All too often the choice i s not to use any type o f service at all.
Growth Potential and Key Constraints

40.
People are not accessing health services because they represent poor valuefor money.
As i s the case everywhere, people who require health care in the D R C investigate services, basing
their choice o f provider on perceptions o f quality and price. Whether the issue i s quality or price,
health services in Congo are failing the population. Regarding quality, health services in the DRC
are often inaccessible, but even when within reach, essential inputs in most clinics, for example
drugs, are often unavailable. In terms o f price, health services are prohibitively expensive for the
overwhelming majority o f people. In such a context, Family Planning i s a completely neglected
issue illustrated by the record low modem contraceptive prevalence estimated at 4%. This i s
confirmed in PPA, which cites user charges as the major reason that people do not access health
services. In many instances due to a lack o f management supervision, public services have in
effect become commercialized, with health workers offering inappropriate expensive treatments
(notably injections and blood transfusions) in order to maximize their incomes.
41.
Current failings in the public health system are due to a variety of factors. In the
diagnostic prepared for the Health Systems Strengthening Strategy (HSSS) the Ministry o f Health
identifies the major constraints facing the sector as:
A weakjinancial commitment by the state, putting the burden o f financing o f the sector on
patients (in the form o f user charges), and on external partners. Even with improved budget
allocations, due to the weakness o f the economy, the overall state budget will be inadequate
so significant external assistance will be required for the foreseeable future.
Weak organization, policy-making and management of services at central and provincial
levels leading to a proliferation o f new technical units often with low capacity.
Very weak management of public health services at the local operational level, recently
exacerbated by: the multiplication o f Health Zones and a decrease in the motivation and the
quality o f care by health workers in the public sector due to deteriorating working conditions,
long delays in salary payment, and unbalanced distribution o f qualified personnel.

A recent proliferation of health professionals following the uncontrolled expansion o f
private medical schools and training institutions for nursing and allied health professions
resulting in overcrowding o f health staff in health facilities, particularly in urban areas,
fighting for the few patients who can afford the cost o f care and offering services biased by
the search for profit.
Weak governance of public resources characterized by high levels o f corruption and low
accountability o f the public administration to the population.

41

42.
The primary constraint inhibiting health sector development is chronic under-funding.
Whereas accurate health financing data i s currently unavailable (particularly regarding private
expenditures) it i s evident that the overall resource envelope for the sector i s grossly insufficient
to meet the needs o f the population. This has largely been due to a collapse in public financing,
(including external support) during the 1990s when budget allocations to health f e l l to less than 1
percent o f the state budget. By 2004, this had increased to 7 percent but this s t i l l only represents
funding in the order o f US$1 per capita. With a budget execution rate o f only 3 1 percent in 2004,
public financing amounted in that year to US$0.3 1 per capita.
Poor coordination is another key constraint and is a direct result of weak stewardship
of the health sector. This has been reflected by a lack o f coherent policy-making, a weak
administrative framework and outdated health legislation. The Basic Health Law o f 1952 i s no
longer relevant and the absence o f updated legislation has promoted a laissez faire attitude

43.

towards the planning and management o f health services. Institutional inflation, often due to
external donors, has led to a proliferation o f poorly coordinated new units with l o w technical
capacity. In addition, communication has been weak between the Government and i t s partners
(including church-based health providers) and between external partners supporting the health
sector. On the positive side, the Health Zone system developed in the 1980s i s s t i l l best-practice
for primary health care service delivery and there has been substantial policy work since 2001 on
developing basic packages o f services and public-private partnerships. Important policy work has
also been done on Health Zone services standards and on a sector strategy. Coordination o f
donors i s improving within the national strategic goal o f developing the Health Zone system,
although more work and strengthening o f the Ministry o f Health i s needed.
44.
The development of effective human resources has been constrained by an over-supply
of poorly trained health workers. The number o f health professionals in several categories has
increased markedly in recent years, particularly professions seen as lucrative, including nursing
and laboratory technicians. Training, often o f poor quality, has been provided by new institutions
which have sprung up without any planning or control. Failures in the labor market have led to an
oversupply o f poorly trained and inequitably distributed health workers in some fields and a
chronic undersupply o f workers in others, including sanitary engineers, medical equipment
technicians and health workers in food safety and hygiene.
45.
Over the last decade, civil servants have not retired. A considerable number o f Ministry
o f Health workers, estimated to account for up to 25 percent o f the entire sector workforce, are
s t i l l registered as active salaried workers although many receive very l o w salaries or none at all
and therefore work only minimally. Through coordination with the c i v i l service administration
and in line with the reform o f public administration in DRC, these workers will need to be retired
with appropriate retirement benefits as soon as possible.
46. Inefficient drug supply systems represent a considerable constraint on health sector
development. The national supply system o f essential drugs i s unable to ensure that drugs are
available within deadlines and in sufficient quantity and quality and to ensure that costs are
covered. The regional drug distribution system (Fkde'ration des Centrales de Distribution des
Mkdicaments Essentiels, FEDECAME) i s poorly resourced and has l o w management capacity.
Centrales de Distribution Rkgionales (CDR) at the provincial level suffer from the same
problems plus limited storage facility. In addition, lifting o f import tax and other import charges
for drugs and consumables i s not systematic and remains an ongoing struggle. In this context,
supply o f critical drugs such as A C T which have a short shelf life, and ART, TB drugs and
contraceptives which cannot suffer any shortage, i s highly constrained. However, the regional
drug distribution system has made considerable progress since being introduced in 2001 and

42

provides a good foundation for further expansion. Private sector drug distribution systems are
almost totally unregulated.

47. I n the short-term, growth in the health sector will concentrate on the development of
Health Zones as the most efficient unit of health service delivery. A new approach to defining
Health Zones i s being introduced which will use the existence o f a general referral hospital as the
main criterion. This definition i s expected to lead to a reduction in the number o f Zones from the
currently untenable level o f 515. The Bank together with other donors should condition i t s
continuous support to the health sector to the rationalization o f the number o f zones. Support to
Health Zones i s seen as essential for improving health indicators and i s expected to come in the
form o f a comprehensive set o f packages including improved training o n the diagnosis and
treatment o f common diseases, incentives linked to performance and better logistics support to
ensure efficient procurement o f necessary drugs and supplies. Consolidation o f the existing
system will require phasing in adequate financing for all Health Zones, including those not
currently supported by a partner.
48. The strengthening of the peripheral level of the health system will include provision of
minimum packages. Minimum Activity Packages (MAP) for primary care health units have been
developed as well as Complementary Activity Packages (CAP) for referral hospitals in
accordance with the norms and standards in the relevant guidelines and principles developed by
the HSSS. These minimum packages need to be costed on the basis o f actual experiences in
delivering them in the country. The Ministry o f Health i s aware that the expansion o f packages
will need to be sequenced across the country to maximize efficiency and equity. Measures for
ensuring acceptable standards o f service delivery will also need to be implemented: (i)quality
assurance probing o f services at zone level; (ii)inclusion o f the M A P in the medical and
having non-state partners adopting the MAP.
paramedical schools’ curriculum; and (iii)

49. All Health Zones should be able to provide a basic package of free services. Recognizing
that it w i l l take time to r o l l out M A P and CAP services to all health units across the country, it
will be important in the interim that Health Zones provide at least a basic package o f services.
The exact composition o f this package will need to be agreed with the Government and will be
dependent on the resources available. At a minimum, it i s hoped that the package will include:
distribution o f long lasting impregnated insecticide mosquito nets for children under five and
pregnant women; vitamin A supplements; regular de-worming for children; communication o f
key messages; immunization o f children and women; distribution o f iron/folate during pregnancy;
supervision o f simple malaria treatment in the home and in health units; and community treatment
o f acute respiratory infections. Due to the relatively low cost o f these child-focused interventions
and their high public health benefits, it i s hoped that the Government will be able to provide this
basic package o f services free o f charge within the timeframe o f the CAF. If donors whish to
ensure a basic package o f free health services they will have to work closely with the Government
to ensure that: (i)staff salaries are adequate and paid on time and (ii)sufficient resources are
spent to meet the objective o f providing the basic package in all Health Zones.

50.

Community and household-level interventions can help to reach the maximum number

of people. T o ensure that substantial progress i s made in the next years, much more w i l l be
needed to provide the basic package o f free services at the household and community level, rather

than relying solely on facility-based programs. Increased utilization o f community health workers
for key interventions, including household-based malaria care, will be a step in this direction.

43

5 1.
To improve efficiency, considerable restructuring will be required throughout the
health system. Planning i s under way for a restructuring o f the central level o f the Ministry o f
Health within the framework o f the general reform process o f the Public Administration. In
addition, a Steering Committee composed o f the Ministry o f Health and key donors i s expected to
support the H S S S reforms specified in the strategy document. At the intermediate level,
provincial teams are expected to support the development o f Health Zones, with provincial
steering committees being established to guide implementation o f HSSS. These committees w i l l
be important bodies for the sector to respond to the decentralization processes advocated by the
new constitution o f the DRC. Although it i s s t i l l too early for the implications o f decentralization
to be fully known, financing in the health sector will almost certainly be affected, with a
significant proportion o f revenues for services coming directly from the provinces. This trend will
need to be monitored and donor financing strategies adjusted as necessary.
52.
I n parallel, attention will need to be given to the reorganization of an institutional
support to the intermediate and central levels of the system This will enable the development
and implementation o f policies and activities to assure efficient management, stable financing and
a balanced supply o f health workers. The Ministry o f Health has described these strategic axes in
the HSSS, finalized in 2006, which i s supported by all development partners in the Groupe Inter
Bailleurs Sante' (GIBS).

53.
I n order to maximize the impact of new investments in the health sector, it will be
essential to improve the strategic management of the sector. At a strategic level the Government
will need to undertake a substantial program o f sector reform involving all major stakeholders.
Specifically, the Ministry o f Health should be supported to embark on a Sector Wide Approach to
improve strategic management o f health systems. One o f the key objectives o f the national SWAP
will be to revise the overall health sector strategy taking into account the lessons learnt from the
various health programs currently being implemented in the country. It will be important to
evaluate which programs are the most effective, efficient and equitable in increasing access to
good quality health services. In supporting a Government-led SWAP, donors too will need to
revise their own health programs taking into account the results o f these evaluations.

54.
The health sector should produce costed multi-year operational plans. This would in
effect be the rolling action plan for the HSSS, and would explicitly state the priorities for health
sector development in the medium-term. Taking into account the overall resources available for
the sector, the costed activities in these plans would determine financial allocations in the sector's
MTEF.

55
To facilitate planning, a good estimate of the cost of delivering the basic package of
health services needs to be developed on the basis of empirical evidence in DRC. Early
indications from development projects indicate that a basic package o f services can be provided at
a funding level o f between US$6.50 and US$8 per capita. In recent years, due to the almost total
absence o f state financing, the population has been forced to use private funding mechanisms,
particularly user fees, to access health services. For many households, however, these fees have
been prohibitively high. Utilization levels have plummeted and millions o f Congolese have
ceased to use formal health services.
Coordination mechanisms need to be established to manage epidemic and emergencies.
56.
Coordination mechanisms will need to be established to ensure a more effective alert system,
including better surveillance and monitoring o f disease vectors. Mechanisms for coordinating
responses to outbreaks will be required including traditional (and infant killer) diseases such as

44

malaria, measles, diarrhea and meningitis. Specific plans will also need to be developed for
epidemics o f emerging diseases, including hemorrhagic fevers and Avian influenza.
57.
There needs to be better integration of vertical disease programs. To maximize
efficiency, the activities o f vertical disease programs will need to be fully integrated within the
service packages delivered at the facility level. This will require integrating financing,
management, and monitoring and evaluation systems with those o f the broader health system.
Developing appropriate guidelines and protocols will also be an important aspect o f this process
and i s expected to lead to better coordination o f care at the health facility and individual patient
levels.
58.
Growth in the health sector will be dependent on increasing public financing. In the
short-term, at least 7 percent o f the national budget should be allocated to the health sector. This
i s expected to increase to at least 15 percent by 2015. In increasing public financing, it will be
essential that these funds are allocated efficiently. A significant part o f additional Government
expenditure should go to essential public health functions including the procurement o f drugs and
the improvement in remuneration and working conditions o f public health workers.
59.
With tax revenues currently so low, considerable subsidization of the system by
external sources will be necessary in the short-term. Although work i s ongoing to cost the
financing requirements o f the health sector, it i s already clear that, in the short-term, these will
exceed the level o f resources available from domestic sources. Substantial predictable aid
financing will be essential to subsidize the proposed reforms in the health sector. T o maximize
aid effectiveness, financing will need to be harmonized, aligned to the Government strategy, and
used to fund activities in expanding access to primary health care. There i s also scope for large
scale employers to contribute to the health care costs o f their workers which was traditionally the
case until a few years ago. The extent to which large enterprises (notably in the mining sector)
should finance health and other social services i s currently being discussed within Government.
60.
The public health sector should develop efficient budget systems. With public funding
so constrained, it will be imperative to maximize the efficiency o f finances allocated to the health
sector. As in the case o f the education sector, this will require a complete overhaul o f the health
budget system. In order to facilitate strategic planning, annual health budgets should be derived
from a rolling MTEF. The MTEF will help formulate realistic programming based on the needs
for the sector and serve as a mechanism for justifying additional resources for the sector in order
to meet i t s strategic objectives.
6 1.
Investigate pooling resources to improve efficiency. To improve the efficiency o f public
health funding, the Ministry o f Health and external donors should review the possibility o f
developing pooled funding mechanisms. Initially, this may be restricted to some limited basket
funding arrangements for specified inputs and activities but ultimately, the aim i s for the state
budget system to accommodate direct support from donors. Whatever funding modalities are
used, donor funds will need to be harmonized and predictable. As a number o f donors are starting
large scale health projects, several o f which are supported through province-level funds, and new
funding sources are coming on stream (e.g., Global Alliance for Vaccination and Immunizations,
GAVI and the Global Fund) there i s a good opportunity to harmonize these inputs.
62.
The management of the growth of human resources will be very important. In
developing human resources inputs, priority will need to be given to managing the growth o f the
health workforce at the intermediate and peripheral levels, particularly in Health Zones, where
continuous training i s envisioned for Zone Framework Teams.

45

63.
Improving the remuneration of health workers will be an essential element in
revitalizing services and particularly reducing user fees. In many areas receiving external
assistance, this i s currently being done through incentives (primes) t o health workers, paid by
NGOs from donor funds. Without addressing constraints in the health labor market, including
contractual arrangements and remuneration, generalized improvement in service utilization will
not occur. Any strategy t o raise salaries and working conditions for health workers will need to be
accompanied by measures t o increase supervision and monitoring, t o improve the quality o f
services and ensure compliance with guidelines, notably regarding patient charges.

64.
Public health workers terms and working conditions need to be improved
systematically. In order to eliminate the need for supplementary payments, new salary scales for
each category are required. These scales will need to be in line with the average wages (Salaire
Minimum Garanti, SMIG) l a w and take into account professional training and experience. T o
encourage recruitment and retention in underserved areas, a system o f monetary incentives and
other benefits for workers should be developed. Any health labor market reforms, including
changes to incentive packages, will also need to take into account the likely impact on private
sector providers.
65.
Overall sector development will require an appropriate mix of public and private
providers with effective contractual arrangements. In recent years, many health services have
been delivered o n behalf o f the State by not-for-profit health providers including the Catholic and
Protestant churches, other faith-based groups, NGOs and public enterprises. The PRSP implicitly
recognizes the need to maintain this system as part o f a mixed economy o f public and private
providers. Developing an appropriate public-private mix o f services will require a two-pronged
strategy: The provision o f public services will need t o be improved, at the same time that
mechanisms are introduced t o ensure adequate oversight o f the services provided by non-state
partners. This will require developing efficient contracting arrangements, which provide
incentives to improve performance without creating excessive administrative costs. Formulating
policies on public-private partnerships will be an essential element o f overall reforms and will
require evidence-based decision making and close collaboration between all partners.

66.
Improve inter-sectoral collaboration. The interaction between health and poverty i s well
established. Improvement in health and health systems are therefore linked t o actions carried out
in other sectors. Consequently, it i s essential t o underline the linkages and benefits o f activities in
the other pillars included in the PRSP.
Prioritv Activities

67.
Donor assistance will focus on helping the Government implement six key strategies.
On the basis o f the constraints and growth potential identified above, the CAF health strategy will
concentrate o n supporting the Government in the following six priority activities. M a n y o f the
interventions listed below are taken from the Government’s o w n HSSS. If implemented, these
strategies offer an opportunity t o significantly advance towards the achievement o f the health
related MDGs in DRC:
e

Revise the legislative framework for the health sector: (i)advise Parliament on the adoption
o f a new health law; (ii)improve governance within the Ministry o f Health through

development and compliance with new directives; (iii)
update and distribute to all levels, the
national policy and plans for health system development, and guidelines for health system
strengthening; (iv) establish systematic communications, discussion and collaboration

46

between Ministry o f Health directors at central level and communicate policy to the
provincial level; (v) regroup and strengthen technical programs within the various
departments in the Ministry o f Health, and suspend the establishment o f new units in the
interim; (vi) develop and apply guidelines regarding management functions, communications
and reporting between central, provincial and Health Zone authorities; (vii) draft legislation
on the establishment, accreditation and licensing o f private for-profit health providers; (viii)
develop regulations and guidelines and criteria for the establishment and registration o f health
NGOs; (ix) develop contracts for partnerships with health NGOs and provincial health
authorities; (x) develop guidelines on selection and procurement o f medical equipment; (xi)
manage health sector reforms efficiently in accordance with decentralization processes; and
(xii) establish monitoring and evaluation systems, including for private sector providers.
Improve access to care as well as equity: (i)provide a basic package o f curative and
preventive health services including family planning services in all Health Zones; (ii)
revise
the organizational structure o f the health sector at all three levels; (iii)
reduce user fees and
drug prices and conduct studies to investigate the impact o f fee removal on utilization levels,
particularly among the poor; (iv) prioritize Health Zones with high potential for new
investment; (v) implement high impact interventions in Health Zones with weak capacity;
(vi) r o l l out the Minimum Activity Package o f services in primary care units and the
Complementary Activity Package in hospitals; (vii) update continually and disseminate
protocols on the management o f common diseases and methods o f referrals and coordination
with vertical disease programs; (viii) develop a strategy and policy framework for publicprivate partnerships, including contracting mechanisms, social marketing and delivery o f
high-impact services to households; and (ix) construct new health facilities in accordance
with the plans laid out in the HSSS and enforce a moratorium on all capital developments
outside o f this strategy.
Achieve a balanced supply of human resourcesfor health: (i)
establish a joint committee with
the Ministry o f Education and Institute for Professional Preparation aimed at reforming
training o f health professionals; (ii)determine criteria for the accreditation and licensing o f
training institutes as well 'as for the closure o f institutes which do not meet the standards for
A 1 training levels; (iii)enforce a moratorium on the establishment o f new secondary level
training institutions; (iv) elaborate and implement training plans for all levels o f the health
system; (v) establish examinations for graduates o f unaccredited training institutes; (vi) agree
optimal levels o f supply o f nurses at A 2 level and establish the appropriate number o f
accredited training institutions per province; (vii) harmonize salary supplements for staff in
the Ministry o f Health in'accordance with the SMIG; (viii) develop incentive payment
mechanisms for posts in selected areas and occupations; (ix) offer retirement packages with
appropriate conditions; and (x) conduct a health labor market study on current incentive
schemes and perceptions o f public and private sector health workers.
Ensure a continuous and regular supply of drugs and other resources: (i)
provide appropriate
office and financial resources for Fbdkration des Centrales de Distribution des Mbdicaments
Essentiels (FEDECAME); (ii)
remove permanently import taxes and administrative fees on
certain essential pharmaceuticals; (iii)rationalize the ordering o f drugs through between
FEDECAME-CDR and health zones; (iv) strengthen the capacity in CDRs and relocate
certain CDRs; (v) reinforce mechanisms for controlling the quality o f pharmaceuticals; (vi)
reinforce and rationalize mechanisms for inspecting pharmacies; (vii) regulate the acquisition
o f drugs by public health units in the private sector; and (viii) conduct a feasibility study for
the production o f drugs in DRC as well as drug pricing and subsidies.

47

Establish stable and sustainable financing mechanisms for the health sector and sequentially
remove financial barriers to health care: (i)align financial contributions from stakeholders
with the health strategy; (ii)establish a health SWAP led by the Government and involving
all stakeholders in the sector; (iii)develop a health financing strategy to support sewice
delivery; (iv) sequentially reduce and possibly eliminate financial barriers for selected health
services and/or population groups; (v) formulate a medium-term expenditure framework for
the sector; (vi) increase the share o f the state budget allocated to health to 7 percent
immediately and 15 percent by the end o f the CAF period; and (vii) undertake annual
mappings o f donor contributions to the health sector.
0

Establish multi-sectoral coordination mechanisms: establish linkages and collaborative
networks with institutions in: (i)education; (ii)agriculture; (iii)water and sanitation; (iv)
roads, communications and transport; (v) community participation; (vi) gender; (vii)
environment; and (viii) nutrition.

C. Water and Sanitation
Background

68.
The current water and sanitation coverage rates are some of the lowest in the world
and have actually decreased in the last 20 years. The latest statistics found in the PRSP indicate
that just 22 percent and 9 percent o f the population currently has access to clean water and
adequate sanitation, respectively. These l o w coverage rates have resulted in a public health
situation where diarrhea causes 12 percent o f Congolese deaths, morbidity rates o f diarrhea for
children under five (in a two week period) have reached 20 percent, and water and sanitation
related disease epidemics including cholera and plague continue to affect population centers.
Progress in reaching the MDGsfor water and sanitation is slow. With respect to MDG
69.
7, safe drinking water i s defined as any “improved” water source and includes protected springs,
rainwater collection systems, and protected dug wells, with or without pumps. Improved
sanitation facilities include both simple pit latrines and VIP latrines. For the DRC, Goal 7
translates to reaching 72 percent water coverage and 58 percent sanitation coverage by 2015. This
means that the DRC will need to have an additional 45 million people drinking safe water and an
additional 24 million having access to safe sanitation systems. More than 5,000 people will need
to gain access to safe water every day and 6,500 people will need to gain access to basic
sanitation.

70.
Financial barriers are inhibiting access to services. As with the other social sectors,
financial barriers are part o f the factors inhibiting the adequate uptake o f water and sanitation
services. Reducing these barriers by devising appropriate pro-poor (life-line) tariff regimes and
subsidizing inputs, for example, latrine slabs, will be an important aspect o f any strategy to
achieve an increase in coverage o f water and sanitation services.
Over 60 percent of the rural population use springs as their primary source of water.
Due to this relatively high coverage o f springs, other water sources such as wells, boreholes and
pumps are not as common in the DRC as in other developing countries. Only 10 percent o f the
population uses these types o f water sources and there are less than 2000 manual hand pumps in
all o f the DRC. Throughout the country, the burden o f collecting household water i s experienced
disproportionately by women and girls. This adversely affects the ability o f girls to remain in
school, particularly in rural areas.

71.

48

12.
Urban water coverage rates have declinedfrom 68 percent to 37percent in the last 15
years. The urban water system suffers from a lack o f maintenance, destruction o f infrastructure,
and poor management. Approximately 40 percent o f connections are inactive and the estimated
technical losses amount to 50 percent, markedly higher than in other parts o f the region.
Approximately eight million urban dwellers, or 3 1 percent o f the urban population, have access to
safe drinking water. Only 49 percent o f billed amounts are actually collected, the worst rate in the
sub-region. Government agencies, which account for approximately 44 percent o f REGIDESO’s
turnover, do not pay their bills. Accumulated internal arrears are a major constraint on sector
development and are being addressed through Government measures aimed at reducing internal
leakage/wastage and eliminating illegal connections.
73.
I n spite of REGIDES03 monopoly of urban water distribution, only 94 urban centers
have been covered out of an estimated 300. O f these 94 centers, only 64 are actually functioning11 lack necessary equipment and 19 were damaged during the war. At present, Kinshasa and
Lubumbashi alone account for 76 percent o f REGIDESO’s activity. As well as i t s low coverage
rates in urban centers, REGIDESO has been unable to extend i t s services to the vast peri-urban
areas that have grown around major cities. Where services are functioning, overall network
efficiency (the proportion o f urban water supplied which i s sold) i s only 58 percent.
74.
The urban growth rate in DRCfor the period 2005-2010 is predicted to be 4.85percent.
Demand for urban water sources i s expected to rise significantly in the next 3 - 4 years in parallel
with urban growth rates. Over 30 percent o f the total population i s currently living in urban areas
and by 2010 the urban population i s predicted to be approximately 30 million.

15.
There are no functioning sewage systems in the DRC and most excreta are disposed of
in family latrines of various levels of acceptability. Lubumbashi and Bukavu are the only cities
to ever have had a working sewage system, although both have long since ceased to operate.
Kinshasa i s the largest city in the world without a functioning sewage system.

16.
There are also no functioning garbage collection systems in the DRC. In some parts o f
the country, effective informal collection services collect refuse from homes and businesses.
However, as there are no public fill-sites in the DRC and no means to transport refuse in bulk out
o f cities, most refuse i s currently dumped into ravines, roads, and rivers.
Growth Potential and Key Constraints

11.
The water and sanitation sector is constrained by a fragmented administrative
structure. There are currently six different Government bodies involved in the sector through six
separate ministries. The major agencies include: REGIDESO for urban water (Ministry o f
Energy); Socie‘te‘ National d’Hydaulique Rurale (SNHR) for rural water (Ministry o f Rural
Development); Programme National Assainisment (PNA) for sanitation (Ministry o f the
Environment) and the gth Direction o f the Ministry o f Health working in both water and
sanitation. The current structure for the water and sanitation sector i s too complicated to be
managed efficiently. Even with the creation o f a coordination body in 1990s, the Comite‘ National
d’Action de 1’Eau et de 1Yssainissement (CNAEA) (Ministry o f Planning), there has been no
significant improvement. Overlapping responsibilities, unclear terms o f reference and
unproductive infighting continue. There are currently three proposed water codes for the country
- each proposed by a different ministry and none accepted by the Government.

49

78.
Due to the large size of the country, the 1 7 bases of SNHR and the Kinshasa-based
PNA are unable to respond efficiently to the needs of rural Congolese. In Katanga, for example,
there are three S N H R bases covering a geographic area roughly the size o f France. O f the three
bases, only one i s currently functioning, but it has inadequate staffing, no vehicles, office supplies
or even the most basic engineering tools.
79.
The sector is heavily constrained by a lack of technical capacity at the rural level. In
the Ministry o f Health organizational plan, each Health Zone should have a Water and Sanitation
Supervisor (Supewisuer de L 'Eau et d 'Assanissement,SEA). However, these supervisors do not
exist in all Zones, and those that do exist have not been adequately trained. None o f the SEAS
have ever received government funding for water and sanitation projects.

80.
Urban sanitation is the least organized sub-sector with the lowest access rate to
services. The access rate to adequate urban sanitation i s estimated in the PRSP to be only 10
percent o f the population. The principal government service responsible for urban sanitation i s the
P N A with a mandate that covers both urban and rural sectors. The PNA, however, i s currently
only operational in Kinshasa and does not have adequate materials or technical capacity to
effectively respond to sanitation needs.
8 1.
The best potential for increasing coverage of rural water services is to scale-up existing
Government-designed, water and sanitation programs. Some o f these programs, for example the
Village Assaini, have existed since the early 1990s but have not been scaled up nationally due to
chronic under-funding in the water and sanitation sectors. In rolling out rural water programs it
will be important that activities are coordinated by relevant bodies within Government and are
based on appropriate structures - for example existing Health Zones.

82.
I n order to maximize efficiency, rural water programs should attempt to integrate
water, sanitation and health promotion activities. Specifically, programs should set specific
output targets for each community served which could include: having a protected water point, 90
percent coverage o f family latrines, an active health committee and numerous other hygiene
related activities. Program activities are likely to include: spring protection, latrine slab
fabrication with social marketing, community organization, and hygiene education.
83.
Most rural communities will not require highly specialized technical support. As the
majority o f rural populations use springs as their water source and spring protections are normally
not technically challenging, most communities will not require significant technical support.
However, where a targeted village does not have the potential for a spring or hand dug well, it
will be necessary to send the case as a referral to the S N H R who will respond to specific needs
with borehole drilling, gravity-based water systems, and possibly complicated multi-head spring
catchments.
84.
Community participation will be an important element of successful rural water
programs. Communities should be actively engaged in choosing their packages o f water and
sanitation projects and in managing the implementation o f projects with relevant Government
officials. In order to improve efficiency and increase local ownership, communities should also
be encouraged to provide non-skilled manual labor and locally available inputs (sand, stones and
gravel).
85,
Several international donors have concentrated their programming on developing
growth of urban water services. The World Bank, the European Union, French Development
Agency, German Technical Cooperation Agency and Belgium Development Cooperation have

50

targeted rehabilitation and extension o f existing REGIDESO-managed water networks. In
addition, there has also been support for community-run water systems in the province o f South
K i v u and in peri-urban zones o f Kinshasa, Kindu, and Mbuji Mayi.

86.
Within the urban sub-sector, efforts will need to concentrate on areas which have a
relatively high population density, with a specific focus on peri-urban areas with very low
coverage rates. To maximize the impact o f limited financial resources, sector development will
need to concentrate on expanding cost-effective services (for example, public stand posts and
shared yard taps). I t will also be necessary to support the design and implementation o f key
sectoral reforms through a combination o f hands-on technical assistance and financial support, in
particular, to strengthen the capacity, performance, accountability, and financial viability o f
REGIDESO. Furthermore, there will be a need to provide financial support for large-scale
investments in selected cities, both to rehabilitate damaged systems and expand coverage to meet
the rising demand for urban water services, especially by the poor.
87.
A study is being conducted to improve the functionality of REGIDESO. This study i s
being implemented by the Comite' de Pilotage de la Re'forme des Entreprises Publiques
(COPIREP), the national institution in charge o f public utility reform, to determine the reform
path to develop service provision.
88.
Due to the low service levels of REGIDESO in the past 20 years, there have already
been significant independent initiatives to provide water to urban centers. These systems are
autonomously managed by community groups on a non-profit basis. A recent study analyzing
these systems in six provinces concludes that many continue to run efficiently without external
inputs. Building on this experience, donor activities will focus on increasing water supply and
sanitation services through community groups in densely populated areas where public health
problems are most acute and where the largest number o f people can be connected to services for
a given level o f investment.

51

89.
Externalfinance for growth in the urban sanitation sector has so far been limited to
Kinshasa. The World Bank i s currently implementing a pilot program that involves the local
Government in the management o f solid waste removal. In addition to this project, a recent study
has analyzed the sanitation situation in Kinshasa. Principle recommendations include
transforming the mandate o f P N A to become an organization body and the creation o f a national
urban sanitation fund. The study also details plans for latrine standardization and elaborates plans
for solid waste collection and sewage collection and treatment.
90.
Significant institutional reform will be required In developing a coherent and efficient
water and sanitation sector, recent studies have confirmed the need for significant institutional
reform o f REGIDESO, S N H R and PNA. The old, but s t i l l valid, Plan Directeur, written in 1990,
recommends substantial reforms, including the participation o f the private sector and the
restructuring o f key agencies. These reforms have already started in REGIDESO (with
COPIREP).
An SNHR study suggests that the agency should no longer have an implementation
9 1.
role in the sector. A recent study proposes reforms that would make SNHR a coordination and
supervision body for private sector and NGOs, which would be the main providers o f water
services. Although there are few private sector water companies at present, it i s hoped that within
ten years, the private sector will have developed sufficiently to become a major provider,
particularly in urban areas.

92.
There has already been a significant change to the rules governing urban water,
including freeing urban water supply for private and community management. These changes
have allowed peri-urban projects in three cities to be developed that are completely communitymanaged, efficiently run and self-financing. It i s anticipated that efficiency in the urban water
sector will be greatly enhanced by similar public-private initiatives. T o ensure equitable access to
water services, particularly for the poor, it will be necessary to reduce financial barriers by
implementinglife-line tariff systems.
Prioritv Activities

93.
Donor assistance will focus on helping the Government implementfour key strategies.
If implemented, these strategies offer an opportunity to significantly advance towards the
achievement o f the water and sanitation MDG and the health related MDGs in DRC. Specifically,
the following activities would enable DRC to increase the proportion o f the population with
access to clean water and to adequate sanitation:
Improve strategic and operational management in water and sanitation: (i)develop a
roadmap o f reform for the sector, including agency reorganization; (ii)establish a regulatory
body to control water tariffs, quality and service standards for community managed and state
managed water systems; (iii)develop a Water and Sanitation Code for the DRC using the
proposed codes as a base; (iv) develop national standards for water quality, paying special
attention to heavy metal contamination and mappingldatabase creation; (v) strengthen the
capacity o f Government ministries in charge o f water regulation, management contracts and
tariff policy; (vi) strengthen the capacity o f REGIDESO in technical, commercial and
financial operations; and (vii) evaluate pilot private sector schemes t o deliver potable water
services and make appropriate policy recommendations.
Expand access to water and sanitation in rural areas: (i)launch the national rural water and
sanitation program; (ii)support the national coordination o f a rural water and sanitation

52

program through the appropriate directorates o f the Ministry o f Health and provincial
bureaus; (iii)establish a specific national budget for a national rural water and sanitation
program; (iv) formalize technical referral links between the rural water and sanitation
program and the SNHR; (v) implement a national training program o f Health Zone-based
water and sanitation supervisors in all targeted health zones; and (vi) provide training and
support to S N H R and the private sector in technical support o f the rural water and sanitation
program.
Expand the coverage of urban water service: (i)develop a national standard for the
organizational structure o f community-run water systems and a standard tariff system that
targets access for all (life-line tariffs); (ii)implement community-managed water system
pilots in South Kivu and the peri-urban areas o f Kinshasa, Mbuji M a y i and Kindu; (iii)
implement community-run water systems in 20 urban centers; (iv) continue the existing
program o f rehabilitation o f REGIDESO-managed water systems in Kinshasa and
Lubumbashi; (v) launch a rehabilitation program for REGIDESO-managed water systems in
11 cities; and (vi) provide REGIDESO with management and technical training. In that
context, a drastic change in both commercial and financial approach i s necessary to turn
around the utility and enable expansion o f services to greater parts o f Congolese population.
At the present time, only 11.5 million persons have access to a supply o f drinking water (i.e.
22 percent o f the country’s total population, versus an average o f some 60 percent in SubSaharan Africa as a whole). REGIDESO faces substantial financial challenges, reflected, on
the one hand, in chronic operating deficits (in 2006, the net operating loss was 14.6 billion
Congolese francs, i.e. approx US $30 million, with total revenues o f 46.2 billion Congolese
francs, i.e. U S $94 million). They are also reflected in substantial debt whereas debt
servicing i s out o f reach due to REGIDESO’s insufficient revenues. The financial position o f
REGIDESO needs to be improved before i t s activities can be developed. This will involve:
(i)restructuring i t s bottom line through debt reduction (including debt with the State and
other public agencies); (ii)improving commercial management and collection (especially
with the State which represents 40% o f Regideso’s turnover); and (iii)
an investment policy
guided by operational viability objectives. The short-term objective would be to cover
operating costs and begin to generate surpluses in order to replenish the revolving fund and
keep up with repairs and replacements. Various private sector participation options that would
restore REGIDESO to a sound financing footing are being analyzed and donors have committed to
support their implementation.
Expand the coverage of urban sanitation services: (i)implement social marketing programs
in Kinshasa and other cities promoting family latrine construction; (ii)
establish a solid waste
disposal facility in Kinshasa and three additional urban centers which integrate recycling for
revenue generation for the urban poor; (iii)implement key recommendations and the action
plan o f the Kinshasa sanitation study; and (iv) establish a waste-water treatment plant in
Kinshasa.

111. A KEY TRANSVERSAL PRIORITY - SOCIAL PROTECTION
94. Social protection: a means to improve access to services and reduce vulnerability. The
title o f the PRSP pillar on the social sectors specifically refers to two objectives: increasing
access to services and reducing vulnerability in the population. In effect, these are both key social
protection measures that cut across strategies in health, education and water and sanitation.

53

95.

Social protection defined: “Social protection refers to actions taken in response to levels
o f vulnerability, risk and deprivation which are deemed socially unacceptable within a given
polity or society”. According t o the National Strategy for the Social Protection o f Vulnerable
Groups, such actions seek to support individuals, households and communities in their efforts to
manage their risks in order t o reduce their vulnerability, regulate their consumption, and achieve
greater social equity.

96.
Achieving the MDGs in DRC will be dependent o n having effective social protection
mechanisms in place. The D R C will not be able achieve the objectives o f the Poverty Reduction
Strategy if a large segment o f the population i s unable to access basic services and i s excluded
from the benefits o f growth. The Poverty Reduction Strategy will be judged a failure if large
numbers o f people remain exposed to levels o f vulnerability, risk and deprivation that are socially
unacceptable to the Congolese people.

97.

Socialprotection is referred to, implicitly and explicitly, throughout the PRSP. See Box 1
Box 1 Social Protection in the P R S P

Under Pillar Three o f the PRSP, social protection i s explicitly recognized as a ‘social sector’, along
with education and health. According to the Paper, the objectives o f this policy are to: (i)improve the
social status o f vulnerable people; (ii)facilitate universal access to basic social services; (iii)
implement wealth creation programs adapted to the situation o f target groups; (iv) promote
community development. Target groups include vulnerable women and children, disabled people,
older people, displaced people and refugees. The approach adopted in this section o f the PRSP draws
on the National Strategy for the Protection o f Vulnerable Groups, which was developed for the
Ministry o f Social Affairs with the support of the World Bank.
Some o f the activities planned under Pillar 4 (HIV/AIDS) fall into mainstream social protection
concerns. These include: strengthening care for orphans and vulnerable children; support to host
families o f orphans and vulnerable children; the fight against stigmatization and discrimination;
integrating the fight against HIV/AIDS in the school and workplace; and improving the legal
fiamework for the protection o f people living with HIV/AIDS.
Social protection i s a transversal theme in other parts o f the PRSP. The need for social safety nets i s
identified to ensure universal access to basic services, particularly for health services.

The PRSP proposes the creation o f a Congolese Observatory o f Poverty and Inequality - an
independent body linked to the Ministry o f Planning. I t will be responsible for monitoring poverty,
assessing the impact o f policies on poverty reduction, and undertaking advocacy.

98.

Vulnerable people face many barriers to accessing basic social services. In addition to the
financial barriers that poor people face in accessing services, vulnerable groups face a variety o f
additional economic and non-economic barriers t o accessing services including disability and
discrimination.
I n low income countries with high levels of deprivation, such as DRC, socialprotection
99.
measures should have two primary functions:

Firstly, they should ensure that sector programming focuses o n the most marginalized groups in

society, and prioritizes interventions t o address the greatest barriers t o access. Special measures
need to be taken to ensure the voices o f those who may be ‘less visible’ are included in planning
processes and that groups receive additional, targeted support, beyond the services received by
the general population. Social inequities need t o be addressed along with material inequities.

54

Secondly, social protection measures are required to reduce catastrophic risk. In DRC, where 71
percent o f the population lives below the poverty line, the majority o f households are at daily risk
o f becoming completely destitute. To mitigate these risks, social protection measures are needed
to reduce household exposure to catastrophic expenditures, for example the costs o f expensive
medical care. Given the high numbers o f people concerned, and the high costs associated with
targeting, there i s a strong argument that a number o f social protection measures should be
provided universally. In other areas, for example providing cash transfers, targeting will be
necessary.
100. Donor assistance will focus on helping the Government implement two key strategies.
If implemented, these strategies offer an opportunity to significantly reduce risk among the
country’s most vulnerable populations as well as move towards a minimum safety-net for the
general poor. In implementingthese social protection measures it will be extremely important that
these activities are harmonized with relevant sector strategies and humanitarian aid activities.
Reduce risk among the most vulnerable populations: (i)transform ad hoc interventions to
support vulnerable groups, including children affected by HIV/AIDS, into national strategies,
actions plans and policies, such as the National Strategy for the Protection o f Vulnerable
Groups; (ii)
identify and provide support to associations o f vulnerable groups; (iii)pass and
enforce appropriate legislation to promote and protect the rights o f vulnerable groups; (iv)
strengthen specialized child protection services in the social welfare, police and justice
sectors; (v) address discrimination against disabled children and children from ethnic
minorities; and (vi) harmonize the activities o f the different Ministries and services
intervening in social protectiodsocial services sectors and revive a reformed Inter-ministerial
Committee for the protection o f vulnerable groups.
Provide a minimum safety-net for highly vulnerable populations: (i)increase access to
selected packages o f free basic social services, in particular free primary education and free
pharmaceuticals for killer diseases; (ii)
conduct a feasibility study to make appropriate policy
recommendations on providing cash-transfers to poor households in order to stimulate
demand for basic services, increase household income, increase household investment and
establish a social protection unit within an appropriate
reduce the risk o f deprivation; and (iii)
ministry to ensure that vulnerable groups benefit from the PRSP disproportionately.

55

ANNEX 4: COMBATING HIWAIDS
I.OVERVIEW
A. Background

1.
The HIV/AIDS prevalence rate in DRC is estimated at 4.5 percent of the population
but will almost certainly rise, particularly as transport routes open. As o f 2006, more than
1,466,980 people are estimated to have died from AIDS-related diseases and another 1,230,000
living with the disease. Since the onset o f the pandemic, at least 950,000 children have been
orphaned as a result o f HIV/AIDS.
2.
The spread of the disease is continuing relatively unabated Despite efforts to limit the
spread o f HIV/AIDS the disease continues to spread and affect more people. During 2006 alone,
a further 162,800 people were infected with HIV and over 107,720 succumbed to AIDS-related
complications. The situation in 2007 i s likely to have been worse. O f those who are living with
HIV/AIDS, 208,270 are requiring a type o f care and support o f whom only 17,000 actually
receive it.

3.
HIV/AIDS has affected all parts and people in DRC but some areas more than others.
The distribution o f HIV/AIDS in DRC has been biased. Conflict affected areas have higher
HIV/AIDS rates than others, young people are more vulnerable than other age groups, and
women are more at risk than men. In terms o f employment groups, truck drivers and miners,
whose work involves them being away from their regular partners for long periods o f time, are an
especially high risk category. The situation among uniformed service personnel i s thought to be
very serious, although real-time data i s not currently available.
4.
Women are a high risk group particularly because of widespread sexual violence. Rape
and sexual abuse have become a major problem particularly in the war zones and to a lesser
extent throughout DRC and are contributing significantly to the spread o f HIV/AIDS. Among
women who are known to have been victims o f rape, the prevalence o f HIV/AIDS i s
conservatively placed at around 20 percent but comprehensive data i s unavailable and the
situation may be worse than these figures suggest.

5.
Youngpeople are becoming increasingly vulnerable. The age at which people are being
exposed to and infected with HIV i s decreasing significantly, particularly among women. In the
20-29 year old age group, the prevalence o f HIV/AIDS i s now 14 percent among women - almost
double the figure among men in the same age group. In the 14-19 year old age group, the
prevalence o f HIV/AIDS i s 3.6 percent, over 2 percent higher than what the World Health
Organization typically anticipates for people in this age group in high HIV/AIDS prevalence
settings. Young people are more likely to have extra partners than miners (55 percent), truck
drivers (37 percent), and military personnel (27 percent) all o f whom are usually considered to
live high-risk lives. Prevention i s generally poor in this age group. In a recent survey, only 17
percent o f young girls reported having used a condom during their last sexual encounter, and
although boys appeared to be more likely to do so (24 percent), the overall figure was s t i l l very
low.

- 56 -

B. Strategic Objective
6.
The primary strategic objective is to limit the spread of the H I V virus among high risk
groups, particularly young people and women. Whereas peace and stability present the DRC
with tremendous opportunities for economic development, there i s a considerable danger that a
rapid growth in economic activity and transport networks will facilitate the spread o f HIV. This
would act as a brake on the long-term development o f the country. I t i s therefore o f paramount
importance that as the country becomes reconnected that some o f the first services to reach
neglected communities relate to effective HIV prevention. Furthermore, it will be important that
H I V prevention be targeted at the most vulnerable groups in society which epidemiological data
shows to be women and young people.
C. Overall Approach: Improve the performance o f HIV/AIDS services by expanding
prevention programs while meeting the basic needs of the People Living with AIDS
(PLWA) through improved health systems and strengthening the coordination o f partners

7.
The proposed overall approach will concentrate on expanding prevention programs
through improved health systems and strengthening coordination amongst stakeholders in
order to increase efficiency. The focus will be on increasing access to the full scope o f healthrelated HIV/AIDS services by ensuring that these services, particularly prevention programs, are
provided through a restructured and improved health system. Given limited Government and
donor resources, it will be vital to prioritize and sequence activities. This will require
concentrating resources on proven cost-effective interventions and delaying activities which have
a lower impact on preventing the spread o f the virus or treating HIV/AIDS efficiently. The
approach aims to strengthen existing human and institutional resources, while also developing
new and innovative approaches to reaching people vulnerable to HIV/AIDS. Reinforcing
awareness about HIV/AIDS will lead people to not only reduce high-risk behavior but also it will
encourage them to contribute to the care o f others already affected by HIV/AIDS.
Growth Potential and Kev Constraints

8.
A lack of investment in the health sector has led to a massive deficit in the coverage
and quality of HIV/AIDS services. In recent years, public financing o f the health sector has
dropped significantly which has adversely affected both preventive and curative services. There
are relatively few VCT centers in DRC and this i s a major reason why more people are not
coming forward to be routinely tested for HIV and being referred for treatment. In addition,
access to safe blood i s virtually non-existent in most parts o f the country. This represents a
considerable problem given the high blood transfusion rates due to conflict and the inappropriate
use o f blood transfusion in deliveries and malaria treatment. Unsafe blood transfusion therefore
continues to be one o f the principal sources o f HIV/AIDS transmission in the country.
Furthermore, adults and young people do not have access to information about HIV/AIDS and
gender based vi,olence through the health care system. Given the constraints in DRC, prevention
o f transmission i s a priority and involves strengthening prevention and treatment o f STIs and the
Prevention of Mother to Child Transmission (PMTCT) o f HIV.
9.
Knowledge about HIV/AIDS remains poor, particularly amongst young people. In
2006, less than three percent o f men and women in the 15-24 year old age group currently have
correct information on HIV/AIDS and how to avoid it. Most people in this high-risk group remain

57

excluded from effective health education information, so it must be a top priority to tackle this
problem quickly and systematically. There are many reasons for this situation. Insufficient
investment has been made in providing HIV/AIDS educatiodinformation for young people. In
addition, the messages which have been disseminated have clearly been ineffective in changing
the behavior o f young people. In the future, a much higher priority will have to be given to
reaching young people in ways that recognize the special needs o f young people, their l i f e
situations and what they need to know.
A lack of investment in the education sector has meant that the number of children in
10.
school is very low, and even where there are schools, these are not providing information and
education on HIWAIDS. Although the school system i s potentially one o f the best vehicles for
providing children with the information they need in order to avoid HIV/AIDS, the lack o f
investment in the education system and the lack o f a policy on HIV/AIDS education, has meant
that this potential i s not being realized. Furthermore the education system’s ability to reach
children with effective HIV messages i s heavily constrained by the fact that in many rural areas
the majority o f children do not go to school.

11.
Large numbers of young people away from their homes represent a significant highrisk group for contracting H I K High mortality among older cohorts and selective migration has
produced a very young population o f single people or people in non-formal relationships in both
urban and rural settings. People under the age o f 30, at the peak o f their sexual lives, now
constitute a large proportion o f the population. This, together with a lack o f access to education
and information about HIV/AIDS now presents a serious situation in D R C for HIV/AIDS, as well
as other sexually transmitted infections. The youthfulness o f the population has come to
constitute a major challenge for DRC and calls for priority to be given to special HIV/AIDS
prevention programs tailored for youth o f different ages and backgrounds.
12.
There are indications that the vulnerability of uniformed service personnel to
H I W A I D S is high and that the risk of their spreading H I W A I D S to the communities they are
deployed in is also high. In the last two decades, conflict and political instability have resulted in
a large increase in the number o f men and women in uniform in DRC. Uniformed service
personnel, stationed away from their families, often engage in sexually risky behavior and have
been directly implicated in much o f the sexual violence that has characterized the DRC in recent
years and which has been associated with the spread o f HIV/AIDS. The vulnerability o f military
and police personnel to HIV/AIDS has therefore become a major factor in the spread o f HIV in
the communities where they are deployed. To date, there i s little evidence that these problems
have been taken up systematically by either the military or the police. However, the military,
police and peacekeepers could constitute an untapped resource with respect to the prevention o f
HIV/AIDS and sexual violence. If properly trained and adequately motivated, they could also
play an important role in reaching out to young people and other vulnerable groups.
A number of factors relating to DRC’s recent turbulent history create special
13.
challenges in tackling H I V / A I D S in the country. For example, conflict and poverty have
contributed to widespread disruption o f family and economic l i f e which has contributed to the
spread o f HIV. Highly dysfunctional l i f e situations have been created for millions o f people as a
result o f conflict, forced displacement and migration within the country. Young people have
moved away from families and social networks have broken down that might otherwise have
been able to generate responsible social and sexual behavior. The fragility o f family and
community l i f e has also meant that the capacity o f relatives to care for orphans and widows has
been far more limited than it would otherwise have been.

58

14.
D R C is a large country, with a culturally and linguistically diverse population that is
difficult to reach with effective H I H A I D S services. The size and complexity o f the country
presents serious logistical challenges in terms of providing HIV/AIDS prevention information
and education to people in different parts o f the country, and some areas have not yet been
reached with consistent programs. Reaching all parts o f the country will constitute a major
challenge in the fight against HIV/AIDS but this must be given a high priority as the HIV virus
threatens to spread as new transport corridors are opened up.
The lack of a clear national policy on access to anti retroviral therapy makes it difficult
15.
for hundreds of thousands of people to beneflt from current therapies. To date, DRC has not
developed a national policy on access to ART and it i s estimated that fewer than 5 percent of all
those people who could benefit from ART have access to it. O f the 195,000 people who currently
require ART, only17,OOO are receiving the treatment. This low access to ART i s a major
constraint in attempts to reduce mother to child transmission o f HIV. In 2005, there were only
219 locations where this treatment was available and o f the estimated 130,000 pregnant HIV
positive women annually, only 1,700 had access to the treatment prior to delivery, and only 1,258
babies received prophylaxis. The ultimate goal for DRC must be to make ART available to all
people with HIVIAIDS, including pregnant women, if the cycle o f infection i s to be broken and
premature deaths are to be averted. Given the current constraints in DRC one o f the priorities of
the CAF will be to take significant steps towards this goal by reducing mother to child
transmission o f HIV during late pregnancy and birth.
Attitudes to people with HIV/AIDS and women who have been raped are in general
16
negative. Despite the large numbers o f people who have been infected and are living with
HIV/AIDS, stigma and discrimination persist. As a result people who have been affected by
HIV/AIDS and sexual abuse are reluctant to participate in social and economic life. High priority
will need to be given to getting families and other people to not only accept, but also care for
people with HIV/AIDS and women who have been sexually abused. Unless this i s done, the
number o f people who are excluded and abandoned will grow and their health and well being will
deteriorate further, ultimately affecting the well being o f society at large.
At present, there is weak coordination of HIV/AIDS partners and poor strategic
17.
management of the sector. In terms o f coordination, despite their being an agreement amongst
partners concerning the need to implement three “three ones approach” there have been few
tangible improvements in coordination, strategic planning and monitoring and evaluation. Major
HIV/AIDS programs are neither harmonized nor coordinated and there are poor linkages between
the activities o f the Multi-Country AIDS Program and those o f the Global Fund. Donors are
starting to do joint reviews, but efforts are ad-hoc and there are s t i l l not enough coordinated
initiatives. Although civil society i s engaged in the sector, there are too many organizations
involved in HIV/AIDS and there i s not enough coordination o f their activities. Although a
National Strategy was developed in 1999, it i s now obsolete and there i s no action plan to ensure
i t s implementation.
I n improving the effectiveness of HIVprevention, it will be essential that everyone, but
18.
especially those who are at highest risk of contracting HIV/AIDS, have access to quality
information about how to prevent the disease and what can be done if and when people are
infected with it. In the current context, with transport routes about to open throughout the
country, prevention o f HIV/AIDS, particularly among high risk groups, i s the top priority. More
intensive outreach i s needed among these groups, in particular, young people between the ages of
10 and 14. Other high-risk groups include sex workers, the military, peacekeepers and police,
truck drivers, street children, prisoners, refugees, returnees and pregnant women. Information and

59

education that i s evidence-based and specifically tailored to the needs o f high-risk groups i s
required as well as the creative use o f existing infrastructure and human resources, some o f which
have not been traditionally involved in HIV/AIDS prevention. This i s particularly the case for
youth. In general, young people in DRC remain very poorly informed about HIVIAIDS and ways
o f preventing it. Schools have been insufficiently motivated to engage in the subject o f
HIVIAIDS and currently have a limited ability to reach all children due to l o w school enrolment
rates. Young people need to be involved in areas such as peer education and counseling,
mobilizing community care and support for people affected by HIV/AIDS and sexual violence.
Several peer-based programs and small N G O initiatives have been launched in recent years aimed
at this age-group and should be scaled-up.
19.
With prevention the highest priority, a multi-pronged prevention strategy will need to
be launched. This strategy will need to include social mobilization activities aimed at changing
behavior among high-risk groups. Increasing access to V C T services, which can also help to
change behavior, as well as generate serological information, will be a key component.
Distribution o f condoms and ensuring safe blood transfusions are equally important.

20.
Extending the coverage of therapeutic HIV/AIDS services is a high priority for the
HIV/AIDS strategv but will need to be managed carefully, taking into account financial and
capacity constraints. The aim will be to improve access to cost effective H I V / A I D S therapy and
care services that are provided free or within the real capacity o f people to pay for them. The
CAF will support the Government in achieving this objective and will ensure that public and
private providers expand their supply o f services to meet rising demand. Expanding access to
treatment raises important issues o f equity, sustainability, and health system capacity. In an
environment o f limited resources, it will be important that treatment programmes are sustainable
and take into account the country’s budgetary constraints.
21.
Improving support to People Living with HIV/AIDS will improve the welfare of these
people and assist in efforts to prevent the further spread of the virus. As part o f this process
HIV/AIDS activities will improve the social and economic integration o f women, children and
men who have been affected by HIV/AIDS and/or by rape and sexual violence. This will require
increasing community awareness about the causes o f HIV/AIDS and sexual violence as well as
also the impact that social exclusion has on the health and welfare o f the people concerned and on
that o f the community as a whole.

22.

To improve efficiency and therefore maximize the impact of HIV/AIDS activities,
coordination between partners must be improved. Improving the performance o f HIV/AIDS
services will require defining and implementing a common strategic vision with improved
coordination and funding mechanisms. The rational development, effectiveness and sustainability
o f HIV/AIDS-related activities will depend on the capacity o f national institutions and their
partners. To strengthen existing capacity resources will need to be channeled into these
institutions so that they can fulfill their roles effectively. To increase efficiency it w i l l be
important that coordination o f Government and donor HIV/AIDS activities i s improved. This will
mean adhering to the internationally agreed “three ones” structure for HIV/AIDS management:
one national aids strategy, one national coordinating body and one monitoring and evaluation
framework.

60

Prioritv Activities

23.
Donor assistance will focus on helping the Government implement four key strategies.
If implemented, these strategies would go far to create a culture o f HIV/AIDS prevention, while
at the same time improving the lives o f those who have already been affected by the disease:
0

Accelerate and scale up HIV/AIDS prevention, focusing particularly on women and young
people: (i)
make prevention the highest priority in the national response to HIV/AIDS, using
all forms o f the media including television, radio, papers, etc.; (ii)
improve services at health
facilities for the diagnosis and timely treatment o f all sexually transmitted diseases and
prevention o f mother-to-child transmission; (iii)make condoms universally accessible by
increasing supplies and reducing and possibly eliminating charges for these commodities,
particularly for high-risk groups; (iv) provide accessible counseling and testing services for
HIV/AIDS, concentrating on underserved areas; (v) develop a national policy and program
for comprehensive safe blood transfusion; and (vi) reach children over ten years with
properly designed sensitization materials on HIV/AIDS, reproductive health and gender
issues and train teachers to use life-skills approaches.
Move progressively towards providing universal access to+ee HIV/AIDS treatment and care,
including access to life-saving ART: (i)
improve access to ART by increasing the coverage o f
treatment services and by reducing the barriers, particularly financial, which inhibit the
develop a sustainable financing strategy to reduce the costs o f ART
uptake o f treatment; (ii)
treatment with a view to moving towards the universal provision o f free ART; and (iii)
develop a strategy to ensure the uninterrupted supply o f ART to all those under treatment by
strengthening and streamlining procurement and distribution logistics.

0

0

Mitigate the negative impact of HIV/AIDS on PLWHAs and their families: (i)
make mitigation
and protection o f PLWHAs, victims o f rape and their families a central part o f the national
produce an evidence-based multi-sector action plan to minimize
response to HIV/AIDS; (ii)
stigmatization and discrimination, including support to orphans and children; and (iii)
develop partnerships with the private sector, including large parastatal companies in mining
and transport, focused on prevention, protection and j o b opportunities.
Defme and implement a common strategic vision with improved coordination and funding
mechanisms: (i)
ensure that the strategic management o f HIV/AIDS activities complies with
the “three ones” principle o f one coordination body, one strategic plan and one monitoring
and evaluation framework; (ii)
ensure that all policies and actions are coordinated with other
sectors and mainstreamed into other on-going health activities; (iii)create a national
mechanism for coordinating all HIV/AIDS planning, research, and monitoring and
evaluation; and (iv) promote greater national financing o f H I V / A I D S actions and establish
new mechanisms for mobilizing H I V / A I D S resources.

61

ANNEX 5: REINFORCING COMMUNITY DYNAMICS AND STABILIZING
HIGHLY VOLATILE COMMUNITIES
I.OVERVIEW
A. Background

1.
Any serious effort to reduce poverty and vulnerability in the DRC must focus on
rebuilding communities, particularly in rural areas. Home to more than seven-tenths o f DRC’s
total population, rural communities have come under enormous pressure during the past decade as
a result o f conflict, mass displacement and the almost total collapse o f state services. Many o f the
country’s most vulnerable populations live in highly volatile rural communities, including at least
1.1 million destitute Internally Displaced Persons (IDP) and their host families. Pastoralists who
have lost access to their land are another group in extreme distress suffering from a much higher
incidence o f malnutrition than farmers or fishermen.
2.
Urban centers also contain pockets of extreme deprivation. Rural to urban immigration
rates are estimated to have increased at least three-fold during the years o f conflict. Families and
individuals have fled violence in the countryside and sought safety and better opportunities in
urban centers. Lacking state services and with only limited administrative capacity, urban
communities have struggled to absorb new arrivals. Conditions are difficult, particularly in the
overcrowded slums around city centers - many people are without jobs and the housing stock has
deteriorated sharply. Basic services including health, education, water, sanitation and transport,
are insufficient and prohibitively expensive for the majority o f families. Social tensions have
increased and sporadic outbreaks o f urban violence are becoming more common.

3.
People have relied on short-term survival strategies and solidarity networks to mitigate
the worst impact of the conflict. People living in neglected communities, whether in rural or
urban areas, have responded to the constant disruptions, displacements and collapse o f stateservices by drawing on whatever resources they have to secure their own livelihoods and wellbeing, adopting short-term survival mechanisms and relying on existing social structures. In rural
areas, people have depended on subsistence agriculture, in many cases, returning to forms o f
production long out-of-use. In urban areas, people have taken up street peddling or other forms o f
petty-trade. Throughout the country, people have reduced their savings, sold their assets,
substituted wild foods for nutritious alternatives, relied on traditional medicines, cut-back or
eliminated expenditures o n vital social services and sometimes developed illegal and exploitative
links with regional actors and militia. Based on existing kinship and clientalist obligations within
communities which distribute and share resources, these strategies have helped people cope with
continuing instability and sharp declines in their living conditions. N e w solidarity networks have
also emerged, many o f which provide rudimentary safety-nets for their members. Collaboration
between local interest groups and communities has contributed in many areas to the broader
public good. Communities may be under stress, but people have responded to their problems in
dynamic ways.

4.
Harnessing community dynamism will be critical for stabilizing many volatile
communities, particularly those where Internally Displaced Peoples and refugees will be
returning. Although large areas o f eastern and southern DRC are now secure, renewed conflict i s
possible in many locations. New types o f military and civilian strongmen, local elites, army
commanders and militias have almost unlimited access to small arms and other weapons, which
continue to be smuggled into DRC from neighboring countries despite an arms embargo. Unpaid

- 62 -

soldiers are major perpetrators o f human rights abuses and delays in the reintegration o f former
combatants threaten to destabilize communities. Disputes over property rights also threaten to
ignite localized tensions, particularly in communities where homes and land have been
confiscated or occupied during the conflict. The granting o f land concessions by different
authorities has complicated restitution since ownership cannot easily be determined. The shift
during the conflict to mineral extraction has further reduced the amount o f land available for
agricultural and livestock production in many o f the areas where IDPs, refugees and excombatants are returning. Urban unrest i s also a threat, particularly in the capital where large
groups can be easily mobilized. A key challenge now i s to move away from mechanisms that risk
the viability and prosperity o f communities towards community-based strategies that build on and
strengthen the resources o f communities themselves, re-linking them into sustainable national
processes.

B. Strategic Objective
5.
The primary strategic objective is to stabilize highly volatile communities by harnessing
local dynamism In rural and urban areas where the potential for renewed conflict i s high,
community-based programs which reinforce existing solidarity networks will be supported as the
quickest way to improve conditions and promote reconciliation. Initiatives aimed at creating jobs,
supporting local government, reducing violence, re-constructing market and feeder roads and
reducing communal tensions will be implemented through partnerships with local and nongovernmental organizations. T o reduce administrative costs, partners already providing
emergency and humanitarian assistance will be used.
C. Overall Approach:

Stabilize highly volatile communities, contribute to human security and increase the
effectiveness of poverty-reductionprograms by involving and building the capacity
of community groups
6.

Although early attention needs to be given to stabilizing high-risk areas through
community-based programs, local participation is also importantfor improving human security
and ensuring equitable poverty reduction in the medium-term Stabilizing volatile communities
will be one o f the highest priorities in the post-election period. Outbreaks o f localized conflict
could easily ignite widespread violence and jeopardize efforts by the new Government to build an
inclusive political, social and economic culture. In the absence o f state services and effective
public administration, communities themselves will need to play a leading role in their own
stabilization and recovery, particularly in the early stages, when large-scale national development
programs are not yet in place. In the medium-term, as conditions improve and state authority i s
extended, communities will continue to play a decisive role in poverty-reduction programs,
participating in their planning, monitoring and implementation. Their involvement will promote
decentralized decision-making in the delivery o f public goods and can be used to develop national
policies and legal and institutional frameworks for local governance. Community involvement
will be crucial for ensuring that poverty-reduction programs take into account differences at the
local level related to age, ethnicity, civil status and above all, gender.

7.
Community organizations have long been providing local services in the absence of
state-run public services and are able to contribute effectively to stabilization and povertyreduction in the years ahead Whether implementing their own initiatives or contributing to
national programs, community-based organizations are vehicles for ensuring local participation in

63

development programs. Studies have shown that community organizations are particularly
effective in areas with high levels o f instability and vulnerability. In addition to identifying and
addressing needs, these organizations, which empower local populations, can have a positive
spillover effect on national political life by fostering trust and promoting practices o f good
governance at the community level. Involving communities:
Generates economies o f scale: Community organizations constitute a grassroots "receiving
system" that allow national partners to reduce the transaction costs o f services and broaden
the impact o f specific interventions, for example, public-private partnerships for the provision
o f basic services.
Compensates for insufficient public service provision: It will be some time before public
structures are rebuilt to a degree that the state will be able to deliver or monitor services at
local levels. A participatory approach that helps communities provide services can help to
prevent deterioration in social indicators and living conditions.
Reduces costs and increases efficiency: Communities have the best knowledge o f existing
social, political and economic constraints that can derail policies or project implementation.
Their assistance in designing successful projects that work around these constraints can lead
to significant cost savings.
Builds social capital: During the conflict, trust and social cohesion broke down. Stabilization
programs that require community members to interact with each other and local institutions to
agree on design or implementation can become the vehicle through which previously divided
groups rebuild their relationships. Project meetings can become the forum where opposing
views are peacefully expressed and reconciled.
Empowers the poor and vulnerable, particularlv women: Community organizations can be
effective in helping the poor increase their access to resources and share more fully in the
benefits resulting from their efforts. Community programs often result in higher levels o f
production and income and tend to accelerate rural capital formation.
Strengthens good governance and democratic practices: The limited size and informality o f
.
community organizations tend to encourage democratic practices and develop collective
decision-making and leadership skills. As individuals exercise these skills and begin to expect
transparency and accountability from their community leaders, the demand for better
governance beyond their localities i s often generated.
Promotes sustainability Participatory approaches encourage self-reliance by empowering
people to use their own initiative. Communities learn how to use resources effectively and to
organize themselves to achieve results, resulting in more sustainable programs.
Growth Potential and Kev Constraints

8.
Highly volatile rural areas in Province Orientale, North and South Kivu, Katanga,
Equateur and Bas Congo as well as two pivotal urban areas-Kinshasa and Mbuji Mayi-may
erupt into open conflict unless steps are taken to reduce tensions. Living conditions are difficult
in all o f these areas, many o f which are isolated and marginalized and have particularly high
concentrations o f vulnerable populations. North Kivu, for example has the largest concentration
o f IDPs in the country, including 500,000 long-term displaced. Almost half a million IDPs have
returned this past year to their villages in Ituri, North Kivu, South Kivu and Katanga, putting
intensive pressure on existing infrastructure, and more are expected in coming months. In
addition, over 22,000 refugees have been formally assisted to return to their homes in Equateur,
South Kivu, Katanga and Province Orientale. An additional 73,000 refugees are estimated to have

64

spontaneously returned without formal assistance, creating greater demand for land, homes,
employment and other services.
Violence is rampant in parts of the D R C and needs to be brought under control.
9.
Violence linked to ethnic and social divisions continues and may worsen in areas where local
groups are politically mobilized. Criminality i s on the rise due to corruption, the ready availability
o f weapons, permissive attitudes towards violence and the presence o f impoverished soldiers and
unemployed ex-combatants. The lack o f a unified command structure in the army, coupled with
nonpayment o f salaries, insufficient training and logistics, gives rise to frequent breakdowns in
discipline and violations o f human rights. In some regions, attempts to reintegrate ex-combatants
into communities have met with only partial success due to delays in the disbursement o f funds.
Community insecurity i s also fueled by the combination o f a weak judiciary and police force and
a defunct penal system.

10.
Many communities are food insecure. A recent Joint Food Security Assessment has
identified North and South Kivu, Equateur, Ituri District, Maniema, and Katanga as the most food
insecure areas in the DRC. Acute malnutrition i s becoming more common, with threats o f famine
in South Kivu and Katanga reported by humanitarian partners.
11.
Jobs and income-generating opportunities are scarce. The collapse o f the economy, and
particularly the agricultural sector, has pushed millions o f Congolese into destitution.
Manufacturing enterprises have closed down and widespread rape, murder and looting have made
farmers afraid to go their fields. Transport on the Congo River i s intermittent, making access to
all but the most proximate markets impossible. Civil servants have stopped receiving their
salaries and local unemployment has grown due to the collapse o f government services. Two o f
the most active economic sectors are associated with natural resource extraction and the growing
illegal economy focused on arms dealing, money laundering and diamond smuggling. Many
unemployed youths have joined the military and militia groups who subsist through looting and
forcibly extracting taxes o n any goods being brought to market.
12.
District and local authorities have limited institutional competence to implement
recovery and development programs. Competencies in basic administrative functions, including
planning, budgeting, management, regulation and evaluation need urgent strengthening. These
skills w i l l be particularly important under new decentralization arrangements where 40 percent o f
national taxes collected in the provinces and all local taxes will be managed by regional and local
authorities.

13.
Social and economic infrastructures need rehabilitation, Local infrastructures including
roads, bridges, public buildings, communication systems and water supply systems have been
severely damaged. As a result, the country i s physically divided - there i s not a single road
linking either the north to the south or the east to the west. Markets have been disrupted,
communication i s limited to cell phones (and may remain so), and the number o f people with
access to safe drinking water and basic social services remains unacceptably low.
14.
Reconciliation is needed to build bridges between groups affected differently by the
conflict. The breakdown o f trust and the erosion o f social capital are major factors impeding local
development. Many communities remain divided and there i s resentment between those who
stayed and those who fled or went abroad. Tensions are also high between ethnic groups,
particularly those who are associated with different militia or military groups. Abrupt changes in
economic status, frequently linked to illegal activities, have created new centers o f power. New

65

elites, many o f whom are beholden to interests outside their communities, have challenged and

undermined the role o f elders and other local leaders.

15.
Short-term stabilizationprogrammes, based on clear criteria and implemented through
trusted partners, will be launched in highly volatile areas. To be effective, the stabilization
programmes will need to focus on a limited number o f key objectives that can be achieved
quickly in the areas o f livelihoods, local governance, community security, infrastructure and
reconciliation. Trusted implementing partners will be chosen, with preference given to
organizations that already have administrative structures in place and are therefore cost-efficient,
including church groups and non-governmental organisations. To avoid spreading limited
resources too thinly, conflict assessments and other analytical tools will need to be used to
identify potential flashpoints where tensions could erupt. Specific criteria used to identify these
flashpoints will include: high levels o f armed violence; high levels o f political mobilization or
intimidation; high concentrations o f returnees; concentrations o f ex-combatants and/or FARDC
without visible means o f support; high levels o f ethnic tensions; lack o f government-supplied
water and electricity; high levels o f food insecurity; non-payment o f civil servants; high
concentrations o f street children; and risk o f land conflicts. O f these criteria, levels o f violence
and food insecurity will be determinate. Efforts will also be made to launch programmes in areas
where on-going humanitarian assistance programmes have been necessary to ensure the survival
o f the poorest and most vulnerable populations.
16.
Implementation of short-term stabilization programs is likely to be difficult. Efforts to
generate livelihoods, particularly in rural areas, will be constrained by the lack o f basic
agriculture implements, quality seeds, essential fishing materials and extension services as well as
crop diseases and pest infestation. The destruction o f processing plants, insufficient storage and
conservation facilities, loss o f cattle and poultry and the destruction o f veterinary institutions will
also impede progress. Improvements in local governance will be adversely affected by corruption,
discriminatory practices, weakness in civil society, delays in payments to civil servants, lack o f
experience with democratic practices and lack o f basic administrative materials. Efforts to
improve community security will be affected by the proliferation o f small arms, the illegal trade
in natural resources, presence o f criminal gangs, lack o f access to legal assistance, poorly
maintained prisons and de-motivated and poorly trained enforcement personnel. Infrastructure
rehabilitation will be affected by the lack o f skilled labor, reconstruction materials and investment
capital.
17.
Despite these difficulties, the effectiveness of short-term stabilization programmes can
be maximized through participatory approaches. In order to mitigate the risk o f operating in
unstable environments, many stabilization programmes will start o f f as small-scale, flexible
interventions. As the community’s capacity to design, implement, monitor and even fund
activities increases, programmes will be scaled-up. Every effort will be made to use communitybased approaches that maximize employment opportunities for unskilled workers, including
public works schemes for construction and rehabilitation activities. Approaches based on the
principles o f social inclusion, equity and human rights will also be used to reinforce democratic
processes and contribute to sustainable peace-building.

18.
The impact of short-term stabilization programs will be strengthened by harmonizing
them with other poverty reduction and humanitarian activities. Establishing linkages at the
community level between short-term stabilization programmes and other interventions will be
essential for creating synergies, avoiding duplication and filling gaps. Particular efforts will be
made to build on the self-sufficiency programmes being implemented under the auspices o f the
DRC’s Humanitarian Action Plan. Efforts will also be made to link stabilization programmes

66

with other development projects, including those that provide community grants to finance smallscale projects aimed at improving local services.
I n an effort to find the most effective approach for rebuilding communities, area19
based recovev programmes will be piloted in selected communities. Area-based Recovery
(ABR) refers to a type o f program that maximizes community participation by giving local
groups control over decisions and resources related to post-conflict recovery. Community groups
partner with elected local governments and central government agencies, the private sector and
NGOs to secure resources, provide services and establish appropriate regulatory environments for
promoting local recovery. Locations for ABR will be chosen on the basis o f social indicators areas with high levels o f vulnerability and poor social indicators will be given priority. By
focusing on neglected areas that are unlikely to benefit from national development initiatives in
the short-term, ABR can help to improve conditions in some o f the country’s most impoverished
areas. ABR requires certain conditions to be in place. In areas where basic security does not yet
exist or where there are no local institutions, ABR will not be viable. Another restricting factor i s
the absence o f leaders who can represent the interests o f the local population. ABR i s also not
appropriate in areas where the provision o f public services requires large and complex systems or
where these services can be supplied more effectively by private enterprises. Like the short-term
stabilization programs, ABR will be implementedthrough trusted partners. At the end o f the CAF
period, the results o f the ABR pilots will be reviewed. If found to be effective, efficient and
equitable, the ABR approach may be scaled-up.

20.
Linkages between local administrations and community organizations will be
reinforced through pilot Local Development Funds (LDF). Strengthening relationships between
community organizations and local administrations i s necessary for rebuilding public life.
Experiences in other countries suggest that Local Development Funds, if carefully managed, can
contribute to improved collaboration between local administrations and community groups. In
DRC, pilots o f LDFs have a mixed record, in part because oversight mechanisms have been
inadequate and the capacity o f local governments i s weak. During the C A F period, LDFs with
stronger control procedures will be launched in a few carefully selected communities. Block
grants will be allocated through local government structures to the LDFs, which will be managed
by the community. LDFs will be used to support priority interventions chosen bv the community.
All projects implemented through LDFs will be subject to compliance with agreed measures
including financial accountability and pro-poor orientation. Communities managing LDFs will
either undertake their own procurement, with appropriate support from local administrations, or
jointly procure with public institutions. At the end o f the CAF period, the results o f the LDF
pilots will be reviewed. If it’s found to be effective, efficient and equitable, LDFs may be
introduced in other communities.
21.
Community involvement can also help to make poverty reduction programs more
effective at the local level. Community participation can be incorporated into the design o f
virtually any poverty reduction program. Effective participation involves giving beneficiaries the
opportunity to help define and implement activities and organize themselves around these
according to their own needs and possibilities. To do this, executing authorities and agencies w i l l
need to establish mechanisms for involving communities in setting targets, fine-tuning
implementation strategies, drafting work plans, and developing baselines and indicators.

67

Priority Activities

22.
Donor assistance will focus on helping to rebuild highly volatile rural and urban areas
through community-based programs as well as on involving communities in poverty-reduction
and recovery programs. Activities in each location will vary but will generally aim to:
Improve delivery capacity of state institutions and community-based groups and pilot ABR in
selected communities: (i)strengthen the capacity o f local authorities to manage, budget and
regulate provision o f basic social services; (ii)promote strategic partnerships between civil
society and local authorities; (iii)establish appropriate legal frameworks for Local
Development Funds including measures for ensuring financial accountability; (iv) set-up
Local Development Funds in pilot communities; (v) strengthen the capacity o f local
organizations including NGOs, youth groups, faith-based organizations, women's
associations, media, educational groups, and peace and human rights networks on prioritysetting, project design, procurement, implementation and monitoring and evaluation; and (vi)
strengthen the capacity o f civil society in protection, early warning, advocacy, public
information, social cohesion, facilitation and service delivery.
Increase j o b and livelihood opportunities: (i)map existing livelihood opportunities and
resources; (ii)establish revolving micro-credit and grant schemes for women, youth and other
highly vulnerable groups; (iii) support cooperatives and producers associations; and (vi)
provide vocational, technical and professional training to women and youth.
Rehabilitate public infiastructure: (i)encourage the use o f labor-based methods; (ii)
rehabilitate secondary and feeder roads; (iii)rehabilitate welfare and recreational
infrastructures (iv) rehabilitate market centers and traditional supply sources; and (v) provide
training to local officials on oversight and procurement procedures.
Improve security conditions and promote reconciliation: (i)develop mechanisms for
dialogue, mediation and conflict resolution between civilian communities, police and military
authorities; (ii)reduce small arms through community development initiatives; (iii)support
the establishment o f a national mine action management body (iv) establish women's
networks and provide training to selected individuals on rape-victim counseling; (v) establish
a network o f safe-houses throughout the community for victims o f family and sexual
violence; (vi) establish local peace-building groups and reconciliation and mediation
mechanisms including Initiatives Locaux de Paix and Comite's Locaux de Paix; and (vii)
strengthen the land registration authority and support local conflict arbitration mechanisms
Facilitate the effective participation of communities in poverty reduction programs: (i)
clarify
the status and rights o f community organizations; and (ii)
eliminate bureaucratic procedures
that
impede
genuine
community
participation.

68

. . .

a

.

a

*

.

.

m

. . .

a

. . . .

0

.

a

0

. ...

.

.

. . .

*

. .

.

.

...... .

. ..

0

.

. . . .

.

.

e

e

e

0

.

0

.

I.

. .

w

0

e

.

.

I.

e

..

e

e

. .

. . . . .

*

.

. .

e

.

a

0
00

b

b

.

b

.

b

b

b

b

.

b

.

e

b

.

e

e

e

*

e

b

I

e

e

e

e

e

e

e

e

e

. .

e

e

.

I

*

e

e

.

e

I*

L
I*

*

e

e

. ..

I*

a

.

.

a

a

a

.

.

.

a

a

a

a

.

a

...

e

.

e

.

.

e

e

.

.

.

. .

.

e

e

e

*

e

e

e

.

.

e

.

e

.

e

e

.

e

e

e

.

e

e

...

.

.

e

.

e

.

.

I

e

.

e

. .

.

. .

...

.

e

a

m

e

a

e

. . .

.

b

.

b

.

b

. ..

b

b

.

.

.

0

.

0

.

a
a

.

......

. . .

0

. ..

.

e

e

e

0

e

3

E:
e

e

e

0

e

a

.

e

e

e

.

e

.

e

e

8

e

8

.

.

m

*

*

B
3

*

.

.

.

e

. .

.

...

.

a

. .

.. . .

. .

.

a

*

8

.

8

.

e

8

.

8

e

e

e

e

.

.

.

8

e

8

.

.

.

.

.

e

e

e

e

.

e

e

.

.

e

e

e

D

e

e

e

D

e

e

e

e

..

.

b

6

E

zE

b

.

e

a

.

a

.

e

.

e

.

e

.

.

.

e

vi

.e

Bumba
Co

TSHOPO

Boende

mi

Ikela

Lowa

Kasa
i
Mangai

KONGO CENTRAL

Kikwit

Mbanza-Ngungu

Matadi

Feshi

To
Damba

o
ang
Kw

Ka
s

LOMAMI
Kananga
MbujiKASAÏ- Mayi
Kabinda
ORIENTAL

ai

Mwene-Ditu

Kapanga

0

100

200

300

400 Kilometers

INTERNATIONAL BOUNDARIES

0

100

200 Miles

Lubudi

Kolwezi

To
Lucano

This map was produced by the Map Design Unit of The World Bank.
The boundaries, colors, denominations and any other information
shown on this map do not imply, on the part of The World Bank
Group, any judgment on the legal status of any territory, or any
endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.

Luv
ua

Pweto

Lake
Mweru

Kilwa

HAUTKATANGA

10°S
To
Luwingu

Likasi

Dilolo

Moba

la
ba

ZAMBIA

ZAMB I A
25°E

Lubumbashi

To
Kitwe

Lake
Malawi

Sakania
30°E

IBRD 33391R

AUGUST 2007

PROVINCE BOUNDARIES

Sandoa

L

5°S

Lake
Tanganyika

a

RAILROADS

s.

Kamina

BURUNDI

TA N Z A N I A

Lu

MAIN ROADS

TANGANYIKA
Manono

H A U T- L O M A M I

LUALABA

NATIONAL CAPITAL

Kalemie

Kabalo

ira
uf

lua
Lulua Lu

ANGOLA

PROVINCE CAPITALS

RIVERS

To
Bujumbura

Lulimba

ga
Luku

LULUA

DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC
OF CONGO
SELECTED CITIES AND TOWNS

Kasongo

RWANDA

Kongolo

Luebo

Tshikapa

KWANGO

Malela

m

Boma

Idiofa

Uvira

Kama

Lusambo

K A S AÏ

SUDKIVU

MANIEMA

Lom
am
i

To
PointeNoire

KWILU
ilu
Kw

CABINDA
(ANGOLA)

Bulungu

Kenge

Ilebo

SANKURU

Lueo

KINSHASA

uru
Sank

To
Kibuye

Bukavu

Kalima

Kindu

Lodja

Lukenie

0°

Lake
Victoria

To Ruhengeri

i

5°S

Buna

Margherita Peak
(5,110 m)

Lake Kivu

nd

Kutu

Goma

Ul
i

Congo

Betamba

MAI-NDOMBE

Lake
Albert

a

ela

Lubutu

UGANDA

Bunia

Lake
Edward

NORDKIVU

lab

a

ka

pa

Lua

Tshu
a
om

Inongo

AT L A N T I C
OCEAN

Beni
Butembo

L om

Lu

ila

KINSHASA
(CITY)

Bafwasende

Wanie Rakula

T S H U A PAL

Bikoro

Yumbi

ITURI

Kisangani

Mbandaka

CONGO

imi

Yangambi

É Q U AT E U R
0°

Wamba
Mongbwalu

I

Ou b

nga
Bongandanga
Lulo
Basankusu

Aruw

Banalia

o
ng

angui

MONGALA

To
Pakwach

Aketi

M A L AW

Lisala

Kiba
li

Watsa

Isiro

.

Akula

HAUT-UELE

Titule

Buta

Mts

Imese

Businga

ba

SUDUBANGI

Faradje

Uele

tum

DEM. REP.
OF CONGO

Gemena

BAS-UELE

Bondo

NORD-UBANGI

Mi

Libenge

Gbadolite

t

Zongo

5°N

To
Juba

M

To
Bangui

SUDAN

To
Bangasso

To
Kembe

Ubang
i

30°E

ba

5°N

G ABON

25°E

CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC

itu

15°E

M

10°E

