Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized

Document o f
The World Bank
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Report No. 38840-MK

INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT

AND
INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION
COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY
FOR
THE FORMER YUGOSLAV REPUBLIC OF MACEDONIA
FOR THE PERIOD FY07-FY10

March 2,2007

South East Europe Country Unit (ECCU4)
Europe and Central Asia Region (ECA)
Southern Europe and Central Asia
International Finance Corporation (IFC)

The date of the last Country Assistance Strategy was September 9,2003.
CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS
(as o f March 2,2007)
Currency Unit =
US$ 1.0 =

Macedonian Denar (MKD)

MKD 46.24

GOVERNMENT FISCAL YEAR
January 3 1'' - December 3 1''
ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS
AAA
ADR
ALMP
APE
APL
AS
BEEPS
BERIS
CARDS
CAS
CEFTA
CEM
CFA
CFAA
CFPs
CPAR
CPC
CPPR
CPS
CPSPR

csw

DIF
DPL
EBF
EBRD
EC
ECA
ECAA
ECSEE
ED1
EIB
EIOP

ELEM
ESM

Analytic and Advisory Activities
Alternative Dispute Resolution
Active Labor Market Programs
Agency for Entrepreneurship Promotion
Adaptable Program Loan
Advisory Services
Business Environment and Enterprise
Performance Survey
Business Environment Reform and
Institutional Strengthening
Community Assistance for
Reconstruction, Development and
Stabilization
Country Assistance Strategy
Central European Free Trade Agreement
Country Economic Memorandum
Country Fiduciary Assessment
Country Financial Accountability
Assessment
Country Financing Parameters
Country Procurement Assessment Report
Commission for Prevention o f Corruption
Country Portfolio Performance Review
Country Partnership Strategy
Country Partnership Strategy Progress
Report
Center for Social W o r k
Deposit Insurance Fund
Development Policy Lending
Extra Budgetary Fund
European Bank for Reconstruction and
Development
European Commission
Europe and Central Asia
European Common Aviation Area
Energy Community o f South East Europe
Electronic Data Interchange
European Investment Bank
European Investor Outreach Program

ESW
EU
FDI
FESAL
FSAP
FY
fYR
GDLN
GDP
GEF
HACCP
HBS
HCI
HIF
IBRD
ICR
IDA
IDF
IEG
IFC
IFC A S
IMF
IRRP

IT
JPPR
LDP
LJIIS
MAFWE
MAPAS
MDGs
MEPSO

..

11

Electric Power Generation Company
Electric Power Company o f Macedonia
/Electric Power Distribution Company
Economic and Sector W o r k
European U n i o n
Foreign Direct Investment
Financial and Enterprise Sector
Adjustment L o a n
Financial Sector Assessment Program
Fiscal Year
Former Yugoslav Republic
Global Distance Learning Network
Gross Domestic Product
Global Environmental Facility
Hazard Analysis o f Critical Control Points
Household Budget Survey
Health Care Institution
Health Insurance Fund
International B a n k for Reconstruction and
Development
Implementation Completion Report
International Development Association
Institutional Development Fund
Implementation Evaluation Group
International Finance Corporation
I F C Advisory Services
International Monetary Fund
Irrigation Rehabilitation and Restructuring
Project
Information Technology
Joint Portfolio Performance Review
Liberal Democratic Party
Legal and Judicial Implementation and
Institutional Support Project
Ministry o f Agriculture, Forestry and
Water Economy
Pension Supervisory Agency
M i l l e n n i u m Development Goals
Electric Power Transmission Company

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
MIGA

MILES
MIPD
MK
MKD
MLSP
MOH
MSE
NATO
NBRM
NGO
OECD
OED
PDF
PDPL
PEP SE
PER
PHC
PIT
PIU
PPP
PSMAC
PSMAL
RECRP
REPARIS

Multilateral Investment Guarantee
Agency
Macroeconomy, Investment, Labor,
Education and Safety framework
Multi-Annual Indicative Planning
Document
fYR Macedonia, Macedonian
Macedonian Denar
Ministry o f Labor and Social Policy
Ministry o f Health
M i c r o and Small Enterprises
N o r t h Atlantic Treaty Organization
National Bank o f the Republic o f
Macedonia
Non-Governmental Organization
Organization for Economic Cooperation
and Development
Operations Evaluation Department
Pension and Disability Insurance Fund
Programmatic Development Policy L o a n
Private Enterprise Partnership Southeast
Europe
Public Expenditure Review
Primary Health Care
Personal Income Tax
Project Implementation Unit
Public-Private Partnership
Public Sector Management Adjustment
Credit
Public Sector Management Adjustment
Loan
Real Estate Cadastre and Registration
Project
Road to Europe -Program o f Accounting
Reform and Institutional Strengthening

Vice President
Country Director
Task Team Leader

RIA
ROSC
SAA
SA0
SAP
SBA
SDSM
SEE
SEED
SFRY
SME
SOE

sso

TA
TF
TTFSE

UF
UN
UNDP
USAID
USD
VAT
VMRODPMNE
WB
WBG
WHO
WMO

World Bank
Shigeo Katsu
Orsalia Kalantzopoulos
Sandra BloemenkamD

Regulatory Impact Assessment
Report o n Observance o f Standards and
Codes
Stabilization and Association Agreement
State Audit Office
Stabilization and Association Program
Stand-by Arrangement
Social Democratic U n i o n o f Macedonia
Party
South East Europe
Southern Europe Enterprise Development
Socialist Federal Republic o f Yugoslavia
Small and M e d i u m Enterprise
State Owned Enterprise
State Statistics Office
Technical Assistance
Trust Fund
Trade and Transport Facilitation in South
East Europe
Unemployment Fund
United Nations
United Nations Development Programme
United States Agency for International
Development
United States Dollar
Value Added T a x
Internal Macedonian Revolutionary
Organization - Democratic Party for
Macedonian National Unity
W o r l d Bank
W o r l d Bank Group
W o r l d Health Organization
Water Management Organization

IFC
Edward A. Nassim
Shahbaz Mavaddat
G i e r i Konda

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance o f
their official duties. I t s contents may not be otherwise disclosed without W o r l d Bank authorization.

...

111

FORMER YUGOSLAV REPUBLIC OF MACEDONIA
COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY
Table of Contents

EXECUTIVE
SUMMARY ..............................................................................................

......................................................................................................
I1.COUNTRY
CONTEXT............................................................................................
.

1

IINTRODUCTION

..............................................................
Economic Developments Since the Last CAS .................................................................
C. FYR Macedonia’s Poverty Profile...................................................................................

.
B.
A

Regional Context and Political Developments

.

1
1
3
4

111 FYR MACEDONIA’S
LONG-TERMVISION, MEDIUM-TERM PLANS, AND
OUTLOOK
6
A

.

.

B

.

..................................................................................................................

FYR Macedonia’s Long-Term Vision and European Integration

...............................

...........................................................................

The Medium-TermEconomic Outlook

........................................

I V FYR MACEDONIA’S
DEVELOPMENT
CHALLENGES

.
B.
C.
A

......................................................
Improving Governance in fYR Macedonia ..................................................................
Improving Public Service Delivery................................................................................
Accelerating Economic Growth and Job Creation

v.WORLD BANKGROUP’SCURRENT PORTFOLIO ...............................................

.
B.
C.
A

.

Past Bank Assistance and Quality and Management o f the Existing Portfolio

V I THE WORLD BANKGROUP
PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY
A

.

10
10
15
23

26

........................

28
29

29
29

Pillar 1: Foster Growth and Job Creation. Increase Living Standards for A l l , ... , ....................................... , .. , .............., ..... 30
Pillar 2: Public Service Delivery and Supporting Good Governance. ............................................................................... 35

.
C.
D.
B

...................................

Key Features and Pillars of t h e Results Based Partnership Strategy

8

........26

..................................
FYR Macedonia’s Country Financing Parameters (CFPs) ........................................

Lessons Learned from the CAS Completion Report (CASCR)

6

.................................
The Programmatic Development Policy Lending Program (PDPL) .............
Partnerships and Participation......................................................................................
The Framework for Bank Assistance and Financing Scenarios

.
........................................
VI11.R I S K S AND MITIGATION
REMEDIES..............................................................
I X.CONCLUDING REMARKS
...................................................................................
V I I RESULTS-BASED
MONITORING
AND EVALUATION

iv

37
40
40

42

43
44

Annexes
Annex 1: FYR Macedonia CPS FY07-FY 10 Results Matrix .......................................................
Annex 2: FYR Macedonia’s CAS Completion Report. FY04-FY06 ...........................................
Annex 3: IFC in fYR Macedonia ..................................................................................................
Annex 4: MIGA Assistance Program and Guarantee Outstanding Exposure ..............................
Annex 5: CPS Consultations and Outreach ..................................................................................
Annex 6: Donor Assistance to fYR Macedonia by Program ........................................................
Annex 7: FYR Macedonia Country Financing Parameters ..........................................................
Annex 8: FYR Macedonia’s Relations with the EU.....................................................................
Annex 9: Governance Activities in World Bank Program .........................................................
Annex 10: EU Partnership Priorities and World Bank Assistance .............................................
Annex 11: Standard CPS Annexes .............................................................................................
Annex 12: Fund Relations Note..................................................................................................

45
56
85
91
93
95
96
97
101
103
118
128

Tables
Table 1: FYR Macedonia -Key Economic Indicators ....................................................................
Table 2: Indicators o f World Bank Lending Portfolio (FY03 - FY06) .........................................
Table 3: Proposed ESW Program FY 2007-2010 .........................................................................
Table 4: Proposed Lending Program FY 2007-2010 ....................................................................
Table 5: Triggers for Lending.......................................................................................................

9
27
37
38
39

Figures
Figure 1: Labor market developments are critical to poverty alleviation in FYR Macedonia....... 5
Figure 2: Major Obstacles to Firm Activity in fYR Macedonia. 2005 ........................................ 11
Figure 3 : Customs Clearance Times Have Fallen in Kumanovo .................................................. 17
Figure 4: Bribes at Customs Have Fallen Dramatically ...............................................................
17
Figure 5: Bribes for Business Licensing Have Fallen Dramatically.............................................
18
Figure 6: Bribes Related to Courts Have Fallen. Process o f Enforcing Contracts Has Improved 19
Figure 7 . Bribes Related to Procurement Have N o t Fallen .......................................................... 22
Boxes
Box 1: Improving Governance in the Health Sector in fYRMacedonia ....................................... 21
Box 2: Client Survey.....................................................................................................................
41
Box 3 : Anticipated Development Challenges which the CPS i s Designed to Influence .............- 4 3
The following W o r l d Bank staff contributed to the preparation o f the CPS: James Anderson. Husam
Mohamed Beides. David S . Bemstien. Gordon Betcherman. Zarko Bogoev. Denis Boskovski. Rajna
Cemerska. Sarbani Chakraborty. Olav Rex Christensen. Bruce J. Courtney. W i l l i a m R. Dillinger. Gary J.
Fine. Michele Gragnolati. Paulus A . Guitink. Dominic S . Haazen. Ardo Hansson. B e k i m Imeri. Robert
A . Jauncey. Peter Johansen. Christine Kessides. Andrew C . Kircher. Julian A . Lampietti. Toby Linden.
Silvia Minotti. Bojana Naceva. Evgenij Najdov. Snjezana Plevko. Kirsten Burghardt Propst. Sarosh
Sattar. Jasminka Sopova. Victoria Stanley. Erik van der Plaats and Jasminka Vamalieva .
The preparation team also includes Gjergi Konda. Margo Thomas and Zoran Martinovski from IFC.
John R. Wille and Mario Marchesini from MIGA .

The CPS team acknowledges the strong support from OPCS colleagues (Erika Jorgensen and Poonam
Gupta) and FINCR (Paul Levy) .

V

FORMER YUGOSLAV REPUBLIC OF MACEDONIA
COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY
EXECUTIVE
SUMMARY
i.
Background. Progress in the former Yugoslav Republic o f Macedonia (fYR Macedonia)
over the past few years has been impressive. In 2001, the country was an IDA borrower and
recovering from the economic, political and social fallout o f an internal conflict. Today (2007),
N R Macedonia i s an IBRD borrower and enjoys EU candidate status. O n the economic front,
macroeconomic stability and predictability have steadily increased, inflation has remained under
control, and barriers to market entry and exit have been reduced by simplifying and accelerating
registration and bankruptcy procedures. Meanwhile, though, economic growth and formal sector
job creation have been disappointing. Growth has averaged only 3.5 percent over the 2003-2006
period. Such growth rates place f Y R Macedonia among the slowest growing economies in E C A
in this period. Also, the recovery remains narrowly based on a few key sectors and
unemployment remains high. W h i l e official data have consistently overstated unemployment, at
over 30 percent, fYR Macedonia’s official unemployment rate i s among the highest in the
region.
ii.
Since 1990, the Bank has actively supported the country’s transition. During the
1990~
Bank
~ support was focused on building the foundations o f a market economy and a stable
macroeconomic framework. Bank assistance was primarily focused on reform o f the financial
and enterprise sector, agriculture, human development public sector reform, infrastructure and
energy, through a series o f sector adjustment loans accompanied by investment lending. Since
fYR Macedonia joined the World Bank Group in 1993, IDA and IBRD commitments to the
country through 38 operations total approximately US$ 780 million and I F C commitments total
over $93 million in I F C funds and more than $25 million in syndications.
iii. Performance during the FY04-06 CAS picked up following concerted efforts to address
key issues and accelerate implementation. During the FY04-06 CAS period, the Bank worked
with the government to deliver a high case lending program o f $166 million, including $60
million for adjustment. The Bank’s program gradually shifted from a public sector to a private
sector focus. The Bank also delivered a program o f Economic and Sector Work (ESW) and
technical assistance that contributed to policy dialogue during the CAS period. The quality o f
portfolio performance significantly improved since 2003. In 2005, fYR Macedonia gained direct
access to foreign capital markets; it has received a credit rating just below investment rate and
successfully issued i t s first Euro bond in December 2005 on relatively favorable terms.
iv.
EU accession. On December 16, 2005 the European Council granted candidate country
status to N R Macedonia. The Council made this decision on the basis o f the substantial
progress made in completing the legislative framework related to the Ohrid Framework
Agreement, as well as fYR Macedonia’s track record in implementing the Stabilization and
Association Agreement (SAA). W h i l e no date to open actual negotiations is specified, the EU

vi

perspective i s a very positive element in reaching consensus across ethnic lines, crucial against
the backdrop o f the Kosovo discussions.

v.
A new government took ofJice with great ambitions. After four years o f opposition, a
new coalition was elected to office in July 2006 on a very concrete election manifesto entitled
“Rebirth in 100 Steps.” Building o n progress made over the last few years, and in the context o f
overarching goals o f EU accession and N A T O membership, these 100 steps focus predominantly
on reforms to accelerate economic growth from i t s current level o f 3.5-4 percent to 6-8 percent in
the next few years. The manifesto was endorsed by all coalition partners, and, in July 2006, the
government presented their new program for the period 2006-2010’ to the Parliament. The
program aims to improve the living standards o f all citizens, increase employment, strengthen
the fight against corruption, develop the democracy, and improve inter-ethnic relations political
stability.
vi.
The WBG will support jYR Macedonia in its efforts to join the European Union.
Overall, the proposed Country Partnership Strategy aims to accelerate fYR Macedonia’s
perspective to j o i n the European Union. The proposed program is w e l l grounded in the policy
priorities o f the government and takes full account o f the priorities as defined in the Stability and
Association program (SAP), and results from consultations with the government and other
stakeholders. In the next four years, fYR Macedonia needs significant investments in i t s
institutional capacity. The road to Europe will not only require the country to design and adopt
EU-compatible standards and regulations, i t also requires building the capacity to implement
them. The WBG program over the next four years expects to play an important role in this
process, including by providing “bridge” financing to allow f Y R Macedonia to benefit faster
from EU pre- accession funds.
vii.
The CPS aims to support the government’s program around two core pillars: i)
fostering economic growth, j o b creation, and increasing the living standards o f all; and (ii)
improving the governance and transparency o f public service delivery to support the market
economy.
Pillar 1: Foster Growth and Job Creation, Increase Living Standards for All. The
WBG will support the governments’ ambitious goals on accelerated growth and j o b creation
through an integrated and multi faceted program. Under this pillar, the WBG will aim to (i)

viii.

maintain macro economic stability, while ensuring proper integration o f EU priorities into the
budget; (ii)
improve business environment, including regulatory reform and proper enforcement
o f contract and creditor rights; (iii)reduce the costs o f capital; (iv) improve the enterprise
sector’s competitiveness, (v) improve agricultural competitiveness; (vi) establish a functioning
land market and institutions; (vii) improve infrastructure for growth by strengthening the
framework for public-private partnerships and invest selectively in energy and transport; (viii)
remove rigidities in labor market regulations and reduce the labor tax wedge; (ix) develop a
productive and appropriately skilled labor force; and (x) use cash transfer systems to encourage
school enrolment and preventive health.
Pillar 2: Public Service Delivery and Supporting Good Governance. Under this pillar,
ix.
the CPS aims to support fYR Macedonia in continuing the progress made in improving

vii

governance and reducing corruption, while deepening reforms in k e y sectors where governance
weaknesses continue to undermine progress in the economic reforms necessary to strengthen the
economy and create jobs. Improved transparency and accountability in service delivery i s
critical to meet the government program on growth, foster human capital, and meet EU
standards. The WBG will support f Y R Macedonia in i t s efforts to (i)continue i t s efforts to
improve the environment o f legal uncertainty and lack o f confidence in the judicial system; (ii)
apply proper public finance principles and governance standards at the municipal level, including
to municipal public enterprises and utility companies; (iii)
continue improving the efficient use
o f public resources and performance monitoring in the provision o f affordable and quality health
services, and (iv) make cash transfer systems more targeted and introduce incentives to
encourage school enrolment and preventive health.
The need for Bank lending is significant over the next four years but is subsequently
likely to wind down as fvR Macedonia moves toward EU Accession and eventual graduation.
The volume o f the proposed lending envelope under the CPS i s significant. The proposed base
case lending envelope equals the high case lending envelope o f the 2003-2006 CAS. This level
accommodates the government’s intention to work closely with the WBG on key areas o f their
reform agenda in order to accelerate conversion towards EU levels and to help build the capacity
to access and implement EU pre-accession funds. At the end o f the CPS period, however, it i s
expected that the country will have gained access to significant EU pre-accession funds, reducing

x.

subsequent borrowing significantly.

Actual lending will be determined by thepace of reforms in key sectors. The pace o f
xi.
reforms thus far, combined with fYR Macedonia’s creditworthiness and low, but stable growth,
warrant a program o f lending support that would encourage progress under the two main pillars
o f the CPS. The base case includes both investment and adjustment lending, and envisages two
or three new loans per year, for a total o f US$220 million over the four years. Under the high
case scenario, this lending program could be augmented by two more investment loans, for a
total o f an additional US$60 million over the four years. Triggers for the base case require
continued satisfactory macroeconomic performance, and proposes selected indicators to make
continued progress on the business climate, while maintaining stability and a continuation o f
satisfactory portfolio performance. The triggers for the high case require meeting all fiscal
targets included in the IMF program as well meeting specific triggers on the energy sector and on
the competition agenda. Developments in f Y R Macedonia are changing rapidly; the lending
program will be reviewed during the planned CPS Progress Report (FY09), to ensure that WBG
support remains fully responsive to evolving needs in the country.

xii.
Risks. Regional instability, especially against the backdrop o f the Kosovo discussions,
could greatly influence the sustainability o f the economic reform efforts. I t could also have a
negative impact on fYR Macedonia’s ability to attract much needed new investments. Domestic
political tensions pose a risk to the implementation o f the government’s reform program as well.
Finally, lack o f progress in the EU accession process could weaken the consensus on the
direction o f the reforms, and could consequently result in a slow down o f reforms. However,
successful implementation o f the program as supported by this CPS, would strengthen N R
Macedonia’s economy, raise living standards o f i t s citizens, and would help f Y R Macedonia to
continue to play i t s model role as a functioning multi-ethnic state in the Balkans.

viii

Country Partnership Strategy forfYR Macedonia FY07-10

FORMER YUGOSLAV REPUBLIC OF MACEDONIA
COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY
I.INTRODUCTION
Progress in the former Yugoslav Republic o f Macedonia ( N R Macedonia) over the past
few years has been impressive. In 2001, the country was an IDA borrower and recovering from
the economic, political and social fallout o f an internal conflict. Today (2007), N R Macedonia
i s an IBRD borrower and enjoys EU candidate status, albeit without a clear date to start the
negotiations. The country has applied for NATO membership, and hopes to j o i n in 2008.
Successive Macedonian governments have made considerable efforts to implement the Ohrid
Framework Agreement, which provided the basis for resolving the 2001 ethnic conflict. To
complement this political progress, f Y R Macedonia governments have been pursuing an
ambitious economic reform program and have successfully preserved macro-economic stability,
though growth performance has not been stellar, especially by regional standards, and
unemployment levels remain extremely high.
1.

2.
The proposed CPS for FY07-10 builds on the experience o f the World Bank Group
(WBG) since the early 1990s. I t aims at hamessing the contributions o f a l l parts o f the World
Bank Group, including I F C and MIGA, and building on fYR Macedonia's progress during the
past few years. At the same time, the strategy i s designed to support the government's goals o f
tackling the stubborn challenges o f growth and unemployment that face the country. Overall, the
CPS aims to accelerate N R Macedonia's perspective to j o i n the European Union. Proposed
activities envisaged under this CPS are focused on two pillars: (i)fostering job-creating
economic growth, and increasing living standards for all, and (ii)improving governance and
transparency in public sector delivery to support a market economy. The CPS will employ a
selected m i x o f investment and policy lending, along with a robust program o f Analytical and
Advisory Activities (AAA) work to support the CPS goals.

11. COUNTRYCONTEXT
A.

Regional Context and Political Developments

3.
FYR Macedonia is a small, land-locked country of about 2 million people with a multiethnic population in the middle of the Western Balkans.' The country embarked upon the
transition process as one o f the smallest and poorest o f the six republics o f the former Socialist
Federal Republic o f Yugoslavia (SFRY). Income per capita at the start o f transition was only
one third o f that in Slovenia and one half o f that in Croatia, while open unemployment stood at
above 20 percent o f the workforce. I t inherited an economy narrowly based in l o w value-added
sectors such as agriculture, textiles and iron and steel production. Tensions were high
throughout the 1990s due to spill-over effects o f nearby hostilities, which severely affected the
1

According to the 2002 census, the population consists o f ethnic Macedonians (64 percent), ethnic Albanians (25
percent), ethnic Turks, (4 percent), ethnic Serbs (1.7 percent), Roma (2.7 percent), and some other small minority
communities.

1

Country Partnership Strategy forjYR Macedonia FY07-10

transition process and economic development o f the country. Free flow o f passengers, trade and
transport was interrupted as a result, and hampered further by many new cross border
requirements for international trade-oriented companies, increasing trade and transportation
transaction costs.

4.
The Western Balkans region is now much calmer and the EUperspective is clearer,
but the road is still long and risks remain. More than a decade after the end o f the Bosnia war
and more than six years after the fall o f the Milosevic regime in Belgrade, the Western Balkans
i s a relatively stable region with free elections and no military conflicts. In Thessaloniki in June
2003, the European Union committed i t s e l f to integrating the countries o f the region, and

reaffirmed the European perspective based on a fair and rigorous conditionality as set out in the
Stabilization and Association Process and the Thessaloniki Agenda. The experience o f Central
and Eastern Europe illustrates best how the institutionalization o f the European integration
perspective i s the most efficient way to foster the overall political, economic and administrative
reforms in prospective new member countries. This i s crucial in the Western Balkans. However,
actual EU accession i s a long term proposition and the region i s s t i l l faced with major
outstanding issues, including the status o f neighboring Kosovo that could disrupt the progress
made over the past years.

5.
Political developments in JYR Macedonia. Over the past 15 years, fYR Macedonia has
been mostly spared from direct violence seen elsewhere in the region. The exception was an
inter-ethnic conflict in 2001, which ended six months later with an internationally mediated
peace agreement called the Framework Agreement for Peace (also known as the Ohrid
Agreement), that provided for the cessation o f hostilities and the increased protection o f the
rights o f ethnic Albanians and other minority groups. Since 2003, considerable progress has
been made in implementing the Ohrid Agreement, including in enhancing the representation o f
minorities in governmental structures. In this context, fYR Macedonia embarked on a significant
decentralization program. The country’s ambition to accede to the EU also provides strong
reintegrating forces that -under the broader framework o f harmonization with Europe- are
fostering increasing economic and political ties within the region and beyond. The two
consecutive regular parliamentary elections in 2002 and 2006 were held peacehlly and largely
democratically. Challenges remain, however, as tensions between the ruling coalition and the
opposition are severe. As pointed out in the latest E C Progress Report (November 2006), the
limited political dialogue seriously impedes the country’s ambition to accede to the EU.
6.
EU accession. O n December 16, 2005 the European Council granted candidate country
status to fYR Macedonia. The Council made this decision on the basis o f the substantial
progress made in completing the legislative framework related to the Ohrid Framework
Agreement, as well as f Y R Macedonia’s track record in implementing the Stabilization and
Association Agreement (SAA). While no date to open actual negotiations i s specified, the
shared goal o f EU integration is a very positive element in what i s s t i l l occasionally a tense
political and ethnic dialogue within the country, crucial against the backdrop o f the Kosovo
discussions. The first EU accession progress report, presented in November 2006, recognized
progress achieved, but noted a slowdown in the pace o f reforms in 2006, probably due to the
elections in mid 2006. The report outlines specific recommendations o f the Commission in a
number o f areas, stressing areas such as police and judicial reforms, the fight against corruption

2

Country Partnership Strategy forJrR Macedonia FY07-IO

and organized crime, the need to secure depolitization and capacity in the public sector, and the
need to sustain efforts in implementing the Ohrid Framework Agreement.
7.
Decentralization and urban development. Decentralization, a major element o f the
Ohrid Agreement, has been unfolding in stages. I t was formally launched in mid-2005. The
associated fiscal and administrative reforms could help unlock the economic and especially jobcreating potential o f N R Macedonia’s cities and ease ethnic pressures, provided that public
management at the local level i s strengthened further. Ensuring effective local service delivery
and good governance will require continued cooperation between the central government and the
elected municipal governments, as well as cooperation among the municipalities themselves.
B.

Economic Developments Since the Last CAS

8.
The civil conflict in 2001 disrupted a brief period of positive economic momentum.
Although direct damage from the conflict was limited, investment activity markedly dropped,
and output contracted by 4.5 percent in 2001. Defense-related expenditures pushed the budget
and current account deficits to 7 percent o f GDP. The effects o f the conflict were s t i l l clearly felt
in 2002 as investment and export growth remained sluggish while budget and current account
deficits remained high.
9.
Economic recovery gradually took hold in subsequent years as the budget deficit was
quickly eliminated in 2003 and structural reforms gradually resumed. The budget has
remained roughly balanced since 2003 while expenditures were reduced from 40 percent o f GDP
in 2002 to about 35 percent o f GDP in 2005. The tight fiscal policy contributed to a reduction in
the current account deficit. In 2005, the current account deficit fell to 1.4 percent o f GDP
following a 4 percentage points o f GDP increase in recorded private transfers to 17.7 percent o f
GDP, the highest in Southeast Europe. These transfers increased by an additional 1 percentage
point o f GDP in 2006 as the current account moved to a small surplus o f 0.4 percent o f GDP.
The overall balance o f payments has strengthened considerably as gross reserves increased to
about 4.5 months o f imports. In this environment, external and public debt ratios have gradually
declined to less than 40 percent o f GDP.

10.
While prudent macroeconomic policies have firmly established macroeconomic
stability, economic growth and formal sector job creation have been disappointing. Recorded
growth has averaged only 3.5 percent over the 2003-2006 period. Such growth rates place fYR
Macedonia among the slowest growing economies in E C A in this period. Also, the recovery
remains narrowly based on a few key sectors and unemployment remains high. W h i l e official
data have consistently overstated Unemployment, N R Macedonia’s official unemployment rate
i s among the highest in the region. High and persistent unemployment statistics reflect l o w new
job creation in the formal sector. In part this i s due to an overly restrictive labor market and a
high tax wedge.2 I t i s also due to the poor corporate governance which emerged following a
mainly insider-oriented privatization process in the mid-nineties, which brought neither adequate
2

The new Labor L a w adopted in July 2005 significantly eased labor market restrictions. The n e w government has
already reduced the tax wedge and i s contemplating a switch to general budget financing o f health expenditures in
an effort to h r t h e r reduce payroll taxes.

Country Partnership Strategy forJrR Macedonia FY07-IO

knowledge and capital transfers, nor access to markets and finance. On the contrary, fYR
Macedonia’s corporate structure s t i l l tends to favor status quo over encouraging new entry and
increased competition. An overly burdensome business regulatory environment until recently
hampered new business startups and j o b creation. Collectively, these forces have contributed to
a high unemployment rate by encouraging informality. The informal economy in f Y R
Macedonia may be well over 40 percent o f GDP, significantly above the estimated regional
average.

11.
Conversely, at about 20 percent o f GDP the investment rate in fYR Macedonia has
lagged significantly behind faster growing economies in the region. The flow o f FDI into fYR
Macedonia has also been disappointing over the past decade. Apart from the spike in FDI in
2000 and 2001 when the largest bank and the telecom company were privatized and in 2006
when the electricity distribution company was sold, FDI has averaged 1.5 percent o f GDP, one o f
the lowest rates among transition countries. Business climate surveys indicate that the most
serious obstacles to private sector development include: an inefficient and opaque judicial
system, poor access to credit, heavy regulation (especially in labor markets), political risks,
corruption, uncompetitive practices, and policy unpredictability.

’

12.
Exports, a major source o f growth in transition economies, have performed poorly during
the last decade growing by an average o f around 4 percent a year in real terms. The country’s
share in world exports recovered slightly in 2005-2006 but i t i s s t i l l below i t s level in the mid1990s. Macedonian exporters have been able to regain market share in some o f i t s traditional
trading partners, in particular Serbia, Greece, and Germany, but lost shares in eastern markets
such as Ukraine and Russia, and have been unsuccessful in penetrating new markets. fYR
Macedonia s t i l l specializes in low-value added goods (iron and steel, textiles, tobacco,
agriculture produce) and the lack o f FDI has kept the country out o f intra-industry trade linkages
preventing transfer o f technology and limiting market access. In absence o f productivityincreasing investments, the country has managed to remain competitive only due to strong prices
in recent years and through lowering labor costs.

C. FYR Macedonia’s Poverty Profile
With only moderate economic growth, poverty has not decreased since 2002. An
estimated 21 percent o f the population lives below the absolute poverty l i n e indicating that they
are unable to meet their basic food and nonfood needs. Some 7 percent o f the population has
expenditures so l o w that they are unable to even acquire a minimum level o f calories. However,
the stagnation in the level o f poverty masks internal changes occurring in f Y R Macedonia:
urban poverty in secondary towns has risen while rural poverty has fallen. This i s not surprising,
taking into account that these areas were largely dependent o n employment by former SOEs
which failed to restructure successfully.

13.

14.
Not holding a job is a major cause of poverty and unemployment affects younger
people disproportionately. Only 33 percent o f the poor working age population i s employed,
compared with 46 percent o f the non-poor p ~ p u l a t i o n . ~The differences are particularly
3

Household survey data, 2004

4

Country Partnership Strategy forjYR Macedonia FY07-10

important in urban areas. W h i l e the poor tend to be active to almost the same extent as the nonpoor, they suffer from much higher unemployment rates - some 60 percent o f the poor in Skopje
were unemployed in 2004. The average unemployed person i s 35 years old, compared to 41
years for the employed; two fifths o f the unemployed are less than 30 years old, compared to 17
percent o f the employed. Labor markets are therefore critical to understanding the poverty
situation.
Figure
1: Labor market developments are critical to poverty alleviation in FYR Macedonia.
Average consumption (2002=100) and poverty

-P
106

-

105

7

104

t

103

c consumpbon (left) -Urban

Poverly (right) -Rural

T"

-f

I:

-

99 *
97

50

- 23

101 t

98

npoor

- 25

102 I
100

Labor market indicators, poor and non-poor, 2004.

Poverty(nght)

2003

2034

45 3

40
30

20

4 17
2w2

.

~Non-poor

10

15

0

Actiwty rates

Unemployment rates

15.
Growth has generated some jobs -but few well paying jobs- which may explain the
slow poverty reduction. Between the first quarter o f 2004 and the second quarter o f 2006,
employment rates4 increased from around 33 percent to around 35 percent. The higher
employment rates reflect an increase in activity rates -more people holding or looking for a jobcoupled with a small fall in unemployment rates. Poverty data are not available for this year, but
given the strong correlation between poverty and unemployment, chances are that they will have
fallen, i f only slightly. The welfare o f the poor in particular has been adversely impacted by the
low level o f j o b creation leaving the poor's rate o f unemployment to stand at 50 percent
compared to about 30 percent for the non-poor. Moreover, the jobs poor people find tend to be
poorly paid, insecure and seasonal jobs. As a result, poor people derive more o f their income
from informal sector activity and social assistance compared to the non-poor.
16.
Employment status, household size and the educational level of the head of household
determine income per capita. Thus, people with limited education obtain l o w paying jobs on
which they usually have to support large families, including economically inactive adults. In
contrast to the difficulties o f the prime age population and their dependents, poverty
systematically declines with age, and poverty among the elderly i s lower than among other age
groups. This suggests that pensions play an important role in mitigating old age poverty.
Finally, a cross-cutting correlate o f poverty i s ethnicity with poverty being higher among the
Roma as well as ethnic Albanians.
17.
Non-monetary dimensions of poverty (in particular, poor housing conditions and low
education) affect another 30 percent of the population. However, poverty in all dimensions for
individuals i s rare, meaning that few persons suffer across all dimensions o f income and non4

The share o f the population aged over 15 that actually was employed

5

Country Partnership Strategy forJrR Macedonia FY07-IO

income poverty. Health indicators, school enrollment rates and access to and reliability o f
infrastructure services appear to be in line with national income per capita. In particular, there
have been large improvements in access to secondary and tertiary education over the last 15
years. This being said, access and quality o f the services received by the poor or less affluent
people lag considerably behind the non-poor.

III.FYR MACEDONIA’S
LONG-TERM
VISION, MEDIUM-TERMPLANS, AND
OUTLOOK
A.

FYR Macedonia’s Long-Term Vision and European Integration

18.

Prospects for faster growth have improved. Over the last four years, a number o f
important reforms have been implemented. Macroeconomic stability and predictability have
steadily increased, inflation has remained under control, and barriers to market entry and exit
have been reduced by simplifying and accelerating registration and bankruptcy procedures. The
launch o f a new “one-stop shop” business registration system in January 2006 significantly eased
the time, cost and burden o f registering new business. The new system provides a transparent
registration for new businesses and has reduced registration time from 48 days to 5 days. A
comprehensive judicial reform was launched in 2005 which, if vigorously implemented, will
firmly establish the r u l e o f law including creditor, contract and property rights. After engaging
in a critical dialogue with social partners regarding an overhaul o f the labor law and institutions
to introduce more flexibility into fYR Macedonian labor markets, a new Labor L a w was enacted
in July 2005. In the banking sector, supervision, regulations as well as governance are being
strengthened. Finally, the country has been successfully brought to candidacy status o f the
European Union. The latest Progress Report o f the European Commission notes that f Y R
Macedonia i s well advanced in establishing a functioning market economy, having maintained a
broad consensus on the essentials o f economic policies, though sustained efforts will remain
critical to enable the country to cope with competitive pressure and market forces within the
Union in the medium-term.

19.
But challenges remain. Enterprises in fYR Macedonia have not undergone the dynamics
o f restructuring witnessed in other countries in the region. This i s in part due to the poor
corporate governance which emerged following privatization (see paragraph 41 below). Unfair
competition practices s t i l l occur and may discourage potential new f i r m s from entering the
market. In fact, fYR Macedonia has been much less successful than other countries in the region
in attracting greenfield FDI and new domestic firms. In a number o f transition countries, de
novo small and medium enterprises have been a major source o f new j o b creation.
Unfortunately, fYR Macedonia lags far behind in this area. FYR Macedonia’s investment to
GDP ratio also lags behind faster growing transition countries. Institutional weaknesses, such as
cumbersome administrative procedures and corruption, as well as a l o w degree o f legal certainty
and predictability o f economic and regulatory policies encumber the business climate and a
proper functioning o f the market economy. Labor and financial markets are s t i l l functioning
unevenly, and the informal sector distorts the economy, resulting in unfair competition practices
and weaker consumers’ protection. These flaws in the investment climate have been

6

County Partnership Strategy f o r j Y R Macedonia FYO7-I 0

compounded by weak public sector governance which further undermines investor sentiment.
Improvements in this area will be essential, also to deal with the complex EU accession
requirements.

Priorities o f the government
20.
A new government took office with great ambitions. A new coalition was elected to
office in July 2006 o n a very concrete election manifesto entitled “Rebirth in 100 Steps.” These
100 steps focus predominantly o n economic reforms aimed at accelerating economic growth
from i t s current level o f 3.5-4 percent to 6-8 percent in the next few years. The Manifesto was
endorsed by all coalition partners, and, in July 2006, the government presented their new
program for the period 2006-2010 to the Parliament. The main goals o f the program are to
improve the living standards o f all citizens, increase employment, strengthen the fight against
corruption, further develop democracy, and improve inter-ethnic relations and political stability.
21.
EU and NATO membership. The program says EU and NATO integration are o f
paramount priority for fYR Macedonia, and plans to finalize the remaining reforms, while
promoting peace and stability in the country and in the region through respect o f democratic
principles.
22.
Spur dynamic economic development, reduce the grey economy and create jobs. To
achieve the stretched goals o f accelerated growth and j o b creation, the government’s strategy
includes a wide ranging set o f policies to spur economic activity and create jobs and increase
living standards o f the population. Some active labor market policies are envisaged as well.
Within a disciplined, though slightly more relaxed fiscal policy framework, the government has
started to reduce taxes and redirect public spending towards capital investments.

23.

Improve business climate. Structural reforms to improve the investment climate are
central to the program, in particular by: (i)
reducing the burden o f superfluous business
regulations by introducing a regulatory “guillotine” (for existing regulations) and requiring a
regulatory impact assessment (for new regulations); (ii)reducing the business registration
process time further from five to three days; (iii)
completing the land cadastre and real estate
registry; (iv) ensuring a more efficient and competitive financial system; (v) further increasing
labor market flexibility; and (vi) protecting ownership rights, contract enforcement and
shareholders rights.
24.
Increase fyR’s Macedonia competitiveness, and improve the performance of the
agriculture sector. Investments in technology, knowledge and education will be increased to
improve the competitiveness o f the Macedonian economy, including its agricultural sector.
Agriculture will also be supported, inter alia by the development o f the agricultural land market,
the international promotion o f Macedonian agricultural products, increased access o f farmers to
credit and the development o f certified organic foods.

25.

Attract new market entrants to boost competition. The government’s strategy places a
great deal o f emphasis o n attracting new entrants to the market. The government i s actively
seeking to promote greenfield FDI and has appointed two ministers without portfolio and a

7

Country Partnership Strategy f o r j Y R Macedonia FY07-10

number o f consulting agencies to attract foreign investment. I t i s strengthening staffing, funding
and international network for i t s investment promotion agency (MacInvest). The government
has also started advertising heavily in major western business publications and i s providing a
package o f incentives to potential investors.

26.

Governance and public service delivery. Under government plans, public service
delivery would be improved through increased transparency and quality o f public institutions to
implement reforms. The program calls for improved governance, including implementation o f
the judicial reforms, and a decisive fight against corruption. Telecommunication costs will be
reduced by increasing competition, and investments to expand road, electricity generation, and
irrigation networks, including through concessions and public-private partnerships (PPPs), are
envisaged. Railways will be modernized and internet penetration stimulated. The functioning o f
the energy market will be improved. Increased enrolment in (higher quality) education will be
stimulated, as will enhanced quality in the health care sector through increased transparency and
efficiency. Decentralization will continue, with adequate attention for a clearer definition o f the
competencies o f local authorities. Finally, social policies will be more closely linked to the job
market.

27.
Implementation of theprogram has started. A number o f concrete steps o f the Program
have already been implemented. Within months o f taking office, the government reduced the
VAT for selected agriculture inputs and -effective January 2007- corporate and personal income
tax rates were reduced and unified. At 12 percent, these rates are now among the lowest in the
region. The zero taxation policy on reinvested profits has been introduced as well, with a 50
percent cap to limit loss o f revenue. A third mobile telephone provider was licensed in February
2007, the regulatory “guillotine” system was launched in January 2007, and many other
measures are under preparation.

B. The Medium-TermEconomic Outlook
FYR Macedonia could achieve faster growth in the medium-term. The projections
28.
presented here assume continuing improvements in regional stability, domestic political stability,
prudent macroeconomic policies and strong and sustained reform implementation. Under these
assumptions, the medium-term macroeconomic outlook is positive.
Increasing investment to GDP. The government’s reform program builds o n recently
improving growth prospects by focusing on sustained improvements in the investment climate.
Acceleration o f economic growth to levels recently achieved in neighboring countries ultimately
w i l l depend on a positive private sector response to these emerging improvements in the
investment climate. Attracting new entrants to the market, both greenfield FDI and de novo
small and medium enterprises, gradually increasing the investment to GDP ratio, continuing the
expansion o f credit and reduction in real lending rates, will be essential ingredients for
accelerating growth, exports, and j o b creation.

29.

8

Country Partnership StrategyforjYR Macedonia FY07-IO

National Accounts
GDP (US$million)
Real GDP growth rate
Investments (percentage o f GDP)
Gross National Savings (percentage o f GDP)
Fiscal Accounts (Dercentage o f GDP)
Expenditures

I

I

Actual

5,368
4.1
21.4
13.7

I

1

Estimate

5,766
3.8
20.0
18.6

1

Proiected

6,217
3.2
22.1
22.5

1

6,699
4.5
22.8
19.6

1

7,216
5 .O
23.2
19.8

1

7,730
5.0
23.8
19.8

I

8,278
5.0
24.6
19.7

1
1

I

I

Deficit. including grants
External Accounts (percentage o f GDP)
Exports o f Goods and Services
Imports o f Goods and Services
Current Account balance, including transfers
External debt*
Gross Reserves (months o f next year's imports)

36.1

1

35.3

1

34.7

1

33.7

I

33.3

1

33.5

1

33.5

0.4

1

0.2

1

-0.5

1

-1.0

1

-1.0

1

-1.0

1

-1.0

38.8
60.5
-7.7
37.9
3.3

48.2
67.7
0.4
38.4
4.5

43.6
62.5
-1.4
39.1
3.8

49.0
69.5
-3.2
38.0
4.4

49.1
70.3
-3.5
38.7
4.8

49.3
70.5
-4.0
38.8
4.6

49.5
70.6
-4.9
38.7
4.4
I

1

Inflation
Consumer Prices (period average)
*/ includes short-. medium- and long-term debt.

I

-0.4

I

0.5

I

3.2

I

3.1

I

2.4

I

1.8

1

I

1.8

Reduce perceived political risks. Sustained improvements in the investment climate
30.
would also require a reduction in perceived political and geopolitical risk. The continued
implementation o f the Ohrid Agreement, continued progress toward eventual EU membership,
and the successful implementation o f a final status arrangement in neighboring Kosovo
ultimately could prove as important to the investment climate in fYR Macedonia as the
envisaged economic reform program.
The government's medium-term fiscal strategy is ambitious. I t aims at continuing the
gradual decline in public debt ratios achieved in recent years and reducing the burden o f
distortionary taxation. The government has already announced plans to further reduce corporate
and personal income tax rates to 10 percent in 2008. I t s proposed reallocation o f public
expenditures towards public investment concurrent with a gradual reduction in the expenditure to
GDP ratio and efficiency gains could better support growth.

3 1.

32.

Moderate current account deficit. The current account deficit i s projected to grow
gradually to about 5 percent o f GDP as aggregate demand increases. Prospects for export growth
should slowly improve as structural reforms introduce greater competition and attract FDI which
will gradually increase the competitiveness o f Macedonian f i r m s and their ability to produce
higher-value added goods and services. Planned privatizations would finance the increased
current account deficit in the next two years and a gradual increase in greenfield investment in
the medium-term would help ensure that external debt remain modest at around 40 percent o f
GDP .

9

I

Country Partnership StrategyforJrR Macedonia FY07-10

33.
Gross external financing requirements are expected to remain modest at about $1
billion per year over the medium-term. These would be required to finance a current account
deficit o f $350 to $400 million, amortization payments o f a similar magnitude and a gradual
increase in net foreign reserves. Net FDI flows could cover roughly 40 percent o f total financing
needs. Debt ratios would remain modest and stable. Debt sustainability i s not likely to be a
concern during this CPS period.

IV. FYR MACEDONIA’S
DEVELOPMENT
CHALLENGES
A. Accelerating Economic Growth and Job Creation

34.
Accelerating and sustaining growth is needed to achieve the government’s ambitious
economic and social objectives and for putting f l R Macedonia on the road to EU Accession.
I t i s primarily through j o b creation that the benefits o f this growth will be transmitted to
Macedonian citizens. Improving employment obviously will require greater demand for labor
through economic growth. But it will also call for supply-side interventions to enhance the skills
o f the labor force and to provide incentives for workers to increase their participation in the labor
market. Job creation will be c q c i a l to increase living standards and reduce poverty, ensure
financing for public investments in health, education, and social protection, maintain political
stability and enable fYR Macedonia to take fuller advantage o f EU accession. As high
unemployment has been a long lasting problem for fYR Macedonia, addressing this issue will
not be easy.
35.
The job creation challenge can only be met through a multi-faceted approach that
encompasses both labor demand and supply. FYR Macedonia has n o w approved a National
Employment Strategy and a National Action Plan for Employment. These documents have been
prepared w i t h support and assistance from the EU. However, while the strategy and action plan
addresses many important issues, the country’s jobs agenda must be broader in scope, involving
reforms in many sectors beyond the labor market. A comprehensive approach to improving
employment requires efforts in a number o f areas that encompass sound economic and regulatory
policies, an attractive investment climate, efficient labor market regulations and institutions,
education and training systems that develop relevant and high-quality skills, and a social safety
net that offers protection while encouraging e m p l ~ y a b i l i t y . ~

36.
The current macroeconomic situation should be favorable for growth and job creation,
but continued prudence is essential. Macro stability, for the most part, i s not a binding
constraint to investment in N R Macedonia. Inflation i s low, foreign debt levels are moderate
(below 40%), the budget deficit has been maintained at below 1 percent o f GDP, and the current
account deficit is, at below 2 percent, the lowest in the region. Concurrent with the decline in the
current account deficit, international reserves have increased substantially.
With these
developments, the Central Bank has been a net purchaser o f foreign exchange since early 2005
and has been able to ease monetary policy while maintaining the de facto pegged exchange rate
5

This approach i s consistent with the MILES framework that has been used in recent labor market assessments.

10

County Partnership Strategy f o r j Y R Macedonia FY07-10

regime. Private sector credit has grown by more than 20 percent per annum over the past few
years and i s likely to continue to grow at such a pace as interest rates continue to decline. With
the new flat tax o f 12 percent, fYR Macedonia now has the lowest personal income tax and
corporate income tax in Europe. Continued prudence in macroeconomic management will be
key to attracting investments and enabling firms to grow and create jobs.

37.
Making
the
business
climate more favorable for
investors is critical. Firm surveys
consistently indicate that an
unfavorable investment climate i s
among the most
important
constraints to growth and j o b
creation in fYR Macedonia. The
results o f the latest BEEPS survey
o f f i r m s demonstrate the range o f
constraints in the investment
climate that limit growth and j o b
creation in fYR Macedonia
(Figure 2). Most important are
issues related to financing, anticompetitive
practices
and
corruption,
enforcement
of
contracts, the functioning o f the
judiciary, and licensing and
regulations. W h i l e access to land,
workforce skills and infrastructure
weaknesses are farther down the
list, experience elsewhere shows
that they w i l l rise in importance as
soon as the economy starts taking
off.
Most o f these factors
originate from national policies
and institutions, but can also be
affected by the municipalities,
especially if they become more
proactive.

Figure 2: Major Obstacles to Firm Activity in fYR
Macedonia, 2005
(% o f f i r m s reporting as major or severe obstacles)
Cost of financing
Antkconpetitbe practices of others
Contract violations
Corruption
Tax rates
Functioning of the judiciary
Access to financing
Uncertainty about regulatory policies
Tax adninistratbn
Business licensing and pernits
Macroeconomic instabilty
Custom and trade regulations
Street crime, theft and disorder
Organised c r i m / m f i a
Labour regulations
Oectricity
Teleconnunications
Skills and education of workers
Transportation
Access to land
Ttle or leasing of land
0

0.15

0.3

0.45

0.6

0.75

Source: BEEPS 2005

38.
The cost of capital needs to be reduced and access to capital improved. Despite falling
interest rates over the last three years, the cost o f financing remains the most important reported
factor constraining business activity. Recent reductions in the Central Bank rates have only
partially been translated into commercial banks rates, suggesting a relatively uncompetitive
banking climate, l o w banking efficiency and difficulties in assessing credit risks o f potential
borrowers. Better financial information on enterprise performance would help improve access to
capital. I t will also help lenders and investors to better evaluate corporate prospects, and make
informed investment decisions.

11

Country Partnership Strategy for f r R Macedonia FY07-I 0

39.
Changes have been introduced to make the costs of doing business low andpredictable,
but further reforms are needed. Progress has been made to improve the investment climate,
including judicial reforms to ensure better contract and property protection, land and real estate
cadastre, enterprise registration, and bankruptcy legislation. However, these reforms are
incomplete, and the agenda needs to focus on some o f the key remaining bottlenecks. An
illustration o f the remaining challenge i s that fYR Macedonia i s s t i l l at a disappointing 92”d place
o n the overall “ease o f doing business measure” in Doing Business 2007.
Addressing concerns of uncertainty over business regulations is now a priority. The
government i s strongly committed to regulatory reform and i s in process to revamp regulations
affecting the business sector, improving the quality o f both existing and new regulations. A
proper institutional framework has been designed to guide the process at the central government
level. To deal with the existing stock o f business regulations, a so-called “guillotine” system has
been launched in February 2007, requiring a vigorous re-evaluation and re-justification o f
current business regulations. For fbture regulations, the government will implement a regulatory
impact assessment (RIA) system and institutionalize mandatory consultation mechanisms with
the business community.

40.

Promote Competition. The enterprise restructuring process that followed the privatization
o f the 1990s has not led to the innovation and managerial improvements that would increase the
competitiveness o f the private sector. About 60 percent o f all privatizations in fYR Macedonia in
the 1990s occurred through “insider” buy-outs and this s t i l l affects -even after 10 years- the
efficiency, managerial performance, and competitiveness o f Macedonian enterprises. Although
the private sector share in GDP i s close to 65 percent, and growing, EBRD’s Transition
Indicators s t i l l score fYR Macedonia rather l o w for enterprise restructuring. Remaining
opportunities for unfair competition practices, (e.g., tolerated arrears in taxation, wage and social
contribution or energy bills) need to be addressed rigorously. There are serious problems in the
implementation o f the public procurement law and the related sub-legislative instruments that
result in unfair competitive practices in public procurement; these problems must be addressed.
Moreover, the remaining liberalization agenda requires aggressive implementation, in particular
in the telecommunication and air transportation sectors, where lack o f competition i s resulting in
extremely high prices, hurting the private sector and the public alike.

4 1.

Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) and trade with more developed countries will help
improve the competitiveness of Macedonian companies. In general, Macedonian companies
need to improve their competitiveness; they are adjusting too slowly to new market opportunities
and investing too little in technology adaptation, development o f new products, and in training
and skills upgrading o f their managers and staff, Experience elsewhere shows that FDI and
increased regional and global trade have important side benefits, such as faster transfer o f
knowledge, technology and improved managerial capacity and better access to foreign markets.
FDI levels have been very l o w even by Western Balkan standards, and significant greenfield FDI
i s only starting now. Improving this record i s a top priority for the government and i t plans to
implement various measures to this end. Trading with countries that have a more advanced
knowledge and technology base can also generate positive “learning” spillovers. However, trade
with more technically sophisticated EU partners i s relatively low. With the recent accession of

42.

12

County Partnership Strategy forJrR Macedonia FY07-IO

Bulgaria and Romania to the EU, N R Macedonia now enjoys two EU borders (with Greece to
the south). This allows for increased investments and access to the deep EU market, but also
bears the risk that trade and transit more easily bypasses the country altogether. Thus, actions to
alleviate non-tariff cross border barriers become even more pressing.
Improving agricultural competitiveness is especially important, also in view of the EU
accession process. Agriculture accounts for 16 percent o f GDP and some 20 percent o f
employment. The sector i s also crucial for the rural economy, where almost h a l f the population
lives. Sector performance over the last decade has been mixed, largely dependent on weather
conditions. Constraints to competitiveness include l o w levels o f investment in farm technology
and supply chains as well as underdeveloped land and rural credit markets. As with other
countries in the region, increasing trade liberalization and modernization o f the economy are
transforming Macedonian agriculture. W h i l e opportunities presented by increased trade are
great, unless producers and ago-processors can become more competitive, they will have trouble
maintaining and increasing external and internal market share as low-cost, high-quality imports
increase.

43.

44.

Overcoming these constraints calls for effective public sector actions to resolve market
failures and create an enabling environment for the private sector through transparent,
predictable policies and regulations and investment in public goods. FYR Macedonia’s recently
acquired status as an EU candidate country presents opportunities in the form o f significant
additional assistance for the sector, but also imposes additional institutional and regulatory
requirements. In light o f increasing resources and competition in regional markets, fYR
Macedonia urgently needs to raise Ministry o f Agriculture, Forestry and Water Economy’s
(MAFWE’s) weak institutional and human capacity to facilitate agriculture modernization. In
addition, the labor shedding that will occur once the sector becomes more competitive will
require careful management.

45.

Efficient infrastructure and energy supply are also necessary for spurring growth,
increasing international trade and improving the business climate more generally. Except for
some bottlenecks, the capacity o f the road and rail transport infrastructure i s sufficient but
management and maintenance i s inadequate. Structural reforms and institutional strengthening
are necessary to improve efficiency in transport asset conservation, based o n well-informed
programming and budgeting o f maintenance needs. International transport l i n k s are crucial for
the country, and N R Macedonia’s active participation in the core transport network
strengthening between the European U n i o n and i t s neighboring countries i s very important. The
fragmented railway system can only fully benefit from new freight transportation opportunities
in steel and other industries, if it ensures uninterrupted longer distance railway links.
Furthermore, like the other SEE countries, N R Macedonia has signed the European Common
Aviation Area (ECAA) agreement, but to reap the benefits o f this extension, the country will
have to implement ambitious aviation sector reforms. Finally, fYR Macedonia i s a signatory o f
the Energy Community o f South East Europe (ECSEE) Treaty to promote integration o f SEE
energy markets. Due to i t s advantageous location, and with further improvement in the
performance o f i t s energy sector and increased investment in infrastructure, the country i s in a
position to take full advantage o f i t s participation in the regional power market.

13

Country Partnership Strategy forfYR Macedonia FYO7-I 0

46.
Labor market regulations and institutions are important for protecting workers, but
they also can play a key role in supporting growth and job creation. The 2005 Labor L a w
represents an important step in bringing Macedonian labor market rules in line with the norms o f
a market economy, but the reform agenda i s s t i l l incomplete. Enterprise surveys suggest that
almost one-third o f f i r m s s t i l l consider labor regulations as a severe factor constraining their
growth and, therefore, j o b creation. Further reforms to make contracting more flexible are
needed. Moreover, compliance with labor laws i s s t i l l problematic, which hinders both worker
protection and the formalization o f employment. Although more appropriate regulations should
naturally lead to better self-enforcement, improving the enforcement capacity o f the Labor
Inspectorate will also be needed to reduce non-registration and other forms o f non-compliance.
Reducing the labor tax wedge would encourage job creation. In fYR Macedonia, the
47.
labor tax wedge i s around 40 percent with little variation by wage levels. The tax wedge has
already been reduced slightly with recent changes in the income tax. The government i s
considering reducing payroll taxes further by switching to general budget financing o f health
expenditures. Cuts in social contributions need to be analyzed carefully to assess both the likely
employment payoff as well as the fiscal implications for the social insurance funds. The
administration o f the collection should be addressed as well. The new system o f collecting
pension contributions has been implemented since January 2006 and allows better control o f
compliance, although -as for all social contributions- the enforcement system s t i l l needs to be
strengthened. The important harmonization o f contribution bases across the different systems i s
now underway. The basis for calculating contributions should be shifted from the current netwage basis to a simpler gross-wage formula that i s considered best practice, and has already been
implemented elsewhere in the region.

48.

Skills of the workforce need to be upgraded. In fYR Macedonia, about one-quarter o f
firms identify the skills o f the workforce as a serious obstacle to growth, but in more dynamic
sectors, skills appear to be a more serious problem. As the country further integrates into the
European and global economies, i t will need to seriously reform education at all levels to ensure
that i t s workforce remains competitive. As these efforts are long t e r m in nature, action needs to
be taken now. Education and training have simply not kept up with the changing demands o f the
post-transition economy. At least 40 percent o f today’s youth do not finish secondary school.
International assessments o f learning outcomes consistently show that young Macedonians have
not achieved the skill levels o f their counterparts in the EU and other OECD countries. The
government has proposed making secondary education compulsory and this i s an important step.
But it needs to be accompanied by a significant shift in the type o f curriculum and teaching
offered to students; away from narrow vocationally-oriented courses towards stronger general
education competencies plus encouraging creativity, team work, and problem-solving. There i s
also virtually n o opportunity for the large number o f dropouts to get back o n track through
second chance programs. In higher education, fYR Macedonia needs to press ahead with
reforming the curriculum to make i t more relevant to the labor market, to fulfill the requirements
o f integration into the European higher education area (the Bologna Process), and to restructure
i t s research capacity.

49.
Social protection programs can safeguard the income of workers from shocks to
employment, and can help them reintegrate into the labor market. The task o f cushioning

14

Country Partnership Strategy forjYR Macedonia FY07-10

adjustment costs for workers i s hampered by a relatively small but complicated and nontransparent social assistance system, with few incentives or support to reintegrate into the labor
market. The government plans to revamp this system, including introducing conditional cash
transfers for poor families with children to break the inter-generational poverty cycle. At the
same time, the ongoing pension reform should eventually reduce the burden o n the contribution
rate while broadening and improving the support offered by the system.
The effectiveness of the other two key elements of social protection for workers unemployment benefits and active labor market programs (ALMPs) - also needs to be
significantly improved. Currently, unemployment insurance does not play i t s intended role o f
offering temporary support to active j o b seekers. Most o f the current recipients are, in fact, longterm beneficiaries who are being given unemployment benefits as a transition to eventually
receiving pensions. W h i l e addressing the problem o f laid-off workers i s complex, this solution
eliminates any possibility for an actuarially balanced Unemployment Fund (UF) and for a truly
effective unemployment benefit system. Active labor market programs have been used on a very
limited scale until now. The government does intend to increase i t s investment in these
programs with the assistance o f the EU and others and, if implemented effectively and taking
into account lessons learned from international experience, this could enhance employment.

50.

B. Improving Governance in fYR Macedonia
5 1.
As in countries throughout Central and Eastern Europe, by the late 1990s governance
issues became seen as key constraints to progress in JYR Macedonia. As recently as 2005,
most f i r m s continued to rank corruption as an obstacle to the operation and growth o f businesse6
Addressing corruption concerns continues to be a high priority o f Macedonian citizens
(following unemployment and p ~ v e r t y ) . ~Other obstacles voiced by f i r m s also point to
weaknesses in the system o f governance; f i r m s complain about the functioning o f the judiciary
and, as a direct consequence, about contract violations by suppliers and customers. Dramatic
improvements in the business environment for f i r m s are required, both through better
governance o f the regulatory bodies that impinge upon business activity, and through more
efficient and transparent provision o f the public goods and services upon which Macedonians
rely.

52.
All governments since 1998 have won elections on strong anti-corruption platforms,
and the 2006 elections raised the profile even further. The l i s t s o f legislation adopted and
institutions established covering this area and the governance framework more broadly i s
extensive and mostly in l i n e with good international experiences. In addition to passing an
anticorruption strategy and action plan -common first steps in many countries- fYR Macedonia
has followed up with the implementation o f legislation guaranteeing free access to information,
introduction o f e-government procedures in some areas, establishment o f a special commission

6

EBRD-World Bank Business Environment and Enterprise Performance Survey 2005 (BEEPS)
UNDP Early Warning Report Macedonia, December 2006. http://www.undp,org.mk; W h i l e only 3.9% of
respondents said that reducing corruption should be the top priority of the government, some 42% said that
corruption was one o f the top three issues that worry them.
1

15

Country Partnership Strategy f o r j Y R Macedonia FY07-IO

to check asset disclosures o f public official and investigate cases o f corruption, and has gradually
been strengthening the capacity o f key oversight institutions such as the State Audit Office.

53.
The government has taken steps to repair the disconnect between the anti-corruption
legal framework and enforcement actions. Charges have been brought against high-ranking
current and former officials, judgments were issued in some long-lasting corruption cases, and
other signs o f serious intentions have begun to build credibility for the government
anticorruption programs. However, these efforts need to be sustained in order to avoid suffering
the same outcome as similar efforts in the past and in order to have an impact o n the perceptions
o f corruption and trust in institutions.
54.
The signing of the Stabilization and Association Agreement (SAA) with the EU has
increased consensus among political parties on the need to sustain progress in improving
governance. The experience o f the EU’s newest members, Bulgaria and Romania, has made i t
clear that the European Commission places great importance o n controlling corruption as a
precondition for accession. The Macedonian authorities -both through statements and actionshave signaled that they intend to be proactive in addressing corruption. Although certain
principles o f good governance are universal -transparency, accountability, and voice for
example- the binding constraints are not the same in all sectors. In some areas the institutions of
transparency are strong, while the capacity for implementation i s weak; in others major sector
reorganizations may be required to reduce the incentives for corrupt behavior. This CPS calls for
an expanded focus o n the most critical governance weaknesses and the ways that the WBG can
work with N R Macedonia to address them. Some activities will be oriented directly toward
improving cross-cutting institutions o f governance, while others will address weaknesses in key
sectors.
Recognizing progress in kev sectors, and helping to achieve even more
55.

Improving governance requires transparent, open and accountable public institutions,
but also greater efficiency in the public sector. FYR Macedonia’s efforts to improve
transparency in customs and to build accountability through monitoring provide real evidence of
how reforms can benefit the business community and reduce corruption at the same time.
Through the TTFSE project, border crossing times were closely monitored in four pilot border
and inland facilities. The clearance times were steadily reduced through the l i f e o f the project
(Figure 3), and this also coincided with a dramatic reduction in the prevalence o f bribery at
customs as measured by two independent surveys o f f i r m s (Figure 4). At the same time, the
levels o f corruption reported by f i r m s remain worse than the average for 10 new members of the
EU, and worse yet compared to the average o f the original four EU Cohesion countries. FYR
Macedonia’s poor ranking in the Doing Business indicators for Trading Across Borders also
highlights the need to continue to make administrative procedures for trade more friendly for
business. Nevertheless, the progress to date in reducing the barriers to trade has been
particularly important for business development in a small country such as N R Macedonia, and
the present CPS aims to build o n these successes.

16

Country Partnership Strategy f o r j Y R Macedonia FY07-I 0

Figure 3: Customs Clearance Times Have Fallen in Kumanovo
Kumanovo, Clearance Times
600
500
v)

~

2

2

5

,
I
,

400

300

~

'

200
100

n

Figure 4: Bribes at Customs Have Fallen Dramatically

BEEPS 2002-2005 (high numbers are worse)

WEF 2003-2006 (high numbers are better)

56.

Other reforms have similarly led to improvements in the manner in which government
bodies interact with the business community. Recent reforms such as the introduction o f the
"one-stop shop" for business registration have considerably improved the process, reducing the
time to register a business' from 48 to 18 days, and should bolster gains that had already been
achieved in reducing the frequency o f bribes for business licensing (Figure 5). The ongoing
regulatory reform effort i s also expected to reduce opportunities for corruption.

Doing Business 2007

17

County Partnership Strategy f o r f r R Macedonia FY07-IO

Figure 5: Bribes for Business Licensing Have Fallen Dramatically
and Procedures Have Also Been Streamlined

BEEPS 2002-2005 (high numbers are worse)

Rank for “Starting a Business”
2005 and 2006 (lower numbers are better)

VI

E

0

..

0 -

g,

m
0

[

57.

-

2002

e

I
I
2005

1

Progress in improving business entry is beginning to be matched in imposing discipline

on firms through business exit and payment discipline. The myriad o f governance issues that
gave selective benefits to well-connected f i r m s through soft-budgets, under-priced utilities
prices, and an ineffective bankruptcy procedure have begun to receive more prominent attention
by the Macedonian authorities. A new Bankruptcy L a w i s expected to expedite bankruptcy
proceedings and, more importantly, to help deal with conflicts o f interest among bankruptcy
trustees. Similarly, fYR Macedonia’s nascent regulatory institutions have begun to exercise their
authority in controlling the practice o f giving subsidized energy prices for large energy
consumers and the excessive tolerance o f arrears. These lingering practices leave unsubsidized
f i r m s at a clear disadvantage.

58.
The dual challenge o f building a well-governed state regulatory system for utilities, while
also ensuring that the (monopolistic) providers achieve cost recovery, i s aptly illustrated by the
energy sector. In addition to the impact that soft budget constraints have o n competition, there i s
a very direct impact o n this sector. Poor payment discipline for electricity bills by state owned
organizations and large consumers i s a key factor contributing to the financial deterioration o f
the energy sector in fYR Macedonia. W h i l e the government f i l l y recognized this problem, and
provided additional budget allocations for state organizations to meet their obligations in i t s
supplementary 2006 budget, actual payment discipline by budgetary institutions has yet to be
improved and requires constant monitoring by the government. Combined with weaknesses in
the regulation o f the energy sector -electricity tariff filings lag significant increases in the price
o f electricity imports and are insufficient to cope with the maintenance and investment needs o f
the electricity sector- the utilities have difficulty maintaining cost recovery.

5 9.
Improving financial markets and facilitating access to credit remain critical to support
business entry and growth and, ultimately, job creation. While the legal and supervisory
framework for banking i s increasingly in line with international standards and EU requirements,
continued efforts to strengthen banking supervision are needed to further promote market
discipline and efficiency, and enforce strong bank governance. The government i s also
committed to address weaknesses in the insurance sector, where ineffective supervision together

18

Country Partnership Strategy f o r f r R Macedonia FY07-10

with poor governance arrangements have impeded the sound development o f the sector -one o f
the smallest in the region- and provide inadequate protection to policy holders.
Figure 6: Bribes Related to Courts Have Fallen, Process of Enforcing Contracts Has Improved

. BEEPS 2002-2005 (high numbers are worse)

-2002

WEF 2003-2006 (high numbers are better)

zoos

Rank for “Enforcing Contracts”
2005 and 2006 (lower numbers are better)

Notes: Bribes Related to the Courts has Fallen Slightly; According to Firms, the Process of Enforcing Contracts has
also Improved Somewhat

60.
Judicial corruption in f r R Macedonia has largely been tied to the politicization of the
selection and disciplining of judges, as well as opaque court proceedings and lack of
enforcement. Significant steps were taken in 2005 and 2006 to address this situation with the

adoption o f constitutional amendments and fundamental legislation. However, implementation
of this legal framework will require time, resources and commitment from the government and
the judiciary. The adoption o f new Laws on C i v i l Procedure, Enforcement, Administrative
Disputes and Misdemeanors are designed to reduce the backlog in the courts and speed the
judicial resolution o f disputes. W h i l e new private enforcement agents have begun to operate,
implementation o f the other laws remains a challenge. The revision o f sector laws, continued
training and supervision o f private enforcement agents and the creation o f an Administrative
Court all must take place for the legislative changes to have an impact in improving judicial
efficiency and effectiveness. These reforms are closely linked to efforts to control administrative
corruption and ineffective service delivery in other sectors, both o f which continue to be

19

Country Partnership Strategy forfYR Macedonia FY07-10

challenges for N R Macedonia. A recent report from the Administrative Inspectorate made clear
that agencies such as the denationalization commissions are neither operating effectively nor
quickly enough to satisfy the needs o f the citizens. Improved monitoring and reporting by the
Inspectorate and more efficient resolution o f citizen complaints against administrative actions
w i l l require additional capacity building and resources.

61.
Governance problems need to be addressed in many state agencies and in remaining
public enterprises. For example, unofficial payments for official land or real estate registrations
or even to receive information are not unusual, creating a k e y constraint over real property rights.
Another example relates to the maintenance in fYR Macedonia's road system, which has been
hindered by both lack o f transparency in oversight authority and by substantial leakages in the
collection o f tolls. I t i s not difficult to find similar examples in other public enterprises and
agencies. The government i s working o n plans to deal with this, either by privatizing, for
example, the public enterprise for housing, or by adopting a comprehensive strategy for sector
reform, for example, in forestry. However, without broad reform o f the process o f selection and
accountability o f public sector managers, these are not likely to give lasting results.
62.
Moreover, local public enterprises still remain largely unaccountable, with little
commercial orientation. Most public utilities operate o n the local levelg -specifically, the
communal services enterprises and utilities providing water and sanitation, solid waste
management, and urban transport. The institutional and legal framework for these enterprises
provides insufficient incentives for operational or financial efficiency, and incentives to select
managers based on qualification i s often absent. With the government intent on pursuing large
investment projects (most notably in energy and infrastructure) over the next few years, the legal
framework on use o f concessions, unsolicited bids and private-public partnerships needs to be
carefully reviewed to ensure that these are made in a transparent, competitive, and cost-effective
manner.

63.

I n education and health there have been steps to improve accountability. W h i l e
corruption remains a problem in education," in order to improve transparency, fYR Macedonia
i s now developing a high quality and comprehensive student assessment and testing system. The
full-scale introduction o f a national examination at the end o f secondary education (Matura) in
2008 will improve the objectivity o f access to tertiary education, and a series o f national
assessments will measure system performance. In addition, capacity and accountability have
improved at the school level, because all schools now have School Boards with representation
from parents, that are required to prepare a school development plan, and will undergo a period
evaluation (including both external and internal processes). Ensuring these systems work
effectively i s essential and the priority for the next period. FYR Macedonia also has yet to make
good use o f the emerging data on performance. In health, notorious for its governance issues,
many steps are taken as well, as described in Box 1.

9

Exception include the railways, the airport, road maintenance, forestry, public housing.

10

For example, almost one-third o f participants in the higher education report to have been asked for a bribe at some
point during the last five years.

20

Country Partnership Strategy f o r f r R Macedonia FYO7-IO
P

Box 1: Improving Governance in the Health Sector in fYRMacedonia

Various studies conducted in fYR Macedonia highlight severe governance failures in the health sector. Despite high
public spending o n the sector (5-6 percent o f GDP), citizens make substantial out-of-pocket payments, mostly o n an
informal basis. The public generally views the health sector as corrupt and providing poor services. Addressing
governance in the health sector has been a key emphasis o f W o r l d B a n k lending and non-lending services during the
2003-2006 CAS period.
Until a few years ago, the Health Insurance Fund (HIF) was paying 30 percent higher prices for drugs than
neighboring countries. Encouraged by the Bank’s dialogue, and as part o f the PSMAL2, the HIF initiated
competitive procedures for purchasing generic drugs in 2005. HIF was able to save approximately Euro 10 m i l l i o n
o n i t s annual supplies o f drugs.
A key focus o f the W o r l d Bank Health Sector Management project as w e l l as the PDPL-program i s to improve
transparency and accountability o f the HIF and health care institutions (HCIs). The HIF Board, an important
mechanism for improving governance o f the HIF, has undergone major reforms. The number o f board members has
been reduced, the selection o f Board members by the Parliament was stopped, Board members are n o w required to
sign conflict o f interest clauses and the number o f doctors o n the HIF Board was balanced in comparison to
members o f other groups. The minutes o f Board meetings are published o n the HIF website, increasing
transparency and accountability to the public. Formal training o f Board members i s also being supported through
the Bank-financed project. The HIF n o w requires HCIs to regularly produce monthly financial reports, which are
also posted o n the HIF website, and H C I managers have also been trained in budget and general management. The
plans are n o w for HIF t o monitor k e y performance indicators (e.g. admission rate, referral rate, patient satisfaction)
among HCIs and also report these o n the HIF and MOH website.

The current government i s committed to addressing poor governance in the health sector. Further changes aimed at
improving the governance in the sector have been endorsed, including the “four-eyes’’ principle by introducing two
directors for HCIs, with a v i e w to ensure improved control and accountability o f the HCIs management structures.
Provisions prohibiting conflicts o f interest have been systematically implemented as well. Under the upcoming CPS
period, there are plans to continue to strengthen governance in the health sector by aggressively addressing the
problem o f informal payments, changing the legal framework for health care institutions to become more
accountable to MOH, HIF and the public for results, as w e l l as continue to build the capacity o f HIF as a transparent
purchaser o f health services. The capacity o f the Ministry o f Health and other institutions (e.g. D r u g Bureau) for
regulation and system oversight will also be strengthened.

Strenpthening the institutions o f oversight

64.
The demand side for good governance remains weakly developed, although this is
gradually improving. Civil society has yet to meet i t s potential as a control mechanism over the
government, though some o f the country’s NGOs are characterized by political influence and
conflict o f interests themselves. FYR Macedonia’s new Free Access to Information Law, a
model law in many ways, shows great potential for strengthening the supply o f information for
citizens, the media, and NGOs, although implementation has been uneven and i t will take time
for the value o f such a law to be fully utilized by c i v i l society. A new L a w o n Conflict o f
Interest i s currently under discussion by the Parliament.
65.
The institutions of financial oversight have gradually been strengthened. An
independent State Audit Office (SAO) was established and staffing has grown consistently to the

21

Country Partnership Strategy f o r j Y R Macedonia FYO7-IO

'

point where the S A 0 routinely produces audit reports valuable for identifying corruption.'
Internal audit has also been strengthened and capacity i s expanding. Strong support for the
further development o f both the internal and external audit functions i s n o w being provided by
the EC as an integral component o f conformance with Chapter 32 o f the acquis. All government
transactions are executed through the Single Treasury Account providing sound controls over
collection and spending. The transparency o f government spending has improved as wellmonthly Budget execution reports are posted o n Ministry o f Finance web-site, as are all SA0
reports. W h i l e these measures have increased the visibility o f corrupt practices and reduced
public tolerance, bribery to receive government contracts i s reported to remain a considerably
bigger problem for doing business than in other E C A countries (Figure 7 ) The violations
uncovered by S A 0 auditors almost invariably involve procurement violations, and with few
exceptions, follow-up o n the findings remains weak.
Figure 7. Bribes Related to Procurement Have Not Fallen

BEEPS 2002-2005 (high numbers are worse)

WEF 2003-2006 (high numbers are better)

66.

Establishing a meritocratic and professional public administration has not yet been
achieved, despite it being a priority of successive governments. The L a w o n C i v i l Servants,
setting-up employment, pay and career rules, covers only 13 percent o f the public administration,
though there i s evidence that even this law i s not fully implemented. Administration issues in
other parts o f the public administration remain non-transparent. As a result, changes and
replacements are frequent (especially after political changes) resulting into a politicized public
service, which was one o f the main concerns o f the latest E C Progress Report. Furthermore,
efforts to contain the wage-bill without a corresponding reduction in public employment levels
translated into a low-paid unattractive public service highly vulnerable to corrupt practices. The
decompression o f c i v i l service salaries, completed in 2006, has set a good example, but more i s
needed to address similar issues in the public administration at large.
The need to closely monitor implementation of governance-oriented laws is acute. The
conclusions o f the 2006 Conference on the Implementation o f the State Program for Prevention

67.

II

The largest corruption case currently being prosecuted came to light when the Commission for the Prevention of
Corruption (CPC) noted a single sentence in an S A 0 report to the effect that the S A 0 could not uncover why the
Ministry o f Defense paid a large sum in damages f r o m a court case without first appealing the verdict. After
investigation, the CPC determined that the court case was an elaborate method o f defrauding the state of some
700,000 Euros.

22

Country Partnership Strategy for f r R Macedonia FYO7-IO

and Repression o f Corruption called for establishment o f monitoring indicators that would enable
careful tracking o f the implementation o f the Program.12 A broad effort was launched over the
last year, resulting in sets o f baseline indicators on the implementation o f the Program and also
providing valuable information o n the state o f the governance framework in the country. The
results o f this activity have not been encouraging, as progress in some sectors and areas has not
been met in others. Helping the government improve performance in strengthening governance
i s a key goal o f this CPS.

C. Improving Public Service Delivery

68.

Decentralization is progressing, but challenges remain. Urban areas in fYR Macedonia
may eventually become centers o f economic growth, private investment and j o b creation. Their
efficient functioning i s therefore critical to the agenda o f generating employment, and managing
the city economy essentially involves ensuring responsive local government and effective service
delivery. Urban management i s a particular concern in fYR Macedonia because o f the
uncharacteristically high rates o f urban unemployment and urban poverty, implying missed
opportunities.

69.
The government has made substantial progress in enacting the legislative framework for
decentralization, as specified in the Ohrid agreement. New laws o n Local Self-government, on
Local Government Finance and o n Territorial Reorganization were approved over the last years.
Nevertheless, much remains to be done in terms o f implementation. Eventually, municipalities
will not only be responsible for communal services and public transport, urban planning and i t s
implementation (including construction, permits and inspection), construction and maintenance
o f local roads, parks and sports facilities, but also for child and elderly care, and, most notably,
for establishing, financing, and administering all primary and secondary schools. Recentlyenacted laws on communal services confirm the municipalities’ responsibilities as owners of
these local public enterprises and give the municipal governments wide-ranging rights in tariffsetting, investment decisions, and personnel matters. The regulations are unclear, do not
encourage commercialized management, and improved efficiency in service delivery i s
necessary.
70.

More effective urban and municipal management is needed. Municipalities are
increasingly at the front-line o f confronting fYR Macedonia’s social and economic challenges.
Progress in the urban and municipal agenda will therefore be crucial to the country’s success in
sustaining economic growth and j o b creation, improving welfare for all citizens, and furthering
integration into the European Union. Municipalities cannot succeed, however, without strong
support from the central government, which sets the regulatory and legal conditions, helps ensure
that the municipalities acquire and retain a secure financial status, and create an incentive
structure for sound investment planning, essential to access future EU structural funds.
Municipal financial management, including improving revenue mobilization, investment
selection, allocation o f fiscal transfers, the need for wider public participation, and mechanisms
for inter-municipal collaboration need to be addressed. The provision o f communal services
requires significant reform to ensure financial sustainability and quality o f services over the
12

“Conference o n assessment o f the implementation o f the State Programme for Prevention and Repression o f
Corruption”, Conference materials - November, 2006.

23

Country Partnership Strategy f o r j Y R Macedonia FY07-IO

medium term. Renewed attention i s also needed to the planning and management o f urban land
use, which i s central to the efficiency and environmental quality o f urban areas, and to the
affordability o f housing for the population and o f real estate for businesses. Coordination among
the municipalities i s needed so that they can make the best use o f scarce human and other
resources, and achieve economies o f scale in their administrative functions and services.

7 1.
More effective, accountable and fiscally sustainable health services are needed.
Improving the governance, transparency and management o f the health sector i s critical for
improving “value for money” and strengthening quality and efficiency in the delivery o f health
services. FYR Macedonia spends about 9 percent o f GDP o n health, which i s higher than the
average for EUlO countries and at the same level as OECD countries. Three percent o f GDP
consists o f private payments, most o f which occur on an informal basis. Health arrears threaten
the fiscal sustainability o f the sector. In addition to the fiscal and corruption risks posed by poor
financial management within HIF, there are also concerns with the quality and accessibility o f
health services. Public opinion polls have consistently rated health services as “poor” or “very
poor”, including a recent survey where over 58 percent o f respondents chose one o f those two
ratings. Although health outcomes have improved -and are better than in countries with similar
GDP per capita- substantial gaps s t i l l exist when N R Macedonia i s compared to EU countries.

72.
I n education services, eventually to be delivered in a decentralized setting, major
upgrading is required. FYR Macedonia uses i t s physical and human resources in primary and
secondary education intensively. Schools are large on average, there i s widespread use o f two
shifts, and pupil-teacher ratios at both primary and secondary levels are higher than elsewhere in
Europe on average and are comparable at the tertiary level.

73.

Municipalities are already responsible for funding non-teacher recurrent costs o f primary
and secondary schools; and there are plans to decentralize teacher salaries sometime after July
2007. W h i l e this might make sense in the longer run, this represents a major risk to an education
system where capacity i s s t i l l underdeveloped at the municipal level and where education
spending i s already significantly inequitably distributed despite the fact that most funding comes
from the central government. l3An effective equalization mechanism i s needed. In addition,
ways w i l l need to be found to reverse a recent trend whereby the number o f primary school
pupils i s falling but the number o f teachers i s increasing. The fiscal and physical implications of
the introduction o f mandatory secondary education must be properly planned as well. M o v i n g
ahead with decentralization, therefore, will require careful attention to all o f these aspects, as
well as careful analysis o f various policy options.
74.
The Bologna agenda will have a major impact on jYR Macedonia’s tertiary education.
In tertiary education, there remain significant challenges in the organization and governance o f
the system. Universities remain a loose confederation o f faculties (a practice common across the
former Yugoslav countries) resulting in significant inefficiencies and lack o f cross-disciplinary
work which i s the norm in European countries. While f Y R Macedonia has a significant number
o f students in private tertiary institutions, the regulatory framework for both public and private
institutions i s inadequate. Good evidence o n the quality and practices o f different institutions i s
l3For example, for primary education the highest cost municipality spends 4.3 times per student what i s spent in the
lowest cost municipality.

24

Country Partnership StrategyforjYR Macedonia FYO7-I 0

not available and f Y R Macedonia needs to catch up with regional neighbors on the development
o f standards in secondary and tertiary education, including a national qualifications framework.

A new pension system has been introduced but the agenda i s not complete. The new
75.
multi-pillar old age pension system creates a pension system that i s relatively well adjusted to the
demographic ageing and structural change (projected pension expenditures are expected to
decline and future fiscal pressures will be lower), though some areas o f the system s t i l l need to
be addressed, such as level o f fees, pension fund participation, strengthening o f administrative
and supervisory processes. In addition, i t i s necessary to complete the legislation with the
framework for benefit payments. Disability, survivor and privileged pension systems are s t i l l
based on rather lax criteria that allow misuse. O n the administrative side, some improvements
have been made in the Pension and Disability Insurance Fund (PDF) business processes and
procedures and the establishment o f the Pension Supervisory Agency (MAPAS). Work remains,
however, on further improvements in administrative, regulatory and supervisory capacities o f the
pension institutions, as well as on the development o f the policy-making and monitoring
capacities in the Ministry o f Labor.
Social protection programs need further rationalization. FYR Macedonia’s small social
76.
assistance system includes a myriad o f cash benefits and social services, and i s burdened with
legislative constraints and vacuums, a mismatch between legislation and implementation
capacity, inadequate management procedures and practices and weak communication and
network systems between the implementing institutions. T o ensure successful decentralization
o f social services, management and governance in the Centers for Social Work (CSWs) need
significant reform as well. T o address these problems effectively, the government needs to put
in place a clear outcome-based strategy for social protection. This would allow better technical
quality o f policy formulation, with proper attention for available policy options, human and
financial costs implications, and a proper process o f internal and external consultation.

77.
Social assistance programs can also be used to address inter-generation poverty cycles
and inequalities. The latest Poverty Assessment (FY06) indicates that fYR Macedonia has not
achieved sufficient progress o n equality in schools due to l o w completion rates from minorities
such as Albanians, Turks and Roma (especially girls). Participation in pre-primary education
varies greatly by ethnic group, by region, by urban versus rural area, by income level, and
especially by gender. Overall gross secondary school enrollment rates (around 65 percent) in
f Y R Macedonia are l o w by both regional and international standards. Other forms o f deprivation
in educational achievement exist in the form o f sporadic school attendance, highly unequal
quality o f education or financial barriers to secondary (and tertiary) education. Although some
key MDG-related indicators for health show achievements given the level o f income (Le. child
mortality, maternal mortality and tuberculosis control), one o f the key issues in the health sector
in fYR Macedonia i s severe under use o f basic/primary health care services, especially among
rural populations and vulnerable groups (such as the Roma). Taken together, these issues create
an important outstanding agenda for ensuring full social inclusion, and the government intends to
use incentives under cash benefits program more effectively to address these inequalities.

78.
FYR Macedonia has made significant progress in restructuring and liberalization of
the energy sector. As a member o f the Energy Community o f South East Europe (ECSEE)

25

Country Partnership StrategyforjYR Macedonia FY07-10

Treaty, fYR Macedonia is supporting the full integration o f the energy markets in the regional
power market. The formally vertically integrated state owned monopoly -Electric Power
Company o f Macedonia (ESM)- had been unbundled in 2006 into separate generation (ELEM),
transmission (MEPSO) and distribution (ESM) companies. The distribution company was
privatized and a tender for the sale o f Negotino thermal power plant i s underway. Despite this
progress, much remains to be done to improve sector efficiency and financial performance.
Current electricity tariffs are s t i l l below full cost recovery and commercial losses in the power
networks as well as poor payment discipline especially by large consumers and budgetary
organizations remain a problem. Therefore, urgent attention by the government i s needed to
address the sector performance issues in order to sustain an affordable and efficient electricity
supply necessary for economic growth. In this context, proper social protection mechanisms to
provide affordable electricity supply to poor households are needed to mitigate increases in
electricity prices that may be necessary for these prices to fully recover the cost o f supply.
79.
Further reforms in road, rail, and aviation sectors are needed to enhance institutional
accountability and allow liberalization of transport services. In the road sector, regulatory and
institutional weaknesses and non-transparent priority programming result in increasing
maintenance backlogs. In railways, transparent performance accountability o f various services
(passenger, freight, and infi-astructure) will enhance financial viability, productivity, and
effectiveness o f operations and pave the way for a multiple operator market. The aviation sector
requires further regulatory and institutional reforms to enhance efficiency o f operations, routes,
and airports.

v. WORLD BANKGROUP’S
CURRENT PORTFOLIO
A.

Past Bank Assistance and Quality and Management of the Existing Portfolio

Since 1994, the Bank has actively supported thefYR Macedonia’s transition. Bank
80.
assistance was initially focused o n ensuring a stable macroeconomic framework and building the
foundations o f a market economy, with a particular focus o n reform o f the financial and
enterprise sector, agriculture, human development and infrastructure and energy. This assistance
was delivered through a series o f sector adjustment loans accompanied by investment lending.
Since fYR Macedonia joined the World Bank in 1993, IDA and IBRD commitments to the
country through 38 operations total approximately US$780 million. The Bank and the JMF have
been instrumental in assisting the government in establishing the foundations for i t s public
financial management (PFM) system. The recent acceptance o f fYR Macedonia as an EU
candidate country has meant a significant EC involvement in harmonization assistance for the
Macedonian financial management and procurement laws, systems and processes with the
requirements o f the acquis. Since fYR Macedonia became a member o f I F C in 1993, the country
has received commitments o f over $93 million in IFC funds and more than $25 million in
syndications. Since fYR Macedonia became a member o f MIGA, the Agency has issued over
US$19 million in guarantee coverage. WBG assistance to the country during FY04-FY06 has
been evaluated as satisfactory (see the CAS Completion Report, Annex 2). The proposed
strategy both builds on the lessons o f the previous CAS and relies o n the existing portfolio o f
eight projects to achieve the expected outcomes and results in the next four years.

26

Country Partnership Strategy f o r j Y R Macedonia FYO7-10

8 1.

Performance of the investment lending portfolio picked up following concerted efforts
to address key issues and accelerate implementation. During the FY04-06 CAS period, the

Bank worked with the government to deliver a high case program o f $166 million, including $60
million for adjustment. The Bank also delivered a program o f Economic and Sector Work
(ESW) that contributed to policy dialogue during the CAS period. The 2003 Country Portfolio
Performance Review (CPPR) identified almost half o f the operations as being at r i s k in achieving
their development objectives or being slow on implementation progress. By undertaking a
strategic and decentralized management o f the portfolio, the situation has greatly improved.
Table 2 presents key portfolio indicators.

-

Table 2: Indicators o f World Bank Lending Portfolio @YO3 FY06)
FY03
FY04
FY05

I

Number o f projects
Average age o f Droiects (vears’l
Net Commitment Amount (US$)
Disbursement Ratio (%)
Disbursements in FY (US$)
I Proiects at Risk
Commitment at Risk (%)
Realism Index
Proactivity Index

I

8
3
151.3
30.5
16.7
2
29.4
50
100

I

11
3
155.8
35
19.4
0
0
N/R
100

I

10
3

84.4
35
10.7
0
0
N/R
N/R

I

FY06
10
2
121.9
24
7.0
0
0
N/R
N/R

82.
For projects closed between FY97 and FY06, IEG rated 85 percent o f the project
outcomes (by value) as satisfactory; 90 percent had substantial institutional development impact
and 80 percent were considered to have likely sustainability.
83.
The 2005 Joint Portfolio Performance Review (JPPR) showed that the Bank’s lending
program and analytic work were well aligned with key CAS objectives. This has produced
significant benefits, including support for major reforms and institutional development programs
in a number o f high priority sectors. Several factors were identified as contributing to the
success o f the portfolio, including the close linkages between policy and investment operations,
and between high quality analytic work and key policy reforms.

84.
Effective donor coordination on key reform issues has greatly contributed to helping to
“soften” our IBRD loan terms, especially appreciated by the government to help finance
technical assistance. Strengthened coordination with bilateral donors (especially the Dutch
Government) has contributed to their involvement in co-financing projects in the education,
irrigation, public finance, cadastre, community development and other sectors, sometimes
bringing contributions larger than the loan amount (such as the education modernization project).
Also Trust Funds to help financing technical assistance to implement key reforms included in our
policy loans have been successful.
85.
Since FY05, all new projects are being implemented through existing government
structures.
The JPPR concluded that the implementation o f projects through Project
Implementation Units (PIUs) had reduced the potential impact o f projects on institutional
development and sustainability. As a result, the JPPR recommended that to the maximum extent

27

1

I

Country Partnership StrategyforjYR Macedonia FY07-I 0

possible, all new projects be implemented within existing government structures. When
necessary skills (e.g., financial management, procurement, etc.) are lacking in the public
administration, they will be externally contracted to assist in the project implementation. Such
external consultants, however, will report in all cases to Project Directors or coordinators that are
regular staff o f concerned government agency or ministry. This implementation policy will
continue for all new projects proposed under the CPS. It may take longer to build the
implementation capacity, but the result i s much more sustainable.

B.

Lessons Learned from the CAS Completion Report (CASCR)

86.
The CASCR (Annex 2), endorsed conclusions o f the JPPR and identified a number o f
lessons that formed the basis o f this CPS. Some o f those lessons include:

0

The shwt in focus in the Bank’ program over the 2003-2006 CAS period from public
sector reform to private sector development issues was timely and appropriate, and
should continue. Between 2002 and 2006, fYR Macedonia regained strong macro
discipline and transformed from a post-conflict country to an EU candidate. In response,
the Bank shifted i t s program appropriately to deal more directly with economic growth
constraints. This should continue in the next CPS.
The Bank needs to increase its focus on jYR Macedonia’s integration with the EU.
EU accession i s a top priority for f Y R Macedonia, and the Bank needs to assist the
country in meeting the accession criteria and the EU acquis, including o n building the
institutional capacity to effectively implement EU regulations.
The EU accession process has major implications on budget allocation and priorities.
The Bank’s funding could serve as critical bridge financing to enable N R Macedonia to
access EU pre-accession funds. The new Public Expenditure Review slated for delivery
in FY07 should analyze and provide recommendations to the Macedonian Government
on the fiscal policy challenges the country faces in the run-up to EU accession.
Stronger economic growth and job creation must be achieved. In order to maintain
popular support for the reform agenda, there i s a need for fYR Macedonia to show that i t s
successful macro economic discipline and structural reform initiatives do translate into
stronger growth, j o b creation and improvement o f living standards for all.
FYR Macedonia’s competitiveness needs attention and role of education reform needs
to increase. If Macedonian companies are to compete in the regional and international
markets, their competitiveness needs to improve. Such a stronger competitive edge also
requires a better match between the quality o f education in N R Macedonia with the
needs o f the 2 1St century and the knowledge economy.
The multiyear Policy Development Program has served the Bank’s program well. The
ongoing three-year PDPL program helped in the shift o f policy priorities, has been well
connected to a number o f investment projects, and helped secure continuity and
predictability in the reform program. I t even helped in the transition period following the
recent governments change, as the already agreed upon P D P L policy framework and
related conditionality played an instrumental role in the continuation o f specific reform
efforts.
Decentralization is critical to ensuring the peace and reforms. Decentralization i s a key
part o f the implementation o f the Ohrid Peace Agreement. Key for i t s success will be

28

County Partnership Strategy forfYR Macedonia FY07-IO

that local communities are able to h l l y take part in the country’s development. The
challenge for the CPSO7 is to calibrate the Bank’s interventions carefully, through sector
work and lending, to assist in urban development, including in the provision o f public
services at the municipal level. This will require close cooperation with many other
donors already active at the local level, often better placed to finance and implement

resource intensive community-based activities.

C.

FYR Macedonia’s Country Financing Parameters (CFPs)

87.
Country Financing Parameters (CFPs) for fYR Macedonia were established in April 2005
after consultation with the government (see Annex 7). The CFPs for fYR Macedonia provide for
added flexibility in allowing Bank financing o f up to 100 percent o f project costs, although the
Bank will s t i l l encourage cost sharing as a demonstration o f ownership. The actual cost sharing
percentage would be determined during project preparation on a case-by-case basis. The CFPs
also allow recurrent cost financing on a selective basis, and Bank financing o f local and foreign
costs in any proportion. The CFP will greatly facilitate Bank operations in fYR Macedonia and
reduce the transaction costs o f implementing Bank-financed projects. The additional flexibility
will support project implementation and i s fully consistent with the approach o f the CPS in
emphasizing government ownership o f the underlying project objectives. The maximum
flexibility allowed by the CFPs will nonetheless be applied selectively, in reflection o f the
different levels o f mutual agreement on sector reforms and approaches across different areas, and
with due regard to sustainability and fiduciary oversight. Since the establishment o f CFPs, two
projects have adhered to changes instigated by i t and have utilized the flexibility and benefits.
There i s a strong preference, both o n the government and on the Bank side, to continue designing
the future projects along the same path.

VI. THEWORLD BANKGROUPPARTNERSHIP STRATEGY
A.

Key Features and Pillars o f the Results Based Partnership Strategy

The WBG will supportJYR Macedonia in its efforts to join the European Union. The
88.
proposed program i s well grounded in the policy priorities o f the government and takes full
account o f the priorities as defined in the Stabilization and Association Agreement (SAA), and
results from consultations with the government and other stakeholders. The road to Europe will
not only require the country to design and adopt EU-compatible standards and regulations, i t also
requires building the capacity to implement them. The WBG program over the next four years
expects to play an important role in this process, including by providing “bridge” financing to
allow fYR Macedonia to benefit faster from EU pre-accession funds.

89.

The CPS aims to support the government’s program around two core pillars: i ) fostering

economic growth, job creation, and increasing the living standards of all; and (ii) improving
the governance and transparency ofpublic service delivery to support the market economy.

29

Country Partnership Strategy forJrR Macedonia FYO7-10

90.
The program intends to support the government’s wide ranging reform effort by
combining the implementation o f the ongoing lending program with a proposed new lending
program for the next four years, comprising o f a maximum o f 10 new investment projects, as
well as the completion o f the ongoing three-year DPL program and the start o f a new series o f
DPLs towards the end o f the CPS period. A full program o f analytical support and technical
assistance will help inform the government o n future policy decisions in key economic and
sectoral areas.
Pillar 1: Foster Growth and Job Creation, Increase Living Standards for All

91.
The WBG will support the governments’ ambitious goals on accelerated growth and
job creation through an integrated and multifaceted program. This will encompass both the
demand for and the supply o f labor in N R Macedonia. Under this pillar, the WBG w i l l aim to
support government efforts to: (i)maintain macro economic stability, while ensuring proper
integration o f EU priorities into the budget; (ii)improve business environment, including
regulatory reform and proper enforcement o f contract and creditor rights; (iii)
reduce the costs o f
capital; (iv) improve enterprise sector’s competitiveness, (v) improve agricultural
competitiveness; (vi) establish a functioning land market and institutions; (vii) improve
infrastructure for growth by strengthening the framework for public-private partnerships and
invest selectively in energy and transport; (viii) remove rigidities in labor market regulations and
reduce the labor tax wedge; (ix) develop a productive and appropriately skilled labor force; and
(x) use cash transfer systems to encourage school enrollment and preventive health.
92.
Maintain macroeconomic stability and reduce government expenditures.
Macroeconomic stability will remain critically dependent o n pursuing reforms with particular
emphasis on fiscal and external sustainability. The Bank will support measures to ensure this
stability through continuation o f the current DPL program and the design o f a new series over the
CPS period. A Public Expenditure Review assessing the fiscal impact o f EU accession will help
prioritize expenditures and rebalance current and capital expenditures. A Country Financial
Assessment, currently underway, has identified a number o f systemic problems in the public
procurement system that will require concerted attention. Recommendations will focus on: (i)
improvements to laws and sub-legislative instruments; (ii)
practices and processes for tender
preparation, bid evaluation, and contract supervision; (iii)
complaints processing; and (iv) the
composition and training o f procurement officials within the ministries.

93.
Improve the business environment, including regulatory reform and proper
enforcement of contract and creditor rights. During the entire CPS period, support to
improving the business environment will continue through the ongoing Business Environment
Reform and Institutional Strengthening (BERIS) project approved in FY05. The project supports
the government’s efforts to stimulate economic growth based o n increased domestic and foreign
investment by strengthening public sector capacity to increase competitiveness o f the business
sector in an EU-oriented context. Regulatory reform i s also an important part o f the policy
program supported by the ongoing three-year PDPL program, and the BERIS project provides
resources to fund advisory services in this area.

30

Country Partnership Strategy forfvR Macedonia FY07-10

94.
The Legal and Judicial Institution and Implementation Support project (LJIIS, FY06,
which i s described more fully under pillar 11) will support efforts to better protect contract,
creditor and property rights, crucial to enhance the environment for private sector investment in
f Y R Macedonia. By supporting activities aimed at improving efficiency and effectiveness o f the
judiciary in resolving (commercial) disputes and streamlining administration in some key
commercial areas -bankruptcy and administrative disputes- the assistance should contribute to
reducing the cost o f doing business and facilitating the reallocation o f resources to job-creating
activities. To ease the burden on the courts, I F C Advisory Services (IFC AS) through i t s PEP SE
facility has been working to support legislation reform through the ADR Mediation Program
since 2004. Besides the changes in the legislation and training for the mediators, the I F C will
establish a Pilot Mediation Center in cooperation with Skopje Primary courts.

95.
I F C AS will continue to work on the development o f the recycling industry, focusing on
financial, training and market needs o f the companies, the improvement o f corporate governance
practices through their work with student population and helping Macedonian companies to meet
international and EU technical requirements for export. Also, I F C AS i s expected to include: (i)
technical assistance on the “guillotine” review o f the stock o f business licensing and inspections
regulations; and (ii)a regional project for value chain analyses for the agri-business, general
manufacturing and services sectors starting with the agri-business.
In addition, I F C will provide assistance on cleaning up the stock o f licensing,
96.
inspections, and permit regulations as well as streamlining administrative procedures affecting
businesses on the municipal level, including delivery o f services through municipal one-stop
shops. There will be direct l i n k s with MIGA’s investment outreach and investment promotion
capacity building activities.

97.
Lowering the cost of capital and improving access to capital. On the policy side, the
Bank will assist the government in the completion o f the financial sector reform agenda, critical
for the dynamic growth o f the enterprise sector. In FY08, an update o f the 2003 Financial Sector
Assessment Program (FSAP) will assess progress made towards the completion o f the financial
sector reform agenda and inform the design o f the new series o f PDPLs to address remaining
constraints to financial sector development. These policy loans are expected to continue to
support policy measures associated with financial sector development, and strengthen the
governance o f financial institutions, including the insurance sector. To further improve access to
capital, through the REPARIS program and a TF funded by the Dutch and Austrian
governments, the Bank will continue to support the implementation o f the country action plan on
corporate financial reporting that will align f Y R Macedonia’s regulatory with international
standards and the relevant portions o f the EU acquis communautaire. I F C will support the
development o f new products in the financial sector such as energy efficiency and support the
development o f housing, factoring and leasing. I F C will continue to support commercial banks
and micro-lending institutions and look for opportunities to facilitate banking sector
consolidation through supporting mergers and acquisitions. MIGA will also support projects in
the financial sector which are expected to result in improved access to finance.
Improve enterprise sector’s competitiveness, encourage technological change and
98.
further promote a level playingfield for investment. The Bank will enhance support -through

31

Country Partnership Strategy forfYR Macedonia FY07-10

i t s DPLs- to policies and measures for eliminating barriers to entry, operations and exit that limit
growth opportunity o f the business sector, and will also support the elimination o f soft budget
constraints as well as other measures to strengthen governance o f public institutions. O n the
investment side, a new Competitiveness/Technological Changernigher Education project (FY08)
will further contribute to sustainable economic growth and j o b creation by fostering the adoption
o f new technology for production o f higher quality goods, especially for the export market,
improve the link between research and development and the private sector, encourage
improvement o f managerial skills in the private sector and develop skills able to match the
business sector’s emerging needs (see also below under labor market). Competitiveness on subnational level i s part o f I F C A S program, focused on better business regulation, simplification o f
administrative procedures, better service delivery, developing a system o f rating the
competitiveness o f localities and private investment and value addition to f i r m s .

99.
Improve competitiveness in agriculture. The EU accession agenda has magnified the
importance o f agriculture in iYR Macedonia’s overall policy agenda, since agriculture
constitutes a significant part o f the EU pre-accession requirements. The proposed operation will
help create the infrastructure to use EU assistance to improve competitiveness through on-farm
investments, and redirect government assistance toward investment rather than subsidies, in a
manner consistent with the EU’s pre-accession requirements. The operation will strengthen the
capacity o f MAFWE to support the sector, building the institutions necessary to access and
absorb pre-accession assistance, helping producers and ago-processors meet EU veterinary and
phytosanitary standards, and improving access to irrigation. The operation will incorporate
lessons learned from earlier Bank interventions in the agriculture and rural sector, especially
from the Private Farmer project closed in 2003 and the Irrigation Rehabilitation and
Restructuring Project (IRRP) closed in November 2006.

100. The proposed operation benefits from the ongoing Real Estate Cadastre and Registration
Project, which indirectly helps develop rural real estate markets by improving access to
information and reducing transaction times. I t will also benefit from the ongoing BERIS project
which strengthens the capacity o f the government to improve selected areas o f the business
environment in an EU-oriented context. Finally, the proposed operation will benefit from the
proposed FY09 Feeder Roads project, as this will result in key public infrastructure investments
that reduce transportation costs and thus improve the supply chain and farmer and processor
competitiveness. O n i t s part, I F C AS may work on value chain analyses for the agri-business,
general manufacturing and services sectors. This program i s part o f regional value chain
program, aiming to assess the competitiveness o f BiH, f Y R Macedonia, and Serbia in the context
o f CEFTA and the EU.
101. Establish a functioning land market and institutions. The current Real Estate Cadastre
and Registration Project (RECRP, begun in 2005) seeks to build an efficient and effective real
estate cadastre and registration system, contributing to the development o f efficient land and real
estate markets. The project provides support to complete the systematic first registration (the
real estate cadastre), improves overall transparency and accountability o f the land administration
system and helps to improve on-going registration services, reducing the time to register for sales
transactions to one day by project completion. The project also assists in the development o f
government’s capacity to address the land policy issues necessary to achieve the broader project

32

Country Partnership Strategy forfrR Macedonia FY07-I 0

goals o f improving tenure security and promoting the development o f efficient land and property
markets. The project will work together with the ongoing Legal and Judicial Implementation
and Institutional Support Project (LJIIS , FY06) to provide joint training on property rights

protection and the operation o f the cadastre.

102. The CPS could build on the RECRP -as well as on the Urban Development Project
planned for FY09- by a Land Administration I1Project, considered for FY10, which could focus
on improving land use management for both urban and agricultural land, formalization o f illegal
construction, improved property valuation for market information and taxation purposes, and
continuing improvements to service delivery. For proper enforcement i t will also be crucial to
ensure proper understanding for judges and court staff and improved cadastre relations with the
judicial system. Should the project be confirmed in the CPRPR (FY09), it will be informed by
the lessons learned during the RECRP, as well as by a land policy note (FY07) and by land
issues identified under the planned urban development project and the Agriculture/EU accession
Project.
103.

Improve infrastructure for growth by strengthening the framework for public-private
partnerships and invest selectively in energy and transport. In energy, the WBG will continue
to provide analytical and advisory support for the restructuring o f the energy sector and
improvement o f i t s financial performance in order to sustain an affordable and efficient
electricity supply necessary for economic growth. Through the Power System Improvement
Project, closed in June 2005, the World Bank supported rehabilitation and increase efficiency o f
fYR Macedonia’s six largest hydro plants. The World Bank’s on-going investment lending to the
energy sector includes the Energy Community o f South East Europe - APL3 f Y R Macedonia
Project (FY06) that aims to strengthen the transmission and dispatch capacity and improve
efficiency o f the power transmission company (MEPSO) to support i t s functioning in the context
o f the regional power market. Technical assistance i s being provided through two trust fund
grants to support the development o f a framework for private sector participation in hydropower
development. I F C will consider opportunities in financing mini-hydro power plants in sizable
packages. Furthermore, the Sustainable Energy Project (FY07), funded by GEF, will assist in
the development o f a sustainable market for renewable energy sources and energy efficient
technologies in fYR Macedonia through technical assistance and investment support.

104. Going forward, the WBG will provide analytical and advisory support to the
development o f a strong and sustainable energy sector that can provide households and
businesses with a secure, reliable, efficient and high-quality energy supply. The analytical base
o f these activities will be provided through support for the development o f a National Energy
Strategy (FY08) and continued dialogue and advisory support to the energy sector. In addition,
IFC and the Bank will start preparing (in FY08) a joint policy note on concessions and publicprivate partnerships (PPPs) to help improve the environment for mobilizing private sector
investments in infrastructure. Implementation o f key recommendations o f this analytical work
would attract more private interest to invest in fYR’s Macedonia’s energy sector, and would
enhance opportunities for I F C ’ s sequential involvement in helping structure and mobilize
financing for pioneering infrastructure projects.

33

Country Partnership Strategy for f r R Macedonia FY07-10

105. Informed by this analytical work, a planned Energy Project (FY09) will provide
investment support for high-priority energy infrastructure proj ect(s) aimed at improving the
efficiency o f existing assets and meeting the growth in energy demand. Such energy
infrastructure project(s) could include rehabilitating and expanding existing hydro-electric
generation plants, development o f regionally high-priority electricity transmission
interconnections, or investments in gas supply infrastructure. On its part, I F C through i t s
advisory services, will work closely with the Bank and pursue investment opportunities in PPPs,
including in the gas distribution sector.
106. In transport, the proposed TTFSE I1operation (FY07) will support the development o f an
efficient and effective transport system, reducing economic distance to markets. The project will
promote electronic inter-agency and cross-border exchange o f trade data, and strengthen the
functioning o f key transport corridors. The proposed activities are oriented towards compliance
with the EU pre-accession requirements and reflect the commitments agreed in the M o U for the
development o f the core transport network between the European Commission and Western
Balkan countries (Luxembourg, June 2004). The proposed operation benefits from the recently
completed TTFSE project, which supported modernization o f customs procedures and facilities,
and from the ongoing Railways Reform project (FY05) which improves the financial viability,
productivity and efficiency o f railways operations, and paves the way for liberalization o f
railways services.
Finally, i t will benefit from and supplement the ongoing Business
Environment Reform and Institution Strengthening project (FY05) which strengthens the
capacity o f the government to improve selected areas o f the business environment in an EUoriented context.
107. The WBG will continue i t s analytical work in the transport sector, through a Transport
Sector Study (early FY09) to be followed by a new transport project, most likely focused on
feeder roads, providing better access from the farmgateAoca1 markets to the main transport
corridors (late FY09). This work will be informed by a regional study o n feeder Roads.
Underpinned by the joint policy note o n concessions and public-private partnerships referred to
above, IFC, jointly with the Bank and relevant authorities, will pursue opportunities to
implement PPPs in the transport sectors through PEP SE Infrastructure (its advisory services) or
direct financing o f private sector projects.

108. Remove rigidities in labor market regulations and reduce the labor tax wedge. Given
the importance o f this area for achieving CPS goals on growth and j o b creation, the World Bank
Group plans to support reforms in this area primarily through future P D P L programs. Analytical
support may be provided through the next CEM (FY08). A currently ongoing regional labor
market study will also provide important input for reforms in this area.
109. Develop a productive and appropriately skilled labor force. Education and skills
development play a key role in ensuring a productive and appropriately skilled labor supply,
crucial for fYR Macedonia successful integration into the European and global economies. The
ongoing Education Modernization Project (FY04) will: (i)improve the teaching and learning
environment in primary and secondary schools, so that graduation rates improve and graduates
are better equipped for the next stage o f their lives; (ii)
enhance the transparency o f and evidence
base for decision making in the central government, by establishing an integrated education

34

Country Partnership Strategy forfvR Macedonia FY07-10

information management system and a student performance evaluation system, and by building
the capacity o f Ministry staff in strategic planning and financial management; and (iii)
enable the
public and other stakeholders to get information about the performance o f the education system,
through the results from the student assessment system and school evaluation process.

110. Additional support will be provided by the proposed Competitiveness/Technological
Change/Tertiary Education project (FY08) which -as far as education i s concerned- would
likely: (i)establish a quality assurance system in tertiary education under which public
institutions are held more accountable for their use o f public money and in which students and
the public have information about the performance o f different institutions; and (ii)
improve the
efficiency o f spending o n research and development to ensure i t i s used to tackle the identified
priorities o f the government in ways which leverage private sector investments. IFC may
provide long term financing to reputable private education institutions with high quality
standards and professional management.
Pillar 2: Public Sewice Delivery and Supporting Good Governance,

111. The WBG’s partnership strategy with f Y R Macedonia aims to build o n the progress that
N R Macedonia has made in improving governance and reducing corruption, while deepening
reforms in key sectors where governance weaknesses continue to undermine progress in the
economic reforms necessary to strengthen the economy and create jobs. Improved transparency
and accountability in service delivery i s critical to meeting the government program o n growth,
fostering human capital, and meeting EU standards.

112. Through the DPL program and selected sector work (PER, FY07, PER update, FY09,
annual Programmatic Poverty Assessments, as well as through Country Fiduciary Assessments
(FY07 and FYlO), the Bank will continue to support the efficient and transparent use o f public
resources. An IDF to improve public accounting will help as well. Furthermore specific
attention will be given to improve governance aspects in all sector interventions included in the
strategy (please note Annex 9, summarizing governance issues and the WGB program). For this
CPS, the WBG will support building o f quality institutional capacity to improve the transparency
and regulatory capacity o f governmental structures in all areas included in the strategy.
113. The WBG will support f Y R Macedonia in i t s efforts to: (i)continue reducing the legal
uncertainty and lack o f confidence in the judicial system; (ii) apply proper public finance
principles and governance standards at the municipal level, including to municipal public
enterprises and utility companies; (iii)continue improving the use o f public resources and
performance monitoring in the provision o f affordable and quality health services; and (iv)
develop more targeted cash transfer systems and introduce incentives to encourage school
enrollment and preventive health.

114. Decrease the legal uncertainty and lack of confidence in the judicial system.
Implementation and institution building support provided by the ongoing LJIIS Project (FY06)
aims to increase accountability and transparency in the judicial sector and reduce overall
corruption in fYR Macedonia. The Project supports the implementation o f the new framework

35

Country Partnership Strategy forJrR Macedonia FYO7-I 0

for judicial and court operations and improve efficiency and effectiveness o f the judiciary in
resolving (commercial) disputes and streamlining administration in some k e y commercial areas bankruptcy and administrative disputes. LJIIS also aims to reduce political influence and
improve the quality o f the judiciary, by supporting the new Republic Judicial Council in
implementing efficient processes for monitoring and evaluating judicial performance against
high ethical standards and implement transparent procedures for judicial selection and
disciplining judicial misconduct. Given the long t e r m nature o f addressing these issues, a
follow-on o f this project may be considered for FY10. A final decision o n this will be taken
during the CPSPR (FY09).

115. Apply proper public finance principles and governance standards at the municipal
level, including to municipal public enterprises and utility companies. The proposed Urban
Development Project (FY09) aims to support fYR Macedonia by addressing needed
improvements in the performance o f urban economies and the quality o f urban governance,
through components addressing sustainable municipal financing, municipal service delivery,
urban planning and/or land management. The World Bank’s Urban Policy Note (FY07) looks at
a range o f issues in how cities are being managed. The report focuses o n the policy agenda in
three areas. The first i s municipal financial management, which is a core element o f municipal

performance and o f local governance. The second area concerns the provision o f communal
services; there are many issues in the institutional framework for governance o f the communal
enterprises, and in investment selection, that will affect financial sustainability and quality o f
services over the medium term. Third, renewed attention i s needed to the planning and
management o f urban land use, which i s central to the efficiency and environmental quality of
urban areas, and to the affordability o f housing for the population and o f real estate for
businesses. The proposed project would provide financing for priority infrastructure investments
in a set o f municipalities and their communal services enterprises.

116. Continue improving the use of public resources and performance monitoring in the
provision of affordable and quality health service. World Bank support in the health sector to
date, provided under subsequent adjustment loans, including the ongoing three-year PDPL
program, as well as under the Health Sector Management Project (HSMP, FY04), has focused o n
establishing appropriate governance and financial management structures to improve controls,
transparency and accountability o f the Health Insurance Fund (HIF) and health care institutions.
Key results o f these interventions include: improved transparency and controls over the
pharmaceutical ‘procurement process and reduction in outpatient drug expenditures by the HIF,
development and implementation o f strengthened budget management processes both in HIF and
health care institutions, and a strengthened oversight framework for the HIF. During this CPS
period, the Bank will support the government’s agenda o f reforming health care institutions for
strengthened clinical performance and public accountability, h r t h e r enhance the HIF’s capacity
as a strategic and transparent purchaser o f health services and strengthen the role o f the Ministry
o f Health as the steward o f the health sector. A key element to these reforms i s putting in place
appropriate information sharing structures between HIF, HCIs and M O H that will enable better
purchasing, improved quality o f care and transparent reporting o f results to the public (E-health
initiative). A potential investment project to help finance this initiative will be considered during
the CPSPR (FY09) for inclusion in the FYlO lending program.

36

Country Partnership Strategy forfvR Macedonia FY07-I 0

117. Use the cash transfer system to incentivize school enrolment and preventive health.
The Conditional Cash Transfer (FY08) project will aim at alleviating poverty while working
towards improving beneficiaries’ future opportunities to develop earning skills and capacities
and become self-reliant. This can be done through conditioning cash benefits o n behaviors that
build human capital, such as pre- and primary school attendance, strengthening access to
basic/primary health care services, especially among rural populations and vulnerable groups,
especially during the pre- and peri-natal phases, and attendance o f parenting classes.
FY07
Core Diagnostics
0

0

PER
Programmatic Poverty
Assessment
CFA
Macro monitoring

Table 3: Proposed ESW Program FY 2007-2010
FYOS
FY09

I

I

CEM
FSAPUpdate
Programmatic
Poverty Assessment
Joint Portfolio
Review
Macro monitoring

Poverty Assessment

National Energy
Strategy
REPARIS
supervision
Transport Sector
Study
M I G A T A (EIOP)
IFCAS

Poverty Assessment

Macro monitoring

Pillar I : Foster Growth and Job Creation, Increase
Agriculture and E U
Accession
Competitiveness Study
Urban Policy Note
Land Policy Note
REPARIS supervision
MIGA TA (EIOP)
IFCAS

FYlO

0

0

Joint IBRDAFC
Policy Note on
concessions and
PPPS
REPARIS
supervision
M I G A T A (EIOP)
IFCAS
Other (tbd in
CPSPR)

Macro monitoring

0

REPARIS
supervision
M I G A TA (EIOP)
IFCAS
Other (tbd in
CPSPR)

Urban Policy Note

National Energy
Social Inclusion
CFA
Strategy
Assessment
0
Other (tbd in
0
Transport Sector
Other (tbd in
CPSPR)
Study
CPSPR)
IDFpublic
accounting
VTote: The E S Wprogram will be augmented by annual Poverty Assessments and REPARIS supervision activities,
as well as regional studies on health carefinancing, employment andpensions in SEE, railways in SEE (FY08),
feeder roads in S E E (FY08) and gas sector in S E E (FY08).
Competitiveness Study
CFA
IDF public accounting

B.

The Framework for Bank Assistance and Financing Scenarios

118. The need for Bank lending is significant over the next four years but is subsequently
likely to wind down as fYR Macedonia moves toward EU Accession and eventual graduation.
The volume o f the proposed lending envelope under the CPS i s significant. The proposed base
case lending envelope equals the high case lending envelope o f the 2003-2006 CAS. This level
accommodates the government’s intention to work closely with the WBG on key areas o f the
reform agenda in order to accelerate conversion towards EU standards and to help building the
capacity to access EU pre-accession funds and implement associated programs. At the end o f the

37

Country Partnership StrategyforfYR Macedonia FY07-I 0

CPS period, however, i t i s expected that the country will have gained access to significant EU
pre-accession funds, reducing subsequent borrowing significantly.

-

'"able 4: Propo
I

GEF Energy Efficiency
Agriculture
PDPL2
Subtotal
?YO8 Conditional Transfer Imdementation
PDPL3

Grant
20
30
70

25
25

Subtotal
FY09 Urban development

50
25
25

Subtotal
FYlO Investment Loan 1 *

50
15
15
20

Transport (feeder roads)

Investment Loan 2
P D P L (new series)

GEF Energy Efficiency
Agriculture
PDPL2
Subtotal
Conditional Transfer Implementation
PDPL3
Competitiveness/Technological
Changernigher Education
Subtotal
b r b a n development
Transport (feeder roads)
Energy project (gas, electricity)
Subtotal
Investment L o a n 1
Investment L o a n 2
P D P L (new series)

20

Grant
20
30

70
25
25
25
75
25
25
30
80
20
15
20

zz
Subtotal
50
Subtotal
Total
280
(ote: *Investment loans will be determined d
projects in lam
management, Judicial reform and/or health approved as part of the last CAS, or environmental investment to
strengthen compliance with EU standards.

119. Actual lending will be determined by the pace of reform in key sectors. A lending
program sufficient to support progress under the two main pillars o f the CPS i s warranted by the
pace o f reforms thus far, combined with fYR Macedonia's creditworthiness and stable, albeit
low, growth. The base case includes both investment and development policy lending, and
envisages two or three new loans per year, for a total o f US$220 million over the four years CPS
period. Under the high case scenario, the base case lending program could be augmented by two
additional investment loans, adding US$60 million to the lending envelop for the period. The
base case requires continued satisfactory macroeconomic performance, satisfactory progress in
creating a conducive business environment and satisfactory portfolio performance. The high
case scenario requires strengthened macroeconomic performance, further progress in creating a
conducive business environment and good portfolio performance. I t also requires actions to
increase market competition and to increase payment discipline in the energy sector, to ensure
that the policy environment i s appropriate to proceed with additional investments in
competitiveness and energy. Specific actions listed in the table o f triggers (table 5) would form
the basis for judgment by the Region as to whether policy performance i s appropriate for moving
between cases.

38

County Partnership Strategy forJYR Macedonia FY07-10

Table 5: TI egers for Lending
Trimers for lending in the High case

Triggers for lending in the Base case
Continued satisfactory macroeconomic
performance

-

Decline in public debt to G D P ratio
Contain inflation to EU average range
Maintain prudent fiscal and monetary policies

Continued satisfactory progress in creating a
conducive business environment

-

-

Reduced cost and time for business to comply
with business regulations --Base line: dealing
with licenses 222 days (doing business 2007)-Continued progress in implementation of the
regulatory guillotine

Continued satisfactory portfolio performance
- 70 % ofthe portfolio is implemented
satisfactory

Strengthened macroeconomic performance

-

-

improvement in overall creditworthiness, as indicated by
improvements, inter alia of debt indicators, increases in
FDL investment to G D P ratio, and BOPperformance
contain inflation to EU average range
satisfactory progress in fiscal monetary andfinancial
policies
I

Continued satisfactory progress in creating a conducive
business environment, as indicated by actions such as:

-

-

Start Implementation of the Regulatory Impact Assessment
Improve Access to Business related regulations
Adoption of at least two Land policy acts related to
business environment
Improve service delivery of court system --Baseline:
number ofdays for enforcement of contract 385 days
Target: annual decrease of 5%.

Increased market competition by removing barriers to
entry and exit and create a level playing field for public
contracts [prior t o proceeding with the proposed
competitiveness investment in FY081.

-

-

Substantial compliance with government policy to
complete business registration within 5 days
Remove 3- case limit for bankruptcy trustees

Improved energy payment discipline o f the
budgetarylstate-owned entities and large consumers
[prior to proceeding with proposed energy investment in

FY091

-

Implement action plan to improve financial Performance
of energy sector

Continued satisfactory portfolio performance
80 %of the portfolio is implemented satisfactory

-

120. If base case triggers are not met. In the event that regional events affect the security
situation and overall developments in f Y R Macedonia, the Bank, in a supporting macroeconomic
and policy environment, will reorient assistance to focus on investments to support social
cohesion. In the event that internal factors result in a sustained deterioration in macro economic
stability, a serious discontinuation or reversal in the implementation o f key reforms, or if the
quality o f the portfolio performance seriously deteriorates, the Bank will not proceed with
significant new lending. Instead, the program will focus o n implementation o f ongoing
operations and ESW/TA activities. Only very limited lending for global public goods (for
example avian flu) or direct poverty alleviation investments would be considered in that case.
121. The program, as well as the priorities for analytical work in the last two years of the
CPS, will be assessed in the FY09 CPSPR. Developments in f Y R Macedonia are changing
rapidly. The mid-term CPS Progress Report (CPSPR FY09) will assess performance against
CPS results. The outcomes and milestones reflected in the results matrix (Annex 1) will be used
to assess progress in implementing the reform agenda. The development o f indicators in a
number o f areas will continue during the CPS implementation, and the results matrix will likely
be updated at the time o f the CPS progress report. The structure and sequencing o f the lending
program, especially for FY10, will be reviewed in light o f fast evolving developments and

39

County Partnership Strategy f o r j Y R Macedonia FY07-IO

changes in priorities. This will depend on implementation progress under the current legal and
judicial and land registration projects, as well as on potential emerging o f new priorities. For
example, the government has already indicated that it may want to consider requesting the
Bank’s support to help build the institutional framework for meeting EU requirements in the
environmental area. The government has also indicated interest in building on current health
sector investments with support for an e-health program. Ultimately, trade-offs will have to be
considered to ensure that priorities are determined given the lending slots and volumes that may
be available. During the CPSPR, the authorities and the Bank will also start discussing priorities
for assistance beyond the CPS period, as this may have implications for lending preparation and
ESW in the outer years o f the CPS period.

C.

The Programmatic Development Policy Lending Program (PDPL)

122. The proposed policy lending under this CPS provides continuity with the 2003-2006 CAS
and this new CPS. Under the 2003-2006 CAS, a new three-year PDPL series was launched. The
first o f the proposed three PDPLs was approved by the Board on October 27,2005. The goals of
the PDPL are in line with the new CPS. The program aims to promote economic growth and job
creation through reforms to improve the investment climate and reforms to strengthen the
governance and efficiency o f the public sector. The PDPL reforms are being implemented in
conjunction with a number o f investment projects approved by the Board during the last CAS.
The Health project, the Business Environment project, and the Legal and Judicial Reform project
have all been designed and implemented in many respects to support the PDPL-supported reform
program. All o f these investment loans will have an implementation period which will carry
them through this CPS. PDPL 2, the second in the series i s being presented to the Board together
with this CPS. A proposed PDPL 3 i s envisaged for FY08.
To ensure continuity with the next CPS, the first o f a new multi-year PDPL series i s
envisaged to be launched in FY10, the last year o f this CPS period. The scope o f the new series
will be informed by the core diagnostics envisaged for FY07-10 including the CEM, CFA, the
programmatic poverty assessments, the PER and PER update, and the FSAP. Lessons learned
from an evaluation o f the current PDPL series will also inform the design o f the new series.
123.

D. Partnerships and Participation
124. Extensive consultations underpinned the preparation of the CPS (Annex 5 ) . The
country office started internal consultations in late 2005 with a Country Team retreat and
continued throughout the year. A CPS government counterpart team was formed to guide the
preparation o f the strategy. Consultations with stakeholders took place throughout 2006. A
Client Survey brought first hand information on the views o f our clients on the areas that the
Bank should focus on and confirmed the importance o f the Bank’s work in the country. Four
workshops with local authorities, private entrepreneurs and civil society representatives were
held in different regions o f the country, which were held to examine youth priorities and their
expectations for the new CPS. The draft CPS outline was presented to other international
partners in late January 2007.

40

Country Partnership Strategy f o r j Y R Macedonia FY07-I 0

Box 2: Client Survey
In M a y and June 2006,438 stakeholders o f the W o r l d Bank in fYR Macedonia were invited to participate in a Client
Survey to obtain systematic feedback regarding (i)
the general situation in fYR Macedonia; (ii)
perceived value o f
the World Bank in fYR Macedonia; (iii)
overall impressions o f the W o r l d B a n k as related to poverty reduction,
personal relationships, effectiveness, knowledge base, collaboration, and the Bank’s day-to-day business operations;
and (v) perceptions o f the W o r l d Bank’s communication and outreach in fYR Macedonia.

The findings from the survey suggest that o n a number o f levels the W o r l d Bank i s doing w e l l and the environment
welcomes Bank involvement. Some areas, however, require greater focus and attention.

Overall environment. EU accession and economic growth (closely linked by the respondents) are the two key
issues. The survey indicates that other issues are seen as much less important at this time, including poverty
reduction or education. The survey suggests that stakeholders are especially interested in economic growth to
ensure accession to the EU. The greatest percentage o f respondents reported that “government commitment” will
have a very significant impact o n sustainable growth and development.
The Bank’s role. Survey analysis suggests that there i s broad support for the Bank in fYR Macedonia, without a
noticeable negative constituency. Approximately 45 percent o f respondents indicates that the Bank should be more
involved in the country, a similar percentage believes that Bank’s involvement i s at the appropriate level, and only
7% said the Bank should be less involved. At this point the balance seems right.
Two-thirds o f surveyed stakeholders believe the Bank has an important role to play in economic growth. Attracting
foreign direct investment and poverty reduction are also areas where stakeholders believe the B a n k could play a
valuable part. The survey suggests that public support for reforms grows if they are clearly linked with either the
growth agenda or the EU accession process.
Respondents overwhelmingly identify “knowledge” as the greatest Bank contribution t o fYR Macedonia. This
contribution distinguishes the Bank f r o m other institutions, and i t i s recognized and valued. Other important
contributions are “ability to build implementation capacity” and “lending when others won’t.’’ This finding i s
critical for the Bank, especially since the country has other sources o f financial support,
In general, relationships with the Bank are sound. Clearly, the Bank i s doing an excellent j o b interacting with
stakeholder groups in terms o f personal interactions (respect and overall enjoyment working with the Bank).

The Client Survey suggests that the Bank should pay special attention to flexibility and speed up disbursements,
should devote even more attention to high priority areas including economic growth, including helping to reduce
corruption, and explore what more it can do to help fYR Macedonia prepare for EU membership.

125. The EUplays a central role in definingflR Macedonia’s development agenda. The
Bank enjoys a close relationship with the EU, both in Skopje and in Brussels. This close
relationship has ensured a good match between EU and Bank activities (see Annex 10 for
detailed information o n Bank support in relation to the European Partnership program). As part
o f the CPS preparation process, Bank and E C country teams meet at least once every year for a
“fYR Macedonia Coordination Day”. The meeting in 2006 focused on comparing the strategic
direction o f E C (progress reports, multi-annual program support [MIPS]) and WBG programs, as
well as explored ways to deepen operational collaboration. At project level, Bank operations
closely follow (sometimes evolving) EU requirementsto ensure consistency in policy advice.
126. The Bank will maintain coordination with the IMF, which i s expected to continue to
monitor the macroeconomic framework under i t s ongoing three-year SBA, and will continue
macro monitoring even without an active arrangement. The PDPL program has been developed
in close cooperation with the IMF. Also, sectoral advice and lending (for example health and
41

County Partnership StrategyforfvR Macedonia FY07-10

energy) continues to be coordinated with Fund staff. Without a Fund arrangement, the Bank will
have to take a more substantial role in assessing macroeconomic performance, and will initiate
periodic assessments in this area.

127. Harmonization with other development partners, in particular with the EC, USAID, the
Dutch and Swedish Governments and the EBRD and the UN, i s a critical element o f the CPS
implementation strategy. The need to leverage technical and financial resources provided by
other development partners, often on a concessional basis, i s crucial. In line with principles
developed under the Paris agenda on Aid Effectiveness, the government takes an increasingly
active role in aid coordination, organized through i t s Secretariat for EU Integration, which hosts
monthly donor coordination meetings in all major reform areas, usually co-hosted by a leading
donor in the area. In addition, line ministries and other institutions host donor meetings in their
respective sectors, attended by the most active donors in their sectors.
128. Accordingly, the Bank intends to design programs and projects that integrate the
comparative advantage o f the development partners and ensure an optimal investment impact for
N R Macedonia. In this framework, the Bank will continue to offer i t s international expertise
and design systemic approaches which will enable other partners to participate in financing and
cost sharing.

VII. RESULTS-BASED
MONITORING
AND EVALUATION
129. CPS results monitoring will be undertaken jointly with the government. Monitoring
w i l l track progress towards achieving outcomes influenced by Bank interventions agreed to be
undertaken as part o f the CPS. Box 3 puts forward the major results and outcomes to be
influenced by the Bank and achieved by the government during the CPS period, with more
details outlined in the CPS Results Matrix (Annex 1). More specific results frameworks will be
built into the individual Bank interventions. The Bank will primarily depend on government
systems and agencies for the compilation and verification o f results and milestones. The
statistical system o f N R Macedonia i s capable o f producing reliable and high quality statistics.
The coverage o f the vital registration system i s relatively complete. With technical assistance
from bilateral and multilateral agencies (including the World Bank), the Macedonian authorities
have made significant progress in upgrading the statistical system, including basic data
collection, standards, and methodology for economic and financial statistics. The sample-based
household surveys are fairly up-to-date. The bank will also undertake a strategic AAA program
to ensure good tracking o f results, including: (i)
macroeconomic monitoring; (ii)
Programmatic
Poverty Assessment (FY07-FY09); (iii)Public Expenditure Reviews (FY07 and FY09); (iv)
FSAP (update in FY08 and full in FY10) and (v) Country Fiduciary Assessments (FY07 and
FY10).

42

Country Partnership Strategy forjYR Macedonia FY07-10

Box 3: Anticipated Development Challenges which the CPS i s Designed to Influence
Overall: Good progress towards European integration.

Pillar 1: Foster Growth and Job Creation, Increase Living Standards for All
> Sustained macroeconomic stability.
> Improved regulatory environment for businesses.
> Improved enforcement o f contract and creditor rights.
> Increased capacity o f road and r a i l transport and lower trade and transport related transaction costs.
> Increased exports o f horticultural products, improved capacity o f MAFWE and related institutions t o design and
implement agricultural and rural development policy.
i
Improved efficiency in land markets and secure land and property rights.
3
Improved efficiency and sustainability o f the energy sector.
> Progress toward appropriately skilled labor force.
Pillar 2: Public service delivery and supporting good governance
3
Decreased legal uncertainty and increased confidence in the judicial system.
> Improved service delivery, proper finance principles and governance standards at municipal level.
2
More efficient use o f public resources in the health sector, with more cost-effective services, reduced informal
payments and increased patient satisfaction.
b
Strengthened targeting and rationalization o f social assistance services.

VIII. R I S K S AND MITIGATION
REMEDIES
130.

Regional (in)stability in the region will greatly influence the sustainability of the
economic reform efforts and EU accession ambitions of f y R Macedonia. Political instability
and uncertainty in the region, mainly related to the resolution o f the Kosovo status, affects the
investment climate in f Y R Macedonia and adverse developments in the region could spill over to
fYR Macedonia, as was the case with the Kosovo crisis in 1999. The political consensus in the
country on fostering peaceful cooperation with i t s neighbors and strong consent and cooperation

with the international organizations are important preconditions for successful management o f
such risks. The prevailing political commitment across the region toward EU integration will
further serve to mitigate political risks. The many initiatives to encourage further regional
integration, such as CEFTA, should help mitigate these risks as well. The Bank will monitor
regional developments closely and make necessary adjustments to the support strategy if
warranted.
13 1. Domestic political developments also pose a risk to the implementation of the reform
program. Political divergence between the various ethnic parties can cause a slowdown of
implementation o f the reform program that will be supported by this CPS, and can delay critical
reforms necessary for EU integration as well. Second, the government i s composed o f a
coalition that includes several smaller parties. Regroupings within the coalition are possible,
which in turn, may limit the government’s ability to pursue necessary far-reaching reforms that

43

Country Partnership Strategy f o r j Y R Macedonia FY07-10

may require qualified majorities in Parliament. Flexibility in the CPS program will enable the
Bank to adjust i t s support strategy should the political conditions warrant.

132. A delay in EU membership could result in political turmoil that could adversely impact
the implementation of the reform program. The EU accession process, a top priority for all
political parties and strongly supported by the population at large, i s a strong incentive to achieve
consensus for key structural and institutional reforms. This strategic direction helps focus the
government efforts o n critical reforms, especially those identified in the E C Progress Reports.
Also, strengthening institutional capacity to ensure effective absorption o f EU funds i s an
important incentive for continuing progress in this area. These incentives will become weaker if
progress on the road to Europe would slow down. The E C closely monitors progress on reforms
regularly, and the monitoring o f the Bank’s program can also help identify areas that require
additional efforts to address this risk to the Bank program.

Ix. CONCLUDING REMARKS
133. FYR Macedonia has made an impressive leap from a post-conflict country to an EU
candidate country in only four years, preserving i t s macroeconomic stability, which bodes well
for the outcome o f the overall reform program during the CPS period and building the level o f
confidence essential to fostering growth and investment. FYR Macedonia needs to accelerate
and sustain the economic growth for the benefit o f all citizens, while increasing the efficiency
and transparency o f the public services. The Bank will continue to be a strong partner with fYR
Macedonia as i t faces these challenges in the coming four years and i s committed to helping the
government to achieve the results described in this CPS. A mid-term review o f the CPS (CPSPR
in FY09) would take stock o f progress towards achieving the CPS outcomes and results and
propose appropriate adjustments to the support strategy for FY09-FY 10.

44

hl

I

I

e m

8

8

8

M

:

3

Y
m

e

U

B

M

1

m

4

I

.

m

m

8

I

8

I

m

3

Ei

Epa
3

3

a

a

8

m

E

.I

m

W

. .

I

I

0
v,

.

E

2M
Ea
9

a
L

rn

rn

rn

3

wl

rn

h

r
c

I

m

m

B

4
u

e,

e

'7

a

I'

2

N
IA

d

t

8

8

8

8

-

m

i
8
8
c)

I/)

n

W

8

8

8

Country Partnership StrategyforfvR Macedonia FY07-IO

Annex 2

Annex 2: FYR Macedonia’s CAS Completion Report, FY04-FY06
Date o f CAS :
Date o f Completion Report:
Period Covered by the CAS:
Prepared by:

September 9,2003
February 2007

July 2003-June 2006
Andrew Kircher

A. CONTEXT OF THE CAS04
From Post-Conflict Country to EU Candidate
1.
The former Yugoslav Republic o f Macedonia (FYR Macedonia)’s progress from a postconflict country to an EU candidate in the space o f the 2004-2006 CAS has been impressive.
When the CAS04 was approved in September 2003, f Y R Macedonia was s t i l l recovering from
the economic; political and social fallout o f the 2001 conflict. Today in 2007, N R Macedonia i s
enjoying EU candidate status, albeit without a clear date to start the negotiations, making it the
third country to emerge from the former Yugoslavia to become a candidate, after Slovenia
(already a member since 2004) and Croatia. O n the political front, successive governments in
N R Macedonia have made considerable efforts to implement the Ohrid Framework Agreement,
which provided the basis for resolving the 2001 ethnic conflict.

2.
O n the economic front, the Macedonian government has been pursuing an ambitious
reform program and has successfully preserved macro-economic stability during the past few
years, though i t s growth performance has not been stellar, especially by regional standards.
Following the prolonged contraction o f the early 1990s and stabilization in the mid-l990s,
growth began to pick up in the period o f 1998-2000, but was disrupted by the 2001 conflict.
Growth averaged around 0.3 % in the period 2000-2002 and has accelerated to around 3.5% in
the 2003-2005 period mostly driven by improved trade performance and modest pick-up in
investment activity. This took a heavy toll on living standards as the unemplofment rate
(traditionally at very high levels), increased from around 30% in 2000 to 38% by 2002. Labor
market data indicate that most o f the growth has come from productivity gains as the
unemployment rate remains at around 36.5% at end-2005.
3.
The fiscal adjustment during this period was remarkable, with large imbalances o f 20012002 o f -6.3 and -5.6 percent o f GDP respectively being reduced to 0.1 percent o f GDP fiscal
deficit in 2003, and surpluses o f 0.7 percent and 0.3 percent o f GDP in 2004 and 2005
respectively. The central budget deficit i s expected to average 0.6 percent o f GDP in 2006,
ensuring that government spending and public debt continue on a downward path (as % o f GDP).
The prudent fiscal policy enabled a slight loosening o f the monetary policy, resulting in
declining interest rates16 and expanding credit to the private sector17 without compromising price
l6Lending rates have fallen from 19 and 18 percent in 2001 and 2002, respectively, to 11 percent in 2005. Recent
reductions in benchmark National Bank rates have led to further reductions in lending rates in 2006.
17
Credit growth to the private sector has risen from negligible levels in 2001 and 2002 to more than 20 percent in
2004 and 2005. This growth has continued in 2006.

56

Annex 2

Country Partnership Strategy forfYR Macedonia FY07-IO

and exchange rate stability. The increase in private transfers and the inflow o f portfolio
investments are signs o f improving business confidence in the economy and have contributed to
a significant improvement in the Balance o f Payments in 2005. The current account deficit i s at
sustainable levels as reserves increased to a comfortable level o f four months o f imports. The
country remains moderately indebted and the debt service burden o f about 5 percent o f GDP
since 2003 remains modest. This success was reflected in the improvement in the credit rating o f
the country and subsequently by a four-fold oversubscription to the government’s first issue in
December 2005 o f a 10-year, €150 million Eurobond. The money was used to pre-pay London
Club debt in January 2006.
MACEDONIA: Selected Economic Indicators
2000 2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

Act.

Act.

Act.

Act.

Act.

Prel.

Real GDP growth, in %
GDP per capita, in current U S D

4.5
1,770

-4.5
1,689

0.9
1,877

2.8
2,259

4.1
2,604

3.6
2,797

0.3

3.5

Fiscal Indicators, in % o f GDP
Revenues
Expenditures
Deficit

36.2
33.7
2.5

34.0
40.3
-6.3

34.9
40.5
-5.6

38.4
38.5
-0.1

36.5
35.8
0.7

35.5
35.3
0.3

35.0
38.2
-3.1

36.8
36.5
0.3

Balance o f Payments, in % o f GDP
45.6
Exports o f G&S
Imports o f G&S
63.5
Current Account Balance
-2.0

40.7
56.6
-7.1

36.0
57.8
-9.4

36.5
55.0
-3.2

38.8
60.5
-7.7

43.6
62.5
-1.4

40.8
59.3
-6.2

39.6
59.3
-4.1

Debt Indicators, in YOo f GDP
Total External Debt
o/w short-term
Total External Debt Service**

43.2
1.5
6.8

43.5
1.9
8.2

43.3
1.7
6.8

39.6
0.9
5.7

37.9
1.3
5.2

39.1
1.5
4.5

43.3
1.7
7.3

38.8
1.2
5.1

57.0

55.4

48.6

44.9

42.6

47.3

53.7

44.9

Total Public Debt

Average Average
00-02
03-05

FYR Macedonia’s First IBRD-Only CAS
4.
With an ethnically diverse population o f 2 million, fYR Macedonia gained i t s
independence under difficult circumstances. The breakup o f Yugoslavia in 1991 and the
conflicts that followed resulted in the loss o f a large and protected market and key transport
routes. This led to a period o f economic decline with high inflation, large fiscal deficits, insider
privatization and almost no foreign investment. The Government’s stabilization program,
initiated at the end o f 1994 with the assistance o f international donors including the World Bank
and the International Monetary Fund (IMF), restored macroeconomic stability.

57

County Partnership Strategy for fYR Macedonia FY07-10

Annex 2

5.
Since f Y R Macedonia joined the World Bank in 1993, IDA and IBRD commitments to
the country through 38 operations total approximately $780 million; since f Y R Macedonia
became a member o f the IFC, the country has received commitments o f over $93 million in IFC
funds and more than $25 million in syndications. Bank financing has helped the govemment
maintain macroeconomic stability, reform the enterprise sector and develop a sound financial
sector, and provided investment support in key sectors including energy, roads, irrigation,
community development, health, education, and others sectors. Around half o f all lending has
been on concessional IDA terms. But because o f improved economic performance and
creditworthiness, fYR Macedonia graduated fully from IDA in 2003.
6.
During the three years o f the World Bank’s Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) for fYR
Macedonia during FY04-FY06 (hereafter referred to as CAS04), the country’s first IBRD-only
CAS, the Bank moved to a high-case lending program in M a y 2004, based on the strong reform
efforts by the Macedonian government. This i s particularly noteworthy among the countries o f
the Western Balkans, where volume has been declining as IDA constraints have begun to apply
and where the full transition to IBRD has proven to be difficult for creditworthiness reasons. In
fact, f Y R Macedonia’s strong performance has allowed the Bank to continue lending on full
IBRD terms at a stable level over the past decade.
7.
The CAS04 Completion Report concludes that the Bank’s assistance to f Y R Macedonia
through FY04-FY06 was Satisfactory. The report evaluates the impact and effectiveness of the
Bank’s assistance, and the outcomes achieved, through the implementation o f the CAS04. W h i l e
the CAS04 was not prepared using a Results-Based methodology, this report attempts to retrofit
a results-based framework to i t as a basis for a new Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) covering
FY07-FY10. The retrofitted CAS04 Results Matrix has been prepared as if it had been done
when the CAS was originally prepared in FY04.
8.
The CAS04 followed a Transitional Support Strategy (TSS) that was discussed by the
Board in September 2001 and which covered FY02. The TSS had outlined a program of Bank
assistance to support the post conflict priorities o f the country as it emerged from an internal
conflict in 2001. The TSS outlined a one year” program o f post-conflict Bank support primarily
meeting balance o f payments
geared towards achieving four post-conflict priorities, namely (i)
needs; (ii) reconstruction; (iii) strengthening social cohesion; and (iv) supporting
decentralization.

9.

The CAS04 presented an IBRD program o f support for the period FY04-06, which

sought to build on the markedly improved macroeconomic management and structural reform
progress since the 2002 elections. The IBRD program focused on promoting the effective
management o f public resources, tackling corruption, creating the conditions for private sector
led growth, and ensuring an effective safety net i s in place for the most vulnerable Macedonians.

Although f Y R Macedonia did not have a formal national development strategy at the
time o f the CAS04, the policy agenda o f the government was clearly articulated in i t s political
platform in the 2002 elections. The four pillars o f the platform were (i)political and social
10.

18

The effective period o f the TSS was extended through FY03 following further program delays in FY02.

58

Country Partnership Strategy forJrR Macedonia FY07-I 0

Annex 2

stability; (ii)
poverty reduction; (iii)
job creation; and (iv) tackling corruption. This program
enjoyed broad support throughout the country.
11.
The analysis o f fYR Macedonia’s development challenges in the CAS04 were developed
collaboratively by the Bank and the government, based on the overarching two-pronged
framework provided by the Ohrid Agreement and the Stabilization and Association Agreement
(SAA). The objectives o f the CAS04 were drawn from this assessment, namely: (i)to promote
the efficient management o f public resources and tackle corruption; (ii)
to promote the creation
o f jobs through sustainable private sector driven growth; and (iii)
to promote social cohesion,
build human capital, and protect the most vulnerable.
’

B. RETROFITTING THE RESULTS FRAMEWORK
Objective I:Promoting the efficient management o f public resources and tackling
corruption.
12.
During the CAS04, the government strengthened the management o f public resources and
the fight against corruption. The Bank’s focus on this pillar was in large part an outcome of the
Country Financial Accountability Assessment that looked at the design and implementation of
the public financial management framework and evaluated the framework’s ability to ensure the
proper use o f the country’s own resources and those provided by the Bank and other donors. In
particular, it recommended reform in the five Extra-Budgetary Funds (EBFs), including the
Health Insurance Fund, the Pension and Disability Insurance Fund, the Agriculture Fund, the
Road Fund, and the Employment Fund.
13.
Program rating: Progress on public resource management and corruption i s rated as
Satisfactory. Outcomes have varied across the agenda.

14.
Outcome 1 : Public expenditure management has improved, but much remains to be
done. The Bank’s support o f the public sector management reform program came in three
successive policy lending instruments, including the Public Sector Management Adjustment
Credit (PSMAC), followed by the Public Sector Management Adjustment Loan (PSMALII)
and the First Programmatic Development Policy Loan (PDPL). The latter loan i s part of a
three-year PDPL program aiming at supporting the country’s structural reform program to
promote economic growth and job creation through improving the investment climate and
strengthening the governance and efficiency o f the public sectors. This program will continue to
serve as the centerpiece o f the Country Partnership Strategy 2007-2010 (hereafter referred to as
CPSO7).
15.
As indicated before, a critical weakness identified in the CAS04 was the five EBFs,
which together comprised some 40 percent o f total government spending, and which operated
outside o f the central government budget and the treasury and with weak oversight and financial
controls. The EBFs had been a major opportunity for corruption and misuse o f public resources.
Under the P S M A L II, four EBFs were brought under control and integrated into with the single
treasury account, while the fifth one (the agricultural fund) was abolished. At the same time, the

59

County Partnership Strategy forJrR Macedonia FY07-IO

Annex 2

P S M A L I1supported several reforms in the government budgeting process. Hard budget ceilings
were approved for individual line ministries, the government improved budget execution, and the
parliament enacted new laws on internal audit, public procurement and civil servants. In
particular, the P S M A L I1gave a strong focus to improving governance - especially in the health
sector where international tendering o f pharmaceuticals allowed the government to make savings
o f over $10 million per year. P D P L l continued to support hrther reforms in the management
and governance o f the health sector and i t s financing, and addressed some key reforms in fiscal
decentralization. At the same time, and in close collaboration with other donors active at the
local level, the Community Development Project has helped train more than 200 municipal
finance officers from 84 municipalities and local branches o f the finance ministry in financial
management, budgeting and accounting, in support o f the government’s decentralization
program.

Outcome 2: The civil service and broader public sector employment structures have
started their way on reform. In the CAS04, the uncontrolled growth o f the public wage bill was
found to be a major risk to fiscal sustainability in fYR Macedonia. In the context o f the PSMAC,
Parliament enacted a new Law on C i v i l Servants that included a uniform, rule-based and less
compressed salary structure for all civil servants, uniform definitions o f the types o f positions in
the civil service, competitive and transparent recruitment procedures, and establishment o f an
independent agency. After extensive consultations with the Bank, the IMF, and the government,
actual implementation o f the wage decompression provisions o f this law were only enacted in
April 2004, and i t s 24-month implementation schedule has just been concluded. The
decompression followed a six-year period when civil servant pay was frozen. I t is now serving
as a catalyst for decompression in other areas o f the public administration, including pay reform
in education, the police and the judiciary, among others. P D P L l then continued to support civil
service reforms including further changes to the legislative framework and the development of
comprehensive monitoring indicators and targets to ensure the sustained implementation o f the

16.

reforms.

17.
Outcome 3: The government has moved on regarding inappropriate public sector
interventions in business but needs more action on business environment. Most State and
Socially Owned Enterprises were privatized during the mid-1990s but the effort s t i l l left some
large SOEs to be restructured or liquidated at the beginning o f the CAS04 period. The Second
Financial and Enterprise Sector Adjustment Loan (FESAL), which closed late 2004,
successfully supported the government’s efforts in selling o f f or liquidating about 100 o f these
remaining SOEs, focusing on the largest loss-makers with substantial arrears to the government.
Commercial bank lending increased as a percentage o f GDP from 12-13 percent for 1998-2002
to around 24 percent o f GDP by end-2005, while deposits increased from the equivalent o f an
average o f 22 percent o f GDP during that time to 33 percent in 2005. State ownership of the
banking sector declined from an average o f about 15 percent o f total assets for 2000-2002 to
about 9 percent in 2005. Bank lending to the private sector increased from 14 to 21 percent o f
GDP from 2001 to 2005.

Closures o f SOEs caused a substantial increase in the number o f unemployed. To tackle
18.
this, the government and the Bank developed and implemented the Social Support Project. The
project facilitated labor restructuring through actions to reduce individual and community

60

Country Partnership Strategy forfYR Macedonia FY07-10

Annex 2

impacts o f worker dislocation while providing severance payment for redundant workers. It
carried out active labor programs for about 35,000 unemployed workers in 43 communities
providing 14,000 new jobs, and improved the delivery o f social benefits by strengthening the
Ministry o f Labor and Social Policy with equipment and training o f staff.
19.
Public ownership i s no longer a serious constraint to private sector performance in fYR
Macedonia. In 2002, the government learned the lesson o f the proper sequencing o f privatization
when the telecom privatization was carried out without a regulatory framework in place. The
successful privatization o f the Distribution part o f ESM (the power utility company) in the spring
o f 2006 shows how the government’s strategy o f putting in place the proper framework before
privatization has paid off. With the ESM-Distribution privatization, the government now has the
institutional, regulatory, and administrative framework that enables the electricity market to
operate free from private market power and undue government interventions. To support this
concept further, Business Environment Reform and Institutional Strengthening Project
(BERIS) aims to help the government’s efforts to stimulate economic growth based on increased
domestic and foreign investment by strengthening public sector capacity to improve selected
areas o f the business environment and increase competitiveness o f the business sector. In
particular, the BERIS w i l l assist the government in implementing the European Partnership (EP)
signed between the E C and the government in June 2004, by addressing many o f the priority
areas identified by the EP. The BERIS benefited from very close cooperation with USAID and
EAR.
20.
The first pillar o f the PDPL program focuses on improving the investment climate
through supporting structural reforms in the judiciary, labor market, financial intermediation and
corporate governance, as well as on the regulatory environment for the private sector.
2 1.
Outcome 4: Decentralization has proceeded with government commitment.
Decentralization, which i s an important element o f the public sector reform pillar o f the PDPL1,
i s a central tenet o f the Ohrid Peace Agreement, which set out specific reforms and protections
aimed at strengthening the rights o f minority communities, especially ethnic Albanians, and
mandates the phased decentralization o f the responsibility o f many government functions to the
municipalities.
In November 2004, a referendum aimed at blocking the country’s
decentralization process was defeated at the polls. Because o f i t s centrality to the Ohrid
Agreement, decentralization has been supported by many donors and the Bank has worked
carefully to ensure i t s support was complementary to those efforts, in particular in supporting
fiscal decentralization.
In ESW, the Bank’s Urban Policy Note in 2004 highlighted the challenges o f urban
22.
On the lending side, Bank support for
development in the decentralization context.
decentralization took the form o f three different but similar projects that all produced satisfactory
outcomes. First, the Community Development Project piloted small-scale community based
initiatives in selected demonstration communities under an integrated development framework
designed to respond to priority social needs and facilitate the transition from conflict to peace.
Second, an accompanying ChiltiWouth Development Learning and Innovation Loan helped
develop 25 Youth Centers in fYR Macedonia that served as inter-ethnic community gathering
points. And third, a Community Development and Culture Project Learning and Innovation

61

Country Partnership Strategy forfrR Macedonia FY07-I 0

Annex 2

Loan facilitated community-based socioeconomic development by leveraging N R Macedonia’s
cultural assets and raising awareness among municipal governments o f the value o f their
heritage. In addition to these three projects, the Bank also supports decentralization through i t s
Education Modernization Project, which provides required resources to the government to help
implement the decentralization o f education, and through the Irrigation Rehabilitation and
Restructuring Project (closed in November 2006), which supported institutional reform to bring
about a more bottom-up approach to stakeholder participation.
PDPLl included important
policy measures to ensure proper fiscal decentralization arrangements to proceed with the first
phase o f the decentralization program.

23.

Outcome 5:

Transportation has improved and operations have been made more
efficient. The CAS04 indicated that improvements in the transport sector were essential for
regional integration and growth, and restructuring was necessary for compliance with EU
directives. In the past few years, N R Macedonia has made strides in this effort by improving
the efficiency o f i t s road and railway systems, an objective that was supported through the
Transport Sector Project, which closed in late 2004. Before CAS04, the project underwent a
major reallocation o f funds from the railway I T system to railway infrastructure and to
expanding pilot road maintenance. The project helped expand a k e y motorway to the TransEuropean Network motorway standard, extended a pilot maintenance project to cover 110
kilometers o f road, and provided technical assistance and training for staff at the Fund for
National and Regional Roads. And even though the railways-related component o f the project
was reduced because o f difficulties, the procurement o f necessary equipment for Macedonian
Railways provided good results. As a result o f several studies o f N R Macedonia’s railways,
there i s now a consensus and commitment about the restructuring o f fYR Macedonia Railways
for which the new railway law approved in January 2005 provides the legal framework. The
implementation o f the chosen restructuring model, including labor retrenchment, i s the objective
o f the Railways Reform Project approved in September 2005. I t aims to improve the financial
viability, productivity, and effectiveness o f railway operations, which in N R Macedonia are one
o f the largest money losers among public sector enterprises. The railways project stands out in
the region because i t i s the first o f i t s kind to address structural reform in the railways sector.
Lastly, the Trade and .Transport Facilitation in Southeast Europe Project, which closed in
December 2005, achieved substantial reductions in truck waiting times at border crossings and
inland clearance terminals; improved capacity o f small and medium transport operators and
freight forwarders through training programs; modernized border crossing processing, and
enhanced capacity o f border crossings through upgrading o f facilities. All these activities
contributed to enhanced customs performance and there also exists anecdotal evidence o f
reduced “petty” corruption at border crossings, in line with the objective o f tackling corruption.

Objective 2: Promoting the creation o f jobs through sustainable private sector
driven growth.
24.
FYR Macedonia’s transition from a post-conflict country to an EU candidate has not
been accompanied by a drop in the country’s high unemployment rate. The first major piece o f
ESW to examine this trend was the Country Economic Memorandum - Tackling
Unemployment, released in September 2003. I t argued that as the authorities strive to solidify

62

County Partnership Strategy f o r j Y R Macedonia FY07-IO

Annex 2

peace and stability, accelerate remaining structural reforms, and move policies and institutions
towards European norms, the problem o f high unemployment cannot be ignored. Growth has
been limited by l o w investment levels, and to remove this constraint, the study said the
government should be focused on ways to improve education, create a supportive investment
climate, and accelerate free trade as part o f integration into European markets. Despite progress,
fYR Macedonia has a long way to go in reducing corruption and improving the business
environment for stronger private sector driven growth.
25.
For i t s part, the International Finance Corporation (IFC) had a committed portfolio in
summer 2006 o f US$27 million and i t s outstanding portfolio was US$26 million. During FY0406, IFC didn’t commit any new investments in fYR Macedonia. Still, IFC provided through i t s
Southern Europe Enterprise Development (SEED) an intensive technical assistance program,
aimed at improving the business enabling environment and competitiveness o f SMEs. As o f July
1, 2005 SEED was succeeded by Private Enterprise Partnership Southeast Europe (PEP SE)
which i s providing technical assistance and advisory services to help strengthen the development
o f the private sector and infrastructure o f the Southeast Europe countries. PEP SE i s currently
focused on five technical assistance and advisory services programs - alternative dispute
resolution, recycling linkages project, corporate governance, international and EU standards, and
advisory services.
Meanwhile, the Bank’s Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA) undertook a
series o f short term technical assistance (TA) interventions since FYOO, including support for the
preparation o f a new law for a Macedonian investment promotion agency and the establishment
o f the agency, MacInvest. After the establishment o f MacInvest in the fall o f 2004, the Austrian
Development Agency (ADA) agreed to fund a longer t e r m TNcapacity building project
designed to operationalize the new agency and prepare for a larger, complementary European
Agency for Reconstruction-funded TA program. The first phase o f the project, implemented in
26.

FY05-06, provided the agency with a start-up strategy, a detailed analysis o f the country’s
competitiveness for foreign investment in several key sectors and training for i t s board and
management. The second phase, focusing on further hands-on capacity building o f the agency
staff and the implementation o f an investor tracking system, was implemented in FY06-07.

FYR Macedonia i s also one o f the beneficiary countries under MIGA’s European
27.
Investor Outreach Program for the Western Balkans (EIOP). Under the donor-funded EIOP
pilot initiative, launched in summer 2004, MIGA supports a number o f countries in the Western
Balkan region in proactive investor outreach in the agribusiness and auto component sectors,
focusing on the European business community. During Phase 2 o f the EIOP, being implemented
in the FY07-09 period, the program i s expected to work closely with the new government to
increase investor outreach efforts across a number o f sectors.

28.
Program rating: Progress on the jobs front and private sector driven growth i s rated as
Satisfactory given the challenges in fYR Macedonia but much more work needs to be done.
29.
Outcome 1: Improve the business climate to allow private sector-led growth. With most
o f the regional conflicts being resolved, structural impediments are a key constraint to growth
and employment. The Bank’s Doing Business 2006 report and the series o f BEEPS surveys

63

Country Partnership Strategy forflR Macedonia FY07-10

Annex 2

highlights slow and costly enforcement o f contracts, restrictive bankruptcy procedures,
regulatory impediments and delays, and an inflexible labor market as particular concerns. FYR
Macedonia, as with many countries in the region, also suffers from an opaque corporate
governance structure. The government i s committed to addressing these issues with Bank
support through the First Programmatic Policy Development Loan (PDPL)-supported reform
program, as well as capacity building and investments provided under the BERIS, the Real
Estate and Land Registration Project, and the Legal and Judicial Implementation and
Institutional Support Project approved in May, 2006. For its part, the TTFSE contributed to
decreasing the economic distance to markets by reducing non-tariff barriers to trade. O n a more
longer-term footing, the country needs to upgrade the qualification o f its labor force that
significantly limits the growth prospects o f the economy.
Meanwhile, the CAS04 end-FY06 target o f two private sector projects in infrastructure
30.
has been met. In the energy sector, hydro-plants were given under concession to a private
operator, and the construction o f the Skopje Combined Heath and Power Plant i s planned as a
PPP and the electricity distribution network was recently privatized. In telecommunications,
both GSM service providers are private. However, delays in the establishment o f the regulatory
framework in various sectors have prevented more dynamic private sector entry in infrastructure.

Outcome 2: The financial sector is more sound but problems remain. Before the
31.
CAS04 period, the government saw the need to reform the financial and enterprise sectors with
the aim o f speeding up private sector growth. The Bank supported that objective through the
Second Financial and Enterprise Sector Adjustment Loan (FESAL), which helped provide the
framework for faster private sector growth and j o b creation, supported by a healthier and more
developed financial system. The project was designed and implemented in an environment o f
political turmoil and economic disruption caused by the Kosovo crisis o f 1999. By the project’s
end, fYR Macedonia had made substantial progress in enhancing the overall soundness o f the
financial system, particularly the banking sector. The largest o f the loss-making enterprises that
crowded out new private sector growth had been resolved while changes in the business
environment have removed major obstacles for private sector entry and have contributed to
strengthening o f the creditors’ and shareholders’ rights. Still, a number o f deficiencies and deep
systemic problems in the judicial sector have undermined the success ‘ o f the reforms in the
financial and enterprise sectors.

A key part o f creating the right business environment i s proper financial reporting. In
32.
2005, fYR Macedonia began to take part in “The Road to Europe - Program of Accounting
Reform and Institutional Strengthening”(REPARIS) - a regional program aimed at creating a
transparent policy environment and effective institutional framework for corporate reporting
within South Central and South East Europe. REPARIS, developed by the Bank in close
cooperation with the OECD, the European Commission and other partners, aims to train senior
civil servants, financial sector regulators and accounting and auditing bodies in emerging issues
and new trends in both EU and global requirements impacting the regulation o f accounting and
auditing in participating countriedentities.
33.
Meanwhile, the Bank published a Report on the Observance of Standards and Codes
(ROSC) Corporate Governance Country Assessment o f fYR Macedonia in June 2005. I t

64

Country Partnership Strategy forJrR Macedonia FY07-10

Annex 2

updated the 2001 corporate governance ROSC and assessed the corporate governance policy
framework, as well as enforcement and compliance practices. The report found that fYR
Macedonia is in the final stages o f an intense period o f corporate governance reform with recent
reforms resulting in a fkamework that has improved compliance with many OECD principles.
But the ROSC also recommended several changes, including overhauling the disclosure
framework and completion o f the corporate governance code. Also, a Financial Sector
Assessment in November 2003 found that fYR Macedonia’s financial system was very small and
that the development showed the marks o f the country’s first decade o f independence.
Nonetheless, the soundness o f the banking system has been improving in recent years. The last
three years saw a solid expansion o f the financial sector activities in the country. Though s t i l l
relatively shallow in international and regional comparisons, the entry o f the few foreign banks
created modest competitive pressure resulting in a reduction in commercial banks’ interest rates.
The weighted lending rates f e l l from close to 18 percent in late 2002 to around 11 percent at the
beginning o f 2006, while further cuts are expected if current economic trends continue.
34.
Outcome 3: Reform of the judicial system is apriority The FESAL found that in order
to achieve long-term dynamic private sector-led growth, a number o f comprehensive reforms in
the judicial sector, as well as more sophisticated reforms related to the investment climate, r u l e
o f law, and governance will be essential. The Bank supported the government’s efforts in this
area first with a study on legal and judicial reform, which identified fYR Macedonia’s inefficient
and ineffective system as a major constraint to the further development o f a market economy,
economic growth, and the expansion o f the private and financial sectors. The study, Improving
the Business Climate in JYR Macedonia: A Legal and Judicial Enforcement Assessment,
released in June 2005, found that as a key component in f Y R Macedonia’s investment climate,
the ineffective legal and judicial system not only hinders the functioning o f existing businesses,
but it also creates obstacles to the definition and enforcement o f creditor, contract and property
rights. In M a y 2006, the Bank’s board approved the Legal and Judicial Implementation and
Institutional Support Project to assist the government further in this area, which i s in addition to
key policy measures in judicial reform included in the PDPL. I t s objective i s to assist the
Government o f fYR Macedonia in enhancing government capacity and building institutions
needed to systematically implement key laws and policies that are designed to improve the
effectiveness and efficiency o f the judicial system. Implementation o f these laws and policies
will help remove constraints on the legal and judicial system and improve the functioning o f f Y R
Macedonia’s business environment.
35.
Meanwhile, the I F C has been working since 2004 to support legislation reform through
the Alternative Dispute Resolution (ADR) Program in fYR Macedonia. Remarkable progress in
enabling the environment for mediation introduction and implementation has been made. With
the Ministry o f Justice being main partner, the law on Mediation was passed, as well as a by-law
on the Training Program for Mediators. In addition, training for 60 mediators, 60 lawyers and 15
judges have been delivered, several round tables and one ADR Conference for promotion o f
usage of mediation has been organized, and an extensive and far-reaching PR campaign has been
undertaken.
36.
Outcome 4: Energy supplies are improving. The improvement o f the performance o f the
energy sector i s critical in improving and sustaining economic development in fYR Macedonia

65

Country Partnership StrategyforfrR Macedonia FY07-10

Annex 2

and the rest o f South East Europe. The Bank supported the successful rehabilitation o f the
country’s six major hydropower plants, which represent about 28 percent o f f Y R Macedonia’s
generating capacity, through the provision o f equipment and technical assistance and the
carrying out o f works. This progress, which was supported by the Power System Improvement
Project, was exceptional given the severe social problems in the area in which most o f the
hydropower plants are located due to an influx o f Kosovar refugees following civil disturbances.
More capacity and generation were achieved than forecast, with the actual additional capacity o f
49 M w exceeding the project target o f 31 Mw. And the improved efficiency has increased the
number o f hours per year that the plants are in operation and reduced the number o f unplanned
outages.

37.
In July 2004, the Bank drafted proposals in the FYR Macedonia Energy Policy Paper,
which examined f Y R Macedonia’s progress in energy sector reform, particularly through the
adoption of an Energy Law and establishment o f an independent energy regulator. N o w that the
new energy law has been adopted in March 2006, a new medium t e r m energy strategy will need
to be drafted and the Bank has already been requested to assist under the CPSO7. Meanwhile, a
GEF energy efficiency project has been approved by the Board in December, 2006. In the area
of renewable and environmentally friendly sources o f energy, the government has implemented a
GEF Mini-Hydro power project, which consists o f five small hydropower plants, built on the
water supply pipes o f two towns. The concept i s now being used and further developed by the
government, which have identified additional 400 locations for construction o f similar systems,
attracting significant attention from private investors.
38.
At the same time, f Y R Macedonia and other SEE countries have acknowledged that
solutions to regional energy issues require regional solutions. In December 2003, fYR
Macedonia joined the other countries in SEE in signing the “Athens Memorandum,” which
committed the countries to a regional approach to energy and to integration into the European
Community Internal Energy Market. The needs for investment in the energy sector are more
than the public sector can provide so reforms are needed to bring in the private sector to develop
capacity. FYR Macedonia’s successful privatization o f the E S M utility in the spring o f 2006
shows how the government has made strides in opening up the sector to private funds. In
January 2006, the Bank reinforced fYR Macedonia’s reforms with the ECSEE Adaptable
Program Loan that supports fYR Macedonia’s participation in the Energy Community o f South
East Europe (ECSEE), by assisting in implementing i t s program for power market liberalization
and regional power market accession, and providing investment support and technical assistance
to the transmission company. In this way, i t supports the CAS04, which highlighted the need
for power sector investment and institutional development to support greater integration in the
regional power market and to enhance security o f power supply.
Outcome 5: The transport sector is crucial for successful regional integration. FYR
39.
Macedonia’s strategic location makes it a keystone for land transport between Turkey, Greece,
Bulgaria and the rest o f Europe. The CAS04 stressed that the efficient and effective operation o f
the roads and railways, as well as border crossings and the customs system, which link the
Macedonian economy to the region, will become increasingly important to realizing the
country’s growth potential. Since then, fYR Macedonia has improved the efficiency o f i t s road
and railway systems, an objective that was supported through the Transport Sector Project,

66

Country Partnership Strategy forJYR Macedonia FY07-IO

Annex 2

which closed in late 2004. The implementation o f the chosen restructuring model for the
railways, including labor retrenchment, i s the objective o f the new Bank-financed Railways
Reform Project approved in September 2005.
40.
O n a regional level, fYR Macedonia takes part in the TTFSE, a regional program that
aims to strengthen and modernize the customs administration and other border control agencies
in the countries o f the region, including Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Croatia,
Serbia and Montenegro, Romania and Moldova. The program, the result o f a collaborative effort
between the government, IDA, the EU, the US, and the Stability Pact, and some bilateral donors,
seeks to reduce non-tariff costs to trade and transport, and to prevent smuggling and corruption at
border crossings. Since the project became effective in 2001, fYR Macedonia has seen increases
and exceeded i t s targets in the value o f imports and revenue collected, significant reductions in
truck border crossing waiting times, and enhanced transparency o f customs transactions. These
improvements came despite the interruption caused by the 2001 conflict that directly affected the
transport, and consequently, trade activities in general. TTFSEl closed o n December 3 1, 2005,
and preparation for a follow on project i s underway.
Outcome 6: Support to SMEs must continue. Through several different programs, the
41.
IFC has supported Small and Medium Enterprise (SME) development in fYR Macedonia. A
three-year project funded by Austria i s focused on the secondary material recycling industry in
fYR Macedonia and other Western Balkan countries. The project, managed by IFC, i s focused
on the financial, training, consulting, and market needs o f every segment o f the scrap metal,
paper, plastic and glass value-chains. The objective is to promote SMEs, increase the
competitiveness o f the recycling sector, and improve the lives o f thousands o f families who
make their primary income by collecting scrap materials.

42.

Meanwhile, an I F C project funded by Switzerland aims to improve the internal
corporate governance practices o f Macedonian firms, thus making them more attractive to
potential investors. On June 14, 2006, IFC assisted the Macedonian Stock Exchange to launch
the newly drafted Corporate Governance Code which i s expected to become effective at the
beginning o f 2007. I F C i s also working with Macedonian companies in order to help them
improve their corporate governance standards and plans to start working with banks as well. In
addition, IFC will collaborate with universities to teach corporate governance to students, so that
they can apply best standards in their future jobs. Also, an I F C project funded by Norway i s
focused on helping SMEs introduce EU and international standards. Macedonian companies
are faced with challenges to meet international and EU technical requirements which must be
satisfied if domestic products are to be exported to international and EU markets. In fYR
Macedonia, where the economy i s traditionally reliant on food production and related industries,
IFC has implemented a comprehensive Hazard Analysis o f Critical Control Points (HACCP)
program. I F C has been working to help food-processing companies to implement HACCP and
develop a local expertise able to undertake certification. An HACCP Information Center has
been established at the Skopje Agricultural Faculty.
43.
Outcome 7: Rural development has been limited. One major issue in fYR Macedonia’s
rural development i s irrigation, which i s essential to establish the country’s potential in
agriculture. The Irrigation Rehabilitation and Restructuring Project supported improvements
67

Country Partnership StrategyforfrR Macedonia FY07-IO

Annex 2

by rehabilitating three deteriorated irrigation schemes, enhancing the transparency and efficiency
o f the schemes by introducing participatory management, and reforming the country’s Water
Management Organizations, to make them more financially sustainable. Although the Kosovo
crisis o f 1999 and the 2001 conflict in f Y R Macedonia intervened to delay the project’s progress,
and significant problems have been encountered during the last seven years, in 2004 the board
approved a major restructuring o f this project, and success i s being achieved. The irrigation area
in two project areas had surpassed pre-project level while i t has achieved considerable
improvement in the third area. Soine 25,000 families are now benefiting from the irrigation
schemes while 125 kilometers o f primary canals have been repaired and 2,500 hectares o f
independent irrigation schemes have been rehabilitated. The reforms have delivered better
quality irrigation services and a more efficient water distribution system. At the same time, the
government has liquidated 12 Water Management Organizations (WMOs) and also eight other
WMOs outside the project area to scale up the initiative taken under the project to the sector
wide r e f o m . This program received significant co-financing from the Dutch government.

44.
Outcome 8: Uncertainty over land title acts as a brake on theprivate sector. In 2003 a
Foreign Investment Advisory Service (FIAS) study indicated that problems with the purchase o f
and construction on real estate were rated as the most significant administrative barrier to
investment in fYR Macedonia. The Bank has started i t s assistance in this field through the Real
Estate Cadastre and Registration Project, which aims to help build an efficient and effective
real estate cadastre and registration system, contributing to the development o f efficient land and
real estate markets. An effective system i s critical to fYR Macedonia’s goal o f integration with
the European Union. I t i s too early to assess the project but based on progress made so far,
especially in the Kumanovo pilot, i t i s likely that the project will achieve i t s objectives. The
project has been complemented by the activities o f the Swedish, Dutch, Japanese and Norwegian
governments, through a well developed coordination mechanism. Land policy issues are s t i l l
pivotal to private sector development. Recently completed ESW in agriculture and urban
development have identified issues and solutions for better land use management in N R
Macedonia. CPSO7 will continue on this agenda as well.
Outcome 9: Sustainable growth requires more effectively dealing with environmental
challenges. FYR Macedonia faces significant environmental challenges, particularly in water
resource management, issues that will get higher on the priority l i s t once the country progresses

45.

on the EU accession process. The country has made progress in cooperating with Albania on
conserving and protecting the natural resources and biodiversity o f Lake Ohrid through ajoint
environmental management o f the lake’s watershed. The cooperation was supported by the
GEF’s Lake Ohrid Conservation Project, which sought to provide a transboundary,
comprehensive approach to Lake Ohrid, combining restoration, conservation and protection of
the lake with sustainable use o f i t s natural resources. The approach was codified into a new
transboundary treaty, “Agreement for the Protection and Sustainable Development of Lake
Ohrid and its Watershed, ” ratified by both countries in 2005. The project was the first GEF
project o f its kind in Southeastern Europe, and has been recognized internationally as a
successful model o f bilateral management o f trans-boundary resources.

Objective 3: Promoting reconciliation, building human capital and protecting the
most vulnerable.
68

Country Partnership Strategy forfYR Macedonia FY07-10

Annex 2

46.
The 2001 conflict disrupted the positive economic momentum that fYR Macedonia had
enjoyed in the previous years. The effects o f the conflict were felt on the country’s output,
investment and export growth, while the budget and current account deficits remained high.
Through the Ohrid Peace Agreement o f 2001, the government set out specific reforms aimed at
ensuring the rights o f minority communities. Several years after Ohrid, N R Macedonia i s
respected in the region for having come a long way since the days o f conflict and for forging a
multi-ethnic state that has progressed in reconciliation among i t s various groups. But to make
the peace and cohesion last, fYR Macedonia must continue to implement the Ohrid principles
and strive to promote reconciliation.
47.
Meanwhile, fYR Macedonia i s one o f the leading countries that participate in the Decade
of Roma Inclusion 2005-2015, a multi-country initiative supported by the Bank and other
partners. The Macedonian government has positively responded to the initiative and has formed
an inter-sectoral Country Working Group, under the auspices o f the Minister o f Labor and Social
Affairs and with active involvement o f Roma NGOs. The Country Working Group has
developed a Decade Action Plan, which outlines the actions to be taken in the priority areas o f
education, health, housing and employment.
48.
Program rating: Progress on reconciliation, building human capital and protecting the
most vulnerable i s rated as Satisfactory.
49.
Outcome 1: The maintenance of social cohesion is improving. Bank support for social
cohesion and community development took the form o f three different but similar projects that
all produced satisfactory outcomes and all were supported by grants from the Dutch government.
First, the Community Development Project aimed to foster reconciliation among the people,
reduce social tensions, and build local social capital. The project has made progress toward that
goal by piloting small-scale community based initiatives in selected demonstration communities
under an integrated development framework designed to respond to priority social needs and
facilitate the transition from conflict to peace. Activities under the project have gained
momentum, with performance reflected in project outcomes in completed and ongoing
community investments in poor, conflict-affected and vulnerable groups, and in local
government training projects. In addition to 118 completed community investment/small
infrastructure projects, a total o f 80 Social Services Micro-projects projects were developed and
implemented. At the same time, the project successfully completed the second phase o f local
government training focusing on social service delivery that included 20 courses with 193
participants. However, the project was reviewed by IEG and rated Moderately Unsatisfactory
because the I C R has not provided enough evidence to demonstrate satisfactory achievement o f
the project’s stated objective.
50.
Second, an accompanying ChiltUYouth Development Learning and Innovation Loan
aimed to increase social cohesion through the social integration o f adolescents and youth at risk
(ages 15-24) from different socio-cultural backgrounds. In this, i t helped the development o f 25
Babylon Youth Centers in fYR Macedonia and attracting Albanian youth, who were initially
under-represented in the centers. As o f spring 2006, some 15,400 youth had benefited from the
project’s centers. Meanwhile, several newly elected mayors from municipalities which are not

69

Country Partnership StrategyforflR Macedonia FY07-IO

Annex 2

yet covered by the project have requested technical assistance from the PMU to launch centers
with their own funding, citing them as one o f the few public spaces o f inter-ethnic and intercultural integration in the country.

5 1.
Third, a Community Development and Culture Project Learning and Innovation Loan
performed very well in facilitating community-based socioeconomic development by leveraging
fYR Macedonia’s cultural assets. Handicraft projects are increasingly collaborating with private
companies and tourism projects are expanding their promotion campaigns and international
contacts, notably in the areas o f rural and monastery tourism. The project has raised municipal
government awareness o f the value o f their heritage with every project municipality having
developed some form o f information and promotion for i t s heritage. And local governments,
NGOs, the Ministry o f Culture and the Institute for Protection o f Cultural Monuments are
gaining experience and technical capacity through the project.
Outcome 2: The quality and relevance of education needs to be improved. The Bank’s
52.
Education Modernization Project has reported that progress o n improving the quality o f
education in f Y R Macedonia has been moderately satisfactory, with all o f the building blocks
that are needed to achieve the Bank’s development objectives being n o w in place. In particular,
overall progress against the objective o f learning at targeted schools through strengthening
school level planning and management i s good. As o f December 2006, some 93 targeted schools
have used or are using grants to carry out self-evaluations and development plans while all other

primary and secondary schools are scheduled to take part in the program. Technical assistance
for teacher training has arrived and i s now active o n the ground. Progress, meanwhile, on
improving equity and efficiency for a decentralized education system has been slower. The
building o f capacity o f the municipalities was deliberately delayed to ensure proper linkages to
other donor-funded activities. I t should be noted that the project benefited from extensive
support and cooperation from the Dutch bilateral development agency.
Outcome 3: Health outcomes have improved. In April 2004, the I C R o f the Bank’s
53.
Health Sector Transition Project found progress on financing o f the health system had run into
problems in the beginning but i s now back on track. The project improved the health of the
population by enhancing the quality o f basic health services, with a 48 percent reduction in infant

mortality (from 22.7 in 1995 to 11.8 in 2000); a 37 percent drop in maternal mortality, (from
21.8 in 1995 to 13.7 in 2000), and a 15 percent fall in tuberculosis incidence (from 40 in 1995 to
34.1 in 2001). It also supported an initial phase o f policy reforms to increase cost effectiveness,
fiscal sustainability and patient choice within the health system. The average length o f stay in
hospitals was decreased by 20 percent from 14.3 to 11.4 days, while the number o f consultations
per physician in outpatient care was increased by 18 percent.
54.
The second health project, the Health Sector Management Project, set out to address the
issue o f cost-containment while improving quality and access. Although the project i s s t i l l
under implementation, i t has helped fYR Macedonia to achieve some key results, including
increasing the amount o f collected contributions by 5 percent, as well as the number of
contributors. Some 15 guidelines have been developed, according to international standards, and
distributed, and the average length o f stay in hospitals has fallen by 15 percent.

70

Country Partnership Strategy f o r j Y R Macedonia FY07-I 0

Annex 2

55.
Outcome 4: The pension system has been reformed. Progress on the objective o f
improving the effectiveness and efficiency o f the social protection system has been satisfactory.
In particular, the Bank has supported the government’s efforts to build a sound and fiscally
sustainable pension system through the Social Protection Implementation Project. Bank
assistance helped the development o f the legal foundations o f the new system and assisted in
creating the conditions for i t s successful introduction, including completion o f the legal and
administrative framework for successful operations o f the second pillar, a viable plan for
financing the transition, and introducing long-term government bonds for investment o f second
pillar funds. This support led up to the January 2006 launch o f the country’s second pillar o f i t s
pension system, along with a new individual contribution collection system. Meanwhile, the
Ministry o f Finance issued a long-term government bond in November 2005, and made a
budgetary allocation for financing the pension reform transition in the 2006 budget.
56.
Outcome 5: Measuring of Poverty is Improving. During the last three years, the State
Statistics Office (SSO) made considerable progress in improved calculation and dissemination o f
poverty data. The data collection method was significantly improved, coverage o f information
was expanded to better understand non-income aspects o f poverty (modules on access to health,
education and social services were added to the HBS), regular poverty profile reports were
expanded and are publicly available on the government’s website. The institutional capacity
within the SSO for poverty monitoring i s sound and not reliant on donor activities and there do
not seem to be immediate challenges to continuing these activities though there is some concern
that demands made by the EU accession process will reduce the SSO’s attention to this area.
Earlier, the Bank teamed with the SSO o f fYR Macedonia to produce the FYR Macedonia
Poverty Assessment for 2002-2003 to improve understanding o f the poverty situation in the
country. Published in late 2005, the report provided a valuable opportunity and vehicle for
estimating absolute poverty and more generally assessing living conditions o f the population. I t
also identified some key remaining knowledge gaps in areas where a better understanding will be
needed to provide further guidance on identifying policy actions to combat poverty in the
country. During the course o f the preparation o f the report, the Bank team provided extensive
assistance to the SSO staff on measurement o f absolute poverty as well as a number of other
social indicators (Laeken indicators etc.). The Bank team also prepared a 2004 update on the
poverty numbers, with an emphasis on analyzing the poverty rates between Macedonians and
other ethnic groups to get a better understanding o f poverty challenges in relation to the Ohrid
Peace Agreement. The Bank recently acquired micro-level datasets from the Labor Force
Survey and will soon launch the preparation o f a report investigating labor market developments,
in particular trying to understand how high unemployment rates are maintained without a
significant deterioration in living standards and poverty. Under the CPSO7, it i s foreseen that the
Poverty Assessment will be updated annually on a more programmatic basis to provide more
fi-equent data to inform the country program.

C. OVERALL BANK PEFWORMANCE
57.
Overall, the Bank’s performance i s rated as Satisfactory. I t i s noteworthy that the CAS04
objectives and program were implemented according to the original design. This i s in large part
due to the government’s strategic decision to adhere to i t s commitments to international
institutions such as the Bank in order for the benefits o f reform to take root. The decentralization

71

County Partnership Strategy forJvR Macedonia FY07-10

Annex 2

o f the Bank’s portfolio and project management to the country office also contributed to this
success by allowing for increased supervision effort and intensified sectoral policy dialogue with
the government.

In terms o f lending, the Bank’s program in CAS04 was designed to support strong
structural reform that would enable the achievement o f the C A S outcomes in Tables 1, 2, and 3.
The IBRD instruments were chosen in consideration o f existing Bank support through the active
portfolio (Annex A). The CAS04 outlined a highly selective program o f investment and policy
lending o f up to US$165 million, complemented by a substantial body o f diagnostic and
fiduciary work. At the outset o f the CAS04, N R Macedonia was considered to be in the base
case. But thanks to strong policy performance by the country, the program quickly moved into
the strong reformhigh case lending scenario for the entire CAS04 period, eventually committing
slightly more than the full lending envelope o f $165 million for the three-year period.

58.

59.

The last Joint Portfolio Performance Review (JPPR), finalized in March 2005, showed
that the portfolio i s in good shape, due to the efforts o f the government during the past few years.
(See Box 1). The disbursement ratio in FY05 o f over 30 percent indicates strong progress with
current operations. There are no immediate problems in the portfolio, although strengthened
supervision and guidance i s required for reform projects in areas with large vested interests, such
as the health project, new railways reform project and the new legal and judicial project. The
JPPR showed that the Bank’s lending program and analytic work were well aligned with key
CAS objectives. This has produced significant benefits from the ongoing portfolio, including
support for major reforms and institutional development programs in a number o f high priority
sectors. Several factors can be identified as contributing to the success o f the portfolio, including
close linkages between policy and investment operations, linkages between high quality analytic
work and key policy reforms, and effective donor coordination o n key reform issues. The JPPR
said that in order to maintain this good performance and learn from the ongoing operations, i t i s
important for projects to pay closer attention to monitoring and evaluation systems.

In March 2005 the W o r l d B a n k and the Government o f fYR Macedonia conducted a Joint Portfolio Performance

Review (JPPR). The JPPR indicates that the Bank-financed portfolio has undergone significant improvement
since the previous portfolio review in November 2003. The percentage o f projects “at r i s k ” dropped f r o m oneh a l f o f the portfolio to zero upon the completion o f the JPPR. The success in monitoring the portfolio was due to
good cooperation between the International Finance Department o f the Ministry o f Finance and the W o r l d Bank
Country Office. The alignment o f the lending program and analytical work with the C A S objectives was key to
the success o f the portfolio.
Among the factors that contributed to this outcome, the JPPR emphasized the linkages between adjustment and
investment operations, between high quality analytic work and key policy reforms, and effective donor
coordination o n key reform issues.
However, the JPPR recommendations focus o n paying more attention to defining the linkages between results at
the project outcomes and CAS-level goals, as well as demonstrating progress o n institutional reforms and
capacity building. The JPPR suggests that programmatic lending instruments should be used to link Bank
financing more closely with government-led development strategies/ programs aligned with national goals. I t
also proposes a program o n simplifying the Bank operational requirements and provides tools for implementing
the changes.

72

Country Partnership Strategy forfYR Macedonia FY07-10

Annex 2

60.

In terms o f donor coordination, i t should be understood that there are substantial and
competing priorities for development assistance in fYR Macedonia. Accordingly, the Bank’s
country program relied heavily on development partners to take the lead in some sectors, in
particular those in which the S A A agenda and the complementary EU CARDS program were
focused. Similarly, as many other donors started to provide substantial technical assistance and
training to build capacity at the local level in support o f the decentralization agenda that
implemented the Ohrid Framework Agreement, the Bank focused i t s program on reforms at the
central level. As anticipated, this approach resulted in a more concentrated program and further
emphasized reliance on the Bank’s partners.

Bankperformance - Objective I - The Bank’s performance in supporting the promotion
61.
of the efficient management o f public resources and tackling corruption i s Satisfactory. Support
of the public sector management reform program came from the Bank in the shape o f the Public

Sector Management Adjustment Loan (PSMALII) that supported five major areas o f reform:
budget formulation; budget execution; audit; procurement; and civil service. I t s program also
aimed at introducing these reforms in the health case sector in particular. The program built on
the Public Sector Management Adjustment Credit (PSMAC) that had supported the initial
stages o f the reform strategy o f the government in public sector management. And in September
2005, the Bank followed up the public sector reforms o f the PSMAC and PSMAL I1 with the
approval o f the First Programmatic Development Policy Loan (PDPLl) to fYR Macedonia.
While the PDPL program aims at supporting the country’s structural reform program to promote
economic growth and j o b creation through improving the investment climate, and will continue
to serve as the centerpiece o f the CPSO7, the second pillar continues to focus on further
improving the governance and efficiency o f the public sector, in particular in civil service
reform, fiscal decentralization and the management o f the health care sector.

62.
Finally, the policy reform program was further supported by two investment projects to
help the implementation o f the reform effort by financing technical assistance, training and I T
requirements: (i)
the Social Protection Implementation Project targeted the management and
administration o f pensions and social benefits, to ensure proper implementation o f the new
pension system, and to ensure social benefits are reaching the poor and those in need, and (ii)
the
Health Sector Management Project that provides support to implement the comprehensive
reforms in the health sector as agreed under PSMALII and PDPL. Meanwhile, (iii)
the Trade
and Transport Facilitation in Southeast Europe (TTFSE) project provided support to
implement customs administration institutional reforms and improvement o f the Integrated
Customs Information System (ICIS) to enhance efficiency and speed up border crossing
processing.

63.
Bank performance - Objective 11 - The Bank’s performance in promoting job creation
through sustainable private sector driven growth i s Satisfactory. As outlined earlier, the Bank’s
support for the business climate came in many forms in the CAS04 and many o f the instruments
are only now coming online in the latter phase o f the CAS period. These include capacity
building and investments provided under the Business Environment Reform and Institutional
Strengthening Project (BERIS), the Real Estate and Land Registration Project, and the new
legal and judicial investment loan. Also, the government i s committed to addressing these issues

73

Country Partnership StrategyforJYR Macedonia FYO7-I 0

Annex 2

with Bank support through the Programmatic Development Policy Loan (PDPL)-supported
reform program. O n a more longer-term footing, the country needs to upgrade the qualification
o f i t s labor force that significantly limits the growth prospects o f the economy.

64.
Clearly, improving the business environment i s an area where the Bank can do more in
the CPSO7 given the challenges that fYR Macedonia faces. In 2005, the EBRD-World Bank
Business Environment and Enterprise Performance Survey (BEEPS) showed that while
corruption remains an important problem in fYR Macedonia, things have modestly improved in
some areas in the last three years. Still, progress seems stagnant. And the Bank’s Doing
Business 2006 report said fYR Macedonia ranked 8 1st in the global ranking o f 155 nations on
key business regulations and reforms, roughly the same position it had held in previous years.
Bank performance - Objective 111 - The Bank’s performance in supporting the
65.
promotion o f reconciliation, building human capital, and protecting the most vulnerable i s
considered Satisfactory. The Kosovo crisis and the civil conflict o f 2001 eroded social cohesion
and elevated the importance o f inter-ethnic relations in the ongoing political debate. The Bank
contributed to the ongoing process o f reconciliation through three similar and related projects the Community Development Project, Child/youth Development Learning and Innovation
Loan, and the Community Development Culture Project Learning and Innovation Loan.
Meanwhile, the objective o f protecting the most vulnerable was greatly assisted through the
government’s introduction o f a new and fiscally sustainable pension system through the Social
Protection Implementation Project. Also, a critical outcome o f the CAS upon which the longt e r m reduction o f poverty depends i s improved capacity to understand and track the impacts o f
policy on poverty and progress towards achieving the MDGs. One way the Bank i s helping i s by
building on the FYR Macedonia Poverty Assessment for 2002-2003 and adopting a more
programmatic approach to analyzing poverty levels across the country’s range o f ethnic groups
and identifying where needs for support and intervention are greatest.

66.
Lastly, a reflection o f the World Bank’s performance and reputation in fYR Macedonia
can be seen in a Base Line Survey o f 1,200 Macedonians o f different ethnicities that was
undertaken by the Bank’s Skopje country office. The survey found that 69% o f those surveyed
have a favorable opinion about the Bank. Most o f the people have more trust in the WB than in
the public sector, private sector or NGOs (51% trust the WB, 42% trust the private sector, 40% public sector and 38% - NGOs).

74

Country Partnership Strategy forfvR Macedonia FY07-IO

Annex 2

In the framework o f the consultations for the preparation o f the new CAS, the W o r l d Bank Office in
Skopje undertook a Base Line Survey. A representative sample o f the Base Line Survey was distributed
to 12,000 people from all over fYR Macedonia (towns 74.4% and cities 25.6%). I t covered a wide range
o f people with different ethnicities (Macedonians 66.2%, Albanians 22.5%, Turkish 3.8%, Roma 1.5%,
Serbian 4.4.%, Vlach 1%); different education background (no primary education 2.6%, primary
education 16.2%, secondary education 55.8%, university education 25.5%); different employment status
and political association. The purpose o f the survey was to find out to what extent the public was aware
o f World Bank activity in the country and where the Bank stands compared to other organizations such
as the UN, IMF, EU and EBRD. Based on the survey, the Bank ranks third after the UN and EU (95% of
the population have heard o f the WB as compared to 98% who have heard o f the UN and EU; 69% have
a favorable opinion about the Bank as compared to 83% - UN and 74% - EU). M o s t o f the people have
more trust in the WB than in the public sector, private sector or NGOs (51% trust the WB, 42% trust the
private sector, 40% - public sector and 38% - NGOs).
A. PUBLIC AWARENESS
OF WORLD BANKACTIVITY IN Fk’R MACEDONIA
(given in frequency o f answers out o f a total o f 1200 )

I

PUBLIC

I

PUBLIC

AWARENESSAWARENESS

(FREOUENCY
OUT OF 1200)

(IN
. %1,

1. Most important areas in which opinion about the Bank scores High (Frequency above 400)
I. Have you ever heard o f the World Bank

1141

95.1

ii.What i s the main source o f information about the WB.

525

43.8

502

41.8

466

38.8

615

51.3

510

42.5

-National T V
iii.What i s your opinion o f the WB.
(very favourable - Don’t know, never heard of)
- Somewhat favourable
iv. How much trust do you have in regard to the WB.
(Trust fully - Don’t know).

’

2. Most important areas to Macedonians which score High (Frequency above 400)

i.Which idea for your country’s future appeal to you most?
(join world/world economyiWest).
- Join E U
ii.Which view do you agree on cooperation between N R Macedonia and the WB.
(join world economy and move closer to Europe/ make our economy grow/ neither/ both).
- Make our economy grow
iii.What should be the priority o f the Macedonian government in regard to economic development.
(improve citizens’ well-being, combat corruption, EU accession, employment creation, denar stability,
foreign trade expansion, private sector development, assisting the vulnerable)
- Improve the well-being o f citizens

D. LESSONS LEARNED FROM CAS04 - IMPLICATIONS FOR CPSO7
67.
The shifi in focus in the Bank’ program over the 2003-2006 CAS period from public
sector reform to private sector development issues was timely and appropriate, and should
continue. Between 2002 and 2006, fYR Macedonia regained strong macro discipline and
transformed from a post-conflict country to an EU candidate. In response, the Bank shifted i t s

75

Country Partnership Strategy forJrR Macedonia FYO7-I 0

Annex 2

program appropriately to deal more directly with economic growth constraints. This should
continue in the next CPS.

68.
The Bank needs to increase its focus on jYR Macedonia’s integration with the EU.
EU accession i s a top priority for fYR Macedonia, and the Bank needs to assist the country in
meeting the accession criteria and the EU acquis, including on building the institutional capacity
to effectively implement EU regulations.
69.
The EU accession process has major implications on budget allocation and priorities.
The Bank’s funding could serve as critical bridge financing to enable fYR Macedonia to access
EU pre-accession funds. The new PER slated for delivery in FY07 should analyze and provide
recommendations to the Macedonian government on the fiscal policy challenges the country
faces in the run-up to EU accession.
70.
Stronger economic growth and job creation must be achieved. In order to maintain
popular support for the reform agenda, there i s a need for fYR Macedonia to show that i t s
successful macro economic discipline and structural reform initiatives do translate into stronger
growth, job creation and improvement o f living standards for all.
FYR Macedonia’s competitiveness needs attention and role of education reform needs
to increase. I f Macedonian companies are to compete in the regional and international markets,
their competitiveness needs to improve. Such a stronger competitive edge also requires a better
match between the quality o f education in fYR Macedonia with the needs o f the 21StCentury and
the knowledge economy.
7 1.

The multiyear Policy Development Program has served the Bank’sprogram well. The
72.
ongoing three-year PDPL program helped in shift o f policy priorities, has been well connected to
a number o f investment projects, and helped secure continuity and predictability in the reform
program. I t even helped in the transition period following the recent government change, as the
already agreed upon PDPL policy framework and related conditionality, played an instrumental
role in the continuation o f specific reform efforts.

73.
Decentralization is critical to ensuring the peace and reforms. Decentralization i s a key
part o f the implementation o f the Ohrid Peace Agreement. Key for i t s success will be that local
communities are able to fully take part in the country’s development. The challenge for the
CPSO7 i s to calibrate the Bank’s interventions carefully, through sector work and lending, to
assist in urban development, including in the provision o f public services at the municipal level.
This will require close cooperation with many other donors already active at the local level, often
better placed to finance and implement resource intensive community-based activities.

76

County Partnership StrategyforJvR Macedonia FY07-I 0

Annex 2

-

Box 3. The Ohrid Agreement & EU Candidate Status
The General Framework Agreement for Peace (the Ohrid Agreement) was signed in August, 2001 by the leaders
o f the four main political parties in fYR Macedonia at the time, representing ethnic Macedonians and ethnic
Albanians. The document lists some basic principles o f the Macedonian state and includes provisions on: the
cessation o f hostilities and the voluntary disarmament o f ethnic Albanian armed groups; devolving centralized
power to local administration; and reforming minority political and cultural rights. A m o n g other things, the
provisions create a “double majority” requirement in parliament (including a majority o f representatives from
minority populations) for passage o f certain constitutional amendments and laws affecting minority rights.
The amendments t o the Constitution required by the Ohrid Agreement were adopted by the Parliament in
November, 2001 (almost two months later than anticipated). Afler considerable debate and delay the new L a w
o n Local Self-Government was adopted by the Assembly in January, 2002. The L a w assigns local governments
responsibility for establishmg and financing primary schools, providing social care for the disabled, and other
social categories, and providing primary health care and health protection for persons without health insurance.
The Ohrid Agreement was preceded by the Stabilization and Association Agreement (SAA), w h c h was signed
in Luxembourg in April, 200 1. S A A envisaged a step-by-step establishment o f a free trade area within ten years
after entry into force o f the agreement, i.e. by June, 201 1 at the latest.
S A A implementation was successfully finalized o n November 9, 2005 when the European Commission
recommended that fYR Macedonia be accepted as a candidate by the member states. On December 16,2005 the
EU Summit decided t o grant fYR Macedonia EU Candidate Status. Negotiations for accession to the European
Union will be opened once fYR Macedonia has reached a sufficient degree o f compliance with the membership
criteria.
FYR Macedonia has made significant efforts to align i t s legislation with EU rules particularly in the areas o f the
internal market and trade. However, m u c h remains to be done to enable the country to cope with competitive
pressure and market forces within the Union. In order to reach higher economic growth and competitiveness, the
business climate must be improved and the country must become more attractive for domestic and foreign
investors. The government o f fYR Macedonia has to redouble its efforts t o implement the judicial, economic,
electoral and other reforms needed t o realize their country’s full integration into Euro-Atlantic institutions.

77

Country Partnership StrategyforfrR Macedonia FY07-10

Annex 2

TABLE
1: CAS03 OUTCOMES IN PROMOTING EFFICIENTMANAGEMENT
OF PUBLIC FUNDS
AND TACKLING
CORRUPTION
CAS OUTCOMES
THE BANK
EXPECTED TO
INFLUENCE

INTERMEDIATE
PROGRESS
INDICATORS

'ROMOTING

CFFICEINT

fiANAGEMENT OF
'UBLIC FUNDS
&
rACKLE
:ORRUPTION
'HROUGH:

1

1

Budget
formulation;
Budget
execution;
Improvement o f
procurement
processes;
1 Strengthened
civil service in
public
administration;
Strengthen the
legal framework
o f internal &
external
auditing.

1

1

B

D

H a r d budget ceilings for each o f
the f i i s t line budget entities
were approved by the
government in June 2003;
This was repeated with the
budget approved by Parliament
in 2004 and 2005;
Government consolidated a l l
budgetary transactions in a
single treasury account
maintained at the National Bank
o f Macedonia;
Legislation has been enacted
stipulating that contracts with
public sector entities are legally
invalid unless MOF registers
them;
The new L a w o n Internal Audit
was enacted by Parliament in
September 2004;
The bill o n Stqte Audit Office
was enacted by Parliament o n
M a r c h 26, 2004;
The new L a w o n Public
Procurement was enacted by
Parliament o n M a r c h 26,2004;
Parliament enacted the new Law
o n C i v i l Servants.

RESULTS

4pproximately two-thirds o f the resulting budget user's
iubmissions f e l l within their respective ceilings. As a resull
iudget realism and budget discipline have continued tc
improve.
The government consolidated a l l budgetary transactions ir
I single treasury account maintained at the National Bank
3 f Macedonia, resulting in significant improvements ir
budget execution. Sixteen district treasury offices noM
receive transaction details f r o m their designated budge
Entities, code these transactions and send them to i
sentralized data base.
The government has also improved the management anc
financial oversight o f extra budgetary funds. As a result
the Health Insurance Fund, pension, disability and roac
fund were transferred t o the single treasury accoun
completed o n November 1, 2004.
A new internal audit oversight unit was established in thc
MOF.
Eleven internal audit units have n o w bee1
established and another four first-line budget users have ful
time internal auditors.
Standard bidding documents for works and equipment havc
been issued.
The Public Procurement Bureau ha
established a procedure for obtaining information on publii
procurement f r o m line ministries and has posted thi
information o n the official website. A new procuremen
procedure based o n international competitive bidding wa
adopted by the government for the pharmaceutical
procurement. As a result o f the completion o f the bic
evaluation process, the tender achieved a savings o f 17% (I
8.57 mill.). N e w regulations governing the privatization o
pharmacies have been put in place. This has been
reinforced through the creation of n e w administrative units
in key areas.

78

Country Partnership Strategy f o r f l R Macedonia FY07-IO

Annex 2

TABLE2: CAS03 OUTCOMES I N PROMOTING THECREATION OF JOBSTHROUGH
SUSTAINABLE PRIVATE SECTOR DRIVEN
GROWTH
'AS OUTCOMES THE
INTERMEDIATE
PROGRESS
TO
iANK EXPECTED
INDICATORS
INFLUENCE
[PROVING THE
NANCIAL SECTOR
iD SUPPORTING
UVATE SECTOR
ROWTH THROUGH:

Overhaul o f the
legal framework for
the banking activity;
New Deposit
Insurance Scheme;
Further upgrading o f
National Bank o f
Republic o f
Macedonia (NBRM)
Facilitating the
enterprise formation
and the FDI regime;
Strengthening the
legal rights o f
creditors and
shareholders;
Resolution o f the
assets o f the Bank
Rehabilitation
Agency.

RESULTS

Parliament adopted a new
The new Banking L a w (i)introduced definitions,
Banking L a w in July 2000;
allowable activities and prudential regulations for
banks that are more in line with EU Banking Sector
I A new Deposit Insurance L a w
directives, International Accounting Standards (IAS)
was adopted in July 2000;
, of end-2003 four problem and Basle capital rules; (ii)strengthened bank
corporate governance; and (iii)introduced efficient
banks have been subject to
bank and bank failure resolution
problem
enhanced monitoring;
mechanisms.
, As o f January 1,2002 a new
two-tier payment system
The DIF (Deposit Insurance Fund) insures deposits of
became fully operational and
natural persons,
including foreign currency
unblocked a l l corporate
denominated deposits held in commercial Banks and
accounts;
savings houses. As o f M a r c h 2004 the reserve fund
, A new company l a w was
o f DIF amounted to 3.20 percent o f the deposit base.
approved by Parliament in April
As a result o f large loss making enterprise resolution
2004
the government has formally resolved 32 enterprises
, In July 2000 Parliament
that in 1999 had a total loss o f 2.04 % o f 1999 GDP.
adopted amendments t o the
The government support policy for the enterprise
bankruptcy L a w and the
sector has been rationalized. Hence the governmenl
existing l a w o n Pledges;
, In January 2003 the Parliament adopted a declining cap o n public support for
enterprises. In June 2003 the government met the
adopted a n e w integrated l a w
targets for the reduction in fiscal cap (FESAL I1
for both movable and
targeted a reduction o f 50% o f 1999 levels o f defined
immovable collateral;
, The
establisheda direct and indirect subsidies, expressed as a
percentageOf GDP).
Self Regulatory Organization
for chartered accountants and
auditors;
The government adopted
amendments to speed up asset
recovery.
1

79

Annex 2

Country Partnership Strategy f o r j Y R Macedonia FY07-I 0

TABLE
3: CAS03 I N PROMOTING RECONCILIATION, BUILDING HUMAN
CAPITAL AND
PROTECTING THE MOST
VULNERABLE

THROUGH:
1

1

Strengthening
institutional capacity at
central and local levels
to address child and
youth issues;
Facilitating the
community-based
socioeconomic
development by
leveraging the cultural
assets.

municipalities

where

the

project

is

being

for generating income. Handicrafts projects are
increasingly collaborating with private companies
and tourism projects are expanding their promotion
and international contracts, notably in the areas of

80

Country Partnership Strategy forfvR Macedonia FY07-10

Subtotal
FY06 Judicial Reform
Electric Power Development

Subtotal
Total

FY

04

30.0
15.O
25.0

Annex 2

Subtotal
Legal & Judicial Implement.
ECSEE APL #3
Railways Reform
PDPL

40.0
90.0

05/30/2006
01/1012006
09/15/2005
10/27/2005

86.38
166.48

Subtotal
Total

PLANNEDNON-LENDINGPROGRAM

~~

ACTUALDELIVERYOF
NON-LENDING ASSISTANCE

1 Actual (delivered FY04)
Country Financial Accountability Assessment
1 Actual (delivered FY04)
(CFAA)
I Actual (delivered FY04)
1
Country Economic Memorandum (CEM)
1
Rural Human Capital
1 Actual (delivered FY04)
1
TA Support for Post Conflict Transition
1
Legal Judicial Diagnostic
1 Actual (delivered FY05)
05
1
Poverty Assessment
1 Actual (delivered FY05)
1
Urban Policy TA
1 Actual (delivered FY05)
Dropped
1
Social Services Delivery Study
1
JPPR
1 Actual (delivered FY05)
1
Energy Policy Paper
1 Actual (delivered FY0.5)
1 Actual ( to deliver in FY07)
PEIR
Update
06
1 Actual ( to deliver in FY07)
1
CPAR Update
1 Dropped
1
Social Development Update
1 Actual (delivered FY07)
1
EU Competitiveness
1
Competitiveness/ Innovation Note
1 Actual (delivered FY06)
I
Financial Sector Governance TA
1 Actual (delivered FY06)
1
Poverty Assessment
1 Actual (delivered FY06)
Note: The deliverables marked in bold were planned in the previous C S

1

.

.

81

25.30
12.00
25.00
19.38
30.00

Country Partnership Strategy forfYR Macedonia FY07-I 0

Annex 2

ANNEX C : IFC- SEED TECHNICALASSISTANCEPROJECTS
IN FYRMACEDONIA
Factoring Development Project: The main objective o f the Project SEED was the introduction
and development o f factoring as a new financial instrument in the country. SEED has performed
extensive research for the purposes o f preparing a Factoring Market Feasibility Study by
surveying all relevant stakeholders in this field: businesses, financial institutions, government,
regulators and others. SEED has assessed the legal environment for initiating factoring
operations in the country; tax and accounting treatment for factoring; commercial banks’ interest
and capacity for introducing factoring as a new product along with the interest among companies
in using this product. T w o factoring roundtables were also conducted - one for banks and banklike institutions and the other for businesses. Both o f these workshops stirred a lot o f interest
within the public and private sector community.
Makstil Linkages Project: The focus o f this Project was on developing the capacity o f the
Macedonian scrap metal recycling industry value chain by providing: training to the SME
recyclers and Makstil (one o f f Y R Macedonia’s largest companies, also among the regional
leaders in steel and rolled steel products manufacturing); access to finance to SMEs involved in
the scrap collection and processing; technical assistance to the recycler’s association and needs
assessment studies for the supplier network (primarily Roma collectors).
Tikves Linkages Project: The focus o f this project was on the development o f the grapes supply
chain in the Tikves region by providing training to the grape farmers in vineyard management
best practices as well as by providing technical assistance to Tikves (the largest winery in fYR
Macedonia and one o f the largest in the region) in design o f i t s grape delivery logistics,
assessment o f i t s retrenchment policies, developing new SMEs and seminar in retrenchment
management.
HACCP Certzjkation Project: The main objective o f this project was to help local food
processing companies implement the H A C C P certificate (Hazard Analysis o f Critical Control
Points), an internationally recognized food safety methodology that defines the framework for
hazard identification and control. In a country like fYR Macedonia, where the economy i s
traditionally reliant on food production and related industries, H A C C P remains as one o f the
most important vehicles for local food companies to place their products in European Union
markets. SEED has implemented a comprehensive H A C C P assistance strategy that included
direct assistance to firms, building the capacities o f service providers to offer the certification
locally and working with the Macedonian government to establish a framework that will allow
for easier and cheaper introduction o f H A C C P to local food companies.
Union of Private Chambers of Commerce (UCC) Capacity Building Project: The main objective
o f this Project was to enhance the sustainability o f the newly created U n i o n o f private chambers
and build i t s advocacy and service capacity in order to help i t s SME membership promote and
advocate their collective interests including influencing the government’s decisions regarding
creation o f favorable legal framework where the SME sector can grow and prosper.
Agency for Entrepreneurship Promotion (APE) Technical Assistance Project: The main
objective o f this Project was capacity building o f the national S M E support agency in order to
help improve the business enabling environment in the country and reduce the burdens to private
sector growth and development. Some o f the major accomplishments o f the project were the
preparation o f the SME Country map and the assessment o f the Agency’s strategic plan
providing recommendations that set the path for i t s future operations and activities.

82

Country Partnership Strategy forJrR Macedonia FY07-IO

Annex 2

Capacity Building Program injYR Macedonia: The Project was designed to support the growth
and development o f local Business Services Providers (BSPs), especially in areas where SEED
needed expertise in upcoming projects and activities by focusing o n improvement in
knowledge/skills/experience base o f both senior and junior consultants as w e l l as the trainers
from the consultant/trainer networks. The program also included mentoring and coaching o f
local consultants and pairing them up with their seniodmore experienced colleagues in order to
enable achievement o f proficiency through learning-by-doing process. In addition, an Internship
program with university graduates and students enrolled in last year was conducted, providing
them with on-the-job training, either in SEED or in SEED client companies and partners.

ANNEXD: CAS 2003 OUTCOMES, INDICATORS AND BENCHMARKS
Long
Term
Goal
Efficient
and
transparent
manageme
nt of
public
resources.

Short-term
CAS
Outcome
All EBFs
fully
integrated
into the
budget
preparation
and
reporting
systems
and use the
Single
Treasury
Account
(STA).

Efficient
and
transparent
manageme
nt o f
public
resources.

Adequate
external
audit
coverage o f
budget
users and
EBFs to
assure
integrity o f
public
finances.

Annual audit
coverage o f
public
accounts.

Sustainabl
e private

More
efficient

Reduction in
average loan

Intermediate
Indicator

Base
line

Number o f
EBF’s
integrated into
the budget
preparation
and reporting
systems and
STA (or
abolished).

1

10
Yo

-9%

End
FY06
Target
5

25%

61%

Results
~

~

~~

Fully Achieved
T h e CFAA proposed the abolishment o f one o f the funds (the
Agriculture Fund) and introduction o f more stringent
enhanced controls over the remaining four funds.
The authorities made considerable progress in this field. The
Agricultural Fund was abolished during 2004. At the same
time, the remaining funds were forbidden to incur debt and as
o f January 1, 2005 they all operate through the STA.
Currently, all revenues and expenditures o f the EBFs (with
the exception o f some foreign financed expenditures of the
Road Fund) are being processed through the STA.
The Ministry of Finance has precise and timely reporting on
the balances of the accounts of the EBFs though still has
limited influence over actual spending decisions o f EBFs.
Namely, in order to allow for the specificities o f the four
EBFs, the Treasury does not execute the same level o f
controls over the transactions o f the funds.
T h i s i s partly being overcome by the requirement for
establishing the internal audit functions in the EBFs and
further strengthening of financial controls (appointment o f
MoF representative with a veto power at the HIF Board).
Fully achieved
Since its establishment in 1999, the SA0 has been expanding
the scope of its activities, thus preventing a direct comparison
between the baseline indicator and the targeted one.
The Audit universe of the SA0 in 2005 was 2,043 institutions
compared to 1,740 in 2002.
However, the progress achieved in terms o f improved audit
coverage o f public funds i s notable.
In 2004, the SA0 audited 113 institutions (5.5% of 2004
Audit universe) and prepared 190 Audit Reports compared to
85 institutions in 2002 (4.9% of 2002 Audit universe) with 99
Audit Reports.
T h e coverage in terms o f public funds audited i s significantly
larger.
T h e 2004 Audit Reports covered 42% o f the expenditures of
narrowly defined Central Government (Ministries and firstline Budget users), 67% of the expenditures o f the EBFs and
40% o f the expenditures o f the local government units.
Fully achieved
T h e last three years saw a solid expansion o f the financial

83

Country Partnership Strategy forfrR Macedonia FY07-IO
sector
driven
growth
and
reduced
unemploy
ment.

financial
intermediati
on by the
banking

spreads.

Sustainabl
e private

Increased
Private
sector
participatio
n in
infrastructu
re.

N o of private
investmentslp
artnerships in
Roads,
Railway,
Energy.

Legislative
review
completed
and
changes
necessary
for public
access
made.

Public access
to agreed
poverty
monitoring
datasets via
World Wide
Web
(WWw).

sector

driven
growth
and
reduced
unemploy
ment

Reduced
poverty
and
improved
social

cohesion
Higher
quality
and
credibility
o f data for
povertyhl
DG
monitoring

sector.

0

2

Public
No
acce access
ss

Annex 2

sector activities in the country.
Though still relatively shallow in international and regional
comparisons, the entry of the few foreign banks did create
modest competitive pressure resulting in a reduction in
commercialbanks’ interest rates.
W h i l e exact comparison o f interest rate spreads i s not possible
due to methodological breaks in calculation o f weighted rates,
indicative data show a reduction in the spread from 8.5 p.p. at
end-2002 to around 6.5 p.p. at the beginning o f 2006.
More importantly, this reduction was accompanied by a
simultaneous overall reduction in the rates. The weighted
lending rates f e l l from close to 18% p.a. in late-2002 to
around 11% p.a. at the beginning of 2006.
Further rate cuts are expected if the current economic trends
continue and the announced entry o f few reputable foreign
banks materializes.
Achieved
T h e end-FY06 target of two private sector projects in
infrastructure has been met.
In the energy sector, hydro-plants were given under
concession to a private operator; the construction o f the
Skopje CHPP i s planned as a PPP and just recently the
electricity distribution network was privatized.
I n the telecommunications, both GSM service providers are
private.
However, delays in the establishing o f the regulatory
framework in various sectors have prevented more dynamic
private sector entry in infrastructure.
The adoption o f the legal framework for introduction o f
competition in fixed-line phone services has been prolonged
extensively and it seems that the regulatory bodies are not
exercising sufficient pressures for earlier abolition o f the
monopoly in this sector.
The railways reform process has only recently begun, the
ownership o f the gas pipeline has been subject to court
disputes for a prolonged period while the framework for
giving the two airports under concessions remains unclear.
Achieved
During the last three years, the State Statistics Office made
considerable progress in improved calculation and
disseminationof poverty data.
The data collection method was significantly improved,
regular poverty profile reports were expanded and are
publicly available on the web-site o f the S S M and in 2005, in
a joint effort with the World Bank, the first ever absolute
poverty figures for the country were published.
The SSO has given assurance that i t will continue to improve
its procedures and that it will include the absolute poverty
calculationsin i ts regular work plan.
However, less progress was made in the public access to
actual micro-level datasets. A WB staff review of the
legislation in 2003 revealed that there are no major obstacles
to sharing individual level data for research purposes
(provided all identifying characteristics are removed), the
introduction of some new legislation may warrant a
reassessment.

84

Country Partnership StrategyforJrR Macedonia FYO7-IO

Annex 3

Annex 3: IFC in fYR Macedonia
I.

N O 4 - 0 6 IFC’SPROGRAM

To date, IFC has invested US$93 million in N R Macedonia. A s o f December 2006, IFC’s
committed portfolio was US$26.1 million and i t s outstanding portfolio was US$25.2 million. In
the past, IFC financing include credit lines to Komercijalna Banka and Stopanska Banka and
Procredit Bank, two loans to a textiles company, Teteks, a loan to a pharmaceuticals company,
Alkaloid, as well as financing a pre-privatization investment in Macedonian
Telecommunications (now privatized).
What worked well?
During FY04-06, IFC was active in Advisory Services (IFC AS) operations. These operations
have been in line with the priorities outlined in the CAS, focusing mainly o n the SME sector and
covering the areas o f business enabling environment, access to finance, and value addition to
f i r m s (see Box 1). During the last two years, both the size and duration o f F C AS operations
have increased to help strengthen the development o f the private sector including in the
infrastructure sector. Also, IFC has moved towards a more integrated approach combining
FIAS’s activities with PEP SE activities (IFC’s advisory services facility operating in Southeast
Europe). These advisory services have included the following:
Review o f the administrative barriers to investment. This included a self-assessment
exercise that was led by the Ministry o f Economy and participation o f the private sectors.
Survey o f the administrative and regulatory costs reflected in the Doing Business
2005 report. The main economic obstacles for business operation and growth included
economic and regulatory policy uncertainty, monopoly position and unfair competition,
inadequate conflict resolution, and regulatory burden.
Administrative barriers implementation including: business registration reform; inputs
on the Company Law; and preparation o f the foundation for systemic regulatory reform
to help reduce the cost and risk o f doing business in fYR Macedonia.

Collaboration with the World Bank in designing the regulatory reform component o f
the Business Environment Reform and Institutional Strengthening project.
What didn’t work well?
During FY04-06, I F C made no direct investments in fYR Macedonia. The absence o f IFC
investment projects in the CAS period was the outcome o f several unsuccesshl attempts to
generate investment business in the country. FYR Macedonia’s business climate was not
conducive to private investment, as reflected in the country’s low Doing Business indicators, and
particularly deterred FDI. At the same time, the mass privatization model that fYR Macedonia
followed resulted in either widely dispersed ownership, where new owners adopted a rentseeking mentality, lacked coherent development strategies, and in any case did not have funds to
undertake investment projects, or in the control o f privatized enterprises by interest groups o f
dubious reputation, that I F C could not do business with due to governance concerns. As a result,
the opportunities in the real sector that I F C explored were ultimately dropped.

85

Country Partnership Strategy forfYR Macedonia FY07-10

Annex 3

Similarly, IFC’s attempts to approach the government with several infrastructure project concepts
did not meet with the government’s interest or support. Considering that I F C had already made
investments in fYR Macedonia’s two most prominent local banks prior to the CAS period, there
was l i t t l e opportunity to do more in the banking sector. I F C attempted to pursue a leasing project
but i t did not come to fruition.
However, IFC invested in four regional projects supporting countries in Southern Europe region,
including in f Y R Macedonia:
European Fund for Southeast Europe (EFSE), a collective debt investment vehicle that
channels long-term resources for on-lending to micro-and-small businesses through
banks, specialized microfinance institutions, and viable microfinance non-profit
organizations;
Poteza Adriatic, a private equity fbnd that invests in equity and equity-related
investments, through majority or significant minority stakes;

7L Capital, a private equity fund that makes equity and equity-related investments in
companies, including in small and medium enterprises;
Mercator, a leading Slovenian retailer with operations in South Eastern Europe including
in fYR Macedonia, which i s expanding i t s hypermarket stores and supermarkets network.
Also, IFC i s currently exploring several investment and advisory. project possibilities, both in
financial markets and real sector (SME, infrastructure, social sector).
11.

FYO7-09 IFC’S STRATEGIC PRIORITIES

IFC intends to focus on pillar 1 o f the CPS enhancing f Y R Macedonia’s competitiveness as a
location for investment by:
Improving the business environment

- reducing the costs

and risks o f doing business;

Enhancing competitiveness in strategic sectors o f the economy and deepening the pool o f
domestic and foreign investors.
1.

Improving Business Environment

According to 2006 Doing Business Report, f Y R Macedonia’s overall “ease o f doing business”
ranking places i t in the second tier o f countries, number 92, significantly lagging behind
Romania, Bulgaria, Serbia, and Montenegro in the region. With the exception o f access to credit
(ranking o f 48), the rankings for all other indicators range from 72 to 127 with the poorest
perfonnance in customs, licensing, property registration and business exit. The World Economic
Forum Competitiveness rankings also place f Y R Macedonia in the bottom o f the second tier
worldwide and within South East Europe.
Therefore, in tandem with the Bank’s TA program, IFC will continue to play a strong role to
improve the business environment in fYR Macedonia through i t s PEP-SE facility, focusing on:
AZternative Dispute Resolution (ADR) - mediation, as an alternative to formal court
resolution o f commercial disputes. Since 2004, I F C has been working to support
legislation reform through the ADR Mediation Program in fYR Macedonia. Since then, a
remarkable progress in enabling the environment for mediation introduction and

86

Country Partnership Strategy forjYR Macedonia FY07-IO

Annex 3

implementation has been made. With the Ministry o f Justice being main partner, the law
on Mediation was passed, as well as a by-law on the Training Program for Mediators. In
addition, trainings for 60 mediators, 60 lawyers and 15 judges have been delivered,
several round tables and one ADR Conference for promotion o f usage o f mediation has
been organized, and extensive and far-reaching PR campaign has been undertaken. The
next steps include establishment o f a Pilot Mediation Center in cooperation with Skopje
Primary courts, expansion o f the public awareness campaign and continuation o f the
trainings for mediation practitioners and beneficiaries.

Recycling Linkages Project - development o f the secondary material recycling industry
in f Y R Macedonia and the other countries in the Western Balkans. The project, managed
by IFC, and focused on the financial, training, consulting, and market needs o f every
segment o f the scrap metal, paper, plastic and glass value-chains. The objective i s to
promote Small and Medium Enterprise (SME) development in fYR Macedonia, increase
the competitiveness o f the recycling sector, and improve the lives o f thousands o f
families who make their primary income by collecting scrap materials.
Corporate Governance - improve the internal corporate governance practices o f the
Macedonian firms, thus making them more attractive to potential investors. O n June 14,
2006, IFC assisted the Macedonian Stock Exchange to launch the newly drafted
Corporate Governance Code which i s expected to become effective at the beginning o f
2007. IFC i s also working with Macedonian companies in order to help them improve
their corporate governance standards and plans to start working with banks as well. In
addition, IFC will collaborate with universities to teach corporate governance to students,
so that they can apply best standards in their future jobs.
International and EUStandards - help Macedonian companies to meet international and
EU technical requirements, which must be satisfied i f domestic products are to be
exported to international and EU markets. I F C has implemented a comprehensive
Hazard Analysis o f Critical Control Points (HACCP) program and has been working to
help food-processing companies to implement HACCP and develop a local expertise able
to undertake certification. HACCP Information Center has been established at the Skopje
Agricultural Faculty.
Regulatory Reform - provide technical assistance on the guillotine review o f the stock o f
business licensing and inspections regulations.
Industry competitiveness - value chain analyses for the agri-business, general
manufacturing and services sectors starting with the agri-business. The goal o f the
regional value chain will be to assess the competitiveness o f Bosnia and Herzegovina,
fYR Macedonia, and Serbia in the context o f CEFTA and the European Union, make
recommendations for cross-cutting policy and regulatory reforms to enhance the
competitiveness o f the sector, and support firm-level technical assistance as well as
investment activities o f IFC and MIGA.
Sub-national Competitiveness - an integrated FIASPEP-SE program. The main elements
o f this project include:

87

Country Partnership Strategy f o r j Y R Macedonia FYO7-10

Annex 3

-

o Better business regulation
focused on cleaning up the stock o f licensing,
inspections, and permit regulations as well as all administrative procedures
affecting businesses on the municipal level.

- in addition to reviewing the quality o f regulations,

the project will
address specific administrative procedures for streamlining and simplification.

o Simplification

o Better service delivery - providing assistance in improving the quality o f services
provided to business. The primary mechanism for delivering services will be
municipal one-stop shops. There will be a direct link with MIGA’s investment
outreach and investment promotion capacity building on the sub-national level.
o Competitiveness indices - developing a system o f rating the competitiveness o f
localities. This will draw on the experience o f Peru, Romania and Vietnam where
similar programs have been successfully implemented.

o Private investment and value addition to firms. This module will focus on
capturing synergies with PEP-SE value addition to firms programs (e.g., standards,
linkages) and MIGA programs to generate investment deals by identifying potential
investors and providing information on specific localities.

2.

Increasing Competitiveness

In the real sector, infrastructure, agribusiness, constructionheal estate, retail and mining remain
the top priority sectors for IFC. I F C i s also well prepared to provide advice to the Macedonian
government in i t s efforts to attract high quality FDIs in the privatization process o f strategic

sectors.

Infrastructure

IFC, jointly with the Bank and relevant authorities, will pursue opportunities to
implement PPPs in the infrastructure sectors through PEP-SE Infrastructure or direct
financing o f private sector projects. I F C and the Bank will start preparing (in FY08) a
joint policy note on concessions and public-private partnerships (PPPs) to help improve
the environment for mobilizing private sector investments in infrastructure.
Implementation o f key recommendations o f this analytical work would attract more
private interest to invest in f Y R ’ s Macedonia’s energy sector, and would enhance
opportunities for IFC’s sequential involvement in helping structure and mobilize
financing for pioneering infrastructure projects.
0

Working closely with the Bank, IFC will pursue investment opportunities in
implementing PPPs in the gas distribution sector, depending on government’s progress
with the privatization o f the sector. However, opportunities in this sector remain limited
given the outstanding issues on the ownership o f the transmission pipe, small project
scale (very few large towns justify such investments) and poor gas transmission
infrastructure in the south. In addition, IFC will consider opportunities in financing minihydros in sizable packages.
In the Advisory Services, I F C will target a few things:
o

Skopje municipality: Through i t s PEP-SE Infrastructure, IFC has already
identified opportunities to advise local government for structuring PPP for a

88

Country Partnership Strategy f o r f r R Macedonia FY07-10

Annex 3

concession for water and waste water services. Water and waste water sector
needs significant restructuring (very high debt, overdue payables, etc, particularly
for waste water). I F C can replicate i t s experience in other countries and more
recently in Belgrade water project. However, the local government does not seem
ready to move ahead in that direction.
o

Transportation sector: (i)
Skopje airport privatization: I F C has offered to the
Macedonian government the privatization advisory services o f PEP SE
Infrastructure for the Privatization o f Skopje Airport; (ii)
In close coordination
with the Bank IFC has been involved in discussions on structuring PPP for
corridor 8 and corridor 10.

Corporate sector

SME and micro-enterprises i s a significant segment o f commercial activity and one of
the largest contributions to employment in fYR Macedonia. Micro and small enterprises
(MSEs) are estimated to account for around 90% o f the total number o f active enterprises
in fYR Macedonia. Demand for micro-finance i s driven by increasing self-employment
and insufficient MSEs lending activity by local commercial banks. In the past, IFC has
invested in Procredit Bank, Skopje, representing a 19% ownership stake. IFC intends to
continue supporting local banks with loans for on-lending to SMEs. In addition, IFC will
directly support a few selected SME companies, which will help invert the tendency on
credit risk perception without undermining but rather supporting a more disciplined
lending culture in the banking sector.
IFC will work with regionalprivate companies outside o f fYR Macedonia to encourage
their investments in fYR Macedonia. IFC expects to play an active role providing
comfort to interested regional players coming from Turkey, Slovenia, Serbia, Bulgaria
and Croatia as well as to international investors.

IFC will explore on capturing synergies with i t s PEP-SE value addition to f i r m s programs
(e.g., standards, linkages) to generate investment deals by identifying potential investors
and providing information on specific localities.
Corporate Governance: IFC’s advisory services through PEP-SE has been working on
the Corporate Governance code for listed companies on Macedonian Stock Exchange
albeit small, in-company Corporate Governance consulting for SMEs, and public
awareness campaign and capacity building to strengthen capacity o f the business leaders,
shareholders, regulators and other stakeholders o n corporate governance issues.
Social Sector

In the education sector IFC’s strategy is to help strengthening private sector institutions
with a strong track record o f providing quality education. By providing long term
financing, I F C would intend to demonstrate to other private education institutions and to
the private sector in general, that capital i s available for reputable institutions with high
quality standards and professional management.
Financial sector

IFC will provide funding and TA to develop new products in the financial sector such as
energy efficiency and support the development o f housing, factoring and leasing. IFC
89

County Partnership StrategyforfYR Macedonia FY07-10

Annex 3

will continue to support commercial banks and micro-lending institutions with a focus on
SMEs. IFC will also look for opportunities to facilitate banking sector consolidation
through supporting the merger and acquisitions o f the creditworthy institutions.
Box 1: IFC FY04-06 Advisory Services Projects in fYR Macedonia

Factoring Development Project - introducing and developing o f factoring as a n e w financial instrument in the
.country. I F C has assessed the legal environment for initiating factoring operations in the country; tax and accounting
treatment for factoring; commercial banks’ interest and capacity for introducing factoring as a n e w product along
with the interest among companies in using this product.

-

Makstil Linkages Project developing the capacity o f the Macedonian scrap metal recycling industry value chain by
providing: training to the S M E recyclers and Makstil (one o f fYR Macedonia’s largest companies, also among the
regional leaders in steel and rolled steel products manufacturing); access t o finance t o SMEs involved in the scrap
collection and processing; technical assistance to the recycler’s association (BMO) and need assessment studies for
the supplier network (primarily Roma collectors).
Tikves Linkages Project: developing o f the grapes supply chain in the Tikves region by providing training to the
grape farmers in vineyard management best practices as well as by providing t e c h c a l assistance to Tikves (the
largest winery in fYR Macedonia and one o f the largest in the region) in design o f its grape delivery logistics,
assessment o f i t s retrenchment policies, developing new SMEs and seminar in retrenchment management

-

HACCP Certification Project helping local food processing companies implement the Hazard Analysis o f Critical
Control Points (HACCP) certificate, an internationally recognized food safety methodology that defines the
framework for hazard identification and control. In a country like fYR Macedonia, where the economy i s
traditionally reliant o n food production and related industries, H A C C P remains as one o f the most important
vehicles for local food companies to place their products in European U n i o n markets.
Union of Private Chambers of Commerce (UCC) Capacity Building Project - enhancing the sustainability o f the
newly created U n i o n o f private chambers and building i t s advocacy and service capacity in order t o help i t s S M E
membership promote and advocate their collective interests, including influencing the government’s decisions to
create a favorable legal framework for S M E sector.
Agency for Entrepreneurship Promotion (APE) Technical Assistance Project - capacity building o f the S M E
Support Agency to help improve the business enabling environment in the country and reduce the burdens to private
sector growth and development.
Capacity Building Program - supporting the growth and development o f local Business Services Providers (BSPs)
including mentoring and coaching o f local consultants through a learning-by-doing process.

FYR MACEDONIA
Statement o f Committed and Outstanding Portfolio
As o f 12/31/2006
Approval Fiscal
Year

1998

2003
1999
1998/00/01/03
1997/02
Total Portfolio:

Institution
Short Name

Macedonia Telcom
ProCredit MCD
SEAF Macedonia
Stopanska Banka
Teteks

LN
CmtdIFC
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
2.6
2.6

ET
CmtdIFC

QL+QE
CmtdIFC

11.3

0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

1.1
0.5

10.5
0.0

23.5

90

All
CmtdPart
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

LN
Out
BalIFC
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

2.5
2.5

ET
OutIFC
11.3
1.1
0.0
10.3
0.0
22.7

(in US Dollar Million)

QL+QE
OutIFC

0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

All
OutPart

0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

Country Partnership Strategy for JYR Macedonia FY07-10

Annex 4

Annex 4: M I G A Assistance Program and Guarantee Outstanding Exposure
Guarantees:

To date, MIGA has issued US$19.5 million in guarantee gross coverage in support o f two
projects in f Y R Macedonia, one in the manufacturing sector and one in services. As o f
December 2006, MIGA has no outstanding contract o f guarantee in fYR Macedonia.

Going forward, MIGA will be available to promote foreign direct investment into fYR
Macedonia through the provision o f political risk guarantees. The Agency will focus on priority
areas aligned with the CPS. MIGA will consider supporting investments in the manufacturing,
agribusiness and services sectors and will explore opportunities to use i t s Small Investment
Program (SIP) to help promote small business development. MIGA will also be available to
support projects in the financial sector and infrastructure.
MIGA expects to enhance i t s existing cooperation with the Slovene Export Corporation (SEC),
the Slovene export credit agency, also by providing reinsurance. This will support the ability o f
SEC to promote investments o f Slovene private companies in Southeast Europe, including in
fYR Macedonia. Going forward, MIGA will seek similar opportunities to support the operations
o f national entities in the region.
Technical assistance:

MIGA’s technical assistance unit - merged into FIAS as o f February 2007 - has undertaken a
series o f short t e r m technical assistance interventions over the past several years, supporting the
preparation o f a new law for a Macedonian investment promotion agency and the establishment
o f the agency, MacInvest.
After the establishment o f MacInvest in the fall o f 2004, the Austrian Development Agency
(ADA) agreed to fund a capacity building program designed to assist in the operational start-up
o f the agency and prepare i t for a larger technical assistance project funded by the European
Agency for Reconstruction. The first phase o f the project involved the development o f a
business strategy, a detailed analysis o f the country’s competitiveness for foreign investment in
several key sectors and training for the agency’s staff, management and Board o f Directors.

MIGNFIAS has been in discussions with the new government concerning a possible follow-on
technical assistance program, which would supplement the current EAR-funded activity which i s
scheduled to end in July 2007. In addition to further developing promotional capacity, this
additional technical assistance should address the weaknesses in the current institutional
framework for FDI promotion.
fYR Macedonia i s also one o f the seven beneficiary countries under the Invest in the Western
Balkans Program (IIWB), formerly MIGA’s European Investor Outreach Program (EIOP).
Under this donor-funded initiative, launched in 2004, MIGA/FIAS supports a number o f
countries in the Western Balkan region with regards to investor outreach and marketing, focusing
on the European business community.

91

Country Partnership Strategy forJrR Macedonia FY07-10

Annex 4

Guarantee Program
MIGA Outstanding Exposure ($ million)
As o f end o f fiscal year

FY2001

FY2002

FY2003

FY2004

FY2005

FY2006

FY2007
through
12/31/06

0.0
0.0

0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

0.0
0 .o
0.0
0.0
0.4
0.4

0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.3
0.3

0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

Sectoral Distribution
Finance
Infrastructure
Mining
Oil & Gas
AgribusinessiManufacturingBervices/Tourism

0.0
17.3

Total

17.3

0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
9.9
9.9

MIGA's Risk Profile
Transfer Restriction
Expropriation
War & Civil Disturbance
Breach of Contract

0.0
0.0
17.3
0.0

0.0
0.0
9.9
0.0

0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

0.0
0.0
0.0
0.4

0.0
0.0
0.0
0.3

0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

YOShare of MIGA's Gross Exposure

17.3
0.3%

9.9
0.2%

0.0
0.0%

0.4
0.01%

0.3
0.01%

0.0
0.0%

0.0
0.0%

M I G A Net Exposure in Country
YOShare o f MIGA's Net Exposure

17.3
0.5%

9.9
0.3%

0.0
0.0%

0.3
0.01%

0.3
0.01%

0.0
0.0%

0.0
0.0%

MIGA's Gross Exposure in Country

0.0

92

0.0

Country Partnership StrategyforjYR Macedonia FY07-I 0

Annex 5

Annex 5: CPS Consultations and Outreach
CONSULTATIONS AND OUTREACH
Extensive consultations underpinned the preparation of the CPS. Internally, the whole country
team has been actively involved in the preparation o f the strategy including IFC and MIGA
members o f the team. Early consultations begun in November 2005, when the members o f the
country team got together for two day retreat in fYR Macedonia and, jointly with the then
Minister o f Finance and Deputy P M for EU Integration, discussed the development priorities o f
the country and the general framework o f the Country Partnership Strategy.
Consultations with the political opposition on the CPS program took place in the first half of
2006. With the parliamentary elections concluded in July 2006, these consultations were critical
to ensure that the support program i s focused on national priorities and has the support o f a l l
stakeholders. Despite the differences in party platforms during the election campaign, the
consultations demonstrated wide consensus on the priorities related to economic growth and EU
accession. Both the ruling and the opposition parties stressed on the importance o f focusing the
new program on economic development, creation o f jobs and investment promotion.

I n jYR Macedonia, the Country Office has embarked on focused consultations with
stakeholders. The team started the consultation process by preparation and completion o f a
Client Survey in M a y 2006. Some 270 stakeholders from government, parliament, civil society,
private sector, media and academic institutions responded to the questionnaire. The results
clearly show overall endorsement o f the priority areas o f the Bank and i t s effectiveness in
delivering the support. Draft CPS was presented through a separate section on the Country
Office web site, which has been established to ensure wider participation o f all stakeholders in
the CPS preparation.
The Deputy Prime Minister for Economic Affairs formed a CPS government counterpart team
to guide the preparation of the strategy. The Bank and the government teams conducted a
review o f Bank operations in fYR Macedonia, their effectiveness as well as the lessons drawn
from the decade o f Bank support. They reviewed government’s challenges and priorities as per
the Work program presented in the Parliament in September 2006. The government team
discussed and prioritized the draft CPS program as presented by the Bank. The l i s t o f programs
and projects has been jointly finalized at the beginning o f December. The government fully

endorses the CPS program.

Four workshops were organized in different parts of the country (Tetovo,
Strumica and Bitola) for representatives of local governments, private sector and
organizations in the respective regions. The priorities identified by participants
organized marketing o f the agricultural products and education o f farmers;

Kumanovo,
civil society

include: (i)
(ii)school
renovations and organization o f vocational trainings; (iii)
improvement o f road infrastructure;
(iv) completion and equipment o f the regional Health Care Centers; (v) gasification, investments
in small hydro power plants and usage o f the geothermal waters; (vi) support o f the small and
medium enterprises. The participants also stressed the importance o f more direct support to local

93

Country Partnership Strategy for f r R Macedonia FY07-IO

Annex 5

government, increased support to urban and rural infrastructure, greater emphasis on job creation
and strengthening o f administrative capacities o f local government.
Specific consultations were organized for donors for the CPS priorities and donor
coordination. O n October 4, 2006, a so called “Macedonia Coordination Day” was organized in
Brussels between members o f the country team and representatives o f the European
Commission. The purpose o f the meeting was to present the draft goals and program o f the CPS
and to involve the Commission early on into the design, thereby coordinating Bank’s assistance

with those o f EU. Coordination efforts continued during the remaining o f the CPS preparation
period through meetings o f the Bank’s management and teams with the other donors. All donors
appreciated the role o f the Bank in supporting the process o f socioeconomic development in fYR
Macedonia. They agreed on the importance o f selectivity, complementarity and information
sharing to avoid duplication o f efforts and wasting financial resources.

The Country Office will continue to expand its outreach and communication to strengthen
partnerships in the implementation of the new CPS. Communication tools include, but are not
limited to the Country Office web site, visits o f which expanded tremendously in the last year,

Public Information Center (PIC) and Depository Libraries located at the Faculty o f Economics,
University o f Skopje and at the South East European University in Tetovo. An agreement to
establish affiliations with the Global Distance Learning Network (GDLN) was concluded
between the Bank and the British Council. The Bank will also continue to support civil society
activities through the small grant program as well as through direct involvement in project
preparation and monitoring.
PARTNERSHIPS

I n addition to building strong partnership with Macedonian stakeholders, the Bank has built
effective partnerships with development partners and donor organizations active in JYR
Macedonia, mainly through the country office. The European Commission (EC), Netherlands
Embassy, U S A I D and UN are the Bank’s key multilateral partners in fYR Macedonia with
shared responsibilities in donor coordination. As the pace o f Macedonian integration with the
European Union accelerated, the Bank has started to coordinate most o f i t s activities with the
European Commission both in fYR Macedonia and in Brussels and specific meetings for CPS
preparations have been undertaken to ensure better alignment o f the CPS with the acquis. The
relations with the IMF have been very effective and strong in the area o f public financing and
structural reforms. The Bank also works closely with the Netherlands and Swedish authorities
and has co-financed a number o f projects and programs with them.

94

Country Partnership Strategy forJrR Macedonia FY07-IO

Annex 6: Donor Assistance to fYR Macedonia by Program

95

Annex 6

Country Partnership Strategy f o r f l R Macedonia FY07-10

Annex 7

Annex 7: FYR Macedonia Country Financing Parameters
Date: April 7,2005
The country financing parameters for the former Yugoslav Republic o f M a c e d o n i a set out b e l o w
have been approved by the Regional V i c e President, Europe and Central Asia, and are b e i n g
posted o n the Bank’s internal website.

Item

Cost sharing.
Limit o n the
proportion o f individual project
costs that the Bank may finance

Recurrent cost financing. Any
limits that would apply to the
overall amount o f recurrent
expenditures that the Bank may
finance

Parameter
Remarks / Explanation
up to 100% The Bank will s t i l l encourage cost sharing as a

No country
level limit

Local cost financing.
Are -the Yes
requirements for Bank financing o f
local expenditures met, namely
that: (i)
financing requirements for
the
country’s
development
program would exceed the public
sector’s own resources (e.g., from
taxation and other revenues) and
expected domestic borrowing; and
(ii) the financing o f foreign
expenditures alone would not
enable the Bank to assist in the
financing o f individual projects
Taxes and duties. Are there any None
taxes and duties that the Bank
would not finance

demonstration o f ownership. While in some rare
cases, Bank financing could be increased up to 100
percent, this increase may be differentiated by
government level and sector. The actual cost sharing
percentage would be determined during project
preparation on a case-by-case basis. The experience
so far indicates that the Bank’s financing share may
be higher in the social sectors and lower in the
infrastructure and e n e r w sectors.
In determining Bank financing o f recurrent costs in
individual projects, the Bank would take into
account sustainability issues at the sector and project
level, including the sustainability o f project
outcomes, and implied future budgetary outlays.
The Bank would also continue to monitor the
country’s aggregate fiscal position and prospects,
and i t s implications for recurrent cost financing.
Under the new policy, foreign and local expenditures
will be treated in the same way with regard to Bank
financing. This approach should provide greater
flexibility and reduce the administrative burden for
project implementation. The Bank may finance local
costs as required in individual projects.

The Bank may finance taxes and duties as long as
they are reasonable and non-discriminatory. As o f
December 2004, there are n o taxes or duties that the
Bank would not finance. At the project-level, the
Bank would consider whether taxes and duties
constitute an excessively high share o f project costs.
The proposed financing o f taxes and duties will
facilitate efficient proiect implementation.

96

Country Partnership Strategy f o r f r R Macedonia FY07-IO

Annex 8

Annex 8: FYR Macedonia's Relations with the EU
Since 1991, successive Macedonian governments have placed the prospect o f European
integration at the top o f their agendas. Integration in the EU has been the one o f few subjects on
which a l l political parties have reached a consensus. Since 2001, relations between fYR
Macedonia and the European Union (EU) have been developing in the context o f the
Stabilization and Association process (SAP). The SAP i s a framework in which a new
contractual relationship (Stabilization and Association Agreements) and an assistance program
(CARDS) helf each country in the Western Balkans to progress, at i t s own pace towards EU
membership.'
The idea o f a SAP as a tool o f anchoring the countries fiom the Western Balkans towards the EU
was born at the Zagreb Summit in November 2000, after the Feira Council o f June 2000 that
addressed the future o f the Balkans countries i s in Europe.20 In Zagreb, the Western Balkan
countries made a pledge to abide by the EU rules and conditionality, receiving in return the
prospect for EU accession based on the Treaty o f the European Union (TEU) and the
Copenhagen criteria as well as on assistance program to promote and support this ambition.21
The countries o f the Western Balkans also agreed that, when signed, the Stabilization and
Association Agreements (SAAs) would be the principal means to begin preparing themselves for
the demands that the prospect o f accession to the EU entails.22 In addition, the countries agreed
(once they meet the necessary rules and conditions) to receive financial assistance (CARDS).
CARDS would focus on supporting necessary reforms and institution building to facilitate
approximation with the EU. FYR Macedonia was the first o f the countries o f Western Balkans
to s i g n the S A A in 2001,

Relations between the European Union and fYR Macedonia have evolved progressively over the
years. O n December 16, 2005, the European Council granted candidate country status to fYR
Macedonia. The Council made this decision on the basis o f the substantial progress made in
completing the legislative framework related to the Ohrid Framework Agreement, as well as
Macedonia's track record in implementing the Stabilization and Association Agreement. W h i l e
no date to open actual negotiations i s specified, the EU perspective i s a very positive element in
the reaching agreements across ethnic boundaries o f the country, crucial against the backdrop o f
the Kosovo discussions.
19

-

European Community CARDS Programme Albania Countly Strategy Paper, 30 November 2001.

T h e European Council in Feira confirmed that its objective remained fullest possible integration o f the countries in the region
into the political and economic mainstream o f Europe through the SAP, political dialogue, liberalization o f trade and cooperation
in Justice and Home Affairs. httu:://www.euouarI.eu.int/summits/feilen.htm.

2o

2 ' The European Council in Copenhagen 1993 spelled out the Copenhagen criteria, b y which candidate countries would be
judged for accession on: (i)stability o f institutions guaranteeing democracy, the rule o f law, human rights and respect for and
protection o f minorities; (ii)existence o f a functioning market economy, as well as capacity to cope with competitive pressure
and market forces within the EU; and (iii)ability to take on obligations o f membership, including adherence to the aims o f
political, economic and monetary union - i.e. the acquis communautaire.

Engineered similarly to the Europe Agreements that were signed between the EU and the 10 countries o f Central and Eastern
Europe at the beginning o f 199Os, the SAAs focus on respect for democratic principles and integration o f the countries o f the
region into the EU single market. They foresee the establishment o f a free trade area with the EU and set out rights and
obligations in areas such as competition and state aid rules, intellectual property and establishment, which w i l l allow the
economies o f the region to begin to integrate with the EU. T h e conclusion o f such Agreements represents the signatories'
commitment to complete over a transition period a formal association with the EU, tailored to the circumstances o f each country
but based on the implementation o f the same core obligations.
22

97

Country Partnership Strategy forJrR Macedonia FY07-10

Annex 8

O n November 8 , 2006 the European Commission (EC) published the first Progress Report o f
fYR Macedonia with regard to i t s preparation for EU membership, as part o f the “Enlargement
package” the EU prepares annually. The E C Progress Report outlines the progress fYR
Macedonia made in adhering to the EU accession criteria (as outlined in the Analytical Report
published by the E C on November 9,2005 from October 1,2005 until September 30,2006. The
Analytical report describes the situation in the country in relation to the EU accession criteria Le.
the progress f Y R Macedonia made in adhering to this criteria.
Measuring the progress

EC measures the progress though all activities undertaken by the state to fulfill membership
criteria: adoption o f primary and secondary legislation and i t s implementation. The report i s
prepared based on the information available to the EC, contributed by the government and other
partners. Findings are divided into three chapters: (i)
political criteria, (ii)
economic criteria and
(iii)
capacity to take over membership obligations.
Political criteria

Political criteria are divided into three sub-groups: a) Democracy and r u l e o f law, b) Human and
minority rights and c) Regional cooperation and international obligations.
Under Democracy and r u l e o f law, the report describes the progress o f the work o f the
parliament, government, judiciary and public administration, as well as the progress in the fight
against corruption. A significant part i s devoted to the electoral process, which i s listed as one of
the five key priorities for EU membership. The report states that changes in the electoral
legislation were appropriate and enabled satisfactory elections, according to international
standards. EC’s assessment i s that the elections have passed in a generally peaceful atmosphere,
with certain irregularities on the day o f the elections. E C recommends putting maximum effort
into adhering to international standards for the next elections. As for the post-election process
and the formation o f the new government, E C points at the need to decrease tensions between the
ruling parties and the opposition, and especially the ethnic Albanian political parties (DUI-PDP).
I t i s crucial for the economic stability that the government tries to reach consensus for the key
reforms, especially for those related to the implementation o f the Ohrid Framework Agreement
and other areas that need two-thirds majority o f votes in the Parliament (Badinter principle). I t i s
also emphasized that the opposition should be constructive in its role. In order to achieve the
desired political consensus, it i s urgently needed that effective communication channels are
established between the ruling parties and the opposition.

The report devotes special attention to judicial reforms. Establishing an independent and efficient
judiciary i s one o f the five key priorities o f the European partnership. The report positively
assesses the 2005/2006 constitutional changes as pre-condition for establishment o f independent
judiciary, as well as adoption o f laws related to the judiciary (Law o n Courts, L a w on
Administrative Disputes, Misdemeanor Law, etc.). Certainly, the implementation o f these laws
will be the key. The E C stresses that fYR Macedonia makes significant progress in adopting the
laws, but that the implementation often lags behind.

The Commission notes that there i s a progress in public administration management through
adoption o f several laws from this area (e.g., the Law on access to information), as well as the
98

Country Partnership Strategy for fvR Macedonia FYO7-I 0

Annex 8

further implementation o f the C i v i l Service Law. O f special importance i s the Law on Police
(also one o f the k e y criteria o f the European partnership), but the delay in i t s adoption has made
the decentralization o f the police impossible. The E C pays special attention to the
implementation o f this law, and stresses that an increased cooperation between the ruling parties
and the opposition i s needed to achieve it. The increased authority given to the Public Attorney
i s commended, with a caveat that strengthened cooperation with the Ministry o f Internal Affairs
i s needed. A negative assessment i s given to the massive replacements in the public
administration following the elections, since this practice conflicts with the aim to depoliticize
the public administration.
The report clearly states that, although there i s progress, corruption i s still widely spread in the
society. The few sentences and fines (in the customs, judiciary and Public Revenue Office) are
insufficient to diminish the problem, which means that more effort i s needed to strengthen the
institutions, increase transparency and implement laws.

In the area o f Human and minority rights, a positive assessment i s given to the strengthened
freedom o f expression law, the abolishment o f the obligatory detention (through changes in the
criminal procedures), and to the strengthened internal controls at the Ministry o f Internal Affairs.
The situation regarding minority rights has also improved: the number o f persons employed in
the public administration who belong to the ethnic minorities and the number o f minority
university students has increased. However, the report states that little progress has been made
with regard to solving issues related to the Roma community an that the efforts for
implementation o f the National Strategy for Roma need to be intensified.
European Commission positively assesses the active participation o f fYR Macedonia with regard
to Regional cooperation (CEFTA, Stability Pact, etc.). The progress report commends the
government for i t s constructive role during the Kosovo talks, as well as the progress the country
made in developing the relations with the neighbors.
Economic criteria
The two economic criteria for membership are: existence o f functional market economy and
capacity to compete at the EU market. In the year covered by the report, fYR Macedonia made a
great stride towards functional market economy. There i s a general consensus o n the basics of
the economic policy, the macroeconomic situation i s stable, and there i s a moderate GDP
growth. Specific progress has been made with shortening the time needed to register a company
by introducing one-stop-shop system (another key priority o f the European partnership). The
government has continued with the privatization o f the remaining few state owned enterprises.
Areas s t i l l impeding full functioning o f the market economy relate to disfunctioning rule o f law
and lack o f legal certainty, insufficient guarantee over the security o f tenure and disparities in the
labor market. The Commission has positively assessed the development o f the financial sector
(which i s s t i l l lagging behind compared to other candidate countries), the high level o f trade
interaction with the U n i o n and the increased flexibility o f the labor market. Areas where the
progress i s stale are: the implementation o f the bankruptcy law, l o w level o f investments, slow
resolution o f court cases and inefficiency in solving the problem o f the indirect state aid (Le.
some companies do not pay taxes and social contributions).

99

Country Partnership Strategy f o r j Y R Macedonia FY07-10

Annex 8

Capacity to take over membership commitments

This chapter o f the Progress Report describes the progress in approximation o f the national
legislation towards the European one, acquis communautaire, which i s divided into 33 chapters.
The progress is followed through the approximation o f legislation, but also through the
implementation o f laws and capacities o f the institutions to fulfill their commitments. The
progress on the 33 chapters over the reporting period has been uneven. Significant progress has
been made in some areas, such as customs, public procurement, business legislation, while other,
such as intellectual property, telecommunications and state aid are lagging behind. In some
areas, such as the agriculture and environment, although a progress has been made, the country i s
s t i l l behind. It i s therefore o f special importance to give greater priority to these areas.
The analysis o f the progress o n certain chapters leads to a conclusion that fYR Macedonia’s
institutional capacity i s quite uneven; most progress has been achieved in areas with stronger
institutional capacity. Another key conclusion o f the report i s that the progress i s significant
when i t comes to adopting primary and secondary legislation, but that the implementation often
lags behind. The European Commission believes that enhanced efforts should be put into
increasing the implementation capacity.
Conclusion

The Progress Report states that progress has been made during the previous 12 months with
regard to the membership criteria. The focus o f the reforms has been o n realizing the key
priorities o f the European Partnership, fulfillment o f the commitment o f the Stabilization and
Association Agreement (SAA) and addressing the problems identified in the analytical report o f
the Opinion for membership. Four out o f five key criteria for EU Partnership have been fulfilled.
The only area where progress has not been sufficient is the telecommunication sector. With
regard to the political criteria, most o f the positive marks were given to the initiated reforms in
the judiciary and the parliamentary elections. Respect o f minority rights remains at high level,
while the decentralization process i s developing satisfactorily. Further strengthening o f the
public administration i s necessary to adapt the legislation and the institutions to acquis
communautaire. FYR Macedonia continues to demonstrate macroeconomic stability and
economic growth, but does not have a functioning market economy because o f the insufficient
legal certainty and rule o f law. The progress on individual chapters o f acquis communautaire i s
uneven; considerable legislation has been adopted, but the implementation pace i s slow.

The most important conclusion o f the Progress Report i s that the progress that fYR Macedonia
made so far i s insufficient for the E C to propose start o f membership negotiations. The start of
negotiations will depend on the reforms that are going to be implemented in the forthcoming
period and consequently will be reviewed in the 2007 Progress Report, expected in November
2007.

100

Country Partnership Strategy forfvR Macedonia FY07-IO

Annex 9

Annex 9: Governance Activities in World Bank Program
Sectors

Transportat
ion
Customs/B
order
Crossings
Roads

Railways

Business
Licensing,
Inspections,
and Other
Regulations

Banking
Governance

Governance Outcomes and Trends

WBG Program to Address Weaknesses

- Poor governance structure with multiple

government bodies that don’t communicate.
- Potential for rent-seeking by border agency
inspectors; Inefficient procedures hinder finns;
- Border crossing times have fallen; Transparency
has improved; Unofficial payments have declined
dramatically.
- Institutional weaknesses, including the lack o f
transparency in road management responsibilities,
result in increasing backlog in road maintenance
- Poor financial oversight o f t o l l collections results
in an estimated “leakage” o f Euros 7 m i l l i o n per
year.
Institutional deficiencies constrain strengthening
financial viability, productivity, and effectiveness
o f railway operations.

- Inefficient and non-transparent procedures, poor

accountability and transparency o f public
institutions have resulted in significant barrier to
business entry, operations and exit and
considerable opportunity for rent-seeking;
- The implementation o f a “One-stop shop system”
has significantly reduced opportunity for unofficial
payments and discretionary and arbitrary
decisions;
- A “regulatory guillotine” i s underway to
eliminate those business regulations that are
unnecessary or without a legal ground; the
government has decided t o introduce a regulatory
impact assessment (RIA) system t o ensure
business friendly new regulations, a more
transparent rule making process for n e w
regulations, and increased accountability o f
relevant public sector entities;
- Bankruptcy trustees had incentives t o drag out
cases.
- Poor accountability o f bank management and
boards, and opacity o f the ownership structure o f
certain banks reduce the ability o f the banking
supervisor to oversee the banking sector, including
implementation o f rigorous board member fit and
proper rules;
- The enforcement toolkit does not provide the
supervisor with adequate and clear authorities to
address board members, take important remedial
actions, impose financial penalties, o r enforce
accurate financial statement and corporate
transparency;
-The Banking L a w and the NBRM l a w are being
strengthened to - inter alia - better define and

101

TTFSE I1Project Preparation Steering
Committee established t o improve coordination
Build o n progress; further strengthening o f
transparency through ED1based trade and
transport data harmonization and monitoring.
Support strengthening o f road sector
management and priority programming.
Modernization o f t o l l collection system will
reduce opportunities for fraud and corruption.
Railways Reform Project i s working to establish
separate accounting for i t s k e y functional areas
and create appropriate regulatory and
institutional environment for multiple operator
market.
Build o n progress; further strengthening o f
transparency and monitoring;
The BERIS and P D P L are supporting design and
implementation o f regulatory reform, including
“regulatory guillotine” and RIA system as w e l l
as measures t o improve business access to
information and regulations;
Supporting implementation o f the new
Bankruptcy L a w in P D P L and Judicial Project.

P D P L i s supporting the gradual migration
towards a more risk-based supervisory approach
that would - inter alia - allow the NBRM to h o l d
bank boards, controlling shareholders, and
management increasingly responsible and
accountable for the safe and sound operations o f
their banks,
In close coordination with the IMF, the Bank
has provided technical and policy advice for the
upgrade o f the legal framework for banking.

Country Partnership Strategy forJrR Macedonia FY07-IO

Insurance
governance
regulation

Judicial
System
Agriculture
Health

Education

Energy
Land
administrati
on
Municipal
finance and
managemen
t

Communal
services
(municipal)
enterprises
(CSEs)

:levate the responsibility o f bank boards and
?rovide the supervisor with the necessary tools to
harness market discipline as a key pillar in
promoting and enforcing strong governance.
- There i s practically n o supervision o f insurance
zompanies. Poor governance structure o f the
:xisting regulator results in poor accountability
and transparency o f insurance companies,
uncertainty about their financial solvency and,
ultimately, weak protection o f policyholders’
rights.
- The government has recently decided t o create an
independent supervisory agency outside the
Ministry o f Finance
- Inefficiency o f the system creates incentives for
corruption; Politicization in the selection and
disciplining o f judges.
Lack o f transparency and predictability o f policy
hinders progress; rent-seeking in agricultural
inspections.
Poor governance structure in the Health Insurance
Fund; Closed pharmaceutical market closely
linked to political actors; Rampant conflicts o f
interest and poor financial controls; Unofficial
payments for health care.

- Policy making n o t guided by data o n

achievement
- Reports o f unofficial payments for admission to
higher education

Governance structure establishing separation o f
provision with regulation s t i l l emergent; result i s
poor payment discipline.
Uncertainty o f real property rights; Unofficial
payments for official registrations or even t o
receive information are n o t unusual.
Information o n municipal perfonnance (revenues
and expenditures, including capital investments,
and service delivery) n o t monitored by or for
municipalities, contributing to lack o f incentives
for improved management, weak communications
with constituents, lack o f “downward
accountability”.
Unclear and conflicting institutional framework
discourages commercial orientation o f CSEs and
removes possible incentives for PPP; lack o f
arm’s-length regulation permits political
interference by municipalities.

102

Annex 9

PDPL support for establishment and operations
3 f an independent insurance supervisor and
implementation o f a p l a n t o build supervisory
zapacity.
The Bank has provided technical and policy
advice for the upgrade o f the legal, institutional
and regulatory framework for insurance,
including advice o n governance arrangements
for the n e w insurance supervisor.
Support major re-organization o f the judiciary;
strengthen administrative capacity.
Creating capacity t o design and monitor policy;
Improving reporting systems and administrative
structure for agricultural inspectors.
Restructure o f HIF Board, change selection
process and introduce Board training;
Promote use o f revised positive drug list,
international competitive bidding;
Introduce “four-eyes” principle, requiring both
medical and economic input into key decisions;
Introduce basic benefits package and address copayment policy.
Strengthening the demand side for governance
by supporting school governance structures that
include parent participation;
Supporting comprehensive student assessment
and testing.
Strengthening transparency o f testing and
admission t o tertiary education.
Policy based advice t o strengthen payment
discipline.
Projects in the real estate cadastre and in land
administration t o improve transparency in
registration.
Municipal Development (MD) project (FY09) to
introduce good practices in performance
monitoring o n sustainable basis to promote
better incentives and trust in local government,
and permit benchmarking.

MD project to support reforms in policy
environment for CSEs t o improve their
incentives for commercialized management and
clarify regulatory relationship with
municipalities, including possibly through
changes in legislative framework for potential
PPP

e,

E

.

B
s

b

ci

'.I
E
L
0

k

.I

u
w

I
I

~

I

.

j

:

1

I

I

i!
~

I

/

'

I .E

... . .. ..... ........ .
"

T

r;.
.3

W

n

>

W

n

'5

W

W

r=:
>
.e

W

n

K
.+
W

n

X

W

s--

)
.
,

/B

z

E

-

~

.. _....

..

.

,

0

1
8

.I

.

_. _. .

e,e,

BB
I-

e,

8

e,*

88

I

in

M
0

u
cd

3

(d

d

0

.Y
r(

3

d

8

a
d

cd

e,

E
E

e,

gu
0

c

.3

e
0

e,
e,

3

c

0

E

0

.d

L

cd

3

in

."

....".

..........................

................................

___

M
d

....

.....

....-....I

......".".".."I..-_-

...--____..I

"..l.."

I
I

.--.-I

I
I

..

"

." ..

.. ..

,

i

I

i

i
j

rr

0
rA
rA

e,
0
0

cd

$?
.I

a

5

v1

m
3
3

.... - ............................

..........

.....................

.........

”

.....

.-

..

........

. ._

I

V

.-c

2

.

Y

i?
s
8

(
.
,

Y

U

*. .

.,.

"

"

... ....

"

....

Country Partnership Strategy forjYR Macedonia FYO7-IO

Annex I1

Annex 11: Standard CPS Annexes

Macedonia, FYR a t a glance

1/25/07

I

Macedonia,
FYR

Europe &
Central
Asia

Lower
middle
income

2.0
26
0.2
69

473
24,238
0.1
64

2,475
39,946
1.o
50

5.8
2,630
7,080

1,945
4,113
9,142

4,746
1,916
6,313

3.8
3.6

6.0
5.9

6.9
5.9

Poverty headcount ratio at $1 a day (PPP, O h )
Poverty headcount ratio at $2 a day (PPP, O h )
Life expectancy at birth (years)
Infant mortality (per 1,000 live births)
Child malnutrition (Oh of children under 5)

c2
c2
74
13

2
16
69
28
5

70
33
12

Adult literacy, male (Oh of ages 15 and older)
Adult literacy, female (Oh of ages 15 and older)
Gross pnmary enrollment, male ( % of age group)
Gross pnmary enrollment, female (% of age group)

98
94
98
98

99
96
105
102

93
85
115
113

92
85

82
57

K e y Development I n d i c a t o r s
(2005)
Population. mid-year (millions)
Surface area (thousand sq km)
Population growth (Oh)
Urban population (Oh of total population)
GNI (Atlas method, US$ billions)
GNI per capita (Atlas method, US$)
GNI per capita (PPP, international $)
GDP growth (X)
GDP per capita growth (Oh)

Male

Female

r

(most recent estimate, 2000-2005)

Access to an improved water source (Oh of population)
Access to improved sanitation facilities (Oh of population)

Age dlstrlbution, 2005

Under-5 mortality rate (per 1,000)

1B90

0 Macedonia, FYR

N e t Aid Flows

1980

(US$ millions)
Net ODA and official aid
Top 3 donors (in 2004):
United Stales
Netherlands
Germany
Aid (Oh of GNI)
Aid per capita (US$)

1990

2000

2005

3

252

248

37
21
7

53
28
18

0.7
2

7.1
125

4.7
122

93.7

5.8
6.2

0.5
3.3

0.1
134

65.9
100

49.3
91

1.9
4,472

2.0
3.587

2.0
5,766

2Ka

1885

oEurope & Central Asia

/Growth of GDP and GDP per caplta ( O h )

I’”T

Long-Term Economic Trends
Consumer prices (annual % change)
GDP implicit deflator (annual % change)
Exchange rate (annual average, local per US$)
Terms of trade index (2000 = 100)

Population, mid-year (millions)
GDP (US$ millions)

1.8

2031

m

95

I

&GDP

t

-GDP per capita

1980-90 1990-2000
2000-05
(average annual growth %)
0.6

0.5
-0.8

0.2
1.9

Agnculture
Industry
Manufactunng
Services

(% of GDP)
8.5
44.5
35.7
47.0

12.0
33.7
20.7
54.2

12.9
29.3
18.4
57.7

0.2
-2.3
-5.3
0.5

0.9
1.3
1.2
2.2

Household final consumption expenditure
General gov’t final consumption expenditure
Gross capital formation

72.3
19.0
16.7

74.4
18.2
22.3

78.4
19.0
20.0

0.1
-0.4
3.6

2.4
-2.0
2.2

Exports of goods and services
Imports of goods and services
Gross savings

25.6
35.9
9.3

48.6
63.5
23.2

45.1
62.5
20.1

4.2
7.5

-1.2
-0.6

Note: Figures in italics are for years other than those specified. 2005 data are preliminaryestimates.
a. Aid data are for 2004.
Development Economics, Development Data Group (DECDG).

118

.. indicates data are not available.

Country Partnership Strategy forfrR Macedonia FY07-10

Annex 11

Macedonia, FYR
Balance of Payments and Trade

2000

2005

(US$ millions)
Total merchandise exports (fob)
Total merchandise imports (cif)
Net trade in goods and services

1,323
2,094
-642

2,041
3,226
-1,091

Voice and accountability

81

213

Regulatory quality
Rule of law

Governance Indicators, 2000 and 2005

Workers' remittances and
compensation of employees (receipts)
Current account balance
as a ?4 of GDP

-72
-2.0

-8 1
-1.4

Reserves, including gold

700

1,325

,

Political stability

I

Control of corrupbon

Countw's percentilerank (0-100)

Central Government Finance

hgghgher vdues !miry betier wings

(% of GDP)
Revenue
Tax revenue
Expense
Cash surplusideficil
Highest marginal tax rate (%)
lndiwdual
Corporate

External Debt and Resource Flows

Technology and Infrastructure

2000

Paved roads (% of total)
Fixed line and mobile phone
subscribers (per 1,000 people)
High technology exports
(% of manufactured exports)

63.8

2004

310

642

1.2

1.3

49
35.6

49
35.6
7.1

Environment

(US$ millions)
Total debt outstanding and disbursed
Total debt service
HlPC and MDRl debt relief (expected: flow)

1,460
245

2,253
260

40.7
13.9

39.1
9.4

175
0

97
52

-

Total debt (Oh of GDP)
Total deb1 service (Oh of exports)
Foreign direct investment (net inflows)
Portfolio equity (net inflows)

-

:ornposltlon of total external debt, 2005

Agncultural land (% of land area)
Forest area (% of land area, 2000 and 2005)
Nationally protected areas (% of land area)

2,659

Freshwater resources per capita (cu. meters)
Freshwater withdrawal (% of internal resources)
5.7

5.1

IBRD
Total debt outstanding and disbursed
Disbursements
Principal repayments
Interest payments

116
13
3
7

244
54
11
7

IDA
Total debt outstanding and disbursed
Disbursements
Total debt service

249
36
2

364
8
5

65
40
6

28
28
1

0

5

19

0

C 0 2 emissions per capita (mt)
GDP per unit of energy use
(2000 PPP 5 per kg of oil equivalent)
Energy use per capita (kg of oil equivalent)

(US$ miilions)

,I!!85

Private Sector Development

2000

2006

Time required to start a business (days)
Cost to start a business (% of GNI per capita)
Time required to register property (days)

-

16
7.4
98

Ranked as a major constraint to business
(Oh of managers Surveyed who agreed)
Anti-competitive or informal practices
Cost of financing

..

..

36.2
36.1

0.2

7.7

Stock market capitalization (%of GDP)
Bank branches (per 100,000 people)

IFC (fiscal year)
Total disbursed and outstanding portfolio
of which IFC own account
Disbursements for IFC own account
Portfolio sales, prepayments and
repayments for IFC own account
MlGA
Gross exposure

Note: Figures in italics are for years other than those specified. 2005 data are preliminaryestimates
.. indicates data are not available. -indicates observation is not applicable.
Development Economics, Development Data Group (DECDG)

119

1/25/07

Annex I I

Country Partnership Strategy f o r f r R Macedonia FY07-IO

Millennium Development Goals

Macedonia, P/R

With selected targets to achieve between 7990 and 2075

(estimate closest to date shown, +/- 2 years)

Goal 1: halve the rates for $1 a day poverty and malnutrltlon
Poverty headcount ratio at $1 a day (PPP, YOof population)
Poverty headcount ratio at national poverty line (% of population)
Share of income or consumption to the poorest qunitile (%)
Prevalenceof malnutrition (% of children under 5)

1990

1995

2000
e2

94

99
38

Goal 4: reduce under4 mortality by two-thirds
Under-5 mortality rate (per 1,000)
Infant mortality rate (per 1,000 live births)
Measles immunization (proportion of one-year olds Immunized, %)

38
33

92
99

97

56

Goal 3: eliminate gender disparity in education and empower women
Ratio of girls to boys in primary and secondary education (Oh)
Women employed in the nonagricultural sector (% of nonagricultural employment)
Proportionof seats held by women in national parliament (%)

Goal 6: halt and begin to reverse the spread of HIVIAIDS and other major diseases
Prevalenceof HIV (% of population ages 1549)
Contraceptiveprevalence (% of women ages 1 5 4 9 )
incidence of tuberculosis (per 100,000 people)
Tuberculosiscases detected under DOTS (%)

i

99

39

98
42
E

99
42
19

26
23
97

18
16
97

14
13
96

23
97

99

3

54

-

30
73

54

~~

35.6

Goal 8 : develop a global partnership for development
Fixed line and mobile phone subscribers (per 1,000 people)
Internetusers (per 1,000 people)
Personal computers (per 1,000 people)
Youth unemployment (% of total labor force ages 15-24)

50

84

a. 1

Goal 7 : halve the proportion of people without sustainable access to basic needs
Access to an improved water source (% of population)
Access to improved sanitation facilities (% of population)
Forest area (% of total land area)
Nationally protected areas (% of total land area)
C02 emissions (metric tons per capita)
GDP per unit of energy use (constant 2000 PPP $ per kg of oil equivalent)

-

92
96

84

Goal 5: reduce maternal mortality by three-fourths
Maternalmortality ratio (modeled estimate, per 100,000 live births)
Births attended by skilled health staff (% of total)

125

6.1

6

Goal 2: ensure that children are able to complete primary schooling
Pnmaly school enrollment (net, %)
Primary completion rate (% of relevant age group)
Secondary school enrollment (gross, %)
Youth literacy rate (Oh of people ages 15-24)

Education Indicators (Oh)

2004
e2

35.6

8.2

5.4

5.7

7.1
5.1

150
0

179
0

310
25
36
59.9

642
78
69
65.7

CT indicators (per 1,000 people)

Measles immunization (%of I-year olds)

1

1988

+Primary
+Ratio

2wo

2w2

2t.x

net enrollment ratio

of girls to boys in primary 8
secondary education

2MxI

I

OMacedonia, FYR IlEurope & Central Asia

Note: Figures in italics are for years other than those specified.

,. indicates data are not available.

DevelopmentEconomics,Development Data Group (DECDG).

120

I

2w2

2oa

fixed + m b l l e subscribers
[D Internet

users

1/25/07

Country Partnership Strategy f o r P R Macedonia FY07-I 0

Annex I1

-

CAS Annex 8 2
Selected Indicators* of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
As Of Date 01/25/2007

Indicator
Portfolio Assessment
Number of Projects Under Implementation a
Average Implementation Period (years)
Percent of Problem Projects by Number a,
Percent of Problem Projects by Amount
Percent of Projects at Risk by Number a , d
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount
Disbursement Ratio (Yo)*
Portfolio Management
CPPR during the year (yes/no)
Supervision Resources (total US$)
Average Supervision (US$/project)

*

Memorandum Item
Proj Eva1 by OED by Number
Pro1 Eva1 by OED by Amt (US$ millions)
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Number
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt

2004

2005

2006

2007

11
2.9
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
35.0

10
2.8
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
35.0

10
2.4
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
24.0

9
1.7
33.3
36.1
33.3
36.1
7.9

Since FY 80 Last Five FYs
24
10
605.0
207.7
11.1
17.4
3.5
3.2

As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY).
Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio.
Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) and/or implementation progress (IP).
As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the
beginning of the year: Investment projects only.
* All indicators are for projects active in the Portfolio, with the exception of Disbursement Ratio,
which includes all active projects as well as projects which exited during the fiscal year.

a.
b.
c.
d.
e.

-

CAS Annex 83 IBRDllDA Program Summary

Macedonia, N R

As Of Date 02/27/2007

Proposed IBRDllDA Base-Case Lending Program a
Fiscal year

Proj I D

US$(M)

2007

AG. EU ACQUIS
PDPL 2

20.0

TTFSE 2
Result

20.0

Conditional Cash Transfers Project

25.0

MUNICIPAL DEVELOPMENT
TECHNOLOGIAL CHANGE & HIGHER EDUCATI
Result

0.0

2008

30.0

70.0

Overall Result

25.0
50.0

120.0

121

Strategic Rewards b
(H/M/L)

Implementation b
Risks (HIMIL)

Country Partnership Strategy for fvR Macedonia FY07-I 0

-

Annex I1

-

Annex B4 Summary of IBRD Nonlending Services fYR Macedonia

-

FY 2007 FY 2010
As of date 15 January 2007

Completion FY

cost
(US$OOO)

Recent completions
Legal and Judicial Diagnostic
Programmatic Poverty Assessment
ROSC on cosporate governance
UrbanIMunicipal Development Study
Agriculture and EU Accession
Programmatic Poverty Assessment

2005
2005
2005
2007
2007
2007

79
358
52
111
103
103

GIDIB
GIDIBIPD
G
GIDIB
GIDIB
GIB

KGIPS
KGIPSIPD
KGIPS
KGlPS
KGlPS
KGIPS

Underway
Country Fudiciary Assessment
PElR
Competitiveness Study

2007
2007
2007

72
310
110

GIDIB
GIDIB
GIDIB

KGlPS
KGIPS
KGIPS

GIDIBIPD
GlDlB
GIDIB
GIDIBIPD
GIDIB

KGIPDIPS
KGIPS
KGlPS
KGIPS
KGIPS

Product

Planned
Programmatic Poverty Assessment
CEM
National Energy Strategy
Transport Sector Study
FSAP Update
Other TBD

08
08
08
08
08

a1 Government (G), Donor (D), Bank (B), Public Dissemination (PD).
bl Knowledge Generation (KG), Public Debate (PD), Problem-Solving (PS).

122

Audience

a/

Objective

b/

Annex 11

Country Partnership Strategy forfvR Macedonia FY07-10

-

Macedonia, FYR K e y Economic Indicators

Indicator
National accounts (as % of GDP)
Gross domestic product'
Agriculture
Industry
Services

Actual
2003
2004

2002

2005

Estimate
2006

2007

Projected
2008
2009

2010

100
12
30
57

100
13
31
56

100
13
29
58

100
13
29
58

100
13
29
58

100
13
29
59

100
12
29
59

100
12
29
59

100

100
17
4
13

97
17
4
13

99
18
3
15

97
17
4
14

97
18
3
15

98
20
3
17

98
20
3
17

97
21
3
18

97
22
3
18

EXPOI~S

(GNFS)~
Imports (GNFS)

38
58

38
55

40
60

45
62

48
68

49
69

49
70

49
71

50
71

Gross domestic savings
Gross national savings'

0
13

3
18

1
15

3
20

3
22

2
20

2
20

3
20

3
20

3791

4630

5368

5766

6217

6699

7216

7730

8278

1730

1990

2440

2830

3030

3180

3470

3740

3990

2.8
1.o

4.1
3.8

3.8
4.6

3.2
3.1

4.5
4.5

5.0
5.0

5.0
5.1

5.0
5.0

3.9
5.5
6.7

3.6
2.2
3.3

3.0
3.7
3.5

4.4
4.5
5.6

4.9
5.4
6.2

4.9
4.5
4.4

4.9
4.1
4.2

Total Consumption
Gross domestic fixed investment
Government investment
Private investment

Memorandum items
Gross domestic product
(US$million at current prices)
GNI per capita (US$,Atlas method)

Real annual growth rates (%, calculated f?om 95 prices)
Gross domestic product at market prices
0.9
Gross Domestic Income
1.o

Real annual per capita growth rates (%, calculated from 95 prices)
Gross domestic product at market prices
0.6
2.6
Total consumption
5.4
-3.5
Private consumption
10.7
-1.8

12
30
58

Balance o f Payments (US%millions)

Exports (GNFS)b
Merchandise FOB
Imports (GNFS)~
Merchandise FOB
Resource balance
Net current transfers
Current account balance
Net private foreign direct investment
Long-term loans (net)
Official
Private
Other capital (net, incl. errors & ommissions)

Change in reservesd
Memorandum items
Resource balance (% of GDP)
Real annual growth rates ( YR95 prices)
Merchandise exports (FOB)
Primary
Manufactures
Merchandise imports (CIF)

1365
1112
2192
1916
-826
498
-358

1689
1363
2548
221 1
-858
741
-149

2080
1672
3247
2785
-1166
791
-415

2511
2040
3603
3097
-1091
1065
-8 1

3000
2400
4209
3612
-1210
1240
22

3284
2640
4656
4008
-1371
1272
-213

3540
2843
5072
4378
-1532
1350
-249

3809
3049
5452
4717
-1644
1387
-306

4098
3293
5847
5067
-1750
1439
-402

78
8
-29
37
141
131

96
59
44
14
45
-5 1

156
35
50
-15
243
-19

97
136
60
76
263
-415

380
-40
37
-77
30
-392

184
116
-28
144
25
-1 12

432
112
35
77
54
-349

276
11
20
-10
96
-76

345
-14
31
-45
143
-72

-21.8

-18.5

-21.7

-18.9

-19.5

-20.5

-21.2

-21.3

-21.1

-1.8
11.2
-4.7
21.8

2.2
-11.5
-1.2
-5.2

11.5
-2.7
19.1
11.2

12.2
18.4
17.6
-4.0

9.6
19.2
5.0
7.8

7.2
11.5
5.0
3.8

6.8
12.8
3.5
8.4

6.5
6.7
6.4
7.0

7.4
7.1
7.5
6.8

(Continued)

123

Country Partnership StrategyforjYR Macedonia FY07-IO

Annex I 1

Macedonia, FYR - Key Economic Indicators
(Continued)

Indicator

2002

Public finance (as % o f GDP at market price$

Current revenues
Current expenditures
Current account surplus (+) or deficit (-)
Capital expenditure
Foreign financing

Actual
2003
2004

2005

Estimate
2006

2007

Projected .
2008
2009

2010

34.7
36.9
-2.2
3.6
0.7

38.1
34.4
3.8
4.1
0.6

36.3
33.0
3.3
3.1
0.5

34.0
31.7
2.3
3.6
3.7

33.9
31.8
2.1
2.9
-4.0

32.2
30.3
1.9
3.4
-0.7

32.0
29.7
2.3
3.6
0.0

32.2
29.7
2.5
3.8
-0.4

32.2
29.5
2.7
4.0
-0.2

29.5
-11.8
8.8

32.8
14.7
73.8

35.8
15.3
111.2

38.4
14.9
1159.9

43.2
19.8
158.8

50.6
26.3
76.6

57.7
22.8
90.5

66.2
22.9
94.3

71.4
15.6
100.0

Merchandise export price index
Merchandise import price index
Merchandise terms o f trade index
Real exchange rate (US$/LCU)'

63.0
82.0
76.8
87.0

75.5
100.0
75.5
87.4

83.0
114.3
72.6
86.8

90.1
131.1
68.8
87.9

96.7
133.2
72.6
85.4

99.2
145.4
68.2
85.4

100.0
146.6
68.2
85.4

100.7
147.6
68.2
85.4

101.3
148.5
68.2
85.4

Real interest rates
Consumer price index (% change)
GDP deflator (% change)

1.8
3.4

1.2
0.3

-0.4
1.3

0.5
3.3

3.2
3.4

3.1
3.1

2.4
2.6

1.8
2.0

1.8
2.0

Monetary indicators

M2/GDP
Growth of M2 (%)
Private sector credit growth /
total credit growth (%)

Price indices( YR95 =loo)

a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.

GDP at factor cost
"GNFS" denotes "goods and nonfactor services."
Includes net unrequited transfers excluding official capital grants.
Includes use o f I M F resources.
Consolidated central government.
"LCU" denotes "local currency units." An increase in US$/LCU denotes appreciation.

124

Country Partnership Strategy forJrR Macedonia FY07-IO

Annex I1

Macedonia, FYR - K e y Exposure Indicators

Indicator

2001

Actual
2002
2003

Estimate
2005

2004

Projected
2007
2008

2006

2009

1469

1671

1831

2034

2253

2389

2543

279 1

3001

N e t disbursements (US$m)a

-56

14

32

113

338

-3 5

106

118

26

Total debt service (TDS)
(US$m)a

28 1

257

264

280

260

486

482

462

569

96.6
42.7
18.5
22.9

110.7
44.1
17.1
24.7

96.6
39.5
13.9
27.5

87.5
37.9
12.0
27.6

81.1
39.1
9.4

71.8
38.4
14.6

71.0
38.0
13.4

72.3
38.7
12.0

72.1
38.8
13.7

4.8
42.6

7.5
62.8

5.8
54.0

7.5
50.8

8.3
53.0

6.4
20.6

8.0
40.8

13.0
57.3

15.5
58.3

Total debt outstanding and
disbursed (TDO) (US$m)a

Debt and debt service indicators
(%)
TDOIXGS~
TDOIGDP
TDS/XGS
ConcessionaVTDO
IBRD exposure indicators (%)
IBRD DSipublic DS
Preferred creditor DSipublic
DS (%)'
IBRD DS/XGS

0.7

0.9

0.5

138

181

0.5

0.4

0.7

0.7

0.8

1.O

IBRD TDO (US$~I)~

117

Of which present value o f
guarantees (LJS$m)
Share o f IBRD portfolio (%)
IDA TDO (US$~I)~

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

254

293

358

388

362

3 84

359

355

349

224

248

265

279

IFC (US$m)
Loans
Equity and quasi-equity /c
MIGA
MIGA guarantees (USSm'l

a. Includes public and publicly guaranteed debt, private nonguaranteed, use o f IMF credits and net short-

term capital.
b. "XGS" denotes exports of goods and services, including workers' remittances.
c. Preferred creditors are defined as IBRD, IDA, the regionalmultilateral development banks, the IMF, and the
Bank for InternationalSettlements.
d. Includes present value of guarantees.
e. Includes equity and quasi-equity types of both loan and equity instruments.

125

328

365

E

.-

d
W

n
e

Annex 11

Country Partnership Strategy for fYR Macedonia FY07-10

Macedonia, FYR Social Indicators
Latest single year

POPULATION
Total population, mid-year (millions)
Growth rate (% annual average for period)
Urban population (77 of population)
Total fertility rate (births per woman)

Lowermlddleincome

1980-85

1990-95

1999-05

Europe &
Central
Asia

2.0
0.8
55.7
2.5

2.0
0.6
59.7
2.0

2.0
0.3
68.9
1.7

472.9
0.0
63.7
1.6

2,474.7

4,113
130

1,918
130

4.4

4.3

POVERTY
(% of population)
National headcount index
Urban headcount index
Rural headcount index

1.o

49.5
2.2

20.5
19.5
21.8

INCOME
GNI per capita (US$)
Consumer price index (2000=100)
Food price index (2000=100)

1,710
88

INCOMElCONSUM PTION DISTRIBUTION
Gini index
Lowest quintile (% of income or consumption)
Highest quintile (% of income or consumption)
SOCIAL INDICATORS
Public expenditure
Health (% of GDP)
Education (% of GNl)
Net primary school enrollment rate
(% of age group)
Total
Male
Female
Access to an improved water source
(% of population)
Total
Urban
Rural
Immunization rate
(% of children ages 12-23 months)
Measles
DPT
Child malnutrition (% under 5 years)
Life expectancy at birth
Wears)
Total
Male
Female
Mortality
Infant (per 1,000 live births)
Under 5 [per 1,000)
Adult (15-59)
Male (per 1,000population)
Female (per 1,000population)
Maternal (per 100,000 live bfrths)
Births attended by skilled health staff (%)

Same regionlincome group

2,830
109

0.4
6.0

5.6

92
92
93

90
91
90

96
97
87

92
99
80

82
94
71

97
95

96
96
6

93
93
5

85
a8
12

72
70
74

74
71
76

69
64
73

70
68
73

23
25

13
14

28
34

33
42

147
100

145
84
23
99

31 6
134
58
94

184
117
163
86

94
95
94

53
69

03/01/07
CAS Annex 85. This table was produced from the CMU LDB system.
Note: 0 or 0.0 means zero or less than half the unit shown. Net enrollment rate: break in series between 1997 and 1998 due to
change from ISCED76 to ISCED97. Immunization: refers to children ages 12-23 months who received vaccinations before one
year of age or at any time before the survey.

127

Country Partnership Strategy f o r f r R Macedonia FY07-10

Annex 12

Annex 12: Fund Relations N o t e

This Fund Relations Annex includes: (i)
the February 5, 2007 statement o f the IMF mission to
Skopje, which includes an assessment o f the macroeconomic outlook and the status o f the IMF
Second Review; and (ii)
the August 11, 2006 Public Information Notice at the conclusion o f the
2006 Article I V Consultation.
Statement of the IMF Staff Mission

An IMF mission headed by Mark Griffiths has visited Skopje January 25 - February 5, 2007 to
discuss the Second Review under the Stand-By Arrangement.
The mission found that good progress has been made towards completing the review. The
program’s macroeconomic targets for 2006 were met. The fiscal position remains strong,
international reserves have increased, and interest rates are low. Preliminary official data
estimate 2006 real GDP growth was broadly unchanged from 2005, but other indicators suggest
that growth may well have been considerably higher.

The economic outlook for 2007 and the medium t e r m i s favorable. To secure macroeconomic
stability, the 2007 budget that was approved by parliament in late December 2006 limits the
fiscal deficit to 1 percent o f GDP-slightly higher than the target for 2006. The additional
resources will be used to finance important reforms, including harmonization o f social security
contributions, higher investment, the second pillar pension system, and lower tariffs and income
taxes.
The mission welcomes the recent agreement with Paris Club creditors regarding debt
prepayment. These prepayments are expected to be completed by end-April 2007. As a result,
interest payments will decline, and medium-term debt sustainability will further improve.
In the view o f the mission, i t is crucial that the government adheres to i t s fiscal targets, and that
fiscal risks stemming from problems in a few sectors o f the economy-in particular, the health
and energy sectors-are mitigated. Steps have been taken. However, the mission encouraged the
authorities to develop a comprehensive action plan to restore the financial viability o f the energy
sector, in close collaboration with the World Bank.

The mission reached understandings on almost all elements o f a draft letter o f intent. A few
issues s t i l l need to be discussed in greater detail, including: (i)
clarification o f the strategy for
next steps in harmonizing the
liberalization and reform o f the telecommunications sector; (ii)
bases o f social security contributions and the personal income tax; (iii)
improving tax collections,
through integrating the social funds to collect social security contributions and, eventually,
consolidating these reponsibilities within the public revenue office; and (iv) the new draft

128

Country Partnership Strategy forJYR Macedonia FY07-I 0

Annex 12

banking law. Provided sufficient progress i s made in the coming weeks, an IMF Executive Board
meeting to complete the Second Review could be held in March 2007.

Finally, the mission would like to thank the Macedonian authorities for their continued
cooperation, and for their generous hospitality.
Skopje
February 5,2007

129

Country Partnership Strategy forfYR Macedonia FY07-10

Public Information Notice (PIN) No.
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE
August xx, 2006

Annex 12

International Monetary Fund
700 l g t hStreet, NW
Washington, D. C. 20431 USA

IMF Concludes 2006 Article IV Consultation with the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia
On July 28, 2006, the Executive Board of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) concluded
the Article IV consultation with the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia.23
Background
Economic performance has started to improve. After a decade of sluggish growth, in part
the result of external shocks, growth has reached 4 percent for two years in a row. In 2005,
growth was driven by strong exports. A broadly balanced fiscal position and the fixed
exchange rate have kept inflation under control. The external position has strengthened,
with gross reserves rising from €700 million at end-2004 to around €1,200 (more than 4
months of imports or 25 percent of GDP) by May 2006. The recorded current account deficit fell
sharply to 1.3 percent of GDP in 2005 driven by increased private transfers, though these
may also capture capital account transactions.

The increase in reserves has allowed the central bank to cut interest rates. Bank credit has
expanded, especially to households and in foreign currency, though from a low base and
less rapidly than in the region’s other countries.
The overall fiscal position showed a small surplus in 2005. Last year’s 0.3 percent of GDP
central government budget surplus was better than projected by 1 percent of GDP,
reflecting continuing underperformance of ministries’ Special Revenue Accounts, restraint in
public employment, and procurement delays. One-off revenue developments, including the
unusually high telecom monopoly dividend and advancing VAT payments by importers, also
contributed.
Under Article IV of the IMF’s Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with
members, usually every year. A staff team visits the country, collects economic and financial
information, and discusses with officials the country’s economic developments and policies. On
return to headquarters, the staff prepares a report, which forms the basis for discussion by the
Executive Board. At the conclusion of the discussion, the Managing Director, as Chairman of
the Board, summarizes the views of Executive Directors, and this summary is transmitted to the
country’s authorities. This PIN summarizes the views of the Executive Board as expressed
during the July 28, 2006 Executive Board discussion based on the staff report.
23

130

Country Partnership Strategy f o r j Y R Macedonia FY07-10

Annex 12

In 2006, growth is projected to remain at 4 percent, with higher domestic demand offsetting
some decline in net exports. Inflation is expected to increase to 3 percent, driven by supply
factors, including higher tobacco taxes and oil prices. The official current account deficit is
projected to widen to 3 percent of GDP due to higher oil prices, lower interest rates
stimulating imports, and some slowing in last year’s increase in private transfers.
Despite recent progress, structural weaknesses constrain the economy’s ability to increase
employment and achieve more rapid output growth. Recorded unemployment in 2005
reached 35 percent, one of the highest in the region, as employment has barely increased
since 1995. Levels of financial intermediation and the stock of foreign direct investment
remain low. Macedonia ranked poorly in international comparisons of the business
environment due to high costs of opening and closing a business, hiring and laying off
workers, and enforcing contracts. Property rights are poorly defined with the land cadastre
incomplete, the tax wedge on labor remains high, and telecommunications services are
expensive. The government has amended the constitution and passed new laws to
introduce comprehensive judicial reform, yet implementation has just started.

Executive Board Assessment
Executive Directors commended the Macedonian authorities for their sound macroeconomic
policies which, after a decade of sluggish growth, have now started to deliver economic
recovery. Inflation has remained under control, the current account deficit has narrowed,
international reserves have increased, and the fiscal position is sound.
Directors noted that, despite these successes, considerable challenges lie ahead. These
include raising living standards closer to European levels, reducing unemployment, and
keeping the current account deficit under control. Directors stressed that the best way to
meet these challenges would be by maintaining the country’s hard-won macroeconomic
stability, and accelerating structural reforms.
Directors viewed the 0.6 percent of GDP fiscal deficit target as one of the anchors of
macroeconomic stability. They cautioned that loosening the fiscal stance would be
premature in view of uncertainties about the current account’s true size, medium-term fiscal
challenges, and the limited institutional capacity in line ministries to spend additional funds
efficiently. Rationalization of the public sector should be undertaken before spending
increases are envisaged. Going forward, Directors also encouraged efforts to strengthen
the fiscal revenue base and reduce nondiscretionary spending.
Directors considered that the exchange rate peg is appropriate given the Macedonian
economy’s size and openness, and its limited international financial market integration. The
peg has kept inflation low, and, although there are structural weaknesses in the economy,
price competitiveness and the level of the exchange rate seem broadly satisfactory.
Directors considered it important to continue to strengthen the central bank’s policy
instruments. They welcomed the central bank’s recent interest rate cuts, but with euro-area
rates higher and the need to see the effects of the cuts on credit and the real economy, a
pause now seems appropriate.

131

Country Partnership Strategy f o r f l R Macedonia FY07-IO

Annex 12

Directors stressed the importance of structural reforms for accelerating growth. Institutional
reforms, ranging from judicial reform and improving public governance to market
liberalization and privatization, will be essential to developing a functioning marker
economy. Reducing the very high unemployment rate should be a priority, and can be
achieved through active labor market policies, reducing the tax wedge, and eliminating
barriers to part-time employment. Financial market development is also needed, notably to
lower intermediation costs, improve the credit culture, and enhance banking supervision.
Such reforms would boost investment and employment, strengthen total factor productivity,
and increase Macedonia's attractiveness for foreign direct investment. Directors noted that
although these tasks are immense, so too are the potential rewards, and they encouraged
the authorities to implement these reforms expeditiously.
Macedonia's provision of data to the Fund is broadly adequate for surveillance purposes.
Directors nevertheless underscored the need for continued efforts to improve the quality
and coverage of statistics, including in the area of fiscal transparency.

Public lnformation Notices (PINS) form part of the IMF's efforts to promote transparency of the IMF's
views and analysis of economic developments and policies. With the consent of the country
(or countries) concerned, PlNs are issued after Executive Board discussions of Article IV consultations
with member countries, of its surveillance of developments at the regional level, of post-program
monitoring, and of ex post assessments of member countries with longer-term program engagements.
PlNs are also issued after Executive Board discussions of general policy matters, unless otherwise
decided by the Executive Board in a particular case.

132

Country Partnership Strategy f o r j Y R Macedonia FY07-IO

Annex I 2

Table 1. FYR Macedonia: Selected Economic Indicators, 2003-07

2003

2004

2.8

4.1

4.0

4.0

4.0

1.2
2.6
3.6
36.7

-0.3
-2.0
4.4
37.2

0.5
1.8

2.9

2.0

Real economy
Real GDP
Consumer prices
period average
end of period
Real wages, period average
Unemployment rate (average)
Government finances
Central government balance I /
Revenues (including grants)
Expenditures
Central government debt 21
Gross

Net

2005
2006
Prel.
Proj.
(Percentage change)

...

37.3

...
...
...

2007
Proj.

...

.,.

...

(In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated)

-0.1
38.4
38.5

0.4
36.5
36.1

0.3
35.8
35.6

-0.6
33.8
34.4

-0.6
34.5
35.1

39.0
34.9

36.6
32.5

40.2
32.5

35.6
20.9

35.3
21.7

18.0
14.5
6.8

16.1
11.8
8.3

14.9
11.7
9.2

20.1

23.0

Money and credit
Broad money (M3, percent)
Short-term lending rate (percent)
Interbank money market rate (percent)
Balance of payments
Exports
Imports
Trade balance
Current account balance
excluding grants
(in percent of GDP)
including grants
(in percent of GDP)
Overall balance
Official gross reserves
(in months of following year's imports
of goods and services)
External debt service ratio 31
External debt to GDP ratio (percent) 41

...
...

...
...

(In millions of Euro, unless otherwise indicated)

1,203
1,953
-750

1,343
2,237
-894

1,642
2,496
-853

1,833
2,847
-1,015

1,912
3,001
-1,089

-227
-5.5
-137
-3.4
14
710

-389
-9.0
-334
-7.7
-19
717

-1 14
-2.5
-62
-1.3
340
1,123

-209
-4.2
-151
-3.1
478
1,602

-290
-5.6
-20 1
-3.9
120
1,699

3.3
24.2
37.7

2.9
14.7
40.2

4.1
13.0
47.1

5.5
25.8
45.7

5.6
20.3
46.3

-0.1

-1.8

-3.3

...

...

Exchange rate
Real effective exchange rate (CPI-based)

Sources: Data provided by the authorities, and iMF staff projections.
11 In 2005, central government spent an additional 0.4 percent of GDP on the NBRM recapitalization.
2/ In 2005 and 2006 the change in stock reflects a major debt management operation. Net debt is defined as
gross debt minus government's deposits with the NBRM.
3/ Debt service due, including IMF, as a percent of exports. For 2006, includes a major debt management
operation. Excludes rollover of trade credits.
41 Total external debt, including trade credit. For 2005, includes a Euro 150 million Eurobond issue.

133

