Public Disclosure Authorized

Document of
The World Bank
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Public Disclosure Authorized

Public Disclosure Authorized

Public Disclosure Authorized

Report No. 35621-LS

INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION
COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY

FOR
TEE KINGDOM OF LESOTHO

March 27,2006

South Africa, Botswana, Lesotho, Namibia, and Swaziland Country Department
Africa Region
This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance
of their official duties. I t s contents may not othetwise be disclosed without World Bank
authorization.

The date o f the last Country Assistance Strategy was June 4, 1998.
CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS
US$1 = M6.22 Maloti as o f March 22,2006
GOVERWMENT FISCAL YEAR
April 1 - March 3 1
WORLD BANK FISCAL YEAR
July 1 -June 30
ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS
AAA
AfDB
AGOA
AIDS
APCBP
ATC
AU
BoS
BCP
CAS
CASCR
CDSP
CEM
CET
CMA
CPIA
CPPR
CWIQ
DFID
EFA
EPA
EU
FDI
FPE
FY
GDDS
GDP
GEF
GNP
GoL
GTZ
HCTA
HDI
HIV
HSRP
ICA

Analytical and Advisory Activities
African Development Bank
African Growth and Opportunity Act
Acquired Immune Deficiency
Syndrome
Agricultural Policy and Capacity
Building Project
Agreement on Textiles and Clothing
African Union
Bureau of Statistics
Basotho Congress Party
Country Assistance Strategy
Country Assistance Strategy
Completion Report
Community Development Support
Project
Country Economic Memorandum
Common External Tariff
Common Monetary Area
Country Policy and Institutional
Assessment
Country Portfolio Performance Review
Core Welfare Indicators Questionnaire
Department for International
Development (U.K)
Educationfor All
Economic Partnership Agreement
European Union
Foreign Direct Investment
Free Primary Education
Fiscal Year
General Data Dissemination System
Gross Domestic Product
Global Environmental Facility
Gross National Product
Government o f Lesotho
Gesellschaft fur Technische
Zusammenarbeit (German Technical
Cooperation Agency)
HIV/AIDS Capacity and Technical
Assistance Project
Human Development Index
Human Immunodeficiency Virus
Health Sector Reform Project
Investment Climate Assessment

Vice President :
Country Director:
Task Team Leader:

ICR
IDA
IFC
IPA
IMF
ITP
LCD
LDC
LHWP
LRA
LUSRP
MAP
MCC
MDGs
MDTCP

MTEF
MFA
MTA
ODA
OED
PEMFAR
PER
PFM
PPP
PRS
PRSP
PSCP
PSD
RRMP
RSA
SACU
SADC
SSA
SWAP
TA
UN
UNDP
USAID

WBI
WDR

ImplementationCompletion Report
International Development Association
International Finance Corporation
InterimPolitical Administration
International Monetary Fund
IntegratedTransport Project
Lesotho Congress for Democracy
Less DevelopedCountry
Lesotho Highlands Water Project
Lesotho Revenue Authority
Lesotho Utilities Sector Reform Project
Multi-Country HIV/AIDS Program
Millenium Challenge Corporation
MillenniumDevelopmentGoals
Maloti-Drakensburg Trans-Frontier
Conservation Project
Medium-TermExpenditureFramework
Multi-Fiber Agreement
Multi Fiber Trade Agreement
Official DevelopmentAssistance
Operations EvaluationDepartment
Public ExpenditureManagement and
Financial Accountability Review
Public Expenditure Review
Public Financial Management
Public Private Partnership
Poverty Reduction Strategy
Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper
Private Sector Competitiveness Project
Private Sector Development
Road Rehabilitation and Maintenance
Project
Republic of South Africa
Southern Africa Customs Union
Southern African Development
Community
Sub-Saharan Africa
Sector-Wide Approach
Technical Assistance
United Nations
United Nations DevelopmentProgram
United States Agency for International
Development
World Bank Institute
World Development Report

Gobind Nankani
Ritva Reinikka
Charles Annor-Frempong

COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY FOR LESOTHO
TABLE OF CONTENTS

I.

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

i

11.

COUNTRY CONTEXT

i

A.
B.
C.
D.
111.

IV.

V.

Political Economy and Social Context
Poverty Profile
Recent Economic Developments
Medium-term Outlook and Debt Sustainability

LESOTHO’S DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM AND ISSUES

8

A. Country Priorities and Development Challenges
B. Progress towards Attaining the Millennium Development Goals

8
13

BANK GROUP ASSISTANCE STRATEGY FOR FYO6-09

13

A. Implementation o f the Last CAS
i. What Worked W e l l and What Worked Less W e l l
ii. Lessons fkom OED Evaluations and Client Surveys
iii.Portfolio Management
B. Partnerships and Consultations on the CAS
C. Proposed Assistance Strategy
D. Bank Group Instruments
E. IDA Financing FY06-FY08
F. Country Financing Parameters
G. Monitoring Results and Evaluating Impacts o f the CAS

13
13
15
16
16
17
22
24
26
27

MANAGING R I S K S

28

Boxes

Box 1

Combating Corruption

12

Selected Macroeconomic Indicators
Tentative IDA Lending Program
Analytical and Advisory Work FY06-09
CPIA: Areas for Improvement

7
24
25
26

Tables
Table 1
Table 2
Table 3
Table 4

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance o f
their official duties. I t s contents may not be otherwise disclosed without W o r l d Bank authorization.

ANNEXES
Annex 1:
Annex 2:
Annex 3:
Annex 4:
Annex 5

Results Matrix
CAS Completion Report
Progress Towards Attaining the Millennium Development Goals
Matrix o f Donor Support to Lesotho 2005
Country Financing Parameters

Annex A2:
Annex B2:
Annex B3:
Annex B3:
Annex B4:
Annex B5:
Annex B6:
Annex B7:
Annex B8:
Annex B8:

Country at a Glance
71
Selected Indicators o f Bank Portfolio Performance & Management 73
IBRD/IDA Program S u m m a r y
74
IFC and MIGA Program S u m m a r y
75
S u m m a r y o f Non-lending Services
76
Key Social Indicators
77
Key Economic Indicators
78
Key Exposure Indicators
80
Operations Portfolio (IBRDIIDA and Grants)
81
Statement o f IFC’s Held and Disbursed Portfolio
82

30
38
63
64
65

COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY FOR LESOTHO

I.

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

i.
A small, poor, and landlocked economy, highly dependent on South Africa,
Lesotho faces the challenge of achieving strong, sustainable and job-creating growth
that benefits the poor whilefighting the H I W A I D S pandemic, the most urgent and
potentially devastating adversity confronting the country. Lesotho’s vision o f i t s future
and how to address these challenges i s set out in the Poverty Reduction Strategy (PRS),
which was endorsed by the Bank and IMF Executive Boards in September 2005. With
the overarching aim to improve the welfare o f the current generation without
compromising opportunities for future generations, the PRS delineates a comprehensive
agenda which places private-sector-led economic growth and employment creation at i t s
core, along with the betterment o f human conditions, notably as they relate to HIV/AIDS.

..

Prepared i n parallel with the PRS and through a process of extensive and
broad-based consultations with development partners, this Country Assistance Strategy
(CAS) proposes that the World Bank Group maintain a strong but inore focused and
results-orierztedpartnership with the Government of Lesotho during FYO6-09. The
overarching objective o f this strategy i s to make full use o f the Bank Group’s
comparative advantage in Lesotho, Le., combining analytical strength and convening
power with financing capacity and leverage in support o f the PRS to achieve stronger,
sustainable and job-creating growth, to ensure that the poor benefit, and to j o i n forces
with other stakeholders and development partners in the fight against HIV/AIDS.
11.

iii. To achieve enlzaizced impact, the CASproposes a results framework that sets
out desired outcomes and defines key intermediate indicators. This i s a major change
from the past. While all activities will be assessed and selected according to their
potential for achieving the outcomes, the results framework provides flexibility to
respond to changing circumstances and demands for analytical and financial services.
Through better monitoring, this results framework will allow earlier identification o f
issues, better-informed decisions, and pro-active problem solving.
Predicated oil continued macroeconomic stability and the promotion of good
iv.
governance, this CAS proposes that four key strategic objectives frame the Bank
Group’s assistance over the coming years:
0

0

Fighting HIV/AIDS. H I V I A I D S components will be included in all future Bank
programs in Lesotho, including in transport, private sector development, education,
and public service delivery. Technical assistance w i l l also be provided to strengthen
the capacity o f the National AIDS Commission to access available grant funding,
update strategies, and coordinate, monitor and evaluate programs.
Employment and Income Generation through Higher Economic Growth. Bank
support will b e directed towards three key areas: (i)
creation o f an enabling
environment for private sector development, exports, and investment; (ii)
enhancing

growth potential o f the rural economy and improving access to infrastructure and
basic services; and (iii)
sustainable use o f natural resources and the environment.
0

0

Improving Human Development Outcomes. Bank assistance will be directed
towards improving health status and learning outcomes. Focus will be on improving
health systems, the education sector, transport, water supply, and skill development in
the private sector. Inhealth, the focus will be o n increasing the efficiency o f public
expenditures, exploring ways to improve equity, and designing mechanisms for more
effective delivery o f health care. Ineducation, quality, efficiency, service delivery,
and management capacity will be at the center o f Bank support.
Decentralization, Public Service Delivery, and Monitoring and Evaluation. The
Bank will support the Government’s decentralization effort by contributing to
intergovernmental fiscal architecture, improving capacity and incentives for local
governments to deliver services, and empowering communities and users. In
collaboration with other partners, the Bank will assist the Government in putting in
place adequate mechanisms for monitoring the PRS and initiating impact evaluations.

v.
I n terms of instruments, the Bank will continue to invest in high quality
analytic work to underpin a strategic I D A lendingprogram. IDA lending, with a total
indicative allocation of US$47 million under IDA14, will increasingly focus on
programmatic and sector-wide approaches, including Poverty Reduction Support Credits
(PRSCs), which will be preceded by significant analytic preparation and support. This
will allow a better alignment with government systems, but require greater attention to
institutional dimensions, as well as a strengthening o f Lesotho’s fiduciary systems.
Theproposedprogram draws on the lessons of the last CAS and is designed to
vi.
mitigate risks that could hinder the effectiveness of Bank support. Implementation o f
the last CAS was hindered by political instability at the beginning o f CAS period,
compounded by capacity constraints, and the lack o f a core set o f measurable outcomes.
The prospects for the current CAS are significantly improved due to (a) political stability;
(b) a high level o f ownership o f and commitment to the PRS and CAS; and (c)
mainstreaming capacity building activities in all Bank projects to strengthen the capacity
o f government officials. T o mitigate the economic and capacity r i s k s facing Lesotho and
the Bank program, the Bank will support, in partnership with others, private sector
development, public sector reforms, and the scaling up o f H I V / A I D S prevention and
treatment. Finally, closer Bank engagement on the ground and strengthened client
commitment to the development agenda will support implementation o f the program.
Thefollowing issues are suggested for Board discussion:

vii.
0

0

Does the CAS adequately address the growth and human development challenges
which will enable Lesotho to move towards achieving the MDGs?
Does the Board agree that the approach taken in the CAS with respect to the
HIV/AIDS pandemic is appropriate?

..

11

11.

COUNTRY CONTEXT

A. POLITICAL ECONOMY
AND SOCIAL CONTEXT
1.
Lesotho was established as a British protectorate in 1868 and became an
independent constitutional monarchy in 1966 after holding i t s first democratic elections
in 1965. However, Lesotho’s democratic process has been marked by conflict between
political parties and power struggles between civilian and military regimes. Since
independence, there have been four military coups and 23 years o f authoritarian rule,
including seven years o f military government. Fragmentation o f political parties
characterizes the political landscape, with 19 political parties currently contesting for
political office.
The 1990s saw political upheavals escalate. After the 1993 election, a new
constitution was introduced, but the lopsided victory o f the Basotho Congress Party
(BCP) led to tensions between the newly elected government and the military. Inthe
M a y 1998 parliamentaryelections, the Lesotho Congress for Democracy (LCD) w o n all
but one o f the seats contested, as a result o f the ‘first past the post’ electoral system.
Soon after, the results were challenged and considerable civil unrest ensued, resulting in
widespread destruction o f property. Troops from the Southern African Development
Community (SADC) intervened, contributing to the unrest, but eventually calm was
restored. The government and opposition parties agreed on a new election in April 2000,
but delays in reforming the electoral system and registering voters led to a further
rescheduling to M a y 2002. The L C D was re-elected with a clear majority. Although the
elections were peaceful, Lesotho’s past political fragility remains a concern to investors
and also influences the manner in which the government tackles key development
challenges. The current electoral framework, based on a blend o f the “first past the post”
electoral system and proportional representation o f all parties, seems to offer the best
compromise for maintaining political stability.

2.

In accordance with Lesotho’s Constitution, the Government passed a Local
3.
Government Act in 1997. The A c t confers o n communities responsibility for their own
affairs and development. Elections for the newly created local assemblies were
conducted o n April 30,2005, which was the first ever multi-partylocal government
election. The law reserved 30 percent o f constituencies for women, but in fact 58 percent
o f the elected councilors ended up being women. The holding o f the local election
presents a promising scenario for increasing social inclusion and enhancing service
delivery.

With a population of 2.2 million’ and gross national income o f US$740 per
capita, Lesotho i s a small, poor, landlocked economy, completely surrounded by the
Republic o f South Africa (RSA). Two-thirds o f its land area i s comprised o f mountains
and small valleys, with less than 10 percent suitable for crop cultivation, and only a
portion o f i t suitable for intensive cultivation to support high population densities.
4.

‘

Projections for 2005 based on the Bureau o f Statistics 1996 Population Census. The next population
census i s scheduled to take place in April 2006.

1

Because o f i t s limited natural endowments - chiefly clay, sandstone, and water, with the
latter abundant only in non-populated areas - Lesotho’s economic potential i s likely only
to be achieved through the development o f man-made competitive advantages such as
skilled labor, increased efficiency, and a better investment climate.
The economy i s largely based o n limited agricultural and pastoral production and
5,
o n light manufacturing. About 70 percent o f Lesotho’s population lives in the rural
regions and mountainous areas where income i s generated from traditional, largely
subsistence, low-value-added agriculture and herding. The average household plot
holding i s about half a hectare, only two-thirds o f households have access to land, and 70
percent o f the plots are sharecropped informally. Domestically generated income i s
supplemented by relatively large, though over the past decade declining, remittances
from Basotho mine workers in South Africa; royalties from the supply o f water to South
Africa from the Lesotho Highlands Water Project (LHWP); official development
assistance (ODA), and by foreign direct investment (FDI) to the garment sector. The
latter exports mostly to the U.S. market, but is exposed to the risks o f eroding trade
preferences.
6.
Lesotho has a relatively open trade regime because o f its membership in the
Southern Africa Customs U n i o n (SACU), which generates significant revenue for the
government budget. I t also has easy access to South Africa’s superior infrastructure.
Lesotho trades mostly with South Africa, which accounts for 90 percent o f its imports
and 65 percent o f i t s exports. A s a member o f the Common Monetary Area (CMA),
Lesotho’s currency, the Loti, i s pegged to the Rand, and its monetary policy, including
interest rates and credit polices, is closely tied to that o f South Africa.

7.
Measured by the Human Development Index,2 Lesotho i s ranked 149 out of 177
countries - low on a global scale, but relatively favorable compared to other subSaharan African countries. Lesotho has achieved a relatively high adult literacy rate o f
84 percent. However, there are significant differences between rural and urban areas.
W h i l e the gross primary enrollment rate i s about 125 percent, the net enrollment rate i s
only about 85 percent, thus, lower than in neighboring countries. The secondary
enrollment rate i s only 25 percent, indicating systemic problems o f access and quality,
and resulting in limited employment possibilities. Only two percent o f youth between 18
and 20 is enrolled in tertiary institutions.

While there has been progress during the past decade and a half, almost h a l f o f the
8.
~
there
population does not have regular access to an improved water s o ~ r c e .Similarly,
has been progress in sanitation: Maseru has about 65 percent coverage, which i s fairly
high regionally for urban areas. Another indication o f relatively good sanitation i s the
l o w incidence o f water-borne diseases in either urban or rural areas. Still, while higher
than the sub-Saharan African average, more than half o f rural dwellers do not have access
to improved sanitation. Lesotho’s health and nutrition standards have not improved in
United Nations Development Program (UNDP) 2005 Human Development Report
Lesotho Demographic and Health Survey (2004). Ministry o f Health and Social Welfare and Bureau o f
Statistics. Maseru, Lesotho. February 2006.

2

recent years: the stunting rate remains at 38 percent. About a quarter o f Lesotho’s
population i s considered undernourished, with the highest rate o f protein-energy
malnutrition in Southern Africa and hardly any improvements in the last d e ~ a d e .Under~
five child mortality i s 113 per 1,000 live births, and infant mortality i s high, at 91 per
1,000. On the other hand, the proportion o f one-year-olds immunized against measles i s
85 percent, which i s good compared to other sub-Saharan African countries.
Lesotho has the highest HIV/AIDSprevalence rate among all IDA countries.
9.
Findings from the first nationally representative, population-based HIV prevalence
survey, conducted in 2004, showed that 24 percent o f the adult population i s HIVp ~ s i t i v e .Prevalence
~
rates are found to be higher for women (26 percent) than for men
(19 percent), and higher in urban areas (29 percent) than in rural areas (22 percent). HIV
prevalence increases with age, with a peak o f 43 percent among women in their late 30s
and 41 percent among men aged 30-34. One o f the most worrisome trends i s that one in
nine persons aged 15-24 i s HN-infected: 15 percent among young women and 6 percent
among young men. HIV prevalence among young people i s a closer indicator o f new
infections than total prevalence among adults. The number o f AIDS orphans i s estimated
at 100,000; interestingly, the survey showed that in 2004 school attendance among
orphans was similar to that o f non-orphans. I f HIViAIDS remains unchecked, i t i s
projected that Lesotho’s population will decline by 23 percent and l i f e expectancy will
decline to 35 years by 2015. The impact o n households i s severe, often leading to
depletion o f assets to cover medical and burial costs, and to a loss o f income as
productive members o f the household become illand die.

B.

Poverty Profile

Poverty is widespread in Lesotho, and available evidence, although inadequate,
suggests that poverty and inequality may have increased over the past two decades.

10.

Based on the 1994/95 Household Budget Survey, almost two-thirds o f the country’s
population live below the national poverty line and more than one-third are classified as
ultra-poor (living below half the poverty line).6 While the share o f poor people appears
to have remained stable since the 1980s, the number o f poor and extremely poor people
in the country has grown. A series o f poverty mapping exercises carried out in the 1990s
confirm this trend. Unfortunately, more recent reliable data are not available. A new
household survey was implemented in 2002/03, but capacity constraints have delayed
data processing and reporting. Moreover, the lack o f a standardized national framework
for data collection makes comparison o f household data over time difficult. Completing
the 2002/03 poverty profile i s a high priority for the Government and development
partners alike.
Poverty in Lesotho i s overwhelmingly a rural phenomenon, with striking
11.
variations in relation to geography, gender, household size, livelihood patterns, and
FA0 2005. Food Security Policy for Lesotho.
Lesotho Demographic and Health Survey. 2004. Ministry o f Health and Social Welfare and Bureau o f
Statistics. Maseru, Lesotho. February 2006.
Poverty Reduction Strategy: The poverty line i s M 1 4 6 per person per month based o n the 1986187
Household Budget Survey, measured in 2002 prices.

3

access to basic services. Unemployment and underemployment, the major causes o f
poverty and income disparities, remain extremely high, at close to h a l f o f the working age
population, mostly residing in rural areas. Household surveys show that the greatest
determinant o f poverty i s geography. The mountainous areas, which are home to
approximately one-third o f the population, have the highest incidence o f poverty. A key
cause o f rural poverty i s the significant amount o f labor devoted to low-productivity rainfed crop farming and livestock, which do not provide an adequate livelihood without
additional support from non-agricultural employment and remittances. There has been a
sharp decline in the latter over the past decade and little, if any, progress in the former.
C.

Recent Economic Developments

12.

Lesotho’s economy has undergone a fundamental transformation and
structural change over the past 1 5 years. GDP growth accelerated significantly since

2000/01 despite declining worker remittances. The growth rate achieved during 2001/02

- 2003/04 was 3.4 percent, compared to -0.4 percent in the previous three years. This i s

explained by three important changes in the external environment. First, the garment and
clothing industry has evolved from a nascent artisan industry in the late 1980s to a major
source o f export earnings. Starting in the late 1980s and gaining momentum with the
duty and quota-free access to the U.S. market provided under the 2000 African Growth
and Opportunity Act (AGOA), the industry attracted significant levels o f FDI, primarily
from East Asia. With garment exports jumping from about US$100 m i l l i o n in 1998 to
about U S 4 5 0 million in 2004, corresponding to an average annual growth rate o f more
than 50 percent, the sector has been the main source o f growth over the past five years.
Second, Lesotho experienced an exceptional increase in FDI, mainly from South
13.
Africa, for the Lesotho Highlands Water Project (LHWP). Conceived as an enclave
project, with relatively limited spillovers into the local labor and goods markets, the
construction phase o f this highly capital-intensive project was associated with large
capital inflows, peaking at almost 20 percent o f Lesotho’s gross national investments in
the early 1990s.
Finally, until the late-1980s’ close to 50 percent o f Lesotho’s national income was
14.
generated through remittances from Basotho workers employed in South African mines,
which employed almost h a l f of the male labor force. In contrast, in 2003/04, about 80
percent o f Lesotho’s GNP was produced domestically, while remittances from miners
(and other migrants) had fallen to about 20 percent o f GNP. W h i l e the share o f
agriculture in GDP has been shrinking and that o f services has stagnated, the growing
share o f manufacturing and construction has transformed Lesotho into a more modem
and more export-oriented economy. Private investment in manufacturing and
construction increased to 20 percent o f GNP in the first half o f this decade (from virtually
nil in the late 1980s), and the share of exports has grown steadily to now almost 40
percent o f GNP.
The Government’s stabilization policies during 1998-2002 in response to
15.
external shocks were largely successful. With monetary and exchange rate policies

closely tied to that of R S A and bolstered by relatively prudent fiscal policies, inflation

4

was kept under control at single-digit levels. Largely driven by FDI and the strong export
performance o f the garment and clothing sector, real GDP growth averaged about 3%
percent per annum during the period 1991-2003, compared to the average SSA growth
rate o f 2% percent during the same period. The overall fiscal balance (including grants)
has turned from a deficit to an increasing surplus in the last two fiscal years.
The current account deficit has narrowed significantly, from 11 percent o f GDP in
16.
2003-04 to less than 3 percent in 2004-05, mainly owing to considerable export growth
and a sharp rise in S A C U customs receipts. Exports were boosted by strong growth in
the garment sector, as a foreign-funded denim mill started operations and a diamond mine
was re-opened in 2004. Despite ongoing layoffs in mining, remittances from South
Africa also grew thanks to wage increases. These positive effects more than offset the
adverse impact o f a worsening o f the terms o f trade, which since 2001 has been
reinforced by the real appreciation o f the Rand vis-a-vis the U S dollar.
17.
M o r e recently, as a result o f the erosion in the competitiveness o f manufacturing,
the garment sector in particular, and the adverse impact o n agriculture o f the drought, real
GDP growth slowed to about 2 percent in 2004 and i s expected to weaken even further in
2005. While keeping inflation in check, the Loti’s peg to the Rand has resulted in a 30percent appreciation o f the real effective exchange rate over the past 3 years. Moreover,
the phasing out o f the quotas under the Uruguay Round’s Agreement o n Textiles and
Clothing (ATC) from the start o f 2005 has begun to erode Lesotho’s trade preferences in
textiles and garments, and there i s increased competition from lower-cost producers such
as China and India. Six factories were thus closed in the first quarter o f 2005, and about
10,000 jobs were lost o n that account alone. The fall in exports to the United States in
2005 is estimated at about 10 percent.

D.

Medium-term Outlook and Debt Sustainability

I n the medium term, Lesotho is vulnerable to the HIV/AIDSpandemic and to
18.
regional and global developments that can adversely affect its growth prospects. In the

short and medium term, key adverse developments include: (i)
the erosion o f trade
preferences through the phasing out o f textile quotas under the ATC; (ii)
the expected
removal o f the AGOA provision allowing the use o f third-country fabrics in 2007; (iii)
the anticipated decline in S A C U tariff revenues due to trade liberalization; and (iv) the
likelihood o f a reduction in remittances as Basotho workers continue to be retrenched
from South African mines and as they are affected by recent changes in South Africa’s
immigration legislation. These changes favor skilled workers, making it difficult for a
new generation o f miners to enter the South African labor market. Over the medium
term, the most worrisome and potentially most devastating development i s the impact o f
HIV/AIDS, which, if not adequately addressed, could have serious impacts. Preliminary
cost estimates to the economy and the public sector o f the HIV/AIDS pandemic are very
high. Slower labor force growth and a lower savings rate, which reduces capital
formation, could lower output growth by an average o f 0.4 percent per year between 2005
and 2014. The impact o f HIV/AIDS on the fiscal position o f the government is also

5

expected to be considerable - an additional deterioration o f the overall fiscal balance o f 5
percent o f GDP by 2010.7
During the period covered by this CAS (FYO6-09) real GDP growth i s expected
19.
to recover from the 2005/061ow but remain weak at about 2percent. The dampening
effect o f eroding competitiveness and phase-out o f quotas under the A T C i s expected to

be only partially offset by strengthened growth in non-garment manufacturing and
diamond mining. This scenario also assumes an improvement in public investment and
implementation capacity beginning in 2005/06, while private investments are expected to
remain at about 24 percent o f GDP throughout the period. The large fiscal surplus o f 9.1
percent o f GDP in 2004/05 (including grants), which reflected mainly temporary factors,
particularly the rise in receipts from SACU, is projected to stay healthy in 2005/06 and
2006/07, again mainly o n account o f higher than expected S A C U receipts and lower
expenditure than budgeted, particularly o n investment projects. W h i l e the new S A C U
windfall will be partially saved and the Government plans to make early repayment o f
some non-concessional external debt, the fiscal position i s expected to switch to a deficit
in subsequent years. The fiscal weakening reflects both a downward trend in revenues,
due to a reduction in the corporate income tax rates from 35 percent to 25 percent and the
anticipated drop in S A C U receipts resulting from lower import duties due to trade
liberalization, and the proposed large increase in spending (by 10 percent o f GDP) and
budgetary allocations for PRS as well as non-PRS related expenditures. Reflecting
these developments and the adverse impacts from worsening trade prospects, the current
account deficit (excluding official transfers) i s expected to deteriorate somewhat in
2005/06 and widen h r t h e r in subsequent years.
Lesotho’s debt indicators have improved markedly in the last two years. With
20.
the strengthening o f the fiscal position, the Government used the fiscal surplus in 2003/04
and 2004/05 to repay i t s domestic debt. The stock o f treasury bills fell from 17 percent o f
GDP in 2002/03 to 8 percent o f GDP in 2004/05. Lesotho’s external public debt as a
share o f GDP declined from 83 percent at end 2002/03 to 53 percent in March 2005,
reflecting the combined effect o f strong GDP growth, very limited government
borrowing, and exchange rate appreciation. The latter factor alone accounted for a 20
percentage point decline.

21.
Virtually all public and publicly guaranteed external debt i s held by the Central
Government, which has taken over the debt incurred by public entities. In nominal terms,
as o f end-March 2005, Lesotho’s public and publicly guaranteed external debt stood at
US$721.6 million, equivalent to US$485 million in net present value terms. Almost 80
percent o f this debt was owed to multilateral creditors, mainly IDA (37 percent) and the
African Development Bank (26 percent). The remainder o f the debt is split between
bilateral and commercial creditors (13 percent and 9 percent, respectively). Concerning
private sector debt, only the obligations towards countries outside the Common Monetary
Area (CMA) are recorded. At end-March 2005, these obligations were estimated at
US$2.2 million.

’

IMF - The Fiscal Impact o f H I V i A I D S in Lesotho - Selected Issues and Statistical Annex - January
2004.

6

Table 1: Selected Macroeconomic Indicators
Actual

2002i03
Gross domestic product
Gross national product
Exports, f.0.b
Imports, f.0.b
Consumer price index (period
average)
Investment and saving
Gross domestic investment
Gross national savings (including
remittances)
Government budget
Revenue
Total grants
Total expenditure and net lending
Overall balance (excluding grants)
Overall balance (including grants)
Government debt
Domestic debt, net o f deposits
External debt-service ratio (in
percent o f exports o f goods and
services)
Current account balance
Excluding official transfers
Including official transfers
Gross official reserves (end o f
period)
(in millions o f U.S. dollars)
(In months o f imports o f goods nd
services)
Memorandum items:
G D P at current prices (millions o f
maloti)

3.2
3.4
29.8
22.6

Estimate

Projected

2003104 2004/05 2005106 2006/07 2007108
(Annual percentage change, unless otherwise specified)
3.3
2.0
1.3
1.9
2.4
3.6
2.3
1.7
2.1
2.2
32.0
36.4
4.8
3.5
-2.3
1.5
0.6
27.2
24.9
1.o

9.6

6.4

4.3

5.0

5.0

2008i09
2.5
1.7
1.o
2.1

5.0

5.0

(In percent o f GDP, unless otherwise specified)

42.9

40.5

34.9

35.4

35.8

36

36

24.3

29.8

32.1

28.9

26.7

26.8

25.6

40.1
3.9
48.4
-8.3
-4.3
99.4
0.8

41.7
2.2
43.1
-1.4
0.8
76
-2.2

44.6
2.6
43.5
6.5
9.1
60.6
-3.7

47.8
1.6
45.2
2.6
4.2
64.9
-3.8

53.5
2.9
53.6
-0.1
2.8
61.4
-2.3

52.3
2.8
51.8
0.5
3.3
57.1
-1.2

45.3
2.7
50.4
-5.1
-2.4
53.3
-0.2

11.8

9.1

7.3

12.5

7.9

7.7

6.9

-35.1
-18.6

-25.7
-10.8

-22.2
-2.8

-25
-3.2

-26.1
-6.1

-26.1
-7.1

-26.3
-10.4

408.4

436.9

507.7

474.4

442.6

418.7

384.3

4.3

3.8

4.5

4.1

3.8

3.5

3.2

7,541

8,249

8,935

9,388

10,008

10,763

11,587

Source: BOS, IMF and WB staff estimates, January, 2006.

Overall, Lesotho presents a moderate risk of debt distress, assuming annual
22.
external borrowing equivalent to about 2percent of GDP, and a gradual increase in
the real growth rate, reaching 4.5percent after 2012/13. A joint IDA-IMF debt
sustainability analysis using the fi-amework for low-income countries approved by the

Boards o f both institutions concludes that Lesotho’s external debt burden does not appear
excessive, as i t s external debt indicators are projected to remain well below the relevant
indicative thresholds. However, the debt sustainability analysis highlights the sensitivity
to changes in exchange rates and in the terms o f new borrowing, as well as to shocks
affecting the country’s narrow export base. In particular, a potentially risky scenario

7

could emerge in the presence o f persistent and severe shocks to garment exports. A
reversal o f the large exchange rate appreciation o f the past few years could also
substantially raise the debt-to-GDP ratio.

111.
A.

LESOTHO’S DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM AND ISSUES
Country Priorities and Development Challenges

A s articulated in Lesotho’s Vision 2020 document, the long-term vision i s that by
the year 2020 “Lesotho shall be a stable democracy, a united andprosperous nation at
peace with itselfand its neighbors. I t shall have a healthy and well-developed human
resource base, a strong economy, a well-managed environment and an established
technological base ”. The key elements o f this vision are reflected in Lesotho’s Poverty
Reduction Strategy (PRS), which was endorsed by the Bank’s and the IMF’s Executive
Boards in September 2005, following a highly consultative and participatory preparation
process involving most o f the country’s key stakeholders and communities.

23.

*

24.

With the overarching development goal “to provide a broad based improvement

in the standard of welfare for the current generation of Basotho, without compromising
opportunities for future generations”, the PRS groups priority areas o f actions within
three key pillars o f policy objectives: (i)
employment and income generation through
higher economic growth; (ii)
sharing the benefits o f growth through improved health and
education standards and the conservation o f the environment; and (iii)
improving
governance and public sector p e r f ~ r m a n c e .Within
~
these three pillars, the PRS identifies
eight priority areas of action, including creation o f employment opportunities;
improvement o f agricultural production and food security; infrastructure development;
deepening o f democracy and governance and strengthening o f safety and security;
improved access to health care and social welfare; improved quality o f and access to
education; better management and conservation o f the environment; and improved public
service delivery. Three key cross-cutting themes relate to HIV/AIDS, gender, and
children and youth.
First Pillar of the PRS: Employment and Income Generation through Higher
Economic Growth
Lesotho is confronted with slow economic growth and high unemployment.
25.
The mostly foreign-owned garment industry, while well-connected to global supply
chains and exporting almost all o f i t s output, has limited linkages to the rest o f the
economy. Meanwhile, the domestically-owned private sector, comprised o f micro and
small enterprises engaged in trade, services, construction, sandstone quarrying and, to a
limited extent, manufacturing, i s disconnected from the regional supply chains of

Southern Afi-ica. Accelerating employment creation for the growing labor force will only
be possible through the expansion o f private sector activities - formal and informal as
National Vision for Lesotho - Empowerment for Prosperity (Undated).
Details can be found in the “Kingdom of Lesotho Poverty Reduction and Strategy Paper and Joint Staff
Advisory Note, Report No. 32541-LS, July 18,2005.

8

well as domestic and foreign. W h i l e difficult, transfer o f managerial and technical skills
and creating backward and forward linkages from the foreign manufacturing firms
operating in Lesotho to Basotho entrepreneurs will be critical. N e w activities such as
tourism and horticulture, where Lesotho has some inherent comparative advantages, are
expected to increase opportunities for employment and revenue generation.
A s set out in the PRS, the Government plans to create an environment conducive
to export-oriented foreign and local investment. Given the small size o f the domestic
market, the government strategy i s mindhl o f the need to integrate trade issues in poverty
reduction programs. The goal i s to lower the cost o f trading with South Africa, other
S A C U countries, and the rest o f the world by removing barriers to trade and movement o f
capital and labor within SACU, and to establish a competitive business environment
through the removal o f administrative barriers. lo

26.

27.

South Africa is the key regional market for Lesotho’s exports. To achieve
deeper regional economic integration, Lesotho will need to press for improvements in the
S A C U Agreement. These would include: simplification o f the common external tariff
(CET); harmonization o f policies, regulatory framework and standards; restrictions o n
anti-dumping duties levied by South Africa; and introduction o f single border-posts
within SACU. Regarding access to global markets, Lesotho will need to continue to
lobby in the United States to maintain the preferences under AGOA, and to actively
participate in negotiations for an Economic Partnership Agreement (EPA) with the
European U n i o n (EU), with a view towards improving access to the EU market. The
scope o f cooperation and integration with South Africa should be as broad as possible
and o n many levels. In addition to strengthening government-to-government cooperation,
i t i s essential to support and bolster partnerships between businesses across the board.
Tourism and commercial horticulture offer an entry point for closer collaboration and
cooperation.

Steps have already been taken by the Government towards the realization o f these
objectives. The Government, in collaboration with development partners, notably the
Bank, organized a Private Sector Development Forum in April 2005 to forge a
partnership between the public and private sectors to achieve sustainable private-sectorled economic growth. Based on the recommendations that emerged from the forum, the
Government has prepared a program o f actions, with an ambitious but achievable
timetable, aiming at enhancing economic performance and productivity, attracting more
private investment, and diversifying the economy. To achieve these objectives, the
Government plans to introduce reforms in three priority areas: (i)
improving the business
climate by reducing the legal and administrative impediments to growth; (ii)
strengthening logistics, infrastructure, trade and investment facilitation, and institutions to
support areas with the highest potential for growth and exports; and (iii)
strengthening
domestic competitiveness through improving skills and strengthening linkages between
training and industrial needs.

28.

lo
Lesotho:

Integrated Framework, Diagnostic Trade Integration Study, 2003.

9

Theperformance of agriculture, the backbone of the rural economy and the
29.
sector that employs most of the poor, has been stagnant since the early-1 990s, leading
to negative per-capita growth in agriculture output. Together with shrinking remittances,

this has had serious consequences for food security. In addition, agricultural performance
i s heavily affected by an eroding natural resource base, lack o f infrastructure,
vulnerability to drought, and the high HIV/AIDS prevalence. Moreover, with a large
share o f the population living in mountainous areas and remote villages, coupled with
weak community institutions o n the demand side, the challenge o f service delivery, both
productive and social, i s formidable.

30.

The Government’s main agricultural policy i s to move away from maize-driven
food self-sufficiency to food security through a two-pronged strategy to promote: (i)
commercial agriculture, by developing production where the country has a comparative
advantage and access to markets, such as in certain vegetables and h i t s ; and (ii)
household food security, through production activities aimed directly at the poor. The
k e y elements to achieve these objectives include: development o f a national land policy;
intensification o f agricultural production (through adoption o f farming systems that
incorporate ago-forestry and animal husbandry and investment in irrigation and market
infrastructure); piloting a block farming approach in horticulture and h i t trees (apples
and cherries); and strengthening and decentralization o f the extension service.
Second Pillar of the PRS: Sharing the Benefits of Growth: Health, Education and
the E n vironm ent

3 1.
To reverse the downward trend in health outcomes, the Governmentproposes to
promote access to high-quality essential health care, reduce malnutrition, and improve
access to social welfare services. These objectives are reflected in the ongoing health
sector reform and sector-wide approach led by the Government and supported by i t s
development partners. The thrusts o f the reform program is to improve the capacity o f
the health sector to deliver essential services; develop efficient and sustainable health
care finance; mitigate the effects o f brain drain; strengthen disease prevention programs;
promote decentralization; and build stronger partnerships with c i v i l society, especially
the Churches Hospital Association o f Lesotho. H I V / A I D S i s a major challenge to the
health sector and a major risk to the achievement o f any substantial improvement in
health outcomes. W h i l e there i s a concerted effort underway to r o l l out anti-retroviral
treatment and scale up HIVIAIDS prevention, the pace o f implementation remains slow.

32.

To achieve education for all, the Government introducedfree primary
education (FPE) in 2000, including the cost of textbooks and schoolfeeding in all FPE
classes. The governnient intends to ensure that each child spends at least t e n years in

school to increase the chances o f finding employment. The government views
investment in appropriate education as the single most important contribution i t can make
to Lesotho’s long-term socio-economic development. For this reason, the education
budget remains the highest o f all sectors, and i s set to grow even further over the next
three years.

10

33.
Lesotho relies heavily o n the skills and education o f its people for economic
growth. The government allocates an exceptionally large proportion o f GDP to postsecondary education. T o provide a suitable skill base to support economic growth, the
government strategy i s to develop technical and vocational education and to enhance i t s
l i n k s with the labor market. Within the higher education sector, reforms will be needed to
ensure equity, efficiency, and an appropriate focus on science and technology.

To ensure sustainable development and to reverse the declining trends in the
34.
environment and agricultural productivity, the Government proposes measures to
promote sustainable land management, address emerging urban environmental issues,
and strengthen environmental governance. To promote sustainable land management,
the Government strategy i s to support community-based approaches in both range
management and soil and water conservation, combining incentives and awareness and
educational measures. This will be done through a better targeting o f public expenditures
in the areas o f agriculture, forestry, land, and water management. In addition, the
Government plans to continue to implement strategies to reduce the loss o f biodiversity
and land degradation through accessing Global Environment Facility (GEF) resources.
Finally, the Government intends to improve the management o f emerging industrial and
urban pollution problems, promote environmental education, and to improve the legal,
policy, and institutional fi-amework for environmental management.

IThird Pillar of the PRS: Improving Governance and Public Service Delivery

I

35.

Lesotho is faced with acute management constraints, staffing deficiencies, and
politicization of the civil service. Inadequate administrative and institutional capacity in
ministries and central government agencies has made policy formulation, coordination,
and implementation cumbersome. Qualified and experienced personnel are in short
supply, as they tend to migrate to the RSA in search o f better employment opportunities,
and incentives are not geared towards improving performance and client service. At the
same time, demands for improving service delivery on the ground and establishing
effective monitoring and evaluation systems are increasing. This i s most urgent in
poverty monitoring, given the current weakness in data collection and analysis.

36.

The Government envisages enhancing the effectiveness o f public services through
an ambitious public sector reform program. The goals o f the proposed program are to
ensure that public services are delivered in the most appropriate, effective, and efficient
way, through improved public financial management, decentralization o f service
provision, and c i v i l service reform. In financial management, the objectives are to
maintain fiscal discipline, allocate resources more efficiently and in line with government
priorities, and improve service delivery. The accounting system will be strengthened
through computerization and staff training. To ensure that the reforms are properly
implemented, the Government i s planning to strengthen the Public Accounts Committee
and to expand the independence o f the Auditor General. Similarly, the Government
seeks to improve the law and justice system, reduce delays injudicial services, promote
respect o f property rights, and increase access to alternative dispute resolution
mechanisms. While measures to enhance the capabilities o f the state and to decentralize

11

the supply side o f service delivery are critical, the role o f beneficiaries, communities, and
c i v i l society in capacity development i s equally important. Lesotho demonstrated the
power o f participation in the PRS preparation; a similar approach o f “engaged society” is
required in its implementation and to overcome current capacity constraints.

37.

Within the context ofpublic service reform, the Government has embarked on a
zero-tolerance campaign against corruption. I t is currently in the process o f
overhauling its financial management system and restructuring the revenue base. This
has been done through the establishment o f the Lesotho Revenue Authority and the
merging o f the Ministries o f Development Planning and Finance into one Ministry, as
w e l l as the establishment o f the Anti-Corruption Directorate. As discussed in B o x 1,
Government has already displayed its resolve and capacity to address large-scale
corruption that has occurred in the context o f the Lesotho Highlands Water Project.
_

_

_

~

~

Box 1: Combating Corruption

The Lesotho Highlands Water Project (LHWP) i s notable for more than having the tallest dam in
Africa (Katse), winning numerous engineering awards, and protesting by proj ect-affected people
and NGOs. Unfortunately, corruption was uncovered in the implementation o f Phase 1A that i s
s t i l l being fought in Lesotho’s courts in 2005.
Initially, the Lesotho Highlands Development Authority (LHDA) w o n a civil action against i t s
former Chief Executive. That led to criminal prosecution, which culminated in a long prison
sentence for receiving bribes from several o f the international companies engaged in the project.
The Government, l e d by a determined Attorney General, launched several cases against the f i r m s
that paid the bribes and has won convictions against many o f them. Further prosecutions are
expected.
For i t s part, the Bank assisted the prosecutors with information and has subsequently debarred
Acres International, which i s hence ineligible to seek Bank-financed contracts for a period o f
three years. It also debarred an agent and has a further debarment action pending.
In what i s often referred to as a David and Goliath story, the Government o f Lesotho has achieved
spectacular success in bringingmajor international corporations to account for corrupt dealings in
securing contracts. This has sent shock waves throughout the industry.

The LHWP was one o f the projects investigated by the U.S. Senate Foreign Relations Committee
as part o f i t s investigation o f corruption in projects financed by multilateral development banks.
I t s recommendation to further tighten anti-corruption measures was signed into law in November
2005.

ICross-Cutting Themes of the PRS

1

38.
In addition to the three main pillars o f the PRS, the Government recognizes three
major cross-cutting themes o f national importance: HIVIAIDS, gender, and children and
youth. The Government plans to strengthen the legal, institutional and policy framework
to the levels required to effectively combat the H I V / A I D S epidemic, remove
discriminatory practices related to gender, and address the needs o f children and youth.
As part o f Government’s efforts to combat HIV/AIDS, the law establishing the National
12

AIDS Commission as the central coordinating body was passed in 2005. Furthermore,
two percent o f the recurrent budget was committed towards HIVIAIDS prevention.
Mainstreaming o f HIV/AIDS in all government departments has also been undertaken.
The alarmingly high prevalence o f HIV/AIDS calls for a strong and coordinated effort by
the Government, the private sector, c i v i l society, and development partners to fight the
stigma associated with HIVIAIDS and a widespread reluctance to admit publicly the
severity o f the pandemic.
Progress Towards Attaining the MillenniumDevelopment Goals

B.

39.
The United Nations Development Program (UNDP), together with the
Government, prepared a second Lesotho Status Report on the Millennium Development
Goals (MDGs) in 2005. Annex 3 contains a summary o f progress made towards the
attainment o f the MDGs in Lesotho. In general, Lesotho appears to be on course to
achieve some o f the MDGs by 2015, but efforts at addressing health outcomes are being
eroded by the high prevalence o f HIV/AIDS. Chronic drought has also affected the
ability o f the rural population to provide adequate nutrition, leading to severe
malnutrition among children. The decline in agricultural production and reduced
remittances from mine and industrial workers are also likely to negatively affect attempts
to eradicate extreme poverty. Considerable progress, however, has been made towards
attainment o f universal primary education and gender equality in education, as well as
towards environmental sustainability.

IV. BANK GROUP ASSISTANCE STRATEGY FOR FYO6-09
Implementation o f the Last CAS

A.
i.

What Worked Well and What Worked Less Well

40.
The CAS Completion Report (CASCR) assesses the implementation of the 1998
CAS as moderately unsatisfactory, with the exception of a few areas where
implementation and outcomes are considered satisfactory. The CAS was fairly closely
aligned to the Government's development program," which focused o n two main
objectives: (i)
reduction o f poverty (through j o b creation, poverty programs, social
services, safety nets, and management o f poverty-related environmental degradation);
regional and global integration (by enhancing external competitiveness). The
and (ii)
CAS contained a number o f activities aimed at contributing to the achievement o f both
these overarching objectives. In particular, the CAS program included support to
education and health; poverty reduction by enhancing the poverty impact o f the Lesotho
Highlands Revenue Fund; assistance to improved management o f the environment;
support to a stable macroeconomic environment, privatization, and private sector
development; and capacity building.

I1
As spelled out in the Sixth National Development Plan for the period 1996197-1998199 and the Strategic
Economic Options Report o f 1997.

13

The implementation of the CAS suffered from a setback at the outset, as well as
41.
from a number of dejiciencies. First, the original CAS was envisioned for the three
years FY98-00, but its implementation was extended until 2005 due to political instability

soon after the CAS was approved and the delayed preparation o f the PRS. Second, the
CAS did not identify a core set o f measurable outcomes. Therefore, specific outcomes to
assess progress were extracted from a generalized formulation o f outcomes or goals. The.
assessment o f outcomes was further limited by a lack o f reliable data both for the country
as a whole and for the CAS and Bank-funded projects. Although the 1998 CAS
identified monitoring and evaluation as a key issue, little progress was made to address
the deficiencies.
42.

The outcome of the CASprogram in support ofpoverty reduction was
unsatisfactory. The implementation completion reports (ICR) o f the Community
Development Support Project (CDSP) and the Agricultural Policy and Capacity Building

Project (APCBP) were rated highly unsatisfactory and unsatisfactory, respectively.
Despite their disappointing outcomes, the two projects provide important lessons for the
future. The CDSP was the first attempt by the Bank to address the demand side o f
service delivery to the rural poor. As highlightedby the recent Report o f the World Bank
Task Force o n Capacity Development in Africa, effective delivery o f public goods
requires an engaged society as much as i t requires an effective state. Hence, while the
first attempt on the demand side o f service delivery and capacity development failed,
better mechanisms to realize beneficiary and community participation need to be found.
Similarly, while the APCBP did not work as expected, institutional issues in agriculture,
particularly in relation to the extension service, land reform, marketing and pricing
policy, financial management, efficiency o f expenditures and restructuring remain. Other
ways than central ministry-centered capacity development has to be found in the future.
43.

Bank support in the education and health sectors fared much better and helped
bring about important improvements. Bank assistance through the Second Education
Sector Development Project contributed to improvements in primary, secondary and

technical/vocational education. Net primary enrolment rates improved from about 65
percent in 1998 to 85 percent in 2002, and participation in secondary school has also
increased. In technical and vocational education the project financed studies to support a
restructuring o f the system towards a more demand-driven approach. Although
significant improvements in health services and health indicators are yet to materialize,
the IDA-supported Phase IHealth Sector Reform Project contributed to the formulation
o f a sector-wide approach, performance-based multi-year plans and budgets linked to
sector priorities, improvements in financial management and procurement systems, and
scaling up o f Lesotho's response to H I V / A I D S through a multi-sector effort.
44.

CAS activities in support of regional integration and employment creation, on
balance, resulted in less than satisfactory outcomes. While integration into the regional
and global economy largely consisted o f attracting FDI into the garment industry, with
considerable success, Lesotho's efforts to improve external competitiveness were not as

successful. Labor productivity remained l o w relative to wage levels, and the impact o f
infrastructural bottlenecks (especially the integration o f the rail network with South
Africa's) o n the cost o f doing business further exacerbated the problem.
14

Several projects implemented during the CAS period focused on capacity
building and institutional strengthening as cross-cutting issues, resulting in some
measures of success. For example, capacity issues were addressed in the education

45,

sector through distance learning for teachers, training o f school advisory committees,
management committees and secondary school boards, and through the preparation o f a
public expenditure review (PER) and a medium-term expenditure framework (MTEF) at
the ministry level. Consequently, the performance o f school financial management
systems and monitoring have all improved. Central ministry-focused capacity building
was also reasonably successful in health, despite serious problems in the health sector in
the past. Notable achievements at the close o f the Health Sector Reform Project were:
capacity to coordinate and monitor the reform program by the Directorate o f Planning;
preparation o f an MTEF; improvement in financial management and information
systems; and development o f a 5-year strategic plan for monitoring and evaluation, with
quarterly activity monitoring and annual joint reviews.
ii.

Lessons from OED Evaluations and Client Surveys

The Operations Evaluation Department (OED) undertook a Country Assistance
46.
Evaluation in 2001 arid noted several weaknesses in the implementation of the CAS.

OED noted that the Bank’s assistance in the 1990s had evolved from an emphasis on
stabilization and growth, to a focus on poverty reduction and private sector development,
but that planned analytical work was only partially implemented, l i n k s between analytical
work and lending were weak, and that there had been no public expenditure reviews. O f
the five planned AAA program activities, only two (the Financial Sector Review and the
Private Sector Development Study) were completed. OED rated Bank assistance overall
to be moderately unsatisfactory, institutional development modest, and sustainability
uncertain. I t considered doubthl whether the Bank’s analytical work had helped shaped
policy and interventions in Lesotho.

47.
The Bank responded actively to the recommendations o f the OED evaluation,
demonstrating flexibility. I t launched a new utilities reform project shortly thereafter,
which has delivered tangible results. In the electricity sector, access has more than
doubled, growing from 5 to 11 percent between 2000 and 2005. In the
telecommunication sector, telephone density has also increased significantly, from 14,000
subscribers in 2000 to 240,000 in 2005. The aggregate telephone density increased from
1 to 10 percent between 2000 and 2005, with a high ratio o f mobile to fixed-line
subscriptions (5: 1). The number o f telecenters doubled, reaching 1,200 in 2004, thus
providing additional access to end-users. Similarly, while absent in the 1998 CAS, the
Bank responded to the HIV/AIDS pandemic in 2001 by including a major HIV/AIDS
component in the health project.
48.
A client survey was conducted in Lesotho in August 2005. Government, the
private sector, c i v i l society, the local donor community, and Bank staff participated. The
results showed that stakeholders were quite interested in the Bank’s knowledge and
advice, as well as in the Bank’s financial resources. The respondents valued the Bank’s
straightforwardness and consistency o f message. The results support an increasing role
for the Bank to generate and disseminate knowledge that i s relevant, responsive, and
15

timely. The respondents expressed a desire that the Bank focus on poverty reduction,
followed by job creation, government effectiveness, infrastructure, and PSD.
Inhigh priority areas o f poverty reduction, strengthening the private sector, and
49.
agriculture, the Bank’s effectiveness was seen fairly l o w compared to other ratings. The
survey results suggest that the Bank should reassess the work i t i s doing in these areas
and demonstrate results on the ground. There was considerable frustration in not being
able to deal with issues o n the ground as opposed to headquarters, and stakeholders
would l i k e the Bank to do a better j o b communicating in terms o f projects, programs, and
analytic work. This provides an opportunity for the Bank to develop a communication
strategy that conveys how its programs are linked to the development priorities o f the
country. A recently established Development Information Center at the National
University o f Lesotho and the Development Dialogue series will go a long way towards
this objective.

iii.

Portfolio Management

Lesotho’s IDA portfolio consists o f seven active projects with total net
50.
commitments o f US$120.2 million, o f which US$69 million i s currently undisbursed (for
a fuller assessment see the CASCR, Annex 2). The quality o f the portfolio has improved
as the number o f problem projects has been o n a downward trend. However, the
portfolio is still plagued with slow disbursement rates and long project preparation
periods (3-5 years), delays in meeting effectiveness deadlines, and frequent extension o f
closing dates.

B.

Partnership and Consultations on the CAS

5 1.
The Bank undertook recently a review of alignment and harmonization of
development assistance in Lesotho. W h i l e the recommendations o f the review, such as

joint reviews and missions, regular meetings o f the Government and development
partners, movement towards sector-wide programs, and joint analytical work, are
currently being implemented, more remains to be done. Looking ahead, the focus will be
placed o n more upstream collaboration o n assistance strategies with bilateral donors, the
African Development Bank (AfDB), the EU, and the United Nations (UN) system,
greater harmonization o f procedures, carrying out joint analytic work in k e y areas o f
poverty, decentralization, and service delivery, and the use o f sector-wide programs in
health, education, and transport. Annex 4 shows areas where development partners are
currently providing support to Lesotho. The Bank will also continue to collaborate
closely with the International Monetary Fund (IMF), which conducts regular monitoring
missions, and increasingly with the International Finance Corporation (IFC), following
the example o f the health sector.
Similarly, the PRS provides the basis for donor harmonization and alignment with
52.
country systems. Some mechanisms are already in place to harmonize development
assistance at the sector level. For example, there i s an expanded UN Theme Group o n
HIV/AIDS, jointly chaired by a UN agency and a bilateral development partner on a
rotating basis. Donors meet bi-monthly and have recently instituted regular meetings

16

with the Minister o f Finance. However, critical aspects o f development assistance
commitments, disbursements, and monitoring are not yet in sync with the government
budget cycle. The Government’s capacity to lead and coordinate development assistance
will also require strengthening. The U N D P has agreed to take the lead in supporting
Government in this respect, with assistance from the Bank and other development
partners.
This CAS has been prepared through aprocess of extensive and broad-based
consultations conducted during and after the production of Lesotho’s PRS.
Consultations were carried out during a Country Portfolio Performance Review (CPPR)
held in April 2005 and led by the Government, a PSD forum, also in April 2005, a client
survey conducted in August 2005, and a CAS retreat held in September 2005. Further
consultations o n the draft CAS were held with the Government, c i v i l society, NGOs,
development partners, and the private sector. These was a strong consensus o n
development challenges and priorities among various stakeholder groups, while it was
commonly agreed that actual implementation o f policies, programs, and projects will
determine h o w successfully they will be met.

53.

C.

Proposed Assistance Strategy

The experiences and lessons learned in implementing the 1998 CAS and the
54.
various consultations o n the new CAS suggest a number o f considerations to be taken
into account in the Bank’s support to Lesotho in the coming years:
0

0

0

The alarming progression of HIV/AIDSprevalence needs to be addressed as a
matter of highestpriority. All IDA-supported undertakings in Lesotho - projects,
programs, and, where appropriate, AAA - should henceforth include a significant
HIV/AIDS component. In addition, free-standing technical support would seem
warranted to help ensure Lesotho’s access to substantial grant finance available
globally. A regional H I V / A I D S program will support peer learning.
Stronger growth and job creation are required to make significant inroads in
reducing poverty and inequality. A focused emphasis on competitiveness through
institutional reforms, skills development and a much more conducive environment for
private business, investment, and exports injob-creating sectors i s warranted,
including further regional integration and economic diversification. A thriving and
regionally competitive private sector i s essential for high economic growth and
employment creation.
Full exploitation of the productive and job-generating potential of the rural
economy is critical in reaching a larger share of Lesotho’s poor and underemployed. This requires a strengthened focus o n addressing the inadequate economic
and social integration o f Lesotho’s rural and mountainous areas in terms o f improved
infrastructure, access to public services, and provision o f administrative and technical
support for subsistence production. The strategy would also promote commercial
agriculture where market opportunities exist (such as in horticulture, apple and cherry
trees) through establishing linkages with the South African producers and buyers, and

17

would assist in the development o f new, more market-oriented activities such as
tourism.
Improved and more client-focused public service delivery in education, health care,
and other areas is of critical importance to achieve progress in human development
and the growth and jobs agenda. Emphasis o n governance, public sector
management, and financial accountability are a continuing priority. Building on
existing initiatives and enhancing regional collaboration in service delivery will be
part o f the solution.
Mainstreaming capacity building in the Bank program, with all projects including
specific elements to build the capacity of local officials to undertake their
responsibilities, will strengthen implementation.
Improved ability to monitor and evaluate the effectiveness of policies, programs,
and projects, including joint donor support to strengthen the Government’s capacity
to gather and analyze data, i s o f critical importance.
Donor harmonization in earnest and use of instruments of aid delivery that are
conducive to capacity development, including joint analytic work, SWAPS,
programmatic assistance, and phasing out o f project implementation units, will go a
long way to improve aid effectiveness, sustainability, and portfolio performance.

55.
Looking ahead, the Bank’s comparative advantage in Lesotho lies in i t s analytical
strength and convening powers, combined with development finance and i t s ability to
leverage other development partners. The Bank’s credibility - both as a financial partner
and center o f knowledge - remains solid. It can hence play an important role in
addressing the critical growth and poverty issues facing Lesotho, as well as in tackling
key challenges in public service delivery, capacity development, and ensuring appropriate
monitoring and evaluation o f results.

56.
Flexibility and selectivity, as demonstrated during the previous CAS cycle, i s
critical and will be achieved through use o f a results framework that sets out desired
outcomes and defines key intermediate indicators. The results framework provides
flexibility to respond to changing circumstances and evolving demands for analytical and
financial services, and this CAS proposes not to f i x a predefined mix o f instruments and
sectors, even if tentative outlines are ventured. Rather, new activities would be assessed
according to their potential for achieving the outcomes sought. By ensuring better
monitoring o f progress towards these outcomes and their intermediate indicators, a welldefined results framework will also allow earlier identification o f issues, better-informed
decisions, and pro-active corrections and problem solving.
Although not a blueprint, the resultsframework provides strong strategic
57.
directions, while leaving sufficient flexibility to respond to evolving country priorities
and adequate scopefor dialogue to appropriately design future project and program
lending as well as analytic work. Prepared in close consultation with Government, c i v i l

18

society, the private sector, bilateral and multilateral development partners, and other
stakeholders in Lesotho, the CAS will be implemented in collaboration with these
partners with a view to minimize overlap and duplication, strengthen synergy, and
optimize the leverage and use o f Bank resources. W e expect to achieve the following
four strategic objectives and CAS outcomes. They are fblly consistent with the three
PRS pillars discussed above, while one o f the cross-cutting themes in the PRS, the fight
against HIV/AIDS, i s elevated as IDA’Sfirst strategic objective.

Strategic Objective 1: Fighting H I V I A I D S pandemic (CAS outcome 1)

At 24 percent, Lesotho has one o f the highest adult H I V / A I D S prevalence rates in
58.
the world, much higher than the 7.5 percent for sub-Saharan Africa overall. The
epidemic has already had a profound effect in Lesotho, posing significant - and, if
unchecked, disastrous - development challenges to the country. In retrospect, both
government development plans and the Bank’s 1998 CAS attached too little attention to
this enormous challenge. A s said earlier, this CAS singles out the H I V / A I D S pandemic
from the cross cutting themes in the Government’s PRS as i t s top priority. A significant
H I V / A I D S component will be included in all future Bank projects and programs in
Lesotho. To avoid duplication o f effort, this will be done in close collaboration with the
National AIDS Commission (NAC). The focus will be o n results o n the ground and less
o n inputs, legislation, and processes.

59.
The Bank will continue technical assistance through the H I V / A I D S Capacity
Building Project (similar in objectives and structure to the Bank’s Multi-Country
HIV/AIDS Program [MAP] projects elsewhere in the Africa Region) to enhance the
capacity o f the N A C to plan, coordinate, implement and monitor national plans and to
help the Government access substantial grant resources from the Global Fund and others,
including filling in the gaps in monitoring and evaluation. The Bank will also enhance
collaboration with neighboring countries through grant financing for training and
exchange o f information and ideas.
Strategic Objective 2: Sustainable Pro-Poor Growth and Job Creation

60.
Following the fading growth impetus from LHWP and dwindling remittances,
growth has recovered in the past few years thanks to the expansion o f FDI-driven
exports. Lesotho, however, i s faced with the dual and urgent challenge o f developing
new growth areas and employment opportunities. T o help address this challenge, the
CAS supports Pillar 1 o f the PRS and will focus i t s support o n three areas: (i)
creation o f
an enabling environment for private sector development, exports, and investment (foreign
and domestic); (ii)
exploitation o f growth potential in the rural economy and improving
access to infrastructure and basic services; and (iii)
ensuring sustainable use o f natural
resources and the environment.
Creation of an Enabling Environment for Private Sector Development and
61.
Investments (CAS outcome 2.1). The private sector i s constrained by a weak business
environment and inadequate institutional support. More recently, changes in preferential
trading arrangements have eroded some o f the competitive advantages experienced by the

19

largely FDI-driven garment export sector. The CAS proposes to support government
efforts to address demand-side as well as supply-side constraints to export-oriented
growth led by the private sector. The former will be pursued through trade policy
dialogue with the Government and other stakeholders o n improving the S A C U
Agreement, maintaining trade preferences under AGOA, and completing an EPA with
the EU to improve access to the EU market.

63.
Behind-the-border issues such as costly transportation, excessive business
regulation, time-consuming border and customs handling, and lack o f skills will be
addressed through a Private Sector Competitiveness Project (PSCP), in FY07. The key
objective o f the project is to create an environment for increased private sector
participation in the economy by enhancing i t s productivity, and hence i t s ability to
compete. This goal will be achieved by improving the business environment and reducing
the costs o f doing business; strengthening the linkages with the regional economy,
especially with South Africa; strengtheninginstitutional support for employable skills
and business management; improving productivity at the firm level; and supporting
industry-specific programs (in tourism, horticulture and garment industries) aiming at
facilitation o f forward and backward market linkages and industry-relevant skills
development programs. In addition, analytic and grant support will be provided to the
legal and judicial system, including the prosecution authority, anti-corruption
commission, and the High Court.
64.
Exploitation of Growth Potential in the Rural Economy and Improving
Infrastructure and Access to Basic Services (CAS outcome 2.2). Access to basic
infrastructure such as roads, water, sanitation, energy and I C T for growth and economic
development in Lesotho is limited. Even the preliminary estimates provided in the PRS
indicate that resource requirements for this sector are beyond the means o f the
Government, and it will need to look to partnerships with the private sector to meet
financing needs as well as improved management. The Bank’s focus in this CAS is o n the
iura1 space, addressing capacity and institutional constraints and empowering
communities for improved service delivery and agricultural performance. In addition to
existing support under the Water Sector Improvement Project APL (WSIP) and the
Lesotho Utilities Reform Project (LURP), new financing under this CAS will focus o n
transport and roads, with the aim to link and integrate the currently under-serviced rural
regions with the rest o f the economy. The Integrated Transport Project (ITP), co-financed
with the EU and to be presented to the Board in FY07, will support institutional reforms
to improve management o f roads and provide funding for rural access roads
(rehabilitation o f existing ones and construction o f new ones), as well as for a few critical
bridge connections.
In addition to the opening up o f the eastern corridor for economic activity through
65.
the ITP, providing social infrastructure through ongoing education and health projects,
and promoting tourism and horticulture through closer collaboration with South African
partners through the PSCP, the Poverty Reduction Support Credit (PRSC), proposed for
FY08, will have a focus on decentralization and o n key reforms in land policy and the
provision o f water infrastructure. This will be pursued on a community-demand-driven
basis for both domestic and agricultural purposes. The PRSC will be preceded by joint
20

analytic work in FY07 with the EU and the United Kingdom’s Department for
International Development (DFID) o n these issues.
Ensure Improvement in and Sustainable Use of Natural Resources and the
66.
Environment (CAS outcome 2.3). Through GEF financing, the Bank is supporting the

Maloti-Drakensburg Trans-Frontier Conservation Project (MDTCP), which i s piloting a
number o f initiatives, including institutional strengthening and community-based
management o f natural resources. I t i s envisaged that a new GEF project will be
developed (FY08) to scale up some o f the interventions o f the MDTCP, with a particular
focus o n sustainable land management and community woodlots to improve vegetative
cover and provide sources o f h e 1 for domestic use in rural areas. In addition, the Bank
will support measures aimed at improving the sustainability o f water resource
management and improving the Government’s capacity to implement and enforce the
Environmental A c t o f 2001.
Strategic Objective 3: Improve Human Development Outcomes

As described in paragraphs 7 through 9, Lesotho i s faced with poor education,
67.
health and nutrition outcomes. There have been positive developments in the education
sector, however, the quality o f education and management o f the sector continue to pose
problems. The health status o f the population appears to have declined over the past
decade - average l i f e expectancy at birth has declined, and infant mortality, under-five
child mortality, and maternal mortality rates are high. Morbidity and mortality from
communicable diseases have increased in recent years as well. The HIV/AIDS pandemic
has obviously contributed to these negative trends, but there i s also an overall sense that
the quality o f health services has declined. The Bank will continue to support Pillar 2 o f
the PRS through interventions in the education and health sectors, including both analytic
and project work.
Improve Health Status of the Population (CAS outcome 3.1). The Bank will
68.
support health sector reforms through the HSRP Phase I1(approved FY06), which will
develop health financing policies and reforms to increase the efficiency o f public
expenditures, explore ways to improve equity, and design mechanisms for more effective
delivery o f health services at district levels and below. Mechanisms for the SWAP have
been developed and efforts will be made to deepen the approach using country systems.
The main financing agencies, including the Bank, are the AfDB, Development
Cooperation o f Ireland (DCI), and UN agencies, such as the World Health Organization
(WHO), the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) and the United Nations
Population Fund (UNFPA).

69.
Improve Quality of Education (CAS outcome 3.2). Despite improvements in
several education indicators, issues o f coverage, student flow indicators, quality o f
education, service delivery, and educational outcomes and management capacity s t i l l
need considerable attention. The overall long-term and strategic goal i s to provide
Lesotho with the requisite manpower for development. The Bank has supported the
education sector since 1975, and Lesotho has made progress on most o f the quantitative
measures o f coverage. In addition to Bank support through the ongoing Education Sector

21

Development Project Phase I1(approved FY04), Lesotho has been allocated funding from
the Catalytic Fund o f the EFA Fast Track Initiative administered by the World Bank.
This support, U S $7.2 million in 2006, and U S $4.7 million in 2007, i s aimed at filling
the financing gap in the primary education sub-sector.
Strategic Objective 4: Decentralization, Service Delivery, and Monitoring & Evaluation
Decentralization and Empowerment of Local Communities (CAS outcome 4.1).
70.
The Government i s committed to ensuring participation o f communities in governance
and the development process with the election o f district and local councils. Roles and
responsibilities o f different local authorities as well as administrative arrangements and
relations between the central and local governments are yet to emerge. The Bank has not
fully engaged in the process, but intends to provide future support through a PRSC
(FYOS) to facilitate the decentralization process.

The PRSC will have a dual focus on: (i)
improvements in the management
71.
decentralization and
capacity o f public resources at all levels o f governance; and (ii)
empowerment o f local communities for improved service delivery and accountability.
The focus at the national level will be o n improvements in the budget process and
medium-term expenditure framework, as well as financial management, public
procurement, c i v i l service reform, and monitoring and evaluation, in collaboration with
the DFID, UNDP, and other development partners. Decentralization support will:
complement efforts by the Gesellschafi fur Technische Zusammenarbeit (German
technical cooperation, GTZ) to establish an inter-governmental fiscal architecture;
provide support to a district development h d ; promote local government capacity and
incentives for service delivery in rural areas; promote community and user empowerment
through information dissemination and other social accountability tools, such as citizen
report cards; and support the Government’s strategy to promote employment creation in
rural areas. The expected outcomes will be: (i)
improved budget preparation and
execution; (ii)
increased resource flow to the districts; (iii)
improved social and
agricultural service delivery overall; (iv) improved accountability o f local governments;
and (v) improved monitoring o f the PRS.
D.

Bank Group Instruments

72.
The Bank will rely o n a mix o f analytical work, lending products and capacity
building initiatives to achieve the results identified in this CAS. Capacity building will
continue to be mainstreamed in the program, and all projects to be supported will have
specific elements to build the capacity o f local officials to undertake their responsibilities.
Analytical Work: The Bank will continue to invest in high-quality analytic work
73.
in collaboration with other development partners, including the EU, UNDP, GTZ, DCI,
and DFID, with increased attention to client demand and measurement o f impact. Putting
forward critical reform issues and more effective dissemination are also o n the AAA
agenda. With a strong focus o n capacity building and outcomes, analytical work will
increasingly provide the underpinnings for Bank operations and policy dialogue with the
Government. In addition to the core areas o f public expenditure, financial management,

22

and poverty monitoring, the Bank will undertake sector work on decentralization, service
delivery, poverty (including social and gender assessment), and HIV/AIDS. As part o f
the monitoring o f CAS outcomes, task teams will systematically document how specific
AAA products contribute to achieving CAS outcomes (Table 3)
Outreach and Communication will continue to be proactively pursued from the
74.
Bank’s Liaison Office in Maseru and the Country Office in Pretoria. The newly
established Development Information Centre will serve as a focal point, and the
Development Dialogue Series will continue to be an important vehicle for the discussion
o f development issues central to Lesotho.

75.
Financial Products: In addition to existing adaptable program loans and other
investment operations, IDA lending will focus increasingly o n programmatic support and
SWAps. As mentioned above, institutional and administrative dimensions will receive
greater focus, as successful reform often hinges o n institutional bottlenecks. The Bank
intends to provide budgetary support to Lesotho beginning in late FY08 (early calendar
year 2008), to correspond with Lesotho’s fiscal year. This will necessarily depend o n the
detailed assessment o f public sector systems to be completed during the 2-year
preparatory period. Preparatory work began this year with the carrying out o f the Public
Expenditure Management and Financial Accountability Review (PEMFAR). This report
has identified k e y areas o f public financial management (PFM) that need improvement,
and the Government has adopted a comprehensive PFM reform plan supported by
donors. Pilot medium-term expenditure frameworks (MTEFs) are being camed out in six
ministries, as w e l l as other aspects o f an improved PFM system.
76.
Also contributing to the partial transition to budget support are other ESW tasks
proposed for the CAS period. The upcoming Poverty Assessment, the Service Delivery
work, and the Country Procurement Assessment Report (CPAR) will all help to identify
bottlenecks and t o improve country expenditures and services. This, combined with
concerted donor involvement in public sector reform and SWAPS, should enable a PRSC
to be presented in FY08. Inturn, the preparation o f the PRSC i t s e l f will further
contribute to the strengthening o f Lesotho’s fiduciary systems, as well as to the
promotion o f the harmonization agenda through a greater alignment with government
systems. Once the PRSC is on stream, i t is expected that increasingly, sector programs
will become part o f the PRSC series. In case w e do not have the PRSC, then we will
proceed with the APWSWAp approach till such time that a PRSC can be prepared.
I F C is advising the Government of Lesotho on the structure and
implementation of a Public Private Partnership (PPP)for the replacement of the
Queen Elizabeth 11hospital. This project, undertaken in cooperation with the Bank’s

77.

ongoing health sector reform program, will include the following elements: (i)
a technical
options study for the replacement o f the existing hospital; (ii)
design and implementation
o f a PPP framework with the Ministry o f Finance; (iii)
scoping and design o f SME
linkages for the new hospital and related health services; (iv) scoping and design o f a
health professionals training program for new hospital; and (v) tendering for a private
sector partner to design, build and operate the replacement hospital. The Hospital PPP
project will support the sector reform program by strengthening and increasing access to

23

health services (CAS outcome 3.3); i t s related components for SME development and
health professionals training are designed to provide concrete results injob creation
through private sector development (CAS outcome 1.1) and addressing the need for a
larger pool o f qualified health care professionals. LFC’s focus in Lesotho will be on
improving the overall investment climate through designing and implementing programs
jointly with the World Bank.

E.

IDA Financing FYO6-09

78.

Based on the results framework defined above, the Bank’s proposed financial
support to the Government o f Lesotho i s summarized in Table 2 below, including an
indicative lending program. The IDA allocation for FY06 i s US$15.6 million (limited
frontloading i s possible), o f which US$7 million i s provided on a grant basis. The
indicative amount for FY07-08 i s US$31.3 million, o f which US$13.9 million would be
provided on a grant basis. Actual allocations for FY07-08 will depend on: (i)
the
country’s performance as assessed annually by the Country Policy and Institutional
Assessment (CPIA) and the Bank’s Annual Report on Portfolio Performance; (ii)
its
performance relative to the performance o f other IDA countries; (iii)
the amount o f
overall resources available to IDA; (iv) changes in the l i s t o f active IDA-eligible
countries; and (v) the terms (grants or loans) for which Lesotho qualifies under the
I D A 1 4 debt sustainability framework. The allocation for FY09 will also be influenced by
these factors, as well as the volume o f resources available for the IDA15 period (FY0911). I t i s anticipated that Lesotho will utilize i t s IDA allocations in their entirety during
the CAS period, provided that the implementation o f the PRS remains broadly o n track.

An indicative analytical and advisory work program for FY06-09 i s shown in
79.
Table 3. I t i s funded from the Bank’s own resources and co-financed by development
partners and the Government.
FY06
Health Sector Reform
Project Phase I1

FY07

FYOS

FY09

Private Sector
Competitiveness
Project

Poverty Reduction
Support Credit I

Poverty Reduction
Support Credit 11*

Integrated Transport
Project

Community-based
Environment and
Natural Resource
Management (GEF)
Project

Technical Assistance
Project for H I V i A I D S

Education APLlSWAp
Under preparation:
Health APL/SWAp
Water APL/SWAu
determined by IDA15

* When the country i s ready for budgetary support, increasingly, sector programs w i l l be subsumed in
the PRSC series.
24

I Table 3. Indicative Analytical and Advisory Work Agenda FY06-09
Accountability Review
Reform

80.
The CPIA rates the quality o f a country’s present policy and institutional
framework and plays a k e y role in the Bank’s allocation o f IDA resources among IDA
recipients. Along with the performance o f the portfolio, the CPIA ratings play a major
role in determining the volume o f IDA flows a country receives every year. Countries
are evaluated according to 16 criteria, grouped into four policy areas: (i)
economic
management, (ii)
structural policies, (iii)
policies for social inclusion and equity, and (iv)
public sector management and institutions. These criteria are re-examined periodically
and adjustments are made in line with lessons from cross-country experience and
research findings. Based on the current assessment, Lesotho’s perfonnance i s
comparable to the average IDA recipient. In order to move to a higher level o f IDA
support, the Government would need to take actions that would lead to an increase in the
CPIA ratings. Table 4 presents a number o f areas where the implementation o f reforms
and results on the ground could lead to improvements in Lesotho’s CPIA score.
Improvements in the areas o f social inclusion and equity and public sector management
and institutions are especially important in terms o f delivering services to the country’s
population. These governance areas are also emphasized in the allocation o f IDA
resources.

25

Table 4. CPIA: Areas for Improvement
Structural Policies

Improve the business regulatory environment by:
(a) Streamlining and simplifying procedures for new business entrants;
(b) Updating the Investment and Company Laws

Policiesfor Social
Inclusion and Equity

(a) Passage o f the Married Person’s Equality Bill, 2000;
(b) Finalization and implementation o f the National Gender and
Development Policy

Public Sector
Management and
Institutions

(a) Strengthening budget links t o policy priorities and poverty reduction
strategy;
(b) Improving public financial management and fiscal reporting;
(c) Improving transparency o f poverty expenditures, including tracking
expenditures by function;
(d) Improving efficiency o f procurement planning and execution;
(e) Deepening the decentralization process.

Podfolio Performance

(a) Zero projects with unsatisfactory Implementation Performance and
Development Objective ratings;
(b) Satisfactorv comuliance with urocurement urocedures.

F. Country Financing Parameters

8 1.
A s mentioned above, the Bank i s carrying out a PEMFAR, which i s being
finalized. The draft report concluded that Lesotho has made some progress in budget
preparation and transparency. However, budget execution, accounting, reporting, audit
and external oversight require significant improvement to develop into a credible PFM
system.

T o address PFM weaknesses, the government has adopted a comprehensive PFM
82.
reform plan supported by key donors. It l i n k s the reform o f all elements o f the PFM
system around a common analytical framework and strategy and provides the basis
around which all donor support can be coordinated. It integrates medium t e r m planning
and annual budgeting procedures into an MTEF. The MTEF has been piloted in six
ministries. These pilot ministries have developed detailed Budget Framework Papers as
an input into the setting o f budget ceilings. The PFM will be strengthened through: (i)
the development and implementation o f an Integrated Financial Management Information
System (IFMIS) to manage, control and monitor the financial performance o f the budget;
(ii)
the establishment o f Management Information Systems in line ministries to monitor
the achievement o f physical performance targets and commitment o f resources; (iii)
strengthened internal controls and internal audit capacity to ensure public resources are
used for the intended purposes; and (iv) reform o f public procurement processes to
enhance value-for-money. The legislature’s oversight o f the executive’s custody o f
public finances i s also included in the P F M reform program through strengthening the
capacity o f the Public Accounts Committee (PAC) o f the National Assembly and that o f
an independent Auditor General’s office.
26

83.
The government and i t s development partners are engaged in efforts to harmonize
aid procedures to support national development programs, to align them with the national
budget planning and implementation processes, and to prepare the ground for increased
SWAps and programmatic lending. This has come at a time when the impact o f
traditionally designed IDA projects has sometimes been constrained due to limitations on
the Government’s ability to meet satisfactorily i t s commitments in terms o f counterpart
contributions to local expenditures such as operating costs, taxes, etc. In the meantime,
in line with the agreements reached with the government during the 2005 CPPR, the
Bank will continue to mainstream project implementation within l i n e ministries as part o f
capacity strengthening o f government structures.

84.
Country financing parameters pursuant to OP 6.00, Bank Financing, have been
developed. The new framework will allow the Bank to finance expenditures needed to
meet the development objectives o f the operations it supports, within an overall
framework that addresses risks to fiscal sustainability and the appropriate use o f Bank
resources. The parameters are welcomed by the Government o f Lesotho. Annex 5
provides further detail.
Under the new parameters, the Bank would have greater flexibility in financing
85.
taxes and duties. The Bank’s share o f total expenditure may increase marginally, but this
is expected to be offset over time by greater use o f SWAps, where Bank cost sharing i s
typically lower than average.

G. Monitoring Results and Evaluation Impacts of the CAS
Data generation, monitoring and impact evaluation i s an area where much
progress and significant further efforts are required to enable Lesotho and its
development partners to gain an informed view o f the level o f accomplishment and
challenges s t i l l ahead. Although country ownership o f the PRS is strong and the need to
track progress o n agreed results is generally accepted, the country lacks a national
monitoring and evaluation system that will enable the Government to report o n progress
and manage results. During the preparation o f the PRS, Lesotho undertook the
preparation o f a National Monitoring and Evaluation Master Plan with the objectives o f
guiding the future design, implementation and continuing analysis o f poverty reduction
strategies, ensuring not only accountability, responsiveness and transparency in the
allocation o f resources but also maximum impact o n poverty reduction. The Bank will
support the Government’s efforts to establish a national M&E system through the
ongoing PRSP Trust Fund for Capacity Building and Strengtheningthe PRS Secretariat.12
The system will: provide stakeholders with up-to-date, reliable data, based o n specific,
measurable, time-bound indicators; help establish structures that can support and sustain
the envisaged M&E; and track inputs into the system, as well as related outputs and
outcomes.

86.

12

With the restructuring o f the Ministry o f Finance and Development Planning, the PRS Secretariat has
been merged within the reorganized departments in the Ministry. However, capacity building efforts under
the Trust Fund are directed at a l l those involved in the PRS process f r o m the Ministry.

27

87.

In addition, Lesotho has been participating in a regional program to strengthen
statistical capacity through the General Data Dissemination System (GDDS), which i s
implemented jointly by the IMF and the World Bank. As a result o f this project, Lesotho
i s now a fbll participant in the GDDS, with reasonably up-to-date meta-data covering
national accounts, balance o f payments, money and banking statistics, government
finance statistics, and some data o n poverty, education, health and population. Both the
IMF and the World Bank have provided short-term technical assistance to help Lesotho
implement specific plans to improve the coverage and quality o f statistics in these areas.

88.
Lesotho will also receive technical assistance to review the poverty data generated
from the 2002/03 household budget survey and to finalize the work o n national accounts.
Further support from the Bank’s Trust Fund for Statistical Capacity Building is envisaged
in FY07 to help strengthen coordination and management o f national statistics.
Monitoring the PRS will form the basis for monitoring the CAS as well. Until
PRS monitoring i s in place, performance o f the CAS will be reviewed annually and at
midterm using the outcomes identified in the Results Matrix (Annex 1). Annual country
program reviews in collaboration with the Government will assess the implementation o f
the portfolio. The reviews will serve as input into the mid-term review which will
eventually determine whether the program i s on course or requires modification. A
completion report will be prepared at the end o f the four-year period to assess the overall
impact o f the program o n the development agenda o f Lesotho.
89.

V.

MANAGING R I S K S

Lesotho faces several risks in achieving i t s development objectives. The largest
90.
risk i s that there is not sufficient capacity or engagement to implement the program.
Such problems affected implementation o f the previous CAS, particularly during i t s
earlier phase. T o address the problems experienced in the 1990s, the Bank has made
several k e y changes. Most importantly, the Bank’s presence in Lesotho has been
significantly strengthened, with senior staff resident in the capital. In addition, the
decentralization o f Bank country management and sector staff to South Africa has made a
major contribution to improved implementation. The Bank’s improved capacity for both
dialogue and program monitoring has shown results in terms o f resolving implementation
issues and focusing effort, as w e l l as in the collaborative effort in the development o f the
PRS and t h i s CAS. Indeed, the preparation o f the PRS showed both the Government’s
capacity to conceptualize and prioritize a clear program and its commitment to the
development agenda. The country team believes that this combination o f factors -this
CAS’S focus on results, the establishment o f the PRS’s framework for development, and
the Bank’s presence o n the ground - will all encourage earlier identification o f issues,
better informed decisions, and pro-active corrections and problem solving.
Lesotho and the Bank also face several important external risks to the
91.
achievement o f the CAS objectives. Thefirst o f these risks i s the effect o f the erosion o f
trade preferences stemming from the phasing out o f the quotas under the Agreement on
Textiles and Clothing that i s hurting the garment sector - a k e y driver o f growth in
Lesotho. This, combined with lack o f appropriate skills and l o w productivity, pose a

28

significant threat to Lesotho's growth prospects. This risk i s being mitigated by the
adoption o f a new PSD strategy aimed at improving the business climate, logistics and
infrastructure, and competitiveness.

The second r i s k is that Government commitment to reform will not be translated
92.
into action in a timely manner due to weak institutional capacity at both the central and
local levels. W h i l e local government elections were held in April 2005, and local
councils have been established, lack o f an enabling fiscal framework and administrative
capacity limit the implementation o f plans and strategies. To address this risk, the
Government i s working in partnershipwith the Bank and i t s other development partners
to implement its public sector reform and program to strengthen public service delivery
based o n decentralization o f service provision, improved public finance management, and
c i v i l service reform.

93.

The third risk is associated with the impact o f the H I V / A I D S pandemic o n the
economic and social fabric o f Lesotho. Lesotho will face a tremendous loss o f
productive capacity, initially through increased absences from work, and subsequently
through premature deaths o f productive members o f the workforce. National resources
will be diverted to caring for the sick, at both the household and government level. This
will negatively affect savings and investment, leading to a slower rate o f economic
growth. Recognizing that i t s previous efforts to address the H I V / A I D S pandemic have
been hampered by institutional weaknesses, the'Government, with support from the Bank
under the HIV and A I D S Capacity Building and Technical Assistance Project, i s
strengthening the capacity in the public and private sectors to enable better use o f
available resources, including from the Global Fund, to respond to the pandemic. Recent
initiatives, including the adoption o f a new policy framework (Scaling up the Fight
Against HIV/AIDS), a nationwide voluntary testing campaign, the opening o f new
voluntary counseling and testing centers, and the provision o f ARVs at certain centers are
also expected to reverse the current trends. In this CAS, the Bank is mher stepping up
the fight against H I V / A I D S in all sectors it operates.
Thefourth risk is the potential risks associated with a change in the government's
94.
commitment to economic and social policies and the PRS following the next general
elections, which are scheduled for April 2007. W h i l e Lesotho has had a history o f
political disturbances following general elections, recent political and administrative
changes, including the adoption o f the mixed member proportional system and
decentralization and democratization at the local level should lead to greater acceptance
o f election results. With respect to support for the PRS, the document was prepared in a
highly participatory manner and was subject to an impressive level o f consultation with
representatives o f the parliament, c i v i l society, and the private sector. The level o f
participation has resulted in a high degree o f country ownership, and the policies are
unlikely to substantially change after the elections. The CAS has also been widely
discussed at various levels o f government and c i v i l society to ensure commitment to the
program.

29

1

x
.I
L
c

5!

.L
v)
I

h

k
E

c

3f

W
0

9

c
v)

.
I

4
v)

e

c

E

s

u"
0

s

Q

4
I

ri

X

Ez
4

e

m
m

a

P

c
0

,

d

m

i

m
0
N
C
P
x

s

W
3

0

5

I

vl

E

2
I

E

e

2
.-

0

!
's

w

p.

m

-

Annex 2 L E S O T H O 1998 CAS COMPLETION REPORT
Date o f CAS: M a y 21, 1998
Progress Report: None Required
Period covered by CAS: M a y 1998-June 2000 (Fiscal Years 1998-2000)
Period covered by the present report: M a y 1998-June 2005 (extended period)
C A S Completion Report Completed by: Charles Armor-Frempong, Senior Country Officer

I.

Introduction

1.
This Country Assistance Strategy Completion Report (CASCR) assesses the extent to
which the 1998 Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) for Lesotho achieved i t s intended results and
draws lessons for the new Lesotho CAS. The report i s in five parts: (i)an introduction, which
provides background and summary conclusions, (ii)
a review o f the country’s long-term strategic
goals, which the CAS was intended to support, (iii)
an assessment o f CAS outcomes, (iv) an
assessment o f World Bank performance, and (iv) a summary o f key lessons.
2.
The 1998 C A S was developed before Bank’s focus on managing for results was
articulated. Consequently, the CAS did not identify a set o f specific measurable outcomes
against which results could be evaluated. The assessment o f outcomes i s further limited by the
dearth o f reliable data, particularly for monitoring poverty interventions in Lesotho with respect
to both the C A S and Bank-funded projects. Although the 1998 CAS identified this as an issue, n o
effective mitigation efforts came to fruition, and t o date n o substantial progress has been made to
address the deficiency. Finally, the original CAS was envisioned for FY98-00, but i t s
implementation was extended until 2005, mainly in response to political instability in the country
soon after the program was approved and to delays in preparing the Poverty Reduction Strategy
(PRS). Hence, although the 1998 CAS design envisioned the stated outcomes to be achieved by
FYOO, this report reviews progress achieved during FY98-FY05, Appendix 1 summarizes the key
findings.
3.
An important conclusion of the present evaluation i s that progress made toward
most of the targeted outcomes has been limited. The outcomes o f poverty reduction in rural
areas and the development o f a comprehensive approach t o natural resource and environmental
management are assessed as not achieved. The investment in human development, improved
macro-policy environment, privatization and private sector development, and institutional
capacity building are assessed as only partially achieved. Finally, overall Bank performance
during the period i s evaluated as moderately unsatisfactory.
11.

Lesotho Context and Long-term National Development Goals

Alignment of CAS with Government Strategies

4.
The overall objective o f the 1998 C A S - to support Government of Lesotho (GOL)
efforts to reduce poverty and improve the country’s competitiveness - was defined against a
background o f (i)
declining earnings from migrant mine workers and customs revenue arising
from trade reforms in South A h c a ; (ii)
growing unemployment and income poverty, especially in
rural areas, partly due to retrenchment o f migrant mine workers in South Africa and t o declining
agricultural productivity; and (iii)
the need for Lesotho (a land-locked country wholly dependent
o n South Africa) to integrate into the larger economy o f the sub-region.

5.
T h e objectives and pillars o f the CAS were aligned with Lesotho’s national development
objectives and strategies as reflected in GOL’s main policy documents, including the Sixth
National Development Plan (SNDP) for 1996/97-1998/99 and the 1997 Strategic Economic
Options Report (SEOR). The policy documents centered on two main programs: poverty
reduction and economic integration.
T h e GOL’s poverty reduction program focused on:
improving employment and income opportunities for poor people, including support for
the informal sector, development o f special employment programs, and enhancement o f
the poverty impact o f the Lesotho Highlands Revenue Fund (LHRF);
(ii) improving social services for the poor, including strengthening primary, vocational, and
non-formal education, undertalung health sector reform, and expanding public assistance
(safety net) programs; and
managing
poverty-related environmental degradation, including the development o f rural
(iii)
environmental programs and waste management.

(i)

Integration into the regional and global economy focused on:
(iv)
(v)
(vi)

maintaining external competitiveness;
promoting private sector development; and
building institutional capacity (especially in the public sector) to support these efforts.

6.
Two CAS pillars supported the Government’s program: (i)
poverty reduction through
investment in human resources, and (ii)
support for closer integration into the regional economy.
The CAS proposed a base-case lending scenario o f four credits totaling $50 million: (i)
a Social
Fund Learning and Innovation Credit, (ii)
the Second Education Sector Development Project,
Phase 1 (ESDP), (iii)
the Health Sector Reform Project (HSRP), and (iv) the Maloti-Drakensberg
Transfrontier Biodiversity Conservation Project (MDTBCP), which was funded by the Global
Environment Facility (GEF). The high-case scenario envisaged, in addition to these projects, two
credits: (i)
a Private Sector Development Project, and (ii)
a Water Supply Project. The Utilities
Sector Reform Project (USRP) was added upon the Government’s request, as was the HIV/AIDS
Capacity Building Project (HCBP). The CAS envisaged five pieces o f analytical w o r k ( a Public
Expenditure Review, an Education Review, a Health Review, a Poverty Monitoring Support
System, and a Regional Review o f Labor Market Dynamics. The CAS pillars and their supporting
programs are analyzed for their outcomes in Section I1o f this report.
Political and Macroeconomic Background

7.
National elections were held in M a y 1998, the same month that the CAS was
presented to the Board. The Lesotho Congress for Democracy (LCD) won all but one
parliamentary seat, which led to protests by the opposition, followed by a mutiny by military
officers and general unrest in the country. Troops from Southern African Development
Community (SADC) intervened and calm was subsequently restored. However, a political
stalemate endured until new elections were held in 2002. In addition to the human and economic
loss, the political crisis affected the implementation o f the newly adopted CAS. Essentially,
Lesotho’s agenda during the period was focused on the resolution o f the political crisis, and, in
retrospect, the Bank should have waited before finalizing the CAS.
8.
Notwithstanding the political difficulties, there was no substantial shift in
government policies. Following the 2002 elections, the National Development Goals and the

39

Vision 2020 documents were prepared, and a medium-term PRS was completed in 2004. The
government’s development focus was redefined under the PRS to be (i)rapidly expanding
employment through private-sector-led economic growth; (ii)delivering poverty-targeted
programs that empower poor and vulnerable people; and (iii)deepening democracy and
improving public sector performance.
9.
In general, the macroeconomic policy environment has been conducive for growth.
The G O L pursued an export-led economic growth strategy documented in the Poverty Reduction
and Growth Facility (PRGF) program signed in collaboration with the IMF. Lesotho has
performed relatively well over the past decade, except for 1998 when c i v i l unrest after the
election practically brought the country to a standstill. The country’s Gross Domestic Product
(GDP) grew from 0.2 percent per annum in 1999 to 3.8 percent in 2002, but slumped slightly to
3.3 percent in 2003. Gross National Income (GNI) growth has averaged 0.8 percent per annum
over the same period. The export-led growth has mostly taken place as a result o f the United
States’ A h c a Growth and Opportunities Act (AGOA), which encouraged significant and rapid
growth in the textile manufacturing sub-sector. Exports to the United States more than
quadrupled, from $100 million in 1998 to $450 million in 2004, and employment in the sector
jumped from 26,000 in 2000 to 50,000 in 2004.
10.
Although Lesotho’s real annual average GDP growth since 1980 has been 3.4
percent, a series o f poverty mapping exercises carried out in 1990,1993, and 1999 confirms
that this growth has not reduced poverty. The number o f ultra poor households (defined as
those living at or below half the level o f the national poverty line) increased from 35 percent to 39
percent during the period, while the percentage o f households below the national poverty line
remained at 58 percent. The number o f households with a wage earner (including in the informal
sector) declined from 59 percent in 1990 to 49 percent in 1999;’ during the same period, the
number o f adults with work fell from 30 percent to 23 percent. The country also experienced a
decline in the Human Development Index, from 120 in 1999 to 145 in 2004. Progress in poverty
reduction has been hampered by the highly skewed distribution o f wealth (with most growth
concentrated in the capital), the impact o f the HIV/AIDS pandemic, and the reduction in
remittances from mine workers. However, some progress has occurred in some sectors. Rural
water supply coverage increased from 52 percent to 74 percent by 2002 according to WDI
figures, and access to sanitation facilities increased from 3 1 percent to 49 percent during 19901999.’ The most impressive performance i s recorded in the education sector, where the net
primary school enrollment rate increased from 65 percent to 85 percent between 1998 and 2002
(See Table 1).
Retrospective Assessment of CAS Contribution

11.
I n retrospect, the C A S should have highlighted and addressed the potential impact
of HIV/AIDS on the country’s development effort. According to the Operations Evaluation
Department’s Country Assistance Evaluation Report (OED, CAE, 2001), despite the fact that
statistical data on the prevalence rate for Lesotho was unavailable at the time, the implications o f
high prevalence o f a AIDS and lower population growth o n per capita income growth and poverty
reduction worldwide were known. Thus, an opportunity for the Bank to put the issue at the center
o f the country dialogue and help develop the most basic integrated health information system and
survey instruments necessary to monitor HIV/ADDS was missed, and this led to an
underestimation o f i t s rising prevalence and consequently i t s growing impact on social and

’

Lesotho: Poverty Reduction Strategy.
Data from the Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper and Joint Staff Advisory Note. July 18,2005

40

economic development in the country. However, an HIV/AIDS component was added to two ongoing Bank financed projects: (i)
the HSRP, during negotiations, and (ii)
the Agricultural Policy
and Capacity Building Project (APCBP), at mid-term. A subsequent HIV/AIDS Capacity
Building Project, which had not been envisaged under the CAS, was prepared to support G O L
efforts in the fight against the pandemic, and became effective in 2005.
12.
Monitoring, tracking outcomes, and managing an operation rely on having clear
baseline data and appropriate targets. In their absence, the management process and eventual
performance evaluation i s considerably undermined. Lesotho i s severely deficient in statistical
data across sectors, frustrating efforts to establish reliable baseline data for monitoring - a key
constraint to measuring development outcomes. The CAS correctly identified the problem.
However, one o f the proposals to reform and develop the country’s capacity for poverty
monitoring through the Community Development Support Project (CSDP), a social fund learning
and innovative loan (LE), underestimated the problem. In hindsight, the Bank should have
provided leadership through a full TA project to strengthen the capacity o f the Bureau o f
Statistics (BoS) to improve i t s statistical database and promote monitoring and evaluation systems
in collaboration with other donors that have been active in this field (e.g. EU, UNDP, DFID).
The generation and use o f data i s o f particular importance in the context o f the PRSP, which
requires a national M&E system for a proper implementation. Although this issue was raised by
OED, CAE in 2001,3 nothing substantial was undertaken.
13.
The environment for addressing development issues in Lesotho i s generally a
formidable challenge. The country has acute management constraints and staffing deficiencies,
due largely to brain drain and politicization o f the civil service. Inadequate administrative and
institutional capacity in many m i n i s t i e s and government agencies make policy formulation
difficult, and make coordination, implementation, and institutional reforms almost impossible.
The Country Portfolio Performance Review (CPPR), conducted in 2002 and 2005, noted
centralization o f decision-mahng at the highest levels o f administration as constraining interministerial communication making it difficult to implement programs spanning across two or
more agencies. These factors have adversely affected CAS outcomes. In response to these
issues, a Public Sector Improvement and Reform Program (PSIRP) was proposed in 2003, but the
factors it was intended to address have contributed to delaying project preparation beyond the
extended CAS period.

111.

Assessment of CAS Outcomes

Pillar 1: Poverty Reduction through Investing in Human Resources
12.
The pillar was aligned with the Government’s goal of improving social services by
strengthening primary, vocational, and non-formal education, reforming health services,
and providing safety nets. The Bank’s program focused strongly on education and health, while
safety nets - apart from the LE to enhance the poverty impact o f the Lesotho Highlands Revenue
Fund (LHRF) - were not part o f the Bank program. Substantial results were achieved in primary
education in terms o f improving access. In health care, sector policy, a strategic plan, and a
budget were formulated in an integrated fashion, while financial management and procurement
were improved. Table 1 summarizes some o f the outcomes and key performance indicators for
measuring performance. Appendix 2, constructed on the basis o f Annex B 9 from the 1998 CAS,
includes all performance indicators and comments on specific progress made. Following the
OED review, the Bank helped to scale up Lesotho’s response to the HIV/AIDS pandemic. But
Lesotho Country Assistance Evaluation, Report # 23407, OED, Dec 27,2001.

41

health outcomes are affected by numerous factors other than health services, and despite progress
in health sector reforms, infant and child mortality increased slightly during the CAS period and
malnutrition worsened somewhat.

13.
T o reduce income poverty, the Government focused on job creation as a key
outcome. T o achieve this goal, it proposed support to the informal sector and special
employment programs and to enhance the poverty impact o f the Lesotho Highlands Revenue
Fund (LHRF). The Bank directly contributed only to the LHRF, in addition to providing
financial and project supervision services to the Highlands Project itself. The Bank support to
road construction and water supply indirectly buttressed job creation through training o f local
contractors. However, the Bank LE, CDSP, intended to pilot demand-driven service delivery to
be subsequently adopted by the LHRF and ensure systematic poverty monitoring in the country,
was unsuccessful. Overall, it appears that poverty remained at the previous levels, while extreme
poverty slightly worsened, however, household survey evidence i s not available to confirm
Lesotho’s poverty trends. T h i s i s an urgent matter to be addressed by the Government, and
development partners and will need to figure prominently in the new CAS. Also to reduce
poverty, the Government set out to manage poverty-related environmental degradation
through rural environment programs and waste management. The Bank prepared the MDTBCP,
funded by GEF. It set out to pilot institutional strengthening and community-based management
o f natural resources, w h c h i s s t i l l ongoing. The recent mid-term review showed promise for
community-management o f the natural resources, but no significant outcome has been reported.
Table 1. Selected Performance Indicators for Pillar 1

1994-95

Poverty reduction

1999-2005

58

Households living below poverty l i n e

1998

Educational outcome indicators

School enrollment, primary (percent net)
School enrollment, secondary (percent net)
Primary completion rate (percent o f relevant age
group)
Pupil-teacher ratio, primary

2002
65
14
63
44

2000

Health outcome indicators

Mortality rate, infant (per 1,000 live births)
Mortality rate, under-5 (per 1,000)
Life expectancy at birth
Malnutrition prevalence, weight for age
(percent o f children under five)
Prevalence o f HIV, total (percent o f population aged
15-49)
Water and sanitation coverage outcome indicators

Improved water source (percent o f population with
access)

75
105
47
(1997)
.
16
(1996)

30

(2001)
1990

n.a.

37

Improved sanitation facilities (percent o f
population with access)

The target was unrealistic or must have been a typographical errox

42

n.a

CAS target
Reduce
poverty
CAS target

85

n.a
n.a.

22
73
(2003)
47
2003

47
CAS target

79
110

204
n.a.

37

n.a.

18
(2000)

n.a

n.a.

....

qn

u.a.

L7

2002

CAS target
76

37

Increase 50
percent
coverage

n.a.
I

Source: 2005 World Development Indicators, World Bank; Poverty data extracted from the 2005

PRSP.

Outcome 1.1: Poverty Reduction in Rural Areas

14.
I t i s doubtful whether programs designed to reduce poverty during the review
period achieved their goals. OED rated the CDSP and the APCBP on their outcomes as
Unsatisfactory and Moderately Unsatisfactory, respectively (Table 4). However, although
APCBP did not achieve i t s development objectives over the project timeframe, i t clearly
advanced the policy and institutional framework that supports the delivery o f agricultural services
to the poor through decentralization. In addition to the preparation o f a National Agricultural
Strategy (NAS) and district economic strategies, an agricultural subsidy policy and a land policy
were drafted, and a framework was prepared for marketing facilitation with recommendations for
deregulation o f 13 commodities. Moreover, the extension system was unified and operationalized
in all 10 districts o f the country and the Ministry o f Agriculture and Food Security (MAFS) was
streamlined through restructuring of the central and district offices and functions decentralized for
better extension service delivery to the rural poor. Four agricultural enterprises were liquidated
and one was privatized, creating opportunities for private sector participation in the delivery o f
agricultural services.
15.
The CDSP, a LIL, was designed to test new mechanisms for direct support to
communities through a community-driven development (CDD) approach and to monitor
poverty trends in Lesotho. A major lesson o f the LIL was how serious a challenge it i s to reach
poor people in rural communities in a highly centralized, bureaucratic, and stratified environment.
Elite capture became the norm when parliamentarians became involved in deciding on facilities
for the poor. The non-performing LHRF was reformulated with the intent o f supporting C D D
projects with a poverty reduction focus, giving preferential attention to five pre-identified poor
districts as well as peri-urban Maseru. The new entity, the Lesotho Fund for Community
Development (LFCD), was established through a Legal Notice in March 1999 and began
operating in 2000. The L H W P included support for the L F C D after the closure o f the CDSP in
order to ensure pro-poor choices; however, the L F C D has become virtually moribund. These
policy and institutional changes requires long-term and continuous support, and their contribution
toward poverty reduction takes some time to materialize.

Outcome 1.2: Investing in Human Resources

16.
Considerable progress was made in addressing the human resource constraints in
Lesotho, and the Bank’s assistance contributed significantly to the outcomes. Consistent with
the government policy to provide 10-year basic education, the ESDP Phase1 contributed to
primary, secondary, and technical/vocational education. In primary education, the project
financed classroom construction, textbook provision, bursaries to orphaned student and other
vulnerable children, school management development, and a distance teacher education program.
The primary net enrolment rose from 65 percent in 1998 to 85 percent in 2002; and there was
increased school completion rates as well. In technical and vocational education, the project
financed studies and policy development to support a reorientation o f the system toward a more
demand-dnven approach responsive to the labor market. The project also supported policy
development in higher education and i s attempting to introduce a higher education incentive fund
to energize the subsector.

43

17.
Although high-level health indicators have not yet improved, substantial progress
has been achieved in the health sector. The HSRP Phase 1 and APL financed by IDA (as well
as by others donors) contributed to the achievement o f the following results: (i)
formulation and
implementation o f a comprehensive health sector policy; (ii)
development o f a performancebased multiyear plan and budget linked to sectoral priorities; (iii)
improvement in financial
management and procurement systems and procedures within the sector; and (iv) scaling up
Lesotho’s response to HIV/AIDS through support for nongovernmental and public sector
institutions. These achievements have laid the basis for an enhanced focus on health service
delivery and outcomes during the HSRP Phase 2.

Outcome 1.3 Promotion of a Comprehensive Approach to the Natural Environment
18.
The Bank’s support to natural environment challenges was articulated through
three operations whose combined impact was rather limited. The MDTBCP project,
undertaken jointly with a similar project in South Afhca, focused on biodiversity conservation
and eco-tourism development. The recent mid-term review concluded that the communitymanaged natural resources component i s progressing well. The APCBP provided support on
range management and land reform issues, in addition to agnculture sector reform, but i t closed
without achieving any o f i t s objectives. The Water Sector Improvement Project (WSIP) focused
on improving sanitation and water quality and availability in both peri-urban and rural areas. The
WSIP became effective in 2005. Overall, promoting sustainable natural resource management in
Lesotho remains a challenge that will need to be more aggressively tackled during the next CAS
period and beyond.

Pillar 2: Supporting Closer Integration into the Regional Economy
19.
This pillar i s in line with the Government’s strategy of maintaining external
competitiveness. The Bank supported Lesotho’s external competitiveness through
macroeconomic analytic work in growth and employment, privatization o f state-owned
enterprises, public sector reforms, public expenditure management reforms, and financial sector
reforms. The Bank’s support was essentially in two forms: assisting the country to improve i t s
macro-policy framework and support to the Government’s intention to privatize state-owned
enterprises and strengthen private sector development. Table 2 presents some key macroperformance indicators for measuring outcomes.

Table 2. Outcomes and Core Performance Indicators for Pillar 2
Outcomes and Performance
1998
2004
Indicators
Economic management and growth indicators
GDP per capita (constant 2000
495
540
US$)
GNI per capita Atlas method
690
740
(current US$)
2.4
GDP growth (annual percent)
-4.6
(av. 19992004)
Cash surplus/deficit ( percent o f
n.a.
(2003
-. GDP)
Social spending indicators
1998
2002

44

CAS target

increase
increase
increase
Fiscal balance

CAS target

Health expenditure, total (percent
5.5
6.2
o f GDP)
10.4
Public spending on education
13.0
(200 1)
total (percent o f GDP)
Share o f expenditures on wages and
34.4
n.a.
salaries ( percent)
Current expenditures, total ( percent
40
n.a.
o f GDP)
Financial outcome indicators in three utilities
1998
2002
Water (net annual profit, WASA)
L S 98,000
LS4 million
Telecom (net annual profit, LTC)
Electricity (net annual profit, LEC)’
L S 14 million
LS44 million
Source: 2005 World Development Indicators, World Bank

n.a
n.a
Under 50
percent
30 percent o f
GNP
CAS target

LS7 million

The economic performance of the country using GDP and GNI as indicators has
20.
improved over the period. The enactment o f the Financial Institutions Act in 1999 created a
more conducive environment for the financial sector to contribute significantly to the general
economy. Losses in two utilities - Telecommunications and Electricity - have declined, largely
because o f the reforms embarked upon under the Utilities Sector Reform Project (USRP), which
was originally not included in the CAS. I t i s worth noting that the LHWP has had direct impact
on the economy over the years, contributing about 13.6 percent and 5.9 percent to GDP in 1998
and 2002, respectively.
Outcome 2.1 Improve Macro-Policy Environment

2 1.
The Bank’s program supported improvement in the macro-policy environment
through a series of economic and sector work @SW). The Bank supported this objective
through a joint Public Expenditure Management Review (PEMR) completed in 1999 with the
government and the policy dialogue accompanyng the preparation o f that report. From 19972000, there was a lapse in IMF assistance to Lesotho; since the resumption o f the program the
Bank has worked in close cooperation with the IMF, giving more consideration to the
institutional and administrative problems, sustained growth, job creation, and poverty reduction.
The Bank focused i t s advice on sectoral structural reforms, including privatization and private
sector development as well as the PRS, public sector reform, public expenditure management
reform, and financial sector reform.
Outcome 2.2 Privatization and Private Sector Development

22.
Privatization o f public sector companies was initiated through the APCBP and the
USRP. O f the 16 enterprises identified to be privatized under the APCBP, only 1 was privatized
(leased); four were liquidated and a further two partially liquidated at the close o f the project.6
The USRP, initiated in 200 1, successfully supported privatization o f Lesotho Telecoms and the
placement o f the Lesotho Electricity Company (LEC) under a management contract, leading to
the turnaround in the fortunes o f the two enterprises. The electrification rate in Lesotho grew
from 5 percent to 11 percent between 2001 and 2004, while revenues rose from M98.5 million to

Utilities Sector Reform Project, P070673, Aide Memoir, April 2005
Agricultural Policy and Capacity Building Project, P001402, Implementation Completion Report
(ICR), June 20,2004.

45

M121.5 million within the same period.’
The introduction o f competition in the
telecommunications sector has also resulted in a ten-fold increase in aggregate teledensity and
diversification o f services to end users. T h e total number o f fixed and mobile subscribers rose
from 36,000 in 2001 to 287,000 in 2005 (248,000 mobile and 39,000 fixed lines) and the number
of telecenters from 628 to 2605 between 2003 and 2005.

23.
Although progress has been made in the privatization of major utility companies,
the Bank’s effort at supporting PSD was delayed. In addressing concerns raised in the OED
report, the USRP was designed, and three more A A A s , namely, the Investment Climate
Assessment (FY05), the Private Sector Development (FY05) and Country Economic
Memorandum (FY05) were all completed during the extended period. In addition, a Country
Framework Report on infrastructure development was completed in (FY04). The Bank also
contributed to the preparation o f the Diagnostic Trade Integrated Study for Lesotho, jointly with
DFID, the EU, and IMF. Private sector f i r m s face numerous constraints to growth and
development, including a restrictive business environment, weak enterprise skills, and inadequate
institutional support to PSD. As a result, the private sector in Lesotho i s characterized by high
transaction costs, l o w labor productivity, and l o w ability to compete. In addition, the almost
complete lack o f economic diversification and weak market linkages put at risk the sustainability
o f economic growth. In the next three years, the Government will need to play a more active and
supportive role to achieve the following three objectives: (i)
retain foreign investors beyond the
phasing-out o f trade privileges and attract larger amounts o f FDI; (ii)
diversify the economy from
its heavy reliance on one activity (apparel manufacturing) and one market (the United States) and
(iii)
better integration o f the domestic private sector with that created through FDI and with the
RSA. To do so, the Government must remove binding constraints to PSD; provide necessary
support to the private sector; and exploit the economy’s complementarities with South Afkica and
the investment potential in other sectors, including services.
Outcome 2.3 Build Institutional Capacity
24.
Institutional and capacity building was an overarching goal in the CAS and
mainstreamed in all projects executed during the period. I t i s an area where some successes
were recorded in some sectors and little progress made in more ambitious areas. Capacity issues
were addressed in the education sector through distance learning for teachers and training o f
School Advisory Committees, Management Committees, Secondary School Boards, and the
Ministry through the preparation of a PER and a MTEF. Consequently, the performance o f
school financial management systems and monitoring have all improved. In the health sector,
where the bulk of the program was focused on capacity and institutional development, notable
achievements at the close of the project were the capacity to coordinate and monitor the reform
program by the Directorate of Planning; preparation of an MTEF; improvement in financial
management and information systems; and development and institutionalization o f a 5-year
strategic plan for M&E, with quarterly activity monitoring and annual joint reviews.
IV

Measuring the Bank’s Performance

Quality o f Products and Services
25.
The FY98 CAS was intended to be completed over a three-year period, FY99-00.
During the review period, two projects (education and health), which were follow-ons to earlier

’

Utilities Sector Reform Project, P070673, Aide Memoir, April 2005.

46

projects, were successfully completed, one new project, the APCBP, was also completed, while
the Maloti-Drakensberg and Lesotho Highlands projects are s t i l l ongoing. The WSP became
effective in late FY05, and the private sector project i s under preparation. The following ESW
products were completed during the review period: the Public Expenditure and Management
Review (FY99), the Country Economic Memorandum (FY05), the Private Sector Development
Strategy (FY05), and a Financial Sector Review (FY99). All o f these were discussed with the
Government. A second public expenditure management review i s also under way. Two new
projects, the USRP and HIV/AIDS Capacity Building Project, not originally envisaged under the
CAS, were prepared. An Integrated Transport Sector and Institutional Reform Project, also not in
the CAS, has been under preparation since FY03.

26.

The portfolio's focus on results and the quality of project M&E has been mixed.
Several findings emerge from a recent M&E review o f the country portfolio,8 such as that the
project development objectives were either too ambitious or too modest, that there i s a substantial
absence o f baseline data, and that the results matrices were overly complex. The focus on
capacity building and better institutional performance by several o f the projects posed a major
problem for identifying key performance indicators, as measuring progress and performance in
capacity building i s generally difficult. All these issues create significant challenges for
managing for results - i.e., for using information to improve decision-making and steer countryled development processes toward clearly defined goals.

27.
Half o f the exiting projects during the 1998-2004 periods have been rated as
unsatisfactory. Most o f the exiting projects are not attributable to the CAS period, since they

were active in the 1990-1999 period. O f nine exiting projects, five were rated either as
unsatisfactory or moderately unsatisfactory by OED regarding their outcome achievement. What
i s more important, only one of the projects' has a substantial rating in i t s institutional
development impact (see Table 4) - i.e., the extent to which the project improves Lesotho's
ability to make more efficient, equitable, and sustainable use o f its human, financial, and natural
resources either through a better definition, stability, transparency, enforceability, and
predictability of institutional arrangements andor a better alignment o f the mission and capacity
o f an organization with i t s mandate.

Table 4. OED ratings in exiting projects
Exit
Project
FY
1998 Industry and Ago-Industry
1998 Health Population I1
1999
1"Education Sector Dev. (ESDP)
1999 Highlands Water Phase 1A
200 1 Privatization / Restructuring
2004 Agricultural Policy and Capacity

Approva
1 FY
1991
1990
1992
1992
1994
1998

OED
Outcome
Unsati'sfactory
Mod. Unsatisfactory
Mod. Satisfactory
Satisfactory
Mod. Unsatisfactory
Mod. Unsatisfactory

OED ID
Impact
Negligible
Modest
Modest
Substantial
Modest
Modest

Lesotho Monitoring and Evaluation Review, Operations Policy and Country Services (OPCS), May,
27, 2005.
In the Highlands Water Project Phase I A , the significant outcomeshmpacts that OED highlighted in
the I C R review were that LHDA (Lesotho Highland Development Authority) had been established and
become an effective and sustainable organization; physical works had been completed to a high standard
and water export sales have been realized; highland communities were now benefiting from good access
roads and power and communications networks; and that LHDA was prepared and able to complete Phase
1B and subsequent stages, as well as operate the completed facilities.

47

Building
Lesotho Road Rehab. &
1996
2004 Maintenance
2"d Education Sector Dev. (ESDP)
1999
2004 Phase1
2004 Community Dev. Support (CDSP)
2000
Source: World Bank Business Warehouse, October 2005.

Mod. Satisfactory
Satisfactory
Unsatisfactory

Modest
Modest
Negligible

Overall quality at entry and quality of supervision were rated satisfactory. The
28.
quality at entry for the Health and Education projects were rated satisfactory by QAG. In general,
supervision quality has been satisfactory, as evidenced by proactivity and realism indices (see
Table 5). Bank supervision and management support for the CDSP was also deemed satisfactory.
The I C R noted that management met with team members to agree on minimum actions needed to
upgrade the ratings when the project was downgraded to an unsatisfactory rating during
implementation. APCBP was rated unsatisfactory on preparation because o f weak consultations,
complexity, and overly ambitious targets. However, the I C R rated overall Bank performance as
satisfactory because o f the project's quality o f supervision.

29.
The quality of the portfolio has improved as the number o f problem projects has
been on a downward trend. There were n o projects at r i s k in FY04 and the greater part o f FY05,
until the MDCDP was downgraded with unsatisfactory implementation progress. However the
rating was subsequently reversed. Pro-activity and realism indices have remained steady at 100
percent, an indication o f the candor o f reporting by T T L s and quick resolution o f emerging
implementation problems.
Table 5. Trends in Portfolio Performance (FY98-05)
FY98

FY99

NO0

FYOl

FY02

FY03

FY04

NO5

Source: World Bank Business Warehouse, data as o f October 24,2005.

Notes:

The active portfolio includes GEF, IBRD, IDA, Montreal Protocol, and Special Financing
operations, and these are excluded in the above figure.

48

Includes problem projects (i.e. with unsatisfactory Implementation Progress (IP) andor
Development Objectives (DO) ratings) and potential problem projects (i.e. at risk o f not meeting
DO and/or IP).
2

3

Ratio o f the disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance o f the Bank’s portfolio at
the beginning o f the year for investment projects only.
Proactivity i s defined as [number o f projects that were problem projects 12 months ago, but for
which proactive actions were taken within the year] divided by [{the # o f projects that were
problem projects 12 months ago].
Realism i s defined as [the number o f projects rated as problem projects] divided by [the number
o f projects rated at risk. Problem projects have DO or IP rated unsatisfactory. Projects at r i s k
include both problem projects and potential problem projects.

Portfolio Assessments
30.
The disbursement ratio and the annual amount of funds being disbursed rose
steadily from 12.5 in FY99 to 30.6 in FY04 but declined to 26.5 in FY05. The lower rate o f
disbursement in FY05 i s explained by two new operations (HIV/AIDS Capacity Building Project
and the WSIP) that entered the portfolio during the year and the long duration o f the LHWP, as
well as by a generally poor disbursement performance o f the projects in the portfolio. The
LHWP and the USRP are expected to close on December 3 1,2005, but have disbursed only some
60 percent, while MDTBCP, after 3.5 years and closing in 2 years, has disbursed 16 percent.
None are on track t o fully disburse. Because the absorptive capacity for Lesotho i s low, a number
o f projects were closed and outstanding balances cancelled. Extension o f closing dates i s also
common, largely because o f inadequate capacity for implementation, inability to meet D C A
conditionalities, slow disbursement, and slow decision-making.
31.
The average cost of doing business i s among the 10 highest in the Region. The
average cost o f supervision i s $117,000 per project compared to a Regional average o f $91,000.
This i s partly a fimction o f the higher cost associated with the supervision o f the L H W P and
partly o f centralized supervision from Washington. Despite i t s proximity, the Bank’s Pretoria
Office had little role in managing programs. The high cost o f doing business i s also linked to the
long duration involved in the processing o f projects in the country and the appreciation over the
last 3 years o f the South Africa Rand, to which Lesotho’s currency i s linked l-to-I. Preparation
of the APCBP, for example, was started in 1993 and it was not until 1999 that the project was
declared effective, after one year o f effectiveness delay. The Road Rehabilitation Project, which
also started in 1991, became effective in 1997 and closed in 2003 after a two year extension o f its
closing date, with more than $12 million credit cancelled. In general, it takes several years for
new projects to be prepared, except for successor projects such as the education and health
projects that were designed as adaptable program loans (APLs).

Table 6. Project Preparation Time in Lesotho
FY

1998
1998
1999
2000

Project
Agricultural Policy and Capacity
Building
Lesotho-Highland Water
2”d Education Sector Dev. (ESDP)
Phase 1
Health Sector Reform

Approval
Date

PCD
Revision Date

06/25/1998

12/15/1993

06/04/1998

01/13/1993

04/15/1999

06/08/1998

06113/2000

0411911999

49

Days

1653
1968
311
42 1

12/20/1999
0311911998
Community Dev. Support (CDSP)
03/29/2001
0411212000
Utilities Sector Reform
2"d Education Sector Dev. (ESDP)
09/01/1999
0711712003
2004 Phase 2 lo
10/26/2004
0210812001
2005 Water Sector Improvement
0113012004
0710612004
2005 H I V I A I D S Capacity Building
Average days
Average for the Africa Region
(FY98-0:)
Average Bankwide (FY98-05)
Source: World Bank Business Warehouse, October 2005 (excludes GEF projects).
2000
2001

64 1
351
1415
1356
158

919
502
482

32.
The small portfolio i s characterized b y challenges in maintaining effectiveness
conditions. The relationship between the number o f effectiveness conditions and the length o f
effectiveness delays i s not clear. The LHWP, with eight effectiveness conditions, was delayed
for 10 months, whereas ESDP 11, with n o effectiveness conditions (other than legal opinion), was
made effective approximately two weeks earlier than scheduled. On the other hand, the
HIV/AIDS project, with only one effectiveness condition, was delayed for about six months.
Although the number and length o f effectiveness delays have been declining, together with the
number o f effectiveness conditions, it can be concluded that delays in effectiveness were mainly a
function o f ineffective leadership and insufficient commitment o n the part o f the borrower.

Selectivity of Bank Assistance
The C A S argued for selectivity based on the comparative advantages of the Bank. The areas
identified for support were structural reforms in critical sectors (health and education),
macroeconomic policy dialogue, and leveraging resources in other areas such as infrastructure,
agriculture, and natural resource management. All the projects initiated and implemented during
the period had strong emphasis o n sectoral reforms, with the Bank providing leadership for donor
coordination. This was also the case with the macro-economic policy dialogue, where the Bank
and IMF coordinated their response and support to the GOL agenda. I t has, however, been
argued (OED, CAE 200 1) that the number o f activities undertaken during the period far exceeded
the absorptive capacity limits o f the Government.
Country Dialogue and Aid Coordination
33.
Country dialogue has been conducted f r o m Washington and the results have been
mixed. Policy dialogue was strong during the preparation o f the PRS. The Bank provided
substantial support toward the preparation o f the Lesotho PRS, leading to a highly rated quality
output. Partnership with the IMF also has seen improvement in joint missions and support to the
PGRJ? in shaping the macroeconomic environment, leading to sustained growth since 1998. The
Bank's Liaison Office in Lesotho has also been strengthened since early 2005, in order to
improve country dialogue and donor coordination. Support to policy dialogue has been quite
satisfactory and appreciated by the Government, as indicated in the 2000 Client Survey.
Operational support, however, has been weak. The Bank has not been able to address persistent:
lo

During preparation of 2"d ESDP Phase 2 in early 2003, i t was agreed not to do a separate Project
Concept Document (PCD). Since there was no Project Concept Document for the Phase 2, S A P figures
refer to the original date o f the ESDP I1Phase 1 concept review (which i s September 1999). Table 7 shows
then 1,4 15 days for Phase 2 preparation. In reality, it took about n i n e months from preparation to approval
(July 2003), and then another two months to effectiveness (September 2003).

50

(i)
delays in project preparation; (ii)
unrealistic allocation o f resources to projects; (iii)
weak
capacity and slow and cumbersome decision-malung processes in project implementation; (iv)
slow disbursement; and (v) slow response and turnaround time by clients.
34.
Overall Bank performance i s assessed as moderately unsatisfactory. The Bank failed
to deliver analytic support on time (Appendix 3), an area where the Bank support i s very much
appreciated. The effect o f the likelihood o f a change in government and the associated changes in
policy and decision-making processes were identified but underestimated; consequently, the CAS
agenda was ambitious for the three-year design period. The Bank appears to have accepted the
slow pace o f doing business as a norm and fallen in line with slow bureaucratic procedures within
the public services, at great cost. It appears there are n o delivery deadlines, as project activities
go o n for years without end. Project preparation time in the country i s among the longest in the
Region, and range from 3-6 years. Almost all projects are extended by 1 or 2 years and yet
cancellation o f credits after closure i s the norm. For example, one transport project under
implementation during the C A S preparation cancelled more than $12 million in a country with
dire needs o f infrastructure.
(V)

K e y Considerations for the next C A S

The following lessons emerge from the implementation o f the 1998 CAS:

Lesotho has one o f the highest adult HIV/AIDS prevalence rates in the world, a much
higher rate than for Sub-Saharan Africa as a whole (24 percent compared to 7.5
percent). As o f the end o f 2003, there were an estimated 320,000 people living with
H I V / A I D S in Lesotho, or almost 3 in 10 adults. The epidemic has already had a profound
effect in Lesotho, posing significant development challenges to this low-income country. In
retrospect, both Government development plans and the Bank’s 1998 CAS attached too little
attention to H N / A I D S . A stronger effort i s required to fight the HIV/AIDS pandemic in the
new CAS
Stronger growth and job-creation efforts are required to make significant inroads on
poverty reduction and inequality. A stronger and more focused emphasis on strengthened
competitiveness and a much more conducive environment for private business and
investment injob-creating sectors i s warranted.
M o r e emphasis on regional dimensions i s needed to ensure the country’s successful
involvement in regional integration and in the globalization process and to give the
country access to larger markets. Lesotho i s a small land-locked country highly dependent
on RSA, and it must explore economic integration to i t s advantage.
Full exploitation of the productive and job-generating potential of the rural economy i s
critical in reaching a large share of Lesotho’s poor and underemployed people. This
requires a strengthened focus o n addressing the inadequate economic and social integration
o f Lesotho’s rural and mountainous areas - in terms o f improved infrastructure and access to
essential public services, greater provision o f administrative and technical support to increase
productivity o f existing subsistence production and to develop new, more market-oriented
activities

Capacity building and improved public sector service delivery - not least in education
and health areas - i s of critical importance to achieve any progress on these fronts, and
a strong and focused emphasis o n governance issues as well as o n public sector management
and financial accountability are o f continued priority.

51

0

0

0

0

T o ensure improved ability to monitor and evaluate the effectiveness of policies and
projects, focused and donor-wide support to strengthen central capacities to gather,
maintain, and analyze data and statistics i s o f critical importance.
I t i s important to redefine the role and strategy of the Bank (the way of doing business
in the country) and to be selective to avoid fragmentation. The Bank has t o redefine i t s
role and strategy and reach an agreement with the government on key priorities and
timelines.
The supporting role o f the Pretoria office should be aligned with the
decentralization policy o f the Bank for effective dialogue and implementation support.
I t i s important to consider carefully the choice of instruments for policy and
institutional reforms. Given the formidable challenges associated with institutional reforms
in Lesotho, the Bank will have to rethink and determine better ways o f promoting modest but
feasible reforms that can serve as entry point for changes in the future. The CAS should
avoid being overly ambitious, clearly identify the implementation hurdles, and agree on a set
of manageable intermediate and monitorable outcomes that tackle a limited set o f specific
policy and institutional reforms.

A number of opportunities are emerging to strengthen alignment, harmonization, and
results focus in Lesotho, and to pave the way for moving toward budget support
operations. The PRS provides a credible framework for alignment o f development
assistance around country priorities. Comprehensive sector strategies for health, education,
agriculture, food security, water, and H I V / A I D S provide a framework for the introduction o f
SWAPS.

52

d

8

G

3

W

m

.9

a

a

e

a

a

a

a

a

e

c

o

o

.

a

#

0

i3

ii
v1
-

3
0

0

0

.

0

h

e

W

IA

0

.

0

0

0

i-

0

0

.

0

1

8
Y

e,

E!

8
0

e

e

0

0

0

E

0

%
1
0

B
a,

8m

-

3

s

m

P

G
3

e

e

e

x

I

i

II

m

8
N
P^

3

h

2

3

?
3

N

t:
d

9
3

N

e

E

i
I

e

>
a

h

Planned Learning and Innovation Loan (LIL) and Institutional Development Fund (IDF) Grants and
Actual Deliveries (FY98 - 05)
FY

1998

2003

PROJECT

CAS Pla

Community Support
Development Project LIL

4.7

CEM: Growth and Employment
Options Study
PRSP Trust Fund for Capacity
Building and Strengthening o f
the PRSP Secretariat

2004

2005

CASCR
Status

US%(M)

497,837

Closed on 3Ol912003
with unsatisfactory
rating and a partial
cancellation o f US$1.8
million
Completed 2005

Private Sector Development
Strategy

0.15

Ongoing - Closing
date extended till Dec
2006
Completed 2005

Public Expenditure Review

0.25

underway

61

US%(M)

2.9

Appendix 4: Planned AAA Program and Actual Deliveries (FY98 - 04)
FY
1998

CAS Plan
Product
Improving the Focus o f the Lesotho
Highlands Revenue Fund: Issues and Reform
OptiOnS

Completed FY98

Country Assistance Strategy
1999

2000

CASCR
Completion and date delivered to the client
Completed

Completed FY99

Financial Sector Review
Public Expenditure Review

Completed FY99

Education Sector Review

Completed FY05

Health Sector Review

Outstanding

Policy Dialogue o n C i v i l Service Re,rm
Labor Market Dynamics

Outstanding
Outstanding

Poverty Monitoring Systems Support
Country Dialogue/General ESW

Partly carried out through the APCBP through
the CWIQ o f 2002
Outstanding

Country Assistance Strategy

Underway to be completed FY06

62

Annex 3: Progress Towards Attaining the Millennium Development Goals
Millennium Development Goals and
Targets
(percent unless otherwise indicated)

Indicator/Measures

Early
1990s

Latest
(2005)

Prospects
By 2015

school.
3. Promnre Gender Equality and Empower blbmvn

iource: UN Millennium Development Goals Report 2005

Note: The 2004 Demographic Health Survey, published in February 2006, has more recent data on some o f the
indicators (e.g., access to water).

63

rt

Z

3

2

P

3

3
3
3

-

3
2

I

Annex 5: Lesotho: Country Financing Parameters

LESOTHO: COUNTRY FINANCING PARAMETERS
The country financing parameters for Lesotho set out b e l o w have been approved by the
Regional V i c e President, A f r i c a Region, and are being posted o n the Bank’s internal
website.

Item
Cost Sharing
Limit on the proportion o f individual
project costs that the Bank may
finance

Parameter
u p to 100%

Recurrent Cost Financing
Any limits that would apply to the
overall amount o f recurrent
expenditures that the Bank may
finance

NOcountrylevel limit.

65

RemarksExplanation
100% or high share o f Bank financing i s
expected to be applied selectively in
individual projects on a case-by-case basis.
Country ownership and commitment would
continue to be emphasized in all cases.
Bank financing share i s expected to be
typically l o w in sector-wide approaches,
and would be moderate in infrastructure
projects. Projects in all other sectors could
be financed up to 100% after talung into
account government overall funding o f the
sector, sustainability issues and
justifications provided by the project teams.
W h i l e no country-level limit on recurrent
cost financing i s set, financing o f recurrent
costs will be considered on a case by case
basis. In infrastructure sectors, where
revenue generating mechanisms (through
user fees, tariffs) are in place to cover
recurrent costs and to ensure sustainability,
Bank financing o f recurrent costs are
expected to be the exception rather than the
norm. Financing o f recurrent costs in noninfrastructure sectors will be considered
based on project and sector needs and
circumstances. In determining Bank
financing o f recurrent costs in individual
projects, the Bank will take into account
sustainability issues at the sector and project
levels. In addition, at the country-level, the
Bank would monitor sustainability risks
through the CPPR exercises. There will
also be general and sector-specific Public
Expenditure Reviews, where issues o f
sustainability will be identified to provide a
basis for an overall dialogue with the
government, and changes will be made if
needed accordingly.

Local Cost Financing
A r e the requirements for Bank
financing o f local expenditures met,
namely that: (i)
financing
requirements for the country’s
development program would exceed
the public sector’s own resources
(e.g., from taxation and other
revenues) and expected domestic
borrowing; and (ii)
the financing o f
foreign expenditures alone would not
enable the Bank to assist in the
financin o f individual ro‘ects
Taxes and Duties
Are there any taxes and duties that
t he Bank would not finance?

I Yes

Lesotho meets requirements for local cost
financing. The Bank may finance local costs
in any proportions required by individual
projects.

i
Lesotho’s taxes are considered reasonable.
Hence the Bank may finance the costs o f
taxes and duties associated with project
expenditures. At the project-level, the Bank
would consider whether taxes and duties
constitute an excessively high share o f
project costs and will make any necessary
adjustments during project preparation.

66

Country Financing Parameters Supporting Note
I.Cost Sharing

1.
Government’s ownership and commitment to i t s development program as spelled
out in the PRS i s strong. As discussed earlier in the CAS document, the Bank’s CAS i s
well aligned with the country’s PRS. The Government o f Lesotho is financing from i t s
own resources over 40 percent o f i t s overall development program. Bank financed
projects are a small part o f the government’s overall development program. All donor
funds are included in the budget but separately accounted for outside the GOLFIS central
accounting system, based o n individual donor requirements. Donor funds flow through
Special Accounts maintained at the Central Bank. The new I F M I S will help the
government better account for external resources, most o f which are currently disbursed
direct to the executing agencies by the donors, through the Central bank, but without first
going through the treasury.

2.
The CAS completion report (Annex 2) reviewed the performance o f the portfolio
during 1998-2005 implementation period and provides detailed analysis o f portfolio
performance. The quality o f the portfolio has improved over the years as the number o f

problem projects has been decreasing while disbursement ratio has consistently increased
over the years. Quality at and entry for the Health and Education projects were rated
satisfactory by QAG but there are challenges in meeting effectiveness deadlines. The
CPPR review o f 2005 agreed to a minimum number o f effectiveness conditions in future
projects. Compliance with fiduciary requirements will be the main conditions for
effectiveness in new lending.

3.
Currently, the Bank’s financing share of projects in Lesotho i s typically about 8090 percent, with the government covering the balance o f 10-20%. The government has
been able to sustain this contribution due to a healthy fiscal position which has seen the
current account deficit (including official transfers) narrowed from 11 percent o f GDP in
20031’04 to less than 3 percent o f GDP in 2004/05. This i s largely the result o f temporary
factors, mainly a sharp rise in Southern African Customs U n i o n (SACU) receipts due to
revised import data for 2002, as w e l l as strong volume growth in the garment sector in
the first half o f the year, which is not expected t o be repeated in the second h a l f o f the
year. In the outlook period however, Lesotho’s ability to sustain this impressive
performance is more than doubtful. I t i s vulnerable to a range o f potentially permanent
adverse developments including but not limited to: (a) the erosion o f trade preferences
through the phasing out o f textile quotas under the Uruguay Round Agreement o n
Textiles and Clothing (ATC) which commenced in early 2005; (b) the expected removal
o f the AGOA provision allowing the use o f third country fabrics in 2007; and (c) the
forecast decline in S A C U tariff revenues due to trade liberalization; and the likelihood o f
a reduction in remittances as Basotho workers continue to be retrenched from South
African mines. Thus, as with other developing countries, donor funding will continue to
be necessary for Lesotho to achieve i t s MDG targets.
4.
W e propose to allow Bank financing o f up to 100 percent o f individual project
costs. The proposed enhanced flexibility in expenditure eligibility will not cause the IDA

67

allocation limits to be exceeded, but ensures flexibility in the context o f existing and
planned projects and programs. As the FY06-08 IDA allocation for Lesotho i s fixed,
financing up to 100 percent o f certain projects would automatically mean financing less
o f the other projects. Cost-sharing arrangements in individual projects will be determined
taking into account aspects such as the government’s financing o f the development
program for the sector concerned from i t s own resources, the project cost estimates; and
co-financing by other partners. Bank financing share i s expected to be typically low in sectorwide approaches (SWAps), and would be moderate in infrastructure projects. W h i l e in the
immediate term, the Bank’s financing share o f total expenditure may increase marginally,
this i s expected to reduce over time by greater use o f SWAps, especially in the social
sectors.

5.
In all cases, the emphasis o n borrower commitment and ownership would
continue, In the absence o f a financial contribution, government commitment to the
projects will be measured by their input in other areas, such as the quality o f personnel
seconded to run the projects, the level at which discussioddialogue on the project i s
pitched, and government’s ability and willingness to effect new laws and regulations
supporting the desired outcomes o f the project. Borrower ownership and commitment to
the IDA funded program would be also evinced by various borrower actions such as
Government’s continued support to activities previously supported by IDA (e.g., in the
Highlands Water Project, Government continues to allocate resources to support
community activities for communities displaced by the project); participation in the
annual joint Bank/ Government review o f the lending program; and continued support for
the ‘scholarship’ fund to support free education from Primary (now extended to
Secondary), which was piloted by the Bank’s ESDP APL.
11.

Recurrent Cost Financing

6.
Over the last few years, recurrent expenditures represented about 80 percent o f
total public expenditures in Lesotho. Currently in Lesotho, the Bank finances limited
recurrent costs in line with the existing policy (mainly for project operating costs).
7.
In Lesotho, increased financing o f recurrent costs per se does not jeopardize fiscal
or debt sustainability as recurrent costs are already well integrated into the budget
preparation and execution processes, and financing o f these costs by the Bank would not
introduce any special considerations for fiscal sustainability.
The Government
recognizes that public sector reforms are essential in the medium t e r m to bring resources
in line with the priorities o f the PRSP. The Bank will continue to carry out sector-focused
and general Public Expenditure Reviews, and other analytic and advisory activities, to
highlight major issues relating to fiscal and debt sustainability.
8.
We propose financing recurrent costs as needed to meet project development
objectives, including salaries o f PIU staff, consistent with sustainability and fiduciary
concerns.
Financing o f recurrent costs, including salaries, would facilitate the
implementation o f certain projects, especially those in the environmental and social
sectors. Most sectors have ongoing difficulties with retaining qualified staff, and receipt
o f adequate and consistent funding for extension services, and implementation and
68

maintenance o f local development programs. Therefore, it i s important for IDA to retain
flexibility t o fund recurrent costs as needed in individual projects especially with long
term impact o n human capital and productivity. Under current Bank policy, c i v i l servants
would have to resign from their positions in order to work on Bank-financed projects.
This i s not seen as a viable option, however, since pensions are not transferable from the
public to the private sector. C i v i l servants are thus only marginally involved in the
management o f projects, and opportunities for capacity building within the government
are lost. Enhanced flexibility in recurrent cost financing would be beneficial in the case
o f financing service delivery o f public entities, particularly decentralized ones. Funding
o f recurrent expenditures under investment operations improves the likelihood o f
attaining development objectives while improving sustainability o f the country’s
developmental programs in the medium to long term.
In infrastructure sectors, revenue generating mechanisms (through user fees,
9.
tariffs) to cover recurrent costs and to ensure sustainability are in place, and are being
improved. These mechanisms will be utilized to achieve financial sustainability. Thus in
the infrastructure sectors, financing o f recurrent costs are expected to be the exception
rather than the norm.

10.
The track record on sustainability o f projects closed in the last few years has been
generally good: since 2001, five closed projects had ICR sustainability ratings o f likely
(Health Sector Reform project, Road Rehabilitation and Maintenance Project, Second
Education Sector Development Project, Agricultural Policy and Capacity Building and
PrivatisationRestructuring projects), and one had a highly unlikely rating (Community
Development Support Project). I t i s acknowledged that recurrent cost financing carries
with i t risks o f sustainability. For that reason, we propose that the recurrent cost financing
should be applied o n a selective and case-by-case basis. In determining Bank financing
o f recurrent costs in individual projects, the Bank will take into account sustainability
issues at the sector and project levels. In addition, at country level we propose to
regularly monitor such risks through the CPPR exercises. As mentioned above, there will
also be general and sector-specific Public Expenditure Reviews, where issues o f
sustainability will be identified to provide a basis for an overall dialogue with the
government, and changes will be made if needed accordingly.

111.

Local Cost Financing

11.
The total financing requirement for Lesotho’s development program i s M1.2
billion (12 percent o f GDP), o f which M525 million (5.2 percent o f GDP) are
domestically financed. The remainder is financed externally through a mix o f grants and
loans. The implications o f implementing the PRS are not fully reflected in these
estimates. The PRS has been costed at over US$600 m i l l i o n over the three year period.
Taking the cost o f implementing the PRS into account, it is clear that the financing
requirements for Lesotho’s development program exceed the public sector’s own
resources generation capacity. The Lesotho portfolio includes projects in the social
sectors, safety nets, community development, HIV/AIDS, road rehabilitation and
maintenance whose majority expenditures are local as opposed to foreign. On average,
57% o f IDA disbursements for FY02-04 were towards local costs. The lending activities
69

foreseen for 2006-08 are expected to continue to require substantial contracting o f local
goods and services. Hence the financing o f local expenditures alone would not be
sufficient. Lesotho meets the requirements for Bank financing o f local costs; and
therefore the Bank may finance local costs and foreign costs in any proportions as needed
for individual projects.

IV.

Financing o f Taxes and Duties

12.
Lesotho’s tax system is generally efficient, with a broad-based value-added tax
(VAT) which i s supplemented by corporate and personal income taxes, and excise duties.
Domestic tax revenues are approximately 20 percent o f GDP and tax administration is
considered efficient. Customs duties are shared within the S A C U framework. Ad valorem
rates (39 bands) range from zero to 55 percent with more than h a l f o f the lines bearing a
zero rate. The highest rates are applied to luxury consumer goods which are not
applicable in Bank-financed projects. Personal income i s taxed at the rate o f 25 percent
for the first M33,075 of taxable income and 35 percent thereafter. Corporate taxes range
from 5 percent (manufacturing) to 25 percent for (non-manufacturing income). The VAT
has been set at four different rates applicable to different categories o f goods and
services: there i s no VAT o n goods and services exported from Lesotho and o n basic
staples as well as agricultural inputs; 5 percent VAT o n electricity and telephone
services; 14 percent o n other supplies o f goods and services and 15 percent on alcohol
products and tobacco products. Bank financed projects are taxed at the same rate as the
country’s normal rates. Lesotho’s taxes have been assessed as l o w to moderate and are
not considered excessive, thus there are n o taxes or duties that the Bank would not be
able to finance. At the project-level however, the Bank would consider whether taxes
and duties constitute an excessively high share o f project costs and will make any
necessary adjustments during project preparation.

70

Annex A2: Lesotho at a Glance
POVERTY and SOCIAL
2004
Population, mid-year (millions)
GNi per capita (Atlas method, US$f
GNi (Atlas methab, US$ billions)

Lesarno

SubSaharan
Afrlca

Lowincome

18
740
13

719
800
432

2,338
510
1,184

09
11

22
10

1%
21

30
37
79
18
78
81
126
125
I27

37
46
I01
58
65
95
102
88

31
58
79
44
75
61
94
101
88

Development diamond.
Life expectancy

T

Average annual growth, 199844
Populatior1(%f
Labor force (%)
Most recent estimate (latest year available, 199844)
Povetiy (% of pwu/atian below nationalpoverty line)
Urban pupuiation (% oftoral pupulafian)
Life expectancy at biith (years)
Infant mortality (per 1,000 live births)
Child malnutrition (% or children under 5)
Access to an improved watef source PA ofpopulation)
Literacy (% of populationage 751.)
Gross primary enrollment ('% afschool-age population)
Male
Female

GNI
per
-Pita

Gross
primary
enrollment

Access to improved water source

i -

-Lesotho
Lowincome WOUD

KEY ECONOMIC RATIOS and LONG-TERM TRENDS
1984

1094

2003

2004

GDP (US$ billions)
Gmss capital fOnation/GDP
Exports of goods and services/GDP
Gmss domestic savings/GDP
Gross national savin&GDP

0 37
14 1
97
-90 1
94

0 84
58 7
21 8
-30 1
29 8

11
348
503
-16 6,
20 5

13
32 4
49 8
493
21 1

Curre* a m n t baiance/GDP
interest paymenWGDP
lutai debVGDP
Total debt sewicelexports
Present value of debvGDP
Present value of debUexports

"85 8

-28 8
13
73 5
45

-12 1
13
663
79

-48
11
53 0
58

198444

1994-04

2003

2004

200448

5.8
41
155

23
I.3
13.0

32
23
-05

23
14
07

14
03
36

1984

1994

2003

2004

24.3
24.8
12.5
50.9

18.2
38.9
16.3
42.9

17.7
41.5
19.8
40.9

17.5
40.9
19.5
41.6

159.9
30.2
113.9

100.4
29.7
108.5

83.2
33.4
101.7

81.9
37.4
101.5

1984-84

19S4-04

2003

2004

1.7
10.5
8.1
4.6

1.8
2.8
3.1
2.4

-2.5
5.2
1.9
3.9

-0.3
2.0
-6.0
3.8

0.9
4.4
25.5
5.6

-0.4
4.7
-3.9
1.3

2.0
1.7
-6.2
-3.3

0.9
13.8
-5.3
1.5

(average annual gmwth)
GDP
GDP per capita
Exports of goads and services
STRUCTUREof the ECONOMY
(% of GDP)
Agriculture
Industry
Manufacturing
Services

Householdfinal consumption expenditure
General gov? final consumption expenditure
imports of goods and services

(average annual growth)
Agriculture
Industry
Manufacturing
Services
Householdfinal consumption expenditure
General gov'f final consumption expenditure
Gmss capital formation
imports of goods and services

Economic ratloo'
Trade

Indebtedness

-

-Lesotho
Lowincome group

1 Growth of capital and GDP (x)
5

0

4
-10
-15

-GCF

*GDP

Growth of exports and imports (%)
40
20

0
-20

Note: 2004 data are preliminary estimates.
The diamonds show four key indicators in the country (in bold) compared with its incomeqroup average. If data are missing, the diamond will
be incomplete.

71

I

Lesotho
PRICES and GOVERNMENT FINANCE
Domestic prices
(% change)
Consumer prices
implicit GDP deflator
Government finance
(% of GDP, includes current grants)
Current revenue
Current budget balance
Overall surplus/deficit

TRADE
(US$ millions)
Total exports (fob)
Clothing and other goods
Machinery and transport equipment
Manufactures
Total imports (cif)
Food
Fuel and energy
Capital goods

1984

1994

2004

11.0
7.7

8.2
7.4

6.7
5.9

8.6
1.7

20.4
8.4
9.0

46.7
15.1
0.6

41.4
5.3
-3.2

44.7
8.3
0.6

I984

1994

2003

2004

141

473
347
17
73
484
217
41
98

640
470
23
99
609
273
52
123

122
100
122

128
100
128

43 1

1984

1994

2003

2004

53
478
-426

185
874
-689

520
1,064
-543

703
1,329
-827

Net income
Net current transfers

332
-223

329
185

247
168

314
253

Current account balance

-316

-175

-129

-60

Financing items (net)
Changes in net reserves

325
-9

293
-118

149
-20

112
-52

49
1.5

368
3.6

430
7.6

490
6.5

1984

1994

2003

2004

619
42
143

706
19
247

688
20
253

28
2
2

65
22
6

62
4
6

26
49
-5

17
-18
-6

23
-9
-9

0
20
1
19
3
16

0
18
25
-7
2
-9

0
14
8
8
2
4

(US$ millions)
Exports of goods and services
Imports of goods and services
Resource balance

Memo:
Reserves including gold (US$ millionsl
Conversion rate (OEC, local/US$)

EXTERNAL DEBT and RESOURCE FLOWS
(US$ millions)
Total debt outstandingand disbursed
IBRD
IDA
Total debt service
IBRD
IDA
Composition of net resource flows
Official grants
Official creditors
Private creditors
Foreign direct investment (net inflows)
Portfolio equity (net inflows)
World Bank program
Commitments
Disbursements
Principal repayments
Net flows
Interest payments
Net transfers

I

Inflation ( W )

1

I

iL6 r

Export price index (2000=100)
impolt price index (2000=100)
Terms of trade (2000=100)

BALANCE of PAYMENTS

2003

I

Export and import levels (US$ mlll.)
6W
5w
4W

3w

2w
1W
0

98

W

99

03

02

01

Expwts

rnImpOr!3

"I

Current account balance to GDP (%)
0
5

-10

-15
-20

-25
/-Jol98

99

00

01

02

03

M

omposition of 2004 debt (US$ mill.)

61

s - IBRD
B - IDA

2o

D - Other multilateral

E - Bilateral
F - Pnvate
G . Short-term

9/8/05

Development Economics

72

Annex B2 - Lesotho - Selected Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
As Of Date
1111812005

indicator
Portfolio Assessment
Number of Projects Under Implementation
a

Average Implementation Period (years)
Percent of Problem Projects by Number a , c
Percent of Problem Projects by Amount
Percent of Projects at Risk by Number a,
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount a*
Disbursement Ratio (%) e
Portfolio Management
CPPR during the year (yedno)
Supervision Resources (total US$)
Average Supervision (US$/project)

Memorandum Item
Proj Eva1 by OED by Number
Proj Eva1 by OED by Amt (US$ millions)
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by
Number
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt

2003

2004

2005

2006

8
4.0
25.0
7.1
25.0
7.1
26.8

5
3.4
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
30.6

6
3.1
16.7
4.5
16.7
4.5
26.5

7
3.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
5.0

No
1,083
155

Yes
1,040
130

Yes
1,012
101

Since FY 80
25
307.2

Last Five FYs
4
62.7

36.0
22.9

50.0
21 . I

As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY).
Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio.
Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) and/or implementation progress (IP).
As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the
beginning of the year: Investment projects only.
* All indicators are for projects active in the Portfolio, with the exception of Disbursement Ratio,
which includes all active projects as well as projects which exited during the fiscal year.

a.
b.
c.
d.
e.

73

Annex B3 - Lesotho - IBRDDDA Program Summary
Proposed IBRDllDA Base-Case Lending Program a
Fiscal
year

proj ID

2006

LS-Health Sector Reform Phase 2 APL

2007

LS-IntegratedTransport SIL

us$(M)
6.5

Result

6.5
23.5

LS-Private Sector Competitiveness
2008

8.0

Result

31.5

LS-Poverty Reduction Support Credit I

10.0

.o

Result
Overall Result

48.0

74

Strategic Rewards
b (H/IWL}

Implementation b
Risks (WIWL)

-

Annex B3 - Lesotho - IFC and MIGA Program Summary, 2003 2006

IFC approvals (US$m)

2003

2004

2005

2006

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

10.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

Sector (%I
Investment instrument(%)

MIGA guarantees (US$m)

75

Annex B4 - Lesotho - Summary o f Nonlending Services
As of 811812005

Product
Recent completions
Sources of Growth and
Employment
PSD Strategy
Underway
CAS Full
PRSP
PEMFAR
ICA Analysis/ Dissemination
Planned
Poverty Assessment
Decentralization and DemandDriven Service Delivery
Country Procurement
Assessment Report
Incidence and Impact of
HIV/AIDS

Completion FY

Cost (US$OOO)

FY03
FY05

Audiencea

Objectiveb

$150
120

Govt/Bank
GovtDonors/Bank

KG/PS
KG/PS

FY06
FY06
FY06
FY06

150
150
150
40

GovtlBank
GovtDonors/Bank
GovtDonors/Bank
GovtDonors/Bank

KG/PS
KGlPS
KG/PS
KGlPS

FY07

135

Govt/Donors/Bank

KG/PS

FY07

90

GovtlDonordBank

KG/PS

FY07

90

GovtlDonorslBank KG/PS

FY08

75

a. Government, donor, Bank, public dissemination.
b. Knowledge generation, public debate, problemsolving.

76

Annex B5 - Lesotho - Key Social Indicators
Latest single year
POPULATION
Total population, mid-year (millions)
Growth rate (% annual average for period)
Urban population (% of population)
Total fertility rate (births per woman)

Same regionlincome group
SubSaharan
LowAfrica
income

1975-80

1985-90

1998-2004

1.3
2.3
13.4
5.7

1.6
1.7
17.2
5.1

1.8
0.9
18.1
4.3

719.0
2.2
36.7
5.2

2,338.1
1.8
30.7
3.6

500
15
15

650
54
52

740
185
198

600

510

6.2

5.3
10.4

2.6
3.4

1.5
3.2

73
65
81

86
83
89

64
68
60

78
82
76

76
88
74

58
82
45

75
89
69

80
76

70
79
18

61
59

66
67
44

52
50
54

58
56
59

37
36
38

46
45
46

58
57
59

97
140

74
104

79
110

101
171

79
122

667
630
550
60

519
461
24
39

317
266
538
38

POVERTY (% of population)
National headcount index
Urban headcount index
Rural headcount index
INCOME
GNI per capita (US$)
Consumer price index (1995=100)
Food price index (1995=100)
INCOMElCONSUMPTlON DISTRIBUTION
Gini index
Lowest quintile (% of income or consumption)
Highest quintile (% of income or consumption)
SOCIAL INDICATORS
Public expenditure
Health (% of GDP)
Education (% of GDP)
Net primary school enrollment (% of age group)
Total
Male
Female
Access t o an improved water source (% of population)
Total
Urban
Rural
Immunization rate (X of children ages 12-23 months)
Measles
49
DPT
56
Child malnutrition (% under 5 years)
17
Life expectancy at birth (years)
Total
Male
Female
Mortality
Infant (per 1,000 live births)
Under 5 (per 1,000 live births)
Adult (15-59)
Male (per 1,000 population)
Female (per 1,000 population)
Maternal (modeled, per 100,000 live births)
Births attended by skilled health staff (%)

37 1
279

Note: 0 or 0.0 means zero or less than half the unit shown. Net enrollment rate: break in series between 1997 and 1998 due to
change from ISCED76 to ISCED97. Immunization: refers to children ages 12-23 months who received vaccinations before one
year of age.
World Development Indicators database, World Bank - 08/29/05

77

Annex B6 - Lesotho - Key Economic Indicators

lridicator

2001

Actual
2002
2003

listiinate

2004

2005

2006

Projected
2007

2008

National accounts (as % of GDP)
Gross domestic product"
Agriculture
Industry
Services

100
18
42
40

100
18
42
40

100
18
41
41

100
17
43
40

100
18
42
40

100
18
42
40

100
18
42
40

100
18
41
41

Total Consumption
Gross domestic fixed investment
Government investment
Private investment

114
43
11
32

118
40
10
30

117
36
8
28

119
34
8
26

123
31
8
23

123
31
22

122
32
9
22

121
32
9
23

~xp01-t~
(GNFS)~
Imports (GNFS)

43
98

56
116

49
106

56
105

54
106

53
106

54
106

54
106

Gross domestic savings
Gross ~ t i 0 savingsc
~ 1

-14
26

-18
26

-17
29

-19
28

-23
27

-23
26

-22
26

-2 1
25

767

699

1065

1367

1453

1484

1554

1645

600

540

590

740

890

970

1000

1040

Real annual growth rates (%, calculated
from 1995 prices)
Gross domestic product at market prices
Gross Domestic Income

3.2
3.0

3.5
3.0

3.1
3.0

3.1
3.0

1.2
1.2

1.7
1.7

2.4
2.4

2.5
2.5

Real annual per capita growth rates (%,
calculated from 1995 prices)
Gross domestic product at market prices
Total consumption
Private consumption

2.2
-1.8
1.4

2.6
6.1
5.4

2.2
1.0
1.0

2.2
3.7
0.0

0.3
2.1
1.0

0.8
0.9
0.1

1.5
0.2
0.1

1.6
0.3
0.3

315
276

397
359

520
473

703
640

738
673

760
692

745
68 1

752
686

725
677
-410
-1 13

835
777
-438
-133

1064
981
-543
-129

1329
1230
-627
-66

1352
1251
-614
-45

1368
1266
-608
-80

1375
1272
-630
-106

1403
1275
-650
-158

27

29

41

53

69

70

77

83

-12

7

-18

-9

-8

-14

-14

-14

Memorandum items
Gross domestic product
(US$ million at current prices)
GNI per capita (US$, Atlas method)

9

Balance of Payments (US$ millions)
~xp01-t~
(GNFS)~
Merchandise FOB
Imports (GNFS)~
Merchandise FOB
Resource balance
Current account balance
N e t private foreign direct investment
Long-term loans (net)
Official
Private

78

Actual

Indicator

2001

202

2003

2004

llstinmte
2005

2006

Projected

2007

2008

Other capital (net, incl. errors & ommissions)
Change in reservesd
Memorandum items
Resource balance ("3o f GDP)
Real annual growth rates ( YR95 prices)
Merchandise exports (FOB)

Primary
Manufactures
Merchandise imports (CIF)

Public finance (as YOof GDP at market
prices)e
Current revenues
Current expenditures
Current account surplus (+) or deficit (-)
Capital expenditure
Foreign financing
Monetary indicators
M2/GDP
Growth o f M2 (%)
Private sector credit growth /
total credit growth ("3)
Price indices( yR95 =loo)
Merchandise export price index
Merchandise import price index
Merchandise terms o f trade index
Real exchange rate (US$/LCU)f
Real interest rates
Consumer price index ("3change)
GDP deflator ("3 change)

18

-3

-20

-52

6

31

23

27

-53.5

-62.6

-51.0

-45.9

-42.3

-41.0

-40.6

-39.5

19.4
15.8
32.1
-8.6

21.7
18.0
33.5
13.8

24.1
20.3
34.9
-39.6

29.2
25.2
39.0
26.0

-5.9
-8.7
0.3
9.4

-3.5
-6.1
1.9
-0.2

-2.8
-5.1
1.7
1.o

-0.8
-2.8
2.8
1.6

41.6
35.5
6.1
10.3
2.9

40.4
36.9
3.4
11.0
3.5

41.4
36.1
5.3
8.5
2.6

45.4
35.3
10.1
7.2
1.5

47.5
36.8
10.7
7.7
1.2

52.1
41.2
10.9
10.3
2.5

52.6
41.6
11.0
10.6
3.0

47.1
40.5
6.6
10.2
3.0

30.2
17.2
44.4

29.4
8.8
7.5

28.5
6.0
142.6

28.3
3.3
-17.2

28.7
3.5
972.4

28.5
4.9
28.7

28.2
5.5
172.5

27.8
5.7
240.5

184.2
106.4
173.2

197.0
106.6
184.8

208.7
110.9
188.2

219.0
110.8
197.7

227.6
110.8
205.5

234.3
110.8
211.5

238.8
110.8
215.5

241.2
110.8
217.6

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

10.1
7.3

9.7
8.2

7.2
5.9

4.8
6.3

4.8
3.4

5.0
4.5

5.0
5.0

5.0
5.0

.

a. GDP at factor cost
b. "GNFS" denotes "goods and nonfactor services."
c.
d.
e.
f.

Includes net unrequited transfers excluding official capital grants.
Includes use o f IMF resources.
Consolidated central government.
"LCU" denotes "local currency units." An increase in US$/LCU denotes appreciation.

79

Annex B7 - Lesotho - Key Exposure Indicators
E s h ate
2005

2006

688

671

649

628

606

583

-19

-18

-17

-22

-18

-17

-18

64

64

60

55

54

44

40

36

109.5
77.9
11.8
64.5

105.4
94.1
10.3
65.6

85.3
66.3
7.8
67.5

63.5
50.3
5.5
70.0

63.2
46.2
5.2
72.9

61.3
43.7
5.1
75.7

59.1
40.4
4.1
77.9

56.4
36.8
3.7
80.1

82.0

10.2
40.3

40.3
68.7

32.7
62.2

6.7
46.6

7.3
48.0

7.4
49.0

8.6
60.9

8.8
66.8

9.4
72.4

1.3
55

4.4
37

2.6
19

0.4
20

0.4
20

0.4
19

0.4
17

0.4
15

13

187

218

247

253

257

259

259

260

258

Actual
2003

2001

2002

598

658

706

Net disbursements (US$m)a

-8

8

Total debt service (TDS)
(US$m)"

64

Indicator
Total debt outstanding and
disbursed (TDO) (US$m)a

2004

Projected
2007
2008

2009

Debt and debt service indicators

("w

TDO/XGS~
TDO/GDP
TDS/XGS
ConcessionaYTDO

IBRD exposure indicators (%)
IBRD DS/public D S

Preferred creditor DS/public
D S ("A)'
IBRD DS/XGS
IBRD TDO (US$mId
Of which present value o f
guarantees (US$m)
IDA TDO (US$m)d

I F C (US$m)
Loans
Equity and quasi-equity /c

MIGA

red
a. Includes public and publicly guaranteed debt, private nonguaranteed, use o f IMF credits and net short-term capital.
b. "XGS" denotes exports o f goods and services, including workers' remittances.
c. Preferred creditors are defined as IBRD, IDA, the regional multilateral development banks, the IMF, and the Bank for
International Settlements.
d. Includes present value o f guarantees.
e. Includes equity and quasi-equity types o f both loan and equity instruments.

80

3

00

I

23

I

Yu

MAP SECTION

