Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized

Document o f
The World Bank
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Report No. 37703-MU

INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT

Public Disclosure Authorized

Public Disclosure Authorized

COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY
FOR
THE REPUBLIC OF MAURITIUS
October 12,2006

Southern Africa Country Department
Africa Region
This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance o f their
official duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without World Bank authorization.

REPUBLIC OF MAURITIUS
COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STR4TEGY
CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS
Currency Unit: Mauritius Rupee (MUR)
US$1 = MUR 32,5 (September 2006)
WEIGHTS AND MEASURES
Metric System
FISCAL YEAR
July 1 - June 30
ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS
AAA
ABP
AFD
AfDB
AIMS
AIMS SIDS
BADEA
CAS
CAS CR
CEM
COMESA
CPE
CPS
DPL
EASSy
EIB
EPZ
ESW
EU
FIAS
FSAP
FY
GDP
GEF
IBRD
ICR
ICT
IDF

Analytical and Advisory Activities
Annual Business Plan
Agence Franqaise de DCveloppement
African Development Bank
Atlantic, Indian Ocean, Mediterranean,
and the South China Sea
AIMS Small Island Developing States
Arab Bank for Economic Development
in Africa
Country Assistance Strategy
CAS Completion Report
Country Economic Memorandum
Common Market for Eastern and
Southern Africa
Certificate o f Primary Education
Country Partnership Strategy
Development Policy Loan
East Africa Submarine System
European Investment Bank
Export Processing Zones
Economic and Sector Work
European Union
Foreign Investment Advisory Service
Financial Sector Assessment Program
Fiscal Year
Gross Domestic Product
Global Environment Facility
InternationalBank for Reconstruction
and Development
ImplementationCompletion Report
Information and Communication
Technologies
Institutional Development Fund

Country Director
Task Team Leader

IFAD
IFC
IMF
IOC
MDG
MFA
MIC
MIGA
MTEF
NEA
NEAP
OPEC
PEFA
PER
PERL
PFM
PIU
QAG
SACU
SADC
SME
TCF
TDS
UNDP
WBI
WMA
ZEP

InternationalFund for Agricultural
Development
InternationalFinance Corporation
InternationalMonetary Fund
Indian Ocean Commission
Millennium Development Goal
Multi-fiber Agreement
Middle Income Country
Multilateral Investment Guarantee
Agency
Medium-TermExpenditure Framework
New Economic Agenda
National Environmental Action Plan
Organization o f Petroleum Exporting
Countries
Public Expenditure and Financial
Accountability
Public Expenditure Review
Public Expenditure Reform Loan
Public Financial Management
Project Implementation Unit
Quality Assurance Group
Southern African Customs Union
Southern Africa Development
Community
Small and Medium Enterprise
Technical Cooperation Facility
Technology Diffusion Scheme
United Nations Development Program
World Bank Institute
Wastewater Management Authority
Zones d’Education Prioritaires

James Bond
Janet Dooley

This CPS was produced by a core CPS team including L i l i a Burunciuc, Janet Dooley, Robert Keyfitz,
Luis Alvaro Sanchez, and Harifera Raobelison, under the overall guidance o f James Bond. Richard
Newfarmer, Sascha Djumena, Ann Rennie, Alain Labeau, Marc Juhel, Ganesh Rasagam, John
Donaldson, Maria-TeresaBenito Spinetto, Isabel Neto, and other members o f the Bank Group-wide
Mauritius Country Team also made valuable contributions throughout the process. Helpful
guidance and advice was provided by Tevfik Yaprak (OPCS). From the European Commission,
Hans Rhein and Vikramdityasing Bissoonauthsing greatly contributed to the development o f this
CPS.

TABLE
OF CONTENTS

....................................................................................................................................... i
Country Context and Outlook .............................................................................................
..............l

Executive Summary

I.

.....................................
.............................
....................................

What Drove the Success of Mauritius’ Economy

The Situation Today....................................
Millennium Development Goals ..............

.....................................
.................................

Main Challenges.........................................................
Medium Term Economic Outlook...............................

............................

Government’s Actions to Date....................................

11.

111.

IV.

Government Development Program

............................................. ....................................................

1
1

3
3
5
6
7

Bank and EUAssessment ..................................................................................................................... 9

....................................................................
Country Partnership Strategy .........................................................................................................
Lessons Learned from Past World Bank Experience

11

.................11

Why should the World Bank be involved in Mauritius? ..................................

CPS Objective........................
Overall Approach..................
CPSprogram ............................................

10

.....................................
..........................

.....................................

The Strategic Framework
Regional Cooperation Pro
Guidelines for Bank Involvement.................................

.....................................
..................................

Monitoring and Evaluation .........................................

..................................

17
17

CPS Consultation Proces

.........................................................................................................

V.

Risk and Mitigation Measures
Credinuorthiness.................................................................................................................................

VI.

Concluding Remarks

........................................................................................................................

Annexes
Annex 1:
Annex 2:
Annex 3 :
Annex 4:
Annex 5:
CPS Annex A I :
CPS Annex B2:
CPS Annex B3:
CPS Annex B3:
CPS Annex B4:
CPS Annex B6:
CPS Annex B7:
CPS Annex B8:
CPS Annex B8:

Results Framework
2002 CAS Completion Report
Country Financing Parameters
Partner Institutions,
Consultations with Stakeholders
Mauritius at a Glance
Selected Indicators o f Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
IBRD Program Summary
IFC and MIGA Program Summary
Summary o f Non Lending Services
Key Economic Indicators
Key Exposure Indicators
Operations Portfolio
Statement o f IFC’s Held and Disbursed Portfolio

Tables
Table 1:
Table 2:
Table 3:
Table 4:

Long Term Growth Scenarios
Medium Term Outlook
Public Debt/GDP Ratios under Various Scenarios
Fiscal Projections

Boxes
Box 1
Box 2

Main Recommendation from the CAS Completion Report
Development Policy Loans

18
19
19

Foreword
This Country Partnership Strategy has been prepared together with the Government and
with the European Commission’s 2007-2013 Country Strategy Paper. This joint work i s
part o f the harmonization agenda, following the presentation o f the reform program o f the
Government o f Mauritius. I t includes a shared diagnostic and results matrix. The
European Commission and the World Bank have also agreed to undertake joint
implementation by supporting common programs and carrying out joint evaluations and
mid-term review.

EXECUTIVE
SUMMARY
Since independence in 1968, Mauritius has achieved remarkable economic and
social success, based on good governance, exceptional use o f preferential trade agreements
for its sugar and textile exports, and the development o f strong tourism and financial
services industries. At independence, the country was poor, with a per capita income of
about US$260. Today, per capita income i s US$5,250, the second highest in the Africa
region after Seychelles, with good social indicators.

(i)

(ii) However, while economic performance remains good by international standards,
Mauritius i s facing significant economic and social challenges as it i s forced to transition
from dependence on trade preferences to open competition in the global economy.
Average growth has slowed from over 7.5 percent in the second half o f the 1980s to 3.5
percent during the past five years. The fiscal deficit i s estimated at 5.4 percent o f GDP for
FYOY06. And unemployment (currently at 8-10 percent) i s o n the rise due to a mismatch
in labor skills and labor market rigidities. The country’s challenge i s n o w to boost
economic growth through higher productivity; develop human capital through education
reform to raise s k i l l levels; promote new emerging sectors and move Mauritius to a more
knowledge based economy while preserving i t s long standing commitment to social
we1far e,
(iii) To address these challenges, the Government o f Mauritius has laid out a plan to get
Mauritius back on a high growth path, and protect Mauritians who are being negatively
affected by the transition. The reform program presented in the budget on June 9,2006
has four pillars: (i)Fiscal Consolidation and Improved Public Sector Efficiency; (ii)
Improving Trade Competitiveness; (iii)
Improving the Investment Climate; and (iv)
Democratizing the Economy through participation, social inclusion and sustainability. The
new reform program lays out an impressive roadmap in addressing the challenges ahead by
liberalizing the economy, improving the public sector, reforming the tax base, promoting
investment, and establishing a new social program. The challenge i s to now develop sector
programs and implement reform.
(iv)
Given the magnitude o f the country’s economic and social challenges, the
Government has asked for increased support from the World Bank, especially in terms o f
the provision o f knowledge, and from the European Union (EU), with whom the country
has had longstanding trade ties and assistance through the European Development Fund.

This FY07-13 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) i s based on three guiding
(v)
principles: (i)
alignment with the Government Program; (ii)
flexibility; and (iii)
harmonization. I t has been developed in close collaboration with the Government o f
Mauritius and the European Union to ensure that it responds to the country’s emerging
needs, and reflects a coherent approach o f Mauritius’ major development partners. This
CPS builds on lessons learned from previous Bank experience in Mauritius and on the
flexible approaches developed elsewhere in the Bank for Middle-Income Countries. It i s
grounded in the Bank’s recognition that it needs to adapt i t s business model to Mauritius’
development agenda, and the Government’s recognition that the Bank brings much more
than financial resources to the table.

i

(vi)
The CPS takes as a starting point the four pillars o f the Government’s strategy.
Details o f the Bank Group program in Mauritius will be set out each year in an Annual
Business Plan (ABP). The ABP will be developed in parallel with the Government’s
annual planning and budget processes to ensure that the Bank i s fully in step with
Mauritius’ development agenda, and with other donors’ support.
(vii) The CPS objective i s to help the Government deal with short-term trade shocks and
the transition to a more competitive and sophisticated economy, while minimizing negative
social impacts. It i s built around a results framework outlining a broad l i s t o f potential
outcomes agreed with the Government o f Mauritius and the EU. However, because the
CPS sets out a broad program, the elements o f which will be determined every year
through Annual Business Plans, it i s not expected that the Bank will contribute to all o f the
pre-identified outcomes, but only to those in which it will be involved.
(viii) The Government has indicated i t s interest in a range o f Bank instruments to help it
implement i t s reform program and achieve its strategic objectives over the next seven
years. First, the Government has requested a series o f annual development policy loans
(DPLs) to help implement key facets o f the reform program, for an expected IBRD amount
o f US$30 million each, starting from FY07. This budget support program will be done
jointly with other development partners, particularly the EU, France, and the African
Development Bank. Second, the Government has requested infrastructure investment
loans, for which cofinancing will also be sought, notably with the EIB. Third, the
Government would like analytical and advisory work to continue and intensify. To
support the Government’s research needs, the Bank i s putting in place a Rapid Response
Facility and the EU a Technical Cooperation Facility. The two institutions are exploring
with Government the possibility o f a Joint AAA funding arrangement to create a coherent
EU/World Bank framework for technical assistance and analytical work for the
Government’s reform program. I t i s hoped that this arrangement will catalyze additional
resources for analytical work, and be done jointly with Government. Finally, over the CPS
period, the Government will be seeking increased partnerships with the other parts o f the
Bank Group (IFC,and MIGA), to assist in the mobilization o f private investment.

The strategy faces several key risks, the most important o f which are as follows.
First, there may be erosion o f support for the reform program in light o f the difficult
transition. The Bank will monitor the situation and adjust the program as necessary.
Second, there i s a risk that the Government may not borrow from the Bank. T o better
manage the work program and adjust if the Government does or does not borrow, the Bank
and Government have agreed to plan and review the work program o n an annual basis.
Finally, there i s a risk that the Bank may not be able to meet the expectations o f the client,
especially as far as the analytical and advisory work i s concerned. The demand o f the
Mauritian Government for the Bank’s services currently exceeds what the Bank can
reasonably finance out o f i t s operational budget. Therefore, this strategy proposes the
creation o f the joint donor-government AAA fund that can finance analytical work and
technical assistance to meet the government’s research and capacity needs.
(ix)

*.

11

Executive Directors may wish to consider the following issues for discussion:
0

0

Does the CPS and its companion Annual Business Plans, appropriately respond to
Mauritius’ needs, balancing flexibility with accountability?
Predicting results for a M I C program where Bank support will only be determined
on an annual basis i s a challenge. I s the proposed framework, providing a menu o f
possible results depending on what tasks the Bank carries out and doing it jointly
with the EU, appropriate?
Given the limited Bank resources for Mauritius, i s the proposed approach to partner
with other donor institutions and to catalyze additional resources, including from
the Government, a sensible one?

...

111

Mauritius Country Partnership Strategy 2007-2013
I.

COUNTRY CONTEXT AND OUTLOOK

What Drove the Success o f Mauritius’ Economy

1.
Mauritius i s a small island economy in the Indian Ocean with a population o f 1.2
m i l l i o n people and an income per capita o f US$5,250. It has achieved spectacular
economic success since independence in 1968, outperforming most other countries in the
region and middle-income and small island states as well. From 1968-2004, per capita
GDP growth averaged 3.8 percent’ compared to 2.3 percent for low- and middle-income
countries overall, as successive waves o f diversification transformed the country f r o m a
monocrop sugar producer to an exporter o f sugar, textiles and clothing, tourism and
financial services. Underpinning this success was a well-conceived and executed strategy
to create growth and employment through labor-intensive, export-oriented manufacturing,
while maintaining social harmony through an elaborate social welfare system. In this
context, Mauritius has been successfully benefiting from preferential trade regimes in
sugar and textiles.
2.
Mauritius boasts a vibrant democracy along with well established traditions o f
consensus building and maintenance o f social harmony.2 The system o f parliamentary
democracy has helped boost democratic values and political stability, an essential
ingredient for steady economic growth. These were well reflected in the July 2005
election o f a new government as, despite a keenly contested election, some policy
continuity has been maintained. Indices for voice and accountability, government
effectiveness, regulatory burden and rule o f l a w are sharply more favorable in Mauritius,
not only compared to other countries in Africa3, but also to fast growing emerging Asian
countries.
The Situation Today

3.
Today, Mauritius i s facing a sharp transition from dependence o n trade preferences
to open competition in the global economy. Moreover, i t i s doing so in an unusually
difficult environment because o f a “triple trade shock” caused by the erosion o f trade
preferences in sugar and textiles and the rise in o i l prices. As a small island economy
heavily dependent o n sugar and textiles, Mauritius i s among the most vulnerable countries
in the world to current changes in the world trade regime. The fact that the rest o f the
economy i s less sophisticated than the sectors subject to international competition (EPZ
and tourism) does not help.

I

Average GDP growth for the same period was 6 percent.
Mauritius has been a parliamentary democracy based on the Westminster system o f democracy model since
independence in 1968. National and local elections are held every five years under the supervision o f an
independent Electoral Commission. The political landscape consists o f numerous political parties, both small
and large. Mauritius has an independent judiciary based on a combination o f English Common Law and the
Napoleonic Code.
3
Mauritius ranks 5 1 out o f 158 country rankings in the 2005 Transparency International Corruption
Perception Index, third in the Africa region after Botswana and South Africa.
2

1

4.
So far, trade preference erosion has mainly affected the clothing sector. Mauritius i s
a relatively high-wage country, and with the end o f the Multi-fiber Agreement (MFA) in
January 2005 i t i s no longer able to compete in traditional market segments. As a result,
the export processing zones (EPZ) apparel sector has downsized by over a third in the past
several years. A similar fate likely awaits i t s sugar sector when the EU begins
implementing price cuts in 2006, leading to a sugar price reduction by 36 percent by 2009.
Meanwhile, the r i s e in o i l prices from $24/bbl in 2002 to more than $70/bbl in early 2006
has added nearly 4 percent o f GDP to the annual o i l import bill. From 2003 to 2005, i t s
terms o f trade deteriorated by nearly 15 percent, equivalent to a massive 10 percent o f
GDP. In addition, export growth has been depressed further by sluggish economic
conditions and weak import demand from Europe, which i s Mauritius’ main trading
partner.

5.
The combined effect o f these developments has been a slowdown o f growth from
5-6 percent in the late 1990s to 3-4 percent over the last five years. Exports have stagnated
in real terms, and productivity growth has slowed sharply. In 2005, the growth rate slowed
further to just 2.5 percent, as a poor sugar harvest coincided with a sharp contraction o f the
EPZ. The creation o f new jobs has not been fast enough to prevent an increase in
unemployment. Domestic investment has fallen, the current account has deteriorated
sharply and foreign exchange reserves have fallen. Fixed investment slumped to an
average ofjust 22 percent o f GDP in 2001-2005 from as much as 30 percent in the mid1990s; both public and private investment shared in the retrenchment, except for a brief
spike in public investment in 2003 associated with the Government’s New Economic
Agenda and construction o f a Cyber Tower and business park including an I C T
infrastructure platform.
Mauritius’ economic success has translated into welfare improvements, but these
6.
achievements are under threat. The incidence o f absolute poverty i s relatively low,
although pockets s t i l l prevail in some suburban and coastal regions in Mauritius and on the
Island o f Rodrigues, and certain groups have remained marginalized. Some 12 percent o f
the population i s estimated to be poor, based on a poverty benchmark calculated at 50
percent o f the median monthly household expenditure. According to the Household Survey
(2001 -20024), 10.2 percent o f households were earning less than Rs 5000 (about US$154)
a month. Significant gender and regional differences exist. The incidence o f poverty i s
relatively higher among female-headed households (33.8 percent) than among male headed
households (8 percent). O n the island o f Rodrigues, the poverty rate i s 30.2 percent. The
incidence o f poverty in rural areas i s more than three times that o f urban areas.

7.
Unemployment has become a serious social problem, climbing steadily from below
3 percent in 1991 to nearly 10 percent today. There i s an important social dimension to
unemployment: nearly a third o f the unemployed live in households in the bottom quintile
o f income distribution, 15 percent live in households with no other sources o f income, and
a high proportion o f unemployed are women (who account for two-thirds o f the
unemployed in the EPZ sector). The unemployed also are disproportionately young; in
2005, the 12-24 year age bracket comprised 16 percent o f the active population but 43
percent o f the unemployed, and the unemployment rate among youth (under 25 years old)
was 26 percent compared to a moderate 6.5 percent for those 25 or older. Most o f the
unemployed have l o w educational attainment - 88 percent have not received a high school
These are the latest data available; household surveys are carried out every f i v e years.

2

certificate. Meanwhile, other social problems such as crime, domestic violence and
HIV/AIDS are on the rise. These issues aside, the overall social picture i s quite positive
and encouraging, as demonstrated by good progress on the Millennium Development
Goals (MDGs).

Millennium Development Goals

8.
Mauritius i s one o f the few countries in Africa that have either met or are highly
likely to meet all but one o f the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) by the year 2015.
I t has accomplished remarkable results over 15 years in terms o f the MDG indicato.rs, with
four out o f the eight specific goals already achieved, largely due to the maintenance o f free
health care and free primary and secondary education. The overwhelming majority o f the
population has access to safe drinking water. Primary education i s universal. The general
state o f health o f the population i s good. Life expectancy has increased from 62 years at
the time o f independence in 1968 to 73 years (2005), and infectious diseases such as
malaria, polio, diphtheria, typhoid and cholera have been virtually eradicated.
9.
The only MDG that Mauritius i s unlikely to meet i s the reduction by two-thirds in
child mortality. Mauritius’ infant mortality rate currently stands at 14 deaths per 1,000
births. This i s well lower than the rate in most middle-income countries. Bringing the rate
down from 14 t o 6 (below the level the USA has today) i s considered unlikely given
Mauritius’ level o f income, especially in the various pockets o f poverty. On the whole,
Mauritius’ development challenges go well beyond the reaching o f the MDGs and focuses
on successfully guiding Mauritius to the next level o f development.
Main Challenges

10.
Economic challenges. Considering the severity o f the external shocks, the
economy’s resilience to the removal o f textile preferences and increase in o i l prices has so
far been impressive. Nevertheless, with its traditional exports n o longer globally
competitive, Mauritius’ most urgent challenge i s economic. To stimulate the growth o f
new, emerging sectors and facilitate the movement o f resources into them, a nexus o f
problems must be addressed.

11.

Thefirst task i s to move resources - land, labor and capital - out o f slow-growing,
low-productivity sectors into dynamic, new activities where Mauritius has a potential
competitive advantage internationally and may be able t o achieve rapid productivity
growth. This will require integrating the large and growing informal sector back into the
formal economy. In addition, the present system o f overly complex industrial regulations,
fiscal incentives and inflexible labor-market institutions will have to be reformed; they
currently are biased toward stasis rather than innovation, toward production for protected
domestic markets rather than exports, and toward capital-intensive technologies rather than
labor. The problems are especially severe for small enterprises, which lack not only the
necessary sophistication, but also access to legal, marketing and other support services.

12.

A second element necessary to reignite growth i s to upgrade services that are
crucial inputs into internationally competitive sectors. High telecommunications costs
often run t w o to four times higher than comparator countries, hobble the o f f shoring and

I C T industries, and discourage essential internet access for businesses trying to sell
Mauritian products in export markets. Restrictions o n air access keep passenger and

3

freight transportation costs high. Electricity costs, meanwhile, are higher than in
comparator countries while the public provider i s accumulating losses. While there i s a
potential of alternative energy sources (biofuels, including ethanol and bagasse, and wind
energy), a clear, sound energy policy i s needed, in particular as concerns independent
power producers. Transportation infrastructure i s also inadequate for a more advanced
economy and congestion is becoming increasingly costly in terms o f direct costs o n
business, loss o f time, use o f fuel and impact on the environment.
13.
Third, critical lapses in education and barriers to hiring foreign workers have
created shortages o f people with essential technical and managerial skills. Mauritius i s
turning out too few workers and professionals with the world-class skills needed to
compete effectively in tourism and hotel management, o f f shoring and ICT businesses and
other dynamic global industries. At the heart o f the problems in education i s the fact that
only two-thirds o f children reach secondary school, only 36 percent complete high school
and only 14 percent obtain tertiary qualifications compared with about 40 to 60 percent for
countries at similar PPP income per capita.

14.
Fourth, bureaucratic procedures, red tape and corruption highlight the need for
public sector reform. Greater efficiency i s needed at a time when there are exceptional
demands for social spending, transitional support and investments in infrastructure, but
public sector debt o f around 70 percent’ o f GDP i s constraining fiscal space. Poor fiscal
discipline, misalignment o f budget allocations with national priorities, widespread and
costly tax expenditures and poorly targeted subsidy programs all contribute to l o w overall
public-sector efficiency.
15.
Other challenges. Apart from the need for economic reform, the country also
faces social challenges. Mauritius’ developmental success i s built on social cohesion. With
the rise o f unemployment and educational inequalities the restructuring o f the economy
may risk increasing the poverty among certain segments o f the population, unless
appropriate and well targeted social safety nets are put in place.
In the health sector, the overall indicators are good. But Mauritius has the second
16.
highest prevalence rate o f diabetes in the world, and H I V / A I D S incidence, though
relatively low, has been rising, particularly among drug users. I t i s estimated that there are
some 18,000 injecting drug users in Mauritius, and that some 13 percent o f these are
infected with H I V / A I D S virus. Without sustained and determined action n o w HIVIAIDS
could soar within a decade as has been observed in other countries with similar profiles.

17.
Environmental challenges are also important. Tourism has proved to be a reliable
pillar o f growth, but the country’s goals o f nearly tripling arrivals to two m i l l i o n over the
next decade and constructing 18,000 new hotel rooms will call for careful environmental
management. A strategy i s needed for waste management and protection o f ocean
resources. The environmental implications o f withdrawing significant amounts o f land
from sugar cultivation also need to be addressed. As a small island, Mauritius i s also
exposed to climate change, cyclones, and rising sea levels, requiring disaster management
and early warning systems. Mauritius also faces a risk o f o i l spills, which would threaten
such environmental resources as coral reefs, sea grass beds and beaches, and thus affect
tourism.
S

Including parastatal debt.

4

18.
Gender issues have been brought to the fore by downsizing in the textiles and
clothing industries, where layoffs have predominantly affected women, whose
unemployment rate far exceeds men’s.
Medium Term Economic Outlook
19.
Mauritius’ long term prospects are good. Over the past quarter century the country
has been a star performer and the recent resilience in the face o f a difficult structural
transition and a sharp trade shock has also been impressive. Strong institutions and a
pragmatic approach to economic management provide a solid platform for reforms which
the Government i s introducing. While this i s a time o f considerable uncertainty, there i s no
reason to anticipate a radical break from past trends. Long term (20 year) scenarios
prepared for the Country Economic Memorandum indicated that growth in the range o f 4-6
percent annually should be feasible (Table 1). However, moving the outcome toward the
top o f the range would entail a significant reform effort in a range o f areas.

Table 1 - Long Term Growth Scenarios
output
EmDlovment

Medium
4.8
1.2

Low

Source: Mauritius CEM

3.2
0.6

High
6.5
2.1

20.
In the medium term, the expectation is that growth will recover progressively from
recent levels toward that range (Table 2). O f course, the speed o f the recovery depends on
the quality and credibility o f the Government’s reform program and the assumption
underlying the outlook i s that it will continue and have a significant impact. Table 2
anticipates an acceleration in GDP growth from 3.5 percent in FY 05/06 to an average o f
5.3 percent in FY 10/11- 12/13, while inflation, though relatively high as a result o f
exchange rate depreciation, remains stable. Both savings and investment rates trend higher,
with private investment rising by two percentage points o f GDP. The current account
deficit remains around 4 percent o f GDP. The outlook assumes the successful
implementation and acceptance o f structural reforms, although it i s somewhat more
pessimistic than the Government’s o w n projections.
Table 2: Medium Term Outlook

Real GDP growth (%)
Inflation (%)
Gross Domestic InvestmentiGDP (%)
-Private (%)
Gross domestic savings (% GDP)
Current account balance (% GDP)
Government deficit (% GDP)
Government debt (% GDP) ‘I

05/06
3.5
5.1
23.7
15.0
14.8
-5.2
-5.4
59.0

Source. World Bank Local Data Base, September 2006.
I/
Excludes parastatals.

5

06/07
3.5
8.5
26.6
15.8
18.5
-7.0
-4.7
58.5

07/08
3.6
6
24.5
16.1
19.3
-4.8
-4.2
57.9

08/09
3.8
6
24.0
16.4
20.1
-3.8
-4.1
57.4

09/10
4.3
5.5
24.3
16.5
21.8
-2.4
-3.5
55.8

Avg
lOil112/13

5.3
4.5
26.5
18.2
24.5
-2.2
-3 .O
51.9

2 1.
The issue o f fiscal sustainability i s o f critical importance. Consolidated central
government debt i s currently around 59 percent o f GDP and total public sector debt
(including parastatals) i s around 70 percent o f GDP, with the assumption that i t will trend
down. While that level o f debt does not threaten an imminent melt-down, it does expose
the economy to downside risks. The IMF6assesses medium term vulnerability b y
. estimating the impact o f various shocks on 2007/08 debt/GDP (Table 3). The initial
conditions in their scenarios are near to current values. The scenarios begin with a 2004105
debt o f 71.8 percent o f GDP. Under the baseline assumption o f a moderate fiscal
consolidation, the debt to GDP ratio falls to 63.9 percent while with no adjustment it rises
slightly to 75.7 percent. But with adverse developments in growth and world interest rates,
the no-adjustment situation quicltly gets out o f control and debt rises to 112.3 percent o f
GDP.’ B y contrast, with adjustment the outcome i s a s t i l l manageable 75.7 percent o f
GDP.

Table 3 - Public Debt/GDP Ratios Under
Various Scenarios
Baseline
- Low growth
- Low growth and high interest rates
N o adjustment
- Low growth

86.6
112.3

Source: Sacerdoti et a1 2005. Note: initial debt level is
71.8% ofGDP in 2004/05

Government’s Actions to Date
Since the publication o f the long-term prospective study, Vision 2020, in the mid22.
1990s, there has been a widespread acceptance that Mauritius’ long term development
depends on moving away from low-wage, labor-intensive commodities exports to more
skilled, high value-added, knowledge-based services. The country has taken many steps
towards realizing this vision, including restructuring the sugar and textiles sectors;
establishing an offshore financial sector utilizing a network o f double tax treaties;
promoting information technology and other priority sectors through various incentive
schemes; designation o f a Cyber Park and construction o f a publicly funded, Rs 1.5 billion,
state o f the art, Cyber Tower with fiber optic wiring; modernizing the port and establishing
a Freeport which provides a duty-free logistics, distribution and marketing hub;
strengthening and deregulating telecommunications; and more. Many firms have upgraded
their technology, some w i t h assistance from the Government’s technology diffusion
scheme (TDS). Signs o f a fledgling new economy taking hold offer encouraging support
for the overall concept. But the new economy, comprising activities such as seafood,
information technology and business process outsourcing, remains small in terms o f
output, exports and employment.

6

Sacerdoti, Emilio, Gama1 El-Masry, Padamja Khandelwal and Yudong Yao 2005, Mauritius: Challenges o f
sustained growth, (Washington, IMF)
7
The shocks modeled are a two standard deviation fall in growth and a two standard deviation rise in interest
rates for a two year period.

6

23.
Today there i s broad acceptance o f the need for deep structural reform and an
awareness that speeding up transformation will require more than just tweaking incentives
at the margina8

11.

GOVERNMENT
DEVELOPMENT
PROGRAM

The Government’s program entails a delicate balance o f economic and political
24.
factors for which it expects to harness broad support. But while the program lays out long
term issues, details s t i l l need t o be spelled out.
(i)

Fiscal Consolidation and Improved Public Sector Efficiency

25.

Fiscal consolidation i s based o n explicit rules intended to put deficits and debt on a
downward path by: (i)
limiting government borrowing to the financing o f the capital
budget; and (ii)
reducing the ratio o f net public debt to GDP. Projections f r o m the
Ministry of Finance anticipate revenue stabilizing at around 19 percent o f GDP,
accompanied by a decline in the share o f expenditure from 25.4 and a narrowing o f the
overall central government budget deficit.

T a b l e 4 : Fiscal Projections
(as % o f GDP)
05/06
06/07
Current revenues
19.9
20.1
Current expenditures
22.1
21.5
Capital expenditures and net lending
3.2
3.4
Budget balance
-5.4
-4.7
Primary balance
-0.6
-0.1
Government debt ”
59.0
58.5
Source: World Bank Local Data Base, September 2006.
‘ I Excludes parastatals.

07/08
19.3
20.1
3.4
-4.2
-0.2
57.9

08109
19.1
19.8
3.5
-4.1
-0.2
57.4

Avg
1011109110 12/13
19.3
19.4
19.2
18.8
3.5
3.6
-3.5
-3.0
0.2
0.0
55.8
51.9

26.
The Government’s Medium-Term Expenditure Framework (MTEF), supported by
Sector Ministry Support Teams set up at the Ministry o f Finance and Economic
Development, will underpin this consolidation, anchoring annual budgets within an
aggregate multi-year framework and enabling the Government to set priorities and resolve
budgetary trade-offs. Operationalization o f the Mauritius Revenue Authority and a
reduction in tax expenditures and discretionary ministerial powers to remit taxes and duties
are expected to improve revenue collections. At the same time, proposed modifications to
the structure o f direct taxes will streamline incentives and increase equity. The expectation
i s that the new tax structure will better reward effort, innovation and entrepreneurship,
increase transparency, and encourage investment and j o b creation, especially by small and
medium enterprises (SMEs).

8

A preliminary communications assessment found that there was an overwhelming awareness of the
economic challenges Mauritius i s facing and agreement that action needs to be taken; however, as with all
complex reform transitions, there i s not a full agreement among all stakeholders on how to minimize the
impact of the transition on the population.

7

27.
O n the expenditure side, policy measures focus on eliminating waste and increasing
efficiency. More careful monitoring o f capital projects i s intended to improve the quality o f
public investments and discourage unjustified cost overruns. Closer scrutiny o f recurrent
expenditures will reduce waste and improve efficiency.
(ii)

Improving trade competitiveness

28.

The centerpiece o f the effort to improve trade competitiveness i s an overhaul o f the
incentive framework to reduce distortions and biases. A three-year program to liberalize
tariffs and turn Mauritius into a duty-free island i s aimed at leveling the playing field
between producing for the domestic and export markets. In the first year, the maximum
tariff w i l l be lowered from 65 percent to 30 percent, and the number o f bands reduced from
7 to three. Subsequently, revenues w i l l be brought down to 0.1 percent o f GDP by 20082009 from 1 percent before reforms. In addition, the incentive regimes for EPZ and nonEPZ firms w i l l be unified; among other things, that will include setting all corporate taxes
at a neutral 15 percent (also to be phased in over three years).

29.
A second phase o f the program w i l l tackle the high cost o f services. The cost o f
International Private Leased Circuits will be reduced by 25 percent immediately, while
increasing competition and strengthening the telecommunications regulator (ICTA) will
promote more cost-effective supply in the future. Other measures call for liberalizing air
access, developing ports infrastructure, increasing training and promotional efforts for the
hospitality and tourism sector, and strengthening financial institutions.
30.
Restoring global competitiveness also requires modernizing and restructuring
existing sectors (sugar and textiles and clothing) and, where a role for the public sector i s
indicated, providing public support for the development o f new activities such as ICT,
financial services, specialty tourism, seafood and land-based ocean activities. Achieving
these objectives will entail adequate planning and preparation o f long term development
plans and sectoral strategies as well as enhanced access to financial services.
(iii)

Improving the Investment Climate

3 1,
A range o f reforms i s proposed to make the regulatory environment more
transparent and less burdensome. The plethora o f incentive schemes will be streamlined,
development and building permits merged, and the system administered on the basis o f expost verification rather than ex-ante approval, with the goal o f reducing the time to start a
business to three days (from 46 in 2005). Overhauling the current tripartite wage-setting
machinery and easing restrictions on redeploying workers will increase labor market
flexibility, while liberalization o f the regime for issuing work permits will enable
employers to hire workers with needed skills. Most importantly, the Board o f Investment
will be converted from an administrator to a facilitator and promoter o f investment. The
aim i s to secure a position for Mauritius in the top ten most investment- and businessfriendly locations in the world (according to the Doing Business survey).
(iv)

Democratizing the economy through participation, social inclusion and
sustainability

32.
The Government announced an Empowerment Program to ease the burden o f
unemployment, enhance j o b prospects, reduce labor and skills mismatches and promote
8

small and medium enterprise (SME) development. A major plank o f the program will
provide wage subsidies for on-the-job training or retraining for 20,000 unemployed and
redeployed workers over the next five years. There also will be special programs for
women who have been particularly affected by the downsizing o f the textile sector. Other
components w i l l make land available for small entrepreneurs, provide social housing and
increase financial and technical support for SMEs.

33.
Education and training will be key components o f the Program, designed both to
broaden workers’ access to jobs and increase the skills base available to employers. Two
priority areas for skills development and upgrading are the tourism sector and ICT. The
Government also w i l l support upgrading and training o f teachers and supervisory
personnel, review the educational curriculum to encourage creativity and cognitive
thinking, revitalize the Zones d’Education Prioritaires (ZEP) providing special support to
pupils attending l o w performing primary schools, and develop a national strategy for
tertiary education to enhance competitiveness in the global economy.
To ensure sustainability o f social spending, social subsidy programs will be
34.
reconfigured to target income support to the needy, and the pension age will be
progressively raised from 60 currently to 65 years. Another objective i s to ensure access to
high quality health care for all, with special attention to vector borne disease
(Chikungunya), HIV/AIDS which has been on an upward trend among drug users, and
diabetes, as Mauritius has one o f the world’s highest prevalence rates.

Bank and EU Assessment

35.
Despite the formidable nature o f the challenges ahead, the government i s enacting
its program with considerable and well known assets - a substantial tourism related
infrastructure and attractive beaches, a multi-lingual and moderately well educated work
force, a strong system o f governance, and a culture o f democracy. N o less important i s the
credibility o f i t s policy framework, a credibility carefully constructed over several political
administrations and recognized around the world. Putting these assets to work in ways that
w i l l propel the country back to a higher growth rate requires tackling lingering policy
problems with a decisive and coherent national strategy that enjoys broad support among
senior policy makers and the society at large. A dialogue with all stakeholders i s an
important element for its success.

The authorities are fully aware o f Mauritius’s major economic challenges and their
36.
reform plan i s entirely homegrown. Realizing that business-as-usual i s not an option given
the immediate threats to macro-stability, the Government’s bold budget represents a break
from the system that worked well in the past but i s no longer viable. I t seeks to move
away from “an outdated socio-economic model . . . a non-functional system which i s very
complicated, hard to understand and open to a b ~ s e . ”and
~ accepts that a failure to adapt to
globalization has slowed growth and contributed to a deterioration in macroeconomic
performance. I t charts a new course toward more market-driven, transparent and rulesbased economic management based on clear rules and guidelines to replace the current
regime o f special incentives and interventions.

9

Securing the Transition: From Trade Preferences to Global Competition, Government o f Mauritius, Budget
Speech 2006-2007, June 2006.

9

37.
While the World Bank, IMF, EU and other donors fully support the direction o f
this initiative, several structural reform measures outlined in the 2006/07 budget must be

more fully spelled out, including costing and prioritizing over the medium and long term.
Notably, a more detailed program addressing needs in education, the financial sector,
infrastructure, energy, institutional development, parastatal-sector reform, price
liberalization, air access and telecommunications regulation needs to be developed. lo

38.
The 2006 budget i s the first step in an ambitious program that entails significant
political challenges. Its ability to move forward with the reform program over the medium
and long term will depend on i t s ability to get buy-in both within Government as well as
from the broader population. Additionally, the Government will have to address the
challenges o f implementation b y overcoming capacity and organizational constraints
within Government.
39.
To fund the program, the Government i s rightly seeking the additional internal and
external resources b y improving fiscal management, proactively seeking more investment,
getting the diaspora engaged, and seeking higher levels o f support from the international
community, including greater coherence among development partner programs. The speed
and scope o f the reform efforts will depend to a certain extent on the Government’s ability
to mobilize necessary funding and prioritize and sequence investments over the mediumterm.

111.

LESSONS
LEARNED
FROM PAST WORLD BANKEXPERIENCE

40.
In preparation o f this Country Partnership Strategy, the Bank carried out a
Completion Report o f the previous FY02-04 CAS (Annex 2). Several important lessons
from this analysis have been factored into the design o f this Strategy. In terms o f overall
approach, the alignment o f the Bank’s assistance to the Government’s program worked
well as the Bank’s activities were strategically relevant and led to results. However,
predetermining a multiyear program did not work well, as the Bank’s work over the CAS
period diverged from what was planned. In particular, the Government did not borrow two
out o f the three expected loans, and the analytical work that was carried out differed from
what had been planned.
Box 1: Main Recommendations from the CAS Completion Report

1. The Bank should continue to align i t s program to the Government’s.
2. I t should use a more flexible approach in i t s work with Mauritius through a joint Annual
Business Planning process,
3. The Results Framework should be realistic and linked to areas where the Bank can have
impact.
4. Additional resources for A A A work should be leveraged over and above the Bank’s budget.
5 . Greater emphasis should be given on dissemination o f findings o f analytical work and
collaboration with other donors.
6 . A l l arms o f the World Bank group should support an integrated program.
7. A one-person liaison office in Port Louis should be established to maintain regular dialogue
and outreach efforts.
10

A more detailed assessment outlining the main reform challenges will be provided in the documentation

10

4 1.

O n the lending program, an important lesson from the last C A S was that the
Government found the transaction costs o f borrowing from the Bank too high. Since the
planned lending did not transpire, the CAS Completion Report recommends allowing
flexibility for adjustment or investment lending, and having a fall back position if no
lending occurs. Although the Bank did not carry out all the planned operations, the
activities that the Bank did finance led to results, contributing to the conclusion that
Mauritius i s a country where donor interventions can lead to development impact.

42.

Over the C A S period, the Government expressed particular interest in the Bank’s
analytical and advisory assistance (AAA) and access to worldwide experience. According
to the various evaluations, Bank AAA for Mauritius was generally considered o f high
quality and informed Government policy making. However, the limited budget for
Mauritius posed constraints in always meeting the Government’s needs in a timely manner.
For example, greater emphasis could have been placed o n dissemination and follow-up,
which was constrained by the limited budget for Mauritius. Moreover, the AAA work
diverged from the C A S program as the Bank tried to be responsive to the Government’s
needs. The assessment o f the last C A S therefore suggested that a jointly agreed l i s t o f
prioritized activities prepared o n an annual basis with participation o f line ministries would
increase clarity o n Bank support to Mauritius. In addition, it i s recommended to leverage
Bank financing o f AAA - for example, through a cost sharing arrangement with the
Government. Another possibility would be for the Government to use i t s own resources
for project preparation in cases o f lending, which would free up the budget for AAA.

43.
O n the monitoring o f program results, the last C A S policy matrix focused on higher
order goals o f the Government’s reform program, to which Bank assistance was aligned
but over which the Bank’s interventions would have only an indirect influence. Forecasting
expected results o f the Bank’s support remains a challenge, however, as its program will
only be determined o n an annual basis.
Finally, coordination with other donors was good in specific sectors, but less
effective at a strategic level. In addition, more could be done to leverage the limited IBRD
program through the other arms o f the Bank Group - IFC, FIAS, MIGA, GEF and WBI.
Partnerships and harmonization, therefore, could be enhanced, and form an important part
o f the new strategy.

44.

45.

Based o n these lessons and in line with recommendations f r o m the Bank’s Middle
Income Country Task Force, this CPS sets out a new approach for the Bank’s engagement
in Mauritius as described below.

IV.

COUNTRY
PARTNERSHIP
STRATEGY

Why should the World Bank be involved in Mauritius?

46.
Mauritius has demonstrated over the past decades a capacity to address challenges,
profit from opportunities, and increase the welfare o f i t s population even in an
environment where institutions are imperfect. Today, as the country embarks o n
implementation o f i t s n e w b o l d program, the Government expects assistance from the
f o r the D e v e l o p m e n t Policy Loan series.

11

Bank t o help design and implement reforms using experience and best expertise from
around the world.

47.
The Bank’s involvement in Mauritius is consistent with i t s comparative advantage
as a knowledge institution in line with the Middle Income Country (MIC) approach.
Additionally, involvement with middle income clients like Mauritius affords the Bank the
opportunity to enrich i t s knowledge on how to help more advanced clients to continue
improving the welfare o f their people and to adjust to new global world realities.
CPS Objective

48.

The objective o f this Country Partnership Strategy i s to help Government deal with
short-term trade shocks and the transition to a more competitive and sophisticated
economy, while minimizing negative social impacts.

Overall Approach

49.
The proposed approach i s a flexible strategy with annual adjustments to the work
program. I t i s aligned with the EU assistance strategy. The three m a i n principles o f the
CPS approach are: (i)alignment with the Government program; (ii)
flexibility; and (iii)
harmonization with other donors.
50.
Alignment with the Government program. The CPS builds o n the Government
program, which outlines a broad vision for the long term and includes well defined shortterm actions. The government i s s t i l l operationalizing its vision over the medium-to-longer
term; it plans to take into account results on the ground and other relevant developments in
this process. The CPS defines a strategic framework that is consistent with the
Government strategy, and lays out the broad outcomes the Bank and the EU intend to
support.
5 1.
Flexibility. The design o f the CPS allows for flexibility to assure responsiveness to
the Government’s demands and to take account o f evolving circumstances. The objective
i s for the Bank to be able to provide the assistance that is needed when it i s needed by the
client. At the core o f the flexible approach are annual business plans prepared jointly with
the government and synchronized with the Government’s budget and decision-making
processes. The annual discussions will include a review o f the effectiveness o f the Bank’s
program and whether i t i s reaching the agreed results. The business plan discussions will
take place at the beginning o f each calendar year (January-February), right before the start
of the Government’s and Bank’s budget cycles.

52.
Donor harmonization. In l i n e with the Government’s request and consistent with
the Paris Declaration o n harmonization, the Bank assistance to Mauritius i s aligned with
that o f other donors to provide a package o f coordinated support around a common
program. Specifically, this CPS includes a common EU-World Bank diagnostic o f the
political, economic and social situation, a common assessment o f the government’s
program, and a common results matrix, thus providing a platform for j o i n t work o n CPS
program implementation and monitoring o f results. The CPS i s designed to facilitate
maximum harmonization with other donors, such as Agence Franqaise de Developpement

12

’.

(AFD), African Development Bank (AfDB) and United Nations Development Program’
This includes efforts to design and implement joint operations (budget support,
investment) and setting a mechanism with donor and government contributions (possibly
through a trust fund arrangement) to finance analytical and technical assistance work.

CPS Program
53.
The Government has signaled i t s strong interest in the Bank’s analytical and
advisory services and policy advice on key strategic issues. The specific services designed
to respond to Government’s knowledge needs w i l l be agreed upon as part o f the annual
business-planning process. The Bank and the EU intend to set a mechanism for joint
research through a A A A fund to which the government may contribute i t s own resources.
This fund w i l l finance analytical and technical assistance work involving local research
institutions and universities. This approach w i l l allow for a greater alignment with the
government needs and better transfer o f knowledge.

54.

The Government has indicated that it plans to borrow US$30 m i l l i o n a year for a
series o f development policy loans (DPLs). This w i l l be provided as part o f a financing
package supported b y the EU, AFD, AfDB, and possibly other donors. The government
also i s prepared to borrow for investment operations, but i t would like these to be
supplemented with concessional or grant money from other donors. Hence, the Bank’s
investment loans are likely to be part o f broader financing packages involving the
European Investment Bank (EIB), AfDB and other financiers. The I F C i s expected to be a
player in supporting investments with particular focus on tourism, financial markets and
ICT sectors. The IBRD annual lending volume for FY07-10 i s not expected to exceed
US$60 million.12 The IBRD annual lending volume for the period F Y I 1-13 will be
determined by the Bank during FY 10.
Other instruments such as Global Environment Facility (GEF) and Institutional
55,
Development Facility grants and WBI training programs will be employed to deal with the
environmental and capacity building challenges. Mauritius has requested t o be included on
the WBI l i s t o f focus countries as part o f i t s efforts to develop a regional knowledge hub to
serve the Indian Ocean Rim and the network o f Small and Vulnerable States, possibly with
EU support. FIAS and MIGA will support the government’s efforts to increase
investments. Finally, Mauritius has signaled its strong interest in participating in regional
programs.

I1

Abu Dhabi Fund, BADEA, IFAD and the OPEC Fund have indicated agreement to be part o f the
coordinated external support and India and China have also been requested by Government to fit their
support into the same framework.
12
For the purpose o f the Bank’s internal risk exposure analysis it i s important to note that if there i s a
demand for higher levels of finding, the loan package would include a creditworthiness review confirming
that finding levels remain within prudent levels.

13

1

Box 2: Development Policy Loans

The Bank’s budget support consists o f a series o f Development Policy Loans (DPLs), starting with a
US30 million Trade and Competitiveness DPL in FY07. The loans provide a framework among
Government and major development partners (EU, France, and African Development Bank) to
support the Government’s objective to boost growth and remain competitive while protecting the
vulnerable, by implementing structural reforms in public sector management, industrial regulation,
labor relations and provision o f social safety nets.
The first DPL will support a broad array o f strategically important measures including:
Fiscal consolidation including allocation o f budgets according to preset ceilings, reducing tariff
protection as a first step toward making Mauritius a duty-free island, and reconfiguring
subsidies on rice and flour to take the form o f increased income support to the needy;
Improving the investment climate by streamlining business regulations, including shifting from
ex ante approval to ex post verification o f license requirements for starting a business; and
Reforming the labor market by rationalizing the wage setting mechanism and easing restrictions
on work and residency permits.

The Strategic Framework o f Bank Engagement

56.
The Bank’s assistance will be structured around the Government’s four reform
pillars: (i)fiscal consolidation and improving public-sector efficiency; (ii)
improving trade
competitiveness; (iii)
improving the investment climate; and (iv) democratizing the
economy through participation, social inclusion and sustainability. This assistance will be
provided in an integrated manner by the different arms o f the World Bank Group, and will
be harmonized with other donors as discussed below. The results matrix in Annex 1
outlines the Government’s long-term objectives and the outcomes to which the Bank and
EU may contribute. The specific outcomes and impact o f the Bank program will depend
on the work program that i s determined annually.
57.
Fiscal consolidation and improving public sector efficiency. The Bank, in close
cooperation with the EU, AFD and other donors, will support the government’s goal to
reduce public-sector debt over the long term as a key element of sound macroeconomic
management. The assistance under this pillar will target improvements in the quality and
effectiveness o f public expenditures by making the MTEF operational and enhancing debtmanagement policies and capacity. The Bank also may support improvements o f the tax
system. Another potential area i s reform o f the state-owned enterprise sector to increase its
efficiency and reduce the fiscal risks. Development Policy Loans will be a key tool for
policy dialogue in these areas. In addition, a series o f AAA products will provide the
needed analytical underpinning. A planned programmatic Public Expenditure Review
(PER), possibly done jointly with the AFD, will play a key role in this regard b y focusing
on sector strategies and their implications for public finance. In addition, the Government
has requested a Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability (PEFA) assessment for
Mauritius to be financed b y the EC. This assessment should contribute to defining areas
for further public financial management reforms with the Government and contribute to the
efforts to make public spending more effective.
58.
Improving trade competitiveness. Assistance under this pillar will support the
government’s goal o f increasing the country’s trade competitiveness by removing a series

14

I

o f constraints such as the anti-export bias o f the current institutional set-up, the limited use
o f regional trade opportunities, the high cost o f logistics, and rigidities that prevent rapid
adjustment to the external shocks. The reform efforts under this pillar will build o n the
Country Economic Memorandum (CEM) and Aid-for-Trade w o r k carried out by Bank in
FY06. The outcomes that the CPS seeks to influence include the creation o f a level
playing field for all actors in the economy, an increase in regional trade, and reduced costs
o f supporting logistics - transportation and telecommunications. Government’s efforts to
restructure the sugar industry and to improve the viability o f the energy sector will
continue receiving attention, especially from the EU side. A financial sector assessment
(FSAP) to be conducted jointly by the Bank and the IMF will support the government’s
intention to deepen the financial sector and improve the effectiveness o f financial services
as a key means o f improving competitiveness and integrating small and medium
enterprises into the formal economy. This will enable IFC to support second tier banks,
thus contributing to deepening o f the financial sector, provided that IFC pricing i s
attractive enough in the context o f Mauritius’ competitive financial market.

59.
While the D P L series and AAA will be the main instruments to support policy
dialogue, possible investment projects will support infrastructure upgrades needed for a
more advanced and competitive economy. For example, Mauritius has expressed interest in
joining the East Africa Submarine System (EASSy), a regional telecommunications project
which will finance a fiber optic cable connecting the east cost o f Africa to the rest of the
world (See paragraph 64). Other potential infrastructure projects include airport and port
expansion, and measures to reduce road congestion and travel time. IFC investments will
complement the Bank’s and other donors’ work on infrastructure and energy; these
investments may include support for setting up land markets through auctions and
assistance in finding strategic partnerships and promoting Private Public Partnerships in
the ports, airports and the communications sector, as well as help catalyzing foreign direct
investment in key industrial and financial sectors.

60.
Improving the investment climate. The CPS will support the government’s stated
intention to j o i n the ranks o f the most business-friendly countries in the world. In
particular, i t will support policy changes initiated by the Government in its regulatory
framework, which currently limits the mobility o f resources and attraction o f additional
resources. Specific changes include measures to eliminate labor market rigidities and
improve business and land regulations. As with the trade competitiveness pillar, the joint
donor budget-support package and selective AAA will support the objectives o f this pillar.
In FY2007 the Bank will finance an Urban Land Policy Note, and will continue providing
advice o n the investment climate through IFC and FIAS. Analytical work o n the tourist
sector under the programmatic PER will provide the underpinning for the tourist sector
expansion with possible investment projects supported by IFC. MIGA will help improve
investor confidence through the provision o f political risk guarantees as needed. MIGA
also may help promote private sector investment in the water and wastewater sectors at the
sub-sovereign level.
6 1.
Democratizingthe economy. Important objectives o f the Mauritius government
are to make the adjustment o f the economy to the triple trade shocks as painless as possible
for i t s people, to make sure that the pain i s shared equally, and to offer everyone equal
opportunities to participate in the new, more competitive economy. Under this pillar, the
Bank, the EU and other donors may help with improving the effectiveness o f social

15

assistance in reaching the needy; promoting the inclusion o f vulnerable groups o f the
population; developing an education system that supplies the skills needed in the new
economy; and protecting the environment. Bank assistance w i l l build on work undertaken
under the previous CAS on education, social assistance and pensions. The programmatic
PER (FY07-09) will look into education and retraining needs. A joint World Bank-UNDP
effort, supported b y an IDF grant, will seek to help the Government deal with the rising
threat o f HIVIAIDS. In environment, the Bank i s likely to continue supporting
improvements in wastewater management and other environmental programs, including
through the GEF, to protect the environment as tourism and other economic activities
expand.

62.
The World Bank and AfDB will continue assisting the government’s efforts to
communicate effectively with the citizenry on the objectives and content o f the reform
program. This may be the area where the greatest efforts are required to mitigate the
implementation risks.

Regional Cooperation Programs
63.
With a view to achieving sustainable economic development and full participation
in the new international economy, Mauritius has been proactive in promoting i t s interests
at various bilateral, regional and multilateral levels. I t also has championed a number o f
initiatives to support the cause o f developing states, including Small Island Developing
States (SIDS), and to strengthen regional cooperation and integration. The EU i s actively
supporting the regional agenda by providing funds at the regional level to promote
economic integration, including the sustainable management o f natural resources. The EU
further intends to sign Economic Partnership agreements with both the Eastern and
Southern Africa and Southern Africa Development Community (SADC) regions by 2008.
64.
The Government o f Mauritius i s particularly interested in participating in regional
initiatives. I t would like to be linked to the East Africa Submarine System (EASSy) fiber
optic submarine cable, in which the Bank Group has a coordinating role. This would lower
telecommunications costs and increase interconnectivity with the rest o f the world - a
particularly important goal if Mauritius i s to become an I C T hub. The Bank also has been
asked to oversee a study o f the feasibility o f setting up a Center o f Excellence in Mauritius
to provide public sector training to African Government officials.
A t the same time, the Bank i s ramping up i t s engagement with the Indian Ocean
65.
Commission (IOC), and i s in discussions on the possibility o f a regional work program that
also would benefit Mauritius. Topics include regional waste and energy management,
follow-up on the o i l spill contingency plan project, follow-up o f regional network o f coral
reefs, promotion o f the recommendations o f the World Bank-Commonwealth Secretariat
Small States Forum 2006 Task Force on Small States and the role o f the I O C in the (i)
2007 and (ii)
the project to promote sustainable development in the Atlantic, Indian Ocean,
Mediterranean, and the South China Sea (AIMS) Small Island Developing States (AIMS
SIDS). The Bank also i s discussing technical assistance to support the I O C on tourism,
regional fisheries management, trade, ICT, regional maritime transport, hazard risk
management and illegal trade control.

16

Guidelines f o r Bank Involvement

66.
The flexible nature o f the CPS creates a need for guidelines as to when and where
the Bank should be engaged in Mauritius. Based on Mauritius’ financial circumstances and
its defensible development agenda, the first basis for any engagement must be demand by
Mauritius, which w i l l also ensure that activities undertaken are a country priority.
However, o n i t s side, the Bank must ensure that i t s work in Mauritius serves the
institution’s broader goals and meets institutional standards. For this purpose, management
w i l l regularly monitor both reforms and the environment into which Bank resources are
placed.
67.

The Bank will ensure that the environment into which Bank resources are placed i s
adequate in terms o f policy direction and governance. This will require regular monitoring
o f Mauritius’ overall reform efforts, particularly progress in areas such as macroeconomic
and fiscal management, and the various aspects that could contribute to greater
competitiveness, as evidenced by actions in these areas as outlined above. Outcomes in the
four pillars o f the Government reform program will be monitored through the CPS results
matrix and the D P L as outlined below.

68.

Under the unlikely scenario o f a major departure from sound macroeconomic
policies, the Bank would respond by reducing lending volumes, and DPLs will not be
available in a context where the macroeconomic framework i s unsatisfactory, including,
for example, were public debt to rise to a level approaching 80 percent o f GDP. Any
significant changes in the proposed strategy would be reflected in the CPS Progress
Report.

Monitoring and Evaluation

The results matrix presented in this CPS i s a joint EU-World Bank monitoring tool.
69.
I t includes outcome indicators for both EU and World Bank programs. Because the CPS
sets out a flexible, broad program, the elements o f which will be determined every year
through Annual Business Plans, the CPS results framework includes a broad l i s t o f
potential outcomes. I t i s not expected that the Bank will contribute to all o f these
outcomes, but only to those in which it w i l l be involved. In addition, given that this i s a
joint EU-World Bank matrix, i t includes outcomes in areas o f EU involvement that may
not be part o f the Bank program. I t also i s important to note that the Bank may contribute
to outcomes that are not reflected in the results matrix, if any are added to the program as a
result o f the annual business planning exercise. Therefore the results matrix will be further
refined as the program i s developed as part o f the Annual Business Planning exercise.
70.
In addition to the results matrix, the CPS program will be monitored and evaluated
through two instruments, which have been harmonized with other donors and the
Government. First, the annual business plan discussions will be used to evaluate the
results o f the Bank’s program and assess whether it i s meeting its broad development
objectives under the four CPS pillars. The Annual Business Plans also will provide an
opportunity to update and fine-tune the results framework in l i n e with the agreed assistance
program for each particular year. This exercise will be carried out jointly with the EU.
The changes will be reflected in the updated results matrix as part o f the regular CPS
progress reports (once in 2-3 years). This approach to monitoring and evaluation differs
from the traditional approach o f a pre-determinedprogram with pre-defined objectives. I t
17

i s a n approach that f i t s best a flexible program designed t o respond to the needs o f middle
income countries.

71.

Second, the j o i n t donor budget support program includes a common results
framework which will be used to monitor the overall Government program. The Bank will
be supporting the implementation o f this program through the DPL series. This framework
also will be used to stimulate communication among the different players o n results.

72.
Should Bank assistance become limited to technical assistance and AAA if
Mauritius determines that Bank lending i s not sufficiently competitive with other sources
o f finance available in the market o r f r o m other institutions, program monitoring would
need to be tailored t o the impact o f increased knowledge and p o l i c y advice. The Bank
should then be evaluated o n its effectiveness in responding quickly to requests for
technical assistance which m a y occur.
CPS Consultation Process
Consultations with Government and non-Government actors were held t o better
inform this CPS o n the challenges Mauritius i s facing and their impact o n the Mauritian
people. As mentioned previously, the CPS was prepared jointly with the European
Commission. Input for the CPS was gathered through meetings with stakeholders during
Bank mission visits, an assessment o n perceptions in the country t o the economic
challenges done by an external communications group, a CPS website, an online survey,
focused group discussions, and distribution o f informational materials to broaden the
understanding o f this Strategy and Government’s economic reforms. The feedback
received during the consultations was very useful in improving the understanding o f the
country’s needs, and has contributed to an improved CPS design. A fuller account o f the
consultation process can be found in Annex 5.

73.

v.

RISKAND MITIGATION
MEASURES

The Strategy incorporates measures to deal with foreseeable country and Bank
program risks.

74.

75.
Country risks. There is a risk o f erosion o f political support for the b o l d reforms
initiated by the Government. It i s difficult t o predict the outcomes o f these reforms, and the
results may be slow t o come. The ethnic harmony is fragile and tensions could turn into
violence unless the economic transition i s handled carefully. Hence, there could be a
political backlash that may force the government to slow down. There also i s the risk that
the Government may fail to communicate the reform program effectively t o internal and
external stakeholders, leading t o lack o f buy-in and a slow d o w n o f reform. The
Government may muddle through or focus energies o n less strategic efforts that m a y fail to
produce substantive results. In addition, persistent fiscal deficits and excessive demands
o n domestic credit markets risk crowding out needed investment spending. Finally,
external price shocks (particularly oil) m a y end up in perennial high prices with potentially
negative implications. The Bank will monitor the situation and adjust the program as
necessary. The j o i n t budget support program with other donors will help the government
maintain good macroeconomic management and sustain the pace o f reform.

18

76.
Risks to the Bank program. There i s a risk that the Government may not borrow
from the Bank as happened during the implementation o f the previous Country Assistance
Strategy. During the preparation o f this CPS, the Government has repeatedly indicated
that it intends to borrow from the Bank over the medium term as i t needs: (i)financing for
i t s new reform program; and (ii)
the Bank’s technical expertise and worldwide experience
to help see the country through the challenging time ahead and minimize the social impact
o f transition. To address this risk, rather than pre-determining the work program over the
next several years, the Bank and Government have agreed to plan and review their work
program on an annual basis so that necessary adjustments can be made. There i s also a
risk that the Bank may not be able to meet the expectations o f the client, especially as far
as the analytical and advisory work i s concerned. The Bank’s operational budget for
Mauritius i s relatively small and inadequate to meet the client’s expectations. Given the
uncertainty concerning how much the government will borrow for either policy or
investment loans during the CPS period, the operational budget may be even smaller in the
future. The strategy tries to address this risk through the creation o f a proposed joint
donor-government AAA fund that can finance efforts to meet the Government’s analytical
and technical assistance needs.
Creditworthiness
77.
Mauritius’ foreign currency issuer ratings are Baa2/P-2, and the rating for the
government’s rupee-denominated debt i s A2. These ratings reflect the country’s modest
external debt burden and i t s economic dynamism within a stable political framework.
However, in December 2005, Moody’s Investors Service lowered the outlook on Mauritius’
debt ratings to negative from stable, “. . .in light o f the unfavorable direction o f government
finances over recent years, including high levels o f government debt.”13 Mauritius debt
stands currently at around 70 percent o f GDP, but most o f this i s borrowed internally and
poses little exchange risk, especially with foreign reserves at a comfortable level equal to
around eight months o f imports, however the decline in EPZ export earnings and the
higher import bill are placing increasing pressure on external liquidity. The situation i s not
imminently unsustainable, but the country i s vulnerable to macroeconomic risks arising
from slower growth, further adverse movements in the terms o f trade and rising interest
rates. Government bas recognized the need for strong fiscal consolidation which was
announced in the 2006-2007 Budget Speech. The credit risks to the Bank are l o w but
increasing.

VI.

CONCLUDING REMARKS

78.
This CPS i s designed to ensure strong Government ownership o f the Bank’s
program, to allow the Government and the Bank to adjust that program to changing
Government priorities and country circumstances, and thereby to maximize the Bank’s
contribution to Mauritius’ development. As i s the case o f any new relationship, the strategy
will challenge both the Bank and the Government, but if it i s successful, it will create a real
partnership in service to the people o f Mauritius.

l3 Moody’s Investors

Service Press Release, 21 December 2005

19

-

.-m

- d

Y

r)

9

ari

0

5

P

E

Y

in
Y

3

8
3

B
E

5

r n .
w

s*

2

A

Y
v)

2
B

Y

3

I

m

'I

U

C

a,

E

U

2
"Y S
El:

3

- b

41

0

Annex 2
Page 1 o f 16

Annex 2: 2002 CAS Completion Report
Evaluation Summary
Overall, the Bank did well over the CAS period in substance and quality, which
led to results. I t aligned i t s e l f to Government objectives, and showed flexibility in
diverging from the program t o respond to Government requests. However, the C A S did not
evaluate risks properly as it did not foresee the risk that the country would not borrow, and
it put all i t s eggs in one basket by centering the whole program on the PERLs and
underpinning AAA. Because the Bank’s program was to provide budget support, the CAS
monitoring matrix was broad and too ambitious to track the Bank’s results as opposed to
the Government’s o w n objectives and outcomes. Finally, the lack o f a local presence also
hindered Bank effectiveness. However, because the Bank program led to satisfactory
results and the Bank adjusted itself and responded effectively to meet the needs o f the
client, the Bank assesses i t s w o r k over the C A S period as satisfactory.

(i)

In 200 1, the Government o f Mauritius developed an ambitious development
(ii)
program, the New Economic Agenda (NEA), with the objective to change the course o f the
country’s economy and turn i t into a “high-tech, high-income service and knowledge
economy.” The key components o f this program were: (i)
improvement in the
competitiveness o f Mauritius’ private sector; (ii)investment in people and society; (iii)
preservation o f Mauritius’ fragile environment; and (iv) improvement in economic
management.

(iii)
In preparing the NEA, the Government demonstrated a strong commitment to
sound fiscal management and improved development prospects by taking important actions
to stabilize the economy and introduce a much needed education reform. In view o f this
commitment and the appropriateness o f the NEA to address Mauritius’ development
objectives, the 2002 Country Assistance Strategy was prepared to fully support the NEA.
(iv)
Designed around program support and analytical and advisory services, the CAS
represented a departure f r o m traditional project financing. It foresaw up to three
independent Public Expenditure Reform Loan (PERL) program support operations over the
three-year C A S period, depending o n the government’s external financing needs. Although
program support under the PERLs would cover all budgetary expenditures, analytical and
advisory services would give priority to human development, the environment,
transportation and economic management.

This evaluation shows that the Bank was able to provide positive input and
(4
achieve results in all priority areas for Bank support. In the financial sector, a complete
overhaul o f banking legislation led to an improved financial reputation and framework for
accounting, auditing and corporate governance. With Bank support, Mauritius established a
modern payments system and Financial Services Commission to regulate the non-bank
financial services sector. In education, reforms over the C A S period led to a more equitable
system with the elimination o f star schools, and increased access, particularly in secondary
education, with decentralization o f the secondary education system and creation o f 45
secondary schools. E x a m pass rates improved in secondary and higher secondary, although

Annex 2
Page 2 o f 16

primary exam rates slightly declined. At the tertiary level, the number o f students increased
from 16,759 in 2000-2001 to 25,715 in 2004-2005. In wastewater, cost recovery has been
achieved, and tariffs have been put in place at agreed sector policy levels. The Wastewater
Management Authority registered an improvement in the collection performance o f
wastewater bills. As o f January 2005,56,153 houses had been connected to the WMA, and
an additional 1,300 houses had been connected and were being processed for billing
network. I n sewerage, all sector and institutional reforms were completed according to the
agreed sector policy letter. In addition, standards for industrial discharge were
implemented in compliance with environmental standards. Through its long standing
dialogue o n transport during the C A S period, the Bank assisted in major road network
upgrading, and i s currently financing a Project Preparation Facility to examine options for
reducing traffic congestion in Port Louis. The Bank also continued to provide technical
assistance in port and maritime transport to help the authorities cope with higher-thananticipated growth in port transshipment traffic. Finally, to improve budgeting, a Medium
Term Expenditure Framework (MTEF) unit was established, and MTEFs were prepared in
six pilot ministries.

The overall approach the Bank took in Mauritius was sound at the time.
(vi)
Mauritius’ borrowing was limited, but was highly interested in the Bank’s analytical and
advisory services. Rather than undertaking multiple investments, this approach was
planned to enable the Bank to closely support the country’s new reform program and
resolve the restrictions on the Bank’s internal budget. However, the strategy and dialogue
through the adjustment program unraveled after the first PERL. Only one project, the first
PERL, was approved during the C A S period, and AAA diverged f r o m what was planned.
After the first PERL, the Government indicated that it did not need further borrowing from
the Bank for budget support, as it found the transaction costs - such as the Bank’s
conditions and triggers to move from the first to second PERL - relatively high. In
addition, i t s borrowing was likely spurred by continued demand for Bank services and
access to international expertise and advice, rather than actual financial need.
The Analytical and Advisory assistance (AAA) program rated highly on
(vii)
Strategic Relevance and Quality. The Bank was also flexible in diverging from the CAS to
address emerging needs o f the Government. However, a lack o f human and financial
resources for Mauritius created difficulties for the Bank to respond quickly and with high
quality to ad hoc requests not included as part o f the normal business planning process. O n
one hand, work programs o f Bank sector staff are planned for the year ahead, and it proved
difficult to mobilize top expertise for Mauritius on short notice. In addition, Government
requests were sometimes put directly to sectors, with n o prioritization. Aside from the
process, other areas which could be improved include greater dissemination o f findings o f
analytical work and follow up.
(viii)
Coordination with other donors was good in specific sectors, but less effective at
a strategic level. In addition, more could be done to leverage the limited IBRD program
through the other arms o f the Bank Group - IFC, MIGA, GEF and WBI.
Based o n lessons learned, this report outlines actionable recommendations to be
6x1
incorporated into the n e w Country Partnership Strategy to the extent possible:

Annex 2
Page 3 o f 16

The Bank should continue to align i t s program to the Government’s.
I t should use a more flexible approach in i t s work with Mauritius through joint
Annual Business Planning.
The Output Matrix should be realistic and linked to areas where the Bank can have
impact.
The Bank should allow flexibility for adjustment or investment lending, and
diversify the portfolio.
Additional resources for AAA work should be leveraged over and above the Bank
budget.
Bank AAA should be more practical, and answer the “how” rather than “why” or
“what.”
Greater emphasis should be given to dissemination o f findings o f analytical w o r k
and collaboration with other donors.
The limited IBRD program should be leveraged through other arms o f the Bank
Group - IFC, MIGA, and WBI.
A one-person liaison office in Port Louis should be established to maintain regular
dialogue and outreach efforts.

I.COUNTRY CONTEXT AND LONG
-TERMNATIONAL
DEVELOPMENT
GOALS

1.

Mauritius, a middle income country with a population o f about 1.2 m i l l i o n people, i s
heralded as an example o f successful development worldwide. At independence in 1968,
the country was poor, with a nominal per capita income o f about U S $260. Today that
figure has r i s e n to about US$5,250, and poverty has fallen to only about 10 percent o f the
population. Real per capita GDP growth averaged 6 percent a year from 1968 to 2004,
better than all but a handful o f countries and considerably above the average for all lowand middle-income countries. Now, Mauritius has the second highest per capita income in
Africa after Seychelles, and ranks at the top i n C P I A ratings in the Africa region.
Transparency International ranks Mauritius 54thout o f 145 countries, making the country
the second lowest after Seychelles among African countries in perceived corruption. Doing
Business ranks Mauritius among the top 30 economies in the world in ease o f doing
business. Mauritius has accomplished these gains through (i)
political stability, (ii)
generally sound fiscal management, (iii)
aggressive export promotion, (iv) support for the
private sector, and (v) a strong social welfare system.

2.

A t independence, the Mauritian economy was almost completely dependent o n
sugar. Since then i t has diversified impressively into manufacturing (EPZ textile and
clothing exports) and services (tourism and, more recently, financial services). But
continued growth and development will require making a transition to new, higher valueadded, more skill-intensive activities. Over the past decade, Mauritius has been promoting
diversification into knowledge-based sectors such as information and communications
technology (ICT), financial services, ocean resources and a knowledge hub. Nevertheless,
the economy remains dominated by the traditional pillars - sugar, apparel and tourism.
Accelerating the transition is the main challenge facing the country today.

Annex 2
Page 4 o f 16

Macroeconomic, Structural, and Political Developments since the Last CAS

3.
Recently, a sense o f urgency has been added because o f the phase-out o f trade
preferences for sugar and textiles apparel (which together account for 80 percent o f
Mauritius' merchandise exports). In January 2005, M F A textile quotas ended. A 36 percent
decrease in sugar prices under the EU sugar protocol beginning in 2007 will cost Mauritius
around €100 million per year. Anticipation o f these developments has depressed private
investment over the past several years, leading to a slowdown in growth. Up to 40,000 jobs
already have been lost in sugar and apparel, and the eventual total i s likely to reach 50,000
or more - or 10 percent o f the work force. Meanwhile, the new higher value-added,
knowledge based economy has been slow to take off. Productivity growth has stagnated
and unemployment has risen to near 10 percent.
4.
Slower growth and major public initiatives on education and infrastructure have
taken their t o l l on the public finances. Government deficits rose sharply beginning in 2001 ,
and have remained high in contrast to the government's medium-term fiscal strategy, which
called for them to decline to 3 percent by FY 2004/05. Public sector debt stands at nearly 70
percent' o f GDP. The current situation and near term prospects pose no urgent threat to
solvency, but increasingly there i s a need for modest corrective action to reduce
vulnerability to external risks (terms o f trade, weather and world interest rate shocks) and
internal ones (lower growth). Notably, Moody's recently downgraded i t s outlook on
Mauritius from stable to negative.

5.
Economic performance has been respectable, if below long-term trends. Along with the
structural challenges that Mauritius has been facing, weather poses a constant threat and output
was depressed by Cyclone Dina in 2002, especially in the agricultural sector. Nevertheless,
growth has remained positive. In FY04/05, GDP growth at factor costs was 4.0 percent, as
disappointing results in agriculture and a 9.5 percent contraction in the EPZ sector were offset
by strong growth in tourism, fueled by a 5.9 percent increase in arrivals to 761,063. A
resoundingly pessimistic outlook - over 80 percent o f respondents polled about their
expectations reported they were somewhat or very pessimistic about the economy at year-end
2005 - has depressed investment and contributed to weak private demand. But all things
considered, this i s not a bad performance.

Real output growth ( percent)
- EPZ
Investment rate
- private
CPI inflation ( percent)
CA balance ( percent GDP)
Fiscal balance ( percent GDP)

' Includingparastatal debt

1997200 1
5.8
5.9
24.3
16.5
6.0
-0.3
4.5

2002
1.8
-6.0
21.8
14.9
6.4
5.2
6.0

2003
3.8
-6.0
22.7
13.8
3.9
2.3
6.2

2004
4.5
-6.8
21.7
15.0
4.7
0.8
5.4

2005
2.9
-13.0.
21.3
14.7
4.9
-3.3
5.0

Annex 2
Page 5 o f 16

11. CAS OBJECTIVES AND OUTCOMES, BANKPERFORMANCE AND QUALITY

OF SERVICES

The FY02 CAS Framework and Objectives

6.

The 2002 CAS underwent a broad consultation process with government, civil

society, labor unions, vulnerable groups, and donors. The consultations provided input to
the Strategy on the challenges facing the country. For example, one focus group was made
up o f unemployed men and women in their 40s and 50s. The majority in this group were
women divorced or abandoned by their husbands who had been previously employed at
closed textiles factories, l e t go with few or no benefits and generally without other skills.
Another group consisted o f labor unions to discuss in particular, the proposed reforms in
education. These issues surrounding the challenges o f maintaining Mauritius’
competitiveness and o f the top priority o f education featured heavily in the Strategy.

7.

The 2002 CAS sought to cover a wide ground with limited resources. I t set out to
support the Government’s ambitious reform program, the New Economic Agenda (NEA),
the goals o f which were to maintain the country’s growth performance and improve the
welfare o f its citizens. The NEA’s key components include: (i)
improvement in
competitiveness o f Mauritius’ private sector; (ii)investments in people; (iii)
preserving and
protecting Mauritius’ fragile environment; and (iv) improvement in economic management.
8.
The Bank’s CAS highlighted the expansion o f education and improvement in
quality as the most important requirements for the success o f the NEA, and also pinpointed
other development areas that deserved greater focus, including social programs,
environmental issues, mass transit, and public resource management.
9.
More specific medium-term outcomes which the Bank set out to support during the
CAS period were as follows (Annex 1 indicates the Bank instruments employed to support
outcomes in these areas, as well as results achieved).
Improving competitiveness
a. Reform the financial sector
b. Encourage better corporate governance
Investing in people and society
c. Produce a better educated workforce that fully meets the requirements o f the
public and private sectors.
d. Improve social cohesion and seek a fairer distribution o f the benefits o f growth
and greater inclusion for all population groups on the island.
Environment and transport
e. Ensure the liquid waste, solid waste and transport sectors are financially,
institutionally and legally sustainable, and that they operate in full compliance
with environmental standards.
Economic management
f. Ensure medium and long-term fiscal sustainability.
g. Better align expenditures with the country’s strategic priorities.

Annex 2
Page 6 o f 16

Monitoring Results and Outcomes

10.
In assessing the Bank’s contributions to Mauritius’ development progress over the
CAS period, the C A S Completion Report builds on multiple assessments, including the
Quality Assurance Group (QAG) 2005 Country Analytical and Advisory Activity (AAA)

Assessment, project Implementation Completion Reports, internal reviews, Country
Partnership Strategy (CPS) consultations, and a stakeholder survey.

11,
In general, these reviews found that the Bank continues t o be relevant, and provides
substantive input to Mauritian policy. Nonetheless, the task o f assessing Bank performance
in a country with a minimal lending program faces several challenges, which limit the
precision with which the Bank’s contributions can be described. In particular:
Because the Bank has been largely involved in analytical work in Mauritius,
impacts and influence on policy decisions are difficult to identify.
Having no presence in the country limits the Bank’s contacts and knowledge about
how i t s contributions are perceived.

12.
The C A S matrix was overly ambitious. I t included over 100 outcomes, most of
which were the Government’s o w n indicators for its reform program, which the Bank
intended to broadly support through budgetary assistance. M a n y benchmarks represented
higher order goals to which Bank assistance was aligned but over which the Bank’s
interventions would have only an indirect influence, with the result that Bank performance
could be assessed only in terms o f Bank contributions to particular outcomes. Out o f these
outcomes only ten can be considered to be linked with Bank activities, and even many o f
these have no baseline nor target. D u e to these shortcomings, this C A S C R does not
reproduce the CAS’S original program matrix stating the status at completion for each CAS
benchmark. Instead, the C A S C R aims to identify the key results that the C A S achieved,
the contributions that the Bank made, and the lessons learned. Moreover, given that the
Bank’s impact arises indirectly from i t s interventions and policy advice, this report presents
a largely qualitative review o f Bank assistance over the past three years.

FY02 CAS Outcomes in Achieving Mauritius’ Strategic Goals
13.
Despite the small Bank program in Mauritius, some good results were obtained in
priority areas for Bank support - notably in the education, financial, transport, environment,
sewerage and sanitation sectors, as w e l l as in economic management. The following
section outlines outcomes in each o f the Government’s strategic objectives that are linked
with Bank support.
Improving Competitiveness:reforming thefinancial sector and improving corporate
governance

14.
The development o f the financial services industry has been one o f the success
stories o f the Mauritian economy over the past 15 years. The sector i s often referred to as
the “Fourth Pillar” o f the economy. Its contribution to GDP, in fact, n o w exceeds that o f

Annex 2
Page 7 o f 16

sugar, the EPZ, and tourism. I t has grown at a compound rate o f approximately 9 percent
per year since the early 1990s, and, while growth has slowed in the past few years, i t
continues to outpace growth in the economy as a whole (7.6 percent in 2005). Moreover, if
one excludes the one-off sale o f Mauritius Telcom, it has also been the largest single source
of foreign direct investment into Mauritius in recent years. FDI in banking alone (Le.
excluding non-bank financial services), has accounted for 25 percent o f all FDI in Mauritius
since 1995 and 41 percent if the Mauritius Telcom sale i s excluded.
Over the CAS period, the Bank has been actively involved in the successful reform
15.
and transformation o f the financial sector in Mauritius and the quality o f the Bank’s input
has been highly appreciated b y the authorities. A t the beginning o f the CAS period, the
Financial Stability Forum categorized the country’s offshore financial center as a poorly
regulated jurisdiction. The strengthening o f the regulatory and supervisory framework, and
the complete overhaul o f financial sector legislation resulted in an improved financial
reputation recognized by the international community and an improved framework for
accounting, auditing and corporate governance. In particular, the Bank’s two projects in the
financial sector, the Financial Sector Infrastructure Project ($4.75 million) and the Financial
Sector Supervisory Authority Project ($1.8 1 million) helped Mauritius establish a modern
payments system and set up the Financial Services Commission as the regulator for the
non-bank financial services sector. As follow up to the FSAP, the Bank worked with
FIRST Initiative to provide technical assistance to establish a code o f corporate governance,
implement anti-money laundering measures, draft a new Securities A c t and establish a
Financial Reporting Council. The instruments the Bank used in this sector were Economic
and Sector Work (ESW), policy advice, technical assistance, and IBRD investment loans.
ESW included a comprehensive financial Sector assessment (FSAP) in 2002-03, pension
reform work, and assessments on Corporate Governance, Accounting and Auditing, and
Corporate Insolvency.

16.
The Government has translated high priority recommendations from the Study on
Corporate Governance into action, including regulation o f the auditing profession and
development o f a voluntary corporate governance code. The Code o f Corporate
Governance for Mauritius was institutionalized b y its publication in October 2003.
Mauritian-listed companies, banks and non-bank financial institutions, large public
companies, state-owned enterprises (including statutory corporations and parastatal bodies)
and large private companies are now required to report according to the recommendations
o f this code. A National Committee on Corporate Governance, which acts as the national
coordinating body responsible for all matters pertaining to corporate governance, and the
Mauritius Institute o f Directors, which acts as the body responsible for promoting the
highest standards o f corporate governance and o f business and ethical conduct o f directors,
were established in February 2005.
17.
The Bank has also helped the Government build i t s knowledge base concerning
competitiveness and productivity b y preparing an Investment Climate Assessment, a Labor
Market Study and an Education and Training Sector Note. Most recently, the Bank
prepared a Country Economic Memorandum, “Managing Change in a Changing World”,
2

According to the Central Statistics Office, financial intermediationrepresented 9.7 percent o f GDP in 2005,
as compared to 4 percent for sugar, 8 percent for the EPZ, and 7.5 percent for tourism.

Annex 2
Page 8 o f 16

May 2006 and a just in time Aid for Trade T A and Report: From Preferences to Global
Competitiveness, April 2006. These analyses on growth and competitiveness formed the
basis for the Government’s ambitious reform program laid out in the June 2006 budget. The
Bank also provided some complementary support by convening four international
practitioners from Ireland, Chile, N e w Zealand, and Mexico to Mauritius in September
2006 to share lessons learned on what worked well and what worked less well in reform
programs. This was a practical way to learn from experience as well as to communicate
with the broader public around reform and transition.
Investing in people and society: Education and training, poverty alleviation and pensions

During the CAS period, the Government o f Mauritius fully met i t s objective o f
18.
launching its landmark education reform. Prior to the PERL preparation, the government
had already extended mandatory education from six to 11 years o f schooling. Subsequently,
a new exam system, which has
the government made good progress, as follows: (i)
effectively eliminated national ranking for entrance into secondary schools in favor o f a
the secondary education system
regional structure, was introduced in December 2002; (ii)
both the primary and secondary school curricula have been largely
was decentralized; (iii)
revised; and (iv) a program has been formulated to address the problems o f low-performing
schools (Zones Education Prioritaires ZEPs), which i s being implemented in 27 schools
mostly located in deprived regions and reaching 11,000 pupils. The enrollment rate o f the
12-16 age group i s at around 80 percent in 2004, up from 76 percent in 2001. Access also
has increased through the creation o f new secondary schools, from 34 in 2000 to 70 in
2005. Despite the widespread reforms, however, the downward trend o f Certificate o f
Primary Education (CPE) pass rates has not yet been reversed (63 percent in 2004 from 66
percent in 2000), although the secondary and higher secondary pass rates have improved
from 76 percent in 2001 to 77.5 percent in 2004 and from 72 percent in 2001 to 76.2
percent in 2004, respectively. A t the tertiary level, the total number o f students has,
increased from 16,759 in 2000/2001 to 25,715 in 2004/2005.

19.
The Bank’s value added in this reform has been in: (i)
meeting the urgent and
critical need to cost the entire education reform; (ii)
offering advice on curricula
providing assistance in developing the Mauritius Qualifications
development, and (iii)
Authority as a regulatory agency for vocational training. The Bank’s Education and
Training Sector Note brings together policy, institutional management and reform
management issues, and provides lessons from Mauritius’ Asian competitors in the
education sector. Once Bank support through the preparation o f the second PERL ended
and the Education and Training Sector Note was finalized, the Bank has virtually stopped
i t s sector support to education in Mauritius, as no lending or AAA was requested, although
the Bank has provided policy advice through the recent C E M on growth. Today, the new
Government’s reform program includes reversing some o f the policy decisions taken by the
previous Government, notably b y reuniting the Form I-V and Form V I colleges, which has
become the subject o f a major nationwide debate.
Environment and Transport

20.
The Government o f Mauritius has fully met i t s objective o f obtaining cost recovery
in the wastewater sector, and tariffs have been put in place as per agreed sector policy

Annex 2
Page 9 o f 16
levels. Prior to the PERL preparation, the government had enacted the Wastewater
Management Authority ( W M A ) Act and published the revised wastewater tariffs for 2002.
Since then, the amendment to the WMA Act to provide for compulsory house connections
(both domestic and non domestic) was approved b y Government and enacted in August
2004. The W M A has been established as a financially sustainable, autonomous corporate
body, and the progression and structure o f tariffs are in place at agreed sector policy levels.
A joint billing system was introduced in January 2004. The W M A has registered an
improvement in the collection performance o f the wastewater bills, with the rate o f tariff
collection averaging 85 percent during 2003-2004, and 82 percent during 2004-2005. As of
January 2005, 56,153 houses have been connected to the W M A , and an additional 1,300
houses have been connected and are being processed for billing network. In sewerage, the
Government also met i t s objective o f completing all sector and institutional reforms
according to the agreed sector policy letter. This i s now being revised for the period 200520 10. Finally, standards for industrial discharge have been implemented in compliance
with environmental standards. Notwithstanding these achievements, progress in the sector
i s somewhat behind initial plans due to poor management at the agency.
2 1.
The value added o f the Bank in the environment sector has been in: (i)
supporting
the development o f National Environmental Action Plans (NEAPS); (ii)
providing advice
on the financial sustainability o f the sewerage sector, which resulted in water and sanitation
reforms and investment program and an introduction o f a joint billing system for clean
water and sewerage; (iii)
aiding the institutional reform o f the WMA; (iv) assisting in the
implementation o f the household connection system; and (v) supporting biodiversity
conservation through GEF. With Bank support a national Solid Waste Master Plan and
Strategy was put in place. The Bank introduced the Prototype Carbon Fund for the
reduction o f emissions, and supported participation o f the private sector in developing solid
aste management systems. Achievements in the Environment, Sewerage, Solid Waste and
Water Sectors are examples o f successful processes and partnerships between the
Government and donors, which f i r s t developed sector strategies and priorities, and then
addressed priority areas through projects, with the donor community working together
according to comparative advantage. Specifically, while the Bank helped the Government
develop the NEAPs, the African Development Bank helped Mauritius develop a National
Sewerage Master Plan, which different donors supported through projects and regularly
heldjoint Government donor meetings on sewerage.

The transport sector underwent a similar process where the Bank supported a
22.
National Strategy, followed by ESW, which i s n o w leading to lending, with a view to
partnering with the private sector and donors. The Bank developed a Transport Action Plan
in 2003, which included a financial tool for government to determine the phasing and
sequencing o f all investments in the transport sector. Through i t s longstanding dialogue on
transport throughout the CAS period, the Bank assisted in major road network upgrading,
and i s currently financing a Project Preparation Facility to examine different options for
reducing traffic congestion in Port Louis. In the wake o f the successful implementation o f
the Port Development and Environment Protection Project, the Bank also continued to
provide technical assistance in port and maritime transport, to help the Authorities cope
with higher-than-anticipated growth in port transshipment traffic, which enhanced Port
Louis’ regional role and benefited Freeport activities as well, but strained existing
institutional and operational arrangements. An Environmental Transport Investment project

Annex 2
Page 10 o f 16

i s currently being prepared. With about 610 people per square kilometer, Mauritius i s one
o f the most densely populated countries in the world. Traffic congestion around the capital
i s a major problem for the small island economy, and detrimental to its continued growth.
Economic Management

The emergence o f sustained budget deficits since 2000 indicates underlying
problems with fiscal management. L e s s evident but also a problem i s a failure to align
budget resources with national priorities. To address these issues, the Bank supported the
introduction o f a Medium Term Expenditure Framework (MTEF). Significant progress has
been achieved, with the establishment, staffing and training o f a central M T E F unit in the
Ministry o f Finance and Economic Development; development o f a three-year framework
o f revenues and spending which i s published as an annex in the Budget Estimates; and
preparation o f six pilot MTEFs incorporating results-based formats. More recently, in
response to some loss o f momentum, the Bank reviewed the implementation strategy, and
recommended some changes to increase awareness and ownership o f both M T E F and the
Government’s fiscal framework. A fully operational MTEF i s well within Mauritius’ grasp,
and the recent Country Economic Memorandum has outlined steps to revitalize the
implementation process.

23.

24.

The stock o f knowledge has improved, and the Bank has contributed to policy

reform, particularly in the areas o f public-sector management, education and development
o f the private sector, including the investment climate and labor market. The Bank’s ESW
on Pension Reform contributed to national dialogue, which led to the introduction o f means
testing on the basic pension. This measure, however, was controversial, and has been
reversed by the current Government. ESW on the labor market and unemployment led the
Central Statistics Office to revise i t s procedures for compiling data on labor.

Measuring Bank Performance
Overall, the Bank did well during the CAS period in both substance and quality,
which led to results. I t also aligned itself to Government objectives, and showed flexibility
in diverging from the program to respond to Government requests. However, the CAS did
not evaluate risks properly, as it did not foresee the risk that the country would not borrow,
and it put a l l its eggs in one basket b y centering the whole program on the PERLs and
underpinning AAA. Because the Bank’s lending program was to be implemented through
budget support, the CAS monitoring matrix was broad and too ambitious to track the
Bank’s results as distinct from the Government’s own objectives and outcomes. Finally,
the lack o f a local presence hindered Bank effectiveness.

25.

26.
The Bank’s lending and non lending program described in the last CAS aimed at
supporting the New Economic Agenda, through a series o f umbrella Public Expenditure
Reform Loans (PERLs) and AAA. These adjustment operations were to be supported by a
heavy program o f ESW, designed and agreed upon with the Government and selected
donors. While the principles underlying the last CAS, in terms o f aligning to the
Government program and providing international expertise and advice remain valid, the
actual work program diverged from what was envisaged. The f i r s t PERL was approved in
2002, but the two subsequent PERLs totaling US$SO million did not materialize. As only

Annex 2
Page 11 o f 16
one PERL transpired, the impact o f Bank assistance and the quality o f overall policy reform
monitoring and influence was less than envisaged in the CAS. Through the ongoing
portfolio and a strong AAA program o f technical assistance and ESW, however, the Bank
continued to provide policy advice and keep informed o f sector developments.

27.
A shortcoming o f the 2002 CAS was in identifying the risk that the country would
not borrow, and the divergence from the planned AAA. As the tasks undertaken changed
from the planned CAS to accommodate new Government priorities, the Bank considered
preparing a progress report to revise the program. Since the CAS timeframe was only two
years, however, the decision was taken t o prepare a new CAS instead, and to focus the new
Strategy on emerging good practices from other Middle Income Countries. This
undertaking was started but delayed upon the request o f the Government due to elections.
In hindsight, despite the problems that occurred from the deviation from the planned
program, this worked out well, as the Government changed, and with the new Government
came completely new ideas for Bank support.
Quality o f Services

28.

Lending Services. The Bank’s decision to phase out multiple investment operations
and focus on single tranche PERLs reflected both i t s intention to support Mauritius’
ambitious reform program and i t s limited resources for activities in Mauritius. PERLs were
planned to be timed to coincide with Mauritius’ budgetary cycle so that proceeds o f World
Bank loans would be available at the beginning o f Mauritius’ fiscal year.
29.
In terms o f objectives, the first PERL aimed to assist the government set the
foundation for attaining i t s medium-term outcomes. The I C R for the first PERL rated Bank
and Borrower performance as satisfactory. The Bank was considered to have supported
Mauritius adequately through the core advisory services that were rendered under
supervision, and in helping track the overall Government program. The second PERL
would have been aimed at helping the Government implement its landmark education
reform. The preparation process for the second PERL had a useful impact since i t led the
Bank to provide close technical assistance and advice as the government undertook i t s
education reform. Results from this work and the education support provided through the
AAA are documented in the previous section. Once the second PERL was dropped and the
ESW finalized, the Bank stopped actively supporting the government on education reform.
Country elections took place thereafter, and some o f the policy decisions under the previous
Government have since been reversed.

The Bank has received some mixed feedback as to the underlying reasons for the
discontinuation o f borrowing. On the one hand, the Government indicated that it did not
need further borrowing from the Bank for budget support. Another reason given was that
the transaction costs, such as the Bank’s conditions and triggers to move from the first to
second PERL, for Bank financing were found to be relatively high for what Government
was getting in return. The borrowing was actually likely spurred by continued demand for
Bank services, and access to international expertise and advice rather than actual financial
need.
30.

Annex 2
Page 12 o f 16

3 1.
Analytical and Advisory Assistance Services: On the analytical and advisory
services side, a Country Procurement Assessment Report, a Public Expenditure Review to
assess financing for the NEA, a Transport Action Plan, and a C E M were undertaken. A
Financial Sector Assessment Plan (FSAP) also was completed in FY03. Some o f the AAA
tasks indicated in the CAS, for example, Welfare Reform, Health Sector reform, Gender
Assessment and ESW on the Informal Economy and Taxation, were not undertaken. On
the other hand, several AAA activities not included in the CAS were carried out upon the
request o f the Government; these included i n ESW on Occupational Pension Funds,
Insurance Industry, Anti-Money LaunderingiCFT Assessment, Real-time Gross Settlement,
Membership in SACU and Corporate Governance. A i d for Trade TA and report has
recently provided an important underpinning for the new Government reform program.
Also, as part o f non-lending services, the Bank established an IDF grant (US$494,000) to
help with capacity building for implementation o f the MTEF.
32.
For several pieces o f ESW, the Bank reacted quickly and efficiently to meet just-intime knowledge needs o f the Government. The Strategic Relevance and Internal Quality of
Bank AAA were rated highly. Most importantly, the client has greatly appreciated the

Bank’s technical and analytical work and continues to seek more than the Bank can provide
within i t s limited resource envelope. An internal Bank assessment by the Quality Assurance
Group (QAG) revealed areas for improvement in the AAA program, which the Bank has
already begun to take into account. It proved to be too ambitious to pre-program a threeyear AAA program, as several activities were not undertaken and replaced by others.
Financing an ambitious AAA program also proved to be difficult once the Government
stopped borrowing from the Bank.

3 3.

Q A G found that the Bank should have moved more aggressively not only in the
development o f high quality analytical work, but in its dissemination and follow up. The
level o f dissemination and follow up were in part due to limited resources for the Mauritius
program in the absence o f borrowing, and in some cases dissemination was kept at a l o w
level due to the preference o f the Government. Some counterexamples include AAA
involving pensions, FSAP and the Corporate Governance ROSC; these AAA provide good
examples o f where results were presented at well-attended national workshops and
conferences. For both the FSAP and Corporate Governance ROSC, grant funding was
obtained from FIRST Initiative (a multi-donor agency that i s partially funded by’the Bank
and provides grants for financial-sector work) to help the Mauritians implement some o f the
recommendations.
34.
In the absence o f a regular lending program, the major constraint in the Bank /
Mauritius partnership i s the limited human and financial resources allocated to the
Mauritius program, as highlighted in the QAG’s AAA assessment. This, together with the
absence o f structuredjoint work planning sessions, hampered the effectiveness o f Bank
support and Bank responsiveness to new needs of the Government.

35.
Mix of instruments. Even though borrowing was less than expected, there was
generally an appropriate mix o f instruments. Q A G has suggested a greater use o f technical
assistance; and programmatic ESW i s being integrated into the new Country Partnership
Strategy.

Annex 2
Page 13 o f 16

Portfolio and Other PerformanceIndicators

36.

Portfolio indicators and ICRs for the projects carried out during the CAS period, the
Public Expenditure Reform Loan and the Financial Sector Infrastructure and Supervisory
Authority Projects, were systematically rated satisfactory on both Bank and Borrower
performance. Throughout the CAS period, the Bank has had no problem projects, or
projects at risk. This reflects Mauritius’ high technical capacity and strong institutions.

37.
OED rated four tasks within the timeframe o f the CAS: (i)Port Development and
Environmental Protection; (ii)
Biodiversity Restoration; (iii)
P E E ; and (iv) Financial
Sector Infrastructure Project. The Port Development Project and the Financial Sector
Infrastructure were rated Highly Satisfactory; the Biodiversity Restoration Satisfactory; and
the PERL Moderately Satisfactory. All Projects were rated likely or highly likely for
sustainability; substantial for impact; satisfactory for Bank performance, and satisfactory or
highly satisfactory for Borrower performance.
Conclusion

3 8.

While Mauritius clearly has all the necessary ingredients for successful programs
that have led to good outcomes from Bank support, the problems in the Mauritius-Bank
partnership l i e not in the tasks themselves, which are carried out successfully, bringing to
bear the Bank’s global knowledge and resources, but rather in the process o f identifying,
prioritizing, and funding tasks. The traditional pre-determined three-year CAS i s not well
suited for the Mauritian context. Rather, a more regular dialogue on the country program i s
needed.

111.

ACTIONABLERECOMMENDATIONS

3 9.
Recommendation 1: Continue to align the Bank’s program to the Government’s.
Aligning the Bank’s program to the Government worked well, andBank input was
consistently highly rated in achieving strategic relevance.
40.
Recommendation 2: The Bank should use a more flexible approach in its work
with Mauritius through a joint Annual Business Planning process with Government.
The Bank’s work program over the CAS period diverged from what was planned. While
this showed responsiveness on the side o f the Bank, some difficulties emerged with staffing
and financing tasks outside o f normal business planning. To avoid this problem, the Bank
and the Government should agree upon a list o f prioritized activities for which the
Government would l i k e the Bank’s support. A jointly agreed, strategic approach that
involves participation from line ministries prepared on an annual basis would increase
clarity on both sides about Bank support to Mauritius. A complementary approach would
be to define just one or two flagship areas for in-depth assistance and to limit just-in-time
advice to a few products only. While the 2002 CAS made best use o f available instruments
at the time, this new approach reflects emerging good practices in other Middle-Income
Countries.

Annex 2
Page 14 o f 16

41.
Recommendation 3: The output matrix should be realistic and linked to areas
where the Bank can have an impact. The last CAS policy focused on higher order goals of
the Government’s reform program, to which Bank assistance was aligned but over which
the Bank’s interventions would have only an indirect influence. The CAS matrix therefore
was overly ambitious.
42.
Recommendation 4: Allow flexibility for adjustment or investment lending by
diversifying the portfolio, and have a fall-back position fi no lending occurs. The 2002
CAS planned to carry out umbrella adjustment operations rather than multiple investment
operations due to both substantive and budgetary reasons. The Bank should not put all i t s
eggs in one basket. Given that the Government chose not to continue borrowing, this
approach was not meeting the needs o f the Government at the time.
43.
Recommendation 5: Leverage additional resourcesfor AAA work over and above
the Bank’s budget. Given that financing an ambitious AAA program proved to be difficult
once the Government stopped borrowing from the Bank, it will be important to leverage
Bank financing o f AAA, for example, through a cost sharing arrangement with the
Government. Another possibility would be for the Government to use i t s own resources for
project preparation in cases o f lending, which would free up bank budget for AAA.
44.
Recommendation 6: Answer the “how” rather than the “why” in AAA. While the
quality o f Bank work i s appreciated, it i s important for this sophisticated client to focus
more on how to implement reforms than the underlying analysis.
45.
Recommendation 7: Give greater emphasis to dissemination offindings of
analytical work and collaboration with other donors. Emphasis should continue to be put
on dissemination o f findings o f analytical work and collaboration with other donors. Given
its lack o f local presence, the Bank could cooperate more with other donors in knowledge
dissemination and sharing. Coordination with other donors was good in specific sectors,
but, in line with the weaknesses in joint programming with the Government, has been less
effective at a strategic level. The Bank also should leverage i t s assistance more against
Government resources and those o f other donors.
46.
Recommendation 8: Leverage the’limited I B R D program through greater
involvement of the other arms of the Bank Group, IFC, M I G A , GEF and W B I , for
example, in private sector development and the financial sector, and in positioning
Mauritius as a global knowledge hub.
47.
Recommendation 9: Establish a one-person liaison office in Port Louis to
enhance dissemination and follow-up o f analytical work as well as outreach efforts.

P

s

:

U

Y

a

Y

B

2
Y

L

.-c

e
S

0

.

.

e

Annex 3
Page 1 o f 4

Annex 3: MAURITIUS: COUNTRY FINANCING PARAMETERS

Item

Parameter

Cost slzaring. Limit on the
of
individual
proportion
projects that the Bank may
fin ance

u p to 100%

Remarks / Explanation

The government’s preference i s for Bank investment loans
to be supplemented with concessional or grant financing.
The Bank’s lending i s likely to be part o f broader financing
packages involving the European Investment Bank (EIB),
AfDB and other financiers, and the Bank’s financing share
in most instances i s likely to be less than 100%.
Recurrent cost financing. Any N o country Bank financing o f recurrent costs at the portfolio level i s
limits that would apply to the level limit on expected to remain within the recent modest ranges. At the
overall amount of recurrent recurrent cost project-level, the Bank may finance recurrent costs after a
expenditures that the Bank may financ ing
careful consideration o f the sustainability of project
finance
achievements and implied future budgetary outlays within
the overall context o f Mauritius’ aggregate fiscal position
and prospects.
Local cost financing. Are the Yes
requirements
for
Bank
financing o f local expenditures
met, namely that: (i)financing
requireinent s for the country’s
development program would
exceed the public sector’s own
resources (e.g., from taxation
and other revenues) and
expected domestic borrowing;
and (ii) the financing o f foreign
expenditures alone would not
enable the Bank to assist in the
financing o f individual projects
Taxes and duties. Are there N o
any taxes and duties that the
Bank would not finance.

The Bank may finance local and foreign costs in any
proportions as needed for individual projects.

Taxes and duties have been judged to be reasonable. A t the
project level, the Bank would examine whether taxes and
duties constitute an excessively high share o f project costs.

Annex 3

MAURITIUS: COUNTRY FINANCING PARAMETERS

Page 2 o f 4

Introduction. This Annex provides additional information on the country financing
parameters for Mauritius established pursuant to OP/BP 6.00, Bank Financing. The
Government has been consulted on the country financing parameters, and has indicated that it
welcomes the increased flexibility in the World Bank’s approach to financing o f investment
projects, and believes that this should facilitate implementation and achievement o f results’.

Public Fincrncinl Mcrnagement. Overall, the Mauritius P F M system i s satisfactory. The
budget adequately reflects policy priorities by the Government. An MTEF together with a
results-based management framework was introduced in 2003 and MTEFs were prepared for
6 sector ministries in the last budget. The M T E F w i l l require further deepening and the
government i s committed to this. Budget preparation i s undertaken in close consultation with
the spending ministries, but while multi-year projections exist for most parts o f the
administration, the prioritization o f public expenditure has made l i t t l e progress. The budget
classification system i s comprehensive and in l i n e with international standards. N o
significant funds are controlled outside the budget, although large losses in the parastatal
sector, largely stemming from subsidized o i l imports, are o f f balance sheet. Financial
management and control system are comprehensive and effective; the Mauritius IFMIS i s
considered a “model” case and covers all relevant stages o f the budget preparation and
execution process. There i s no significant deviation between planned and actual budget.
Payment arrears do not exist. Reconciliation between fiscal and central Bank accounts i s
made regularly and comprehensively (at least weekly). The Accountant General produces
(high quality) budget execution reports on a regularly (monthly) basis which form the basis
for discussions at the Cabinet level. Public accounts are prepared within a month after the
fiscal year ends. The Government Audit Office (external independent auditor reporting to
Parliament) reports within a few months. Recommendations o f the Audit Office are
discussed with adequate actions taken b y the Government.
Cost Sharing. Government ownership o f projects i s strong. The political leadership has
shown a firm commitment to i t s vision and reform program, which i s entirely homegrown.
As noted, the CPS i s based on the four pillars o f the Government’s strategy, and the Bank
Group’s program w i l l be set out each year in an Annual Business Plan (ABP), which will be
developed in parallel with the Government’s annual planning and budget processes to ensure
that the Bank i s fully in step with Mauritius’ development agenda, and with other donors’
support. The Government’s new reform program i s currently estimated to cost as much as Rs
150 billion (US$4.5 billion) over the next ten years, most o f it frontloaded in the first 3 to 5
years. O f this, the Government i s anticipating Rs 80 billion (US$2.4 billion) from local
private investment; Rs. 70 billion (US$2.1 billion) from foreign investment, and the
remainder (US$300 million) from public sector investment and foreign aid. The Government
i s further costing and refining the program. Bank financing o f projects i s fully integrated into
the budget. As noted in the CPS, portfolio performance has been satisfactory. Government
has requested that the Bank finance up to 100 percent o f the costs o f individual operations,
particularly for sectors that the Government considers will trigger rapid growth in the short to
I

Discussions with the Government took place in July 2006, and written comments were received in August
2006.

Annex 3
Page 3 o f 4

medium term. Based o n the above considerations, the cost sharing limit i s being set at 100
percent. The government’s preference i s for Bank investment loans to be supplemented with
concessional or grant financing. The Bank’s lending i s likely to be part o f broader financing
packages involving the European Investment Bank (EIB), AfDB and other financiers, and the
Bank’s financing share in most instances is likely to be less than 100 percent.

79.

Recurrent Cost Financing. Only a small proportion o f the Bank’s current portfolio
in Mauritius involves financing o f recurrent costs, and the Government has so far not
expressed interest in W o r l d Bank financing o f substantial amounts o f recurrent costs. There
are no PIUs in Mauritius, and therefore no PIU related operational running costs.
As
discussed in the CPS, the Government has made fiscal consolidation a pillar o f their reform
strategy, based on explicit rules intended to put deficits and debt o n a downward path.
Projections from the Ministry o f Finance anticipate revenue stabilizing at around 19 percent
o f GDP, accompanied b y a decline in the share o f expenditure and a narrowing o f the overall
central government budget deficit. Mauritius’ debt situation i s not imminently unsustainable,
but the country i s vulnerable to macroeconomic risks arising from slower growth, further
adverse movements in the terms o f trade and rising interest rates. Bank financing o f projects
i s fully integrated into the budget and thus subject to Mauritius’s overall fiscal targets and
legal framework. The Government has been implementing a MTEF budgeting framework,
which explicitly addresses the recurrent cost implications o f project spending. Bank
recurrent cost financing will remain subject to consideration o f overall medium-term fiscal
sustainability and i s expected to be small and not jeopardize overall fiscal or debt
sustainability. O n a project by project basis, the Bank may finance recurrent costs after
careful consideration o f the sustainability o f project achievements; and implied future
budgetary outlays, within the overall context o f Mauritius’ aggregate fiscal position and
prospects.
L o c a l Cost Financing. The Government has an ambitious strategy 10 implement needed
structural reform which exceed its o w n resources and expected domestic borrowing. The
reform program will be implemented over the ten year period costing about US$4.5 billion,
which will be partly sourced from the Government, the domestic private sector and FDI.
There currently remains an unmet financing gap o f about US$1.6 billion over the next ten
years. (The numbers are preliminary and would be further refined following sector analyses).
O n average, from FY99-04, local costs accounted for 23 percent o f the Bank’s investment
lending disbursements for Mauritius (68 percent in FY04). The local cost component o f
envisaged investment lending i s expected to continue to be significant. The t w o requirements
for Bank financing o f local costs are met, and the Bank m a y finance local and foreign costs
in the proportion required for individual projects.

Taxes and Duties Financing. In 2006/07, the Government put in place a new tax regime to
remove distortions and create a level playiog field across sectors, business units and
individuals.* The relinquishing o f the discretionary power o f the Minister o f Finance for
granting exemptions has already reduced much o f distortion. M a j o r taxes and duties are
summarized below:
2

B y 2008-09, the Governinent i s expected to eliminate almost all o f i t s custom duties and consequently the
associated duty draw-backs, relying on its V A T base to mobilize indirect tax revenues. The VAT base i s
expected to be at a single rate as w i l l the corporate and personal income taxation.

Annex 3
Page 4 o f 4

Item
Personal Income Tax

Tax rates (range)

- For first Rs 500,000 of chargeable income, the tax rate i s 15 %.
- For non-interest related chargeable income above Rs 500,000,

Corporate Income Tax
Value-added tax

1 Customs tariffs

1

the rate i s 22.5%
- 15% tax rate for chargeable income from interest
- Non-incentive rate 22.5% in 2006107
- Incentive rate 15%
- Standard rate o f 15%
- 4 Tariff Bands - 0 %, lo%, 15%, 30%

I

Currently, there are no excessive taxes or duties in Mauritius. Therefore, the Bank may
finance all taxes and duties associated with project expenditures. At the project level, the
Bank will examine whether taxes and duties constitute an excessively high share o f project
costs. Changes in tax and customs and/or related exemptions could trigger a review o f this
parameter.

Annex 4: Partner Institutions

Annex 4
Page 1 o f 2

Reflecting Mauritius’ past success and improved access to capital markets, official donor
assistance to the country declined over the past few years, and has become more selective.
The few donors that are active in Mauritius are cooperating on specific programs, notably in
wastewater, and stepping up overall coordination at the strategic level. Though donors have
played a relatively small role in Mauritius in the past few years, the Government i s stepping
up its efforts to win financial, technical and moral support from the outside world. As
described earlier, improved donor coordination in line with the harmonization agenda i s an
underlying principle o f this CPS.
Donors to Mauritius include the European Commission, the European Investment Bank, the
World Bank, Agence Francaise de Developpement, the Indian Government, the Chinese
Government, the Kuwait Fund, the African Development Bank, and the Arab Bank for
Economic Development. In addition, the I M F i s helping the Government with fiscal policy.

The IMF has no lending program in Mauritius given the country’s strong macroeconomic
position, but it conducts routine macroeconomic surveillance. Collaboration with the IMF
will continue; for example, the Bank i s working with IMF on the Aid for Trade work, and
going on joint missions on the fiscal impact o f transition.
The EU i s present in Mauritius and has been active in the areas o f environment (particularly
the wastewater sector) and poverty reduction for the most vulnerable, marginalized groups
who are not benefiting from Mauritius’ development success. The European Commission i s
currently preparing i t s Country Strategy Paper for Mauritius in conjunction with the Bank’s
strategy and i s programming the 1Oth EDF funds for Mauritius. In addition to EDF funds,
Mauritius will benefit from the sugar accompanying measures which will be fully integrated
in the CSP. This includes €6.5 million for sugar sector budget support in 2006-2007,
followed by non targeted budget support together with the World Bank and the French
government in 2007-2008 and beyond. Like the Bank’s Rapid Response TA Facility, the
European Commission will set aside some resources in a technical cooperation facility (TCF)
for Government requests as they arise. The Bank and EU will coordinate on the analytical
and advisory activities through these facilities to better fill knowledge gaps or other needed
non lending support. The E C will also continue direct support to non-State actors. The
European Investment Bank will continue to work in Mauritius, particularly on infrastructure
investments.
The Agence Francaise de Developpement has also confirmed i t s support to Mauritius’
transition as the country moves toward greater integration in the world economy, through
better productivity and competitiveness. The AFD has proposed to support the investments in
the clusters, with public entities and/or private sector, and to accompany the reforms program
launched by the State within the initiative “ A i d for Trade”.
AFD w i l l look to intervene in coordination with other Development Partners, and can
provide three types o f support: (i)
Budget Support, in partnership with WB (DPL) and EC
(1 0th European Development Fund and Funds for the Sugar Action Plan). Within the policy

Annex 4
Page 2 o f 2

dialogue between the Government and the Development Partners, a Budget Support would
be conditioned to i)an alignment with the Mauritius Reform Strategy and the National
Action Plan for Poverty Alleviation, ii)a process o f coordination and harmonization with the
main donors iii)a monitoring and evaluation o f the reforms implemented within a
Performance Assessment Framework based on priority areas and sector identified by the
Government and Development Partners (set o f performance indicators); (ii)
Project
Financing, in the clusters through public bodies and/or private sector in order to support
Technical Assistance, for the definition and/or implementation
government policy; and (iii)
o f sectoral strategy (ICT, vocational training, etc).

As a member o f the UN family, the Bank works with the local UNDP office. The Bank i s
working with the U N D P to prepare an HIV/AIDS IDF grant proposal, and there i s scope for
collaboration on other issues related to the MDGs, including poverty and gender.
The World Bank and African Development Bank are working together in the sewerage and
sanitation sector. They also have contributed to the first budget support operation and the
two institutions will continue to cooperate on Mauritius.

India has economic, social, and cultural ties to Mauritius, and the Bank i s exploring how to
work jointly together.

Annex 5: Consultationswith Stakeholders

Annex 5
Page 1 o f 3

1.
The World Bank held three sets o f consultations to obtain feedback o n the Bank’s
proposed program in Mauritius, in Port Louis and Rodrigues in February and July 2006. The
European Commission, with whom the Bank i s jointly preparing i t s strategy, joined in some
of the consultations. The purpose o f these discussions was to receive direct feedback from
stakeholders on the country’s main challenges and seek views on how the Bank might assist
in the country’s transition. The Bank briefed the participants on the Country Partnership
Strategy and explained how and in what areas the Bank can be involved in Mauritius. The
European Commission, who had already held consultations with c i v i l society on i t s Strategy,
also participated, emphasizing how the donors are working together to support the
Government’s program, that the Country Strategies are fully aligned with the Government’s
reform program, and how the EU will be supporting Mauritius.
Consultations in Port Louis

2.
Participants welcomed the consultative approach and agreed with the broad thrusts o f
the Bank’s assistance to Mauritius. There was also a general consensus o n and awareness o f
the economic problems the country i s facing in light o f the erosion o f international trade
preferences, in particular all agreed on the four pillars o f the Reform Program, which i s also
the pillars o f the CPS. However, as with all complex reform transitions, there are differing
views among stakeholders about how to go about change and how to minimize the impact o f
the transition on the population.

3.
A t all the consultations, participants stressed that communications was essential and
that communication with Government on reform should be a two way street where the views
o f stakeholders are taken into account and the government communicates what it i s doing and
why.
4.
The consultations in Port Louis prior to the 2006 Budget Speech reflected a general
feeling that the situation in Mauritius today i s worse than ten years back, that a fresh look
should be taken at the role the State plays in the economy to reduce and update outdated
regulation, and increase clarity and transparency, to open up the economy and that growth
must be private sector led. Problems with implementation were stressed several times, and
the sense that the public sector was not moving forward. There was a recognition that
Mauritius i s not competitive: labor costs and unemployment were increasing; growth was
being strangled by constraints in education and training and there i s a need for skilled people.
Other suggestions were to encourage clustering among sectors and small companies;
diversify agriculture and find niche markets. Other issues were raised such as land, how to
operationalize Mauritius as a knowledge hub, and a few participants stressed the importance
o f not squandering money, including for Aid for trade.
5.
The Consultations a month following the announcement o f the Government’s
program in i t s 2006-2007 Budget speech focused o n the following issues:

Annex 5
Page 2 o f 3

0

Social impact o f economic transition. Participants stressed the need for involvement
o f social partners in the economic reform program and expressed concern over the
social impact that would be caused by the transition Mauritius i s facing.
Governance and Education were raised as important issues. Energy was mentioned
as a sector where assistance could be helpful. And Sugar was raised as an important
sector for the economy, which has to become more competitive. As the sugar price
cut will hit by 2009, reforms need to be completed by then.

HIV/AIDS was noted as a growing threat in Mauritius, whose rate o f increase could
follow the case o f Botswana. I t was suggested that support from donors for
HIV/AIDS could be given partly to Government and partly to c i v i l society.
H I V / A I D S i s stigmatized and the Government will need community workers t o gain
people’s trust.
Capacity building for civil society was mentioned as a n area that should be
supported.

6.
O n the Bank’s support, the two sets o f consultations in Port Louis yielded mixed
views among the stakeholders. It was f e l t that past collaboration had been successful, and
that the Bank could usefully bring to bear i t s economic analyses such as the Investment
Climate Assessment, and support implementation and policy decisions. Trade unions,
however, expressed concern that the World Bank was too prescriptive in its advice to
Government. The Bank answered that Mauritius i s a country which listens t o advice and does
what it thinks best. The Bank believes the Government i s doing the right thing by learning
about worldwide experience in transition, which allows it to make more informed decisions
based on the country’s needs. I t was noted that these consultations are only o n the Bank’s
strategy and the Bank i s only one actor. While useful, i t i s more important that stakeholders
provide input to the government program.
Consultations in Rodrigues

7.

Participants appreciated the consultation and the Bank team noted the impressively
vibrant and active c i v i l society that exists in Rodrigues. The specificity o f Rodrigues was
underscored, with its 3 6,000 people, specific economy mainly driven by fishing, agriculture,
tourism are the main sectors o f the economy. Unemployment was raised as an important
problem in Rodrigues.

8.

Issues raised included:

(i)
(ii)
(iii)

the need to develop tourism. Constraints identified included high costs o f plane
tickets, capacity, need to develop airport and port, visibility (Rodrigues i s not well
known; need to brand), and lack o f entertainment.
fisheries and agro-industry development.
Water was mentioned several times as a serious problem for Rodrigues, including
for growth such as industry and irrigation.

(iv)
(v)
(vi)
(vii)

9.

Annex 5
Page 3 o f 3
Energy was also mentioned as many subscribers are in arrears; people can not
afford mandatory new security device t o prevent electric shock
L a c k of a good regulatory framework; slowness; creating an enterprise i s not
easy; should create a one stop shop. Should help SME development. Problems
w i t h training and market.
Education. Children go irregularly to school. Can not read, illiteracy
Social i l l s also exist including drug abuse, theft, violence, criminality. Lack o f
security hinders investors.

On the Bank’s support, participants mentioned the following suggestions and ideas:
e
e

e

e

Community Driven Development to empower local government to tackle issues o f
importance for the community and improve capacity
Microcredit schemes: identify potential entrepreneur; provide seed money t o start
project; have peer system o f credit and create cohesion among entrepreneurs.
Airport infrastructure: New project for a new airline strip; add more length and
width to runway. Find aircraft that can land with more people. Problem o f high cost
o f oil.
Participants noted the importance o f making sure money being invested i s well used.
IFAD program i s good example Rs 40 m i l l i o n going to things such as infrastructure
and primary schools.

10.
The W o r l d Bank confirmed that i t can w o r k in any o f these areas. I t has an expansive
network o f expertise in most sectors o f the economy. In order for the Bank to be engaged in
any o f these areas, either through project or analytical work, a request must be made by the
Ministry o f Finance in Mauritius. I t was noted that the W o r l d Bank provides loans rather than
grants as some other institutions or bilateral donors, so this has monetary implications for the
Government o f Mauritius. The appropriate avenue i s that the needs o f Rodrigues are factored
in to the annual business plan discussions in January/February each year so that they can be
considered for W o r l d Bank support. This should be done through the authorities o f Rodrigues
to the Ministry o f Finance in Mauritius. If the W o r l d Bank knows o f Rodrigues’ needs, it can
also mention these areas to the Government for consideration for Bank support.

Annex A1
Page 1 o f 3

Mauritius a t a glance

6/12/06

K e y D e v e l o p m e n t Indicators

Mauritius

(2005)

SubSaharan
Africa

upper
middle
income

Age distribution, 2005
Male

Popuiation, mid-year (millions)
Surface area (thousand sq. km)
Population growth (Oh)
Urban population (Oh of total population)

1.2
2.0
1.I
44

GNI (Atlas method, US$ billions)
GNi per capita (Atias method, US$)
GNi per capita (PPP, international $)
GDP growth (Oh)
GDP per capita growth ( O h )

741
24,265
2.1
37

599
30,135
04
72

6.5
5,250
12,450

552
745
1,981

3,366
5,625
10,924

4.6
3.3

5.3
3.1

55
50

73
14
15

44
75
46
100
29

69
23
7

Female

70-74
BO 64

50-54
40 44
30-34
20-24
10-14
0-4
15

o
percent

5

5

10

io

(most recent estimate, 2000-2005)
Poverty headcount ratio at $1 a day (PPP, %)
Poverty headcount ratio at $2 a day (PPP, Oh)
Life expectancy at birth (years)
Infant mortality (per 1,000 live births)
Child mainutrition (% of children under 5)

Jnder-5 mortality rate (per 1,000)

Adult literacy, male (% of ages 15 and older)
Adult literacy, female (% of ages 15 and older)
Gross primary enrollment, male (% of age group)
Gross primary enrollment, female (Oh of age group)

66
81
102
102

99
87

95
92
106
106

Access to an improved water source (Oh of population)
Access to improved sanitation facilities (Oh of population)

100
94

56
37

94
84

200,
150
100
50

0
1990

1995

0 Mauritius

N e t Aid Flows
(US$ millions)
Net ODA and official aid
Aid ( % of GNI)
Aid per capita (US$)

1980

1990

2000

2005

33

89

20

38

29
34

3.6
84

0.5
17

06
31

42 0
10 6

13.5
10.6

4.2
3.6

49
56

71

15.4
104

25.5
100

28 9
92

2000

2004

OSub-SaharanAfrica

*
Growth of GDP and GDP per capita (Oh)

L o n g - T e r m E c o n o m i c Trends
Consumer prices (annual % change)
GDP implicit defiator (annual O
h change)
Exchange rate (annual average, local per US$)
Terms of trade index (2000 = 100)

90

00

95

+GDP

1980-90

05

-

GDP par capita

1990-2000

2000-05

(average annual gmwth %)
Population, mid-year (millions)
GDP (US$ millions)

10
1,153

1 .I
2,363

1.2
4,465

12
6,290

0.9
6.0

1.2
5.2

1.o
3.9

Agriculture
Industry
Manufacturing
Services

16 5
26 3
15 7
57 2

(% of GDP)
13.1
6.0
33.1
31.2
24.7
23.7
53.6
62.8

61
28 2
20 3
65 7

2.6
9.2
10.4
5.1

-0.5
5.5
5.3
6.4

1.9
1.9
0.6
5.7

Household final consumption expenditure
General gov't final consumption expenditure
Gross capital formation

71 0
14 4
25 4

63.7
12.6
30.7

63.0
13.1
25.9

66 7
14 4
23 3

5.4
3.3
10.3

5.4
4.6
4.7

3.0
4.5
4.6

Exports of goods and services
Imports of goods and services
Gross savings

46 0
57 6
14 0

64.2
71.4
26.3

62.7
64.7
25.3

56 5
60 9
19 7

10.2
10.3
11.1

5.4
5.2
5.7

1.8
1.4
3.1

Note: Figures in italics are for years other than those specified. 2005 data are preliminary estimates. .. indicates data are not available.
Macro-data. balance o f Payments a n d fiscal data refer t o fiscal years, i.e., 2005 refers t o FY starting o n Juiv 1, 2004 and ending on Ju
a. Aid data are for 2004.
Development Economics, Development Data Group (DECDG).

Annex A 1
Page 2 o f 3
Mauritius
B a l a n c e of P a y m e n t s and T r a d e

2000

2005

IGovernance indicators, 2000 a n d 2004

(US$ m,l/,onsj
Total merchandise exports (fob)
Total merchandise imports (af)
Net trade in goods and services

1,523
2,158
-130

2,028
2,919
-269

Workers' remittances and
compensation of employees (receipts)

177

215

Regulatory quality

Current account balance
as a Q/~
of GDP

-69
-1 5

-216
-3 4

Rule of law

Reserves including gold

688

1,487

Voice

Political stability

Control of corruption

20 5
18 1
20 5

19 6
179
20 9

Cash surplus/deficit

-3 8

-5 2

25
25

25
25

E x t e r n a l D e b t a n d R e s o u r c e Flows
(US$ miliionsj
Total debt outstanding and disbursed
Total debt service
HlPC and MDRl debt relief (expected; flow)

50

75

100

Country's percentilerank (0-100)

0 2000

Revenue
Tax revenue
Expense

Highest rnarginai tax rate (Oh)
Individual
Corporate

25

0

Q 2004

C e n t r a l G o v e r n m e n t F i n a n c e 1/
(% of GDPj

and accountability

Source Kaufmann.Kraay-MastNrli

higher valuer rrnpfy bsfferralings

World Bank

T e c h n o l o g y and Infrastructure

2000

2004

Paved roads (% of total)
Fixed iina and mobile phone
subscribers (per 1,000 people)
High technology exports
(Oh of manufactured exports)

97.0

700.0

388

700

1.o

4.5

56
18.7

56
18.2

Environment
1,720
485

2,294
260

Total debt (% of GDP)
Total debt service (X of exports)

36 5
172

36.0
72

Foreign direct investment (net inflows)
Portfolio equity (net inflows)

266
-4

14
79

-

-

:omposition o f total external debt, 2004

Agricultural land (% of land area)
Forest area (% of land area, 2000 and 2005)
Nationally protected areas (% of land area)
Freshwater resources per capita (cu. meters)
Freshwater withdrawal (% of internal resources)

C 0 2 emissions per capita (mt)

2,229
22.2
2.4

2.6

IBRD
Total debt outstanding and disbursed
Disbursements
Principal repayments
Interest payments

86
4
18
5

68
2
9
2

IDA
Total debt outstanding and disbursed
Disbursements
Total debt service

14
0
1

10
0
1

6
6
0

0
0
0

3

0

-

-

GDP per unit of energy use
(2000 PPP $ per kg of oil equivalent)
Energy use per capita (kg of oil equivalent)

IDA 11

wo
(US$ rndlionsj

Sholt-term, 1 3 5 3

ISS

millions

Private Sector Development
Time required to start a business (days)
Cost to start a business (% of GNi per capita)
Time required to register property (days)

2000

2005

-

46
8.8
210

Ranked as a major constraint to business
(Oh of managers surveyed who agreed)
n.a.
n.a.
Stock market capitalization (Oh of GDP)
Bank branches (per 100,000 people)

29.8

..

41.5
11.9

IFC (fiscalyear)
Total disbursed and outstanding portfolio
of which IFC own account
Disbursements for iFC own account
Portfolio sales, prepayments and
repayments for iFC own account
MlGA
Gross exposure
New guarantees

Note Figures in italics are for years other than those specified. 2005 data are preliminary estimates.
911 4/06
.. indicates data are not available. - indicates observation is not applicable.
l / Revenues refer to current revenues excluding current grants: expenses refer to current expenditures: and, deficit refers to deficit after total grants.
Development Economics, Development Data Group (DECDG).

Annex A 1
Page 3 o f 3

Millennium Development Goals

Mauritius

W/th selected targets to achieve between 1990 and 2015

(estimate closest to date shown, +/- 2 years)

G o a l 1: halve the rates for $1 a day poverty and malnutrition
Poverty headcount ratio at $1 a day (PPP, O
h of population)
Poverty headcount ratio at national poverty line (% of population)
Share of income or consumption to the poorest qunitiie (Oh)
Prevaience of malnutrition (% of children under 5)

1990

1995

2000

2004

93
105
78

95
97

88

15

G o a l 2: ensure that children are able t o complete primary schooling
Pnmary school enrollment (net, Oh)
Primary cornpietion rate (% of relevant age group)
Secondary school enrollment (gross, %)
Youth iiteracy rate (% of people ages 15-24)

91
64
55
91

G o a l 3: eliminate gender disparity in education and empower women
Ratio of aids to bovs in Drimarv and secondarv education Ph)
. ,
Women employed in the nonagricultural sector ( O h of nonagricultural employment)
Propoltion of seats held by women in national parliament (%)

98

95

37
7

36
8

98
39
8

100
35
6

G o a l 4: reduce under-5 mortality by two-thirds
Under-5 mortality rate (per 1,000)
Infant mortality rate (per 1,000 live births)
Measles immunization (proportion of one-year olds immunized, %)

23
20
76

21
20
89

18
16
84

15
14
98

G o a l 5 : reduce maternal mortality by three-fourths
Maternal mortality ratio (modeled estimate, per 100,000 live births)
Births attended by skilled health staff (% of total)

91

98

24
100

99

I

102

L

.

G o a l 6 : hait and begin to reverse the spread of HIV/AiDS and other major diseases
Prevaience of HIV ( % of popuiation ages 15-49)
Contraceptive prevalence (Oh of women ages 15-49)
incidence of tuberculosis (per 100,000 people)
Tuberculosis cases detected under DOTS (Oh)
G o a l 7 : halve the proportion of people without sustainable access to basic needs
Access to an improved water source (% of popuiation)
Access to improved sanitation facilities ( % of population)
Forest area (% of total land area)
Nationally protected areas (Oh of total land area)
C 0 2 emissions (metric tons per capita)
GDP per unit of energy use (constant 2000 PPP $ per kg of oil equivalent)

I

1

Education indicators (%)

34

33

100
94

100
19.2

G o a l 8 : develop a global partnership for development
Fixed iine and mobile Dhone subscnbers (Der 1 000 oeoole)
internet users (per 1,000 people)
Personai computers (per 1,000 people)
Youth unemployment (Oh of total labor force ages 15-24)
I

0.6
76
64
33

26

75
68

,

vleasies immunization (%of 1-year olds)

18.7

18.2

1.4

1.6

2.4

2.6

55
0
4

143

388
73
101

700
146
279

2

32

CT indicators (per 1,000 people)
800
e00

I 'L
50

400

200
1998

'

-Primary
+Ratio

20;

'

2

k

'

2004

'

0
1990

net enrollment ratio

of girls to boys in pnmary 8
seconda education

0 Mauritius

1995

2000

2004

0 Sub.Saharan Africa

Note: Figures in italics are for years other than those specified. .. indicates data are not avaiiable.
Development Economics, Development Data Group (DECDG).

2000

2002

2004

UFixed + mobile subscribers
0 internet users

8/12/06

Annex B2
Page 1 o f 1

-

Annex B2 Mauritius
Selected Indicators* of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
As Of Date
07l2412006

Indicator
Portfolio Assessment
Number of Projects Under Implementation

2004

2005

2006

2
4.5
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
6.4

1
7.4
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
19.3

1
8.4
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
24.0

No
135,000
67,000

No
117,000
59,000

No
101,000
101,000

a

Average Implementation Period (years)
Percent of Problem Projects by Number a'
Percent of Problem Projects by Amount a'
Percent of Projects at Risk by Number a , d
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount
Disbursement Ratio (YO)e
Portfolio Management
CPPR during the year (yes/no)
Supervision Resources (total US$)
Average Supervision (USWproject)
at

Memorandum Item
Proj Eva1 by OED by Number
Proj Eva1 by OED by Amt (US$ millions)
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by
Number
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.

Since FY 80

31
346.2
16.1
9.6

Last Five FYs

2
3.5
0.0
0.0

As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY).
Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio.
Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) and/or implementation progress (IP).
As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the
beginning of the year: Investment projects only.
* All indicators are for projects active in the Portfolio, with the exception of Disbursement Ratio,
which includes all active projects as well as projects which exited during the fiscal year.

Annex B3
Page 1 o f 1

-

-

Mauritius CAS Annex 8 3 IBRDllDA Program Summary
As Of Date 08/21/2006

Proposed IBRDllDA Base-Case Lending Program a
Fiscal year

Proj ID

US$(M)

2007

Env. Urban Transp Inv Phase1 (FY07)

12.0

2008

2009

Development Policy DPLI (FY07)

30.0

Sub-total

42.0

Development Policy DPL2 (FY08)

30.0

Infrastructure (to be determined)

20.0

Sub-total

50.0

Development Policy DPL3 (FYO9)

30.0

Urban Infrastructure

20.0

Sub-total
Total

50.0
142.0

Strategic Rewards b
(H/M/L)

Implementation b
Risks (H/WL)

M
H

M
L

H
M

L
M

H
M

L
M

Annex B3
Page 1 o f 1

CAS Annex B3 (IFC & M I G A ) for Mauritius
Mauritius - IFC and MIGA Program, FY 2004-2007

IFC approvals (US$m)

2004

2005

2006

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

Sect o r ("/o)

Investment instrument(%)
MIGA guarantees (US$m)

2007

Annex B4
Page 1 o f 1

-

Annex B4 Summary of Nonlending Services -Mauritius
Product

As Of Date 07/24/2006

Completion FY

Cost (US$OOO)Audiencea

FY02
FY03
FY02
FY03
FY04
FY06
FY06
FY06
FY06
FY06

76
76
a5
31
244
75
462
50
86
165

Objectiveb

Recent completions
Pension Reform
CPAR
CAS
Transport Action Plan
PER
Investment Climate Assessment
CEM
Labor Market Study
Communication Assessment
Aid for Trade Report
Cabinet Retreat and Meetings with
International Practitioners

FY07

Government
Bank
Bank
Government
GovVBank
Government
GovVBank
Government
Government
Government
GovVPublic

Problem-solving
Knowledge
Strategy
Problem-solving
Knowledge
Problem-solving
Knowledge
Problem-solving
Problem-solving
Problem-solving
Knowledge/Pro bl
em-Solving

Government
Government
Government
Government

Problem-solving
Problem-solving
Problem solving
Problem solving

Planned
Communication
LandIUrban Policy Note
Public Expenditure Review
HIV/AIDS IDF

FY07
FY07
FYO7-09
FY07

a. Government, donor, Bank, public dissemination.
b. Knowledge generation, public debate, problem-solving.

100
90
200
30

Annex B6
Page 1 o f 2

-

Mauritius Key Economic Indicators

_______ ______ ___________ Estimated
~

Indicator

200l102

2002104

2003104

2004105

2005/06

___ ____ __ _________.______.-

______________________Projected
2006107

2007108

2008109

2009110

Avg 2010111201212013

National accounts (as 'K o f CDP)

"

100.0
7.1
30.9
62.0

100 0
61
30 4
63 5

100 0
62
29 6
64 3

100 0
61
28 2
65 7

100 0
56
26 9
67 6

100 0
54
26 2
68 4

100.0
4.5
25.2
70.3

100.0
4.1
24.3
71.6

100 0
40
24 0
72 0

100.0
3.7
23.4
72.9

Total Consumption

74.8

75 2

76 6

81 1

85 2

81 5

80.7

79.9

78 2

75.5

Gross domestic fixed investment
Governinent investinent
Private investinent

22 3
70
15 3

22 2
79
I43

22 1
77
14 5

21 3
66
14 8

22 5
75
15 0

26 6
IO8
15 8

24.5
85
16.1

24 0
7.7
16.4

24 3
78
16 5

26.5
8.3
18.2

Exports (GKFS)L
Iinporrs (Gh'FS)

60 6
56 8

59 1
56 9

55 2
55 9

56 5
60 9

59 7
68 6

63 5
71 6

66.3
71 6

67 1
71.0

68 4
70 8

70.9
72.9

Gross doinestic savings

25.2

24 8

23 4

18 9

14 8

18 5

19.3

20 1

21 8

24.5

cross national savingsd

26 5

26 3

23 8

I97

I64

I96

19.8

20 3

21 9

24.3

4549

5248

6064

6290

6448

6598

6851

7103

7399

8508

3880

4010

4520

5250

5410

5380

5460

5570

5750

6357

32
44

47
27

46
05

35

01

35
91

3.6
43

3.8
4.8

43
52

5.3
6.5

.3 7

26
25

35
43
43

24
29
28

25
52
62

2.6
3.5
4.1

2.8
3.6
4.1

33
28
29

4.4
4.2
2.4

Gross domestic product
Agriculture
Industry
Services

Memorandum i l e m s
Gross domestic product
(US$ inillion at current prices)
GNl per capita (US$, Atlas method)

Real annual growth rates (%, calculated froin 1992 prices)
2.7
Gross domestic product at market prices
Gross Domestic Income
I.7

Real annual per capita growth rates (%, calculated from 1992 prices)
Gross domestic prodiict at market prices
16
2.3
Total consumption
4.2
00
Private consumption
-0 7
4.4
Balance o f Payments (US$ millions)
Expotts (GNFS)c
Merchandise FOB
linpoits (GNFS)b
Merchandise FOB
Resource balance
Net current transfers
Current account balance
Net private foreign direct investment
Long-term loans (net)
Official
Private
Other capital (net, tncl. en-ors & oininissions

Change ti1 reserves'

2749
1569
2577
1199
172
71
248

3065
1871
3005
2162
60
81
139

3401
2014
3357
2385
45
60
68

3592
2028
3861
2733
-269
58
-216

3922
2254
4330
3097
-408
39
-333

4190
2270
4725
3411
-535
47
-461

4545
2382
4903
3525
-358
41
-326

4769
2435
5046
3609
-277
46
-266

5058
2528
5241
3739
-183
62
-177

6042
2852
6209
4385
-167
67
-185

48
-15
14
-29
-38

57
-14
8
-22
137

35
-64
-54
-1 I
19

-32
-8 1
-43
-38
220

-10
50
-43
93
195

45
290
11
279
-5

55
288
28
260
-5

55
258
12
245
-5

55
181
-8
189
-5

55
272

-243

-319

-118

109

98

131

-12

-4 1

-54

-137

38

1.1

07

-4 3

-6 3

-8 1

-5.2

-3 9

-2 5

-2.0

-5 0
99
-4 5
-6 8

10.7
-19.3
0.3
12.8

06
27
-1 8
-1 9

-2 0
66
-17 1
00

88
-6 1
-11 0
87

3.8
2.5
0.2
3.3

1.7
-12.4
0.0
3.4

31
-5 0
00
43

0.0
0.0

.I1

283
-5

,Memorundurn items

Resource balance ( % o f GDP)
Real aiiniial groktli rates ( YR92 prices)
Merchandise exports (FOB)
Priinaiy
Manufactures
Merchandise imports (CIF)

-1
-7
0
5

5
3
9
0

4.7

8.9

Annex B6
Page 2 o f 2

-

Mauritius Key Economic Indicators
(Continued)

Indicator
Public finance (as '% o f GDP a t market prices)'
Current ieveiiiies
Current expenditures
Current account surplus (+) or deficit (-)
Capital expenditure
F o r e i F financing

184
20.3
-1.9
41
0.8

20.2
21.0
-0.8
5.3
0.1

202
21.0
-0.8
4.6
-0.3

19.6
20.9
-1.3
3.9
0.3

199
22.1
-2.2
3.2
-0.5

20.1
21.5
-1.4
3.4
0.1

19.3
20.1
-0.8
34
-0.2

19.1
19.8
-0.7
3.5
-0.4

19 3
19 2
35
-0 4

00

194
I8 8
06
36
-0 4

80.5
13.0
78.7

82.3
11.7
54.2

84.9
14.4
37 8

87.7
13.1
67.6

90.5
11.2
75.7

90.0
10.2
75.6

90.0
9.8
72.7

89.8
9.8
72.7

89.6
9.8
85.8

89.2
9.8
88.1

Price indices( YR92 =loo)
ivlercliandise export price index
Merchandise iinpon price index
Merchandise terms o f trade index

900
95.5
94.3

969
1018
95.2

1037
115.0
90.2

1066
131.0
81.4

108.9
137.0
79.5

111.2
145.5
76.4

112.5
145.6
77 2

113.0
144.1
78 4

113 8
143 2
79 5

1175
I42 6
82 4

Real excliange rate (US%/LCL')'

104.5

103 7

100 6

95.0

93.0

91 1

89.3

87 5

85 7

85 7

63
66

5.1
59

3.9
5.9

5.6
4.8

5.1
4 1

8.5
7.0

6.0
6.0

6.0

5.5
5.5

4.5
4.5

Monetary indicators
MZIGDP
Growth o f M 2 (%)
Private sector credit growth 1
total credit growth (%)

Consumer price index (% change)
GDP deflator (Ohchange)

Source. Coiintiy Local Data Base, September, 2006.
a. GDP at factor cost
b. Excludes changes in stocks, which are projected at zero sstarting on 2006107.
c "GNFS" denotes "goods and nonfactor services."
d. Includes net tinrequited transfers excluding official capital grants.
e. Includes iise o f IMF resources.
e Consolidated central government
f. "LCU" denotes "local currency units.'' An increase in US$/LCU denotes appreciation.

6.0

Annex B7
Page 1 o f 1

Mauritius - Key Exposure Indicators

Total debt outstanding and

2179

2422

2222

2314

2605

2894

3152

3334

3555

3910

-14 9

-14 0

-64 5

-8 I

50

290

288

258

181

272

233

253

256

248

220

203

209

218

229

265

TDOIXGSb

66 2

612

58.3

53.8

59 1

60 9

63.4

63.3

62 8

56.6

TDOIGDP

41 5

39 9

35.3

35 9

39 5

42 2

44.4

45.1

45 0

42.8

TDSIXGS

I1

70

6.7

58

50

43

4.2

4.1

40

3.8

ConcessioiialITDO

6 1

13 6

14.1

13 9

11 9

10 4

8.8

7.4

59

3.9

disbursed (TDO) (USSiii)a
Net disbursements (USSm)a
Total debt service (TDS)
(US$in)a

Debt and debt seivice indicators

("/I

IBRD exposure indicators (%)
IBRD DSIpublic DS

11 2

14

5.4

5.4

54

59

5.8

5.1

40

2.6

Preferred creditor DSIpublic

23 1

23 5

20.3

20 4

21 8

26 9

28.2

26.5

22 2

16.4

DS (%o)c
IBRD DS/XGS
IBRD TDO (US$ni)d
Share o f IBRD ponfoiio (Oh)

06
100

04

03

03

02

02

89

80

12

64

83

0.2
112

0.2
145

02

0.1

180

239

01

01

0. I

01

01

01

0.1

0. I

02

0.2

13 0

12 0

10.7

IO7

10 1

95

8.9

83

77

6.4

Loans

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

Equity and quasi-equity IC

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

IDA TDO (US$m)d
IFC (USSni)

MIGA
MIGA guarantees (US$ml

a Includes public and publicly guaranteed debt, private nonguaranteed, use o f I M F credits and net shortterm capital
b "XGS" denotes exports o f goods and services, including workers' remittances.
c. Preferred creditors are defined as IBRD, IDA, the regional multilateral development banks, the IMF, and the

Bank for International Settlements.
d Includes present value o f guarantees.
e Includes equity and quasi-equity types o f both loan and equity instruments.

