Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized

Document of
The World Bank

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Report No. 36147-RO

INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT
AND
INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION
COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY
FOR
ROMANIA
FOR THE PERIOD FY06-FY09
M a y 16,2006

South Central Europe Country Unit
Europe and Central Asia Region
International Finance Corporation
Southern Europe and Central Asia Department

This document has restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance o f
their official duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without World Bank authorization.

CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS
USD 1 =RON 2.8712
FISCAL YEAR
January 1 - December 3 1

SELECTED ACRONYMS AND ABRREVIATIONS
AAA

Analytical and Advisory
Activities
Adaptable Program Lending
Asset Recovery Agency

JPR

Joint Portfolio Review

MDG
MER
MIC

BCR

Business Environment and
Enterprise Performance Survey
Commercial Bank o f Romania

Millennium Development Goal
Ministry o f Education and
Research
Middle Income Country

CAE

Country Assistance Evaluation

MLSSF

CAP
CAS
CCR
CEC

Common Agricultural Policy
Country Assistance Strategy
CAS Completion Report
Savings Bank

MoPF
NBFI
NMS
OECD

CEE

Central and Eastern Europe

OED

CEM

Country Economic
Memorandum
Country Lending Enhancement
Review
Country Partnership Strategy
Development Policy Lending
European Commission
Europe and Central Asia
European Bank for
Reconstruction and
Development
European Investment Bank
European Union
Foreign Direct Investment
Global Environment Facility
Gross Domestic Product
International Bank for
Reconstruction and
Development
International Finance
Corporation
International Monetary Fund
Joint Inclusion Memorandum

PAL

APL
AVAS
BEEPS

CLER
CPS
DPL
EC
ECA
EBRD

EIB
EU
FDI
GEF
GDP
IBRD
IFC
IMF
JIM
Vice President:
Country Director:
Task Team Leader:

IBRD
Shigeo Katsu
Anand K. Seth
Albert Martinez

MIGA

PISA
PRG

PSAL
QAG
SBA
SCF

Multilateral Investment
Guarantee Agency
Ministry o f Labor, Social
Solidarity and Family
Ministry o f Public Finance
Non-Bank Financial Institution
New Member State
Organization for Economic
Cooperation and Development
Operations Evaluation
Department
Programmatic Adjustment Loan
Program for International
Student Assessment
Partial Risk Guarantee
Private Sector Adjustment Loan
Quality Assurance Group
Stand B y Arrangement
Structural and Cohesion Funds

SIL
SME
SOE
S WAp
TA
TIMSS

Sector Investment Loan
Small and Medium Enterprise
State Owned Enterprise
Sector Wide Approach
Technical Assistance
Trends in International
Mathematics and Science Study

VAT

Value Added Tax

WBI
WHO

World Bank Institute
World Health Organization

Acting Vice President, Operations:
Director:
Task Leader:

IFC
Declan Duff
Shahbaz Mavaddat
Kaikham Onedamdy

COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY FY2006-2009
TABLE OF CONTENTS

.................................................................................................. i
I
. Country Context .............................................................................................. 1
Political Developments .............................................................................
1
A.
Economic Developments ..........................................................................
2
B.
Developments in Poverty Reduction. Gender Equality, and MDGs ......8
C.
9
I1. EU Accession and Development Challenges ...................................................
Country Objectives and the Priorities o f the Government Program .....9
A.
Challenges of EU Integration.................................................................
11
B.
111. Bank Program and Past Strategy..................................................................
19
Past Bank Assistance..............................................................................
19
A.
Rationale for and Principles o f Bank Support ......................................
21
B.
Key Priorities for the CPS .....................................................................
22
C.
Key
Components
o
f
Bank
Support
........................................................
23
D.
Bank Instruments...................................................................................
30
E.
F.
Partnerships ...........................................................................................
32
Lending Scenarios ..................................................................................
33
G.
Results Based Monitoring and Evaluation............................................
35
H.
I V. Risk Management and Creditworthiness......................................................
35

Executive Summary

BOXES
Box 1: Anti-corruption Efforts in Romania
Box 2: EU Accession vs. EU Integration

FIGURES
Figure 1: Macro-Economic Indicators - Real GDP
Figure 2: Macro-Economic Indicators - CPI Inflation
Figure 3: Macro-Economic Indicators- Fiscal Balance
Figure 4: Macro-Economic Indicators - Current Account Balance
Figure 5: Macro-Economic Indicators- Registered Unemployment
Figure 6: Macro-Economic Indicators - National Poverty and Extreme Poverty
Figure 7: Agriculture Share in GDP and Labor Forces

TABLES
Table 1: Romania’s Performance in Comparison with EU-8
Table 2: Millennium Development Goals
Table 3: Transition Indicator Scores for Financial Institutions
Table 4: TIMSS 8th Grade Student Assessment Results
Table 5: Estimated Losses From Quasi-FiscalActivities in the Energy Sector
Table 6: Summary o f Outcome Ratings o f Bank Lending by CAS Objective
Table 7: Policy Performance Indicators
Table 8: IBRD Exposure Percentage Ratios for Romania 2002-2009

ANNEXES
Annex A1 :
Annex B2:
Annex B3a:
Annex B3b:
Annex B4:
Annex B 5 :
Annex B6:
Annex B7:
Annex B8a:
Annex B8b:
Annex B9:
Annex C:
Annex C/i:
Annex Chi-a:
Annex Chi-b:
Annex C/iii:
Annex Chv:
Annex D:
Annex E:

Country-at-a-Glance
Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
IBRD Program
IFC Program
Non-lending Services
Social Indicators
Key Economic Indicators
Key Exposure Indicators
IBRD Operations Portfolio
IFC and MIGA Operations Portfolio
Results Matrix
CAS Completion Report
CAS Summary
Romania - Planned Lending Program and Actual Deliveries
Global Environment Facility (GEF) Program
Romania - Planned Non-lending Services and Actual Deliveries
Project Portfolio Rating
Country Financing Parameters
Note on Stakeholder Consultations

Executive Summary
1.
This Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) i s being presented at a time when
Romania i s at the threshold of European Union (EU) membership. The Accession
Treaty was signed on April 25, 2005 and entry i s expected to take place on January 1, 2007.
Romania faces the challenge o f convergence with EU countries in terms o f both incomes and
living standards - i t s per capita GDP in 2004 i s about one-third of EU-15' and it lags in
several social indicators. To meet this challenge, Romania will have to build on its
achievements and at the same time address risks to macroeconomic stability.
2.
EU accession aspirations have enhanced macroeconomic stability and spurred
renewed commitment to reforms in recent years. The economy grew robustly at 4 to 5
percent per year during 2000-05, with inflation declining from above 40 percent in 2000 to
8.6 percent in 2005, the lowest level since the start o f transition. Structural and institutional
reform accelerated during the same period - private sector share o f GDP has moved closer to
EU-8* levels, more than 90 percent o f banking assets are now held by the private sector,
energy reform has resulted in a substantial reduction of quasi-fiscal deficits, and
independence of the judiciary has been strengthened.
3.
Nonetheless, Romania still has to complete the ongoing reform agenda which it
will have to pursue to underpin growth and improve living standards. The restructuring
of the enterprise sector i s by no means complete. Financial intermediation i s still low
compared to that of EU-8. Increasing productivity in the agriculture sector remains a major
development challenge. Further improvements in the business environment include
increasing labor market flexibility and reducing labor taxation., A skills mismatch with
market needs will require a reorientation of the educational system. Poor governance and
weak institutional capacity continue to be key concerns.

4.
Fiscal risks to macroeconomic stability will have to be addressed and monitored
closely by the Government, especially in a situation where there i s no Fund
arrangement in place.
Maintaining financial discipline, sustaining energy sector
restructuring, reforming the social security system, and properly managing the substantial
costs of upgrading infrastructure and environmental standards to meet EU requirements are
priorities to reduce fiscal vulnerabilities. I n addition, to improve allocational efficiency of
public spending, bold reform of the expenditure planning and management systems i s
required. Finally, there i s a need to upgrade the ability to mobilize revenues to co-finance the
absorption o f EU funds and provide resources for the reforms envisaged in several sectors.

5.

While there has been significant progress in poverty reduction, benefits o f
renewed growth have to fully filter through to all segments of the population. The gap
between urban and rural living standards as well as regional disparities will have to be
narrowed. The restructuring of the agriculture sector, which i s likely to result in excess
labor, will have to be accompanied by measures to mitigate the adverse social impact.
Sustainable policies and programs supporting rural and regional development will have to be
designed and implemented successfully. Coverage of social assistance programs needs to be
improved and targeted poverty reduction measures will have to be well designed to ensure
sustainability and impact.

' EU members prior to May 1, 2004.

Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Slovak Republic, and Slovenia. These eight
countries, plus Cyprus and Malta, joined the EU on May 1,2004.

I1

Executive Summary

6.
The CPS aims to support Romania in addressing the above challenges to
facilitate its integration with the EU. The Government has requested the Bank for support
based on the recognition of the Bank’s value added and deep knowledge o f Romania. The
strategic framework of the CPS, developed with the Romanian Government, builds on the
Government Program, lessons from the EU-8, and Bank analytical work. The CPS has three
pillars: (a) accelerating structural and institutional reforms to support sustainable growth; (b)
addressing fiscal vulnerabilities and modernizing the public sector; and (c) targeting poverty
reduction and promoting social inclusion. The CPS lists a set of principles that will govern
the choice and design of Bank lending operations.
7.
Bank support will be characterized by greater flexibility and responsiveness
within the strategic framework. This means an evolution from the previous CAS to a new
CPS that entails: (a) a more flexible approach to lending and non-lending activities in which
broad priorities are established with a defined program during the first phase corresponding
to the EU accession period and an indicative program to be more clearly defined by endFY07 for the second phase covering the post accession period; (b) the use of policy
performance benchmarks to trigger lending up to a ceiling and to define a minimum set of
standards for sectoral engagement; and (c) movement towards alignment o f Bank procedures
with country systems. Bank programs in Romania will continue to incorporate elements of
the Middle Income Country (MIC) agenda, including reducing project preparation time,
accelerating project completion, and introducing new products and approaches.

8.
Bank lending will use a mix of instruments with strategic use of Development
Policy Loans (DPLs) and programmatic approaches. The program will be anchored to
the ongoing Programmatic Adjustment Loan (PAL) series and the successor Fiscal and
Governance DPL both of which will underpin the sectoral reforms supported by other
operations. The Analytic and Advisory Activities (AAA) program will be frontloaded and
will contribute important inputs to the design of lending operations. In addition, the Bank i s
offering a full array of financing and risk management products. To enhance assistance for
institution building, the World Bank Institute (WBI) will include Romania as one of i t s focus
countries in FY07. The CPS has a results framework accompanied by a monitoring and
evaluation mechanism.
9.
A flexible lending program o f $450 to $550 million per year is proposed to
support the strategic objectives of the CPS. Base case lending will be investment projects
which are subject to pre-conditions of appropriate sector policy and acceptable medium term
sector expenditure framework. High case lending will be a combination of investment and
development policy lending where the latter will require maintenance of an appropriate
macroeconomic framework as per Bank guidelines. A periodic assessment of the
macroeconomic framework and performance will be done by the Bank in consultation with
the Fund and the EU. This i s especially important without a Fund arrangement in place.
Should the assessment indicate that the macroeconomic framework has deteriorated such that
investment lending would not achieve its objectives, there would be a low case scenario of
AAA and global goods lending. Bank exposure i s manageable and even at maximum
lending, the Bank exposure will remain below the guideline thresholds with some exposure
indicators declining.
10.
I F C and M I G A will support Romania’s EU accession and integration agenda.
IFC’s main goal in Romania i s to support private sector development, helping local
companies benefit from opportunities and meet challenges during the EU accession and
integration period. IFC will further increase i t s volume and scope of investment and

Executive Summarv

iii

advisory services in order to strengthen market forces and help Romania’s economy integrate
into the EU’s single market, especially through support of large national-level privatizations
in infrastructure, where IFC support and private sector involvement will help increase
reliability and affordability o f services for consumers. When feasible, IFC will complement
the Bank’s work in the energy sector. Also, Romania i s a large market with a banking sector
among the least developed in the region. IFC will seek to introduce new financing
instruments and to develop non-bank financial institutions. MIGA will be open for
opportunities to support foreign investors, particularly in the infrastructure sectors through
the provision of sovereign and sub-sovereign political risk.

11.
The proposed program faces a number o f risks. First, failure to promptly address
emerging weaknesses in the macroeconomic framework including fiscal vulnerabilities,
especially in the absence of a Fund program, could affect adversely the absorption of EU
funds and result in a deterioration of the policy environment of the proposed Bank
operations. Second, slippages in the implementationof the reform agenda - due for example
to the political impact of a delay in EU membership - would have an adverse impact on
sustained growth and poverty reduction, and consequently on convergence with the EU
members. Third, lack of attention to strengthening institutional capacity would put at risk
program implementation. These risks are mitigated by the consensus on the EU accession
and convergence objectives as well as the provisions o f the Growth and Stability Pact, which
would help focus Government attention on critical structural and institutional reforms.
Board members may wish to discuss the following aspects:
0

0

Does the CPS adequately respond to the needs o f Romania, balancing flexibility and
client responsiveness with a strategic framework to guide and focus the program?
Are the suggested principles for Bank lending engagement appropriate?

COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY FY 2006-2009
I.
A.

Country Context
Political Developments

1.
Entry into the European Union (EU) i s expected to take place on January 1,
2007, and this expectation drives Government policies and actions. Negotiations were
formally concluded in December 2004 and the signing o f the Accession Treaty of Romania
took place on April 25, 2005. Nonetheless, the EU will continue to monitor Romania’s
progress to ensure completion of all necessary reforms and commitments undertaken as part
of the acquis communautaire. A safety clause was introduced in the Treaty, specifying that
entry may be delayed by one year if Romania does not comply with key requirements.
Fourteen EU members have already ratified the Accession Treaty, but the ratification by all
current 25 EU national parliaments i s by no means assured. An updated progress report will
be issued by the European Commission (EC) in May 2006. The report i s perceived as a
decisive signal on whether Romania will achieve accession in 2007, and will be discussed
during the June summit of EU leaders.
2.
The E C Comprehensive Monitoring Report, issued in October 2005, reconfirms
the functioning market economy status of Romania and underscores the need to tackle
high level corruption and address the low level of preparedness for absorbing EU
funds. The Report acknowledges that the country continues to meet the political
requirements for membership. The assessment notes the recent decisive steps to reform the
judiciary, at the same time drawing attention to the need to accelerate public administration
reforms and implement effectively the new judicial legislation, with focus on the fight
against corruption. The Report also recognizes that macroeconomic stability has been
broadly maintained, although the imbalances have widened recently, and calls for the
vigorous implementation of the structural reform agenda. The subsequent dialogue between
the EU and Romania largely reflects the findings and recommendations of the Monitoring
Report.
3.
Parliamentary elections held on November 28,2004 brought to power a coalition
government led by the National Liberal Party (NLP) and Democratic Party (DP)
Alliance, and consisting of two other smaller parties. Traian Basescu, the NLP/DP
candidate, was elected president in a second-round run-off against the Social Democratic
Party (PSD) candidate, former Prime Minister Adrian Nastase. The elections failed to result
in a clear majority - defections or new allegiances could tip the balance of power. A
government reshuffle took place in August 2005. The polls continue to indicate high popular
support for the NLPDP Alliance, which may be able to form a government on i t s own in the
case of early parliamentary elections, which remain a possibility.

4.
Government policies continue to be driven by EU accession requirements.
Implementingthe unfinished accession agenda i s central to the program of the Government.
Delays in the implementation of the pre-accession commitments for EU membership could
jeopardize timely entry in 2007. Postponed E U membership, in turn, could engender a
political backlash, perhaps reviving the influence of extremist voices, and discourage
investors, who are increasingly attracted by the EU accession prospects of the country.
Nonetheless, messages coming from the EC in recent weeks have been largely positive,
praising the progress made, especially in the area o f judiciary, giving hope for accession on
schedule.

2

Romania Country Partnership Strategy

5.
Achieving EU membership in 2007 i s the main priority for all parliamentary
parties, in spite of differences in political orientation and approach to reforms. This
reflects the strong support for EU accession, manifested at all levels of the Romanian society.
Surveys constantly show that more than 80 percent of the Romanian population desires rapid
integration into the EU structures. The accession process and the implementation of the
related commitments to reach EU standards, some of which will extend significantly after the
accession date, will therefore remain the strongest anchor for structural reforms, irrespective
of the party configuration o f the governments which come to power in the future.
B.

Economic Developments

6.
EU accession aspirations have enhanced macroeconomic stability and spurred
renewed commitment to reforms in recent years. Until 2000, Romania was one o f the
poorest performing economies of Central and Eastern Europe (CEE). The turnaround in
2000 was preceded by a protracted and precipitous decline in GDP, a peaking o f the poverty
rate to 36 percent, and inflation of 54 percent per year. By contrast, during the last five years
the economy grew robustly at 4 to 5 percent per year, led primarily by investment and
exports, and occasionally by consumption in response to improved confidence in banks and
macroeconomic consolidation. Inflation declined from above 40 percent in 2000 to 8.6
percent in 2005, the lowest level since the start of the transition. Good macroeconomic
performance contributed to a record level o f official reserves, which have increased severalfold since 2000, exceeding Euro 18 billion recently equivalent to about 6 months of
prospective imports.

7.
Romania has been pursuing a broad structural and institutional reform agenda
which has accelerated in recent years. The pace of privatization of commercial companies
picked up sharply in 2004 though it slowed down somewhat in 2005. FDI has substantially
picked up in 2004 and 2005, with inflows exceeding 5 percent of GDP yearly. Important
energy sector privatizations have been completed: privatization contracts were signed for
four electricity distribution companies, the state petroleum company Petrom, and the two gas
distribution companies. Firm bids have been submitted for another electricity distribution
company, and the authorities have moved forward with the appointment o f advisors for the
privatization of thermal electricity generators. I n addition, the state owned Commercial Bank
of Romania (BCR), the largest bank, has been privatized and binding bids are expected to be
submitted for the privatization of the Savings Bank (CEC). Institutional and governance
reforms are advancing, with the first generation measures - the establishment of the legal
framework and the redesign of the institutional architecture - either already adopted or in the
process of being implemented.
8.
While overall the macroeconomic and structural reform performance in recent
years has improved compared to the 1990s, Romania continues to lag the EU-S3New
Member States (NMS) in some areas. While Romania’s growth rate during the past five
years compares well with the EU-8, Romania has the lowest GDP per capita at PPP and lags
in several social indicators. Improvements in competitiveness have been limited, while parts
of the economy remain unrestructured. Subsidization of the enterprise sector through arrears
accumulation, while substantially declining in 2005, has not been fully eliminated.
Agricultural productivity i s low and only slowly improving, while employment in
subsistence agriculture remains much larger than anywhere else in Europe. Labor market
Hungary, Poland, Slovenia, Czech Republic, Slovak Republic, Lithuania, Latvia, and Estonia

3

Romania Country Partnership Strategy

flexibility will have to be increased and administrative barriers faced by businesses further
reduced to improve the business climate. Implementation of programs to upgrade public
administration, strengthen the judiciary, and reduce corruption will have to be accelerated to
achieve impact and meet EU accession commitments. Table 1 compares Romania’s
performance with the EU-8.
Table 1: Romania’s Performance in Comparison with EU-8
GDPper
Capita
(2005,
current
US$)

GDP
Growth,
20022005
(avg.,

CPI
Inflation,
20022005
(avg., O h )

Overall
Fiscal
Balance,
2002-2005
(avg., O/O of
GDP)

Private
Sector as
Percent
ofGDP
(2005)
(EBRD)

Oh)

Romania
Bulgaria
Czech
Republic
Estonia
Hungary
Latvia
Lithuania
Poland
Slovak
Republic
Slovenia

4568.4
3599.0
12254.2

6.1
5.1
3.3

14.4
4.4
1.9

-2.7
0.6
-7.2

70.0
75.0
80.0

8643.2
10831.0
6554.2
7022.9
8313.8
9289.3

6.0
3.6
7.4
7.4
3.7
4.8

2.7
5.2
4.0
0.8
2.3
5.7

1.4
-6.4
-1.7
-1.8
-6.2
-4.4

17929.2

3.4

5.0

-1.6

Sources: World Bank, EBRD, national statistical offices.

FDI,
20022005 (net
per
annum,
avg., O/O
o f GDP)

EBRD Index
for
Infrastructure
Reform (2005)

4.7
7.7
5.1

3.3
3 .O
3.3

80.0
80.0
70.0
75.0
75.0
80.0

4.3
2.6
3.2
2.5
1.9
6.5

3.3
3.7
3 .O
2.7
3.3
3 .O

65.0

1.7

3 .O

I n 2005 macroeconomic weaknesses have begun to surface. Real GDP growth
9.
was 4.1 percent in 2005, down from 8.3 percent in 2004. A lower agricultural output and a
slowdown in industrial production, partly related to the appreciation of the currency against
the Euro and the impact of floods, are the explanations for the deceleration of growth in
2005. The 2005 year-end inflation was 8.6 percent, down from 9.3 percent in 2004, but
above the target of 7.5 percent. The consolidatedbudget deficit was, at around 0.8 percent of
GDP, below the 1 percent target. However, revenues to the budget have increased by around
8-9 percent in real terms, driven by strong VAT collection. Preliminary figures show a
substantial increase, of over 10 percent in real terms, of the revenues to the consolidated
budget in Q1 2006. The current account deficit widened to 9.2 percent of GDP, compared to
government’s 7.5 percent target, owing to the stubbornly high aggregate demand which
increased by 9.4 percent, driven by consumer credit growth. I n an attempt to restrain
resurging inflationary expectations, the central bank resumed, since November, large-scale
sterilization o f foreign exchange inflows, and hiked the policy interest rate to 8.5 percent in
February, up from 7.5 percent.

10.
Economic policy measures introduced in 2005 have triggered additional shortrun macroeconomic challenges. The prevailing economic challenges are related to some
pre-election measures, such as the increase in civil service wages, but compounded by the
fiscal measures adopted at the beginning of 2005. The two most important measures were
the introduction of the flat tax (16 percent) on incomes and corporate profits and the
concomitant launch of an adjustment in the state pension levels for some categories of
pensioners. The underlying revenue loss due to such fiscal measures was around one percent
o f GDP, but the Government i s optimistic that the fiscal package would help reduce the large
informal economy, with a positive impact on revenues and investment in the medium to long

4

Romania Country Partnership Strategy

term. I t i s too early to assess the impact of the fiscal package. Furthermore, the reduction of
enterprise arrears and quasi-fiscal deficits remains a challenge, although the energy related
quasi-fiscal deficits have declined substantially since 2002. Added to this was the
liberalization of the capital account, an EU accession commitment, which prompted the
central bank to rapidly lower interest rates in 2005 to reduce speculative inflows and slow
down exchange rate appreciation. This fueled private consumption, which was already on
the upturn due to the increase in disposable income.

11.

Most of the recent surge in aggregate consumption above its long term trend
comes from the private sector and has affected the savings investment balance. The
strength of private sector demand, up over 9 percent year-on-year in 2005, calls for the
containment of deficit-financed public expenditure to avoid macroeconomic instability.
Until the private sector pressures abate, additional public expenditures will have to be tax
financed, including through improved compliance, or compensated through expenditure
savings elsewhere. There i s also an issue o f what the optimal level of spending i s from the
perspective of sustainable growth. While Romania’s levels of revenue collection and
spending as percent of GDP are among the lowest compared to EU members, they are not
low relative to other middle income countries that have experienced sustained high growth
largely driven by the private sector. An assessment of how the situation evolves will be
made in the context of the periodic review of the macroeconomic framework and the
monitoring of the CPS.

-

12.
Despite a widening current account deficit, the external financing position o f the
country has remained comfortable, though vulnerabilities remain. Romanian bond
spreads show a continuing decline and the average maturity of the foreign debt portfolio has
increased. While there i s no expectation o f difficulty in financing the current account and
budget deficits in the foreseeable future, risks and vulnerabilities triggered by credit
expansion growth and exchange rate volatility continue. I n addition, the liberalization of the
capital account has opened the window to large speculative foreign exchange inflows,
attracted by the relatively high nominal interest rates. These inflows have put a significant
additional upward pressure on the exchange rate, threatening the external competitiveness of
the economy. At the same time real interest rates have remained negative which has added
stimulus to credit-basedconsumption expenditure.
13.
Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) i s expected to rise following EU accession, but
will subsequently decline due to the completion of privatization. Significant progress in
structural reforms including the acceleration of privatization especially in banking and the
energy sectors, and the improvement in the functioning of the business environment are
expected to bring important FDI inflows, particularly within the next two years. FDI will
therefore contribute substantially to financing the large current account deficit, which i s
likely to remain above 5-6 percent of GDP over the medium term. However privatization
will eventually come to completion within a few years time, with impact on the FDI inflows,
which are expected to decline.
14.
Romania’s gross external financing requirements are expected to increase over
the medium term, driven by the obligation to co-pay for the absorption o f the EU funds.
Under the assumption of sustained economic growth and access to the EU Structural and
Cohesion Funds (SCF) after 2007, the external financing needs, including a further build-up
in foreign exchange reserves, are projected to expand from around US$9.0 billion currently
to over US$12.5 billion in 2009. This dynamic assumes continued access o f Romania to the
private international capital markets. The bulk of the financing will be required in order to

Romania Countvy Partnership Strategy

5

co-finance and pre-finance capital expenditure projects eligible for funding under the SCF.
The amount of grants coming under the SCF will be up to 4 percent of GDP per year. The
full absorption of the SCF will undoubtedly prove a tremendous challenge, as the experience
of the NMS indicates. The situation i s exacerbated by the requirement that Romania, as an
EU member state, contribute to the EU common budget. Preliminary estimates indicate that
this contribution i s expected to be around Euro 800 - 900 million per annum in the early
years, or around 1 percent o f GDP, an important revenue loss for the budget, which needs to
be compensated.

15.
Improving the capacity to co-finance EU SCF grants requires increasing the
revenue collection rate. The government has established a medium term goal of enhancing
revenue as a percent of GDP by 3-4 points, bringing it closer to other CEE countries.
Revenue collection i s expected to improve gradually through the widening of the tax base
and improvements in revenue administration and tax compliance, including by taking a
tougher stance against non-payers. However, due to the existing rigidity of public
expenditure, mainly in recurrent spending, it will prove difficult to rationalize and reallocate
resources in the short run in order to make space for the co-financing of EU grants. As level
o f capital expenditures i s currently low at around 2.7 percent of GDP, Romania will need to
resort to borrowing in order to be able to absorb greater shares of the SCF available to the
country after 2007.

16.
Against this background, the IMF confirmed publicly that the Stand By
Arrangement (SBA) that was approved on July 7, 2004 was off track at end-October
2005. The Fund’s Executive Board concluded the 2006 Article I V Consultation on April 26,
2006 and a Press Information Notice (PIN) was published on May 4. In his statement to the
Board, the Romanian representative reported that the Romanian Government did not intend
to continue discussions on the SBA. The arrangement will therefore expire in early July
2006 without completion o f any reviews beyond the first one (on September 22, 2004). The
main divergence of positions between the IMF and the Government concerned the direction
of fiscal policy, and its role in helping the authorities address Romania’s sizeable
macroeconomic imbalances. The Fund expressed concern about the government’s recent
decision to increase the consolidated 2006 budget deficit target to 0.9 percent of GDP, and i s
skeptical that the 5 (+I- one) percent year-end inflation target can be met. While the Fund
recommended wage restraint in the public sector as a means of dampening inflationary
pressures, it observed that Romania’s government revenue i s considerably below levels in the
EU and regretted the sizeable revenue loss resulting from the introduction of the flat tax.
Thus, it emphasized a need for revenues to be increased permanently to provide counterpart
funds for EU grants, cover Romania’s contribution to the EU budget, and meet other pressing
developmental needs. Moreover, although the Fund welcomed the recent tightening of
monetary policy, they observed that the relaxation of fiscal policy may significantly
complicate the ability of the central bank to achieve its goals, especially in light of substantial
capital inflows and its efforts to establish a credible inflation targeting regime. The Fund
predicted a further widening of the current account deficit to 9 percent o f GDP in 2006 and
expressed concerns an overburdened monetary policy could lead to rapid currency
appreciation undermining the current competitive advantage of firms in the tradable sector.
Both the Fund and the Romanian authorities indicated that, even without the formal
framework of a SBA, they would like to continue an active and close dialogue on policy
matters.

6

Romania Countw PartnershiD Strateav

Figure 1 - 6: Macro-Economic Indicators*
Figure 1. Real GDP
(% change)
240
200
160
120
80
40
00
-40
-80
120
160

Figure 2. CPI inflation
(% change, annual average)

-

-

1

-

O0

1

A 9 . 0

--

L

-

-

,
/

0.3

-4 5

-

-

Y8
1997

1997

1998

1999 2000 2001
-0- GDP

+GDP

2002 2003

1998

1999 2000 2001

2002 2003 2004 2005p

2004 2005p

annual growth
growth, 1996=100

Figure 4 Current Account Balance
( % o f GDP)

Figure 3. Fiscal balance
(% o f GDP)
0
-1

-2
-3
4
-5

-6

1 -5.2

1997

w

--910

-5.4
1998

1999

2000

2001 2002

2003

2004 2005p

Figure 5. Registered Unemployment
(% o f civil active population)

2

:

U
-9.2
1997

40.0% 35.0% -

I

10.4

11.8
n

30.0% -

10.5

25.0% 20.0%

-

15.0% 10.0% -

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004 2005p

/

50%0.0%

1997

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004 2005p

-I

-National

*Bank staff estimates; 2005 figures are preliminary estimates.

Dovemi ----National extreme Dovemi

1

Romania Countw Partnershia Stratem

7

Box 1: Anti-corruption Efforts in Romania

Reducing corruption has been on the Romanian government agenda since 2001. The
National Program for Prevention of Corruption and the National Action Plan Against Corruption
were adopted in 2001. Both documents laid out an agenda o f actions aimed at building systems o f
transparency and accountability to complement enforcement o f anti-corruption legislation.
Progress has been made on a number o f fronts, including the adoption o f the L a w on Free Access
to Information, the establishment o f public asset declarations by public officials, new legislation
o n conflicts o f interest, the establishment o f a National Anti-corruption Prosecutor’s Office
(NAPO), and various sectoral reforms. Hundreds o f people have been prosecuted for corruption
charges since NAPO’s creation, though until recently, most have been for relatively minor
offenses. M o r e recently, N A P O has come to be viewed as stronger and more independent,
launching investigations o f higher level officials including former cabinet members.
Romania has stepped up efforts against corruption in 2005 and the E C has
acknowledged the progress made. Immediately upon taking office, the new Government
commissioned an independent audit o f the Anti-corruption Strategy 2001 -04 and began
developing a new strategy and action plan. The independent audit, carried out by Freedom House
and released in March 2005, noted some successes but also highlighted the ineffectiveness o f the
system o f monitoring and imposing sanctions for filing false income and assets disclosures and
declarations o f interests. A new Anti-corruption Strategy and Action Plan (AC Strategy 2005-07)
calls for the creation o f a centralized authority to receive, publicize, and audit the disclosures. In
August 2005 the Government began discussing a draft law to create a National Integrity Agency to
carry out this function. In addition to the efforts to consolidate administrative enforcement o f the
assets and interests declarations, the new Government also sought to further strengthen the content
of the declarations themselves. These declarations are n o w the strictest in Europe and require
detailed information on wealth and income o f all officials (including ministers and
parliamentarians), civil servants, judges and prosecutors, as well as o f their family members. The
business community i s reacting favorably t o reforms undertaken over the past few years.
According to the Romanian f i r m s surveyed by the j o i n t E B R D - W B 2005 Business Environemnt
and Enterprise Performance Survey (BEEPS), corruption i s less o f a problem for businesses
compared to 2002, The 2005 BEEPS reports reductions in the frequency o f bribes in virtually
every area including government contracts, business licences and permits, and tax collection. The
share of bribes in total annual sales has declined almost five-fold between 2002 and 2005.
Central to the fight against corruption were important initiatives aimed at reforming
the judiciary and strengthening the rule o f law in the country. In October 2003, constitutional
amendments were adopted through a national referendum which introduced important changes in
the judicial area. These included: (a) enshrining the principles o f the judiciary as an independent
branch of power, and the right to a fair trial within a “reasonable time”; (b) transformation o f the
Supreme Court o f Justice into a H i g h Court o f Cassation and Justice, responsible for ensuring the
consistent interpretation and implementation o f laws throughout Romania; and (c) a revised
composition and mandate o f the Superior Council o f Magistracy which would strengthen its role
as an institutional guarantor o f judicial independence. The Romanian parliament adopted three
organic laws in summer 2004 which redefined the status o f the Superior Council o f Magistracy
(SCM), introduced new procedures for appointment o f judges and prosecutors, introduced the
concept o f economic managers and limited the Prosecutor General’s powers t o interfere into the
judicial process. These measures have been recognized by the EU monitors as evidence o f serious
commitment o f the Government to the judicial reform goals and in December 2004, Romania
concluded negotiations for EU accession, including Chapter 24 o n Justice and Home Affairs.

8

Romania Country Partnership Strategy

C.

Developments in Poverty Reduction, Gender Equality, and MDGs

17.
Poverty dynamics confirm the robust relationship between growth and poverty
The general poverty rate declined from 35.9 percent in 2000 to 18.8 percent in
red~ction.~
2004 due mainly to the resumption of growth during the period. Poverty reduction i s being
pursued through a two-pronged strategy: (a) improving the targeting and coverage o f the
social protection programs; and (b) establishing the fundamentals for economic growth.
While rural poverty also declined from 47.8 to 27.3 percent during 2000-04, there continues
to be significant disparity between urban and rural areas (11.6 vs. 27.3 percent poverty in
2004). In Romania, there i s a strong association between economic growth and poverty
reduction - the 2003 Poverty Assessment projected that maintaining an annual growth rate of
5 percent in GDP per capita during 2002-07 would reduce poverty by almost half. While
growth has tended to increase inequality, these increases have been modest, suggesting that
growth needs to be a central component o f the poverty alleviation strategy. However, the
benefits brought by restored growth have failed to fully filter through to some large
categories of population, such as the Roma, the disabled, or single-parent families.
Improvements in their situation will continue to require state support, but with more
emphasis on targeting and coverage than in the past.
18.
The restructuring o f agriculture i s likely to result in significant labor
retrenchment and requires careful management, Agriculture necessitates special
attention in Romania because of its high contribution to employment. While i t s share in
GDP i s around 11-14 percent, agriculture continues to be the largest employer in Romania,
accounting for more than 30 percent of the labor force, most of which are in subsistence
agriculture. Because of the reliance on self-employment in agriculture, unemployment in
rural areas i s much lower than among the urban population. These numbers are
unsustainable, as the experience of the EU countries suggests, and a sharp decline in
agricultural employment should be expected in the coming years. The high average age of
the population working in agriculture and its reduced skill levels limit the transferability o f
workers to alternative jobs. One can thus expect the productivity-driven reforms of the
agricultural sector and the adoption of the Common Agricultural Policy (CAP) regulations to
trigger a strong push effect, sending labor from agriculture out of the labor force. Mitigating
the anticipated adverse consequences o f this phenomenon will require paying attention to the
social assistance needs of those with a high chance of being displaced from agriculture. The
success in reducing extreme poverty through the Minimum Income Guarantee program
introduced in 2002 sets a good example o f effective instruments for this type of assistance.
Encouraging alternative employment opportunities and supporting income-generating
activities in the rural areas, away from agriculture, should reduce the restructuring costs for
the sector.
19.
Statistical evidence indicates a large degree o f gender equality in Romania and
there i s no evidence of restricted access for women to public services such as health or
education. For instance, enrollment rates across education levels are similar for men and
women, and so are the social returns to education. However, there are differences regarding
labor participation and remuneration. The employment rate of women (52.1 percent in 2004)
i s around 10 percent lower than that of men and around 4 percent lower than the EU-15
average, The decline in both male and female employment participation seems to have
bottomed out in 2003. Females have better chances of finding a job. This occurs primarily
due to the expansion o f the services sector, where job creation seems to favor skills which are
~~

~

Romania Updated Poverty Profile (2004)

9

Romania Country Partnership Strateav

more associated with women, such as secretarial positions. At the same time the pronounced
decline of mainly mining and manufacturing industries has affected men more than women.
Consequently, unemployment i s higher among men than among women. In 2003, for
example, the overall unemployment rate was 7.4 percent, while for females it was only 6.8
percent. Youth and long term unemployment appears to affect men and women similarly.

20.
Reaching the Millennium Development Goals. The Millennium Development
Goals (MDG) are expressed as improvements targeted for 2015 relative to performance in
1990. Because of the weak economic growth in much of the 1990s when social indicators
worsened, Romania might have difficulty achieving some of the MDGs. School enrollment
rates were already high at the end o f the Ceausescu period and the 100 percent primary
enrollment MDG target i s reachable, but even this modest increase will require
improvements in school financing mechanisms and efforts to enhance quality and equity.
Similarly, the trends in health are such that the MDGs can be reached, but serious issues o f
budgeting, finance and hospital management must be addressed to keep the progress on
track, HIV/AIDS and child mortality targets are within reach, but the incidence of
tuberculosis has risen sharply. The MDGs for water access are likely to remain elusive,
reflecting significant challenges in infrastructureand service provision more broadly.
Table 2: Millennium Development Goals
Goal
Poverty Reduction
Percent o f population below
$2.15 per day
Achieve Universal Primary Education
Net primary enrollment ratio (%)
Youth literacy rate (% ages 15-24)
Reduce Child Mortality
Under 5 mortality (per 1000 live births)
Infant mortality (per 1000 live births)
Improve Maternal Health
Maternal mortality (per 100,000 live births)
Combat HIV/AIDS and other diseases
AIDS diagnoses (per 100,000)
TB diagnoses (per 100,000)
Access to improved water
Water supply in home (% o f pop.)

.
..
..
.
..
.

Source: World Bank

11.
A.

Earliest
Data

Recent
Data

MDG
(2015)

2 1.8 (1 994)

12 (2003)

12.6

76.9 (1992)
99.7 (1990)

92.8 (2001)
99.7 (2002)

100
100

35.7 (1990)
26.9 (1 990)

21.4 (2002)
17.8 (2002)

8.9
6.3

83.6 (1990)

4 1.8 (1 999)

945 (1990)
65 (1 990)

306 (1999)
106 (2000)

20.9
Stabilize
then reduce
by 201 5

54 (1994)

58.3 (2000)

75

EU Accession and Development Challenges

Country Objectives and the Priorities of the Government Program

21.
The overarching long term objective of Romania i s to achieve convergence with
the EU in terms o f income and living standards. With a GDP per capita of around 33
percent o f the EU-15 average, Romania has a large unfinished development agenda,
Reaching the standards o f the current EU members represents the main long term challenge.
These standards refer not only to achieving comparable income levels and economic
performance, but also to establishing the quality of the governance framework and the
robustness o f the institutions that form the foundation of democracy and functioning markets,
Ensuring that growth filters through to the poor and vulnerable, especially in the rural areas

IO

Romania Country Partnership Strategy

and backward regions, and that there i s equitable access to quality public services (health,
education, roads, water) are key pillars of Romania’s EU integration agenda.

22.
The political agenda o f the current administration i s articulated in the
Government Program for the period 2005-08. The Program i s centered around the
objective of joining the EU in 2007 and meeting the obligations deriving from the status o f
member of the Union. This entails, first, the need to accelerate the implementation of the
pre-accession commitments assumed as part of the acquis, and, second, the need to pursue
priority reforms which would place Romania on a sustained and accelerated convergence
path with the current EU members.
23.
The Government strategy o f accelerating convergence with the EU has three
main components. First, the Government acknowledges the need to enhance
competitiveness and establish a business environment conducive to private sector-led
high economic growth in order to catch up with EU members. The Government Program
recognizes the linkage between infrastructure and human capital development and economic
growth, and highlights the requisite o f broadening the growth base by ensuring the
participation o f vulnerable categories of population in growth. I n this context, the main
priorities presented in the Program are infrastructure modernization; improving the
competitiveness of agriculture and addressing the rural development challenge; and
enhancing human capital development, with emphasis on education, health and social
inclusion.

24.
Second, the Government views reforming the mechanisms for fiscal management
to be central to improving the efficiency, transparency and accountability o f public
spending and the absorption o f the EU structural and cohesion funds. The absorption of
EU funds poses significant challenges for the fiscal system in terms o f both prioritizing
expenditure and channeling the resources where the needs are, and for mobilizing the
necessary counterpart funds, which could be in the range o f 1-2 percent o f GDP per year.
The Government Program recognizes these challenges and envisages a bold reform of the
revenue collection and administration and expenditure management mechanisms. Enhancing
fiscal discipline by improving tax compliance and reducing quasi-deficits i s an integral part
o f this agenda.
25.
Third, the Government Program emphasizes the need to modernize the public
sector by strengthening governance and the capacity o f public institutions to effectively
fight corruption. The Program envisages a set of public administration reforms aimed at
consolidating the institutional capacity of the central and local administration, promoting
fiscal and administrative decentralization and reforming the delivery of public services. An
integrated national anti-corruption strategy i s being implemented. The strategy i s built on
several pillars: strengthened independence and accountability of the justice system; enhanced
civil society participation in decision-making; reform of the public sector management
mechanisms; and improved regulatory framework for the enterprise sector.

11

Romania Country Partnership Strategy

Box 2: EU Accession vs. EU Integration

Both the Romanian Government Program and the World Bank CPS distinguish between two
concepts: accession and integration. Accession i s the process through which Romania joins the E U
by meeting the membership criteria. Integration i s the process o f catching up with the current E U
members and successfully reaping the benefits o f membership by pursuing the necessary structural
reforms in a stable macroeconomic environment. To accede into the EU, Romania needs to meet a
number o f specific criteria, laid down by the 1993 Copenhagen European Council:
0

0

Political criteria: Stability of institutions guaranteeing democracy, the rule o f law, human rights
and respect for and protection o f minorities.
Economic criteria: Existence o f a functioning market economy, as well as the capacity to cope
with competitive pressure and market forces within the Union.
Institutional criteria: Ability to take on the obligations o f membership by transposing into
national legislation and effectively implementing the acquis communautaive (the core body of
E U regulations).

Fulfillment of the political criteria i s a prerequisite for the initiation o f accession negotiations
between a candidate country and the European Union. The EU regularly assesses the progress made
by a candidate country through Progress Reports or Comprehensive Monitoring Reports.
Through the CPS, the Bank supports both accession and integration. Although there i s not always a
clear distinction at the level o f individual projects between the two objectives, some projects are
designed with the view to primarily support accession by meeting the acquis commitments (e.g. the
Judicial Reform Project, PAL 2, PAL 3 or Municipal Services Project), while others are intended to
enhance integration, by improving the allocational efficiency o f public resources and increasing the
competitiveness o f the economy (e.g. the Revenue Administration Reform Project, the Transport
Project or the Fiscal and Governance DPL).

B.

Challenges of EU Integration

Lessons from EU-8 NMS

26.
There are several lessons from the experience o f the EU-8 New Member States
(NMS) applicable to Romania. First, early and substantial progress in fiscal consolidation
and reforms i s necessary to meet the financial demands o f EU accession, such as EU-related
spending on infrastructure and environment. Second, the substantial amount o f EU post
accession funds requires major upgrading o f absorptive capacity prior to accession. Third, a
more aggressive pursuit o f structural and institutional reforms would underpin growth and
productivity and enable more rapid convergence with the rest o f the EU. Fourth, greater
effort i s needed to address more explicitly and early on issues o f poverty, social exclusion,
regional disparities, and structural unemployment, including the utilization o f better targeted
social policies to ensure wider participation in growth.

27.

Building on these lessons, three major challenges for Romania emerge. First,
structural and institutional reforms would have to be accelerated to stay on a rapid growth
path and improve competitiveness. Second, fiscal risks to macroeconomic stability and
weaknesses in capacity to absorb EU funds would have to be addressed. Third, reducing
poverty and combating social exclusion should continue to be an integral part o f the
Government’s EU integration agenda.

12

Romania Country Partnership Strategy

Accelerating Structural and Institutional Reforms

28.

Strengthening governance and upgrading institutional capacity are areas of
concern to the Government and stakeholders, especially in public administration, fiscal
management and judiciary. While governance and institutional capacity issues have been
flagged in the FY2002-04 Country Assistance Strategy (CAS), both the CLER’ and the CAE6
recommend that these should continue to be addressed in future Bank programs. Romania
has lagged behind other CEE countries in terms of level of institutional development as
measured by EBRD Transition Indicators. Romania also lags the East European regional
average on six governance indicators tracked by the WBI. In addition, several chapters o f
the acquis focus on governance and institutional strengthening(e.g., Chapter 24 -Justice and
Home Affairs; Chapter 28 - Financial Control; Chapter 29 - Financial and Budgetary
Provisions), with progress in these areas being critical to meeting the current timetable for
accession. The following areas, which are consistent with Romania’s EU aspirations, have
been identified by both the OED and QAG reports as priorities:

Civil service reform i s needed to establish a meritocratic, professional, and
depoliticized civil service, funded with a sustainable public wage bill and transparent salary
setting mechanisms.
a
The decentralization agenda will have to be supported by institutional strengthening
of municipalities and addressing current misalignment between fiscal decentralization and
fknctional devolution.
Public expenditure management requires strengthening to mitigate fiscal
vulnerabilities, improve ability to absorb and strategically allocate post accession EU funds,
and meet EU membership obligations on budget aspects.

Judicial reform will have to be sustained to strengthen the independence o f the
judiciary, increase the efficiency of courts, upgrade the professional level of judges and court
personnel, and improve quality o f judgments.

29.
The capacity of the justice system to cope with the rigors of EU accession
requires further improvements, and the successful implementation and enforcement o f
the acquis have to be accelerated. The 2004 EC Progress Report identifies the functioning
o f the judiciary as one of the main vulnerabilities of Romania in its quest for EU
membership. While substantial steps have been taken lately in strengtheningthe institutional
independence o f the judiciary by enhancing the oversight role of the Superior Council of the
Magistracy (CSM), the efficiency of the courts remains low. Increasingthe accountability o f
the judiciary, developing effective mechanisms for monitoring and evaluating performance,
increasing the professionalismand integrity of judges and enhancing the budgetary autonomy
of the courts continue to be core priorities of the justice reform agenda. I n the fight against
corruption, efforts have focused so far on promoting legislative measures and less on their
effective implementation.

30.
Slow and inefficient enterprise reform o f the past has left Romania with a legacy
of a number o f enterprises to be privatized o r liquidated compared to other CEE
countries. Public enterprises are the core of the un-restructured part of the economy,
especially in energy, mining and railways. In the last few years, the share of new firms,
weighted by employment, i s high and compares well with other CEE countries and thus

’ Country Lending Enhancement Review, Quality Assurance Group, September 1, 2004

Romania Country Assistance Evaluation, Operations Evaluation Department, May 25, 2005

13

Romania Country Partnership Strategy

many new firms have started operations. In contrast, the share o f exits, weighted by
employment, i s very low compared to new entries. This reflects the dominant role of
unrestructured public enterprises over a competitive fringe of private businesses, Key
actions to address the situation include the following:
Energy sector restructuring, especially the privatization of the remaining distribution
and generation companies, needs to accelerate, following a slowdown in recent months.
Concomitant with the gradual liberalization o f the energy market, this would ensure the
private investment inflows necessary to upgrade the obsolete technology and reduce energy
production costs and losses in networks. The Government has recently prepared a new
Energy Sector Reform Strategy for the period 2006-2008, which aims to address the
remaining challenges facing the sector.
The privatization program of commercial companies will have to be accelerated and
completed. As important, the modes o f privatization should enable restructuring and establish
good governance.
Strengthening the financial discipline of the enterprise sector i s fundamental. While
both direct and indirect subsidies have been declining, the reforms should be sustained to
ensure continued declining trend.

31.
Financial intermediation in Romania remains low compared to other CEE
countries and capital markets are thin and short term. Developing efficient financial
intermediation requires sustaining the structural and institutional reforms, more specifically
the completion of the privatization o f the banking system and the strengthening of the
regulatory and supervisory infrastructure, especially for non-bank financial institutions
(NBFIs). Privatization to foreign strategic investors i s expected to improve governance,
strengthen the capital base, and increase activity in the banking system. Capital market
development requires a series o f reforms, including issuance o f secondary legislation in line
with EU directives, modernization of the capital market infrastructure, and increasing the
supply of domestic securities, in particular, the development of a government bond market.
The municipal bond market i s on an upwards trend (Bucharest, the capital, successfully
issued in 2005 i t s first bond on the international market), but the regulatory framework needs
further strengthening.
Table 3: Transition Indicator Scores for Financial Institutions
EBRD Index of Banking
Reform

Hungary
Czech Republic
Estonia
Croatia
Poland
Latvia
Lithuania
Slovak Republic
Bulgaria
SloAia
R

4.0
4.0
4.0
4.0
3.7
3.7
3.7
3.7
3.7
3.3

EBRD Index of Reform of
Non-bank Financial
Institutions
4.0

3.7
3.3
2.7
3.7
3 .O
3.0
2.7
2.3
2.7

Note: Scores range from 1 (little progress beyond establishment of a two tier system) to 4+ (standards and
performance norms of advanced industrial economies)
Source: EBRD Transition Report, 2005

14

Romania Country Partnership Strategy

32.
Improving the business environment will be a key driver of growth. The
elimination of administrative barriers to private enterprise development, the successful
implementation o f anti-corruption initiatives, and the simplification o f the Labor Code have
been identified by investors as areas to be addressed. Discretionary practices in the
enforcement of legislation lead to concerns about a lack of level playing field. Although
rising since 2004, FDI levels are low compared to other CEE countries, especially in
greenfield investment. There i s also a large informal economy. More specifically:
While Romania has made important progress in reforming its business licensing
regime, notably with the introduction o f the silent consent rule, the pace of reform will have
to be sustained. Bankruptcy legislation needs to be enforced expeditiously and without
discrimination.
0

Businesses report that rigid employment laws are a significant obstacle to their
performance. The Labor Code adopted in 2003 added more rigidities in the labor market and
will require substantial changes to enhance flexibility and reduce transactions costs for
companies.
The statutory rates of labor taxation remain high, despite some reductions in social
insurance contributions. The combination of high labor tax rates and inflexible labor market
rules contributes to a relatively large informal sector as a percent of GDP and employment.
0

sector continues to Present a
major
development

the agricultural labor in all
EU-15 countries combined. A
poor policy framework and

34.

Figure 7:Agriculture Share in GDP and Labor Force

-&riculture

share in GDP -Share

in labor force

Increasing investment in human capital and addressing the s k i l l s mismatch with
market needs are necessary for successful integration with the EU. Although Romania

15

Romania Country Partnership Strategy

has significantly advanced in reforming i t s education system, average education outcomes
continue to be relatively low, indicating that there are s t i l l many problems to be addressed.
I n international evaluations (Trends in International Mathematics and Science Study TIMSS - and Program for International Student Assessment - PISA), Romania continues to
have mean scores lower than OECD averages and lower than the scores of Bulgaria and the
EU-8 NMS. The fundamental changes that have occurred in the economy throughout
transition have led to a shift in the demand for skills o f graduates. This indicates a need for
the reorientation of the education programs, both for pre-university and university levels, to
respond to the new labor market needs. The education reform strategy needs to shift towards
a student centered teaching, flexible feedback rules to link the education system and labor
market conditions, and stronger competition among education institutions, including
universities, for public resources and private sector funding.
Table 4: T I M S S eighth grade student assessment results for science and math for
selected accession countries, 1995,1999, and 2003

Mathematics mean score

Czech
Republic
Slovak
Republic
Hungary
Bulgaria
Slovenia

Latvia
Romania

Lithuania

Science mean score
1999
2003
539
n.a.

1995
546

1999
520

2003
n.a.

1995
555

534

534

508

532

535

517

527
527
494
488
474
472

532
51 1

529
476
493
505
475
502

537
545
514
476
47 1
464

552
518

543
479
520
513
470
519

n.a.

505
472
482

n.a.

503
472
488

Source: Nicholas Barr (ed.)Labor Markets andSocial Policy in CEE, World Bank, 2005.

35.
With more than 50 percent of the national road network in poor condition
primarily due to inadequate financing of road maintenance, road transport costs are at
present 30-60 percent higher than what they should be. I n addition, Romania lacks high
standard roads along the major trade corridors, resulting in a road traffic injury rate that i s
more than three times the EU average. In the railway sub-sector, the significant fall in freight
and passenger volumes during 1990s requires rationalization of the network and services, as
well improvements in labor productivity. Romania also needs a longer term strategy for
railway to ensure the financial viability of the railway infrastructure company and to
modernize the infrastructure. For improved trade facilitation, the measures already
implemented at border crossings for road transport need to be extended to other modes, in
particular railway and inland waterway. For full implementation of the ucquis, there s t i l l
remain technical compliance issues that need to be addressed to improve trade logistics. The
estimated investments required to upgrade the major transport corridors and to maintain the
existing infrastructure amount to Euro 20 billion over the 15-year period 2006-2020.
Addressing Fiscal Risks and Enhancing EU Funds Absorption

36.
The energy sector has been central to the persistently large quasi-fiscal deficits,
although there has been significant progress in addressing arrears, due to reforms,
Energy subsidization - in the form of low energy bill collection rates and pricing of energy
services below full cost recovery - was extensively used in the past to support loss making
enterprises with adverse impact on the basic energy infrastructure. Since energy company

16

Romania Country Partnership Strategy

losses were often financed with tax arrears and unpaid loans, these have added to the rising
stock of public debt. Romania has progressively addressed fiscal and quasi-fiscal deficits in
the energy sector and major breakthroughs have been achieved. Table 5 shows Romania's
progress. Electricity and gas tariffs have been adjusted to cost recovery levels, Bill
collection has been improved over several years and i s currently highly satisfactory, These
accomplishments enabled Romania's electricity and gas distribution privatizations. As part
of energy privatizations, arrears built up in the past are being written off, in a process to be
completed when thermal generators are privatized and units remaining in the public sector
are closed or restructured possibly including bankruptcy proceedings. The district heating
sector continues to accumulate new arrears. The situation i s becoming increasingly critical
as central government subsidy support i s being reduced without measures to improve the
operational and financial performance o f the heating companies.
Table 5: Estimated Losses From Quasi-Fiscal Activities in the Energy Sector'
(percent o f GDP)
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
Gas
3.6
3.5
1.9
2.3
1.5
Electricity and Heating
1.1
1.3
0.6
0.5
0.2
'Including losses resulting from payment arrears from non-collection.
staff projection
Predominantly implicit subsidies resulting from pricing below import parity.
Cash losses resulting from pricing below cost-recovery levels.
Source: IMF

* IMF

The social security system could be a source o f long-term fiscal risk. The high
37.
statutory levels o f social contributions (at 47.5 percent of the gross salary) discourage
participation and push workers into informal employment. Despite the introduction of the
flat income and profit tax, and several reductions of the social assistance contributions in
recent years, the number of contributors remains lower than the number of beneficiaries,
leading to an endemic deficit of the public pension fund. Pension system deficits are likely
to grow substantially without further reform. With financing gaps mainly covered by the
state budget, overall government deficits and public indebtedness will tend to rise. Despite
recent reforms, including a two-year increase in the statutory retirement age and a widening
of the contribution base to include the self-employed, farmers and the unemployed, the
pension system remains unsustainable. The urgency for reform i s increasing, because of the
projected slowdown of population growth and the steady aging of the population, which will
increase the demands on the system.

38.

There continues to be a significant gap in terms of health outcomes and financial
resources compared to EU countries. Further improvements are needed to improve the
quality of service delivery and strengthen governance, including the development of an
accreditation body for health services and amendments to the legal framework for health
facilities. Increasing the efficiency, equity and transparency of financing - including the
containment o f pharmaceutical costs and better definition o f the benefit package covered by
health insurance - would help to rationalize services and control costs. Key actions to
enhance use o f service capacity include developing models of care adapted to rural and
remote areas, closing or converting underutilized hospital facilities in accordance with
national and regional strategies, and investing in complementary services such as home care
and ambulatory and daycare services. There should also be an increased focus on resolving
the problem o f informal payments.

Romania Country Partnership Strategy

17

39.
The high cost of upgrading environmental standards will have to be managed
with an appropriate expenditure policy and strengthened institutional capacity. In
relation to the EU-8 N M S , Romania i s starting out with a poorer state of the environment.
The estimated cost of environmental investments needed to meet EU standards i s therefore
comparatively large - about Euro 30 billion during the period 2004-15, the highest among
CEE countries. A large proportion of these costs are expected to be financed by local
governments and the private sector. There are significant fiscal and institutional challenges
in the water and waste water sector as well as in solid waste management. Population with
access to water supply i s 68 percent and to sewerage 52 percent. At present, about 55
percent o f wastewater i s treated and the untreated water creates environmental risk. The
demands for solid waste management are equally daunting - an estimated 30 percent of the
population does not have access to an organized system o f solid waste collection and
management. A proper sequencing o f the investments i s needed to ensure that those with the
highest benefits are given priority. A systemic and sustained effort i s required to build
capacity at all administrative levels to facilitate absorption o f EU environment related funds.

40.
Mobilizing the revenue necessary to cofinance the absorption of EU grants,
finance Romania’s contribution to the EU common budget, and provide the resources
for the reforms envisaged in several sectors i s likely to prove a major challenge.
Revenue collection as percent of GDP i s lower than those of EU member states, although
higher than in some fast growing countries with a similar GDP per capita as Romania. The
recent introduction of the 16 percent flat income and corporate profit tax has opened an
additional gap in revenue collection. Relatively high expenditure rigidity makes spending
reallocations difficult in the short run. The requirement to cofinance EU structural and
cohesion funds and the obligation to contribute to the EU common budget place additional
burdens on public spending. The unification of the collection and administration
responsibilities for income and profit taxes and health, unemployment and social insurance
contributions under the National Authority for Fiscal Administration in 2004 has brought
further challenges in terms o f institutional and operational consolidation o f revenue
administration.
41.
Improving the allocational efficiency o f public spending requires a bold reform
of the expenditure planning and management systems. Developingthe capacity to absorb
and efficiently allocate the EU post-accession grants necessitates a better prioritization of
public spending, where the strategic policy directions from the Government are reflected in
the formulation o f the budget. Better alignment of spending allocations with performance
should help create additional fiscal space. The capacity for strategic planning has to be
enhanced, especially in the social sectors, as increases in public spending in some areas in
recent years, such as in health, have not led to significant improvements in related economic
and social indicators, signaling important inefficiencies in expenditure management or the
need for sector reform. The National Development Plan, under which the structural and
cohesion funds will be allocated, ought to be integrated into the budget process and the move
towards the establishment of a medium-term budget framework needs to be accelerated.
Fiscal decentralization reforms should be better correlated with functional devolution.
Updating accounting, internal and external &dit and control systems i s required in order to
assess to what extent resource distribution i s reflected in improved results.
42.
Public expenditure management i s undergoing major reforms. Following the
recommendations o f the 2003 Country Financial Accountability Assessment (CFAA), the
overall management and coordination of these reform efforts and the capability o f public
sector managers to apply them effectively have been enhanced. This has been done through

18

Romania Country Partnership Strategy

the establishment of an Inter-MinisterialCommittee for Public Financial Management (PFM)
Reform and by implementing training programs for public sector managers and professional
certifications o f internal auditors, expected to effectively promote management
accountability. The Inter-Ministerial Committee has produced, as part of the PAL agenda, a
Strategic Development Plan for PFM Reform, which was formally endorsed by the
Government in July 2005. The agenda includes the introduction o f a medium term
perspective to the state budgeting process, the modernization and upgrading of the Treasury
systems, the introduction of accrual-based accounting, and internal audit and external
financial audit by the Court of Accounts in line with internationally accepted standards.
Many reform actions have been and continue to be supported by large scale technical
assistance projects funded by the EU PHARE program, most notably in the fields of financial
control and audit. Reforms of the budgetary process are currently being implemented with
technical and analytical assistance from the World Bank.
Reducing Poverty and Promoting Social Inclusion

43.
Rural development will be an important component of the poverty reduction
strategy. The rural poor account for two-thirds of the total poor in Romania with selfemployment in agriculture as the main source of income. Formal employment provides an
escape from low productivity self-employment, but two constraints to formal employment
are educational attainment (only one percent of the rural population has achieved higher
education compared to more than 7 percent in urban areas) and poor physical infrastructure
(the rural road network i s extensive but poorly maintained). There i s poor water quality and
lack o f water access in the rural areas, which contribute to the low health outcomes (infant
mortality i s 22 per 1000 live births compared to 15 in urban areas). Poor water and sanitation
conditions in Romanian rural villages have recently been highlighted by the World Health
Organization (WHO) as a high risk factor in control of avian bird flu transmission to humans.
Developingthe rural sector requires addressing the following issues:
Non-farm employment generation will be important in absorbing the labor that will
be shed as the farm economy becomes more efficient. A vibrant rural non-farm economy
requires a market-friendly business environment for SMEs, good physical infrastructure, and
investment in human capital.
b

Increasing productivity on small and medium sized farms requires sustained efforts in
several areas, including improved legal environment for land transactions, agricultural
extension, and marketing infrastructure.
b

44.

Government policy promotes social inclusion and poverty reduction measures,
targeted at disadvantaged groups. This policy will contribute to the country’s continued
stability, social cohesion, wider participation in growth, and economic integration. A Joint
Inclusion Memorandum (JIM) was signed by the Romanian Government and the European
Commission on June 20, 2005. In the JIM, the following vulnerable social groups are
identified: the Roma minority, children in state institutions, persons with disabilities, and
youth over 18 leaving the state child protection system. In addition, victims o f domestic
violence are identified as needing assistance.

45.

T o address the poverty o f the large Roma population, the Government has
developed a social inclusion program. Significant gaps persist in school attendance rates
for Roma children compared to national averages. Socio-economic conditions have made
many highly vulnerable to diseases such as tuberculosis and HIV infections. Almost 21

19

Romania Country Partnership Strategy

percent of Roma live in houses for which they have no title. Only 12.9 percent of the active
Roma population i s formally employed, while 33.6 percent are part o f informal employment.
About half o f the recipients of the Minimum Income Guaranteed (MIG) benefits are Roma.
The Government has prepared the Decade Action Plan outlining the goals, targets, and
indicators which it will commit to achieving and monitoring in 2005-2015.

46.
The poverty risk of children i s still high: around 30 percent of children under
the age of 15 are poor, compared to 23 percent o f the total population. Romania has the
highest infant mortality rate (1 8.4 percent) of all EU member states and candidate countries.
The availability o f early childhood development (ECD) services has dramatically declined
during the transition period; during 1990-2003, the number of crkches has decreased to one
third and the number o f enrolled children has decreased to one sixth o f the previous levels.
The Ministry of Education and Research (MER) has developed an Early Childhood
Education (ECE) Strategy (2005-2011) as part of an envisaged Convergent Early Childhood
Development (ECD) Strategy.
47.
A passive and non-inclusive protection system was inherited from the communist
era, with poor quality care, delivered in large, obsolete, state institutions. Most state
institutions for Persons with Disability (PWD) have unacceptable conditions, due to financial
constraints. The Government approved in September 2005 a Strategy for the Social
Protection, Integration and Inclusion o f Persons with Disabilities (2006-2013), as well as
related action plans but institutional capacity to implement this strategy needs strengthening.
Children leaving the care o f the state institutions are not prepared for an independent l i f e and
lack housing and employment. The Government has a program of building multi-functional
centers to temporarily assist these young people, but this program requires support for
implementation.
111. Bank Program and Past Strategy
A.

Past Bank Assistance

The Bank played a major role in Romania’s transition. The Bank resumed
48.
lending in 1991 during the beginning of Romania’s transition to a market economy. Between
FY91 and 43 FY06, the Bank approved a total o f 50 IBRD financed operations with
commitments of US$ 5.0 billion, about $300 million a year. Lending volumes were higher in
the 1990s at $335 million a year, compared to FY00-05 at $288 million per year. Adjustment
operations accounted for about 40 percent of total lending since 1991. The Bank’s financial
assistance accounted for about 30 percent of all net multilateral assistance over the 19922004 period, and 16 percent of all net inflows, public and private. At end-2004, debt to
IBRD represented about 15 percent of all external debt outstanding. Table 6 provides an
indication o f the effectiveness of Bank lending based on the 2005 Country Assistance
Evaluation by the Operations Evaluation Department (OED).

20

Romania Country Partnership Strategy

Table 6: Summary of Outcome Ratings o f Bank Lending by CAS Objective
Development Objective

Sustainable Private Sector Growth
Poverty Reduction and Human
Development
Governance and Institution
Building
Overall-

Source: OED CAE (200.5)

1991-1999

Outcome Rating

2000-2004
Satisfactory

Unsatisfactory
Moderately Unsatisfactory

Moderately Satisfactory

Moderately Satisfactory

Moderately Satisfactory

Unsatisfactory

Satisfactory

49.
The CAS Completion Report (CCR) which evaluated the previous CAS covering
FY2002-04 cites several lessons applicable to the design o f the CPS. First, linking Bank
support to EU priorities and improving coordination with the EU introduced synergies and
increased government commitment to reforms. Second, the complementarity of the Bank
and Fund programs reinforced each other and close coordination helped ensure consistency
of approaches to issues. Third, institution building and governance reforms and outcomes
have lagged those of other CAS objectives, and the CPS would have to determine
mechanisms to strengthen political commitment to these reforms. Fourth, the agriculture
interventions required a supporting policy framework and would have benefited from linking
with an adjustment operation. Fifth, the AAA program should have been frontloaded and
more tightly linked to the lending operations. Sixth, a stronger CAS focus on results, a more
systematic monitoring and evaluation system of program outcomes, and greater program
flexibility would help improve effectiveness and relevance o f Bank support. Annex C
contains the CAS Completion Report.
50.
The performance o f the active lending portfolio continues to be satisfactory, but
the pace of project implementation has been slowing down. The current IBRD Romania
portfolio o f active projects totals about US$1690 million and i s represented by 20 loans,
three GEF financed projects, one guarantee operation, and seven grants. Romania’s
disbursement ratio has continued its decline from a record high o f 27.4 percent in FY03 to 16
percent (vs. ECA average o f 23.8 percent) in FY05. This decline reflects, in addition to loan
effectiveness delays7 and fiscally driven shortfalls in project funding, a combination of
several other factors: (a) the high level of new commitments since May 2004; (b)
depreciation of dollar-denominated IBRD VSLs, which account for 73 percent of $1.2 billion
in undisbursed funds; and (c) implementation delays due to elections (a slow-down in the
activity o f line ministries and high turnover of Project Management Unit staff). Portfolio
management efforts have intensified recently with the introduction of quarterly reports on
actions agreed with the government during the Joint Portfolio Review completed this
calendar year, and the initiation of a set of key arrangements to accelerate project
implementationand improve the management of closing dates.
51.
IFC’s strategies in Romania have tracked the trajectory of the country’s
progress from socialism to the free market and EU candidacy, all within the past
decade.* Romania became a member of IFC in 1991. Since then, IFC has committed about
$720 million o f i t s own hnds in 39 projects and has arranged $241 million in syndications to
support projects in the financial markets, telecommunications, food and beverage, general

’

Romania’s average elapsed time from Board approval to loan effectiveness i s 160 days vs. the Bank’s standard
of 90 days
From IFC’s Operations Evaluation Group (OEG) Evaluation Brief on Romania, June 2005.

Romania Country Partnership Strategy

21

manufacturing, o i l and gas, and infrastructure sectors. IFC has been directly involved in the
privatization and restructuring o f large state-owned enterprises in the banking and utility
sectors. IFC has played an active role in developing the financial markets, including
improving access to finance for small and medium enterprises and helping two large bank
privatizations, Banc Post and Banca Comerciala Romana (BCR). After two failed
privatization attempts in 2002, with the financial and advisory support o f EBRD and IFC,
BCR, the country’s largest bank, was successfully sold to Austria’s Erste Bank in December
2005 at a record high price. IFC has also helped enterprises increase their competitiveness
and attract foreign investors. Investments include financing o f the largest private placement
for a Romanian risk (Romania’s first mobile phone company) and investing alongside
foreign technical partners in general manufacturing - both greenfield and post-privatization.
In addition, IFC has invested in regional projects that benefit Romania: Medicover in the
health sector, Raiffeisen Bank International, and private equity funds.

52.
Similar to IFC’s operations in other early transition economies, IFC’s Romania
operations correctly emphasized the importance of delivering a significant technical
assistance and advisory services (TAAS) component ahead o f and alongside i t s investment
operations to develop the soft infrastructure o f a market economy, especially in recognition
o f Romania’s investment climate weaknesses. The bulk o f TAAS activities were in
improving investment climate, private sector advisory and privatization transactions, which
included innovative projects such as a concession for the first municipal water utility and a
health care delivery public-private partnership.
53.
The level of IFC activity picked up more recently as the prospects for EU
accession and the attendant reform momentum led to improvements in Romania’s
investment climate. From FY03 to FY06 (as o f end-April 2006), IFC has invested more
than $529 million o f i t s own funds, averaging $130 million a year. As o f end-April 2006,
IFC’s total investment portfolio in Romania stands at $540 million (32 percent in equity and
68 percent in loan), o f which 78 percent i s in the financial sector, 12 percent in infrastructure,
7 percent in oil and gas, and 3 percent in general manufacturing. This represents the 9th
largest committed portfolio across IFC and the second largest in the Southern Europe and
Central Asia region after Turkey.

54.
MIGA’s outstanding guarantee portfolio in Romania consists of eight contracts
in the financial sector and four contracts in the services sector. MIGA’s exposure i s
predominantly in the financial sector. As o f end-March 2006, the Agency’s gross exposure
in Romania i s about US$262 million (equivalent to 4.7 percent o f MIGA’s gross exposure),
while the exposure net o f reinsurance amounts to about US$121 million (equivalent to 3.6
percent o f MIGA’s net exposure).
B.

Rationale for and Principles of Bank Support

55.
Building on the experience accumulated in the NMS and worldwide, the Bank i s
in a distinctive position to support Romania’s overarching objective o f achieving
convergence with the EU. The Government i s cognizant that the unfinished agenda o f
reforms remains large, and has requested Bank support in recognition o f the value-added o f
the Bank’s broad expertise in addressing development challenges. The Bank has been a
valued partner throughout the country’s transition in almost all sectors, with a large portfolio
o f existing projects and strong working relationships with policy makers and other
government officials. In recent years, the Bank has refocused or accelerated work in several
areas critical to Romania’s E U integration process, including judicial and public

22

Romania Country Partnership Strategy

administration reforms, revenue mobilization and public expenditure management. This
work has already yielded useful results for the country and has been reflected in the EC
Progress Reports. As Romania moves towards EU membership, there will be a shift of
emphasis from legal and institutional harmonization to EU integration, which requires
implementation of structural reforms and institutional strengthening. These are areas where
the Bank can provide value-added through its global expertise, local knowledge, and past and
current involvement in Romania’s transition.

56.
Stakeholder consultations and surveys in April-May 2005 give an indication o f
areas of public concern, which are consistent with Government priorities. Insufficient
infrastructure development and inadequate access to quality healthcare and education are
considered the main obstacles to the sustainable development of Romania (see Annex E).
The need for successful EU integration is viewed as the key development priority, followed
by reduction of corruption, improving the business climate, improving government and
justice system effectiveness, and reducing poverty. In general, Bank support i s positively
rated with almost a third of survey respondents highlighting the importance of financial
resources from the Bank, 17 percent emphasizing analytic and advisory activities, and 15
percent valuing the Bank’s knowledge.
57.
The nature of Bank engagement in Romania has been evolving and there are
several factors that point towards a new approach in supporting the country’s
development. First, Romania has completed the negotiations o f the acquis communautaire
and expects to be a member o f EU from January 1, 2007. Second, over the past two to three
years, Romania has established a track record of sustained reforms and macroeconomic
stability, in contrast to the inconsistency of the 1990s. Third, Romania i s a Middle Income
Country (MIC) with an investment grade and access to external sources o f funds. Finally,
with Romania not extending the current SBA or entering a new one, the Bank could play an
expanded role. Building on the lessons from the EU-8 NMS, the Bank will have to define its
role in a changed and changing environment in Romania.
58.
Bank support should move towards greater flexibility and responsiveness within
a strategic framework, anchored on the EU integration process. This means an evolution
from the previous CAS to a new CPS that entails: (a) a more flexible approach to lending and
non-lending activities in which broad priorities are articulated for the CPS period with a
defined program during the first phase corresponding to the EU accession period and an
indicative program to be more clearly defined by end-FY07 for the second phase covering
the post accession period; (b) the use of policy performance benchmarks to trigger lending up
to a ceiling based on creditworthiness and exposure limits and to define a minimum set of
standards for sectoral or thematic engagement; and (c) movement towards alignment of Bank
procedures with country systems in line with the “Use o f Country Systems” initiative and the
concept of entity and sector accreditation contained in the Framework for EU8 countries,
Bank programs in Romania will continue to incorporate elements o f the MIC agenda,
including reducing project preparation time, accelerating project completion, and introducing
new products.
C.

Key Priorities for the CPS

Strategic Framework and Principles of Design of Operations

59.
The strategic framework that guides the future Bank program in Romania
focuses on facilitating economic integration and social cohesion with the EU. Building

Romania Country Partnership Strategy

23

on both the lessons from EU-8 NMS and Government program, the CPS framework has three
pillars: (a) accelerating structural and institutional reforms to support sustainable growth; (b)
addressing fiscal vulnerabilities and modernizing the public sector; (c) targeting poverty
reduction and promoting social inclusion. The outcomes to be generated from this
framework are summarized in the results matrix attached as Annex B9. Several Bank studies
provide more detailed analysis o f the main issues and priorities within each pillar, and the
AAA program will complement or update the work done so far. Periodic consultations with
the Government will review the priorities and initiatives, modify them as needed, and if
necessary change the mix o f operations and instruments.

60.
The choice and design of lending operations follows several principles. First,
Bank lending should finance priority Government programs that are already included in the
expenditure envelope and avoid generating unnecessary additional public spending. Second,
the lending program would assist the Government in increasing revenues and improving the
efficiency and effectiveness o f public expenditures. Third, Bank support would focus on
systemic solutions and programmatic approaches, including the move towards use of EU
consistent country systems. Fourth, the client would have increased flexibility in the choice
of appropriate lending instruments. Fifth, the Bank projects would help Romania absorb
optimally the EU hnds that would become available post accession. Sixth, Bank projects
would improve Government capacity to mobilize various funding sources such as EIB and
Council of Europe Development Bank. Finally, Bank projects would include institution
building components, including reforms to improve transparency and contribute to the anticorruption objective o f the Government. The indicative lending program i s attached as
Annexes B3a, and the links to the outcomes are described in the results matrix in Annex B9.
D.

Key Components of Bank Support

Pillar 1: Accelerating Structural and Institutional Reforms for Sustained Growth

61.
The Bank will continue to support the implementation o f structural and
institutional reforms to underpin private sector led growth and increased productivity.
There i s an ongoing reform agenda, including completing the privatization program covering
manufacturing SOEs and the banking system, improving the business climate, sustaining
energy sector restructuring, increasing agricultural sector productivity, improving the
educational system to upgrade skills, and meeting EU environmental standards.
Completing the Privatization Program and Other Structural Reforms

62.
Programmatic Development Policy Loansg(FY07-08). The PAL program includes
components o f structural reform in the financial and enterprise sectors as well as actions to
improve the business environment, including the reform o f the labor code. The measures
supported by the PAL program are expected to contribute to the following outcomes to be
achieved by the end of the CPS period: (a) completion o f the'privatization of manufacturing
SOEs; (b) increase in private sector share of banking assets to 100 percent; (c) liberalization
of electricity and gas markets to meet EU requirements including 100 percent liberalization
of the electricity market; (d) reduction in the rigidities in hiring and firing as measured by the
Cost o f Doing Business indices compared to 2005; (e) decline in regulatory uncertainty
compared to 2005 as measured by BEEPS; and (0 increase in the employment rate o f
These loans refer to the Programmatic Adjustment Loans (PALS) the first o f which was approved in
September 2004.

24

Romania Country Partnership Strategy

population aged 15-64 from 58 percent in 2004 to 60 percent in 2009. The PAL program
will be accompanied by investment loans in the areas of energy and business environment.

63.
Energy Loans (FY08-09). Continued energy reform i s a key component in
Romania's integration process into the European Union. Two energy operations are included
in the CPS to support the privatization o f electricity distribution and generation, compliance
with EU environmental standards in particular desulphurization, and implementation of
market liberalization in line with EU directives and regional market integration within the
Energy Community of South East Europe. The operations will contribute to the outcome o f
100 percent electricity market liberalization by end-2009, as well as to the privatization
program and the reduction o f quasi-fiscal subsidies. IFC will continue to work with the Bank
to introduce private sector participation in a transparent, competitive, and sustainable
manner. IFC i s ready to provide financing and advisory services and can help mobilize
private sector funding.
Business Environment Loan (FY09). The focus o f this operation will be on
64,
fostering the competitiveness of the enterprise sector to enable local companies to overcome
the significant competitive pressures which will emerge once Romania joins the EU. The
objective of this operation i s consistent with the Lisbon revised agenda, articulated in the EC
"Competitiveness and Innovation Framework Program" for 2007- 13. The project, together
with WBI's program, will contribute to enhancing and leveragingthe use of the EU funds for
implementing the competitiveness agenda of the Government. Bank AAA work in FY06-07
and .IFC's Competitiveness Study will help define the components o f the Business
Environment Loan. I n 2004, the Romanian Government asked IFC for a comprehensive
study to measure competitiveness o f Romanian industry and recommend any measures
needed to improve it. Funding for this Competitiveness Study will come from IFC
($500,000), the Government of Spain ($400,000) and the Government o f Romania
($300,000). The study will begin implementation this calendar year. These initiatives will
support the outcome of improving the business climate as measured by BEEPS and the Cost
of Doing Business indices (the quantification o f the outcome targets will be determined
during loan preparation).
Upgrading Skills and Reducing Labor Taxation

Human Development DPL Series (FY07-09). The HD DPL series includes
65.
components to support: (a) development o f human capital to help achieve accelerated
economic growth and increased competitiveness; and (b) reduction of labor taxation through
reform of the pension system. Education reform will build on past and current Bank
operations and will focus on improving quality assurance and accountability. The DPL series
will assist the Government's program of implementing the multi-pillar system by 2008. The
DPL series will contribute to the following outcomes: (a) improvement in education quality
by 2.5 to 5 percent during the CPS period as measured by assessments and examination
results; (b) reduction in secondary education drop-out rate from 1.7 percent in 2004 to 1.2
percent in 2009; and (c) reduction in labor taxation by 2 percentage points between 2005 and
2009.
Improving Agricultural Productivity

66.
Farm Restructuring Loan (FY07). The proposed Farm Restructuring Loan will
support improvement in the competitiveness of family farms, their absorption capacity for
EU Common Agricultural Policy (CAP) funds, and the integration of Romanian farmers into

Romania Country Partnership Strategy

25

the European market for agricultural products. The loan will build on recent reforms
implemented by the Ministry of Agriculture and assist the Government in addressing
structural constraints, in particular the rigidities in land markets. The expected outcomes o f
the operation are: (a) increased activity in land markets as measured by number of land
registrations and lease contracts (the quantification of the outcome targets will be determined
during loan preparation); and (b) decrease in the share o f agriculture employment to total
employment from 32 percent in 2004 to 28 percent in 2009.
Reducing Transport Costs

67.
Transport Sector Support Loan (FY07). The objective of this operation i s to
provide support to the implementation o f the Government’s program for infrastructure
development as well as rehabilitation and maintenance of road and rail networks. The loan
will focus on maintenance and rehabilitation of national roads and railway lines as well as
improvements in the capacity and efficiency of the agencies responsible for transport
infrastructure in Romania. The loan includes a component piloting the implementation o f
improved management and financing for Judet (county) roads. IFC can potentially help with
the increase of access to financing of sub-sovereign entities. WBI support will assist in
promoting public-private partnerships in the road sector. The loan will help the Government
meet the transport related commitments under the acquis, including the commitment to raise
road user fees to reflect marginal cost o f road use, and reduce costs of road maintenance.
The project will contribute to the outcome of reduction of transport costs by: (a) increasing
the percentage of national roads in good or fair condition from 67 percent in 2005 to 75
percent in 2009; and (b) increasing railway track utilization (in thousand traffic units per
route kilometer) from 2,223 in 2005 to 3,000 in 2009.
Upgrading Environment Standards
Environment Management Loan (FY07). The project will make investments and
68.
build capacity in institutions coordinated by the Ministry of Environmental Protection and
Waters to implement the environment acquis and effectively absorb EU Funds. The loan
will focus on three technical pillars: (a) promotion of nitrate reduction in line with the EU
Nitrates and Water Framework Directives; (b) development of institutional capacity and a
project pipeline for EU Structural funds targeting contaminated lands; and (c) institutional
support to a new National Agency for Protected Areas and Biodiversity Conservation. The
loan will also support equipment and training to help certify environmental laboratories. As
EU membership brings obligations for full integration of global environment issues into
national policies, a program of Global Environment Facility (GEF) support will complement
technical pillars o f the Environment Management Loan. The grant program intends to target
GEF focal areas of biodiversity, international waters, and persistent organic pollutants. The
expected project outcome i s a 20 to 30 percent improved soil and water quality in the areas
covered by the project. IFC will be exploring the potential for sustainability finance and
associated technical assistance programs with selected banks. Programs being considered are
in energy efficiency finance, biodiversity finance, and cleaner production finance.
Pillar 2: Addressing Fiscal Vulnerabilities and Modernizing the Public Sector

69.
The Bank will support efforts by the Government to maintain macroeconomic
stability by focusing on three major fiscal issues. First, the subsidies to enterprises, though
declining, remain high and arrears to the state owned enterprises, in particular in energy,
mining and railways, have to be contained. Second, the inflow of substantial post EU

26

Romania Country Partnership Strategy

accession funds requires appropriate fiscal policies and systems to enhance absorption and
allocate resources to where the needs are. Third, the revenue to GDP ratio will have to
increase to support the fiscal demands o f EU accession.

70.
The Bank will sustain public administration and judicial reforms, including
support to improving transparency and anti-corruption initiatives. Professionalizingthe
civil service and improving efficiency o f the judicial system continue to be important items
in the EU accession agenda. With respect to its anti-corruptionefforts, the Government will
focus on effective implementation of the revised Anti-corruption Strategy and Action Plan.
Bank support in these areas i s anchored in the PAL program and the Fiscal and Governance
DPL, but other operations will pursue public administration reform and anti-corruption
initiatives at the sector level, in particular in the judicial, health, and revenue administration
areas.
Addressing Fiscal Vulnerabilities and Improving Expenditure Systems

71.
Programmatic Development Policy Loans (FY07-OS). The PAL program includes
components that aim to reduce subsidies and enterprise losses by focusing on the
restructuring o f the mining, energy, and railway sectors in addition to the privatization or
liquidation o f manufacturing SOEs. In addition, the PAL program has a strong public
expenditure management component which includes the introduction of medium term
budgeting, the modernization and upgrading of the treasury system, and improvements in the
system o f audit. The PAL program will contribute to the following outcomes: (a) reduction
of enterprise subsidies as percent of GDP from 2.2 in 2002 to less than 1.5 in 2009; and (b)
reduction of quasi-fiscal energy subsidies as percent of GDP from 1.7 in 2004 to less than 1.O
in 2009.
Fiscal and Governance DPL (FY09). This operation will build on the PALS and
72.
provide support towards establishing appropriate fiscal policies and efficient expenditure
management systems. In particular, the loan has the following objectives: (a) to integrate the
budget process with the National Development Plan; (b) to improve strategic planning and
policy development and review; (c) to enhance budget preparation, execution, accounting,
and audit systems in line with the Public Expenditure Management Strategic Development
Plan; and (d) to develop a decentralization framework that clarifies functional assignments
and relationships between the central government and each tier or type of local
administration. WBI will complement the objectives (a) and (b) above by sharing global best
practices in budget programming, Medium Term Expenditure Framework (MTEF) design,
and strategic planning. The specific outcomes from this DPL will be defined after the
completion o f the Public Finance Studies in FY06 and FY07.
Human Development DPL Series - Pension (FY07-09). The Government has
73.
implemented measures towards fiscal consolidation of the public pension system, as a
prerequisite for the secure implementation of the fully funded mandatory private pension
scheme (2nd pillar). However, the system continues to remain vulnerable, for example the
number of contributors i s lower than that o f beneficiaries and the system i s subject to ad hoc
political decisions, which may hamper i t s medium- and long-term financial sustainability. In
addition, the public system provides low benefits to the majority of its beneficiaries. The
proposed HD DPL series aims to support further consolidation o f the public pension system
by strengthening the regulatory framework and capacity, to develop conditions for the
provision o f decent pension benefits, and to help manage the transition to mandatory private
pensions within an affordable fiscal envelope. The outcome i s the maintenance of the public

Romania Country Partnership Strategy

27

pension deficit at less than 1 percent of GDP during the CPS period, or the identification o f
funding sources if the deficit temporarily widens as a result o f appropriate policies. IFC will
look for opportunities to participate in the establishment of private pension funds by
providing technical assistance and financing.
Human Development DPL Series - Health (FY07-09). Building on the past and
74.
current health operations, the HD DPL series will continue to address quality o f service and
fiscal sustainability issues in the health sector by rationalizing health services and facilities,
as well as supporting improvements in health service financing, access, and provider
payment methods. It will also contribute to the Government Anti-corruption program by
reducing the incidence o f informal payments. Progress on these fronts i s considered essential
to the creation of a sustainable health system. The DPL series intends to assist Romania in
addressing the key problems that are contributing to the health-related fiscal deficit and avoid
the problems that are currently preventing a number o f the New Member States from meeting
the Maastricht criteria. The loan can also be structured to facilitate the utilization o f EU
structural funds in the health sector. The DPL series will contribute to the following
outcomes: (a) reduction in amount o f arrears by health care providers by more than 50
percent between 2005 and 2009; and (b) reduction in the incidence o f informal payments as
percent o f health sector expenditures from 10 percent in 2005 to 5 percent in 2008. IFC will
seek to help stimulate the growth o f the private healthcare sector in Romania, as well as
support the delivery o f higher quality and better reach o f services by offering advisory
services and introducing private sector participation.
Improving Revenue Collection and Administration
Revenue Administration Reform Loan (FY06). The CPS will support Romania’s
75.
medium-term goal of enhancing revenue collection through a Revenue Administration
Reform Loan. A sizable informal sector, a history of arrears accumulation, and a large and
essentially untaxed agricultural sector have contributed to Romania’s low revenue-to-GDP
ratio compared to both old and new EU member states. The development objective o f the
proposed project will be to implement a sustainable revenue collection system for Romania
that will: (a) deepen revenue collection to ensure a sustainable level o f public expenditure;
(b) improve governance; and (c) reduce potential for corruption. The project will enhance
the business climate by improving client services and reducing burden of taxpayer
compliance. The project will contribute to the outcome of increased tax compliance rates by
four percentage points between 2005-09.
Improving Absorption of EU Funds

76.
Municipal Services Loan (FY06). This operation will help Romania comply with
the EU’s environmental directives by completing necessary investments in the water and
wastewater sector in two urban areas - Bucharest and Arad. These investments have been
identified as environmental priorities in the country, and the Bank‘s intervention will help to
improve and increase the coverage o f water supply, reduce groundwater contamination
through the construction of sewerage networks, and reduce transboundary pollution through
the construction o f sewerage and stormwater networks. I n addition, this activity o f the Bank
will help Romania prepare projects which will be eligible to receive EU Cohesion and
Structural grants. The lack o f a project pipeline has been a key bottleneck to absorb EU grant
funds and this activity o f the Bank will address this issue. The loan aims to achieve an

28

Romania Country Partnership Strategy

outcome of more than 75 percent absorption of EU funds by end-2009 for the water and
wastewater sector in the counties targeted by the project.
Modernizing Public Administration

77.
The P A L series (FY07-08) and the Fiscal and Governance DPL (FY09) support
civil service reform. The aim i s to establish a more meritocratic, professional, and
depoliticized civil service funded with a sustainable public sector wage bill and transparent
salary settings. In addition, the DPLs will support implementation o f Government’s Anticorruption Strategy and Action Plan, including a review of i t s effectiveness. The existing
Private and Public Sector Institution Building Loan (PPIBL) continues to provide technical
assistance in designing and implementing these reforms. The PAL program has set up a set
o f indicators to monitor progress towards the following outcomes: more meritocratic civil
service management, increased quality of civil servants, enhanced attractiveness of civil
service career, and civil service wage bill affordability. Specific outcomes include: (a)
incidence o f formal evaluations for civil servants exceeding 95 percent each year during the
CPS period; and (b) increase in the percentage of civil servants with university degrees to 77
percent for central administration and 50 percent for local administration by end-2009.
78.
Judicial Reform Loan (FY06).
The Judicial Reform Loan assists in the
implementation of the strategy articulated in the PAL program and focuses on improving the
organization of the court system and upgrading transparency and budgeting. Both the PAL
and the Judicial Reform Loan provide support to implementing the commitments under the
acquis, including addressing the weaknesses in the judicial area contained in the EU
monitoring report. Both the PAL program and the Judicial Reform Loan contribute to the
outcome of 30 percent reduction of time spent by courts on administrative matters by 2009.
Pillar 3: Targeting Poverty Reduction and Promoting Social Inclusion

79.
The Bank’s targeted poverty reduction initiatives focus on addressing living
standard disparities and empowering disadvantaged groups. Growth remains the
cornerstone of Bank efforts to reduce poverty, but at the same time the CPS addresses the
major disparities in rural and regional development as well as the constraints faced by certain
groups in reaping the benefits of economic growth. In particular, the CPS will assist the
Government in addressing rural poverty through a more comprehensive approach, reducing
regional disparity by enabling the Government to utilize the tools and funds available in the
EU for this purpose, and supporting certain disadvantaged groups - in particular the Roma,
children and youth in state institutions, the disabled, and the victims of domestic violence towards both economic and social inclusion.
80.
Human Development DPL Series (FYO7-09). The DPL series will include
measures to improve health outcomes o f disadvantaged groups, such as by restructuring
health care services in underserved areas. I t will also focus on reforms to eliminate the
practice of informal payments for health services thereby reducing the number of poor people
who forgo medical treatment for financial reasons. The DPL series will also include
measures to increase coverage of the Minimum Income Guarantee scheme. The DPL series
will contribute to the following outcomes: (a) halving of extreme poverty rate between 2003
and 2009; and (b) reduction by 10 percent of the number of people who forgo medical care
for financial reasons between 2004 and 2009.

Romania Country Partnership Stratem

29

81.
Rural and Regional Development Loan (FY08). To address the high disparities
between urban and rural areas as well as among and within regions, the Bank will support
systemic solutions through the Rural and Regional Development Loan. The Rural and
Regional Development Loan will support a systemic approach to decentralization and
capacity-building o f decentralized government institutions to strengthen their planning and
programming capacity. The loan will also help improve institutional capacity to absorb and
coordinate development and investment programs across EU Structural (regional and rural)
and Cohesion funds, and to support stakeholder initiatives (Leader programs). The Loan will
build on the positive capacity-buildingresults of the Rural Development Loan and will be the
primary instrument for strengthening county level capacity for absorbing EU funds. This
loan will support the outcome of increased availability and condition o f infrastructure in rural
and economically depressed areas (the quantification o f the outcome targets will be
determined during loan preparation).
Social Inclusion Loan (FY06). This loan will support improvements in the living
82.
conditions and the social inclusion of the most disadvantaged and vulnerable people in the
Romanian society by: (a) improving the living conditions and social inclusion o f Roma living
in poor settlements; (b) increasing the inclusiveness o f Early Childhood Education services in
targeted areas; and (c) improving the quality o f services for Persons with Disability (PWD),
youth in state institutions, and victims of domestic violence. The loan aims to upgrade
capacities in line ministries to design and implement social inclusion programs, assist local
authorities in implementing social programs, and strengthen capacity of community groups.
The Social Inclusion Loan will help implement commitments under the social inclusion
chapter of the acquis and the recently signed Joint Inclusion Memorandum with the EU. The
loan will contribute to the following outcomes to be achieved during the CPS period: (a) 20
percent reduction of gaps between selected depressed areas and neighboring communities as
measured by living conditions index; (b) 70 percent of Roma in targeted settlements
acknowledging an improvement in basic living conditions; (c) 5 percentage point increase in
children from targeted communities participating in Early Childhood Education program; (d)
25 percent of services for PWD scoring at least 80 percent on the standards compliance index
for each category of quality standards; and (e) 40 percent increase in the rate of employment
of youth 18+ benefiting from multi-functional centers.
Avian Flu Loan (FY07). Romania has requested assistance under the Global
83.
Program for Avian Influenza and Human Pandemic Preparedness and Response (GPAI).
GPAI assistance to Romania i s being prepared under the technical lead of F A 0 and WHO.
Romania was the first European country to confirm an outbreak of the Highly Pathogenic
Avian Influenza with the H5N1 virus being first discovered in the Danube Delta in October
2005. Two factors expose Romania to a particular risk for HPAI outbreaks. First, the
Romanian Danube Delta i s a central resting place for migratory birds on their routes from the
Eurasian to the African continents. Second, backyard operations with low bio-safety
standards and close multi-species interactions are the dominant form of poultry holding in the
county. To improve Romania's response and preparedness capacities for a potential increase
in the number o f outbreaks, the Avian Flu Loan will support investments which enhance the
authorities' ability to more proactively address factors contributing to further spread of the
disease among poultry and further reduce the risk o f human infections. Outcomes will be
determined during loan preparation.

30

Romania Country Pavtnership Strategy

E.

Bank Instruments

84.
Bank lending will use a mix o f instruments with strategic use of DPLs and
utilization o f programmatic approaches. The programs in FY06-08 will be anchored to
the PALSwhich focus on core public sector and first generation structural reforms as well as
underpin the sectoral reforms supported by other lending operations. I n FY09, the Fiscal and
Governance DPL will provide the anchor for the Bank program. The HD DPL series planned
to support education, health and pension reforms will focus on policy and structural issues as
recommended in the CLER and build on and complement existing investment operations in
these sectors towards a comprehensive program of reform. Annex B3a contains the lending
program under two scenarios.

85.
The AAA program will be frontloaded and will provide important inputs to the
design of lending operations. The Public Finance Studies are critical inputs to the lending
operations, and to the design o f the second phase o f the CPS. Policy notes on regional
development, private sector development and municipal finance feed into planned operations
in these areas. An Agriculture Note has been completed. Instead o f a major report on
poverty every three years, an annual Poverty Monitoring Note i s planned. Monitoring o f the
macroeconomic environment and related issues continue to be important, more so in the
absence o f a Fund arrangement. The AAA program will emphasize short policy notes to
improve responsiveness and will emphasize dissemination and consensus building. This
requires a certain amount o f flexibility in defining the composition and delivery o f the policy
notes. I n addition, there are ongoing discussions on the possibility o f non-lending TA to be
provided by the Bank in the areas o f public debt management and local currency bond
issuance. Annex B4 contains the A A A program.
86.
The Government i s also considering support in the form o f partial risk
guarantees in the energy sector. There are two concrete possibilities: (a) support to the
Turceni project which i s part o f power generation privatization in the PAL program; and (b)
support to the Tarnita Hydroelectric Project in conjunction with an Energy Loan, which
would help to extend the commercial financing terms for Hidroelectrica. In addition, other
partial credit guarantee possibilities could be explored in the transport sector and for
financing requirements o f Transelectrica or Transgaz. Usefulness o f PRG instruments for
strengthening the municipal finance system i s also being evaluated.

87.
The Bank offers a full array o f financing and risk management products
associated with capacity-building support. These instruments provide the flexibility to
change the financial characteristics o f the loans throughout their life, and offer Romania the
option to manage financial risks related to currency, interest rate and commodity price
volatility. Bank loans, guarantees and risk management products can be applied both at the
country portfolio level and project level. At the country level, the financial products can be
used to support Romania’s debt and risk management strategy through: (a) structured Bank
lending terms, as needed; and (b) intermediation o f long-dated derivatives transactions to
enable the government to better manage financial risks, mainly interest rate, currency and
refinancing risks. For new projects, the Bank can assist the Government by providing the
technical expertise to prepare, finance and execute programs earmarked to receive EU grant
funds, such as infrastructure projects, community based programs, and improvement to
governments systems per EU directives.. At the same time, the Government can use the
flexibility in repayment terms o f Bank loans to provide bridge financing for the portions that
will be reimbursed by E U grants and long-term financing for the portions to be financed by
the Government.

Romania Country Partnership Strategy

31

88.
IFC expects to continue its involvement in supporting Romania with its EU
accession and integration. When feasible, IFC will complement the Bank's work especially
in energy. IFC's main goal i s to support private sector development, helping local
companies to benefit from opportunities and meet challenges during the EU accession and
integration period. IFC will further increase its volume and scope o f investment and
advisory services, especially through support o f large national-level privatizations in
infrastructure, where IFC support and private sector involvement will help increase reliability
and affordability o f services for consumers. Areas o f priority include:
0
In collaboration with the Bank, IFC will continue to support new investors in the
power sector (generation and distribution) and other network utilities (water, gas,
district heating), where emerging regulatory frameworks are not yet well-tested and
constitute an element o f uncertainty and "political risk" which may otherwise
constrain investor interest. IFC i s actively promoting public-private partnerships
(PPPs) through private investment in all infrastructure sectors with advisory services
to be provided by the Private Enterprise Partnership Southeast Europe Infrastructure
(PEP-SE Infrastructure) program. IFC will also continue to ensure that, in
accordance with Romanian law, the privatization transactions in which it i s
participating, either in an investment or advisory capacity, are done on the basis o f a
satisfactory environmental assessment.

Although gradually improving, the financial sector in Romania remains
underdeveloped and cannot yet provide effective intermediation between savers and
investors. IFC will continue working with local banks on introducing new products
and services such as local currency-linked products, structured finance, securitization,
housing finance, energy efficiency lending as well as developing non-bank financial
institutions in leasing, pension, and insurance. IFC will also provide credit lines for
on-lending to micro and SME sector - the driving force o f the Romanian economy.
0

In agribusiness, IFC will support investments that utilize local inputs efficiently to
enhance industry competitiveness. The agribusiness sector i s steadily evolving from
post-privatization restructuring with government support and incentives, to attracting
FDI, especially in dairy and meat processing. Opportunities for IFC investments
include assisting in the development o f an efficient poultry and pork farmers
networks, financing joint-venture partnerships with leading enterprises from nearby
countries (i.e. Turkey), and improving environmental and social standards in the
industry.
0

0
IFC will continue to support commercially productive enterprises in Romania
with strong foreign exchange earnings and employment opportunities, and help with
cross-border investments. IFC will selectively invest in general manufacturing
projects and support regional private equity funds which (a) provide scarce equity
financing for the development o f commercial and industrial companies; (b) offer
managerial and strategic support to improve enterprise competitiveness; and (c) help
position companies as attractive acquisition targets.

With the traditional telecom sector reaching maturity, IFC will consider
investment opportunities in new communication technologies (e.g. VOIP and

0

32

Romania Country Partnership Strategy

Broadband), media (cable TV in particular), and information technologies
(e-Government).
89.
MIGA will be open to opportunities to support the CPS and help improve
investors’ confidence through the provision o f political risk guarantees. In particular,
MIGA can play a role, in close coordination with the Bank, in support o f the privatization in
the energy sector by providing guarantees. In addition, as MIGA can provide political risk
insurance on a sub-sovereign level, MIGA can help promote private sector investment in the
water and wastewater sectors. Also, MIGA will be available to support investments in the
general manufacturing and agribusiness sectors. MIGA will coordinate its involvement with
the World Bank and, particularly in the infrastructure sector, with IFC.
90.
The World Bank Institute (WBI) will include Romania as one of its focus
countries in FY07. Although Romanians have benefited from WBI programs in the past,
WBI will now move away from spontaneous events to targeted multi-year knowledge sharing
programs and skills building activities that will complement the outcomes o f the CPS. The
WBI program will target: (a) support to SMEs to improve their business sustainability and
competitiveness; (b) capacity building utilizing international best practices in fiscal
management and reforms; and (c) public private partnerships in highways. As in all focus
countries, WBI will customize the global knowledge and expertise it brings to Romania
through partnerships with local institutions and agencies, and close collaboration with
operational colleagues. The overall FY07-09 program will be designed using the following
principles: (a) selectivity to ensure that resource envelopes support customization; (b) results
focus through closer WBI/IFC/operational collaboration; (c) sustainability through the
establishment o f local and international delivery and content partners; and (d) relevance by
sharing EU-centric knowledge and expertise with Romania.

F.

Partnerships

91.
The EU plays a central role in defining Romania’s development agenda. The
Bank enjoys a close relationship with the EU - this relationship has not only ensured a good
fit between EU and Bank activities, but has also facilitated the Government’s interface with
the two institutions. For example, a joint Bank/EU Country Procurement Assessment
Review was carried out in February 2005 which made recommendations regarding the
implementation o f the new E U procurement directives in the context o f national public
procurement legislation. As part of the CPS preparation process, Bank and EC
representatives held a “Romania day” meeting in July 2005 to explore ways to deepen
operational collaboration.
92.
The Bank will maintain coordination with the Fund, which i s expected to
continue to monitor the macroeconomic framework even without a Fund arrangement.
The PAL program was developed in close cooperation with the Fund while relevant lending
operations - such as the Revenue Administration Reform Loan - continue to be coordinated
with Fund staff. Without a Fund arrangement, the Bank will have to take a bigger role on
macroeconomic issues, in particular by making periodic assessments o f Romania’s
macroeconomic framework and performance.
93,
Developing operational synergies with other development partners, in particular
with the EC, EIB, and EBRD, is a critical element of the CPS implementation strategy.
The need to leverage the technical and financial resources o f the development partners i s
warranted by Romania’s relatively large requirements across sectors, including the demands

33

Romania Country Partnership Strategy

arising from EU membership obligations. Accordingly, the Bank intends to design programs
and projects that integrate the comparative advantage o f the development partners and ensure
an optimal investment impact for Romania. I n this framework, the Bank will continue to
offer i t s international expertise and design systemic approaches which will enable other
partners to participate in financing and cost sharing. The experience derived from ongoing
joint projects in Romania, such as the Health Sector Reform APL 2 co-financed together with
EIB, or in the New Member States, such as Poland or the Baltic states, will form the
foundation o f this approach.

94.
I n building partnerships, the Country Office (CO) will continue its proactive
work in outreach and communication. The CO plays a lead role in the dialogue with the
Government on key policy aspects and in resolving day-to-day implementation issues. It
functions on a highly decentralized basis, with a large number of supervision and project
preparation tasks delegated to the local staff across the sectors. Currently ten projects are
being supervised and three are being prepared by TTLs in the CO. The Government highly
appreciates the just-in-time service which was further improved with the relocation and
strengthening of the procurement and financial management functions and disbursement
services in the CO.
G.

Lending Scenarios

95,
For FY06-09, a flexible lending program of between $450 to $550 million per
year i s proposed to support the strategic objectives o f the CPS. The base case lending
(Annex B3a) would be investment projects most of which are subject to pre-conditions of
appropriate policy and acceptable medium term expenditure framework as described in Table
7. High case lending (Annex B3a) would be a combination of investment and development
policy lending where the latter would require maintenance of an appropriate macroeconomic
framework as per OP 8.60 and the indicators in Table 7. A periodic assessment of the
macroeconomic framework and performance would be done by the Bank in consultation with
the Fund and the EU. Should the macroeconomic assessment indicate that the environment
i s such that investment lending would not achieve its objectives, there would be a low case
scenario of AAA and global goods type of lending such as the Avian Flu operation. Bank
exposure i s manageable and even at maximum lending, the Bank’s exposure will remain
below the guideline thresholds, and some indicators will continue to decline.
96.
Country financing parameters have been prepared and agreed with the
Government. Bank financed projects are fully integrated into the budget and are well
aligned with the Government’s priorities and development program. The Bank’s lending
program represents a small share o f the Government’s overall spending with the EU
providing the bulk of external sources of funds post accession. Whatever the sources of
funds, public expenditures are subject to the same overall government fiscal rules and
policies. In light of these factors, and provided that lending stays within the overall CPS
envelope, the Bank could finance up to 100 percent of costs o f individual operations.
Annex D summarizes the Country Financing Parameters for Romania.

34

Romania Countw PartnershiD Stratem

Table 7: Policy Performance Indicators
High Case Per
Maintenance o f an Appropriate Macroeconomic
Policy Framework

rmance Benchmarks
The Bank will periodically assess Romania’s
macroeconomic performance and policy framework in
consultation with the Fund and EU. The following
indicators will be used in monitoring performance and
the policy stance:

Before accession to EU:
Continued robust and sustainable real economic
growth.
Maintenance of a public sector deficit consistent
with macroeconomic stability.
Prudent public wage policy.
Continued disinflation.

Continued Satisfactory Progress in Structural
Reforms

Base Case Per

Energy Sector

Infrastructure Sector

Agriculture Sector

After accession to EU:
As above plus:
Progress towards compliance with EU Growth
and Stability Pact provisions
m
Implementation o f the convergence program
with the EIJ
Continued progress in the implementation o f measures
agreed under the PAL program:
Privatization of SOEs under AVAS
Privatization of energy distribution companies
Liquidation o f non-viable mining companies
Reduction o f subsidies to the mining sector
Liberalization o f electricity market
Amendment of employment protection legislation
Implementation of public administration reforms in
particular the pay and employment strategy for civil
service.
Pmance Benchmarks

Continued progress in the reduction of energy
subsidies
Continued progress in the implementation o f
privatization and tariff adjustment programs as agreed
in the PAL program.
Implementation of a sustainable financing program
for maintenance and rehabilitation of transport

program
Maintenance o f policy environment conducive to
farm consolidation, restructuring and improvement in
the operations o f land market
Implementation of acquis commitments on the
integration o f Romanian farmers into the EU common

Romania Country Partnership Strutem

H.

35

Results Based Monitoring and Evaluation

97.
The CPS results monitoring and evaluation will be done by the existing PAL
structures that manage and coordinate multi-sectoral programs, together with the
Department for Program Implementation and Structural Adjustment, part of the
Chancellery of the Cabinet. The PAL program monitoring and evaluation i s done by a
PAL Implementation Unit (PIU) established in the Chancellery of the Prime Minister’s
Office and a Public Policy Unit established as permanent body in the office of the General
Secretary of Government. The PIU will expand its work to the CPS in monitoring and
evaluating a set o f performance indicators, producing quarterly reports on progress in
implementation and outcomes, and highlighting areas that necessitate Government
intervention. The Department for Program Implementation and Structural Adjustment
monitors the implementationof the programs financed from external sources, including from
EU pre-accession funds. The statistical capacity at the ministry level established under the
PAL program will be strengthened and expanded to other offices. In addition, the lending
operations will include components to ensure capacity for program and results monitoring
and evaluation at the ministry level. There will be bi-annual meetings o f a CPS monitoring
committee composed of Government and Bank representatives to review the CPS progress,
including the updating the results matrix to reflect new information and developments. The
results matrix will be updated and extended as part o f the CPS Progress Report.

IV.

Risk Management and Creditworthiness

98.
Sustained progress in implementing the reform program will be affected by both
political risk and weaknesses in institutional capacity. A delay in EU membership could
result in political turmoil that could adversely impact the implementation o f the reform
program. In addition, strengthening institutional capacity would have to be an important part
of the government agenda to ensure effective absorption of EU funds. Nonetheless, the EU
accession process has been the strongest incentive for structural and institutional reforms and
achieving membership remains the main priority for all parliamentary parties. This would
focus Government efforts on critical reforms, especially those identified in the EC Progress
Reports as lagging in terms of implementation. The EC closely monitors progress on
reforms, and will continue to do so after accession. In addition, the periodic Bank
assessment of the macroeconomic environment and review o f compliance with policy
performance benchmarks to govern the level of Bank lending provide a mechanism for
dealing with risks to the Bank program.
99.
Failure to promptly address emerging weaknesses in the macroeconomic
framework could affect adversely the absorption o f EU funds and structural reforms.
As discussed in Section I.B, macroeconomic imbalances have widened and the Bank shares
the concern - articulated by the Fund during the Article I V Board - about the size of the
budget deficit and its impact on the current account and the disinflation process.
Nonetheless, the Government recognizes that sustaining strong growth requires
macroeconomic stabilization and further economic adjustment. After accession, the EU
Growth and Stability Pact (SGP) and other EU mechanisms and instruments applicable to all
member states, as well expectations of future EMU (Euro-zone) membership which requires
meeting the Maastricht economic convergence criteria, provide a framework for
policymaking. Nonetheless, the Maastricht and SGP conditions may not be as detailed and
finely tuned to individual country circumstances as Fund arrangement conditionalities and
advice.

36

Romania Country Partnership Strategy

100. The Romanian banking sector seems well-positioned to absorb adverse shocks,
but attention needs to be paid to medium-term vulnerabilities. Romania made
substantial progress in consolidating its financial sector since 1999, when bank restructuring
took hold. With the recent privatization o f BCR, the share of private ownership in the system
exceeds 90 percent. The sector i s dominated by the branches of important European banks,
which account for over 70 percent o f total assets in the system. The Financial Sector
Assessment Program (FSAP) which evaluated the banking sector in 2003 concluded that the
Romanian banks were well capitalized, rates o f return on equity and capital-adequacyratios
were high, and the size of non-performing loans - at less than 3 percent of total loans - was
manageable. Nonetheless, the risks o f a strong credit expansion would have to be managed.
Bank vulnerability indicators require close and constant scrutiny, especially given the large
and growing exposure o f some European banks to the fast-expanding Eastern European
market.

101. Creditworthiness of the country has improved significantly in the last few years.
Driven by the modernization requirements o f EU accession, total external debt outstanding
and disbursed i s projected to increase from around US$33 billion in 2005 to around US$52
billion at the end of 2009. However, as economic growth will likely continue to remain
robust, the ratio of total external debt to GDP i s expected to only slowly increase from
around 33.5 percent currently. During this period, total debt service i s likely to grow
moderately to around US$6.5 -7 billion per year in 2009. FDI inflows, remittances from
Romanians working abroad (estimated at a steady flow o f over Euro 3.5 billion per year) and
moderate public borrowing should easily cover debt servicing during 2005-09.

102. I n the absence of substantial adverse shocks to the economy, no servicing
problems are envisaged for the country's foreign debt obligations. Official reserves have
reached record highs, driven by the need of the central bank to sterilize large capital inflows
to prevent a massive domestic currency appreciation. Short term debt, although fast growing
in 2005, i s s t i l l below 6 percent of GDP," limiting the country's vulnerability to unexpected
reverses in capital flows. As domestic interest rates have been on a steep downward trend in
2005, the Government's intention i s to resort to larger extent than in the past to domestic
savings to finance the fiscal deficit, which, ceteris paribus, should reduce the need to seek
external capital.
103. The share of the public and publicly guaranteed debt in total external debt (now
around 44 percent) i s expected to continue to decline, despite the large financing
requirements to meet EU accession standards. Because of the major role the IFIs played
as lenders of last resort in Romania's external financing in the late nineties and the country's
constrained access to capital markets at the time, preferred creditors still account for a
relatively high percentage o f the public and publicly guaranteed debt service. This share
fluctuates around 20-25 percent, with a peak o f 34.6 percent in 2004. However, the ability of
Romania and Romanian companies to raise public and private debt on the international
markets at a reasonable cost has improved remarkably in the last few years, as reflected by
the more than halving of the yields of the Romanian debt since 2001, now traded only
slightly above the EU benchmarks. A rapid increase in private debt i s projected, concomitant
with a decline in the share of public and publicly guaranteed debt, which should come below
40 percent o f total debt outstanding by 2009.
~~

loIMF,

Article I V assessment (2006).

37

Romania Country Partnership Stratem

Table 8: IBRD Exposure Percentage Ratios for Romania 2002-2009

Preferred creditor
DS/public DS
IBRD DS/public and
publicly guaranteed DS
IBRD DSKGS
IBRD TDO (US$ mn)
Share of IBRD portfolio

(%I

2003
24.8

2004
34.6

2005
23.2

2006
25.2

2007
24.1

2008
23.3

2009
22.6

11.7

9.9

10.6

11.5

11.0

10.6

10.3

1.o
2239.2
2.0

0.8
2522
2.0

0.8
2509
2.4

0.7
2503
2.5

0.7
2547.4
2.5

0.7
2626
2.5

0.7
2720
2.5

Source: World Bank staff estimates.
Notes: DS = debt service; XGS = exports o f goods and services; TDO = total debt outstanding.

104. The Bank’s exposure to Romania will continue to remain manageable, with no
major downside risks foreseeable in the medium term. The Bank remains a large creditor
to Romania, accounting for about 7.6 percent o f the total debt outstanding and 10.6 percent
o f the public and publicly guaranteed debt service at the end o f 2005. The EU integration
process, through the commitments assumed under the acquis as well as the obligations
deriving from membership post accession such as those coming under the Growth and
Stability Pact, i s expected to provide an anchor for continued macroeconomic consolidation.
Consequently, even if the Bank continues to remain engaged on a significant scale in the
reform process in Romania, i t s relative exposure, as defined by the standard benchmarks, will
remain below the guideline thresholds and some will continue to decline (see Table 8). Debt
service to IBRD i s projected to decline to around 0.7 percent o f GNFS exports by 2009, from
around 0.8 percent currently. The share of IBRD debt in total public and publicly guaranteed
debt will decline to 13.6 percent by 2009 (5.3 percent of total debt outstanding), as other
large preferred creditors, especially European banks, will play a more active role in financing
Romania’s EU integration.

Annex A2
Page 1 o f 2

Romania at a glance
Europe 8
Central
Romania
Asia

POVERTY and SOCIAL
2004
Population, mid-year (millions)
GNI per capita (Atlas method, US$)
GNI (Atlas method, US$ billions)

5/16/06

Lowermiddleincome

21 7
2,950
64 3

472
3,290
1,553

2,430
1,580
3,847

-0 5
-0 3

-0.1
-0.5

10
07

64
68
29

Developmentdiamond'
Life expectancy
T

Average annual growth, 1998-04
Population (%)
Labor force (%I

GNI
per
capita

Most recent estimate (latest year available, 1998-04)
Poverty (% of population below national poverty line)
Urban population (% of total population)
Life expectancy at birth (years)
Infant mortality (per 7,000 live births)
Child malnutrition (% of children under 5)
Access to an improved water source (% ofpopulation)
Literacy (% ofpopulatlon age 15+)
Gross primary enrollment I% of school-age population)
Male
Female

19
55
70
18
3
57
97
99
100
98

91
97
101
103
101

49
70
33
11
81
90
114
115
113

"#,

*

Gross
primary
enrollment

lg*

1

Access to improved water source
Romania

I

Lower-middle-income group

KEY ECONOMIC RATIOS and LONG-TERM TRENDS
1984

1994

2003

2004

GDP (US$ billions)
Gross capital formationiGDP
Exports of goods and servicesiGDP
Gross domestic savingsiGDP
Gross national savings/GDP

30 1
24 8
24 9
22 7
23 2

57.3
24.6
36.3
16.7
18.0

73 2
24 8
37 1
15 4
17 5

Current account balanceiGDP
Interest paymentsiGDP
Total debffGDP
Total debt sewiceiexports
Present value of debffGDP
Present value of debffexports

-1 4
08
28 1
86

-5.8
2.0
42.3
16.2

-7 5
14
29 7
17 2

(average annual growth)
GDP
GDP per capita
Exports of goods and services

1984-94

1994-04

2003

2004

2004-08

-3.8
-3.8

1.5
2.0
10.5

52
55
71

8.3
8.4
15.9

51
53
82

1984

1994

..

STRUCTURE of the ECONOMY
(% of GDP)
Agriculture
Industry
Manufacturing
Services

13 0
37 9
31 5
49 1

63 5
13 8
27 0

70 3
12 6
43 8

69 5
15 1
46 5

1984-94

1994-04

2003

2004

13
-5 1

-02
12

50
46

22 2
62

Household final consumption expenditure
General gov't final consumption expenditure
Imports of goods and services

(average annual growth)
Agriculture
Industry
Manufacturing
Services
Household final consumption expenditure
General gov't final consumption expenditure
Gross capital formation
Imports of goods and services

Trade

T
savings

23

52

61

34
-0 2
26
12 1

72
46
92
13 6

10 8
46
10 0
18 3

I

Indebtedness
Romania
Lower-middle-income group

'

5
3
1
2

21
46
31
32

Economic ratios'

2

0

~
*

I

I

Growth of capital and GDP (Yo)

-GCF

*GDP

I

Growth of exports and imports (%)

10

-

00

01

02

03

04

Note 2004 data are preliminary estimates
*The diamonds show four key indicators in the country (in bold) compared with its income-group average If data are missing, the diamond will
be incomplete

Annex A2
Page 2 o f 2

Romania
PRICES and GOVERNMENT FINANCE
Domestic prices
(% change)
Consumer prices
Implicit GDP deflator

1984

(US$ mlihonsj
Total exports (fob)
Metals
Minerals
Manufactures
Total imports (ci0
Food
Fuel and energy
Capital goods

2004

136 7
138 9

15 3
19.4

9.3
15.8

31 1
35
-2 2

29 7
1.2
-2 3

29.4
2.0
-1.2

1984

1994

2003

2004

12 646

6 151
1065
714
3 754
7 109
661
1906
1782

17,618
2,282
1,482
12,534
23,983
1,737
2,615
7,017

23,516
3,630
1,945
17,126
32,638
2,129
3,548
10,358

99
98
100

99
99
100

03

6 543
10 334

1540

Export price index (2000=1001
Import price index (2000=100)
Terms of trade (2000=100)
BALANCE of PAYMENTS

2003

1984

1994

2003

2004

13,486
11,108
2 378

7 195
7 777
-582

20,646
25,113
-4,467

27,121
33,996
-6,875

-659
0

-129
283

-705
1,861

-1,693
3,101

Current account balance

1,719

-428

-3,311

-5,467

Financing items (net)
Changes in net reserves

-1 591
-128

1046
-618

4,445
-1,134

11,305
-5,838

1598
1 655 1

9,364
33,200.1

18.191
32,636.6

(US$ millions)
Exports of goods and services
Imports of goods and services
Resource balance
Net income
Net current transfers

Memo:
Reserves including gold (US$ mllllons)
Conversion rate (DEC, local/US$)
EXTERNAL DEBT and RESOURCE FLOWS
(US$ mllllons)
Total debt outstanding and disbursed
IBRD
IDA

1984

1994

2003

2004

6 983
1836
0

8 454
1009
0

24,267
2,370
0

21,739
2,265
0

Total debt service
IBRD
IDA

1981
365
0

4 565
63
0

5,530
317
0

5,210
321
0

0
13
-352

104
745
306
263

173
-1,973

-27
-2,325

Composition of net resource flows
Official grants
Official creditors
Private creditors
Foreign direct investment (net inflows)
Portfolio equity (net inflows)
World Bank program
Commitments
Disbursements
Principal repayments
Net flows
Interest payments
Net transfers
DeveloDment Economics

Inflation (%)
80 Ti

Government finance
(% of GDP, includes current grants)
Current revenue
Current budget balance
Overall surplusldeficit
TRADE

1994

9
200
-192
164
-356

475
228
228
63
165

131
236
-106
85
-191

99

1

I

00

02

01

" * GDP deflator

03

04

-0-W

Export and import levels (US$ mill.)
35 000

30.000
25 000

4

1

20 000

1 s 000
10 000
5 000
0
98

99

00

01

Exports

02

03

04

Imports

Current account balance to GDP ( O h )
0
1

2
3
4
5
6

7
-8

1

i

Composition of 2004 debt (US$ mill.)

G 2 866

I
74
226
-152
91
-243

"

04

i

A 2 262 ,93

F 18396

A - IBRD
B - IDA
C - IMF

D -Other multilateral

E - Bilateral

F - Private
G - Short-term

5116/06

Annex 82
Page 1 of 1

-

CAS Annex B2 Romania
Selected Indicators* of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
As of 5/9/2006

Indicator
Portfolio Assessment
Number of Projects Under Implementation a
Average Implementation Period (years)
Percent of Problem Projects by Number a , c
Percent of Problem Projects by Amount ai
Percent of Projects at Risk by Number a,
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount
Disbursement Ratio (YO)e
Portfolio Management
CPPR during the year (yesho)
Supervision Resources (total US$)
Average Supervision (US$lproject)
Memorandum Item
Proj Eva1 by OED by Number
Proj Eva1 by OED by Amt (US$ millions)
OO
/
of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Number
Yo of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt

2003

2004

2005

2006

25
3.4
8.0
9.7
8.0
9.7
27.2

21
3.4
9.5
9.5
9.5
9.5
17.9

22
3.2
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
16.0

23
3.5
4.3
5.0
4.3
5.0
8.3

Yes
1686
73.3

Yes
1466
72.1

Yes
1322
66.1

Yes
1776
72.1

Since FY 80 Last Five FYs
56
17
5,490.0
1,692.6
21.4
0.0
21.6
0.0

a. As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY).
b. Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio.
C. Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) and/or implementation progress (IP).
d. As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
e. Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the
beginning of the year: Investment projects only.
* All indicators are for projects active in the Portfolio, with the exception of Disbursement Ratio,
which includes all active projects as well as projects which exited during the fiscal year.

-

Annex B3a
Page 1 of 2

-

CAS Annex B3 IBRD Program Summary Romania
As of 5/9/2006

ProDosed IBRD Base-Case Lendina Proaram a
Strategic Rewards b
(H/M/L)

Implementation b
Risks (H/M/L)

Fiscal year

Proj ID

2006

Judicial Reform
*Knowledge Economy
Revenue Administration Reform
Social Inclusion
Municipal Services
Su b-total

130.0
60.0
70.0
58.5
128.5
447.0

H
M
H
M
M

2007

Agriculture
Transport
Environment Management
Avian Flu
Sub-total

65.0
150.0
50.0
35.0
300.0

M
M
M
M

M
M
M
L

Rural and Regional Development
Energy 1
Sub-total

50.0
150.0
200.0

M
M

M
M

Business Environment
Energy 2 or Transport 2
Sub-total

50.0
150.0
200.0

M
M

M
M

2008

2009

'

TOTAL

US$(M)

1,147.0

* Knowledge Economy is a carry over from FY05
There are three possible operations in FYO8-09: two partial risk guarantees of about $50m each and a District Heating loan of about $75m.
Should these loans materialize, they would not result in an increase of the total annual lending amounts in the CPS, as compensating
reductions in the planned lending program would then be introduced.

The loans are all investment
GEF ($18m) to support environment is planned in FY07

a. This table presents the proposed program for fiscal years 2006 - 2009

b. For each project, indicate whether the strategic rewards and implementation risks are expected to be high (H), moderate (M), or low (L)

-

Annex B3a
Page 2 of 2

CAS Annex B3 IBRD Program Summary - Romania
As of 51912006

Proposed IBRD High-Case Lending Program a
Strategic Rewards b
(H/M/L)

Implementation b
Risks (H/M/L)

Fiscal year

Proj ID

2006

Judicial Reform
*Knowledge Economy
Revenue Administration Reform
Social Inclusion
Municipal Services
Sub-total

130.0
60.0
70.0
58.5
128.5
447.0

2007

PAL 2
Human Development DPL 1
Agriculture
Transport
Environment Management
Avian Flu
Sub-total

150.0
100.0
65.0
150.0
50.0
35.0
550.0

2008

PAL 3
Human Development DPL 2
Rural and Regional Development
Energy 1
Sub-total

150.0
100.0
50.0
150.0
450.0

H
H
M
M

H
H
M
M

2009

Fiscal and Governance Programmatic DPL
Human Development DPL 3
Business Environment
Energy 2 or Transport 2
Sub-total

150.0
100.0
50.0
150.0
450.0

H
H
M
M

H
H
M
M

TOTAL

US$(M)

H
M
H
M
M

1,897.0

* Knowledge Economy is a carry over from FY05

Share of DPLs could go up to 55 percent in some years
There are three possible operations in FYO8-09: two partial risk guarantees of about $50m each and a District Heating loan of about $75m.
Should these loans materialize, they would not result in an increase of the total annual lending amounts in the CPS, as compensating
reductions in the planned lending program would then be introduced.
Loans other than DPL or PAL are investment
GEF ($18m) to support environment is planned in FY07
a. This table presents the proposed program for fiscal years 2006 - 2009
b. For each project, indicate whether the strategic rewards and implementation risks are expected to be high (H), moderate iM), or low (L)

Annex B3b
Page 1 of 1

CAS Annex B3 (IFC & MIGA) for Romania
As of April 2006

-

Romania IFC FY 2003-2006

IFC Original Commitments (US$m)

2003

2004

2005

86.57 153.31 143.40 146.29

Sector (YO)

Chemicals
Finance & Insurance
Utilities
Transportation and Warehousing
Industrial & Consumer Products

Total

2006

87%

00%

62%
3 8%

13%

24%
65%
11%

100%

00%

00%

100%

Loans
Equity
Other

99%
1Yo

28%
72%

62%
38%

95%
5 YO

Total

100%

100%

100%

00%

Investment instrument("/.)

Guarantee Program
M I G A Outstanding Exposure (Gross Exposure, $ milllion)
As o f end o f fiscal year
FYOl F Y 0 2 F Y 0 3 F Y 0 4 F Y 0 5

FY06
through
3/31/06

Sectoral Distribution

1393

1795

1985

3195

275 I

250 4

Infrastructure

00

00

00

00

00

00

Mining

00

00

00

00

00

Oil & Gas

00

00

00

00

00

00
00

I50

150

1 1 3-_

1 1.3

Finance

Agribusiness/Manufacturing/Services/Tourism

150

154.3

194.5 213.5

330.9 286.5
-

11 3
-~~
~

261.7

MIGA's Risk Profile

91 5

1246

1985

3195

275 I

250 4

Expropriation

1340

1742

1770

3022

2579

250 4

War & Civil Disturbance

1013

1142

1295

121 6

00

00

863

992

1145

1330

113

11 3

MIGA's Gross Exposure in Country

154.3

194.5

213.5

330.9

286.5

261.7

YOShare o f MIGA's Gross Exposure

3.0%

3.7%

4.2%

6.4%

5.6%

4.7%

MIGA Net Exposure in Country

118 0

134.8

126 8

179.4

139.0

121.5

YOShare o f MIGA's Net Exposure

3.7%

4.2%

4.0%

5.5%

4.4%

3.6%

Transfer Restriction

Breach o f Contract

Annex B4
Page 1 of 1

-

CAS Annex B4 - Summary of Nonlending Services Romania
As of 5/9/2006

Product

cost (US$OOO)

Completion FY

Audience a

Objective

Recent completions
Energy, Transport, Urban & Water Strategy Study
C FAA
Poverty Assessment
ROSC Accounting and Audit
Post FSAP TA
FSAP
EU Accession CEM
Capital Markets Assessment
Jiu Valley Development
Energy Sector Study & TA
Pension Reform
Country Systems
Road Sector Investment
Ag ricu Itu re Study
Joint E C N B CPAR
Public Expenditure Management

85
90
191
135
89
500
329
124
74
98
23
31
45
55
54
42 3

03
03
03
03
03
04
04
04
04
04
05
05
05
05
06
06

KG. PS
KG. PS
KG. PS
KG. PS
KG. PS
KG. PS
KG. PS
KG. PS
KG. PS
KG. PS
KG. PS
KG. PS
KG. PS
KG. PS
KG. PS
KG. PS

Underway
Public Finance Study 1
Municipal Finance Policy Note
PSD Policy Note
RurallRegional TA

474
184
54
105

06
06
06
06

KG. PS
KG. PS
KG. PS
KG. PS

Planned
Public Finance Review 2
Macroeconomic Assessment
PSD Policy Note 2
Poverty Monitoring
Fiduciary Monitoring
ROSC
Macroeconomic Assessment
CFAA Update
Poverty Monitoring
Policy Notes (tbd)
ROSC
CEM
Macroeconomic Assessment
Policy Notes (tbd)
CPAR Update
Poverty Monitoring
ROSC

150
140
56
60
30
10
140
120
60
38
10
360
140
147
120
60
10

07
07
07
07
07
07
08
08
08
08
08
09
09
09
09
09
09

KG. PS
KG. PS
KG. PS
KG. PS
KG. PS
KG. PS
KG. PS
KG. PS
KG. PS
KG. PS
KG. PS
KG. PS
KG. PS
KG. PS
KG. PS
KG. PS
KG. PS

a. Government, donor, Bank, public dissemination.
b. Knowledge generation, public debate, problem-solving.

Annex B5
Page 1 of 1

Romania Social Indicators
Same regionlincorne group

Latest single year

POPULATION
Total population, mid-year (millions)
Growth rate (% annual average for period)
Urban population (YOof population)
Total fertility rate (births per woman)

1975-80

1985-90

1998-2004

Europe &
Central
Asia

Lowermiddleincome

22.2
0.9
46.1
2.4

23.2
0.4
53.2
1.8

21.9
-0.5
54.7
1.3

472.1
-0.1
63.6
1.6

2,430.3

2,920
2,540
1,721

3,290

1,580

2

1,730
1
3

2.5
3.5

1.o

48.6
2.1

POVERTY
(% of population)
National headcount index
Urban headcount index
Rural headcount index
INCOME
GNI per capita (US$)
Consumer price index (1995=100)
Food price index (1995=100)
INCOMElCONSUMPTlON DISTRIBUTION
Gini index
Lowest quintile (% of income or consumption)
Highest quintile ( % of income or consumption)
SOCIAL INDICATORS
Public expenditure
Health (YOof GDP)
Education (YOof GDP)
Net primary school enrollment rate
(% of age group)
Total
Male
Female
Access to an improved water source
(% of population)
Total
Urban
Rural
Immunization rate
(% of children ages 72-23 months)
MeasIes
DPT
Child malnutrition (YOunder 5 years)
Life expectancy at birth
(years)
Total
Male
Female
MortaIity
Infant (per 1,000 live births)
Under 5 (per 1,000 live births)
Adult (1 5-59)
Male (per 1,000 population)
Female (per 1,000 population)
Maternal (modeled, per 100,000 live births)
Births attended by skilled health staff (YO)

30.3
7.9
41.0

2.8

4.2
3.5

4.2
4.4

81
81
81

89
89
88

89
89
88

57
91
16

91
98
80

81
93
70

92
96

97
97
3

92
90

86
88
11

69
67
72

70
67
73

70
66
74

68
64
73

70
68
72

29
36

27
32

18
20

29
36

33
42

216
119

237
114

260
117
49
98

317
136
61

192
123
111
86

Note: 0 or 0.0 means zero or less than half the unit shown. Net enrollment rate: break in series between 1997 and 1998 due to
change from W E D 7 6 to ISCED97. Immunization: refers to children ages 12-23 months who received vaccinations before one
year of age.
World Development Indicators database, World Bank - 08/29/05

Annex B6
Page 1 of 2

Romania - Key Economic Indicators

Indicator
National accounts (as /o' of GDP)
Gross domestic producta
Agriculture

2001

2002

2003

Estimated
2005
2006

2004

100

100

15

13

100
12

100
13

Projected
2007
2008

2009

13

100
12

100
11

100
IO

100.0
9

100

Industry

37

38

36

38

38

39

39

40

40

Services

48

49

52

49

49

49

50

50

51

Total consumption
Gross domestic investment
Government investment
Private investment
(includes increase in stocks)

85
21
3
18

83
22
3
19

85
23
4
19

84
23
3
20

84
24
3
21

85
24
3
21

85
25
4
21

84
26
4
22

84
26
4
22

EXPOITS

(GNFS)~
Imports (GNFS)

33
41

35
41

37
45

37
46

32
42

31
40

30
39

30
38

28
36

Gross domestic savings

15

16

I5

14

12

14

15

16

16

Gross national savingsc
Savings-investment

16
-5

17
-5

17
-6

15
-8.0

14
-10

16
-8

17
-8

18
-8

19
-7

40165

45749

56950

73 167

98000

110500

122500

134000

152800

1720

1920

23 I O

2887

3530

3989

4507

5093

5756

5 .o
5.2

4.9
5.4

8.3
7.4

4. I
5.0

5.2
5.5

5.6
5.8

5.6
5.8

5.6
5.8

Real annual per capita growth rates (X, calculated from 1993 prices)
Gross domestic product at market prices
5.8
5.2
Total consumption
5.9
5.0
Private consumption
6.9
5.2

5.1
6.9
7.6

7.0
9.0
11.7

4.2
8.5
10.1

5.3
6.6
7.5

5.7
6.0
6.6

5.7
6.0
6.2

5.7
6.0
5.9

Memorandum items
Gross domestic product
(US$ million at current prices)
GNP per capita (US$, Atlas method)

Real annual growth rates (%, calculated from 1993 prices)
5.7
Gross domestic product at market prices
5.9
Gross domestic income

Balance o f Payments (US$ millions)

(GNFS~
Merchandise F O B

13418
1 I385

16223
13876

20789
17618

27121
23219

31189
26702

33809
28945

36683
31405

39764
34043

42945
36766

Imports (GNFS)~
Merchandise F O B
Resource balance
Net current transfers
Current account balance

16502
14354
-3084
1143
-2128

18825
16487
-2602
1536
-1572

25694
22150
-4905
1854
-3098

33996
30127
-6875
2700
-5488

40796
36152
-9606
4390
-8820

440 19
39008
- 10209
5000
-9503

47496
42090
-10813
5500
-10168

51248
45415
-1 I 4 8 4
6000
-10854

55348
49048
- 12403
6000
-12377

1175
1652
1087
565
925

1090
1555
93 1
624
812

1805
I302
1191

5020
1656
1I71

6250
1934
1027

8400
243 1
520

1 1 1.0

484.9

907.2

191 1.6

6600
3510
I243
2267

5000
4104
1404
2700

5000
5032
1786
3246

-1624

-1885

-1019

-7862

-7265

-7000

-4500

-4000

-4000

-7.7

-5.7

-8.6

-9.4

-9.8

-9.2

-8.8

-8.6

-8.1

9.8
19.1

21.8
14.8

27.0
34.4

11.3
15.0

8.1
8.4

8.4
7.9

8.5
7.9

8.4
7.9

8
8

EXPOIIS

Net private foreign direct investment
Long-term loans (net)
Official
Private
Other capital (net. incl. errors g: ornrnissions)

Change in reservesd
Memorandum items
Resource balance (% o f GDP)
Real annual growth rates ( Y R 9 3 prices)
Merchandise exports (FOB)
Merchandise imports (CIF)

1010

(Continued)

Annex B6
Page 2 of 2

Romania - Key Economic Indicators
(Continued)

Indicator

2001

2002

2003

2004

Estimated
2005

2006

Projected
2007

2008

2009

Public finance (as % o f G D P a t market prices)e
30.1
Current revenues
30.1
Current expenditures
Current account surplus (+) or deficit (-)
0.0
3.1
Capital expenditure
I.7
Foreign financing

29.7
29.0
0.7
3.2
1.6

29.8
28.6
1.2
3.5
2.0

30.1
29.2
0.9
3.3
0.9

30.4
29.3
1.1
2.7
1.2

29.8
29.2
0.6
3.2
1.2

29.2
28.7
0.5
3.4
1.2

30.8
29.7
1.1
3.6
I.4

31.2
30.1
1.1
3.8
1.4

Monetary indicators
M2lGDP
Growth o f M 2 (%)
Real credit to non-government growth (YO)

23.2
46.2
26.0

24.7
38.2
29.6

24.0
23.3
56.7

25.5
40.1
40.5

26.8
33.8
41.9

27.3
23.9
35.0

29.0
15.0
30.0

32.0
13.0
25.0

34.0
10.0
18.0

78.9
69.6
113.3
1.6

79.2
69.5
113.9
2.7

65.0
71.2
91.3
0.4

65. I
72.4
89.9
4.0

65.8
71.6
91.9
17.0

66.5
72.5
91.7

34.5
37.9

22.5
24.2

15.3
19.2

11.9
15.9

9.0
12.3

7.9
10.6

4.8
7.3

3.8
5.4

3.3
4.6

Price indices( YR93 =loo)
Merchandise export price index
Merchandise import price index
Merchandise terms o f trade index
REER appreciation

Consumer price index (Y change)
GDP deflator (% change)

a.
b.
c.
d.
e.

GDP at factor cost
"GNFS" denotes "goods and nonfactor services."
Includes net unrequited transfers excluding official capital grants,
Includes use o f IMF resources.
Consolidated central government.

Annex 87
Page 1 of 1

Annex B7. Romania - K e y Exposure Indicators
Indicator
Total debt outstanding and

2001

2002

12363.6

15699.2

2003
19693.0

2004

Estimated
2005

2006

26559.6

32830.0

37238.5

39935.0

44220.0

51799.2

13023.7

14504.0

14696.5

15312.5

16750.0

19252.8

13535.9

18326.0

22542.0

24622.5

27470.0

32546.4

2007

Projected
2008

2009

disbursed (TDO) (US$m)a
PPG (US$m)
Private (US$m)
1936

1037.6

2958.8

3020.4

Net disbursements (US$m)a

1652.0

Total debt service (TDS) (USSm)a

2600.4

35 1 1.5

3 106.0

3766.1

4538.4

4765.3

5500

Public debt service (US$m)

1726.3

2146

1810.2

2263.1

2234.6

2138.5

2433.5

2625.4

2819.0

Preferred creditor debt service (GS$m)

357.9

431.8

448.6

784

519.2

539

587.4

611.6

63 8

TDOiXGSb

92.1

96.8

94.7

97.9

105.3

110.1

108.9

111.2

120.6

TDOiGDP

30.7

34.3

34.6

36.3

33.5

33.7

32.6

33.0

33.9

TDSRGS

19.4

21.6

14.9

13.9

14.6

14.1

15.0

15.1

15.1

3739.2

4902

4676.4
6000

6014.4
6500

Debt and debt service indicators
(%)

IBRD exposure indicators (%)
IBRD DSipublic DS

6.6

8.9

11.7

9.9

10.6

11.5

11.0

10.6

10.3

Preferred creditor DSipublic

20.7

20.1

24.8

34.6

23.2

25.2

24.1

23.3

22.6

DS ("/o)c
1.5

1.2

1 .o

0.8

0.8

0.7

0.7

0.7

0.7

IBRD TDO (US$m)d
Share o f I B R D TDO in PPG(%)
Estimated IBRD disbursements (US$m)

1876.2

2253.5

2239.2

2521.9

2508.6

2503.4

2547.4

2626.1

2720.2

24. I

23.6

18.6

19.3

17.9

16.6

15.9

14.6

13.6

132.0

334.2

131.3

IBRD amortization

101.8

120.4

145.3

IBRD DSRGS

305
163.2

28 1

184

245

308

334

205.0

190.5

202.7

231.2

242.1

62.7

64.7

66.8

69.0

O f which present value o f
guarantees (US$m)
Share o f IBRD portfolio
IDA TDO (US$m)d

...

...

2.0%

...

...

2.4%

...

2.4%

...

2.5%

...

2.5%

...

2.5%

...

IFC (US$m)

Loans

71.6

54.5

29.0

Equity and quasi-equity IC

29.0

45.0

71.0

194.5

213.5

332.8

MICA (US$m)
MlGA guarantees
M emo

GDP (US$m)

40165

45749

56950

73167

98000

110500

122500

134000

152800

Export GNFS (US$m)

13418

16223

20789

27121

31189

33809

36683

39764

42945.5

IBRD debt service (US$m)

113.7

190.4

212.0

223

236.0

245

267

278

290

7774.4

9555.8

12071

13046.8

14046.8

15046.8

16046.8

18046.8

20046.8

PPG Debt (US$m)

a. Includes public and publicly guaranteed debt, private nonguaranteed, use o f IMF credits, net short-

term capital and other medium and long term credit.

a5

b

E

Y

14

d

I

Annex B8b
Page 1 of 1

CAS Annex B8 (IFC) for Romania
Romania
Statement o f IFC's
Held and Disbursed Portfolio
As o f April 2006
(In US Dollars Millions)
Held
FY Approval Company

1999 Ambro
2003 Arctic
I9981 20021 2( Banc Post
20031 20041 2( Banca Comerciala
2005 Banca Tiriac
1996 Danube Fund
2001 ICME
2004 Mindbank
2005 Petrotel-Lukoil
20021 20031 21 ProcreditRomania
0612711905 RGH
2004 RZB Romania
2003 Ro-Fin
2004 Romanian-Amer...
19941 199812( Romlease
2006 TTS SA
20041 2005
Transilvaniabank
2005 Unicredito
Total Portfolio:

Loan

0.7
9.8
0.0
66.5
26.3
0.0
6.8
0.0
35.0
5.0
0.0
10.0
4.8
3.0
0.9
17.4
49.8
9.3
245.3

Equity

0.0
0.0
14.8
111.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

2.0
47.2
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

Disbursed

Quasi Partic

0.0
0.0
0.0
93.1
0.0
0.0
0.0
7.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
20.0
0.0

175.0 120.1

0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
47.0
0.0
0.0
30.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

Arctic
BCR
Banat
Banvit Romania
Dobrogea
MFB Romania RI 1
Ro-Fin Mortgage
TTS
Transilvania I 1
Unicredit Leasin

Total Pending Commitment:

Loan Equity Quasi Partic
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.7
2.1
0.0
0.0
0.0
46.2
0.0 18.2
42.6
15.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
45.2
47.8
0.0 12.9
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
1.0
0.0
0.0
0.2
0.0
0.0
0.6
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.3
0.0
0.0

112.9

0.0

32.2

87.8

0.0
0.0
0.0
93.1
0.0
0.0
0.0
7.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
20.0
0.0

0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
47.0
0.0
0.0
30.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

164.0 120.1

77.0

0.7
0.0
9.8
0.0
0.0
14.8
66.5 111.0
26.3
0.0
0.0
0.0
6.8
0.0
0.0
0.0
35.0
0.0
5.0
2.0
0.0
36.2
10.0
0.0
4.7
0.0
3.0
0.0
0.9
0.0
17.4
0.0
37.4
0.0
9.3
0.0

77.0 232.8

Approvals Pending Commitment
2003
2006
2005
2005
2005
2003
2003
2006
2005
2005

Loan Equity Quasi Partic

0

i

... .

.

.

.

.

..

e

..

.

.

e

e

.

.

I.

I.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

. .

. .

.

e

e

e

e

e

e

e

e

e

.

.

e

e

e

m

e

e

e

e

e

*

.

Annex C
Page 1 o f 26

CAS COMPLETION REPORT
Country: Romania
Date o f CAS: June 19,2001

Date o f Progress Report: August 6, 2004
Period Covered by the CAS Completion Report: FY02-FY04
CAS Completed Report Prepared by:
Albert Martinez, Operations Adviser, and Catalin Pauna, Country Economist
Date o f CAS Completion Report: September 5, 2005 updated April 5, 2006

A.

LONGER TERM STRATEGIC GOALS

1.
The Comprehensive Development Framework (CDF) initiative in 1999 with
extensive consultations held through 2000 revealed a consensus in Romania around
two strategic goals: (a) poverty reduction and (b) EU accession. At the same time, the
following development priorities and constraints were highlighted: (a) ineffectiveness
of public institutions in particular the legal system; (b) integration with Western
Europe; (c) lack o f access to economic and social opportunities; (d) poverty in the
midst o f substantial natural endowment; and (e) a poorly functioning market
economy.

2.
The CDF process helped shape the agenda o f a new government which was
sworn into office in December 2000 and which obtained Parliamentary approval o f its
“Governing Program 2001 -2004.” The major objectives o f the program were: (a)
restoration o f economic growth; (b) reduction o f poverty and unemployment; (c)
fighting corruption; and (d) acceleration o f integration in the EU and NATO. The
main program pillars were: (a) ensuring macroeconomic stability; (b) improving the
quality o f government services, including the regulatory functions and the judiciary;
and (c) creating a business environment which attracts foreign and domestic investors
in both emerging SMEs and privatized enterprises.
3.
The areas o f focus o f the FY02-04 CAS were strongly aligned with the
Government’s strategic goals o f poverty reduction and growth. The CAS, which was
endorsed by the Government, had three main themes: (a) targeted poverty
interventions aimed at improving delivery o f key social services and revitalizing the
rural economy; (b) accelerating growth through private sector development; and (c)
strengthening public sector institutional capacity, including governance reform. Table
1 below illustrates the responsiveness o f the CAS to the CDF Strategic Goals and
Government Program.

Annex C
Page 2 o f 26

Improving the quality o f government
services, including the regulatory functions
and the judiciary
Creating a business environment which
attracts foreign and domestic investors in
both emerging SMEs and privatized
enterwises

j

1

Reform Study, Energy Sector Study and TA
PAL-I , PAL-2
PSAL-2, PAL-I, PAL-2, CEM, Financial
Sector Assessment Program; Capital Markets
Assessment

4.
While the CAS did not target explicitly EU accession and integration as
specific goals, the program nonetheless supported Romania‘s EU aspirations. The
CAS did not have strong and systematic linkages with the E U accession agenda and
priorities. In part, this was due to the lack o f a well defined EU framework from the
government at that time. There was neither an analysis o f E U accession priorities nor
a review o f Bank-EU complementarities as inputs to the preparation o f the CAS.
Consequently. the design o f projects generally did not incorporate EU accession as a
major criterion although some projects, especially during the latter part o f the CAS,
indicated complementarity with or support to the EU agenda. Nonetheless, the lack o f
systematic EU links in the CAS did not diminish the importance o f the themes
chosen, which mainly reflected Romania’s development needs and the Bank’s
corporate priorities. The CAS focused more on fundamental poverty, social and
economic growth issues which are important to the process o f EU integration.
5.
In the course o f the CAS implementation, the EU accession agenda began to
dominate Government priorities and actions. In response to this development,
towards the latter part o f the CAS period, the Bank strengthened synergy with the EU
in the areas o f special interest to the E U - such as public administration and judicial
reforms - mainly through the preparation o f the PAL program. There were intensive
and extensive consultations between the Bank and the EU on the PAL program,
ensuring maximum complementarity as well as consistency. Thus, the cooperation
and coordination between the EU and the Bank evolved into a more systematic one
towards the end o f the CAS period, and subsequently the operations in FY05 were
deliberately chosen and designed with E U accession and integration as a major
considerat ion.

Annex C
Page 3 o f 26

6.
The regular progress reports issued by the E U on the status o f progress o f
Romania towards accession increasingly became important signals and determinants
o f government priorities. These reports became important inputs to the design o f
Bank operations, such as the governance reforms in the PAL program and the Judicial
Reform Project which was approved by the Board in December 2005. The current
Government indicated that the immediate priority i s achieving EU accession by 2007,
which places importance on ensuring that the issues in the EU progress reports are
being adequately and expeditiously addressed. The current Government has
requested support from the Bank to enable the achievement o f the EU accession goal.
7.
The Fund and the Bank worked well together in setting the preconditions for
macroeconomic stability. After five failed programs, Romania completed an SBA in
2003 and the Fund approved a new precautionary SBA in July 2004 which would help
ensure that the macroeconomic environment remains stable. PSAL-2 complemented
the Fund arrangements by continuing the process o f enterprise and banking reforms,
which were critical to the imposition o f financial discipline and ensuring
macroeconomic stability. Moreover, PSAL-2 also focused on energy reforms, which
sought to reduce arrears that subsidized state owned enterprises. The PSAL-2 reforms
continued with the preparation o f the First Programmatic Adjustment Loan (PAL-I),
which was approved in September 2004. The Fund and the Bank programs were
closely coordinated throughout the CAS period.

8.
The SBA that was negotiated during the CAS period contains several
benchmarks that were also core reforms in the PAL program. While in some
countries, such an SBA design had been a source o f tension with respect to BankFund relations, in Romania the overlapping conditionalities improved synergies and
coordination between the two institutions. More important, the SBA design signalled
a common front between the Fund and the Bank and impressed on the authorities the
importance o f the reforms, as well as strengthened the link between the
macroeconomic stability objective o f the SBA with the structural and institutional
reforms supported by the Bank. The Fund relied on the Bank for the provision o f
expertise on the structural and institutional reforms rather than utilizing Fund staff or
consultants, and in the process helped ensure a consistent approach to issues. Table 2
shows the overlapping conditionalities between the Bank and Fund programs.

Annex C
Page 4 o f 26
Table 2. Overlapping Conditionalities o f SBA (left column) and PSAL-2 (right
column)
Privatization and liquidation o f SOEs
GoR to offer for sale and disposition the
1 Complete the sales o f 50 percent o f assets o f
following assets: Electroputere, Romvag.
Clujana, and I U G Craiova; have a draft
Antibiotice, Tractorul, I U G Clujana, Roman, purchase and sales agreement with a buyer by
Siderurgica, Nitramonia
end-2001. For Roman, Siderurgica, and
Nitramonia, start the implementation o f
restructuring plan (unbundling into viable
and nonviable entities) by end-2001.
Energy Sectoi
GOR will offer for sale through open
international competitive tender to strategic
buyers the two existing gas distribution
companies (Distrigaz Nord and Sud)
GOR will review privatization strategy
prepared by privatization advisor for the two
electricity distribution companies and offer
for sale controlling shares. GOR will adopt
privatization strategy for electricity
generation sector acceptable to the Bank

GOR will ensure that the level o f overall
cumulative YTD collections as % o f billings
o f Distrigaz Nord and Sud i s increased to a
level not lower than 97.5%. GOR will assure
that invoices payable to gas producers and
gas transmission companies, resulting from
gas delivery beginning January I,2002 will
be paid within 60 days
GOR will ensure that
Electrica: monthly cumulative collection
rate i s not less than 97.5% from January 2002
Termoelectrica: monthly collection rate o f
100% for electricity from January 2002
Termoelectrica: monthly collection rate o f
100% for district heating from Januarv 2002
Implement legislative package to unify
existing regulations under several laws and
eliminate distortionary incentives for each
type o f tax.
Plan to improve bankruptcy procedures.
Streamline bankruptcy procedures.

xestructuring
Privatization o f gas distribution companies,
Distrigaz Nord and Distrigaz Sud.

Privatization o f two distribution companies
by end-2002. To achieve this, the GORwill
agree with the World Bank and the E U on the
privatization strategy for these two
companies by end-2001, and undertake an
international tender for sale to a strategic
investor during 2002.
Submission o f monthly reports on the
implementation o f measures to improve
collections o f Distrigaz Nord and Distrigaz
Sud. Floors set on the cumulative collection
rates o f the following companies: Distrigaz
Nord, Distrigaz Sud and Termoelectrica.
Improve the collection rate for
Termoelectrica and the two gas distribution
companies (Distrigaz Nord and Sud).
The overall collection rates for
Termoelectrica and the two gas distribution
companies will be quantitative performance
criteria under the program.
Approve a new profit tax law by end 2001
that will unify existing regulations under
several laws and eliminate distortionary tax
Government will approve a new draft law on
bankruptcy in the banking industry prepared
by the N B R by end October 2001, and ensure
that it i s applicable by end-November 2001,
either through parliamentary approval or as a
government ordinance.

Annex C
Page 5 o f 26
Figures 1 - 6: Macro-Economic Indicators
__._____

Figure 2. CPI inflation

Figure 1. Real G D P

(YOchange, annual average)

(YOchange)
I60
I2 0
80

40

00
-4 0
-8 0
12 0
I60

L
-106 -116
1997

-9 1

1997

1998

I

I

1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004

1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004

u GDP annual growth
-m-

GDP growth. l996= 100

Figure 4 Current Account Balance
( % of GDP)

Figure 3. Fiscal balance
(% o f GDP)
0
-1
-2

-3
-4

-5
-6

-5 2

- j4

1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004
___

___..

~

I

J

-8

A

-1 0
-1 5
1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004

Figure 6. National Poverty and Extreme
Poverty

Figure 5. Regstered Unemployment
(YOo f civil active population)
14
12

104

II 8

105

IO
8

6
4
2
1997

0
1997

1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2 0 0 4

___

Source: Bank staff estimates

-National

IYIJU

I999

poverty
-

2OilO

2llOI

2002

?Oil3

2004

National extreme poverty

Annex C
Page 6 o f 26

9.

Romania made substantial progress towards achieving the longer term goals

set through the CDF process and the medium term objectives set by the new
Government. Two o f the notable achievements related to the EU accession goal were

the conclusion o f negotiations with the EU in December 2004 and the signing o f the
Accession Treaty in April 2005. Entry to the EU i s expected to take place on January
1, 2007. In addition, during the past four years, the economy grew robustly at 4.5-5.0
percent per year, with inflation declining from 40 percent in 2000 to 9.3 percent in
2004. Poverty has been declining, although the rate remains high relative to EU-8
countries. Structural reforms accelerated during the CAS period, mainly during the
latter part. Figures 1-6 track the performance o f Romania in several key areas.

10.
However, progress in institution building and governance reform, including in
the area o f anti-corruption, has been slow. Political commitment to governance
reforms was weak during most o f the CAS period. In addition, capacity to design and
implement comprehensive institution building programs was limited. Both the Bank
and the EU had been pushing for both public administration and judicial reforms, but
the Government began moving on these reforms only towards the end o f the CAS
period when the pressure o f completing the acquis communautaire increased and risk
o f delayed EU entry became more real. In particular, the negative evaluation in the
EU progress reports moved the Government into action. Despite the completion o f
negotiations, entry to the EU was conditioned on the fulfillment o f eleven actions, o f
which seven were related to governance reforms. Nonetheless, there was progress in
institution building in selected sectors or ministries supported by Bank projects,
including in the education, health, and energy sectors.
11,
In retrospect, linking the institution building theme o f the CAS with the EU
accession process should have been done earlier and more systematically. In
particular, the issue o f capacity to absorb EU funds could have been addressed by the
CAS and incorporated more deliberately into the design o f the operations although
two rural operations dealt with absorption o f EU funds. In addition, the Public
Expenditure Review could have looked into both fiscal policy and institutional
implications o f the investment requirements o f EU accession and the absorption o f
EU funds. Using the EU accession lens would have focused the attention o f the
Government on institution building and provided a framework for developing
priorities. The current Government has solicited Bank support towards improving
capacity to absorb EU funds, but with the accession date looming, initiatives to both
upgrade capacity as well as design appropriate policies may not achieve their impact
in a timely manner.
12.
Despite major achievements o f late, Romania continues to lag the EU-8 in
many areas and the reform agenda remains formidable. Romania has the lowest GDP
per capita at PPP and lags in several social indicators. Improvements in
competitiveness are limited to a few activities while large parts o f the economy are
un-restructured. A large number o f enterprises continue to be in state hands, which i s
a major constraint to improving productivity in the economy. Subsidization o f the
enterprise sector through arrears accumulation has not been eliminated. Financial
intermediation i s low, although state presence in the banking system has dramatically
declined due to an aggressive privatization program. Agricultural productivity i s low
and only slowly improving, while employment in subsistence agriculture remains

Annex C
Page 7 o f 26
large. Labor market flexibility will have to be increased and administrative barriers
faced by businesses further reduced to improve the business climate. Table 3 puts
Romania's performance in a regional perspective.
Table 3: Romania's Performance in Comparison with EU-8
GDPper
Capita
(2005,
current
US$)

GDP
Growth,
20022005
(avg.,
YO)

CPI
Inflation,
20022005
(avg., "10)

6.1
5.1
3.3

14.4
4.4
1.9

Overall
Fiscal
Balance,
2002-2005
(avg., OO/ of
GDP)

Private
Sector as
Percent
of G D P
(2005)
(EBRD)

EBRD
Index for
Banking
Reform
(2005)

EBRD Index
for
Infrastructure
Reform (2005)

70.0
75.0
80.0

3.0
3.7
4.0

3.3
3 .O
3.3

Romania

4568.4
3599.0
12254.2

Estonia

8643.2
10831.0
6554.2
7022.9
8313.8
9289.3

6.0
3.6
7.4
7.4
3.7
4.8

2.7
5.2
4.0
0.8
2.3
5.7

1.4
-6.4
-1 -7
-1.8
-6.2
-4.4

80.0
80.0
70.0
75.0
75.0
80.0

4.0
4.0
3.7
3.7
3.7
3.7

3.3
3.7
3.0
2.7
3.3
3.0

Slovenia

17929.2

3.4

5 .o

-1.6

65.0

3.3

3 .O

Bulgaria
Czech
Republic

Hungary
Latvia
Lithuania
Poland
Slovak
Republic

-2.7
0.6
-7.2

Sources: World Bank. EBRD, national statistical offices.

13.
The CAS was unable to deal effectively with the deteriorating agriculture and
rural development policy environment. The agriculture sector in Romania includes 45
percent o f the population living in the rural area, and 67 percent o f the poor. A poor
policy framework and the slow pace o f restructuring have resulted in low productivity
in the sector. Nonetheless, Romania's moderate climate and availability o f land point
towards potential competitiveness o f the sector, which could be unleashed with the
appropriate policies and strong institutions. A review would have to be undertaken to
determine whether the mix o f Bank interventions would need to be modified to
achieve the desired results o f a more competitive agriculture sector and improved
living standards in the rural areas.
14.
The AAA should have been frontloaded and could have been strengthened by
including work on relevant and important areas. The CAS would have benefited from
an earlier completion o f the Country Economic Memorandum and the Poverty
Assessment. As mentioned earlier, the Public Expenditure Review should have
included sections on policy impact o f EU accession and institutional strengthening to
absorb EU funds. Analytical work in both agriculture and rural sectors would have
led to development o f a strategic framework for the choice and design o f projects. In
some important areas, there may have been too much reliance on work by other
donors, as in the case o f decentralization where staff had to contend with issues o f
coordination, quality, and timeliness. There has been no substantive work on business
environment and private sector development (with the exception o f the financial
sector), despite the importance placed by the CAS on private sector led growth.
While the CEM provided the analytical work in many o f the abovementioned topics,
it came too late to be o f use in the implementation or modification o f the CAS

Annex C
Page 8 o f 26
program. The CEM i s currently being utilized as a basis for the development o f the
new Country Partnership Strategy.
Box 1: IFC FY02-04 Activities

During FY02-04 CAS period, IFC invested $265 million o f its own funds (43 percent
in equity and 57 percent in loans) in 11 projects. IFC indicated that it would
complement the Bank’s efforts in private sector development by focusing on key
areas such as restructuring o f municipal infrastructure, mobilizing financing for postprivatization restructuring, and supporting financial markets and SMEs.
It has been difficult for IFC to work at the municipality level as there has been

increasingly competing availability o f grant funds from various multilateral and
bilateral sources. IFC supported three post-privatization restructuring transactions by
financing the modernization o f a cable manufacturing plant (ICME ECAB), by
helping with the revamping o f Romania’s only producer o f refrigerators (Arctic), and
by supporting Banc Post (a previously state owned bank). IFC was very active in
developing the financial sector and small businesses. During this period, 91% o f IFC
investment was in the financial sector which included a financing package o f $186
million to support the future privatization o f BCR (the largest bank in the country),
two credit lines to expand mortgage lending, and financing to Pro Credit and the
Romanian-American Enterprise Fund (RAEF) for on-lending to micro and small
businesses. On the technical assistance side, IFC advised Romania’s Ministry of
Health on the use o f PPPs in public hospitals to improve care, designed a capacity
building program for Banca Romaneasca, helped local insurer Garanta to convert
from local to international accounting standards and carried out an assessment study
of the mortgage bonds and securitization markets.

B.

CAS OUTCOMES

15.
The CAS did not clearly articulate the expected outcomes,’2 and did not put in
place a working monitoring and evaluation system to track progress o f benchmarks
with the exception o f the high case triggers. Nonetheless, the CAS objectives were
quite well understood, and progress in achieving results could be measured in terms o f
improvements in certain indicators both over time and in comparison with EU-8.
Some o f these indicators are included in the discussion o f the main thematic areas o f
the CAS below. The CAS did have performance benchmarks but these were not
monitored on a systematic and consistent basis. The focus o f attention was the high
case triggers, which were mainly process indicators.
16.
The CAS objectives were aligned with the long term strategy o f poverty
reduction. Two o f the three objectives - targeted poverty reduction and private sector
led growth - formed the core o f the poverty reduction strategy o f the Government.
The third CAS objective - institution building and governance reforms - was intended
to improve delivery o f social services and improve the business environment. The
third CAS objective was important to the achievement o f the first two objectives: the
CAS emphasized that delays in building the needed administrative capacity had “an
acute impact on the delivery o f health care and social assistance, especially to the

’’This was prior to the results based CAS initiative.

Annex C
Page 9 o f 26
poor, and on the business environment needed to attract foreign direct investment and
private sector development, in turn to promote growth.”
17.
The CAS contributed to macroeconomic stability, growth, and poverty
reduction, but was not as successful in upgrading governance. The private sector led
growth objective saw some progress in actual outcomes due to the groundwork laid
by PSAL-1 and the approval o f the PSAL-2 early in the CAS period which enabled
the implementation o f certain critical reforms. There was also progress in poverty
reduction from the resumption o f growth during the CAS period (2003 Poverty
Assessment). However, there were delays in governance reforms, which began to
make progress only towards the end o f the CAS period when the conditionalities of
the PAL-1 were being completed prior to Board presentation o f the loan. The fact
that the first PAL was approved after the CAS period - during which two PALSwere
envisioned - i s indicative o f slow progress in reforms. I n addition, the QAG Country
Lending Enhance Review (CLER) in 2004 identified institutional capacity as
continuing to be a major constraint to development.

18.
The EU accession process, the current SBA, the Bank PAL program and CPS
under preparation would help sustain the CAS reforms. The drive towards EU
accession by 2007 puts on the front burner the public administration and judicial
reform agenda o f the PAL program. In addition, the need to create fiscal space to
support EU driven investments focuses government efforts to improve the efficiency
o f public expenditure management, including the elimination o f quasi-fiscal deficits.
The upgrading o f capacity to absorb EU post accession funds provides an impetus
towards institutional development in major areas - such as environment,
infrastructure, and social sectors - and in particular at the sub-national level. The
SBA and the PAL program support continued progress in major structural and
institutional reforms, including privatization and energy sector restructuring. The
CPS would utilize the lessons learned from the CAS and from EU-8 in defining new
priorities and improving instrument mix and design.

B. I

Targeted Poverty Reduction

19.
The rationale behind this component o f the CAS was the recognition that
while growth would result in general poverty reduction, certain groups would get left
behind, in particular those in the rural areas. Hence, the CAS designed a set o f
operations focusing on strengthening the social safety net, improving social assistance
targeting, and developing the rural sector. It has been documented that the poor have
less access to health services, and poor children fare much worse when it comes to
school enrollment. In the case o f rural poverty, increasing opportunities for non-farm
employment for subsistence farmers and increasing productivity for medium and large
farms would be key.
20.
The CAS objective o f targeted poverty reduction had the following intended
results: (a) improved targeting o f social benefits; (b) improved primary health care in
poor and remote areas; and (c) a decline in rural poverty. These results were to be
achieved by focusing on: (a) a selected set o f social sector operations; and (b) a group
o f rural sector interventions. Education and health investments, if properly channeled
to benefit the poorer segments o f the population, would both reduce inequality and
ensure satisfactory long term economic performance.

Annex C
Page 10 o f 26

The results in this component o f the CAS are mixed. The general poverty rate
21.
declined from 30.6 to 18.7 percent between 2001-2004 due mainly to the restoration
o f growth. However, certain groups continue to be left behind - including the Roma
population. Primary health care in poor and remote areas has not improved, with the
Health Sector Project coming on stream only towards the latter part o f the CAS.
However, support from the Social Development Fund i s seen to be effective in
alleviating poverty. In addition, the introduction o f the Minimum Income Guarantee
Scheme improved targeting and coverage and was a factor in the reduction o f extreme
poverty.
Social Sector Interventions

The Social Sector Development Project approved in 2000, which was to be the
22.
major vehicle to support reforms in major areas, had to be restructured in early 2004.
The project components - M&E for poverty policy, social insurance system reform,
labor market adjustment, and social assistance strengthening - were well aligned with
the CAS and government program. The project had good analytical underpinning in
the form o f AAA, including the 2002 PEIR. However, the CLER rated the overall
quality at entry and implementation oversight o f the project as Unsatisfactory. The
project was restructured in early 2004, with current disbursement at only 20.6 percent,
achieved almost entirely after restructuring.
The CLER concluded that the
restructuring did not respond to the design weaknesses and i s rating as low probability
the completion o f the project on time despite i t s being extended by one year to mid2007. However, the latest (end-March 2006) ISR rates the project as moderately
satisfactory with a likelihood o f meeting the Development Objectives.
23.
The planned second Health Sector Reform APL came after the CAS period,
but reforms were supported in the meantime by the first APL. The first Health Sector
Reform APL had as one o f its main development objectives the improvement o f
health services in selected poor and remote areas. The loan was designed on the basis
o f the experience o f an earlier operation and was consistent with a sector strategy
approved by the Government. Effective support to and oversight o f implementation
was provided by the Country Office. However, supervision focused too much on
project implementation aspects and less so on results. Hence, the monitoring and
evaluation system lacked a results orientation, making it difficult to determine
progress in achieving the development objectives. The second Health Sector Reform
APL corrects several o f the deficiencies o f the first APL and ensures sustainability o f
the reform.
24.
The Second Social Development Fund Project i s recognized as a model for
direct poverty alleviation. The project i s rated by the CLER to be Highly Satisfactory
in terms o f both Quality at Entry and Implementation. The objectives o f the SDF are
to improve the livelihood o f beneficiaries from poor rural communities and
disadvantaged groups; and to promote social capital enhancement and civic
engagement among project beneficiaries. There i s strong government ownership and
civil society support with a strong team from the Country Office overseeing
implementation. Project objectives are likely to be met. However, longer term issues
relating to decentralization and the role o f local authorities in the setting o f the SDF
priorities are not addressed.

Annex C
Page 11 o f 26
25.
The Rural Education Project pursues quality improvement, equity and
efficiency, but the lack o f a rural development strategy constrains the exploration o f
greater synergies that may be associated with a coherent and comprehensive
approach. Nonetheless, the operation i s a solid piece o f work in preparation and
design, good partnership arrangements, incorporation o f pilot experience, and a
realistic and sensible approach to the difficult issue of linkages to the longer term plan
o f decentralization. The CLER has rated the project as Satisfactory in terms o f both
Quality at Entry and Supervision. This project has major linkages with both rural
development and decentralization o f public services, though these linkages have not
been fully explored.
26.
The abovementioned lending operations were supported by a solid piece o f
analytical work in the Poverty Assessment, as well as by a good poverty monitoring
program. The Poverty Assessment confirmed the soundness o f the poverty reduction
strategy o f the CAS by focusing on growth with targeted interventions in education,
health, and social assistance. The findings o f the Poverty Assessment were used as
inputs to the national anti-poverty strategy and the development o f a system o f
monitoring and evaluating progress in the outcomes o f the anti-poverty program.

27.
The above interventions are sustainable due to successor operations
envisioned in the CPS. The objectives o f the Social Sector Development Project
remain important and relevant, and an HD Programmatic DPL series i s being
contemplated to move the reforms forward. The second Health Sector Reform APL
was approved in December 2004 and will sustain as well as improve on the reforms
started in the first APL. The results from the Rural Education Project will be assessed
and further education reforms are contemplated as part o f the planned HD
Programmatic DPL series. A Social Inclusion Loan under preparation will build on
the work under the SDF and the Social Sector Development Project.
RuraliAgriculture Interventions
Figure 7: Agriculture as Share o f GDP and Employment
28.
While
the
rural and agriculture
projects
are
45%
generally rated as
40%
Satisfactory, these
35%
interventions are not
30%
25%
achieving
the
20%
desired outcomes.
15%
Productivity in the
10%
5 yo
agricultural sector
0Yo
remains low: the
1990199119921 99319941995199619971998199%200(200120022009004
sector includes 36
percent o f the labor
I -Agriculture
share in GDP
Share in labor force
force
which
contributes only 14
Source: Staff estimates; Country Economic Memorandum (2004)
percent o f GDP.
The 4.8 million people working in the sector today constitute about 72 percent o f the
agricultural labor o f all the EU-15 countries combined. Agriculture remains highly

-

Annex C
Page 12 o f 26
labor intensive and the land plots are small with little incentive towards concentration.
The different rural and agriculture interventions in the CAS were built on a prior
SECAL, but policy back-tracking limited the effectiveness o f the CAS interventions.
In retrospect, the investment operations should have been linked to the PAL program.
29.
The Rural Development Project supports the decentralization framework by
involving the communities in developing rural infrastructure. The project provides
support towards the development o f national rural strategies for local roads and for
water supply and sanitation. The project has close linkages with the PAL program in
the areas o f governance and fiscal decentralization which will help in the achievement
o f the project development objectives. The Rural Development Project i s closely
linked to the EU SAPARD and the Bank SDF programs, with the project having a
more targeted coverage. In the initial stage, the project had suffered from important
implementation problems, which have been subsequently resolved. Currently, the
project i s rated Satisfactory.

30.
The Irrigation Rehabilitation and Reform Project i s a bold attempt at
implementing a desirable irrigation and drainage strategy. The irrigation system i s
inefficient with less than 15 percent utilization. The project has proposed that the
government formulate an effective exit strategy to abandon the systems that are not
economically justified. The project i s pursuing the goal o f establishing democratic
and viable Water Users Associations. However, the lobby to resist reforms i s strong
since the national irrigation agency i s unwilling to shrink the existing system causing
hesitancy on the part o f the government to pursue the reforms. The achievement o f
the development objectives will depend on the ability o f the project to ensure
sustained government commitment and to design a viable and acceptable program for
restructuring the SNIF (national company dealing with arable land).
31.
The Rural Finance Project was designed to introduce and facilitate market
related rural finance intermediation. The project was based on a good review and
analysis o f rural finance in Romania and was launched after the elimination o f
concessionary lending, paving the way for the introduction o f market lending rates.
The CLER rated the project as Satisfactory in terms o f Quality at Entry. However,
the project suffered from implementation difficulties, resulting in an Unsatisfactory
rating during the first two years. The CLER concluded that the rush to lend generated
seriously flawed implementation arrangements and resulted in poor ownership by the
borrower. In addition, the financial system i s quite liquid which would adversely
impact the demand for project funds. I t i s too early to determine whether the project
would achieve its development objectives although the team i s optimistic.
32.
In retrospect, there should have been a major ESW covering the agriculture
and rural sectors as well as regional development to underpin Bank support. The
CEM had a chapter on agriculture but came towards the end o f the CAS. The Jiu
Valley Development ESW provided an analysis on how to promote econqmic
recovery in a region devastated by restructuring o f its major industry, but the ESW
was more region-specific rather than o f general applicability to regional development.
Work on agriculture A A A was recently completed and submitted to government as
well as discussed in a workshop, and this will be an input to a future operation.
33.
The rural and agricultural sector interventions should have been linked to the
PAL program with conditionalities relating to privatization o f state farms and state

Annex C
Page 13 o f 26
owned land, creation o f land markets, imposition o f hard budget constraints on state
farms, and rationalization o f government support to the sector. This would have
required up front analytical work and high level dialogue with the government.

34.
Borrower performance was not satisfactory. Rural sector projects went
through an unsatisfactory status. More important, the policy environment in the
agricultural sector deteriorated during the CAS period. There was a general increase
in aggregate nominal protection level, including and in particular exportables. There
was also a dramatic worsening o f the composition o f public expenditures favoring
input subsidies at the expense o f growth enhancing expenditures.

35.

The sustainability o f the current set o f operations in the agriculture and rural
sectors will depend on the effectiveness o f the next set o f operations. The CPS
provides an instrument for helping the government design a program that would
address the same objectives as the previous CAS. The main lessons from the previous
CAS are: (a) the need for solid analytical underpinning; and (b) the importance o f
appropriate choice o f instruments. An Agriculture Sector Note has recently been
drafted which will underpin an Agriculture Loan, and a RuraVRegional Development
ESW has begun to serve as a basis for the design o f a RuraVRegional Development
Loan.

B.2

Private Sector Development

36.
The restoration o f growth led by private sector initiative was a major objective
o f the government program. Growth was also intended to result in poverty reduction,
another major objective o f the government as well as one o f the two strategic goals
articulated during the CDF consultation process. The Poverty Assessment estimated
that the achievement o f a five percent growth rate starting 2003 would reduce the
poverty rate by half by 2007. To achieve private sector led growth, the government’s
immediate priority was to ensure macroeconomic stability, and hence the policy
agenda during first part o f the CAS was dominated by measures to contain the fiscal
deficit. To ensure sustained efforts towards macroeconomic stability, the government
negotiated a new SBA with the Fund in 2002 and a successor SBA in 2004. The 2002
SBA was successfully completed.
37.
The CAS supported the government’s private sector led growth objective with
a mix o f instruments with PSAL-2 as the flagship operation. The areas o f focus were:
(a) privatization o f remaining SOEs with emphasis on infrastructure and energy
sectors; (b) adoption o f market oriented energy pricing policies and tariff collection
mechanisms; (c) reform o f the financial sector through privatization and strengthening
o f supervision; and (d) expansion o f labor redeployment programs to support
privatization. These measures complemented the SBA since many o f these reforms
were necessary to deal with the sources o f fiscal vulnerabilities. Privatization,
financial discipline, and dealing with quasi fiscal arrears were major themes o f PSAL2.

38.
PSAL-2 was to be followed by a series o f Programmatic Adjustment Loans
(PALs) and accompanied by AAA. The PALs would sustain the reforms initiated in
the PSALs while supporting the needed institutional and governance reforms. A
planned Regional Development Loan would support private sector development in an

Annex C
Page 14 o f 26
area hard hit by economic transition - Jiu Valley which i s almost completely
dependent on coal mining. I n addition, AAA would provide analytical underpinning
to the post PSAL agenda, including the Financial Sector Assessment Program (FSAP)
report, the Capital Market Assessment, and the Jiu Valley Regional Development
Study.
Table 4. Proeress in Reforms
Initial Phase
Small Scale Privatization
Price Liberalization
Trade and Foreign Exchange
Liberalization
Second Phase
Large Scale Privatization
Enterprise Reform
Competition Policy
Banking Reform
Reform o f Non-bank Fin. Inst.
Infrastructure

2000

2002

2004

3.7
4.3

3.7
4.3

3.7
4.3

4.3

4.3

4.3

3.0
2.0
2.3
2.7
2.0
2.7

3.3
2.0
2.3
2.7
2.0
3 .O

3.7
2.0
2.3
3.0
2.0
3.3

60.0

65.0

70.0

7.2
1,025

8.3
2,156

10.0
5,020

Note: The EBRD transition indicators range from 1.O to 4+ with 4+ indicating standards and
performance norms o f advanced industrial economies. The distinction between Initial Phase and
Second Phase reforms was drawn by EBRD.

Share o f private sector in GDP
(%)
Domestic credit to private sector
credit as share o f GDP (%)
F D I Net Inflows (US$ million)
Source: EBRD Transition Report (2005)

39.
During the CAS period, there has been substantial improvement in private
sector development related outcomes. Positive growth has been re-established at 4.5
to 5.0 percent, led primarily by investment and exports. Private sector share o f GDP
increased from 65 to 70 percent between 2002-2004 as a result o f progress in
privatization and new entry. FDI inflows picked up in 2003 and 2004, although
privatization receipts continue to be a major component o f FDI with limited
greenfield investment. Domestic credit to the private sector as share o f GDP also
increased from 8.3 to 10.0 percent during the same period. The EBRD transition
indicators show an overall improvement in the second phase of reforms during the
CAS period.
40.
Progress in privatization was slow during the early part o f the CAS, but picked
up starting 2003. Progress was impeded by the requirements that investors provide
guarantees to preserve employment and make sizeable investments. In 2003, the
authorities implemented a large scale voluntary employment reduction program which
facilitated the privatization o f some large loss makers. Outside o f the banking and
energy sectors, since 2001 the government privatized 112 large companies with about
1 12,000 employees in many cases with substantial employment reductions. Generous
severance payments for laid o f f workers and write-offs o f liabilities have facilitated
the privatization process considerably.

Annex C
Page 15 o f 26
41.
The soundness o f the banking system improved significantly. There was a
discontinuation o f the use o f state owned banks for directed lending - mainly to SOEs
- and financing o f enterprise losses. Out o f 39 banks, only one remains in State hands
accounting for less than 5 percent o f the banking system in term o f assets. The
privatization o f the remaining bank i s underway. The 2003 FSAP review found the
banks to be well-capitalized and liquid, although the reported high capital adequacy
ratios may be somewhat overestimated because o f valuation problems.

42.
Energy reforms have reduced related arrears and set the stage for sector
modernization. Electricity prices were brought closer to cost recovery levels and
heating and domestic gas prices were increased although the latter remains
substantially below import parity. Utility bill collection rates in the electricity and gas
sectors have increased significantly and reached levels similar to those in industrial
countries. However, wholesale electricity collection rate remains problematic and
heating collection rate has risen only marginally. Estimated energy sector losses
(including implicit subsidies) fell from 4.8 percent o f GDP in 2001 to 1.7 percent o f
GDP in 2004.
Table 5. Estimated Losses From Quasi-Fiscal Activities in the Energy Sector'
(percent of GDP)
Gas
Electricity and Heating

2000
3.6
1 .I

2001
3.5
1.3

2002
1.9
0.6

2003
2.3
0.5

2004
1.5
0.2

'Including losses resulting from payment arrears from non-collection
IMF staff projection
Predominantly implicit subsidies resulting from pricing below import parity.
Cash losses resulting from pricing below cost-recovery levels.
Source: IMF

2

43.
PSAL-2 achieved its stated objectives and contributed to the PSD outcomes.
The PSAL-2 operation built on the successful PSAL-1 and its design i s closely linked
to Fund conditionalities. The close linkage to the IMF program was a major success
factor for PSAL-2. The overlap between the Bank and Fund conditionalities was
substantial, especially in areas which have important fiscal and quasi-fiscal
implications. This has led to stronger pressure on the government to maintain the
reform momentum, and enabled the Bank and the Fund to coordinate more
effectively. The Fund relied on the technical work o f the Bank in areas where the
Bank had the expertise, including privatization and energy sector reforms. Each
institution consulted the other on i t s conditionalities, including participation in each
other's missions. The Fund's Ex-Post Assessment gives a favorable view o f the cross
conditionalities in the context o f the Romanian SBA. In addition, joint Bank-Fund
communications with authorities have contributed to a successful policy dialogue.
44.
The use o f an accompanying T A to support PSAL-2 helped enable
implementation o f the program reforms. This i s based on the lessons from the
FESAL, where absence o f administrative and managerial capacity was a major
impediment. A Private Sector Institution Building Loan (PIBL) was approved to
provide technical,assistance towards implementation o f the measures called for in the
PSAL-1. A second TA support package - the Private and Public Sector Institution

Annex C
Page 16 o f 26
Building Loan (PPBIL) - was approved to sustain and expand the work o f PPIBL, this
time linked to PSAL-2 but intended to support also the planned Programmatic
Adjustment Loans. The TA provided for privatization led to provision o f skilled
investment bankers which produced buyers where none had been previously
forthcoming, and introduced greater transparency to the process.

45.
Nonetheless, given the slow pace of disbursement of the PPIBL, i t s approval
may have been premature. While the PPIBL became effective in November 2002, by
the end o f FY04, disbursement was less than six percent. In addition, the PIBL was
only 43 percent disbursed at the time of PSAL-2 approval, and the case could be made
for using up the PIBL before embarking on a second TA loan.
46.
The Government of Netherlands provided a trust fund amounting to $3 million
to support the PSAL program. This trust fund was managed by the Bank and
augmented the Bank TA resources. The existence o f this fund slowed the
disbursements from the PIBL, since the Government understandably gave preference
to the use of grant funds. Nonetheless, the availability of both grant and Bank
resources to support implementation of the reforms was a major factor in the
successful implementation of PSAL-2.
47.
Borrower performance has been satisfactory overall. I n the case of
privatization, changes in policy and TA support from the Bank helped move the
process forward. Though there were delays from original program schedules, the
difficult enterprise and banking reforms envisioned in the PSAL program were
completed demonstrating high government commitment. The close collaboration
between the Bank and the Government was a major success factor in the
implementation o f the program.

48.
The PALS, the SBA, and EU accession help ensure sustainability o f the major
reforms from the PSAL program. In particular, the design o f the PAL program
established important linkages with the two PSALs, as shown in Table 6. The SBA
approved in July 2004 includes benchmarks on privatization and other structural
reforms, in addition to ensuring fiscal discipline. Coordination with the EC on both
policy and technical assistance helped further the sustained implementation of
reforms, Consistent and coordinated messages and actions from the EC, IMF, and
Bank helped break the stop-go cycle o f reforms which characterized the 1990s in
Romania.

Annex C
Page 17 o f 26
Table 6. Sustaining the P5 L Reforms

PSAL 1
Restructure and appoint
privatization advisor for BCR
and Banca Agricola
Start liquidation o f Bancorex
Improve banking regulations
* Improve management o f Asset
Resolution Agency
Privatize first block o f large
SOEs
Privatize first block o f small
and medium SOEs
Offer for sale 35% o f Petrom
shares
Prepare study for regulation o f
electricity. rail, oil and gas
industries
Appoint advisor for strategy
on electricity distribution and
generation privatization
9

PSAL 2
Restructure CEC Bank
Offer BCR for sale
(Bank Agricola had already
been sold and Bancorex
liquidated)
Privatize second block o f
large SOEs
Conduct sales from
privatization pools

P A L Program
Complete sale o f CEC Bank
and BCR to strategic investors
(ending all public sector
banking)

Offer 5 1 percent o f Petrom
shares for sale
Restructure power sector into
separate operating companies
according to advisor’s plan
Offer first two (of eight)
electricity distribution
companies for sale
Announce the sale and sales
strategy for the two gas
distribution companies
Adopt privatization strategy
for generation sector
Improve collections in
electricity and gas sectors

* Offer the gas producer
Romgas for sale
Offer all remaining (six)
electricity distribution
companies for sale
Raise gas prices to economic
levels
Implement heat metering and
controls
Reform district heating tariffs
Remove non-core network
segments from rail system

companies.

i

Complete business
environment study and action

Establish public-private
Business Environment task for
removal o f administrative
barr ie n .
Select adkisor for review o f
bankruptcy laws

Adopt social mitigation
measures including Law on
Collective Dismissals and
payment o f unemployment and
severance benefits

Adequately fund the Minimum
Guaranteed Income Program
and unemployment benefits
Enact a Law on the National
Social Assistance System
Improve public pension
financing
Submit to the Parliament a
draft legislation on the
Mandatory Prikate Pension
Pillar
9

Close privatization agency
APAPS

Eliminate subsidies losses o f
lignite and metallic mines and
further reduce subsides and
losses o f hard coal mines
Amend the Insolvency Law
and improve bankruptcy
processes
Approve corporate governance
legislation
Amend Labor code for
improved labor market
flexibility
Continue implementation o f
Business Environment Action
Plan
Adjust retirement age and
other parameters o f public
pension plan to ensure financial
viability.
Adopt per capita financing
formula for education
Adopt improved systems o f
health sector financing and
health insurance revenue
generation

Annex C
Page 18 o f 26

B.3

Institution Building and Governance Reform

49.
The CAS intended to support institution building and governance reform by
focusing on key areas. Some o f these critical areas included strengthening public
expenditure management, developing regulatory and judicial reforms, and
implementing anti-corruption strategies. The broad aim was to develop a culture o f
accountability in the public sector. An important component o f the government
capacity building was to ensure the proper design and execution o f the
decentralization o f service delivery across a range o f sectors. There were a number o f
inter-governmental issues: the need to create the appropriate incentives for subnational levels o f government, as well as the need to strengthen capacities for subnational governments to respond to the new demands o f the devolution process.
50.
Two Programmatic Adjustment Loans were envisioned to be the primary
vehicles to support the Government efforts in institution building, supported by AAA.
The programmatic approach would provide greater adaptability for step-by-step
institutional reforms, capacity building that involves significant policy content, and an
economy wide scope that goes beyond existing projects. The PALs would be
underpinned by analytical work, including a Public Expenditure Review, a
LegaliJudicial Diagnostic Review, and Country Financial Accountability Assessment.
The PPIBL would support the PALs and the other investment operations programmed
in the CAS would include institution building components focusing on specific
sectors. The planned mix o f instruments was appropriate.

Annex C
Page 19 o f 26
Figures 8-13: Governance Indicators

Annex C
Page 20 o f 26

5 1,
The outcomes in the area o f institution building and governance reform were
disappointing.
The CLER highlighted “weak institutional capacity for the
development and adoption o f policies, making timely and effective use o f external
resources, and project implementation at all levels o f the GOR, especially at the
increasingly important sub-national levels.” The review also noted that the donors
saw institutional capacity as a significant problem area, and the perception was that
‘7n Romania too much money i s chasing too little administrative/implementation
capacity”. The governance indicators show that Romania continues to be lagging the
EU-8 (see Figures 8-13).
52.
However, it should be noted that project level institution building efforts have
been generally satisfactory. The investment projects in Romania have institution
building components thus ensuring that capacities are established or strengthened in
institutions that affect project implementation and outcomes. The technical assistance
loans that supported the adjustment operations also helped ensure the institutional
strengthening.
In particular, the work done with institutions dealing with
privatization, banking supervision, energy, health and education has resulted in visible
progress in capacity building.
The most important exogenous factor was EU accession. In particular, the
53.
progress reports on the status o f EU accession provided the impetus for the
Government to eventually focus - towards the latter part o f the CAS period - on the
public administration and judicial reforms. Both the EU and the Bank gave consistent
messages to the government and coordinated their efforts to support reforms.

54.
Borrower performance during most o f the CAS period was disappointing,
resulting in delays in implementation o f the PAL program. While two PALs were
planned under the CAS, none was delivered during that period with the first PAL
approved by the Board in September 2004. Movement in governance related reforms
started late in the CAS period, mainly in the context o f EU accession. Only when the
pressure o f EU accession began to intensify - in particular the need to close the acquis
negotiations - did the Government begin to act on the difficult reforms in the
governance area. The PAL program was developed earlier but Government action
came towards the end o f the CAS period.
55.
EU accession requirements remain the major driver o f the public
administration and governance reforms. While the acquis negotiations have been
concluded, entry to the E U i s dependent on fulfilling certain specific requirements,
including in the judicial area. Bank support will be needed in both the design as well
as implementation o f the reforms as embodied in the commitments o f the government
in the context o f EU accession.
56.
While the pace o f public administration and judicial reforms was slow,
sustainability i s ensured by the EU accession and integration process. Support in
these areas was requested as part o f the upcoming CPS. The PAL program was
endorsed by the government that came in after the November 2004 elections. The
PALs are to be accompanied by the Judicial Reform Project and the Revenue
Administration Reform Project, while other investment operations are expected to
have strong institution building component. In addition, current and planned ESW
will support the reforms, including the Public Finance Study that i s under way.

Annex C
Page 21 of 26

57.
The most important lesson in the context o f the next CAS i s the need to link
public administration and judicial reform with the EU accession and integration
process, Governance issues are given priority by the Government since slow progress
in related reforms would result in a delay in the EU accession. The need to improve
institutional capacity to absorb EU funds would focus Government attention on
expenditure management and sub-regional institution building. Finally, the links
between anti-corruption and business environment - as well as pressure from the EU would push the Government to accelerate efforts in this area.
C.

M E A S U R I N G B A N K PERFORMANCE

C.I

Quality of Products and Services

58.
The CLER finds that the assistance provided under the CAS was relevant to
the development objectives o f Romania, although with degrees o f success varying
from project to project. The report concludes that the policy dialogue and the
operations contributed to Romania’s economic turnaround post-2000 and that the
focus o f the portfolio has brought the country closer to EU accession. PSAL-2 and
PAL-I have been singled out as key drivers for structural change, while the CEM and
the Poverty Assessment have been central to setting the policy agenda. This CAS
Completion Report (CCR) concurs with the general findings o f the CLER.
59.
The CCR rates the sustainable private sector growth component o f the CAS as
satisfactory, that o f the targeted poverty interventions as moderately satisfactory, and
the institution building and governance outcome as unsatisfactory. The OED Country
Assistance Evaluation (CAE) in 2005 assesses as satisfactory or moderately
satisfactory the outcomes o f a l l three CAS development objectives. Table 7
summarizes and compares the QAG and CCR ratings.
Table 7. Summary o f Outcome Ratings of Bank Lending by CAS Objective
Sustainable Private Sector Growth

Outcome Rating FY00-04
OED CAE
CCR
Satisfactory
Satisfactory

Poverty Reduction and Human
Development

Moderately
Satisfactory

Moderately
Satisfactory

Governance and Institution Building

Moderately
Satisfactory

Unsatisfactory

Development Objective

60.
The CLER rated the PSAL-2 as a successful operation in terms o f both Bank
performance and achievement o f outcomes. PSAL-2 took into account the lessons o f
past failed SECALs by dovetailing neatly its conditionalities with the Fund program
and focusing on the CAS objectives. PSAL-2 drew on an effective mix o f technical
and strategic expertise, and achieved synergies between local and HQ staff in project
preparation and implementation. Client engagement during both preparation and
supervision stages was effective, with a team that basically remained the same
throughout the project. This contributed to achieving the results intended - there was
significant progress in enterprise privatization, financial sector reform, reduction o f
energy related quasi-fiscal deficits, and improvements in the business environment.

Annex C
Page 22 o f 26

61.
The CEM, completed in 2004, was the main piece o f analytical work carried
out during the FY 2002-04 CAS period and was well received. The CEM provided a
comprehensive diagnostic o f the Romanian economy, seen from an EU integration
perspective. I t s focus was on the enterprise sector restructuring, trade integration,
energy sector reforms, competitiveness o f agriculture, flexibility o f the labor market,
and the efficiency o f the financial sector. At the same time, the CEM identified the
main risks and vulnerabilities to which the Romanian economy i s likely to be exposed
in its quest for EU membership and provided a series o f substantive
recommendations. The CLER rated the CEM as being o f “excellent quality”.
However, the report came too late to integrate its conclusions into the FY 2002-04
operational program. I t is, however, extensively used in the preparation o f the CPS.
62.
The Poverty Assessment (PA) assessed the way economic growth and the
Government-run social protection programs impacted poverty dynamics and
composition. The PA covered the period 1995-2002 and was completed in 2003.
While, just like in the case of the CEM, the results o f the PA came too late to be used
as an input to the design o f the lending agenda, it has nevertheless been instrumental
in triggering and providing the technical anchor for a series o f decisions subsequently
taken by the Government. The findings o f the PA were used in the preparation o f the
National Anti-Poverty and Promotion o f Social Inclusion Action Plan and have
helped improve the formulation o f social policies. I t was also central to the initiative
o f the Government to develop poverty evaluation capacities in the Anti-Poverty and
Social Inclusion Commission (CASPIS), and has been a vehicle for stirring civil
society and private sector involvement in the anti-poverty debate and agenda. The PA
brought, at the same time, into closer strategic alignment the agendas o f the Bank,
EU, UNDP and bilateral donors.

63.
Safeguard and fiduciary dimensions were addressed in the design o f all the
projects launched under the FY 2002-04 CAS and in the supervision o f the projects in
the portfolio at the time. In addition, the PAL included conditionalities related to
financial management, building on the findings and recommendations of the AAA,
such as the recommendations related to public financial management from the first
Romania Country Financial Accountability Assessment (CFAA) and the Romania
Accounting and Auditing Report on the Observance o f Standard and Codes, both
completed in 2003.
64.
The World Bank i s viewed to be responsive to clients, and i s held in high
regard in Romania and most stakeholders appreciate the value added i t brings to the
country in terms o f expertise. The CLER assesses that “Romanian Government
officials almost universally expressed appreciation o f the conceptual and
implementation assistance provided by Bank staff. They often contrasted this helpful
attitude to the more limited engagement o f other donors.” Both the CAE and the
CLER recommend ensuring staff continuity, especially in project management, to
warrant the same degree o f effectiveness in the future.

C.2

Portfolio Assessment

65,
The Bank’s Romania portfolio i s the largest one in the ECA region in terms o f
number o f projects and the third in terms o f commitments (after Turkey and Russia).
Figure 14 presents the structure o f the lending portfolio by sectors as o f end-March
2006. Since 1991, the Bank has approved 50 operations, with a total commitment o f

Annex C
Page 23 o f 26

US$ 5.0 billion, thus positioning itself as Romania’s prime development partner. By
end March 2006 the WB portfolio (lending and non-lending) totaled 3 1 operation^,'^
with an aggregated net commitment o f US$ 1,690 million (including the PRG for
privatization o f Banat and Dobrogea Electricity Distributors o f US$ 76.7million).
Figure 14. Portfolio Structure as of March 3 1, 2006

3
-___

I
I

Judicial Reform
Environmentally and Socially Sustainable
Development

I

Rivate and Financial Sector Development
Infrastructure, Mining and Energy

8.1%

39.5%

4.9%

7
34.4%

Education and Health

I
66.
In FY2002-04 the structure and size o f the portfolio reflected the improved
macroeconomic framework and the strategic focus on supporting structural reforms
and the development o f the private sector. About 41 percent of net commitment in the
period FYOl-04 was concentrated in a structural adjustment operation (PSAL-2),
complemented by TA dedicated to support market-oriented and private sector friendly
reforms. The agricultural sector was supported by 19 percent o f the total net
commitments through projects which included important institution building and
community development components (Irrigation Rehabilitation, Rural Development)
and recognized the importance o f environmental friendly behavior (Forest
Development). The infrastructure sector received 1 1 percent o f the net commitment,
targeted toward the development o f a well-functioning wholesale electricity market;
in fact the operation was added to the CAS approved program, to mitigate nonmaterialized expectations o f private sector financing. Two operations addressing high
priorities in rural education and governance improvement (Rural Education and SDF
11) absorbed 1 1 percent o f the net commitment, while the remaining 19 percent o f the
net commitment addressed the need for reducing the environmental, social and
economic vulnerability to natural disasters and strengthening the institutional capacity
for disaster management.
67.
During the CAS period the Bank delivered a US$ 775 million program, higher
than previous CAS programs although short o f the planned lending target o f US$995
million due to the delays in the PALS. Only one loan was cancelled - the US$ 25
million TA loan for public institution building. However, the delivery o f some
l 3 20 IBRD financed loans. 3 GEF grants (Biodiversity, Energy Efficiency, Agricultural Pollution), 1
Partial Risk Guarantee for privatization o f Banat and Dobrogea Electricity Distribution Companies. In
addition the portfolio includes 1 PCF for Afforestation o f degraded agricultural land o f US$ 3.7 million
and 6 GoLernment executed grants with an aggregated value o f US$ 7.3 million. N e t commitment
represents the total commitments, net o f cancellations, on11 for the projects in the active portfolio.

Annex C
Page 24 of 26

projects (see Annex C/iia) was postponed by one calendar year on average. In
particular, both PSAL-2, scheduled for delivery in 2002, and PAL-1, scheduled for
2003, were delivered with a one year delay. As described above, the slower than
estimated launching o f the enterprise and bank restructuring agenda and
implementation o f the institutional and governance reforms delayed the delivery o f
the lending operations.

68.
The AAA program was marginally in terms o f implementation, though those
that were completed were generally of good quality. The program cuts across sectors
and themes and included a series of analytical studies -the PA, the CEM, the Energy
Sector Study, the CFAA, and the FSAP - which formed the framework for
subsequent government reforms. About 60 percent o f the non-lending services were
delivered as planned (see Annex Chi). Six A A A products were dropped, either
because their original themes were addressed elsewhere, such as the Labor Market
Analysis which was incorporated into the CEM, or because they lost relevance from
the perspective o f the direction of the reform. The CEM and the PA were viewed as
quality products with important value added to both the country dialogue and the
design of the upcoming CPS.
The performance o f the portfolio i s satisfactory. Due to the pro-active
69.
management approach jointly implemented by the Government and the WB, the large
majority o f Romania's lending portfolio performs well, and the risk indicators
improved, as shown in the Table 8. Commitment at risk decreased from over US$250
million at the beginning o f the CAS period to around US$80 million in FY 06. The
latest status o f each ongoing project i s presented in Annex C/iv.
Table 8. Portfolio Performance Indicators
FY
2001
No. o f projects under
22

implementation
Net commitment'4
Cancelled in the FY
Disbursed in FY
Undisbursed balance at period
opening
Disbursement ratio
for 2006: projected)
Number o f projects at risk
As % o f total number o f
Projects
Commitment at risk
As % o f total net commitment

FY
2002
22

FY
2003
25

FY
2004
21

FY
2005
22

Q3 FY
2006
23

US$ mil.
US$ mil.
US$ mil.
US$ mil.

1113
34.6
138.1
778.7

1093
0.0
157.4
650.3

1335
5.7
149.4
546.4

1263
0.0
104.6
576.8

1424
0.0
111
690

1603
0.0
109
1126

YO

17.7%

24.2%

27.4%

18.1%

16.2%

18.0%

%

2
9.1%

4
18.2%

2
8.0%

2
9.5%

0
0

1
4.3%

US$ mil.
YO

252.1
22.7%

255
23.3%

130
9.7%

120
9.5%

0
0

80
5%

The rating procedure only covers the WB lending and GEF financed operations.

l 4 Excluding the

PRG ( U S $ 76.7 million). Performance indicators are calculated excluding the PRG.

Annex C
Page 25 of 26

Figure 15: Disbursement Profile

70.
Disbursement
performance deteriorated in
I
FY04 and FY05. From 24-27
I
I
percent in FY02 and FY03,
the disbursement rate of the
portfolio slowed down to 1618 percent in FY04 and FY05.
This i s due to a combination
o f factors: (i) a slower
disbursement take off o f new
loans; (ii) a slow down in the
activity o f line-ministries
because o f the election cycle,
which also resulted in higher
staff turnover at PMUs level;
0.0
5.0
10.0
15.0
20.0
25.0
30.0
(iii) specific factors relating to
Romania’s tight fiscal stance.
This development follows
after disbursement ratios’’ rebounded from the decreasing levels o f FY97 through
FY98, and even surpassed or equaled ECA’s averages in FY99 to FY03 (Figure 15).
A slight recovery o f the disbursement rate (to some 18 percent) i s expected in FY06.

71.
The portfolio review process, jointly carried out with the Government on a
yearly basis, has contributed to improving the performance of the projects. To assure
the full developmental impact of the WB financed projects, the portfolio i s jointly
managed by the Romanian Government and the WB. A JPR was carried out between
May - June 2005 to review a selected number of projects which either experienced
implementation bottlenecks, or were at risk o f becoming problem projects in the
future, although they remain relevant for the country’s program. The three key
objectives o f the JPR were to (i) review the implementation status o f the selected
projects to identify the major constraints and to prepare time-bound action plans; (ii)
identify mature projects which may need to be closed/restructured and (iii) assess the
relevance of the projects against the EU imperatives and changing national
development objectives. The findings o f the JPR were discussed with the Ministry o f
Public Finance followed by a high level meeting led by the Prime Minister (PM) and
the Country Unit Director (CD), with key Cabinet members participating. Portfolio
management efforts have intensified since, with the introduction o f quarterly reports
on actions agreed with the government during the joint portfolio review meetings. I n
addition, a set o f key arrangements to accelerate projects implementation and the
management o f closing dates has been agreed with the Ministry o f Public Finance, in
April 2006.
72.

The Joint Portfolio Review has identified several cross-cutting issues which

affect the disbursement performance o f projects:

I s Disbursement ratio: the ratio o f disbursements during the fiscal year to the undisbursed balance at
the beginning o f the fiscal year (for investment loans only).

Annex C
Page 26 of 26

Cumbersome approval procedures o f small rural investments. The practice o f
high level approval by the Government and the Inter-Ministerial Committees o f
small value demand-driven investment sub-projects has specifically impacted the
DO o f projects targeting capacity building at local level. This issue i s now
resolved through simplification o f the approval process of small demand-driven
investments at the level of the project Steering Committee.
Lengthy decision-making process. This i s particularly serious when coordination
among different Government institutions i s required. This issue affects projects
whose activities imply inter-ministerial cooperation or clearances from multiple
government bodies (i.e. General Cadastre and Land Registration).
Lengthy loan approval procedures. The lengthy decision making process for
getting a loan approved or amended i s a major constraint, and often delays the
completion period which i s now, on average, planned for 4 years.
Financial management aspects. Two issues requiring attention are: (i) the
imposition o f ceilings for withdrawals from loans; and (ii) problems with the
timely availability o f counterpart contribution. Both these issues relate to the rigid
fiscal stance assumed by the Government. The Government and the Bank have
recently agreed on specific ways to mitigate the negative impact o f such issues.

C.3

Country Dialogue and Aid Coordination

73.
The Country Office plays a lead role in the dialogue with the Government on
key policy aspects and in resolving day-to-day implementation issues. The Romania
Country Office functions on a highly decentralized basis, with a large number o f
supervision and project preparation tasks delegated to the national officers, across the
sectors. Currently ten projects are being supervised by CO staff and one operation
has been prepared by local TTLs. The Government highly appreciates the just-intime service o f the Bank. These services have been further improved with the
relocation and strengthening o f the procurement and financial management and
disbursement services in the CO.

74.
The Bank enjoys a close relationship with the EC Delegation in Bucharest
which has not only ensured a good fit between EU and Bank activities, but has
facilitated the Government’s interface with the two institutions. A first-ever joint
BanUEU Country Procurement Assessment Review was carried out in February
2005, and recommendations were made to harmonize the requirements o f the two
institutions in the National Procurement Standards under preparation.
75.
The World Bank agenda and the I M F program became increasingly integrated
during the CAS period. Collaboration between the Bank and the IMF i s a central
pillar o f the assistance to the Romania structural reform agenda. The Bank provides
the technical inputs in monitoring the progress of actions common to the SBA and the
PAL operation, as well technical assistance and expertise for the implementation o f
the measures agreed with the IMF.

h

~

tci

0

2

9
0

k

N
a0

.*c

9

'J
2
2
'J

N

rci

0
0
N

‘? c?
FCI

E

5

e
a

G
W

ov

0

.
I
.
I
I

u

G
L

.I

%

W

z

-+-

.
I

L

o

.
I

ci

2
2
\1
3

Y
Y

4
c

5

J

2
E
cd

I

Annex C/iv
Project Portfolio Rating

1 Project Name

(APL- I)
19. SDF 2 (APL-2)
20. SOC SECT DEV
21, TRANSPORT
RESTRUCTURING
22. KNOWLEDGE
ECONOMY
23. JUDICIAL
REFORM

I

Supervision Rating
As o f March 31,2006
Development
Implementation

I

HS
S
S
S

NYE

1 Approval

S

2002
200 1
2005

1s

2006

HS
MS

NYE

2006

ROMANIA: COUNTRY FINANCING PARAMETERS

Annex D
Page 1 o f 1

The country financing parameters for Romania set out below have been approved by
the Regional Vice President, Europe and Central Asia Region, and are posted on the
Bank’s internal website.
Item
Cost Sharing
Limit on the proportion o f
individual project costs that the
Bank may finance

Parameter
u p to 100
percent

Recurrent Cost Financing
Any limits that would apply to
the overall amount o f recurrent
expenditures that the Bank may
finance

No country
level limit

Local Cost Financing
Are the requirements for Bank
financing o f local expenditures
met, namely that (I) financing
requirements for the country s
development program would
exceed the public sector’s own
resources (e g , from taxation
and other revenues) and
expected domestic borrou ing.
and (11) the financing o f foreign
expenditures alone would not
enable the Bank to assist in the
financing o f individual projects

Yes

Taxes and Duties
Are there any taxes and duties
that the Bank would not finance

No

1

Explana tionlRemarks
3overnment ownership would continue to be key, including
hrough counterpart funding. The Bank would also continue
.o encourage cofinancing with other development partners.
Sector-wide approaches, in which the Bank’s financing
share i s typically low, are expected to increasingly become
xominent in the Romania program, for example in the
.ransport, environment, social protection, agriculture
-estructuring, education and health areas. In some projects,
:ontributions from local communities are required by
substantive project design considerations The upper 100
iercent limit (or high levels of Bank financing) will be used
selectively, after considering the context o f the operation
md the portfolio implications within the CPS envelope.
Specifically the ability to go up to 100 percent cost share
~ i lmostly
l
apply to social sector projects and regional /
nunicipal development programs (in line with EU
requirements) For larger infrastructure reform projects the
government should continue to fund some project costs from
the budget to assure ownership
While no country level limit will be imposed on recurrent
cost financing, the Bank would consider recurrent cost
financing on a project by project basis after careful
consideration to determine the sustainability o f Bankfinanced recurrent activities. PIU salaries would be financed
only in the context o f full integration in line ministries / o r
an agreed, clear plan to integrate in the line ministries
structures, and with clear accountability for management
oversight by the Government.
For Romania the Bank may finance local costs in the
proportion required by individual projects.

The Bank ma) finance taxes and duties associated with
prolect expenditures In individual projects, the Bank would
consider uhether taxes and duties constitute an excessively
high share o f project costs The Bank would not finance
VAT in the case o f entities entitled to obtain the refund of
VAT included in project expenditures

Annex E
Page 1 o f 3
Note on Stakeholder Consultations
Background

1.
As part o f the elaboration o f the Country Partnership Strategy, a public
consultation campaign was conducted to improve Bank responsiveness to the client
needs. The campaign consisted o f a Client Survey and a series o f public consultation
meetings in six towns throughout the country. The consultations included small,
medium and large towns as well as localities at different levels o f economic
development. Through these two instruments, valuable information on public
perception and priorities was collected as input to the design o f the partnership
strategy. The consultation process was implemented during April and May o f 2005.
2.
At the end o f the public consultation process, the general conclusion was that
there i s a general perception that Romania still has a relatively low ability to absorb
the EU funds associated with the accession. Accordingly, most participants
welcomed Bank’s assistance in knowledge-sharingand possibly even training in areas
such as project identification and management as well as the provision o f matching
funds necessary to access the EU funds. The key messages are summarized below.
M a i n findings from the Client Survey

3.
The Client Survey was a two-step process including a questionnaire and in
randomly selected cases, a follow-up interview. The surveyed population included
representatives o f Government, Agencies and Ministries; members o f the Parliament;
Project Management Unit representatives; and members o f the academia, civil
society, business sector and media. The data collection was done by a leading
Romanian opinion poll company that interviewed a total number o f 322 respondents.
Chart 1: General Issues Facing Romania (first and second priority)
IX-

Most important

Second most important

Becoming an effective EU member
Reducing corruption
Improving investment/business climate
Improving government effectiveness
Reducing poverty
Improving the effectiveness of law and justice system
Improving basic infrastructure
Increasing employment I income generating opportunities
Achieving universal access to education
Improving environmental quality/rotecting natural resources S, 3%
Improving access to health services

2%

Reducing the public debt 2%
Others ’%

Don’t know/No answer

1%

0%

10%

20%

30%

40%

50%

Annex E
Page 2 o f 3

4.
The Client Survey found that a significant majority o f respondents are familiar
with the work o f the World Bank in Romania. An interesting fact i s that this
awareness i s translated to a positive attitude towards the Bank with a majority
appreciating the involvement o f the institution on the ground. The most valuable
contributions brought by the Bank were viewed to be the financial resources, policy
and economic advice, and the Bank’s international knowledge.
5.
The research survey identifies the public perception o f the main challenges
EU integration, inadequate
and development priorities that Romania faces.
infrastructure development and inadequate access to quality education are considered
as the main challenges for Romania’s sustainable development. The key development
priorities for Romania are grouped around almost familiar themes: successful EU
integration, reduced corruption, better business and investment climate, more
effective government, better functioning law and judicial system, and reduced
poverty. Respondents consider that the Bank should focus most o f its resources on
support for EU integration, infrastructure development, health sector reform, and
poverty reduction measures.
Main findings from Public Consultation Meetings

6.
Six meetings were organized in the cities o f Timisoara, Iasi, Galati,
Alexandria, Craiova and Sibiu. Overall, about 170 people participated representing a
diverse group o f civil society. Participants were selected to represent a wide a range
o f interests, occupations, and involvement in key areas - public administration,
businesses, NGOs, public service, the Church, minorities, public communications,
public health, education system, media, etc. The broad objective was to validate the
existing knowledge and obtain an updated assessment o f the public perception on
economic and social issues at local community level. To ensure objective feedback
the Bank team assumed a listening mode.

7.
The discussions raised sensitive themes and made a reality-check against
World Bank’s and Government’s perceptions. The main findings were to a great
extent similar to the ones already identified by the Bank in partnership with the
Government. While the ranking may vary from region to region, participants were in
agreement about the main issues that need immediate attention: infrastructure,
environmental concerns, health services, education, social protection, measures for
disadvantaged groups, the disparities between urban and rural areas, problems relating
to the business environment and the good functioning o f the public administration, as
well as problems related to the EU accession.
8.
Under infrastructure for instance, the discussions raised the issue o f the low
quality o f roads as well as the degradation o f other systems such as irrigation or dams
and land improvement operations which can affect the environment. Water sewage
systems and deterioration o f urban housing (apartment buildings) were also quoted as
affecting the living standards.
9.
On both education and health there was consensus that the poor state o f
facilities (schools and hospitals) as well as the low quality o f services need more
attention. Emphasis was given to access to quality education and good medical
services as main factors for addressing the disparity between rural and urban

Annex E
Page 3 o f 3
areas. Despite the steady economic growth o f the past years, there i s public
perception that large categories o f Romanians - such as the elderly, minorities, and
the people with disabilities - are disadvantaged, and social gaps need to be bridged
through better social inclusion and/or social protection.

10.
The debate also focused on areas that may become obstacles for improving
living standards. Corruption and red-tape were indicated as problems impinging on
the healthy development o f the business sector. Public administration was also
perceived as bureaucratic, lacking professionalism and often embracing corrupt
practices.
11.
Concerns were expressed that Romania i s s t i l l with a low level o f
preparedness for the E U accession and membership. As a consequence, the country i s
not benefiting in full from the access to E U funds.
Overall Conclusions.
0

0

0

0

Bank i s a valued partner, both for its financial but also for its international
expertise and analytical work;
Main priorities of Romania in which Bank should assist are related to the E U
integration process;
In view o f the Romanian public most important i s to address disparities
between urban and rural population.
Key areas for development with Bank assistance in future years are education,
health and infrastructure.

MAP SECTION

22°E

24°E

26°E

UKRA INE

To
Uzhhorod

28°E

ROM ANIA

To
Ivano-Frankivs'k

SELECTED CITIES AND TOWNS
COUNTY (JUDET) CAPITALS

ROMANIA

Somes

Pr

l d

a

v

i a

n

Mu

ut

o

a

Husi

.
ts

Bacau

VA S L U I

et

Gheorghe
Gheorghiu-Dej

Sir

BRASOV

Sfîntu
Sfî
Sf
întu
Gheorghe

Moldoveanu
(2,544 m )

46°N

UKR AI N E

VRANCEA
Focsani

Brasov

Tecuci
Tecuci

GALATI
GALATI

a n i a n
l v
y
ARGES A
s
V Î LCEA
VÎLCEA
n
r a
Rimnicu

Galati

t

75 Miles

Ol

50

DOLJ
Calafat

Tulcea
Tulcea

BRAILA

TULCEA

ge

TELEORMAN

Caracal

s

a
ita

Slobozia
Fetesti

CALARASI Calarasi
GIURGIU

j

Ialom

nube
Da

Black

u

BUCURESTI
BUCHAREST

IALOMITA
IALOMITA

Medgidia

CONSTANT
CONST
CONSTANTA
ANTA
A

Navodari

Alexandria

Giurgiu

Sea

Constanta
44°N

D

100 Kilometers

Ar

Slatina
Craiova

Braila

DÎMBOVIT
DÎMBOVITA
MBOVITA
A

W a l a c h i a

OLT

B

Buzau

Ploiesti

Targoviste
Targoviste

MEHEDINTI
75

s

PRAHOVA
PRAHOVA

V
ilcea
Vilcea

Targu
Targu Jiu

DrobetaTTurmu
urmu
ur
mu Sererin

p

u

uza

r

GORJ

l

BUZAU

b

Sibiu

COVASNA
COVASNA

o

T

30°E

M OL DOVA

Vaslui
Vaslui

M

SIBIU

Jiu

25

M

i

a

Orsova

To
Nis̆

0

Roman

BACAU

MiercureaCuic

Medias

HUNEDOARA

Resita

Danub
e

50

h

HARGHITA
HARGHITA

Pitesti

25

To
Chisinau

NEAMT
Gheorgheni

INTERNATIONAL BOUNDARIES

Iasi

Birlad

Alba
Lulia

Hunedoara

n
t

CARAS SEVERIN

0

PiatraNeamt

COUNTY (JUDET) BOUNDARIES

To
Chisinau

Petrosani

To
Novi Sad

44°N

t

a

is
Tim

TIMIS

a

B

SE RB IA
AND
AN
MO N T E NE
N
E G RO

TTîrgu
îrgu
Mures

Deva

Timisoara
Timisoara

ta

res

ALBA
Brad

Mures

Lugoj

tri

MURES

Turda
Turda

ARAD

IASI

p

CLUJ

Crisul A
lb

r

SALAJ

Bis

Bistrita

ClujNapoca

Arad

et

a

Dej

BIHOR

To
Budapest

MAIN ROADS
RAILROADS

Suceava

C

HUN G ARY

BISTRITABISTRIT
ANASAUD

Zalau

Oradea

SUCEAV
SUCEA
SUCEAVA
VA

Baia Mare

RIVERS

Botosani

Sir

MARAMURES

SATU MARE
SATU

To
Budapest

48°N

BOTOSANI

Satu Mare

To
Subotica

NATIONAL CAPITAL

To
˘
Balti

This map was produced by the Map Design Unit of The World Bank.
The boundaries, colors, denominations and any other information
shown on this map do not imply, on the part of The World Bank
Group, any judgment on the legal status of any territory, or any
endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.

To
Sofiya

24°E

BULGA RIA

To
Veliko Turnovo
˘

To
Shumen

To
Shumen

To
Varna

30°E

IBRD 33469

NOVEMBER 2004

Mangalia

Tur
urnu
nu Magurele
Turnu

