Public Disclosure Authorized

–i–
Document of
The World Bank
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Public Disclosure Authorized

Report No. 35435

INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT
AND INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION
AND MULTILATERAL INVESTMENT GUARANTEE AGENCY

Public Disclosure Authorized

COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY
FOR
THE PEOPLE’S REPUBLIC OF CHINA
FOR THE PERIOD 2006–2010

Public Disclosure Authorized

May 23, 2006

China Country Management Unit
East Asia and Pacific Region
International Finance Corporation
Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance
of their official duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without World Bank authorization.

– ii –
CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS
US$1.00 = RMB 8.037 (as of March 2006)
The last China Country Assistance Strategy was discussed on December 19, 2002.

AAA
ADB
AIDS
ASEAN
CAE
CAS
CDB
CDD
CDM
CEM
CG
CPC
CPS
CR
CSR
CSRC
DAC
DFID
DOTS
EIA
E.U.
FDI
FIAS
FY
FYP
GDP
GEF
GHG
GoC
HFC
HIV
IBRD
ICT
IDA

ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS
Analytical and Advisory Activities
IEG
Independent Evaluation Group
Asian Development Bank
IFC
International Finance Corporation
Acquired Immune Def iciency
IMF
International Monetary Fund
Syndrome
M&E
Monitoring and Evaluation
Association of Southeast Asian
MDGs
Millennium Development Goals
Nations
MIC
Middle Income Country
Country Assistance Evaluation
MIGA
Multilateral Investment Guarantee
Country Assistance Strategy
Agency
China Development Bank
MOFCOM Ministry of Commerce
Community-Driven Development
MoF
Ministry of Finance
Clean Development Mechanism
MoFA
Ministry of Foreign Affairs
Country Economic Memorandum
MSE
Micro and Small Enterprises
Consultative Group
NCMS
New Cooperative Medical Scheme
Communist Party of China
NDRC
National Development Reform
Country Partnership Strategy
Commission
Completion Report
NGO
Non-Governmental Organization
Corporate Social Responsibility
NPL
Non-Performing Loan
China Securities Regulatory ComODA
Official Development Assistance
mission
ODS
Ozone Depleting Substance
Development Assistance CommitOECD
Organization for Economic
tee
Cooperation and Development
United Kingdom Department for
PBoC
People’s Bank of China
International Development
PCBs
Polychlorinated Biphenyls
Directly Observed Treatment StratPEP
Private Enterprise Partnership
egy (for treating tuberculosis)
POPs
Persistant Organic Pollutants
Environmental Impact Assessment
PPP
Purchasing Power Parity
European Union
PSU
Public Service Unit
Foreign Direct Investment
QAG
Quality Assurance Group
Foreign Investment Advisory SerRCC
Rural Credit Cooperative
vice
RMB
Renminbi (Chinese currency)
Fiscal Year
SAFE
State Admin. of Foreign Exchange
Five Year Program
SARS
Severe Acute Respiratory SynGross Domestic Product
drome
Global Environment Facility
SCB
State-owned Commercial Bank
Greenhouse Gas
SME
Small- and Medium-sized EnterGovernment of China
prise
Trifluoromethane
SOE
State-Owned Enterprise
Human Immunodeficiency Virus
TA
Technical Assistance
International Bank for ReconstrucTVE
Township and Village Enterprise
tion and Development
UN
United Nations
Information and Communication
U.S.
United States
Technology
WBI
World Bank Institute
International Development AssoWRM
Water Resources Management
ciation
WTO
World Trade Organization

IBRD

IFC

MIGA

Vice President:

Jeffrey Gutman

Declan Duff

Yukiko Omura, Exec.

Country Director:

David Dollar

Karin Finkelston

Philippe Valahu

Task Team Leader:

Johannes Zutt

Stoyan Tenev

Cecilia Sager

– iii –

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Executive summary .......................................................................................................

v

Country context ......................................................................................................
A. Social and economic context ..............................................................................
B. Poverty profile ....................................................................................................

1
1
4

II. China’s development challenges ............................................................................

7

I.

III. Bank Group track record ...................................................................................... 12
IV. Bank Group strategy ..............................................................................................
A. Pillar 1: Integrating China into the world economy ............................................
B. Pillar 2: Reducing poverty, inequality, social exclusion ......................................
C. Pillar 3: Managing resource scarcity and environmental challenges ...................
D. Pillar 4: Financing sustained and efficient growth ..............................................
E. Pillar 5: Improving public and market institutions ..............................................

15
18
20
23
28
30

V. Delivering the Bank Group program ....................................................................
A. Business Volume .................................................................................................
B. The portfolio .......................................................................................................
C. Piloting new approaches to IBRD lending ..........................................................
D. The Bank Group’s knowledge program ...............................................................
E. Partner roles and donor coordination ..................................................................
F. Portfolio management ..........................................................................................
G. Managing risks ...................................................................................................
H. Conclusion ..........................................................................................................

33
35
35
38
38
40
39
44
46

Annexes
Annex 1: China CPS results matrix .......................................................................... 47
Annex 2: CAS completion report ............................................................................. 55
Annex 3: Private sector development strategy .......................................................... 109
Annex 4: Millennium development goals ................................................................. 121
Annex 5: Consultations on country partnership strategy .......................................... 122
Annex 6: Standard CPS annexes .............................................................................. 130
Annex 7: Country Financing Parameters .................................................................. 144

– iv –

–v–

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
1.
China has grown rapidly since 1978, when it began to reform. Over the past 27
years, it has shifted from a centrally-planned to a market economy, maintained GDP growth
of about 9% per annum, and lifted 400 million people out of pov-erty. With a population of
1.3 billion, China recently became the world’s fourth largest economy and third largest trading nation. Even so, China remains a developing country, with GDP per capita about $1,740
and more than 135 million people living on less than $1 a day. It also faces daunting challenges in maintaining rapid growth; managing the resource demands and environmental consequences of growth; and addressing the resulting inequalities in income and opportunity,
which could otherwise undermine the consensus needed to undertake growth-oriented policy
reforms.
2.
To succeed in meeting these challenges, China will need to shift its growth strategy
from one that relies heavily on industry and investment to one that encourages development
of the services industry and reduces barriers to labor mobility. Growth that is more balanced
between industry and services as well as between capital accumulation (on one side) and
urban employment and productivity growth (on the other) will result in higher employment
growth, a more economic and sustainable use of energy and primary commodities, and less
environmental degradation. The Government of China (GoC) will encourage this shift in
implementing its 11th Five Year Program (FYP), which is a "people-centered" strategy aiming to achieve a “harmonious society” that balances economic growth with distributional and
ecological concerns.
3.
The Bank Group continues to play an important development role in China. Through
a combination of AAA and knowledge embedded in its limited lending, the Bank has supported innovations that, scaled-up, have provided benefits far exceeding the direct benefits
of the original projects. These spillover benefits include, for example, key policy or institutional reforms, upgraded technologies, and stronger human resource capacity in local governments. Innovations typically draw on the Bank Group’s international experience and
emerge from a long-term GoC-Bank Group partnership founded on trust, shared commitment, and pragmatic cooperation aiming to bring a sustainable solution tailored to a pressing
development problem.
4.
Given China’s financial circumstances and its appropriate development program,
the Bank Group aims to be a client-driven knowledge institution that uses lending and other
operations to pilot reforms and support institutional development. This Country Partnership
Strategy (CPS) focuses on five thematic areas of engagement that build on the Bank Group’s
international expertise while maximizing the creation and dissemination of knowledge of
China’s development processes inside and outside China. In particular, the Bank Group aims
to help:

•

Integrate China into the world economy, by deepening its participation in multilateral economic institutions, reducing internal and external barriers to trade and investment, and contributing to its overseas development efforts (pillar 1);

– vi –

•

Reduce poverty, inequality and social exclusion, through promoting balanced urbanization, sustaining rural livelihoods, and expanding access to basic social and
infrastructure services, particularly in the rural areas (pillar 2);

•

Manage resource scarcity and environmental challenges, through reducing air pollution, conserving water resources and optimizing energy use (partly through pricing reforms), improving land administration and management, and observing international environmental conventions (pillar 3);

•

Deepen financial intermediation, by expanding access to financial services (especially among SMEs), developing the capital markets, managing systemic risks, and
maintaining financial stability (pillar 4); and

•

Improving public and market institutions, by improving firm competitiveness, reforming public sector units, and rationalizing intergovernmental fiscal relations
(pillar 5).

5.
The Bank Group will support GoC activities in these areas through a variety of
instruments. IBRD AAA and lending will apply international expertise to helping the GoC to
complete the transition to a market economy, improve the welfare of the poor and near-poor,
and develop and implement sustainable resource-management practices. In an increasingly
important role, IFC investments will support China’s structural transition by helping the GoC
to strengthen financial institutions and shift assets into the private sector while also helping
the private sector to adopt international practices. In parallel, MIGA guarantees will support
infrastructure development through FDI, in areas where investors perceive significant noncommercial risk and with a focus on lagging regions. In general, Bank Group interventions
will aim to complete standard-setting model projects or transactions that promote innovation, create demonstration effects, and achieve best practices.
6.
Bank Group AAA will remain a large part of the program, supporting in particular
pillars 1, 4, and 5, where opportunities for lending and investment are limited. IBRD lending—which will also aim explicitly at learning—will support pillars 2 and 3 and, to a modest
extent, 4. IFC investments and TA will focus on pillars 4 and 5, with selective contributions
to pillars 1, 2, and 3 as well. MIGA guarantees and TA will support pillars 1, 2, 3, and 5,
while WBI learning and capacity-building activities will support pillars 1, 3 and 5. Over the
CPS period, it is expected that the Bank Group’s overall exposure to China will remain stable
or grow slowly. IBRD lending is expected to range over $1.0 billion to 1.5 billion a year; IFC
investments to grow from about $400 million to about $700 million a year; and MIGA guarantees to remain at about $50 million in coverage a year.
7.
The key risks to the Bank Group’s development effectiveness in China are stagnation
in the reform process, financial sector difficulties, an external shock, a health epidemic such
as the avian flu, or social instability leading to an economic slowdown. Each risk is being
carefully monitored, and the GoC is taking measures to address each of them.

–1–

I. COUNTRY CONTEXT
1.
Over the last 25 years, the Bank Group’s relationship with China has evolved from
one where the Bank Group shared its international experience with a newly emerging China
to one where China, as it begins to take a larger role in the international community, is increasingly sharing its experiences and its thinking on global development issues with the Bank
Group and the rest of the world. In recognition of China’s double role as a Bank client and a
development partner, the Bank Group’s new strategy for China is a Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) that covers the period 2006 to 2010 and is co-terminous with the 11th Five Year
Program (FYP) of the GoC. A mid-term review of the CPS will be conducted in July 2008.

A.

SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC CONTEXT

Towards developing an all-inclusive “xiaokang” society
2.
China’s FYPs set out the objectives, guiding principles and main tasks for China’s
economic and social development for a five-year period. Under the 10th FYP, which covered
the period 2001 to 2005 (including the period of the last CAS), the GoC continued to pursue
its aim of establishing a harmonious and moderately prosperous (“xiaokang”) society. Rapid
growth since the beginning of the reform period in 1978 enabled the GoC to reach its original
target of raising GDP per capita to $800 by 2000, but the GoC at that time also recognized
that the resulting xiaokang society was “at a low level”, “not all-inclusive”, and “very uneven”. Hence, in November 2002, it put forward a vision of an “all-inclusive xiaokang society” by 2020. That aim was subsequently identified, inter alia, with three quantitative targets:
achieving GDP per capita of $3,000, increasing urbanization to 50%, and decreasing the
ratio of agricultural employment to total employment to 30% (from 50% in 2000).
China’s progress under the 10th Five Year Program
3.
Steady progress towards these goals was made under the 10th FYP. The GoC achieved
its principal objective of maintaining rapid economic development over 2000 to 2005, as
China’s GDP increased by about 57% (an average increase of 9.5% per annum) and GoC
revenues by about 136%. Agricultural production, and in particular grain production, improved, while the output of manufactured products rose substantially. Many major construction projects were completed and others were initiated in areas such as energy, transportation,
communications, and water conservancy. The GoC also continued to implement reforms in
the areas of rural development, state-owned enterprises (SOEs), and the financial, fiscal, tax
and investment systems, with a view to improving macroeconomic management and strengthening the role of market forces in allocating resources (see Table 1 on market-based pricing).
4.
With its accession to the World Trade Organization (WTO) in 2001, China continued
to open up to the outside world. Imports from other Asian countries have grown rapidly as
China becomes an export destination of choice, especially of parts for assembly. The 2004 free
trade agreements between China and ASEAN reinforce this trend. Over 2001 to 2005, China’s
import and export volume tripled, making China the third largest trading nation in the world

–2–
(and also making the country more
Table 1: Transactions at market prices (%)
vulnerable to trade shocks), while
1978
1991
2003
foreign direct investment (FDI) inProducer goods
creased by $274 billion cumulatively
Market prices
0
46
87.3
(with about $60 billion added in each
State-guided
0
18
2.7
of 2004 and 2005). China also
State-fixed
100
36
10.0
strengthened its external position. Its
trade surplus exceeded $100 billion
Retail sales
in 2005, driven partly by rising FDI,
Market prices
3
69
96.1
State-guided
0
10
1.3
and rising current account surpluses
State-fixed
97
21
2.6
together with strong capital inflows
brought net international reserves to
Farm commodities
$819 billion by the end of 2005 (secMarket prices
6
58
96.5
ond only to Japan). In adjusting to
State-guided
2
20
1.6
China’s growing international role,
State-fixed
93
22
1.9
the central bank in July 2005 anSource: NDRC and Price Yearbooks
nounced that it would no longer peg
the renminbi to the U.S. dollar but
move to a managed floating exchange rate regime based on market conditions with reference
to a basket of currencies; the renminbi thereafter appreciated slightly against the dollar.
5.
As the pace of industrialization, urbanization, market development and
internationalization increased and China’s overall production capacity reached new highs,
people’s living standards also reached new highs. Over 2000 to 2005, urban per capita disposable income rose by 58% and rural per capita net income by 29% (both in real terms).
About 42 million new jobs were created in the urban areas, and consumer spending on
housing, communications, automobiles and services grew significantly, leading to highly
visible changes both in rural and urban areas. China also managed to avoid serious economic disruptions from the Asian financial crisis, the SARS outbreak, and several major
natural disasters.
Figure 1: Growth rates (%, 1990-2003)
14
13.4

12
10.9

10
8

8.5

8.9

Household
consumption

Government
consumption

6
4
2
0

1

Capital
formation

Export
volume

6. At the same time, China’s development encountered several problems during the 10th FYP period.
One key problem has been heavy dependence on investment to maintain
growth (see Figure 1), reflecting financial sector inefficiency as well as
a local government preference for
investment over consumption. 1
Other problems include weak capacity for independent innovation, excessive consumption of energy and
resources, worsening environmental
pollution, serious unemployment,

In 2004, the GoC tried to moderate investment growth (which was raising concerns about overheating and the
re-ignition of inflation) by deregulating interest rates and imposing a series of measures to limit investment in
over-heated sectors, but investment growth has remained high. Hence, changing China’s unbalanced economic structure and pattern of growth remains a key challenge.

–3–
widening gaps in development between urban and rural areas and between regions, growing
disparities between certain income groups, and inadequate development of social programs.
The 11th FYP aims to start solving these problems.
China’s 11th Five Year Program
7.
The GoC’s 11th FYP, which has been under preparation since July 2003, covers the
period 2006 to 2010. The draft of the 11th FYP, approved by the National People’s Congress
in March 2006, deepened the GoC’s commitment to achieving an all-inclusive xiaokang
society and began to articulate a detailed roadmap towards achieving it. Based on data from
China’s first economic census, the program will implement a “scientific approach to development” to build a “harmonious society”, with more jobs, better services, improved social
security, and higher living standards for China’s citizens. In continuity with the 10th FYP, the
11th FYP aims to sustain the rapid and steady development of China’s “socialist market
economy”, while in addition achieving the “five balances” (between rural and urban development, interior and coastal development, economic and social development, people and
nature, and domestic and international development) and making economic and social development more people-oriented, comprehensive, balanced and sustainable.
8.
The 11th FYP includes two key quantitative targets. First, it aims to achieve annual
GDP growth of 7.5%, with the goal of doubling 2000 GDP per capita by 2010. Second, it
aims to reduce energy consumption per unit of GDP by 20%, and the total discharge of major
pollutants by 10%, by 2010, with a view to relieving mounting pressure on resources and the
environment.
9.

The program also includes a number of strategic priorities and major tasks, including:

•

Rebalancing China’s pattern of growth, by accelerating development of the service sector; improving the performance and competitiveness of large industry through
utilizing technological innovation; and building a resource-efficient and environmentally-friendly society through undertaking key energy-saving projects and developing a “circular” (recycling) economy;

•
•

Deepening reforms and opening further to the outside world;

•

Promoting more balanced development among the different regions, by encouraging cooperation and mutual assistance among them; zoning the territory into
four different development categories; and promoting urbanization to take advantage of the leading role of city clusters in driving development and poverty reduction; and

•

Increasing the capacity for independent innovation as well as for assimilating
advanced foreign technologies, refining them, and integrating them into commercial applications.

Constructing a “new socialist countryside” that will modernize agriculture, build
rural institutions, improve rural infrastructure and service delivery, and raise farmers’ incomes;

10.
The 11th FYP recognizes that achieving these tasks will place increased demands on
government. Hence, the program is also committed to combatting corruption; improving
transparency; establishing a sound accountability system; reducing discretion in matters sub-

–4–
ject to administrative review; reforming government administration to separate regulatory
functions from enterprise management; and rationalizing the state’s role in service delivery
by determining when the state should merely regulate the private production of a particular
good or service, when it should fund its provision, and when it should undertake direct provision.
11.
China’s 11th FYP is ambitious, even considering China’s remarkable track record of
economic growth and poverty reduction since the beginning of the reform period. At the
same time, it directly addresses most of the central development challenges facing China
today (namely, the imbalances that have arisen in part as a result of China’s development
success) and also sets out appropriate goals for reducing poverty and achieving further social
and economic development. Hence it provides an appropriate framework and program for
the Bank’s new CPS to support.

B.

POVERTY PROFILE

12.
With robust growth, both the incidence of poverty and the number of poor has declined since 2001, and at an impressive rate (Table 2). Official estimates now put the number
of poor at 26 million, but this group is best described as ‘extremely poor’ by global standards.
Using the Bank’s $1/day consumption poverty line, poverty fell by about one-third over 2001
to 2004, yet there are still about 135 million poor in China (the second largest national concentration after India and more than 10% of the global poor). Using the GoC’s official poverty line, which is about $0.70 per day, poverty fell a more modest 10% over the same period,
indicating that the extreme poor are benefiting less from China’s rapid growth. A recent
World Bank poverty assessment found that:

•

•

Poverty is a rural phenomenon: 93% of the poor are in
rural areas, 6% are migrants
working in urban areas for six
months or more a year, 1%
are urban.
About one in two poor
people live in the western
provinces.

Table 2: Changes in the incidence of poverty
Poverty line
Official poverty line
($0.70/day)
$1/day consumption
poverty line

Pop. below poverty line
2001
2004
3.2%
29.3m
15.4%
196.1m

2.8%
26.1m
10.4%
134.9m

Source: Bank estimates based on NBS household data

•

Households in remote mountainous areas, in minority areas, or with an adult
unable to work have a higher incidence of poverty (although 98% of poor households have two or more people able to work).

•

Poverty incidence declines steadily with years of schooling (nearly 40% of the
poor have less than 7 years, over 90% have less than 10 years).

•

Recent progress in non-income dimensions of poverty has been less than expected, given China’s per capita rate of growth.

The distribution of poverty
13.
Using poverty as a lens, China can be viewed as three distinct regions (see Table 3).
The coastal region, where 38% of the people live, benefited from its geographical location

–5–

Box 1: Factors contributing to rural income inequality in China

Observable factors contributing to
income inequality in rural areas

Recent Bank work shows that rural income inequality is mainly affected by differences across
households in the number of income earners relative to dependents, which might limit migration possibilities; differences across households in human capital as well as regional differences
in the returns to human capital; and geography and remoteness, which limits local non-farm
employment.
Distance from township (1.6%)
Productivity of land (3.7%)
No. of household members who are migrant workers (4.8%)
Land per worker (6.3%)
Regional differences in returns to human capital (8.1%)
No. of household members with local nonfarm employment (8.2%)
Human capital of household workers (14.2%)
Region (14.4%)
Household structure: dependency ratio (38.2%)

0%

10%

20%

30%

40%

50%

60%

80%

70%

100%

90%

Contribution (%) of factor to observable sources of inequality

Box 2: Is China’s poverty line too low?
The answer appears to be Yes. Of 63 countries with data, only eight use poverty lines below the
$1 a day consumption line. China is one, and it has the lowest ratio of official poverty rate to the
$1 a day rate. China’s official poverty line was only 24% of rural mean income in 2003 (it was
68% in 1980), and studies suggest that the line is equivalent to the food spending needed to
attain the recommended intake of 2,100 calories a day, implying that all food and non-food basic
needs cannot be met

Ratio of poverty rate under official poverty line to poverty rate under dollar-a-day poverty line

Ratio (official poverty rate
to $1/day poverty rate)

5

Countries with national poverty
lines below $/day

4

China
Nigeria
Uganda
Zimbabwe

3

Tanzania
India
Ghana
Mali

2
China

1
0
1

6

11

16

21

26

31

36

41

46

51

56

61

–6–
and an earlier introduction of reforms
to achieve rapid growth and poverty
reduction. By contrast, the central and
western regions have lagged behind.
If these two regions were an economy
on their own, they would constitute a
lower-income country with a population of about 800 million and an FDIto-GDP ratio that is about half that of
sub-Saharan Africa.

Table 3: Three regions (2003)
Region
Coastal Central Western
Population (m)
GDP per capita (US$)
Share of national GDP (%)
Share of national FDI (%)
FDI as GDP %

493
2,395
59
85
4.6

Source: China Statistical Yearbook, 2005.

430
1143
24
11
1.4

371
919
17
4
0.6

–7–

II. CHINA’S DEVELOPMENT CHALLENGES
14. Since initiating reforms in 1978, China has performed extremely well, emerging recently as the world’s fourth largest economy and third largest trading nation. Even so, China
remains a developing country, with GDP per capita of $1,740 and about 135 million people
living on less than $1 a day. To continue to reduce poverty, China needs to maintain rapid
growth, manage its resource demands and environmental consequences, and address the rising inequalities that are a by-product of growth.

A.

MAINTAINING RAPID GROWTH

15.
With sound macroeconomic management, China in 2006 should see low inflation,
growth of 9.0%, and a decline in the current account surplus (after a record surplus in 2005).
China will probably sustain this growth rate through the CPS period, and it has the potential
to sustain high growth rates beyond it, but this will require a transformation in its growth
strategy.
16.
Over 1993 to 2004, the GoC implemented a growth strategy that favored industry and
investment over services and employment. Low resource prices, weak enforcement of environmental regulations, and subsidized financing from a compliant banking sector all favored
industry, which grew sharply from 1990 to 2004. About 60% of growth over the period resulted from growth in capital stock, while total factor productivity growth contributed a third
and employment growth only 6%. At the same time, most industrial growth was in the form of
labor productivity growth rather than employment growth, with the result that the absorption
of surplus rural labor was largely left to the slower-growing service sector. This in turn produced lower growth in urban employment and agricultural productivity than expected, as well
as growing rural-urban income inequality. China cannot afford to continue with this growth
strategy, as it will limit the shift of labor from agriculture to urban employment, further widen
the productivity gap between agriculture and the rest of the economy, and encourage pollution
as well as greater inefficiency in the use of natural resources.
17.
Recognizing this, the CPC’s Central Committee in October 2005 discussed shifting
from a growth pattern that favors capital-intensive industry to one that is less resource-intensive, more ‘knowledge-driven’ (i.e. more efficient), and more equally shared among the population. This will involve reducing subsidies to industry and investment, boosting domestic
consumption, encouraging the services industry, and enhancing labor mobility so that growth
is more balanced between industry and services as well as between capital accumulation and
urban employment and total factor productivity growth. With less capital accumulation in
industry and more investment in services, which is more labor-intensive, urban employment
would grow faster, leading to a larger transfer of labor out of agriculture, higher agricultural
productivity and incomes, and lower rural-urban income inequality (see Table 4).
18.
To enable domestic consumption to drive demand in the economy, China will need
to pursue reforms such as:

•

Developing pension and health insurance systems that enable households to rely
less on built-up savings, and

•

Raising government spending on health and education and shifting the composition
of spending away from investment.

–8–
19.
To maintain growth with lower investment, economic productivity needs to increase
through such measures as:

•

Continued migration of rural labor to the urban areas, facilitated by:




•

•

Giving rural migrants access to urban social services and safety nets; and
Strengthening urban social and infrastructure services, as well as municipal fiscal and financing capacity to provide these services without reliance on excessive land conversion and quasi-fiscal borrowing;

Increased market efficiency, which will in turn be achieved by:


Transforming SOEs and promoting SME and private enterprise growth;



Deepening economic integration into domestic and international markets; and



Continuing reform of the financial markets;

Improved technological capability in firms, achieved by:


Supporting the ‘national innovation system’ with appropriate incentives;



Encouraging FDI and trade that promote technology transfers; and



Creating incentives for enterprise assimilation of ICT.

20.
If the GoC manages these policy challenges well, China can continue to be a source
of growth and productivity increases for the world.

B.

ENSURING THE SUSTAINABILITY OF GROWTH

21.
To manage the resource demands and environmental consequences of rapid growth,
the GoC recognizes that China needs to conserve water resources, restrain energy consumption, and mininize environmental degradation. China already represents a 4% share of the
world economy, and it has become a major source of demand for raw materials in the global
markets (in 2004 it accounted for about half of global growth in metals demand and a third of
global growth in oil demand, though it still accounts for only 8% of the oil market). Currently, China’s GDP is highly energy-intensive: it uses 50–100% more energy per unit of
GDP than OECD countries for some industrial processes, and 20–100% more energy for
residential heating and cooling than OECD countries with comparable climates. At the same
time, water is scarce relative to China’s needs, and the efficiency of water usage remains low,
in part because water policy is inappropriate (urban water prices are relatively low, discour-

Table 4: Sources and aspects of growth (1993–2004, avg. annual increase, %)
On current policies With rebalancing
1978–93 1993–04 2004–14 2014–24 2004–14 2014–24
GDP growth
Total employment growth
Labor productivity growth
Investment/GDP ratio
Agricultural employment (end period)

9.7
3.5
7.0
30.2
56.4

Source: “China’s Pattern of Growth”, Kuijs and Wang, 2005

9.5
1.1
7.8
36.8
46.9

8.0
0.4
7.6
43.4
41.1

8.0
0.0
8
55.3
33.4

8.0
0.8
7.2
34.5
31.3

8.0
0.4
7.6
36.4
12.5

–9–
aging water conservation; even lower rural prices encourage farmers to produce low-value
water-intensive crops such as animal feed rather than high-value food crops; and water pollution standards are poorly enforced). Finally, reliance on coal (chiefly of low quality) together
with the spread of motorization (vehicles now number 29 million, with four million more
added each year) is intensifying air pollution; 20 of the world’s 30 most polluted cities are in
China. Rebalancing growth to sectors that require less energy and resources, by using the tax
system and regulatory framework to adjust energy and resource use in line with scarcity and
social costs, will help. In addition:

•

Reducing the energy intensity of GDP will require:




Adopting higher standards of energy efficiency;



Developing high-density cities with good public transportation; and



•

Pricing oil, gas, and electricity so that it takes into account environmental degradation costs and their impacts on welfare;

Diversifying the sources of energy away from low-quality coal, including by
investing in new technologies (such as fuel-cell, clean coal, and renewables).

Conserving water resources will require:






Pricing water to reflect more accurately the scarcity value of water and the environmental degradation linked to water use and water pollution;
Piloting rural water markets through establishing institutional mechanisms and
agreeing an initial distribution of rural water rights; and
Taking steps to minimize water pollution by processing urban wastewater for
reuse and improving urban solid waste management.

22.
By taking action now, while China’s urbanization and motorization are in early stages,
the GoC will help to limit future demand and also improve the competitiveness of Chinese
firms producing innovative energy- and water-saving technologies.

C.

MANAGING RISING INEQUALITIES

23.
China’s third challenge is to manage the rising inequalities in income and opportunity that have come partly as the byproduct of its transformation from an
Figure 2: Gini index for per capita income
(1981-2004)
agricultural to an industrial economy.
These inequalities (see Figure 2), if allowed to persist, could undermine the
50
consensus needed to undertake policy
Without adjustments
45.3
for spatial cost of
reforms supporting growth and povliving differences
41.1
erty reduction. To counteract this ten40
dency, the GoC aims to rebalance
growth to sectors that require less
30
capital and generate more jobs while
Adjusted for spatial
also strengthening access to key sercost of living
vices, through:
differences
20
1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

– 10 –

•
•

Improving access to good quality social services in poorer areas;

•

Reforming intergovernmental fiscal relations to enable sub-national governments
to match fiscal responsibilities with revenue assignments; and

•

Improving the management of funds at all levels of government to ensure that funds
are used for intended purposes.

Ensuring that social safety nets have broad coverage and provide adequate and effective support to the needy;

Cross-cutting challenges
24.
Further challenges for China include improving governance, addressing gender disparities, and preparing for an upcoming demographic transition.
25.
Governance and corruption. Corruption is a problem in China. The GoC is addressing the systemic issues that contribute to corruption through rationalizing SOEs, reforming
public sector management (including by shifting service delivery responsibilities to the private sector when appropriate), and strengthening regulatory institutions and the judiciary.
Corruption opportunities have already been reduced by simplifying business licensing, using
a ‘negative’ list to approve investments, and registering (instead of approving) small investments; in addition, stricter guidelines have been set for civil servant behavior and accountability. Under the 11th FYP, the GoC will launch a campaign to combat bribery in business,
focusing on irregular transactions in construction, land transfers, property transactions, the
purchase and sale of drugs, and government procurement. It will also continue to remedy
improper practices that harm public interests and focus more attention on outstanding problems such as arbitrary educational charges and excessively high medical costs.
26.
Gender. Overall, China has a good record on gender issues. Nonetheless, disparities
persist between urban and rural areas and inequity is growing in infant mortality as well as in
the sex-birth ratio (the proportion of male to female live births was 114 in the 2000 census
and now exceeds 130 in five provinces). Gender disparities also persist in illiteracy (e.g.,
failure to attend primary school) and access to higher education as well as in migrant labor
patterns, worker layoff practices, and wage rates.
27.
Demographic transition. China is experiencing a profound demographic transition.
Its total fertility rate, 1.8, is below the 2.1 needed to maintain population levels, while life
expectancy has reached 69.6 for men and 73.3 for women—levels seen in MICs like Brazil or
Turkey. In addition, the population is rapidly aging: by 2030 the share of the population above
retirement age will reach 32% (see Table 5). These changes will have social consequences.
Cancer, cardiovascular disease and other diseases of aging will become more common causes
of illness and death, requiring health spending to shift to the elderly. Rapid aging will also add
to the burden of the public pension system, which is not financially sustainable given current
parameters. Low fertility will result in significant declines in the number of school-age children, with the result that the GoC will need to consolidate schools and adjust education planning.

– 11 –
Table 5: Changing demographics

Total population (millions)
Male
Female
Population share (%)
0–14 years old
15 years old to retirement age
Retirement age or older
Old age dependency ratio
Source: Yvonne Sin, World Bank, 2004

2005

2010

2020

2030

1,308
674
634
100
20.2
60.4
19.5
32.2

1366
700
666
100
20.0
58.3
21.7
37.2

1,449
744
705
100
20.3
52.3
27.4
52.5

1,483
762
721
100
17.7
50.1
32.2
64.3

– 12 –

III. THE BANK GROUP TRACK RECORD
A.

THE BANK GROUP CONTINUES TO HAVE IMPACT BEYOND DIRECT PROJECT BENEFITS

28.
The CAS Completion Report (Annex 2) found that the Bank Group still plays an
important development role in China. Through AAA and knowledge embedded in the Bank’s
limited lending to China (less than 0.2% of total investment), the Bank has supported innovations that, scaled-up, have far exceeded the direct benefits of the original projects, including
initiating policy reform, introducing institutional reform and innovation, upgrading technologies, and building human resource capacity. Major developments to which the Bank
Group was an important contributor include:

•
•

A better understanding of growth and equity issues (through the CEM);

•

Financial sector reforms, including interest rate reform, urban credit cooperative
reform, and the introduction of private strategic investors to banks;

•

Deeper financial intermediation, through IFC’s issuance of the first renminbi-denominated bond to be issued by a foreign institution;

•
•

Greater emphasis on the private sector and its enabling environment;

•

GoC improvements in development planning, including through analytical work
supporting the preparation of the 11th FYP;

•
•

Greater focus on institutional and regulatory issues (e.g. utility cost recovery);

•
•

Drafting of the Rural Land Contracting law; and

B.

PROJECT AND PORTFOLIO PERFORMANCE REMAIN STRONG

•

According to IEG, 87% of closed Bank projects evaluated during the CAS period
had satisfactory or better outcomes (compared to a Bank average of 79%), 94%
likely sustainability (compared to a Bank average of 78%), and 81% substantial
institutional development impact (compared to a Bank average of 54%).

•

The current Bank portfolio has no problem projects; the number of projects at risk
in recent years was well below Bank averages; and the IFC portfolio has the lowest
loss-reserve ratio in the region.

A stronger GoC focus on poverty and high-quality poverty analysis, particularly
regarding the impact of China’s December 2001 accession to the WTO;

Greater GoC awareness of resource scarcity and environmental challenges, at all
levels of government, as well as approaches to managing them;

Greater openness and transparency in GoC project management, including procurement, auditing, environmental assessment, and resettlement plans;

Positioning the Bank Group as a knowledge institution, with greater outreach and a
stronger focus on ideas, innovation, and learning.

– 13 –
29.
During the CPS consultations, GoC officials expressed concerns over some project
implementation issues. These are being addressed. Preparation times are falling, procurement clearances are within Bank norms (in FY05 turn-around time averaged 3.05 days, but
clearances for contracts with values above thresholds need improvement), and loan charges
were reduced when the Board reduced the front end fee for FY06 to 0.25%. Also under
consideration are streamlining safeguards procedures (while recognizing that jurisdictional
variability in implementing GoC standards makes harmonization difficult); reducing counterpart funding requirements (MoF and NDRC are considering lower counterpart funding
for social and poverty reduction projects on a case-by-case basis); increasing continuity in
Bank staff working on a particular project; and delegating more responsibility to Bank staff
located in Beijing.

C.

BUT THERE IS STILL ROOM FOR IMPROVEMENT

30.
GoC officials, other stakeholders, and Country Team members noted some constraints that the Bank Group was not fully able to overcome during the CAS period and that
remain challenges today, including:

•

Failure in some cases to scale-up successful projects through integrating them into
GoC programs (due to, inter alia, limited emphasis on innovation in the selection
of some projects, lack of a GoC counterpart with unified authority and policy responsibility, or the absence of rigorous M&E of project impacts);

•

Failure of the Country Team in some cases adequately to match resources (including staff skills) with country priorities, with the result that there has been some
missed opportunities and some inability to engage fully on critical issues where the
Bank has been active (e.g. municipal finance, urban transport modes, cross-sectoral
environment issues);

•

The post-IDA difficulties that poorer jurisdictions have to repay IBRD loans supporting poverty and social sector projects;

•

Poor integration of AAA, lending, and trust-funded activities (in the latter case
because trust fund resource availability does not always match country priorities,
client demand, and Bank Group capacities); and

•

Difficulties in transferring knowledge through the TA components in projects.

D.

GOING FORWARD, THE BANK GROUP SHOULD BUILD ON SUCCESS FACTORS...

•

The Bank’s role in bringing ideas, innovation, and knowledge remains its most valued contribution. While resource transfers are important to sub-national governments, the Bank Group’s comparative advantage lies in its role as an international
knowledge leader and disseminator of good practices.

•

Innovations typically emerge from a long-term GoC-Bank Group partnership founded
on trust, shared commitment, and pragmatic cooperation. Sustained engagement on
key topics is especially important given China’s gradualist approach to reform.

•

The Bank Group’s ‘dual-track’ approach—building trust through lending and supporting policy dialogue through sector work—has been a key success factor. As

– 14 –
the CAE noted, combining persuasion through analytical work and demonstration through pilot projects has enabled the Bank to “punch above its weight” in
China.

E.

... AND MAKE USE OF KEY LESSONS LEARNED DURING THE PAST CAS PERIOD

•

The Bank Group’s new strategy for China should provide a sharper focus on intermediate strategic priorities that provide a “compass” for Bank Group programming
and dialogue.

•

The Bank Group can do more to exploit synergies between investment lending and
analytical work, while recognizing that demonstration projects supported through
lending introduce and localize international knowledge and experience and support
sustained levels of GoC-Bank partnership that are not often achieved through AAA
alone.

•

For investment projects, higher priority should be placed on demonstration aspects
in project selection, M&E, and the dissemination of lessons learned.

•

Both China and the Bank Group stand to gain from new approaches that enable
increased Bank Group engagement in the social sectors, poverty reduction, and
institutional reforms.

– 15 –

IV. THE BANK GROUP STRATEGY
31.
The Bank Group aims to help China shift over time from a growth pattern that favors
capital-intensive industry to one that is less resource-intensive, more effi-cient, and more
equitably shared. This will involve rebalancing growth to sectors that require less capital,
energy, and resources and generate more urban employment. Key steps will include increasing market efficiency, improving firm competitiveness, facilitating the movement of labor
out of agriculture and to the cities, and enhancing domestic demand. While the Bank Group
is only one of many external partners of the GoC, its activities contribute in various ways to
achieving these steps, as indicated in Figure 3.
32.
Bank assistance under this CPS is organized around five thematic pillars, reflecting
a refinement of the 2003–05 CAS pillars and incorporating the ongoing portfolio. Pillar 1,
integrating China into the world economy, will be supported mostly through AAA and IFC
and MIGA activities, including TA. Pillar 2—reducing poverty, inequality, and social exclusion—and Pillar 3—managing resource scarcity and environmental challenges—will be supported through AAA, IBRD lending, and IFC and MIGA activities. Pillar 4, financing
sustained and efficient growth, will be supported mostly by AAA and IFC activities, with
limited IBRD lending, while Pillar 5, improving public and market institutions, will be supported by AAA as well as IFC and MIGA activities. WBI will support learning and capacity-building under pillars 1, 3 and 5. Over the CPS period, IBRD lending will reach up to
$1.5 billion per annum, while IFC investments are expected to grow from $400 million to
about $700 million per year and MIGA guarantees to remain at about $50 million in coverage per year.

Figure 3:

World Bank Strategy for China: Results Chain
China achieves rapid sustainable economic growth that benefits all citizens

Growth pattern shifts from one that favors export-oriented industry and investment to
one that also encourages services, employment, productivity, and consumption

Increased market efficiency
(eliminating subsidies to industry,
encouraging growth of services)

Prices of energy,
water and land
reflect actual
total costs

Improved firm competitiveness
(removing barriers to competition
and incentivizing innovation)

Financing
allocated to
highest return
activities

Technological
transfer through
trade and FDI

Pillar 4

Pillar 1

Labor movement
out of agriculture

Higher domestic
consumption
driving demand

Improved
incentives for
innovation

Urban social and
infrastructure
services
strengthened

Pension, health
insurance allow
less reliance on
savings

Hukou system
reformed

GoC spending
significantly
shifted
to health and
education

Pillar 2

Pillar 2

Environmental,
energy use
standards
strengthened
and enforced

Greater use of
ICT

Local barriers to
national trade
reduced

Pillar 3

Pillar 2

Pillar 5

– 16 –
What results do we aim to achieve over the CPS period?
33.
The CPS results matrix (Annex 1) outlines the results that the Bank Group hopes to
achieve over the CPS period. Outputs are intended to reflect actions or processes that are
substantially in the control of Bank staff; outcomes require additional inputs (including but
not limited to GoC action) and are beyond the direct control of Bank staff, though Bank work
is intended to contribute to their realization. Of the CPS outcomes, the Country Team places
the greatest priority on the following ten:

•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Enhanced Chinese engagement in global and regional economic institutions;
Better approaches to improving rural public services;
An extended rural health insurance scheme (NCMS), with fair financing;
Reductions in the discriminatory aspects of urban social policy;
Improved metropolitan area management, especially for service delivery;
Improved land and water resource management, including improved water pricing;
A reduction in energy intensity by 20% by 2010;
Expanded commercially-sustainable formal bank lending to SMEs;
Simplification of cumbersome or anti-competitive business regulations; and
A new intergovernment fiscal transfer law that improves equalization impacts.

34.
In addition, the Bank Group aspires to improve its poverty work with greater access
to household data, blend IBRD resources with central government transfers to enable continued lending to poorer regions, explore the possibilities of using local currency as well as subnational financing without a sovereign guarantee to support innovation, accelerate the growth
of investment activities in lagging provinces, and help develop private sector solutions to
environmental problems.
The Bank Group’s vision of its work in China
35.
The Bank Group’s vision is to be a client-driven knowledge institution that uses
investment and other operations to pilot reforms, support institutional development, and promote best practice in the private sector. This CPS aims to focus on a few areas of engagement
that build on the Bank Group’s global knowledge base while maximizing the creation and
dissemination of knowledge of China’s development processes in- and outside China. In
implementing the CPS, the Bank aims to:

•

Undertake annual lending and AAA consultations with the GoC to assess CPS implementation progress and refine areas of Bank Group engagement;

•
•
•

Pilot integrated reform programs in a few regions, provinces or municipalities;
Expand knowledge partnerships with key partners inside China;
Increasingly emphasize M&E in its lending and AAA activities to determine what
works and to disseminate this knowledge inside and outside China; and

– 17 –

•

Leverage scarce Bank resources with bilateral grant resources as well as China’s
own budgetary resources to maximize impact across China.

36.
The Bank Group has the greatest impact in areas where experienced staff work with
GoC counterparts on selected client priorities persistently and sequentially, often over many
years. Thus, changes in the Group’s strategy over the CPS period will be incremental. The
five themes around which the CPS is organized reflect the key challenges that China is confronting and must handle well to continue its “peaceful development”. Bank Group interventions will respond to priorities within the themes and be selected on the basis of client demand,
the Bank’s comparative advantage, expected outcomes (especially innovation), scalability,
and cross-sectoral synergies.

Box 3: Why is China a client of the World Bank Group?
The Bank Group provides ideas, innovations, and knowledge that China values
The GoC values the Bank Group’s work in China for the ideas, innovations and knowledge that
it brings. It sees the multilateral Bank Group as a neutral, disinterested partner that can be
trusted to act in China’s best interests, and is strongly interested in learning from the Group’s
international experience. Bank Group activities build on a long-term partnership based on trust,
shared commitment, and pragmatic cooperation that aim to develop and implement sustainable
solutions tailored to pressing development problems. Though modest in scale, Bank Group activities often achieve large impacts, helping to scale-up policy and institutional reform, technological innovation, and improved project management. Under the FY03–05 CAS, for example,
the Bank Group contributed to the GoC’s stronger focus on high-quality poverty analysis; financial sector reform, including interest rate reform and IFC issuance of a renminbi-denominated
“Panda” bond; and greater GoC awareness of resource scarcity and environmental challenges as
well as approaches to managing them.
IBRD borrowing
While the GoC can access international capital markets at a similar or lower interest rate than
IBRD charges, it remains interested in new IBRD borrowing because it values the non-financial
services that IBRD provides as part of its loan package and that are not readily available from
the private sector. In addition, IBRD typically makes an open-ended commitment to remain
involved in the problem until it is satisfactorily resolved, at a cost that is limited to the IBRD
charges on the associated financing.
Even if the GoC sees value in IBRD borrowing, why should IBRD continue to lend? First,
China remains eligible for IBRD lending, and there is no reason to treat China differently from
other eligible members of the Bank. Second, IBRD lending to China brings clear benefits to the
Bank and its other members. In financial terms, IBRD lending to China contributes to the Bank’s
income and so helps to finance its concessional lending. Although IBRD lending involves small
amounts relevant to China, its development impact can be large, due to the spillover benefits of
demonstration projects (in poverty reduction, financial sector reform, and natural resource management) which benefit not only China, but also East Asia and the world. Finally, Bank learning
from its experience in China can be shared with other Bank members that face challenges similar to China’s and are inspired by China’s success.
IFC investments
To sustain long-term growth, many Chinese enterprises need help to upgrade their corporate
governance, environmental and social practices. Chinese private companies work with IFC be(continued on next page)

– 18 –
Box 3: Why is China a client of the World Bank Group? (continued)
cause they value IFC’s services in these areas—services that are most effective when delivered
in conjunction with IFC financing. To help Chinese private companies adopt international norms,
IFC interventions include significant TA, delivered alone or in combination with financing,
mainly through its Private Enterprise Partnership for China (PEP China). As a trusted partner of
the GoC and the private sector, IFC also plays a unique role in piloting initiatives that lead to
further economic opening and liberalization, as demonstrated in the banking sector and bond
markets. Interventions focus on completing standard-setting model transactions for private sector investments, with a view to promoting innovation, creating demonstration effects, and improving international competitiveness.
MIGA guarantees
MIGA complements existing insurance capacity (mostly bilateral political risk providers supporting underlying bilateral trade relationships) and helps attract FDI by covering non-commercial risk associated with projects responding to China’s developmental priorities, particularly in
infrastructure. It also helps Chinese companies, including SMEs, to invest overseas and facilitates new investment to underdeveloped regions through its guarantees and TA. In addition,
MIGA provides mediation support to clients when investment disputes occur.
WBI activities
WBI complements the rest of the Bank Group through its learning and capacity-building programs, which make international best practices, experience and knowledge available to Chinese
audiences as well as Chinese successes, experiences and knowledge available to other developing countries (e.g. through the May 2004 Shanghai Conference on Poverty Alleviation).

A.

PILLAR 1: INTEGRATING CHINA INTO THE WORLD ECONOMY

37.
In 1978, China accounted for less than 1% of the world economy and its foreign
trade was worth $20 billion; today, it accounts for 4% and its foreign trade is worth $1,155
billion, the third largest national total in the world. This growth has occurred in the context of
a broader strategic GoC goal to facilitate China’s “peaceful development”—embracing economic globalization while opening up domestic markets and tapping into international ones.
Given its emerging position, China stands to benefit from a more open rule-based global
economic system as well as from the exchange of global development ideas, knowledge and
experience. Yet it must also manage the challenges resulting from its success, including the
concerns of some nations over its growing global influence and demand for natural resources.
In this context, the Bank Group will support China’s efforts to reduce barriers to trade and
investment and deepen its participation in multilateral institutions, global development initiatives, and cross-border learning.
Increasing Chinese participation in multilateral economic institutions
38.
China’s increasing integration has been a key driver of its economic success, but it
has also increased China’s impact on global trade, capital, and commodity markets as well as
its interdependence with the global economic system. Sound management of the global
economy will require China to have a good understanding of other large economies and other

– 19 –
countries to have a good understanding of China’s economy. In addition, China’s economic
management authorities recognize the importance of China’s participation in multilateral
economic institutions, underpinned by strong research and strengthened analytical capacity
in the government entities that support them. The Bank Group will help to expand understanding and capacities in these areas through:

•

Generating accurate information on China’s economic and social development
and impacts on the world economy, including through preparing a new CEM on
managing a resource-scarce economy which will, inter alia, focus on China’s industrial policy; land, water and energy policies; pricing; taxation; and recycling;

•

Generating analytical work on trade issues, to inform China’s participation in
the WTO, the Doha Round and subsequent rounds of trade talks, and other multilateral and regional trade initiatives; and

•

Collaborating more closely with Chinese research partners, to gain from their
local knowledge, build their analytical capacity, and support China’s participation
in international institutions.

Reducing barriers to trade and investment
39.
China has a strong interest in strengthening the multilateral trading system. Its
greatest economic gains have resulted from its access to global markets; intra-regional opportunities have been significantly less important. Given that China’s market share is rising
and that its exports are sensitive labor-intensive products vulnerable to contingent protection and trade disputes, a rules-based system serves to promote growth in trade that benefits
both China and its trading partners. Helping to establish such a system while simultaneously
addressing the remaining barriers to inward and outward trade and investment will enable
China to reap the full benefits of increased global integration. To do this well, China needs
to complete a rigorous analysis of the costs, benefits, and trade-offs associated with the
various policy options open to it. The Bank Group will help China in this area through:

•
•

Examining the rationale and roadmap for liberalizing the capital account;

•

Implementing trade facilitation measures, particularly in disadvantaged provinces;

•

Supporting China’s “go-global” efforts with the Bank Group’s own South-South
research, advisory support, and project development; and

•

Helping Chinese companies seeking to invest sustainably in other emerging
markets and supporting investments by Southern multinationals in China (IFC and
MIGA).

Assessing and clarifying options for selectively lowering trade and investment
barriers, including their probable impacts on poverty;

Participating in global development initiatives and cross-border learning
40.
In parallel with its increasing integration into the global economy, China is also
playing an increasing role in development activities as it seeks to disseminate its own successes, learn from the innovative practices of other countries, and contribute to global devel-

– 20 –
opment initiatives. Growing development assistance to Africa, contributions to relief efforts
following the 2004 tsunami and the 2005 India-Pakistan earthquake, and a substantial pledge
at the January 2006 avian flu conference testify to China’s growing development role at the
global level. As China increases its official development assistance (ODA) over time, it is in
the interest of China and the world for China to enter into and influence international structures governing ODA, such as the OECD’s Development Assistance Committee and various
multilateral donor agencies. Priority areas where the Bank Group can assist China’s involvement in overseas development assistance include:

•

Increasing China’s participation in learning exchanges and disseminating its
development experiences to other developing countries;

•

Facilitating China’s involvement in global and regional initiatives, such as developing the Greater Mekong Subregion and managing the threat posed by the avian
flu; and

•

Working with Exim Bank to define cofinancing policies for its overseas
concessional loans.

B.

PILLAR 2: REDUCING POVERTY, INEQUALITY, SOCIAL EXCLUSION

41.
China dramatically reduced poverty after 1980, but pockets of extreme poverty remain and income inequality has risen to levels that are high by international norms. While
some increase in inequality is to be expected with reforms that introduce market-based rewards—as some people make more rapid and successful transitions than others—it can be a
source of social instability and lead to inequality in access to health care and education, and
consequently declines in well-being for the excluded. If inequality stems from poor health
care, limited education, or other factors creating unequal opportunities to participate in
growth, it can also reduce efficiency and limit growth to less than economic potential. To
help address these tendencies, Bank Group activities will support GoC efforts to protect the
livelihoods of the rural and urban poor that have a limited capacity to participate in China’s
growth while also building the capacities and opportunities for those that can participate.
Eliminating absolute poverty
42.
China’s remaining poor are increasingly concentrated among those with limited ability to participate in China’s growth—the elderly, disabled, geographically remote, and small
ethnic minorities. For these people, the GoC’s rural poverty program needs to be better targeted, so that more resources actually reach them. Poor villages have been designated and
funds earmarked, but relatively limited funding directly reaches poor households, as most
funding is absorbed at village- or county-level poverty projects. In addition, social assistance
programs for the poor need to be expanded. Since 93% of the poor are rural, expanding rural
health insurance and social protection programs is key. While the entire health service delivery system needs reform, the rural poor suffer the most (see Table 6). Public health spending
is largely focused on hospital subsidies and the urban health insurance scheme (which has
annual revenues of about RMB900 per beneficiary). Moreover, the shift since 1980 towards
private practice at the village and township levels, combined with the informational advantage of providers over patients, can lead providers to administer unnecessary but profitable
care that results in financial calamity to their patients. The New Cooperative Medical Scheme
(NCMS) for rural areas will help, but since proposed funding for the scheme is only RMB40

– 21 –
per person per annum (compared to average rural health spending of RMB274), the scheme
will either go bankrupt or leave households exposed to considerable financial risk. China’s
pension system also needs reform—premiums are high, risk pooling is inadequate, and governance structures are underdeveloped—and again the rural poor suffer the most, as most of
the rural population is not covered by any formal pension program at all. In this context, the
Bank Group can help protect the livelihoods of the remaining poor in rural and urban areas
by:

•

Piloting a community-driven approach to targeting poverty interventions on
poor households, including in minority villages;

•

Identifying options for containing health service delivery costs (e.g. by shifting
from fee-for-service towards a prospective or capitation payment system);

•

Identifying options for increasing funding to NCMS, so it covers basic care and
some high-cost inpatient risks, with subsidies for the poorest users (e.g. through
expansion of the Medical Assistance scheme);

•

Identifying possible parameters for a rural social safety net and pension system and building policy evaluation and program implementation capacity;

•
•

Catalyzing private sector investment in lagging regions (IFC and MIGA); and
Supporting the International Poverty Reduction Center in China (IPRCC).

Building the capacities of the poor
43.
Poverty reduction will also occur through building the capacities of the poor and
creating more opportunities for them to participate in China’s growth. Better education and
training will be key, as they will help raise productivity and transform China from a lower to
an upper middle-income country. While quality improvements are needed across all levels of
education, the emphasis now should be on providing greater access to education to disadvantaged groups (the poor, minorities, migrants, transitioning workers, and people in remote
areas), including at secondary and tertiary levels (see Table 7 for national gross enrollment
rates). The Bank Group will help in these areas by:

•

Developing policy and implementation mechanisms for financing China’s free
9-year compulsory education program and for providing poor students with financial aid for higher education;

•

Piloting ways to deliver skills training integrated with employment opportunities and including adequate monitoring and evaluation of outcomes; and

Table 6: Availability of health care (1980–2004)
Resource per 1,000 people
Hospital beds
Urban
Rural
Health personnel
Urban
Rural

1980

1990

2000

2004

4.70
0.95

4.18
0.81

3.49
0.80

1.64
0.76

8.03
1.79

6.59
1.38

5.17
1.44

4.93
0.98*

Source: China Statistical Yearbooks, 2005;* = 2003

– 22 –
Table 7: Key education statistics
Indicator

1995

China
2000

2004

Primary gross enrollment rate (%)
Secondary gross enrollment rate (%)
Tertiary gross enrollment rate (%)
GoC spending on education (% GDP)

107.0
78.0
7.0
2.6

105.0
89.0
13.0
2.8

107.0
94.0
19.0
3.3

Upper MIC OECD
average average
106.0
85.0
38.0
4.6

101.0
107.0
69.0
5.7

Source: China Education Statistical and Science and Technology Yearbooks, 2004

•

Building capacity for outgrower (small farmer) development and product traceability in agribusiness and forestry projects (IFC).

Expanding economic opportunities for the rural poor
44.
For people living in rural areas and small towns, it is also important to expand economic opportunities. Given China’s water scarcity and limited arable land, increasing agricultural incomes will depend on improving agricultural productivity and diversifying into
more profitable but also more water- and land-efficient crops. Work also needs to be done to
improve the rural business climate and increase opportunities for off-farm employment. Investments aiming to create an effective intercity transportation and communications system
are key to combining local markets into a national market, encouraging rural production for
the market, and spreading the benefits of city-led growth. While the GoC has invested heavily
in infrastructure since 1980, all modes of surface transportation (1.87 million km of roads,
75,000 km of railway, and 122,000 km of waterway) remain well below need, while only one
in two people has a telephone and one in ten has internet access. The Bank Group can help
GoC expand economic opportunities for the rural poor by:

•

Demonstrating the value of scaled-up commercialized agriculture, higher-value
crops and animal products, and the use of farmers associations, while also encouraging research and private sector investment in agriculture;

•

Upgrading transport infrastructure, particularly rural roads but also expressways, railroads and waterways linking inland provinces to the dynamic coast, so
that transportation benefits accrue to the poor, while also improving network management and traffic safety;

•

Expanding rural connectivity and information systems,
improving the environment
for information and communications technology (ICT),
and leveraging ICT to enhance service delivery and
SME competitiveness; and

•

Supporting microfinance
and rural credit cooperatives (see Pillar 4).

Table 8: China’s urbanization
Year

Total

Population (m)
Urban

%

1978
1985
1990
1995
2000
2004
2010
2020

963
1,059
1,143
1,211
1,267
1,300
1,366
1,449

172
251
302
352
459
543
628
797

18
24
26
29
36
42
47
55

Source: Yvonne Sin, World Bank, 2004

– 23 –
Facilitating the migration of surplus rural labor to the urban areas
45.
China’s urban population has expanded at historically unprecedented rates, from
about 172 million people in 1978 to 543 million by 2004 (see Table 8), with an increase of
105 million in the last five years alone. At the same time, industry has continued to move to
the cities to reap the benefits of agglomeration, which include economies of scale and scope,
linkage effects, gains from industrial diversity, access to deep pools of labor with varied
skills, and innovation resulting from the clustering of firms and researchers. With surplus
rural labor estimated still to exceed 100 million, the GoC recognizes that, for many rural
people, the long-term means to reducing poverty will involve moving to the cities. While
urban job creation is expected to remain strong, particularly in the warmer densely-populated cities on the coast and along the Yangtze river (see Table 9), absorbing migrants into the
urban areas will bring challenges in expanding housing, health care, and education, while
avoiding diseconomies of scale. How China shapes its urbanization will determine much of
the productivity and resource intensity of its economy. Besides supporting investments in
human capital, the Bank Group can help by:

•

Piloting programs that provide skills training as well as information and support in job searching to migrants;

•

Identifying options for reforming aspects of urban social policy that limit the
access of rural migrants to benefits in the urban areas;

•

Improving the quality of urban management and infrastructure as well as the
efficiency of urban markets to attract and retain businesses and jobs; and

•

Supporting private enterprise growth in cities as the main source of sustainable job creation (IFC).

C.

PILLAR 3: MANAGING RESOURCE SCARCITY AND ENVIRONMENTAL CHALLENGES

46.
The GoC is increasingly concerned about resource use patterns that are unsustainable, involving inefficiencies that further deplete supply, erode resource quality, and generate
pollution. While resource development and improved technologies may bring some relief,
better resource management is essential to sustainable development. Because China is at the
beginning of its urbanization and motorization, it is still building the infrastructure that will
determine the future level and spatial distribution of its resource use: prudent choices today
would help to manage demand and minimize waste in the future. To help China to manage its
resources, Bank Group activities under this theme will help to mainstream environmental
concerns into the development process; create a resource-saving society through better regulation, pricing and taxation of natural resources; and meet China’s commitments under international environmental conventions.
Building a resource-efficient
society
47.
As China’s heavy industries
continue to grow and urban consumers—increasing in number and
wealth—expand their use of appli-

Table 9: Shares in the economy (%, 2003)
Province

GDP

Export

FDI

Shanghai
Jiangsu
Guangdong
Total

5.3
10.6
11.6
27.6

10.5
13.6
35.1
59.1

10.2
19.7
14.6
44.6

Source: China Statistical Yearbook, 2004

– 24 –
ances and motor vehicles, China will face growing demands for water and energy (see Table
10 for growth in water use). These demands will be increasingly difficult to meet. China has
limited supplies of water (about 1/4 the global average per capita) and of oil and gas. For
growth to remain robust, China needs to manage these limited resources well. This will
involve both improving the efficiency of supplying water and energy and reducing the intensity of their use through aggressively pursuing changes in technology, industry composition,
resource pricing, and conservation incentives to restrain consumption (see Table 11 for energy intensity in selected industries). It will also involve developing a “circular” (recycling)
economy and improving the management of natural resources such as land, grasslands, forests, and water resources, including by involving affected communities.
48.
Such measures will help to reduce the impact of China’s growth on Table 10: Water use by sector
1980
2004
its environment. Although China is
3
3
bm
%
bm
%
still a less developed country with a
small environmental footprint per
Total
444.0
558
capita, its overall environmental imProduction
416.0
94.0
482
86.0
Agricultural
370.0
83.0
359
64.0
pacts are already large. China’s reliIndustrial
46.0
10.0
123
22.0
ance on coal to meet 70% of its energy
Domestic
28.0
6.0
65
10.0
needs has made it the world’s second
Urban
6.8
1.5
28*
5.2*
largest emitter of CO2; in addition, two
Rural
21.3
4.8
29*
5.3*
out of three cities in China fail to meet
acceptable air quality standards, con- Source: World Bank, 2006. Note: * 2000 data
tributing to illness and premature
death. The Bank Group can help China to save water and energy resources, restrain consumption, and minimize environmental impacts by:

•

Promoting more efficient water and energy supply systems, including by:








Encouraging the development and use of clean and renewable energy technologies (biogas, wind, and photovoltaic energy (with GEF funding));
Demonstrating more efficient ways of supplying and using coal, including
clean coal technologies, since much future supply will come from plants fueled
by China’s coal reserves even if the GoC dramatically expands renewable energy and meets its ambitious targets for hydro and nuclear power;
Strengthening the commercial management of energy supply companies by
helping them to divest non-core assets and the GoC to reduce monopolistic practices and clarify regulatory frameworks (esp. for oil and gas);
Creating more competitive electrical power markets, starting with generation and gradually extending into wholesale and retail;

Table 11: Energy use per unit of output: China vs. international best practice
Nitrogen
Electric Coal-fired Heavy Coal-fired
Steel Cement Fertilizer Paper Motors Boilers Trucks Power
Best practice
China good practice

1.00
1.21

1.00
1.45

1.00
1.31

1.00
2.20

Source: NDRC, Mid- to Long-Term Energy Conservation Plan, 2004

1.00
1.11

1.00
1.15

1.00
2.25

1.00
1.19

– 25 –

Box 4: How China can manage vehicle fuel use and improve the environment
By using proven technologies and policies, the GoC can dramatically lower future fuel use and
green-house gas emissions without compromising its automative industrial development objectives (in China there are just 9 cars per 1,000 people; in the U.S. 700). The figure below shows
alternative futures:
The Road Ahead scenario assumes current fuel prices and motorization growth rates, with car
numbers reaching 145 million, utilization remaining at about 12,500 km per year, and conventional gas as the fuel choice for all but 1–2% of vehicles by 2020.
The Oil Saved scenario assumes 10%
fewer cars in 2020 than the “Road
Ahead”, fuel prices at European levels, car utilization of about 10,200 km
per year, and high use of hybrid electric, compressed natural gas, and
small electric vehicles (50%, 20%,
and 10% respectively by 2020).
The City Saved scenario adds highdensity city development, better public transportation, and high parking
and road charges on vehicles used in
cities, further reducing vehicle use to
8,800 km per year. (Source: China
Motorization Trends, Ng and
Schipper, 2005).







•

Fuel use and greenhouse gas emissions:
alternative possible futures (2005 = 100)
1000
900
800
700
600
500
400
300
200
100
0

2005
Actual

2020
Road Ahead
Fuel

2020
Oil Saved

2020
Cities Saved

GHG

Creating more efficient water markets, inter alia by piloting bulk water markets and expanding volumetric water pricing;
Expanding urban wastewater collection and treatment facilities while upgrading utility management and performance, so that affected cities expand the
reuse of water (currently only 30% of water is reused in China, compared to
75% in other industrialized countries); and
Expanding the role of the private sector in supplying energy and water.

Identifying policy options for reducing consumption, including by:






Promoting the liberalization of water, oil, gas, and electricity markets as
well as the gradual establishment of pricing mechanisms that reflect market supply and demand and the scarcity of resources (over 50% of energy
efficiency gains in the 1980s–90s resulted from price rises that encouraged industries and consumers to buy resource-efficient products);
Identifying stricter resource-use standards for cars, buildings, appliances,
and industrial processes, and improving enforcement, to moderate growth in
demand and create incentives for firms to upgrade capabilities;
Identifying ways to reduce water use in agriculture, e.g., by shifting towards
less water-intensive crops and improving the productivity of irrigation;

– 26 –

Box 5: Addressing climate change
With a rapidly growing coal-dependent economy, China has a critical role to play in global
efforts to address climate change. China is already the second largest emitter of CO2 in the
world (although per capita emissions are still just 1/4 of the average developed country level),
and it could surpass the U.S., the current leader, by 2030. The main cause is coal consumption,
which causes 80% of China’s green-house gas (GHG) emissions as well as widespread air pollution and acid rain. With its long coastline and vast expanses of arid and semi-arid land, China
is also vulnerable to the adverse impacts of climate change, which could intensify water shortages in northern China, increase the incidence of extreme temperature events and consequent
flooding and droughts, and reduce the yields of major crops. The sheer size and speed of China’s
economic growth suggest that China cannot follow traditional growth patterns and must adopt
proactive energy policies to avoid potentially large risks of elevated health and environmental
damage and energy supply disruptions which could undermine China’s long-term goal of becoming a prosperous and harmonious society.
China has a good understanding of the challenge of addressing climate change. The GoC has
made commendable efforts to reform the energy sector and support the adoption of energyefficient and renewable energy technologies. For the 11th FYP, China has pledged to improve
energy efficiency by 20% and meet 10% of its energy needs from renewables by 2020. Yet many
of the GoC’s interventions in the energy sector have been reactive and incremental, due to concerns about supply disruptions and high financial costs. With the goal of quadrupling the
economy between 2000 and 2020, China still has many opportunities to address climate change
through vigorously adopting low-carbon energy options for new investment over the next 15
years, during which two-thirds of the 2020 economy will be built. As the world’s largest developing economy, with substantial and growing market power, China could become a world leader
in using advanced thermal and large-scale renewable energy technologies; setting energy efficiency standards for buildings, manufacturing, and automobiles; and creating an efficient urban
and public transportation network. Because China will continue to rely on coal in the near term,
the GoC also needs to promote low-impact coal mining and utilization technologies and accelerate afforestation and reforestation programs to support carbon sequestration. A proactive policy
response of this kind would generate large national benefits by improving ambient air quality,
reducing acid deposition, and mitigating climate change damage to human health and the environment.
The Bank Group, in close partnership with the GoC, is engaged in a range of areas directly
relevant to climate change. Reducing China’s reliance on coal has been a major theme of the
Group’s policy dialogue and has been supported by Bank, IFC and GEF lending and AAA on
improving energy efficiency, increasing the use of natural gas, and scaling-up the renewable
energy market. The Bank has also helped to formulate the recently-passed China Renewable
Energy Law, assess opportunities for participation in the Clean Development Mechanism (CDM)
market, design the policy and institutional framework for CDM market development, and establish and capitalize the Clean Development Fund. In January 2006, the Bank and the GoC identified several areas for deepening their partnership on climate change under the CPS, including
strengthening policy making and institutional capacity; strengthening the enabling environment
for CDM projects; supporting research, transfer and application of low-carbon technologies;
and facilitating knowledge transfer and research on climate change impacts and adaptation technologies. Deepening this partnership is a key objective of this CPS.



Promoting urbanization and transportation options, including public transportation, that reduce the movement of goods and services and shift it to the
most efficient modes, to reduce pollution and fuel consumption; and

– 27 –


Identifying private financing for renewable, energy efficiency projects.



Mitigating the environmental impacts of human activities, including by:







Piloting strategic environmental assessments in selected cities and provinces,
to integrate environmental concerns into development activities;
Piloting improved approaches to natural resource management, by involving communities and promoting socially-responsible private investment, to contain resource degradation and resulting negative externalities; and
Promoting good corporate practices in environmental management.

Improving land administration and management
49.
China, unlike any other country, distinguishes firmly between rural and urban land
use rights, markets, and administration. Urban land, owned by the state, enjoys a more complete set of use rights than rural land, owned by collectives. Local governments have exclusive power to acquire rural land for public or private development purposes. Moreover, land
acquisition by law results in compensation payment based on agricultural output value rather
than actual real estate value, which is often much greater. Thus collective landowners usually
do not benefit from the higher value of land when it enters urban markets or is allocated for
development use. Administratively, local governments decide on land to be acquired and
compensation to be paid with relatively little oversight. This frequently results in imprudent
local government reliance on revenue from land conversion to supplement their budgets as
well as inefficient urban growth patterns (as cheap land fuels expansion rather than higher
density). The GoC is taking steps to address these issues. The national land law is under
revision, land acquisition procedures and administrative oversight are to be strengthened,
and innovative measures (e.g., annuities, insurance schemes, and local social security systems) are being tested to protect the interests of farmers whose land is acquired. The Bank is
helping to address these challenging issues by:

•

Outlining options for clarifying landholder rights, land acquisition and compensation practices, and supporting alternative approaches to the requisition
of rural land for urban public and private users;

•

Helping to enhance the role of land as a stable revenue source (e.g., by introducing a property tax), thus lessening incentives for farmland conversion;

•

Helping to strengthen public accountability by establishing administrative oversight procedures and by improving information disclosure practices.

Observing international environmental conventions
50.
While the GoC has compelling domestic reasons to address its resource scarcity and
environmental challenges, it has also made commitments under international environmental
conventions (on climate change, ozone-depleting substances (ODS), persistant organic pollutants (POPs), biodiversity, and international seas). The Bank Group can help China to meet
its environmental commitments by:

•

Demonstrating the use of coal-bed methane and carbon finance transactions,
and scaling them up;

– 28 –

•

Eliminating ODS and piloting phaseout projects for mirex, chlordane, and polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs);

•
•
•

Formulating a strategy to protect biodiversity;

D.

PILLAR 4: FINANCING SUSTAINED AND EFFICIENT GROWTH

Showing how pollution in coastal areas can be effectively reduced; and
Promoting sustainable cultural and eco-tourism by developing model sites and
increasing the number of heritage sites with environmental protection measures in
place.

51.
While China has a good investment climate relative to other developing countries,
this is not true for its financial system, which provides poor services to the dynamic private
sector that is the main engine of growth and job creation. SOEs account for only a fifth of
industrial GDP but absorb two-thirds of credit, and it is surprising that China needs to invest
45% of GDP to grow at its current rate. If the financial sector did a better job of allocating
investment to high return activities China could grow at the same rate with less investment,
while also experiencing lower levels of NPLs.
Expanding access to finance
52.
Meeting the demand for financial services efficiently, including in rural areas, involves ensuring the long-run financial stability of service providers in a fair and competitive
market. In 2004, the GoC removed the upper limit on loan interest rates, enabling financial
markets for the first time accurately to price financial risks. Reform efforts now aim to expand access to commercially sustainable financial services so that, over time, non-commercial lending is eliminated except where socially justified. This will require promoting
competition within the banking sector, both from healthier domestic banks and new domestic
and foreign entrants, through leveraging capital raising and privatization to improve bank
governance and resolving unviable banks that stay in business by underpricing risks or overbidding for deposits, thus competing unfairly with sounder banks. It will also require commercializing SCBs through divesting non-core assets, restructuring bad debt, and introducing
new ownership and governance arrangements. Recent progress has included attracting foreign strategic investors that bring new capital and management practices, including through
public stock offerings (see Table 12). Increased private participation, if done well, could reduce the potential for further state-financed recapitalizations and improve the incentives for
bank staff to serve client needs (today, most firms in China have difficulty obtaining bank
loans due to high costs, complex procedures, restrictive collateral requirements, and demanding terms and conditions; lack of a credit rating system aggravates these problems). In this
area, the GoC could lever its ownership interest in the SCBs and central
Table 12: Foreign participation in banking sector
government SOEs that are troubled
Type of participation
2002
Oct. 2004
debtors to develop a framework for reRepresentative offices
211
233
structuring the debtors, thus helping
Commercial
operations
180
204
to eliminate pressure for non-commerLicensed for RMB business
45
105
cial lending by SCBs. The Bank
Total assets ($b)
478
659
Group will continue its large research
Source: Bank for International Settlements and CBRC

– 29 –
program focused on these issues, and in addition is helping to expand access to financial
services with TA, lending and IFC investments, by:

•
•
•
•

Piloting commercially sustainable formal bank lending to MSEs;

•
•
•
•

Providing TA for IFC partner financial institutions in the lagging provinces;

Piloting reforms in rural credit cooperatives through model transactions;
Identifying ways to expand rural access to financial services;
Improving the internal governance and external regulation of financial institutions (banks, collective investments, insurers, and pension funds);

Supporting development of private financial institutions;
Catalyzing development of the private equity and venture capital industry;
Supporting development of the distressed assets market so assets can quickly be
returned to productive use and enterprises regain access to finance.

Developing capital markets
53.
China also needs sound capital markets to diversify the financial system and enable
the economy better to withstand shocks. As the principal issuer of debt securities, the GoC
can ensure efficiency in the government bond market by becoming a price-taker in the primary market, thus improving secondary market liquidity and helping to promote overall
market development. As a sponsor, approver, and financier of infrastructure investments, it
can help ensure that infrastructure in more developed cities and provinces or that can generate revenues is increasingly financed on a non-concessionary basis in new project and enterprise finance markets. As an owner of financial intermediaries actively engaged in the
markets, it can take further steps to improve the internal governance of these intermediaries.
The Bank Group can help by:

•

Articulating a regulatory framework for basic equity security, fixed-income
(debt) security and derivatives markets;

•

Leveraging Bank investments to promote market development and strengthen
financial institutions and mechanisms (e.g. through securitized transportation
projects or the district financing vehicle in the Shanghai APL);

•
•

Strengthening non-banking private financial institutions;

•

Promoting securitization
markets and piloting a secondary mortgage market to
promote the availability of
and control the risks in housing finance.

Supporting development of
the local currency bond
market; and

Table 13: Control of companies on Shanghai
stock exchange (2002)
Control
State-owned enterprise
Collective
Private enterprise
Social organization
Foreign enterprise
Unclear
TOTAL

Number

%

569
22
110
8
9
11
729

78
3
15
1
1
2
100

Source: China Outlook, Oxford Analytica, 2005

– 30 –
Managing systemic risks and maintaining financial stability
54.
Work will also continue to strengthen the capacity of the PBoC to identify, assess,
and mitigate systemic risks emanating from the financial system (see Table 14 for deposit
liabilities of financial institutions). This will involve helping to raise the bank’s financial
stability functions to international standards; improving the quality of the analysis and presentation of its Financial Stability Reports; and strengthening the capacity of its Conglomerates Division. In addition, efforts will be made to improve the transmission of monetary
policy and explore China’s policy options with respect to such subjects as deposit insurance,
financial sector taxation, pension systems management, and (through FIAS) creditor rights
protection. The Bank Group can provide assistance by:

•
•

Helping to draft a Futures Law;

•

Strengthening bank capacities in risk management and PBoC capacity to assess and mitigate systemic risks emanating from the financial system.

E.

PILLAR 5: IMPROVING PUBLIC AND MARKET INSTITUTIONS

Supporting institutional development for secured transactions, credit reporting, and leasing, and systemic change in rural credit cooperatives and nonbanking private financial institutions through model transactions;

55.
China’s recent growth has been based on high investment and labor mobilization,
but over time sustaining growth will depend on increasing firm-level competitiveness. To be
competitive in the long run, Chinese firms need to develop sophisticated products, know
their customers, exploit opportunities for forward integration, and strengthen interfirm cooperation. Many Chinese firms have already learned to behave in these ways, and global
Chinese brands, such as Haier and Lenovo, are now emerging. The GoC can accelerate this
process by improving corporate governance and creating a more competitive business environment. This will help firms to hold down costs, target attractive consumers, and develop
differentiated products that have a unique value, are globally competitive, and can support
higher prices and higher wages.
56.
In addition to helping the private sector succeed, the GoC needs to continue with its
own administrative reforms to complete the transition to a market economy. In particular,
work should continue on redefining the state’s role in service delivery, which is still mainly
the responsibility of public service units (PSUs), by deciding where the state should be involved in service delivery; in what manner; and at what level(s) of government. It should also
strengthen budget formulation, execution, and reporting—against an improved M&E framework—and achieve better alignment
between revenue assignments and
Table 14: Deposit liabilities of financial
fiscal responsibilities at sub-national
institutions (RMB tr)
levels of government, with a view to
improving the equity and efficiency
Deposits
Mid-2005
of public funding. The Bank is acEnterprise deposits
9.6
tive in each of these areas.
Urban and rural savings
13.9
All other deposits
TOTAL
Source: PBoC

4.8
28.3

– 31 –
Improving firm competitiveness
57.
The GoC recognizes that institutionalizing innovation to help firms develop new
technologies and raise productivity is key to China’s continued growth. In 2002, it created a
‘national innovation system’ that aims to link reforms with technological development, but
incentives are still not right and few innovations are being commercialized. Creating better
incentives will involve improving corporate governance. Many restructured SOEs still have
inefficient management practices, are operating at a loss, or depend on protection of a local
government to survive. In addition, many newer firms fail to evolve from their start-up structures, with the result that the failure rate is high (the average private firm closes seven years
after incorporation). Moreover, many barriers continue to characterize the business environment in parts of China. These include the maintenance of ‘restricted’ sectors; burdensome
licensing, inspections, inland customs, and land-use approval procedures; incomplete or nonpublic regulatory systems; unauthorized and discretionary fees and fines; unequal tax, financing, land use, and trading policies for SOEs (which dominate upstream industries) and
private firms (which are active downstream); elevated transportation and logistics costs (often due to entry barriers); and impediments to nationwide distribution networks. The net
result is that China is not enjoying the productivity gains that could be realized from an
integrated and competitive national market. The Bank Group can help to correct this situation by:

•
•

Modeling SOE transformations that set transparency and efficiency standards;

•

Alleviating private sector management skills shortages with IFC’s SME toolkit, Global Business School Network, and Business Edge management training;

•

Catalyzing reforms of business regulations that are unduly burdensome or that
are needed to protect competition by prohibiting monopolization, restraints on
trade (including local rules, subsidies, import levies), and other practices that unreasonably limit competition;

•

Strengthening the ability of investment promotion agencies to help lagging provinces attract greater FDI, with IFC’s field-based facility extending its coverage
beyond the original scope of Sichuan and Western China; and

•

Helping to improve innovation (e.g. by identifying appropriate incentives; supporting private ICT firms and the venture capital industry (IFC); and helping firms
to harness technology transfers out of FDI more effectively (IFC and MIGA)).

Encouraging corporations to adopt international practices in corporate governance, disclosure, protection of public shareholders, and social responsibility
(through IFC model transactions and support for Development Marketplace);

Reforming public service units
58.
China has more than one million PSUs, employing about 30 million people. Most
PSUs were created as public service providers, and non-state provision of services remains
limited. In the short term, therefore, improving service delivery in China requires improving
PSU performance. Past reforms have had positive results, but also created undesirable consequences: for example, PSUs have received greater fiscal autonomy and now raise almost half
of their funding through fees, but autonomy has not necessarily brought improved perfor-

– 32 –
mance or accountability; additional revenues are increasingly captured by personnel spending; and fees can be a barrier to access for the poor. In the longer term, it also requires
redefining the state’s role in service delivery. Generally speaking, the state should not be
involved in directly providing private goods or services, which can best be left to the private
sector, except to correct failures in equity and efficiency. But when service delivery involves
public goods or there is a market failure requiring intervention, the GoC needs to decide
whether it will regulate non-state production of the good or service, fund its provision, or
undertake direct provision—and it needs to decide a division of labor between the various
levels of government. The desirable scope and manner of intervention in service delivery
cannot be determined in theory; it requires a careful review of market failure in the delivery
of each service involved and the availability of public and private resources to address that
failure. The Bank Group can help by:

•

Identifying opportunities for divesting PSUs of the commercial production of
private goods and services that can best be left to the market;

•

Helping to develop a broader variety of organizational forms for service providers, including ‘delegated’ PSUs (which are direct subordinates of a core government department with no independent legal status or accounting system); ‘devolved’
PSUs (which have independent status); non-profit organizations, public sector SOEs,
private SMEs, and large listed companies outside the public sector;

•

Piloting PSU reforms, including support to private investment, in different sectors (e.g. health and education) and localities with a view to determining the
appopriate mix of public and private delivery and improving accountability
(e.g. through establishing and enforcing performance contracts, strengthening financial accountability, reforming the personnel and compensation system, and empowering users).

Rationalizing intergovernmental fiscal relations
59.
Improved PSU service delivery will also depend on improving China’s
intergovernmental fiscal system, which continues to be a barrier to equity in resource allocations, especially in lagging regions. By international norms, local government financing of
services is high in China: for example, local authorities finance 55–60% of public health
spending and 70% of education spending. Moreover, because the intergovernmental fiscal
transfer system does not at present correct for the large geographical disparities in revenuegenerating capacity and in addition the expenditure responsibilities of lower levels of government are not matched with revenue assignments or fiscal transfers, there is a highly unequal
pattern of government spending on service delivery both across and within provinces. Rural
areas suffer the most. Although rural China today receives more in public transfers than it
pays in taxes (a recent reversal of millenia of history), many services are still seriously
underfunded in the rural areas. Without more equalizing transfers, inequalities in access to
services are likely to increase. Happily, the GoC now raises over 20% of GDP in revenues, so
it has the fiscal capacity to rebalance the fiscal system: the key challenge is identifying and
implementing the appropriate institutional reforms. The Bank Group can help by:

•

Identifying institutional reforms that will result in a more equitable and transparent fiscal system, including steps to increase the clarity, equity and efficiency of
functions and expenditure assignments across levels of government; expand the tax-

– 33 –
sharing system to the sub-provincial level; develop new sources of local revenues
(such as a property tax, local personal income tax, or higher resource tax); and consolidate transfer programs with a view to improving their equalization impact;

•
•

Supporting a pilot comprehensive reform of sub-provincial finances; and
Strengthening mechanisms to monitor service delivery, including by identifying
ways to make transfers conditional upon meeting agreed minimum standards of
service delivery in relevant sectors (e.g. compulsory 9-year education).

Improving budget performance
60.
Budget management in China could be further strengthened by better aligning budget resources with government priorities, particularly at local levels (where an incremental
budgeting process does not allow retrenchment from areas that are no longer priorities). The
Bank Group can help by:

•

Supporting revision of the Budget Law and expansion of the national treasury
system to sub-provincial levels to increase transparency and accountability of public
finances, and

•

Articulating means to make broader use of performance indicators in M&E
for budget units and piloting public service delivery surveys.

– 34 –

V. DELIVERING THE BANK GROUP PROGRAM
61.
The Bank Group’s approach—how Bank Group instruments, including the ongoing
portfolio, support the development agenda outlined in this CPS—reflects the findings of the
CASCR, Client Surveys, CPS consultations, and other assessments of the Bank’s performance in China. The Bank Group will continue to ensure that assistance to China is clientdriven through regular dialogue with the GoC, annual AAA and lending consultations, and
increased provision of quick-response policy notes. To further increase effectiveness, the
Bank Group in this CPS aims to:

•

Articulate a more sharply defined set of results to guide Bank assistance. The results matrix (Annex 1) outlines the targets and indicators to monitor Bank Group
performance in implementing the CPS. Reflecting the Bank Group’s business in
China, most outcomes consist of policy and institutional reforms that the Bank
Group will support through a combination of demonstration projects or transactions and complementary analytical work. Outcomes incorporate and build heavily
on the ongoing portfolio and long-term GoC-Bank Group partnerships. To enhance
accountability, outputs as much as possible reflect actions or processes that are
substantially in the control of Bank staff, while outcomes typically require additional inputs (including but not limited to GoC action), and so are beyond the direct
control of Bank staff. It is important to recognize that the attribution of outcomes is
a formidable problem for the Bank Group: even when the Group’s advice is consistent with GoC policy and institutional outcomes, the causality is indirect and diffuse (e.g. passing through mid-level officials and other stakeholders), with China’s
own efforts and the advice and support of many other partners, both domestic and
external, typically contributing more strongly to the outcomes.

•

Emphasize scaling-up successful innovations and ideas through:






•

Focusing on the demonstration aspects of the Bank Group’s work in project selection (potentially enhanced by greater Bank-GoC upstream dialogue on the
pipeline), implementation, and especially M&E (with more project resources
devoted to assessing, distilling, and disseminating project lessons);
Linking lending, non-lending and trust-funded interventions more effectively.
This will involve organizing lending and non-lending on a thematic basis, strategically integrating trust funds, encouraging greater cross-sectoral discussion
within the Bank Group of progress toward CPS milestones, and ensuring that
the lessons of demonstration projects and transactions are fully reflected in analytical work and dialogue on policy and institutional reforms; and
Continuing to explore innovative delivery mechanisms, such as focusing a package of interventions on a particular province or region, or taking a sector-wide
approach in areas such as road transportation.

Encourage greater integration of IBRD, IFC, MIGA and WBI work around the
results identified in the CPS, capitalizing on the comparative strengths of each institution, with IBRD focusing on strengthening the efficiency, sustainability, and
equity with which public goods are provided and IFC and MIGA focusing on the
private sector dimensions. In particular, IBRD will assist the GoC to complete the
transition to a market economy, improve the welfare of the poor and vulnerable, and
promote sustainable resource-management practices while seeking to strengthen

– 35 –
the GoC’s institutional capabilities to encourage a level playing field and competition in the private sector. IFC will respond to the structural changes accompanying
China’s transition through standard-setting model transactions for private sector
investments, particularly in the financial and environmental sectors, and partnering
with companies seeking to adopt international standards in corporate governance,
environmental and social practices. In parallel, MIGA’s guarantee activities will
target infrastructure development through FDI, and support other areas where investors perceive significant non-commercial risk, including support for FDI in lagging regions (also supported by TA). Finally, WBI will further align its knowledge
and learning services to complement IBRD, IFC and MIGA activities.

•

Facilitating continuing Bank Group engagement in poverty reduction and social
sectors by actively working with GoC partners to operationalize new funding arrangements—including the blending of IBRD and central government transfers—
that enable continued innovative IBRD lending in the these sectors. Experience
over the previous CAS period has shown that IBRD lending, when deployed strategically, brings a depth of international knowledge, experience and partnership that
increases the effectiveness of Bank contributions—and associated GoC financing—
in ways difficult to achieve through analytical work alone.

•

Seeking to further simplify and streamline Bank project processes, including reducing project preparation times and the cost of doing businesses by further integrating Bank procedures with GoC procedures.

A. BUSINESS VOLUME
62.
Over the CPS period, IBRD lending is expected to range over $1.0–1.5 billion a
year;2 IFC investments to grow from $400 million to about $700 million a year; and MIGA
guarantees to remain at about $50 million in coverage a year. Lending is likely to involve the
preparation of 10 to 12 projects per annum, all on IBRD terms, supple-mented in selected
poverty, social sector, and energy projects with GEF or other grant resources. Because China
can access international capital markets,3 the GoC has indicated that lending will continue to

2

After peaking at $3 billion per annum in the mid-1990s, lending fell to under $600 million in FY02, due to
China’s graduation from IDA. The currently proposed lending envelope of up to $1.5 billion per annum is
sustainable in the medium term as it would keep IBRD exposure below the Single Borrower Limit of US$
14.5 billion, assuming modest (+/–10%) fluctuations in disbursements and exchange rates. Given the sensitivity of exposure projections to these assumptions, IBRD continues to monitor exposure developments closely.
Additionally, the exposure management arrangements as agreed in February 2003 (see: “An Approach for
Managing Lending and Exposure in Countries Close to the Concentration Limit: Specific Arrangements in
the Case of China, R2003-0003”, January 13, 2003) allow China to increase its exposure above the Single
Borrower Limit conditional on the activation of a Bond Purchase Agreement, which would protect IBRD
against the financial risks from any gross exposure above the Single Borrower Limit. Finally, if there were an
unexpected deterioration in China’s macro-financial or economic conditions (e.g. a sharp escalation of the
financial problems in the banking or SOE sector), the Bank would reassess the appropriateness of its ongoing
lending program, both in terms of lending volume and the policy actions to be implemented, and take corrective action.

3

China is rated investment grade (as of April 2004, Moody’s rated China A2, Fitch A-, and S&P BBB+). In
October 2004, the GoC issued two sovereign bonds, including a US dollar issue and a euro issue, with a value
at settlement of about $1.78 billion at prevailing exchange rates. In 2005, spreads above LIBOR dropped to
50 basis points.

– 36 –
involve complex projects that have some policy or institution-building component with potential for learning and scale-up and that also draw on IBRD technical expertise for which
there is no perfect private-sector substitute. A pipeline totaling about $5.8 billion in new
lending was agreed with MoF and NDRC during the most recent annual Bank-GoC lendingprogram discussion (April 2006); as in the past, this program is subject to revision in light of
evolving circumstances and will be formally reviewed with the GoC on an annual basis. To
respect the $1.5 billion annual lending ceiling, funding will not be committed for all projects
listed in Annex B3, IBRD, over FY07-09.

B. THE PORTFOLIO
Bank lending
63.
As of March 2006, the Bank held about $5 billion in undisbursed loans to China, of
which $4.96 billion was on IBRD terms and $60 million on IDA terms (for projects approved
before July 1999). The lending program has a number of unique characteristics, which partly
explain unusual intercountry comparisons in areas such as sector concentration, portfolio
performance, and lending preparation costs.

•

Loan repayment obligations typically cascade down to a project’s ultimate beneficiaries, increasing ownership and portfolio performance but also limiting IBRD
lending opportunities in support of direct poverty interventions (including basic
social services), as beneficiaries have limited repayment capacities.

•

Most lending is specific investment lending (Shanghai Urban APL is the first and
only programmatic loan, and China has had only one adjustment loan (a rural sector adjustment loan in FY88)).

•

Infrastructure heavily dominates the lending portfolio (over FY00–05, about 40%
of lending by volume was in urban water supply, wastewater treatment, and sanitation; 34% in highways, railways, and inland waterways, of which 6% was in urban
transport; and 10% in electrical energy and renewables, see Table 15), and most
projects involve IBRD financing of $100 million or more.

•

Given the preponderance of infrastructure, about 80% of projects fall into category
A for environmental assessment (compared to 8% Bank-wide). The portfolio’s large
average loan size, concentration in category A projects, and loss of access to PHRD

Table 15: Composition of IBRD lending (%, by number of projects and volume)
Sector
Rural development
Social sectors/TA
Energy
Urban environment
Transportation
o/w urban transport
Industry

FY90–94
Projects Volume
31
19
12
16
16
3
6

Source: World Bank Business Warehouse

35
9
18
11
20
2
7

FY95–99
Projects Volume
29
25
11
13
19
3
3

28
10
20
12
27
3
3

FY00–05
Projects Volume US$m
18
7
9
37
29
7
0

13
3
10
40
34
6
0

838
204
657
2,559
2,151
400
—

– 37 –
grants almost wholly explain the program’s high average project preparation cost.
Nonetheless, in terms of Bank budget spent per $1 million loaned, category A projects
in China are prepared at about 50% the cost of category A projects in the rest of the
Bank.

•

Despite losing access to concessional financing from IDA, about 13% of the FY00–
05 portfolio by volume continued to support rural development, especially watershed, forest, and grassland management, and another 3% to support direct poverty
and social programs. This represents a sharp drop in commitments (from a combined 44% by volume) compared to FY90–94, but the drop would have been greater
still if DFID had not agreed to blend some of its grant resources with IBRD funds
to reduce loan repayment obligations.

IFC investments
64.
IFC’s committed portfolio in China, as of January 2006, stands at $1.125 billion.
Manufacturing accounts for the bulk of IFC’s total exposure (at 39%) followed by financial
markets (26%) and infrastructure (14%). Almost half of IFC’s commitments are in the form
of loans; equity accounts for 39%, while 12% is in the form of quasi-loan and quasi-equity.
The share of equity in China is higher than in IFC as a whole. This is consistent with IFC’s
value proposition in China to be the preferred partner for companies seeking to adopt international standards in the areas of corporate governance and environmental and social practices. Most of IFC’s clients are domestic companies that need a lot of assistance to improve
corporate practices. Thus, TA as a self standing service or indirectly through the PEP China
is an integral part of IFC’s portfolio supervision.
MIGA guarantees
65.
MIGA’s portfolio in China consists of six contracts for a maximum liability of about
$130 million, which is much lower than MIGA’s country limit. Four contracts, with a gross
exposure of $123.2 million, were issued under the last CAS. About 89% of the portfolio is in
the infrastructure sector (mainly with sub-sovereign commitments).

Table 16: Composition of IFC investments (by project number and volume ($m))
Sector
Manufacturing and services
Agribusiness and forestry
Financial services
Funds
Chemicals
Infrastructure
Health and education
Information technology
Total

FY85–90
No. Volume

FY91–95
No. Volume

4

56

4
1

80
10

1

3

3
1

38
25

9

153

5

Source: World Bank Business Warehouse

59

FY96–00
No. Volume
7
4
2

115
19
11

4
5

55
36

22

236

FY01–05
No. Volume
15
6
18
5
3
9
3
4
63

491
126
485
65
40
211
28
24
1,470

– 38 –

C. PILOTING NEW APPROACHES TO IBRD LENDING
66.
In cooperating with MoF and NDRC as well as interested provinces and municipalities, the Bank Group’s China program will continue to seek opportunities to develop new
approaches that respond to China’s unique set of circumstances.

•

IBRD will work with MoF and NDRC upstream to identify lending opportunities
that support policy and institutional innovation. The nature of the expected innovation in selected projects will be more explicitly detailed and a more rigorous M&E
framework will be built around the expected innovation to ensure that lessons learned
are fully captured and disseminated.

•

In selected cases, IBRD will work with provinces and muncipalities to migrate
away from discrete ring-fenced investment loans towards programmatic lending
taking a program-wide approach (e.g. for developing Fujian’s rural roads network),
though lending amounts will be small initially.

•

The Bank will work with Chinese development partners to develop innovative approaches to financial intermediation (e.g. working with Shanghai to develop a new
financing modality for metropolitan infrastructure or working with CDB to provide
credit to micro- and small-scale enterprises).

•

IBRD and IFC will jointly explore opportunities directly to assist sub-national entities (local governments, public utilities, and the development banks that fund them)
without sovereign guarantees and preferably in local currency.

•

IFC will seek ways to expand its capacity to reach domestic enterprises through
local currency products.

•

IBRD will seek to soften repayment terms for poorer jurisdictions to enable the use
of IBRD funds for poverty reduction and social projects in poorer provinces, including possibly through pooling MoF budgetary funds with IBRD loans.

D.

THE BANK GROUP’S KNOWLEDGE PROGRAM (AAA)

67.
In January 2005, the Bank and the GoC announced that they would collaborate on
more than 100 research programs over the next five years. The overall analytical program
will draw on local expertise and be demand-driven. It will be grouped around the five
thematic clusters of this CPS (themes which also have high priority in the GoC’s 11th FYP)
and balanced between activities that inform specific policy decisions and activities that
address strategic development issues where the GoC believes that the Bank can make a
contribution. The program will be delivered through persuasion—from policy notes, detailed operational studies, face-to-face and distance learning courses, and study tours—and
also demonstration—from lending operations and model transactions. To maximize impact, the Bank Group will:

•

Strive to ensure that the strategic relevance, quality, coherence, and integration of
Bank Group products is as high as possible, through regular program discussions
with the GoC and within the Country Team;

•

Respond quickly and flexibly to GoC requests for analytical work on topical issues;

– 39 –

•

•

•

•

Pay more explicit attention to
innovation, and embed robust
M&E frameworks in formal
AAA and demonstration
projects;
Collaborate more closely
with Chinese researchers and
experts as well as other (domestic and international) advisors to the GoC in an effort
to influence the overall development policy dialogue in
China;
Improve dissemination—particularly Chinese-language
dissemination—through preparing brief research notes
for wide circulation, posting
AAA on the Bank’s Chinese
website, and continuing outreach through research entities and occasional GoC
seminars;
Encourage experienced staff
to make long-term commitments to working with GoC
counterparts on client priorities;

Table 17: FY06-08 AAA program
China’s integration into world economy
CEM (managing resource-scarcity)
Trade and poverty
Strategic uses of FDI
Poverty, inequality, social exclusion
Poverty assessment
Participation in poverty reduction
Rural health system reform
Rural social protection reform
Labor market development
ICT in rural areas
Balancing regional development
Metropolitan area management
Resource scarcity and environment
Water scarcity
The ‘circular’ (recycling) economy
Green’ national accounting
Climate change
Land policy reform
Financial sector
Access to financial services
Commercial rural financing
Infrastructure finance
Financial stability
Policy banking
Capital markets
Public and market institutions
Investment climate surveys
Private sector challenges/opportunities
Urban service delivery surveys
Public finance in rural areas
Public service unit reform
China Development Marketplace

•

Sustain AAA partnerships
with DFID, the IMF, ADB,
and OECD (on f iscal reforms, PSU reforms, regional
development, etc); and

•

Deliver IFC’s TA program
(about $48 million over the
CPS period) primarily through PEP China (based in Sichuan), with a focus on the
business environment (50%), financial market development (~25%), and developing standards and public-private partnership models.

68.
WBI learning and capacity-building activities are expected to remain at current levels. This implies greater selectivity in planning, reflecting high Chinese interest in learning
from international best practices. GoC demand will determine annual program design. Activities are expected to focus on managing environmental challenges, reducing barriers to
investment, and improving access to public services. Distance learning will be intensified to
help reach remote areas and scale-up activities. WBI will also build on previous successes
creating knowledge networks.

– 40 –

E.

PARTNER ROLES AND DONOR COORDINATION

69.
China still receives development assistance from a variety of official sources (see
Table 19, next page), focused on poverty reduction, health care, water supply and wastewater treatment, urban and transportation infrastructure, and environmental sustainability.

•

With GoC encouragement, the Bank’s donor coordination activities have focused
primarily on developing strategic partnerships with multilateral and bilateral donors and development partners (DFID, the IMF, ADB, and OECD).

•

Multilateral and bilateral donors have committed about $889 million to Bank activities through a range of trust-funded activities, enabling Bank assistance to China
to expand significantly in the areas of poverty reduction, human development, rural
development, and environment protection.






F.

The Multilateral Fund for the Implementation of the Montreal Protocol, the
Ozone Trust Fund, and the Global Environment Facility (GEF) constitute the
largest multiple-donor sources of trust funds. In particular, the Bank administers
almost $560 million in commitments for two self-standing projects phasing out
ozone-depleting substances as well as about $247 million in GEF commitments
(see Table 18, below). Another $100 million in energy and environment GEF
cofinancing is under preparation.
An innovative ‘blending’ partnership between the GoC, DFID and the Bank
has allowed the Bank to remain active in poverty and social sector projects.
Begun in FY02, DFID has committed grants totaling about $100 million to be
blended with IBRD loans totaling about $300 million to reduce the effective
interest rate for three Bank projects (Tuberculosis Control, Basic Education in
Western Areas, and Poor Rural Communities) to about 2%, enabling the Bank to
remain active in these areas following the cessation of IDA lending.
Donor trust funds also
support non-lending
technical assistance and
project preparation
costs.

PORTFOLIO MANAGEMENT

Social and environmental
safeguards
70.
The current context for applying safeguards policies presents
opportunities and risks. Chinese
practices with respect to environmental impact assessments (EIAs) are
improving, both in terms of analytical quality and institutional willingness to enforce compliance with

Table 18: Global Environment Facility Program
US$m
Biodiversity
Sustainable Forestry Development
Lake Dianchi Freshwater Biodiversity
Climate change
Heat Reform and Building Energy Efficiency
Renewable Energy Scale-Up 1
Energy Conservation 1
Energy Conservation 2
Renewable Energy Development
Beijing Environment 2
Utility-Based Energy Efficiency Finance (IFC)
International waters
Hai River Basin Water Resource Management
Guangdong Pearl River Delta Urban Dev.
Other
Gansu and Xinjiang Pastoral Development
PCB Disposal and Management
Total

16
1
18
40.2
22
26
27
25
16
17
10
10.5
18.3
247

– 41 –
Table 19: Donor activities in China
Donor

Strategy
and Operations

Financing

Focus areas

Recent
analytical work

ADB

Promotes pro-poor growth by
enabling greater access of poor to
benefits of economic prosperity,
opportunity. Four priorities are (i)
promoting equitable and inclusive
growth; (ii) making market work
better; (iii) improving environment;
and (iv) foster regional cooperation.
Key sectors: transport; water supply/
wastewater; agriculture, natural
resources; energy; environment

About $1.5 billion in
annual lending during
2006-2008; $12 million
in technical assistance
grants annually

About 90% of
2006-2008
project lending to
central & western
regions. Nonlending focus on
policy, legal and
governance
reform

Australia

Strategy (2006-10) aims to support
China's own balanced development
policies by building capacity and
providing TA, building institutional
linkages between Australia and China
to support China's development and
work collaboratively in the region.
Focus on governance, health (chiefly
HIV/AIDs) and environment (chiefly
water resource management)

$30 million grants

No specific
provincial focus.
Focus on national
level engagement
on policy,
planning and
management

Canada

CIDA's 2005-2010 Country
Development Programming
Framework focuses on: (i) human
rights, democratic development, and
good governance and (ii)
environmental sustainability

C$30 million annually

Environmental
programming
focus on west.

Denmark

Environment and energy, climate
change (CDM), including wind energy
development program and TA
activities for CDM

€14 million (2005–08)
(significant soft loans
not included)

Northeastern and
southwestern
regions

European
Union

Country Strategy Paper 2002–2006
key areas: social and economic
reform; environment and sustainable
development; good governance and
the rule of law

€250 million grants
(2002–2006)

No specific focus

Ford
Foundation

Gender equity, poverty, participation
and community-based empowerment.
Sectors include: development finance
and economic security; education;
governance and public policy;
sustainable development; sexuality
and reproductive health; law and
rights; NGO development

Around $15 million/
year in grants on
average

No specific focus.
Clusters of work
in western China.

• Most analytical
products of
grants are
published by
the
organizations
themselves

France

Energy efficiency, environment, urban
development, transportation, health,
governance and judicial system,
education

Grants: €9.7million/
year (Embassy); €5m
(AFD & FFEM/200408). Soft Loans:€152m
(2005).Tied soft loans:
€150m (2005)

Embassy: eastern
and central
provinces; AFD:
western
provinces; French
GEF: northeast
provinces

• Wuhan and
Chongqing
municipalities
monographic
studies

• Urban Poverty
Study 2002
• Poverty Profile
(2003)
• Private Sector
Assessment
(2003)
• Development
of Private
Enterprise
(2003)

• Country
Development
Programming
Framework
2005-2010

(continued on next page)

– 42 –
Table 19: Donor activities in China (continued)
Donor

Strategy
and Operations

Financing

Focus areas

Recent
analytical work

Germany

Sustainable economic development
and legal cooperation, environment
policy, protection and sustainable use
of natural resources (including
energy and urban development);
health (HIV/AIDS); railbound
transport; water (wastewater, water
management, drinking water) and
solid waste

Grants: €33.5m;
Loans: €83.5m (2005)

Concentration on
central, western
and northeastern
provinces; also
national level
projects in Beijing

Italy

Strategy focuses on health, cultural
heritage, environment, education,
vocational training and institutional
building

Grants: $42 m; Loans:
$138 m (2002–2008)

85% western and
central provinces

Japan

Economic Cooperation Program for
China (2001) addresses global issues
(environment, HIV, TB, etc);
supporting reform, and open policy;
promoting multilateral cooperation
and mutual understanding between
China, Japan; poverty alleviation;
private sector development. JBIC's
priorities are environmental
protection, human resource
development, poverty reduction

Determined on annual
basis. In FY 2004,
JBIC loans totaled
¥85.9 billion, grant
assistance totaled ¥4.1
billion, and technical
cooperation totaled
¥5.9 billion

JBIC loans focus
on inland areas

Netherlands

Environment, private sector
development, rule of law,
preservation of Tibetan culture

€19 million grants
(2005)

Main focus on
northwest,
western and
central regions

New
Zealand

Poverty alleviation

$1m per year

Western
provinces

Norway

Environment

$16m per year, $3 m of
which is in form of
direct grants

Western and
northeastern
provinces; also
polluted and/or
poor areas of
central provinces

Sweden

Strategy (2006–10) promotes reform
process in areas of environmentally
sustainable development, human
rights and legal development and
social security and gender equality

$8 million grants on an
annual basis (options
for concessionary
credits)

Cooperation on
central ministry
pilots in Yunnan,
Guizhou, Sichuan
and Inner
Mongolia

• Results Analysis
Swedish Technical
Cooperation 2001–
2004 (2005)

UNDP

2006–2010 UN Development
Assistance Framework (UNDAF) and
Country Programme Document

Total resources: $280
million for 2006–2010

Focus on national
policy advice and
dialogue; capacity

• UN Common
Country
Assessment (2004)

• Portfolio analysis
by German
Development
Institute
• Environmental
Protection and Use
of Resources
• Water, Wastewater
and Solid Waste

• Rural Pension
Insurance System
Improvement study
(ongoing)
• Decentralized
Management of
Poverty Alleviation
Fund (2005)
• Study on
Effectiveness of
JBIC Environment
Projects (2006)

• Evaluation report
on development
and cooperation
(2005)

(continued on next page)

– 43 –
Table 19: Donor activities in China (continued)
Donor

Strategy
and Operations

Financing

(CPD) assists Government to realize
Xiaokang vision of all-round human
development. The programme
components are: achieving MDGs and
reducing human poverty, environment
and energy for sustainable human
development, responding to HIV/AIDS
and other communicable diseases.
United
Kingdom

Strategy (2006-2011) focuses on
meeting MDGs for basic education,
health (HIV/AIDs, TB, health system
reform) and access to water and
sanitation, plus developing a partnership
with China on international development
issues

£35 million annual
grants

Focus areas

Recent
analytical work

building and
knowledge
sharing

• UN contribution to
11th five year plan
• China Human
Development
Report 2005:
Development with
Equity

Poorer Western
provinces

• China Country
Assistance Plan
(2006)
• Studies of China's
impact on global
development (2005)
• Urban Poverty
(2004)
• Studies on health
system reform
(2005)
• China & Global
Forest Products
Market (2006)

national regulations. There is also growing public awareness and appreciation of the environment and its relationship to quality of life and sustainable development. Nonetheless, EIA
practice and willingness to implement agreed environmental management and mitigation
plans varies throughout China. There are still gaps in quality from one province to another
and from one environmental institute to another, and the consistency of enforcement and
compliance are highly variable.
71.
Land acquisition and resettlement in China is becoming increasingly important as
land pressures mount in several parts of the country. While there are relatively few gaps
between GoC policy and the Bank’s safeguards policies, there are gaps between GoC expectations and the practices of local governments, which are responsible for land acquisition,
compensation and resettlement programs. Performance in Bank-assisted projects is mostly
satisfactory and counterpart agencies are usually diligent in their application of agreed resettlement action plans, yet it is likely that land acquisition and resettlement will become an
increasingly prominent issue for China generally as well as for the Bank.
72.
Moving forward, the Bank will continue to seek ways to streamline safeguards procedures which apply to Bank projects and identify possibilities for more reliance on country
systems, in appropriate situations and where there is advantage for both the Bank and our
Chinese counterparts. Following TA from the Bank, SEPA recently issued technical guidelines making public consultation and information disclosure mandatory in the environmental
assessment process. Areas for further improve-ment in the safeguards process include the
quality and timing of analytical work, analysis of alternatives, and more meaningful public

– 44 –
consultation and information disclosure. The Bank will seek opportunities to build capacity
in these areas through lending operations, safeguards training and professional development.
Procurement, disbursement and financial management
73.
Procurement has been decentralized to the Beijing office, except for contracts with
values exceeding certain thresholds (still cleared in Washington), and procurement requests
are now handled in three business days on average. Under new legislation promulgated over
the last five years, procurement of works is now usually completed through competitive
bidding in an economic, efficient, and fairly transparent manner; most tenders attract a large
number of bidders; and the lowest responsive bid is often substantially below the cost estimate. With China’s entry into the WTO and growing private sector capacity, procurement of
goods is increasingly completed in conformity with international commercial practices
(though China has not yet signed the voluntary WTO Agreement on Government Procurement). By contrast, procurement of consultants remains weak: most consulting firms are
government design or research institutes; the Bank’s clients typically wish to work with groups
with which they already have a working relationship; and quality does not appear to drive
decisions. Further reforms are needed in this area to achieve international norms.
74.
Financial management (FM) assessments are now also conducted and cleared in
Beijing, though the regional FM manager continues to review overall China portfolio FM
risks and quality arrangements. With the exception of special commitments for which the
supporting documents are sent directly from suppliers to Washington, all project withdrawal
applications are now processed in Beijing (typically within the targeted five days). To build
local capacity, training courses and workshops are provided regularly to auditors to improve
the quality of project audits and to MoF and implementing agencies (including during project
launch and selected supervision missions) to upgrade FM and disbursement procedures in
the implementing agencies. An IDF grant was recently approved to support strengthening the
capacity and effectiveness of provincial, municipal and county auditors in China, and with
Bank support a database of qualified technical trainers is being established to contribute to
capacity-building in the China National Auditing Office (CNAO). In addition, the Banksupported Accounting Reform and Development project helped to establish three residential
training facilities (in Beijing, Shanghai, and Xiamen) to improve China’s accounting and
auditing technical competency. Finally, with continued support from Bank grants, some MoF
staff have been sent overseas to learn the experiences of other countries on public budget
management.
Portfolio reviews
IBRD lending
75.
Given the size and complexity of the China portfolio, as well as its strong performance, the CT has not undertaken portfolio-wide performance reviews. Instead, the team
identifies emerging issues that present a risk and undertakes an issue-specific review as
needed. In the past, these reviews have focused on streamlining project preparation, procurement, or disbursement procedures, or identifying opportunities to adopt a country systems
approach to selected safeguards. A review is currently planned for the implementation of TA
components of IBRD projects. Thematic supervision and assessment, including of safeguards
and making use of IEG, QAG and CT retrospectives, has also proved to be effective in achieving improved portfolio management. The decentralization of senior Bank staff to the Beijing

– 45 –
Office has considerably strengthened the capacity of the CT to manage these matters incountry.
IFC investments
76.
Given the rapid growth of IFC’s China program in the last three years, most of the
portfolio is young and has yet to be evaluated for development impact. OEG evaluations
done in the last three years of older projects in the portfolio show a satisfactory development
outcome in 71% of the cases. In the last two years IFC has been shifting portfolio resources
and responsibilities to the field. Currently there are eight staff in the Beijing office working
on portfolio supervision. This has allowed better risk management and better client service.
IFC’s China portfolio is performing well with the lowest loss-reserve ratio among the larger
countries in the region.
MIGA guarantees
77.
MIGA follows projects insured in China on a quarterly basis, which coincides with
MIGA’s process for provisioning for claims. Over the 2003-05 CAS period, MIGA did not
pay any claims for projects insured in China although it did have one project in the mediation
process, implying an intense dialogue with the GoC to help sort out potential investment
disputes. In addition to its guarantee activities for projects in China, MIGA also worked
closely with the GoC to help solve investment disputes between foreign investors and local
partners in the water and power sectors.

G.

MANAGING RISKS

78.

The key risks to the Bank Group’s development effectiveness in China are:

•

Stagnation in the reform process. Although China’s economic reforms have significantly increased the role of market forces and private initiative, much remains to be
done. Failure to continue the reform process could lead to economic stagnation and
rapid build-up of quasi-fiscal liabilities because of the ongoing need to subsidize
loss-making SOEs.

•

Weakness in the financial sector. The GoC has undertaken important reforms in
recent years to strengthen financial enterprises. Progress has been made in
corporatizing SCBs, restructuring debt, and shareholding reforms, including the
introduction of strategic investors into three of the four largest SCBs, yet there
remain concerns about credit risk management, bank governance and internal controls. Weak performance of some SCBs creates the potential for financial sector
difficulties and is a source of contingent fiscal liabilities that need carefully to be
managed. The GoC is committed to taking further action to accelerate financial
reform, improve corporate governance, and establish effective performance incentives as well as a risk control and capital constraint mechanism so as to transform
SCBs into dynamic market players that are able independently to bear market risks.
To promote the development of a sound business model for SCBs, listing of eligible
SCBs in domestic and overseas capital markets is also being encouraged.

•

Unsustainable debt levels: Long-term fiscal risks exist in China, mainly due to the
GoC’s contingent liabilities, arising from banks’ NPLs, unfunded pension obligations, unrecorded local government debt, and external borrowings by SOEs. Data

– 46 –
limitations preclude precise estimates of these quasi-fiscal liabilities, but they are
believed to be significant.

•

An external shock. China’s growing exposure to global trade is making the economy
increasingly vulnerable to trade shocks, with particular vulnerability to a global
recession, trade disputes with key export markets, or other disruptions (such as a
terrorist attack) that affect global trade.

•

Social dissatisfaction leading to an economic slowdown. Although the first stage of
economic reform mainly benefited agriculture and the rural sectors, in recent years
urban areas have been much more successful in creating wealth, jobs, and opportunities. Increasing social and economic disparities—between coastal and interior
regions, between rural and urban populations—may result in social dissatisfaction
that results in slower economic growth.

•

A cross-border emergency such as SARS or the avian flu. SARS caused 800 deaths
and reduced Asian GDP growth by 0.5 percentage points in 2003. While it is estimated that the effects of a mild avian flu pandemic would be small (less than 0.5%
of GDP), a ‘medium’ pandemic could have sizable supply-side impacts (fatalities,
worker absenteeism, and an overwhelmed health care system) as well as demandside impacts to which export-oriented economies would be especially vulnerable.

79.
These risks are closely being monitored. Forces in favor of slowing or even reversing
the reform process are currently weak. In the financial sector, banks have reoriented lending
to reduce exposure to overheated sectors and also taken steps to assess risk on the basis of
commercial (rather than policy) considerations. Reforms in the pension system and subnational government borrowing are being accelerated, helping to contain fiscal risks, while
structural reforms supporting growth in non-state activity, progressively greater market discipline, and increased openness to foreign direct and portfolio investment, are helping to
preserve economic stability. Recent measures to slow bank lending, money supply and investment are helping to reduce the risk of overheating, though vigilance remains necessary.
Debt sustainability is not a medium-term issue, because direct government debt is small
(24% of GDP at end-2004). The budget deficit in 2005 was 1.6% of GDP, down from 3.6%
in 2000, and according to the IMF this deficit is expected to remain constant in nominal
terms, implying a decline in the primary deficit of about 0.25% of GDP per annum. In addition the GoC has over $800 billion in international reserves as well as substantial SOE assets
and growing tax revenues to meet fiscal obligations arising from realized contingency liabilities. The GoC is aggressively taking measures to address income disparities and build a
harmonious society, including increasing investment in rural development and facilitating
migration of rural population to the cities. Finally, the risk of an avian flu pandemic is well
known globally and, following the Beijing Conference in January 2006, at-risk countries are
actively improving veterinary services and health systems to respond as needed.

H.

CONCLUSION

80.
China by many measures has been the most successful developing country over the
past 27 years. Most importantly, sustained and rapid growth has enabled it to lift about 400
million people above the $1 dollar per day poverty line (at PPP). But past success is not a
guarantee of future success: many countries have done well for a period only to stagnate later.

– 47 –
For China to continue to grow and to reduce poverty, it will need to continue its transition to
a market economy, integrate more fully into the global economy, further develop its financial
services (including pensions and insurance), improve the management of natural resources
(especially land, water and energy), protect the environment, and strengthen public and market institutions. Continued progress in these areas is important to China, but given China’s
growing impact on the global economy, it is also important to the world. In many of these
areas, no one knows exactly what sort of policy and institutional reforms will work best in
China. Research on potential or experimental reforms remains a crucial input into the GoC’s
policy debates and decisions. While the GoC has many partners in implementing its development program, the World Bank Group—by embedding global knowledge and experience in
its research, technical assistance, lending projects and model transactions—is better positioned than most to introduce innovative solutions to China’s development problems and to
carefully evaluate the results so that China can learn what reforms are successful and should
be scaled-up. The World Bank Group is pleased to support China’s development and will
work hard with the GoC to help bring lasting prosperity to all Chinese citizens, including the
most poor.

Paul Wolfowitz
President

Rising domestic and international
resistance to further integration
due to perceived effect on poor
and the environment; limited
experience with overseas
investment

Limited experience with ODA

Increased Chinese
trade and overseas
investment

Increased Chinese
participation in
overseas
development
assistance (ODA)

TA to help GoC understand and consider
subscribing to OECD principles for overseas
investment

Better correspondence between China’s ODA
and other ODA providers; Exim Bank cofinances with IBRD; GoC contributes to
multilateral development agencies

Higher and better quality
China ODA

Absolute poverty
eliminated

Limitations of current area-based
poverty reduction policy; limited
analysis of vulnerability (persistent
poor, migrants, the elderly) and
limited development of social
programs to serve their needs

Continued analysis of implications of Doha
and other trade negotiations on economy,
including services, agricultural subsidies

Strengthened partner-agency research and
analytical capacity supporting China’s
participation in global and regional economic
institutions, including WTO

Higher volume and better
quality of overseas’
investment

China implements free trade
agreement with ASEAN
countries

China meets WTO
commitments and participates
fully in Doha Round

AAA: rural pensions

AAA, financing: rural health

Options articulated for national rural pension
policy
Options clarified for expanding rural health
insurance (NCMS) and Medical Assistance,
with fairer NCMS financing

Strengthened social insurance
programs (pension systems,
urban and rural health
insurance); reformed and
expanded safety nets
programs (dibao)

(continued on next page)

AAA: CDD, poverty in rural
areas. Financing: poverty
Community-level programming and
implementation capacity-building piloted in
selected villages

SAFE capital flows monitoring;
work with MoFA on ODA

IFC and MIGA assistance;
SAFE capital flows monitoring;
AAA on inward and outward
FDI, investment climate
analysis

AAA: trade impact analysis;
Doha round support
(MOFCOM); investment
climate analysis;

AAA: CEM, WTO accession/
Doha round studies, China and
global economy, trade
development, trade finance;
Boao Forum

Bank Group performance
Interventions

Greater community
participation in poverty
reduction programs

REDUCING POVERTY, INEQUALITY, AND SOCIAL EXCLUSION

Imperfect understanding of China
in rest of the world (and vice
versa)

Increased Chinese
involvement in
international
economic institutions

Medium-term CPS goals
Outputs

Enhanced Chinese
engagement in global and
regional economic
institution

Outcomes

INTEGRATING CHINA INTO THE WORLD ECONOMY

Long-term China development goals
Goals
Constraints

Annex 1: China CPS Results Matrix

– 48 –

Outcomes

Inadequate capacity and financing
for social service delivery;
inappropriate provider incentives
and institutional arrangements in
health care; lack of health
insurance

Limited diversification; limited
access to market information;
constraints on investment in
production and supply chain
assets

Limited integration of migrants to
urban areas due to (i)
discriminatory aspects of urban
social policy, (ii) skills deficit, and
(iii) limited absorptive capacity of
cities

Higher capacity of
the poor to
participate in China’s
growing economy

Improved
employment and
income opportunities
for the poor in rural
areas, including
towns and small
cities

Further migration of
surplus agricultural
labor to the urban
areas

Financing (incl IFC): livestock,
agriculture technology, supply
chain, agro-processing, rural
infrastructure. AAA: farmers
associations, food safety, rural
ICT digital divide

Better crop, animal varieties introduced

AAA: labor market; vocational
education. Financing: migrant
skills; vocational education

Labor-market led skills training programs
successfully piloted and scaled-up
Better employment
opportunities for migrants, and
protection of their rights, in
selected areas

(continued on next page)

AAA: labor market; urban
social security; education for
migrant kids. Financing: urban
transport; housing market;
migrant skills

Options identified for reforming urban social
policies to reduce discrimination against
migrants and improve access to information
and services

More equitable access to
social services in selected
urban areas

Reduced transport, utilities,
and communications costs for
the poor in selected areas

Financing: railways,
waterways, roads, small cities,
rural ICT. AAA: ICT policy and
regulation, digital divide

Public-private partnership approaches to
agricultural technology piloted

New farmers cooperatives law drafted

AAA: rural health, PSU reform.
Financing: rural health; WBI
on health economics

Options identified for financing and
organizational reform of public health

Options clarified for shifting from supply to
demand subsidies

Projects piloted in rural and small-town
transportation and communications
infrastructure, modeling new approaches

Improved agricultural
productivity and incomes in
project areas, with scale-up
potential

TA: student assistance in
higher education

Options identified for higher education
financial aid

Health care financing structure
encourages increased and
more appropriate use of
health services, esp. among
rural poor
Options identified for care-based payment
system

AAA, financing: education
finance and efficiency; IFC
investments

AAA: rural social protection
and rural health

Bank Group performance
Interventions

Financing plan options prepared for free
compulsory 9-year education

Options identified for national rural safety net
policy framework

Medium-term CPS goals
Outputs

Education financing supports
more equitable access and
higher educational attainment

REDUCING POVERTY, INEQUALITY, AND SOCIAL EXCLUSION

Long-term China development goals
Goals
Constraints

Annex 1: China CPS Results Matrix (continued)

– 49 –

Outcomes

Creating a resourceefficient society that
takes into account
the costs of
environmental
degradation and
pollution —
particularly for water
and energy (oil, gas,
and electricity)—to
meet GoC goal for
2010 to reduce
energy intensity by
20% over 2005

Overconsumption and inefficient
water and energy resource
allocations resulting from resource
pricing that does not reflect real
cost on the margin (incl.
environmental externalities)

More efficient energy supply
systems demonstrated

Water and energy production and
supply systems inefficient

Viable policies and
technologies identified to help
reduce water and energy
consumption per unit of GDP

More efficient water supply
systems piloted; water
productivity increased in
selected jurisdictions

Opportunities identified for
metropolitan areas to benefit
from planning, financing, and
managing investments on a
metropolitan/regional scale

Institutional fragmentation,
lack of coordination limits
effective infrastructure
service delivery on
metropolitan scale

MANAGING RESOURCE SCARCITY AND ENVIRONMENTAL CHALLENGES

AAA: household urban
services, firm competitiveness
surveys; metropolitan
management. Financing:
municipal projects; metro
projects; NE skills

Bank Group performance
Interventions

Appropriate resource-use standards
articulated, with TA for improved enforcement

Roadmap identified for liberalizing water and
energy markets, so prices reflect total
marginal cost

(continued on next page)

AAA: water valuation, China
2020. Financing: rural water
management/ irrigation;
transmission projects; IFC
investments

AAA: water/sanitation
assessment; recycling.
Financing: wastewater

Model urban water supply and wastewater
treatment facilities built

Bulk water markets piloted

AAA: water scarcity.
Financing: water management,
irrigation

Financing: clean energy and
renewable projects, power
generation/ transmission,
pumped storage projects,
including GEF, IFC
investments. AAA: PPIAF
study.

Water savings concept piloted and scaled-up

Commercial management in selected energy
companies strengthened

More efficient ways of supplying and using
coal demonstrated

Clean energy and renewable energy
technologies piloted and scaled-up

Examples piloted of integrated metropolitan
AAA: round-tables on metro,
area planning, financing, or managing through other urban management
transaction or new institutional arrangements challenges (infrast. PPPs,
service provision regulation,
infrast. finance); metro
dimension addressed in urban
infrastructure portfolio

Integrated development strategy/plan
prepared for selected jurisdiction(s)

Medium-term CPS goals
Outputs

Strengthened urban planning
and management in selected
jurisdictions

REDUCING POVERTY, INEQUALITY, AND SOCIAL EXCLUSION

Long-term China development goals
Goals
Constraints

Annex 1: China CPS Results Matrix (continued)

– 50 –

Outcomes

Poor natural resource and
environment management leading
to excessive degradation of
renewable resources and
depletion of non-renewable
resources

Poor land policies cause
inefficiencies with socially
undesirable outcomes

China’s rapidly rapid development
is associated with increased
emissions of greenhouse gases
and other pollutants, as well as
growing pressures on remaining
natural habitats, coastal
ecosystems and remaining cultural
heritage, which are of global
interest

Improved natural
resource
management, to
reduce degradation
and depletion

Improved land
administration and
management

International
environmental
commitments
met

China continues to make
progress in meeting its
commitments under
international environmental
conventions

Model land administration and
management systems
developed

Improved waste management
in selected jurisdictions

Environmental concerns
mainstreamed into
development plans and
activities, resource
management systems

Model projects implemented for reducing
land-based pollution in coastal areas

Options for biodiversity protection strategy
articulated

Model projects undertaken for phasing out
selected POPs (PCBs, chlordane, mirex)

Options identified for stabilizing GHG
emissions

New land acquisition policy articulated

Options identified for revising property law to
recognize land contracting rights, rural land as
collateral

Integrated land administration and
management system piloted

Policies, mechanisms to address agriculture
non-point pollution piloted and scaled-up

Model urban solid and liquid waste removal
systems implemented

(continued on next page)

Financing: large ecosystem
pollution reduction invest. fund

AAA: climate change.
Financing: HFC23, CDM,
clean energy, POPs phaseout
program, protected areas,
forestry. TA: biodiversity
partnerships

Financing: land administration
systems. AAA: land policy
reform, IDF on land acquisition
regulations

AAA: water and sanitation
assess-ment; ecofarming;
recycling. Financing: wastewater treatment, solid waste
(incl. IFC investments, MIGA
guarantees)

Roadmap identified for increasing waste
removal fees

Improved approaches to land, forest,
groundwater, water basin, and river
management piloted in selected projects

AAA: CEM; circular economy;
green accounting. Financing:
energy, forestry (incl. IFC),
rural, urban projects

Financing: urban transport,
railway, inland waterways

Bank Group performance
Interventions

Strategic environmental assessments piloted
for selected sectors and regions

Transport, urbanization options identified to
reduce transport-generated pollution, fuel use

Approaches identified to reducing water use
in agriculture

Medium-term CPS goals
Outputs

MANAGING RESOURCE SCARCITY AND ENVIRONMENTAL CHALLENGES

Long-term China development goals
Goals
Constraints

Annex 1: China CPS Results Matrix (continued)

– 51 –

Outcomes

Deepened financial
markets

Increased access to,
and improved
allocative efficiency
of, financial services

Underdeveloped markets for longterm risk finance; underdeveloped,
-capitalized securities, insurance
industries; no financial derivative
market; lack of enabling regime for
fixed income market; legal,
regulatory barriers restrict stock
circulation of non-listed companies

Legal, regulatory and supervisory
impediments to commercially
sustainable micro, small and
medium enterprise finance, rural
finance, and housing finance

FINANCING SUSTAINED AND EFFICIENT GROWTH

More developed infrastructure
finance

Enabling environment for
capital markets and insurance
industry improved

Access to selected financial
services (rural credit, smallscale credit, housing finance)
expanded in selected
jurisdictions

Model heritage and tourism
projects developed

Financing: Mortgage Corp.;
AAA: national housing strategy;
IFC support of housing finance,
incl. secondary mortgage
institutions; TA: PSRB and
others

Market-oriented rural finance scheme piloted

Municipal and enterprise bond markets
developed in selected jurisdictions or lines of
business

(continued on next page)

IBRD/IFC projects develop
municipal/ enterprise
infrastructure bond markets
& securitization; IFC bond
issues

Various TA programs with
CSRC, CIRC, PBoC; AAA:
infrastructure finance. IFC
investment/TA in NBFIs,
distressed assets markets

Options for prudent investor protection
scheme articulated, with view to adoption by
2010
Legal framework and appropriate regulatory
institutions developed in areas such as (e.g.)
securities law, secured Financing law, futures
law, leasing law, securitization law

TA: PBoC; IFC (PEP China)
support for credit information
bureaus

Pilot credit information systems established
(incl. for consumer credit)

Pilot microfinance financing-only institutions

Secondary mortgage markets expanded in
pilot jurisdictions

PSRB Financing to rural small businesses
piloted

Financing: MSE finance; IFC
bank and RCC investments/TA

Model cultural heritage
projects (Gansu, Guizhou);
trust funds

Bank Group performance
Interventions

Barriers to commercial small-scale finance
identified

Listed heritage sites piloted, with
environmental protection in place

Medium-term CPS goals
Outputs

MANAGING RESOURCE SCARCITY AND ENVIRONMENTAL CHALLENGES

Long-term China development goals
Goals
Constraints

Annex 1: China CPS Results Matrix (continued)

– 52 –

Risks emanating from financial
system and sectors financed by
bank debt; external pressures (e.g.
capital flows)
PBoC capacity to identify,
assess and mitigate
systemic risks
strengthened

Strengthened firm
and regional
competitiveness

Investment climate includes many
restrictions

State dominates ownership of
many large enterprises; SOEs
crowd out private sector (e.g.
overcapacity, access to finance);
non-viable SOEs difficult to ‘exit’

Simplified business entry and
regulation, particularly in the
western and northeastern
provinces

Selected publicly-listed SOEs
and large private corporations
adopt international best
practice in corporate
governance and corporate
social responsibility

China implements 1999 GoC
decision to ‘let go’ of small
and medium-sized SOEs

AAA: investor protection,
disclosure and enforcement

Bank Group performance
Interventions

Means to improving firm-level innovation
identified

Options identified for simplifying, revising
selected business regulations to prohibit
monopolization, restraints on trade, and
practices that unreasonably limit competition

(continued on next page)

AAA: firm surveys give ratings,
promote awareness of
competitiveness, and support
reforms to improve investment
climate
Options identified for simplifying business
entry (including licensing, access to land)

Assistance provided to selected listed
companies to implement CSR code

AAA: corporate governance,
CSR; IFC investments and TA
to help companies improve
standards in corporate
governance and in social and
environmental practices; TA:
corporate directors

AAA: insolvency reform, state
asset management reform,
social protection IFC
investments

Approaches identified for helping SOEs to
establish boards with independent outside
directors

Enterprise bankruptcy law options articulated

Model SOE privatization transactions
completed

PBoC financial stability functions improved to
international standards

AAA: depositer protection;
bailout policies; SCB
ownership/ governance;
exchange rate risk and
financial vulnerability. TA:
Options for bank failure resolution policies
and associated institutional capacity identified financial stability functions;
periodic Stability Report

Options identified for reforming ownership,
governance structures of SCBs (incl. sale of
strategic stakes)

Steps taken to strengthen corporate
governance framework in line with OECD
principles

Medium-term CPS goals
Outputs

Strengthened corporate
governance, including
improving transparency and
accountability

Outcomes

STRENGTHENING PUBLIC AND MARKET INSTITUTIONS

Improved mitigation
of systemic risks in
the financial sector

FINANCING SUSTAINED AND EFFICIENT GROWTH

Long-term China development goals
Goals
Constraints

Annex 1: China CPS Results Matrix (continued)

– 53 –

Outcomes

Limited link between plan and
Improved link between
planning, budget, service
budget; inadequate monitoring
systems on government spending delivery demonstrated in
selected areas; greater budget
transparency

Better alignment between
fiscal responsibilities and
revenue assignments at subnational levels, including
improved equity and efficiency
in public funding

Expenditure assignments are not
matched by local revenue
autonomy or an effectivelytargeted transfer system, thus
placing disproportionate burden on
counties, townships for financing
social services

More equalizing
intergovernmental
fiscal transfer system

Improved
budget
performance

Improved accountability in
model PSUs

GoC involved in services beyond
normal government role; PSUs
underfunded, over-staffed, focused
on profits

Increased FDI inflows in west
and northeast regions

AAA: PSU reform; investment
climate surveys; public service
delivery surveys. Financing:
poverty, local e-government;
IFC investments in private
health, education”

Categorization of PSUs initiated, according to
type/level of GoC involvement

Broader use of performance indicators
encouraged in M&E of public programs

Measures identified for expanding national
treasury to subnational level

Appropriate revisions to the budget law
articulated

AAA: IDF on M&E framework
for 11th FYP; Northeast
subnational finance, rural
public finance

Financing: rural and urban
projects. AAA: NE subnational
finance; TA support for subprovincial pilot on
New local revenue sources (e.g., property,
local personal income tax) identified; selected intergovernmental fiscal
system; learning on fiscal
piloting
management, public sector
Options for new transfer law identified,
performance (WBI); rural
consolidating transfer programs with improved health
equalization impact
Expenditure assignments clarified across
levels of government

Reform options articulated for allowing notfor-profit private entities to be public service
providers

Policy actions to privatize PSUs articulated

Approaches identified to realizing higher FDI
inflows in west and northeastern provinces
(as % of total FDI)

MIGA/FIAS assistance to
investment promotion
agencies; IFC frontier
investments, SME fund for
equity investments in high
growth private companies in
the west; support to provincial
development plans

Bank Group performance
Interventions

Investment promotion agencies strengthened
in lagging provinces

Medium-term CPS goals
Outputs

Improved service
delivery

West and northeast lag dynamic
coast economically

STRENGTHENING PUBLIC AND MARKET INSTITUTIONS

Long-term China development goals
Goals
Constraints

Annex 1: China CPS Results Matrix (continued)

– 54 –

– 55 –

CHINA 2003–05 CAS COMPLETION REPORT (CASCR)
Date of CAS :
Progress Reports:
Period Covered:
CASCR drafted by:

January 22, 2003
None required
January 2003 to June 2005
Christopher Finch, Senior Country Officer

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 56
Country developments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 56
Results assessment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57
I.

CHINA AND THE WORLD ECONOMY . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 60
Promoting China’s integration into the global economy in the WTO era . . . . . . . . . 60

II. POVERTY, INEQUALITY, SOCIAL INCLUSION . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Increasing employment and productivity off and on the farm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Strengthening transport links within and to lagging regions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Developing human resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Strengthening social protection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Improving targeted poverty reduction programs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

61
61
64
66
67
69

III. MANAGING RESOURCE SCARCITY . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Strengthening effectiveness of environmental institutions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Improving air quality . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Managing water resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Managing land and natural resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Protecting global environmental commons . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

70
70
71
72
75
75

IV. REFORMING THE FINANCIAL SECTOR . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 77
V. STRENGTHENING PUBLIC AND MARKET INSTITUTIONS . . . . . . . . . . .
Strengthening institutions for macroeconomic management . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Improving public sector management and delivery of services . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Promoting private sector development and enterprise reforms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

79
79
81
85

Overall performance, monitoring and evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Bank Group instruments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Country dialogue and donor coordination . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Client feedback . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portfolio management . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

87
87
91
92
94

Conclusions and lessons . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 96
Attachments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 101

– 56 –

A. INTRODUCTION
1.
This CASCR evaluates the effectiveness of the Bank Group’s assistance to China
under the 2003-05 CAS. It is based primarily on a self-assessment, conducted by the Country
Team (CT), with the purpose of identifying key lessons to inform preparation of a new World
Bank Group CPS for the period 2006 to 2010.
2.
The 2003 CAS aimed to support China’s twin transitions from a rural agricultural to
an urban industrial society and from a centrally-planned to a more globally-integrated market-based economy. The CAS was aligned to objectives of China’s 10th FYP, which covered
the period 2001 to 2005 and included key goals of: (i) sustained growth of 7% a year, (ii)
sustainable development through higher productivity in agriculture and in industrial SOEs,
creation of 40 million jobs, and safeguarding the natural resource base; (iii) economic restructuring, rural reform, and opening to the world through better macroeconomic management, fiscal reform, and financial sustainability; building competitive globally-integrated
markets; accelerating agricultural diversification and rural reforms to raise incomes; and
improving science and technology input into production; (iv) coordinating economic and
social development by paying greater attention to quality of life, investing in human capital,
protecting natural capital, improving social protection, promoting the rule of law, and broadening democratic participation; and (v) the development of economically and socially lagging western and central provinces.
3.
Bank assistance targeted three broad related objectives: improving the business environment and helping to accelerate China’s transition to a market economy; addressing the
needs of poorer and disadvantaged people and lagging regions; and facilitating an environmentally-sustainable development process. Each objective was broken down into five subobjectives. Although the 2003 CAS was not officially a “results-based” CAS, a detailed
21-page program matrix (Annex B10) provided the most articulated description of these
objectives as well as of the GoC’s strategy and planned actions, planned and ongoing Bank
interventions, and major interventions of other donors in support of each sub-objective. In
total, the matrix described 118 GoC priorities, and 135 progress benchmarks and multiple
Bank Group instruments.

B. COUNTRY DEVELOPMENTS DURING THE CAS PERIOD
4.
China continued to make significant progress toward many of the development goals
of its 10th FYP during the CAS period. China became the world’s fourth largest economy
and the third largest trading nation as its role in world trade and in the regional production
chain continued to expand rapidly. GDP growth averaged 10% per annum over 2003 to 2005,
extending one of the highest sustained rates of growth in the world, while inflation averaged
1.4%, with the economy rebounding strongly from a sharp contraction in the second quarter
of 2003 largely due to SARS. China’s export volume increased 26% in both 2003 and 2004,
much faster than GDP, and it now accounts for 4% of world output (in nominal terms) and
about 6% of global trade. Official GoC poverty data indicate that China also sustained its
achievements in poverty reduction, efforts that have lifted more than 400 million people out
of poverty and accounted for nearly three-quarters of poverty reduction in the developing
world over the past 25 years. China is on-track to meet many of the Millennium Development
Goals (MDGs), including eradicating extreme poverty and hunger, extending primary education enrolment, and developing a global partnership for development.

– 57 –

5.
Since the beginning of the reform period in 1978, the GoC has maintained continuity in China’s basic economic policies while increasing emphasis on people-centered development that balances growth objectives with social needs, environmental sustainability, and
efforts to reduce inequalities between and within regions. Under the 10th FYP, the GoC
continued to liberalize and open China’s economy (e.g., it reducd tariffs, liberalized interest
rates and deepened financial intermediation, shifted to a managed floating exchange rate
regime, privatized SOEs and expanded the private sector, and also reduced internal barriers
to factor mobility) while also implementing a range of reforms to reduce inequality and
improve environmental sustainability. The 11th FYP, submitted to the National People’s Congress in March 2006, deepens the GoC’s commitment to achieving an “all-inclusive xiaokang”
society. In particular, it aims to implement a “scientific approach to development” to build a
“harmonious society” that sustains the rapid and steady development of China’s “socialist
market economy”, achieves the “five balances” and makes economic and social development more people-oriented, comprehensive, balanced and sustainable.
6.
Significant development challenges remain in China. Growth has continued to depend heavily on investment, and job creation has been limited as industrial growth has been
based primarily on labor productivity growth rather than employment growth. Inequality
remains high, with central and western regions continuing to lag behind the coastal region.
Poverty is increasingly concentrated in rural areas, as the limited absorption of surplus farm
labor resulting from China’s capital intensive growth has limited increases in rural productivity. Progress in non-income dimensions of poverty has lagged behind the rate of growth of
per capita income, with clear disparities in human development indicators between rural and
urban areas. Service quality and access is significantly lower in rural than in coastal areas,
and despite increased government transfers to poorer jurisdictions, imbalances remain in the
intergovernmental fiscal system. Improvements in the efficiency of natural resource use have
not kept pace with increasing resource demands, and growing scarcities of key resources—
particularly energy and water—along with associated environmental impacts, pose possible
impediments to the sustainability and equity of future growth.

C. RESULTS ASSESSMENT
7.
In assessing the Bank Group’s contributions to China’s development progress over
the CAS period, the CAS CR builds on multiple assessments, including IEG’s 2004 Country
Assistance Evaluation, QAG’s 2005 review of AAA, internal reviews of Bank project effectiveness, and client consultations (including regular dialogue with GoC counterparts, CPS
consultations, a Client Survey, and feedback obtained through the China website). In general, these reviews found that the Bank continues to make a substantial contribution to China’s
development (OED found that the Bank in China continues to “punch above its weight”).
This CASCR largely concurs with those findings. Nonetheless, the task of assessing Bank
performance in a country as large and complex as China over the brief CAS period faces
several challenges, which limit the precision with which the Bank’s contributions can be
described. In particular:

•

Because the Bank Group’s impact in China depends on its influence on policy
and institutional reform (rather than on the direct provision of goods and services), impacts are difficult to identify precisely. Although the China portfolio is
one of the Bank’s largest, it is small in relation to China’s economy (less than 0.2%
of total investment over the CAS period). Hence, the Bank’s impact is felt through

– 58 –

the demonstration effects of lending projects, and the influence of analytical work
on policy reforms. When the Bank is successful, it contributes to development impacts that reach far beyond the direct outputs of the AAA and projects that it supports, but, given the presence of other change agents in China, it is rarely the case
that the Bank is the only contributor at the start of the causal chain that leads to a
given result. In most cases, other (domestic and external) agents have also contributed, and these multiple inputs have led to a unique approach that no change agent
fully presented as such at the outset of the reform process. Determining the effectiveness of the Bank’s work in China is necessarily an exercise in judgment.

•

Because the Bank Group’s impact in China is cumulative, with results emerging
in sectors where the Bank has developed a long-term relationship and provided
multiple inputs over many years, it is particularly difficult to articulate with any
confidence the results of the Bank’s work completed over the most recent CAS
period. Many of the Bank Group’s interventions during the CAS period will set the
stage for results (in terms of policy and institutional reforms, scaled-up technologies or capacities, and so on) that will unfold in the future. This is particularly so for
the many CAS interventions that were initiated (as planned) late in the CAS period.
In fact, many of the Bank impacts that can be confidently discussed at this point
involve Bank performance that precedes the 2003-05 CAS period.

•

Quantitative indicators that are often used in other (e.g. IDA) countries to assess Bank performance are limited in availability and usefulness in the case of
China. For many development indicators, data covering some or all of the CAS
period is not yet available, meaning that recent trends in development outcomes are
difficult to establish. In addition, Bank impacts—which aim to involve policy or
institutional reform—do not readily translate into specific quantitative achievements.

8.
As an initial stage in preparing this CASCR, the country team reviewed all 135
progress benchmarks from the 2003 CAS and provided a written assessment of progress
made toward each benchmark, describing Bank contributions as well as key lessons learned.
This resulted in a very detailed document with limited usefulness in providing an overall
assessment of the Bank’s performance. In particular, the document tended to offer a distorted
picture of the Bank Group’s overall performance over the 2003–05 CAS period: (i) Though
the benchmarks in the matrix were numerous, the matrix did not make any attempt to prioritize or establish a clear hierarchy between them, treating all results as having the same importance. (ii) The matrix for the most part did not provide measurable baseline and target
indicators, and many benchmarks were stated generally as improvements in development
outcomes, with the result that quantitative measurement of performance was elusive. Finally,
(iii) many benchmarks represented higher-order goals to which Bank Group assistance was
aligned but over which the Bank’s interventions alone would, even in the best of circumstances, have only an indirect influence, with the result that Bank performance could be
assessed only in terms of Bank contributions to particular outcomes—recognizing that other
agencies also contributed and that the impact of different contributions is extremely difficult,
if not impossible, to disentangle.
9.
As a result of these factors, the CASCR does not reproduce the CAS’s original program matrix with an additional column stating the “status at completion” for each CAS
benchmark. Instead, while, the 2003 program matrix forms the intial point of departure, this
CASCR aims to organize the details by articulating clearly the key results that the CAS

– 59 –
The CAS pillars (2003–05) mapped to the CPS pillars (2006–10)
Pillar 1
Improving business environment and
accelerating transition to market economy
• Strengthening macroeconomic management

Pillar 1
Integrating China into the world economy
• Participating in multilateral institutions
• Reducing barriers to trade and investment
• Participating in global development initiatives

Integrating China into global economy
Reforming the financial sector
• Establishing an overall sector policy structure
• Restructuring the banking system
• Improving governance and regulatory structures
• Establishing capital markets

Pillar 4
Financing sustained and efficient growth
• Expanding access to finance
• Developing capital markets
• Managing systemic risks, maintaining stability

Promoting PSD and enterprise reforms
• Improving environment for private sector activity
• Corporate restructuring, ownership diversification
• Strengthening corporate governance

Pillar 5
Improving public and market institutions

Promoting private participation in infrastructure
Improving public sector management

• Improving firm competitiveness
• Reforming public service units
• Rationalizing intergovernmental fiscal relations
• Strengthening the judiciary

• Improving environment for good governance
Strengthening management of cities
Strengthening performance of public utilities
Pillar 2
Addressing the needs of poorer people and
disadvantaged regions
• Increasing employment and productivity
• Strengthening transport links
• Developing human resources
• Strengthening social protection
• Improving poverty reduction programs
Pillar 3

Pillar 2

Reducing poverty and inequality
• Promoting balanced urbanization
• Sustaining rural livelihoods
Expanding access to social services
Health care
Education
Social protection
• Expanding access to infrastructure services
Transportation
Information and communications technology

Pillar 3

Facilitating an environmentally sustainable
development process

Managing resource scarcity and
environmental challenges

• Strengthening environmental institutions
• Improving air quality
• Managing water resources
• Managing land and natural resources
• Protecting global environmental commons

• Conserving water resources
• Optimizing energy use
• Reducing air pollution
• Improving land administration, management
• Observing environmental conventions

For 2003–2005 CAS, pillar components are listed in order
of appearance in Annex B10 (country program matrix)

For CPS, pillar components are listed in order of
appearance in main document and program matrix

– 60 –

expected to be achieved, the contributions that the Bank made, and the lessons learned. Moreover, given that the Bank Group’s impact arises indirectly from its influence on policy and
institutional reforms, the CASCR presents a largely qualitative review of Bank Group assistance over the past three years.
10.
In the following text, each section provides an overview of major Bank contributions, factors that contributed to or limited success, and key lessons for consideration as the
new CPS is developed. To increase the utility of the CASCR, the 2003 CAS objectives have
been rearranged according to the thematic structure of the new CPS. The diagram on the
preceding page depicts the 2003 CAS sub-objectives mapped to the new CPS themes, with
activities from objective 1 in the 2003 CAS divided into three parts corresponding to new
CPS pillars 1, 4, and 5: integrating China into the global economy, reforming the financial
sector, and strengthening institutions.

D.

CHINA AND THE WORLD ECONOMY

Promoting China’s integration into the global economy
11.
The category “Integrating China and the global economy” appears as one of the subpillars of pillar I of the 2003 CAS. In this area, the Bank aimed to support China’s integration
into the world economy by helping the GoC to cope with the rapid changes expected following China’s 2001 WTO accession.
12.
Implement commitments under and build capacity for conforming with WTO:
The Bank aimed to help the GoC implement specific WTO commitments through advising
on the design and implementation of trade-related laws and regulations. Benchmarks were
largely achieved, primarily through an ongoing Economic Law Reform project, as the Bank
(and WBI) helped responsible agencies, including the State Council, to ensure the compatibility of numerous business laws with WTO requirements and to build the capacity of GoC
officials to implement WTO-related reforms. Partly as a result, China has generally met its
WTO obligations, and accession itself provided strong impetus to growth. IFC’s manufacturing and financial sector investments, coupled with IFC/MIGA support (to MoF, the Exim
Bank, and Sinosure) for outward investments and China’s “go-global” program, also helped
companies build capacity to prepare for increased global integration.
13.
Reforms to maximize benefits and smooth impacts of increased integration: To
help the GoC to design complementary policies, the Bank also sought to provide strategic
analysis of the economic impact of WTO-related reforms, in particular, through completing
a major study and multiple background studies highlighting the small adverse effect of WTO
accession on rural poverty and the importance of complementary countervailing policy measures, especially in rural infrastructure and education (which the GoC has undertaken at a
rapid rate). Bank-supported studies also strongly articulated the importance of liberalizing
labor markets and reducing barriers to internal trade in order to achieve poverty reduction
following WTO accession. While CAS benchmarks on actions to liberalize labor markets
and reduce internal trade barriers did not include specific targets, the GoC has taken several
important steps to address the concerns expressed in Bank reports: in particular, the hukou
system is being relaxed, rural out-migration is now actively encouraged, and specific localities are taking steps to improve local investment climates.

– 61 –

14.
Promote knowledge economy: The Bank aimed to help promote China’s knowledge
economy through improving R&D and information flows and bridging the digital divide. The
GoC has made great progress in developing China’s information infrastructure (e.g. the number of fixed and mobile phones has reached 600 million (40% of the population)), and the
Bank provided important inputs, including support to a high-level policy dialogue on digital
divide issues (facilitated by a WBI study on lifelong learning), a joint research program to
develop the national ICT strategy, and GDLN expansion across China. IFC investments (of
$25 million) in young, small, high-tech companies and support for venture-capital funds also
contributed. Through the Shanghai Poverty Conference and follow-on activities (see Improving targeted Poverty Reduction Programs on page 69), the Bank Group also helped to disseminate China’s successful development experiences to other developing countries.
Lessons learned on promoting China’s global integration
•

•
•

E.

Integrating China into the world economy requires action beyond WTO accession—including greater Chinese participation in other multilateral economic institutions as well as in
overseas investment and development assistance.
Reforms to liberalize labor markets and reduce internal trade barriers are still needed to
ensure a wider and more equitable distribution of the benefits of globalization.
Bank support for pilot ICT projects modeling new approaches in rural areas and small
towns would complement and add value to its ICT policy advice.

POVERTY, INEQUALITY, SOCIAL INCLUSION

15.
Pillar II of the 2003 CAS aimed to address the needs of poorer people and disadvantaged regions. Under this pillar, in line with the growing GoC emphasis on balanced development, the Bank Group sought to continue to shift its support from well-off coastal areas to
disadvantaged inland provinces, with a focus on employment generation on and off the farm,
infrastructure provision, human development, and social protection. In addition, the Bank
sought to expand support to the development of cities and towns and to the provision of jobs
for the large pool of rural surplus labor.
Increasing employment and productivity off and on the farm:
16.
The Bank sought to assist the GoC with investments to demonstrate improved approaches to high-value, diversified agricultural development, natural resource management,
watershed rehabilitation, and agricultural research addressing China’s specific needs. In parallel, the Bank planned continued support in addressing relevant tax and fiscal policies, public and private financial services, and land tenure issues, as well as Bank-IFC activities to
promote private investment in lagging regions.
17.
Spur off-farm job creation: The Bank Group aimed to support absorption of rural
surplus labor in off-farm employment by promoting the development of regions, SMEs, and
municipal investment climates as well as policy reforms to create more flexible markets for
land, labor, and capital (Bank Group engagement in each of these areas is covered under
other CAS sub-objectives below). In addition to interventions targeting specific localities
and policy reforms, the Group provided cross-cutting interventions that examined overall

– 62 –

development constraints and options to spur growth in lagging regions, including studies and
technical assistance on private sector development in lagging regions, national market integration and factor mobility (see below), city development strategies, and support for preparation of the 11th FYP. IFC supported off-farm job creation through investments ($166 million)
in agribusiness and forestry—which created jobs for tens of thousands of farmers—and technical assistance to build farmer capacity to meet demand.
18.
Strengthen management of cities: The Bank also sought to strengthen urban management and policy, as part of a cross-cutting CAS theme on urban development and environment with a direct focus on supporting the provision of jobs to surplus rural labor. (These
activities are included under the Poverty pillar of the new CPS, but were included under
Pillar I—on the business environment—in the 2003 CAS.) Primarily through support under
urban and transport programs, the Bank contributed to better management and financial
mechanisms at metropolitan and regional levels that facilitate urban development and job
creation:

•

Through Bank inputs into policy dialogue and the 11th FYP, the Bank advocated
the establishment of a national policy framework to facilitate factor mobility, urban
economic restructuring, and measures to improve the rural-urban interface.

•

Urban projects supported innovative management and financial mechanisms at metropolitan and regional levels, including infrastructure finance initiatives in urban
environment (under the Shanghai APL) through a district financing vehicle, preparation of an enterprise bond issue, and private sector participation. Fitting with
China’s needs, the Bank has increasingly focused on rapidly growing satellite cities
and towns, and on building ties between local jurisdictions addressing urban environment challenges.

•

Bank studies and dialogue on small town and municipal development, including an
extensive City Development Strategy program in five major cities (with DFID and
Cities Alliance financing), guided the GoC’s continued attention to facilitating the
absorption of rural surplus labor in urban areas and improving urban economies
through economic restructuring, diversification, and enhanced city networking. The
Bank provided analytical support for housing maintenance policies, and a pioneering grant-funded urban poverty alleviation initiative was implemented in Liaoning
province.

19.
Enhance agricultural productivity: Under this sub-objective, the Bank aimed to
support China’s goals to promote diversified agricultural development and increased production of higher-value agricultural products (including via investments in research and extension), develop land markets, and promote watershed rehabilitation as well as better water
management in irrigation.

•

Diversified agricultural development. In target areas, Bank projects helped raise
the share of higher-value crops in total agricultural output and reduce the area planted
to standard grain crops, while recognizing that the GoC remains committed to maintaining sufficient grain planting to achieve national food security. Substantial achievements were also made in reforming the role of non-state entities in marketing agricultural commodities, with the Bank helping to promote farmers associations. Delays in the preparation of several supporting Bank projects, including Jiangxi, Gansu
and Xinjiang Pastoral Development, and Heilongjiang Dairy, which are only beginning to be implemented, also delayed some of the demonstration impacts that the

– 63 –

Bank has sought. In addition, Bank support to restructuring and revitalizing investments in research and extension was initiated only in late FY05 (through the Agriculture Technology project). The CAS also included a benchmark on reforming
rural administrative fees and taxes—an area where the GoC has made progress—
but the Bank was not directly engaged.

•

Land markets. While CAS benchmarks have not yet been met, progress is continuing and has been satisfactory, with the Bank providing key inputs. A comprehensive program of Bank AAA is helping to articulate a roadmap for land policy reform, and the 2003 Rural Land Contracting Law, whose formulation was supported
under an IDF grant, explicitly permits and protects voluntary transfers of rural land
use by farmers during the 30-year land use right term. Further reform is needed to
enable land to be used as collateral for credit (a long-standing objective of Bank
assistance) or direct trade of agricultural land titles.

•

Watershed rehabilitation, irrigation, soil and water resource management.
Building on initiatives piloted under the Bank’s widely-acclaimed Loess Plateau
projects, improved soil and land management techniques (land terracing, conversion of agricultural land on steep hillsides back to forest and steppe) continued to
be scaled-up in GoC programs. In promoting water management reforms, the Bank’s
Tarim Basin, IAIL-2, and Water Conservation projects demonstrated the potential
for Water User Associations to empower rural farmers by improving the equity of
irrigation and bolstering farmer incomes. Bank projects have also helped to establish the important principle that water quotas should apply to irrigation use and to
assess such use through water measurement and evapo-transpiration. These objectives were fully achieved, although more work is needed to mainstream reforms
into the GoC’s own programs.

Lessons learned on off-farm employment, city management, and agriculture
•

•

•

With increasing demand for basic urban services, particularly in smaller and medium-sized
cities within larger metropolitan and city-regional areas, enhanced approaches to metropolitan management will become increasingly needed, including mechanisms for governing interactions between and among municipal and county/district governments (in
particular related to planning and provision of infrastructure services).
On-lending for income-generating activities to farm households has proved problematic, so
the focus of Bank support is shifting toward a greater emphasis on the institutional aspects
of agricultural productivity (e.g., strengthening local institutions such as farmer and water
associations, better targeting of agricultural extension services toward public goods).
Promoting legal parity between state ownership and collective ownership of land is key to
ensuring farmer’s rights and quality-enhancing land investments. More work needs to be
done in developing land use markets, in particular, to use land as collateral.

20.
Promote environmentally sustainable development in the western region: The
CAS included separate sub-objectives aiming to strengthen GoC capacity to address environmental issues and to assist with the development of energy resources in western regions.
The Bank supported these objectives through a model Strategic Environmental Assessment
of China’s Great Western Development Strategy and the preparation of Guidelines for Assessment of the linkages between Environment and Poverty Alleviation, based on case studies in Sichuan and Yunnan. This sub-objective was largely achieved, as sustainable agriculture

– 64 –

and watershed management methods piloted by the Bank (e.g., the Loess Plateau) continue
to be scaled up in western regions. While relatively small in financial terms, Bank Group
investments in hydropower (IBRD) and in metallurgical coke production (IFC) demonstrated
technologies to reduce air emissions in western provinces while also promoting higher environmental, health and safety standards.
Strengthening transport links within and to lagging regions
21.
Under the CAS, the Bank aimed to support the GoC’s efforts to expand transportation infrastructure within and to the poorer provinces through interventions in the highway,
railway and waterway sectors, primarily consisting of investments designed to address critical bottlenecks and to demonstrate more efficient financially and environmentally sustainable construction and management practices. The GoC’s physical targets (included in the
CAS as a progress benchmark) were largely met, with the Bank making small but catalytic
contributions which successfully built local capacity, facilitated transport flows, reduced transport costs, and improved living conditions along the constructed and rehabilitated highways,
as measured at the completion of the projects finalized during the CAS period. There has
also been success in reforming transport logistics and scaling-up practices demonstrated
under Bank interventions, though more could be done.

•

Physical targets. Since the mid-1990s, China has expanded its highway and railway networks at an unprecedented rate, correcting for previous under-investment (a
problem signalled by the Bank in the mid-1990s). The core of the GoC’s highway
investment program has been the National Trunk Highway System (NTHS), a 35,000
km network of highway corridors with a projected cost of $150 billion; over 1999–
2004, highway kilometers increased from about 12,000 to 34,000. The railway network has also expanded rapidly, from 56,000 km in 1996 to 70,000 in early 2005.
The Bank played a catalytic role in both areas, through supporting on average two
new highway projects as well as one or more railway, urban transport or inland
waterway projects each year, mostly in the central and southern regions. Despite
the GoC’s transportation advances, infrastructure remains well below demand. The
density of the road and rail networks remains low relative to geographic area or
population in comparison with other countries at the same stage of development,
particularly in railways, where a large part of the network remains clogged and
potential customers have to wait or be turned away.

•

Economic impacts. Though it is difficult to discern the ultimate socioeconomic
impacts of the Bank’s program, the transport projects completed during the CAS
period have shown high economic rates of return—ranging from 15% to 29%—and
a substantial reduction in interurban and urban transport costs. These effects were
attained by the combination of investments in major thoroughfares with complementary investments in rural roads or urban transport. The Bank’s insistence on a
more balanced approach within and across modes has led to noticeable impacts in
the poorer areas of the provinces where projects were implemented, with assessments showing positive project contributions, in target areas, to non-farm employment, rural incomes, enterprises such as tourism, and association with increased
infrastructure access.

•

Institutional development. Bank support has helped raise technological and management standards in the jurisdictions where it has worked, including for road safety

– 65 –

and planning and management mechanisms, but larger spill-over effects have been
limited. Bank TA addressed, inter alia, logistical services, transport safety, and transport technology and management, and helped raise the policy discussion and standards in the jurisdictions where it was applied. For instance, road safety approaches
in the design of highways, the treatment of black spots, and control of truck overloading have become more commonplace in China—although such activities have
yet to be mainstreamed. By contrast, project implementation and management
mechanisms demonstrated under Bank projects—including transparent procurement and measures to improve social and environmental sustainability—have been
widely disseminated and scaled-up.

•

In urban transport, good models of comprehensive urban transport planning have
been established in a number of cities, but national mechanisms and capacities for
scaling-up these experiences are limited, and municipalities often emphasize investment in ring roads without adequate assessment of transport demand. Bank
efforts at the project level to support improved traffic management, road safety, and
reduced vehicle emissions have proven to be time-consuming and staff intensive.

Less progress has been made in supporting intermodal transport logistics or the promotion of greater container penetration. While there have been successes, such as IFC’s
investment in modernizing the Yangtze River fleet to meet growing demand for container
vessels, Bank Group support has been more limited in these areas, either because the private
sector was ready to assume the necessary responsibilities (e.g., long-distance trucking opera-

22.

Lessons learned in transportation
•

•

•

•

The GoC’s strong role in the selection of projects and their components has yielded strong
client ownership and rapid implementation, but has also challenged the Bank to find ways
to advise on sector-wide matters. The interest of GoC counterparts to move rapidly with
physical investments can also impact a project’s ability to build stronger planning, management, and operational capacities.
In road projects, the desire to finance components that can generate revenues to be used to
repay loan costs—e.g. toll roads—has often tilted the balance towards financing higherclass highways, although increasingly, greater GoC attention to addressing income inequalities has translated into a greater willingness to include rural roads in Bank-supported
projects. Further capacity needs to be built for managing the selection of rural road investments and their procurement and maintenance.
Coordination among transport modes to ensure efficient investment and pricing remains a
key challenge. Since there is no single entity responsible for all transportation invest-ments,
coordination falls to a relatively small team of specialists within NDRC. This organizational structure risks producing road plans that do not strike the best balance among classes
of roads (e.g. that underemphasize lower-class roads servicing poorer communities), providing limited guidance to cities regarding developing nationally consistent and sustainable
transport networks, and selecting and implementing intermodal transportation options that
increase rather than reduce the fuel-use and pollution impacts of the transportation sector.
Recently the Bank has focused attention on helping NDRC and its provincial counterparts
in project selection, but more work is needed in this area to ensure that decision-making
takes a sector-wide perspective.
Key challenges include improving coordination among transport modes to ensure efficient
and sustainable investment programs, implementation of a fuel tax, and strengthening
mechanisms to scale-up successful demonstrations in cities.

– 66 –

tions) or because key GoC entities (e.g., customs administration and Ministry of Commerce)
have not requested Bank assistance.
Developing Human Resources
23.
One of the key challenges that the CT faced, operationally, over the 2003–05 CAS
period was to identify a modality for continued IBRD lending in the social sectors, following
China’s graduation from IDA and the difficulties entailed by borrowing on IBRD terms for
social sector projects in poorer jurisdictions with limited repayment capacities. Given that
lending is the primary means through which the Bank pilots and demonstrates new approaches
to China’s development challenges, the reduction of lending in the social sectors threatened
to reduce the Bank’s engagement and level of strategic dialogue in these areas. In the end,
continued involvement under the 2003 CAS was made possible by DFID, which agreed on a
pilot basis to cofinance a number of Bank projects in the social sectors by blending DFID
grant funds with IBRD resources to reduce the effective interest rate of the IBRD loan.
\24.
Improve coverage and quality of education: In the 2003 CAS, the Bank supported
China’s goals to: (i) expand access to quality basic education; (ii) decentralize education
planning and budgeting; and (iii) reorient higher and vocational education through support
for quality enhancements and demand-driven training and skills development. The Bank and
the GoC recognized that China needed an education system that would produce higher quality results, use resources more efficiently, and be sufficiently equitable to maintain social
cohesion. A two-pronged strategy was agreed for pursuing these aims, involving (i) ensuring
better resourcing for the weakest parts of the system to provide increased access to basic
education for all and (ii) encouraging the most dynamic parts of the system to grow and
continually improve in quality.

•

Basic education. During the CAS period, the GoC completed the 4th and launched
a new basic education project in collaboration with DFID with a goal of supporting
national level reforms and promoting innovation. Together, these projects have provided $515 million in financing for improving school facilities, teacher training,
management, and innovations in educational service delivery in poor provinces,
and have promoted more child-friendly participatory teaching methods in target
schools and better financial management in some provincial education bureaus.
Increased government transfers for compulsory education in rural areas are in line
with the findings of Bank AAA, in part funded by ASEM, which helped to analyze
financial transfer programs to support education in poorer regions.

•

Higher and vocational education. The Bank and China worked closely together to
improve the quality and relevance of undergraduate science education, with investments in curriculum reform, faculty upgrading, teaching skills and lab equipment,
and vocational education. The Bank successfully piloted and disseminated curricula
reforms; helped improve professional development for faculty and administrators
as well as student assistance programs; and enhanced competitive funding mechanisms. These interventions helped institutions to pursue greater efficiency, measure
outcomes by tracking their performance in the labor market, and align with market
demands through developing closer ties with industries. IFC also supported higher
and vocational education through investments to develop high quality distance
medical education across China and to strengthen institutions providing specialized training (e.g., bank training).

– 67 –

25.
Although the relative importance of Bank financing in the education sector has diminished with growing national investment, Bank projects continue to provide important
vehicles for building capacity at the sub-national level and for incubating innovation. Even
so, Bank engagement in the education sector was difficult during the CAS period, given that
poorer jurisdictions found it difficult to borrow on IBRD terms for social sector projects
unless the loans were subsidized by grant resources.
26.
Protect health services: In the health sector, the Bank Group aimed to support the
GoC to improve health services, with a particular emphasis on service delivery to disadvantaged groups and the rural population. The CAS included multiple progress benchmarks,
most of which were very ambitiously national in scope. In providing support, the Bank’s
ongoing portfolio of health projects (no new health projects were launched during the CAS
period) had some important successes. In particular, the GoC made use of a pilot under the
Bank’s Basic Health Services project to formulate its national Medical Assistance program,
which provides financial assistance to the poorest households so that they can access essential health care. Health 9 introduced important innovations for reaching populations at high
risk of HIV/AIDS, and the Tuberculosis project (the largest such project in the world, made
possible by DFID grant cofinancing) met WTO targets for enhanced tuberculosis detection
across a project area covering 700 million people. WBI has also contributed to building
capacity in health economics and financing through sustained partnership with a network of
higher education institutions, and IFC invested in a hospital to expand access to international-standard medical services in Beijing and Shanghai. Even so, relative to the ambitious
goals set out in the CAS, the Bank Group’s impact on the sector has been modest. Reflecting
the Bank’s changing role (including limited prospects for future lending in a non-IDA environment) as well as increased GoC attention to health care financing and delivery issues in
the wake of the SARS epidemic, the Bank during the CAS period repositioned its assistance
from a focus on discrete project interventions to one of greater engagement on policy issues
in the rural health sector, with a major collaborative AAA effort examining the policy changes
necessary to make quality health care accessible and affordable to the rural population. While
it is too early to assess the results of this ongoing effort, it sets the stage for the Bank better to
support GoC policy reforms in the future.
Strengthening social protection
27.
Under the CAS, the Bank planned to help the GoC to strengthen its national social
protection framework and introduce policy reforms in the areas of pension reform and labor
markets. During the CAS period, the Bank continued a long-term program of assistance
through three ongoing lending operations, a substantial AAA program, and WBI learning
events. This program supported GoC pilot initiatives, helped to shape the policy framework
and debate, and contributed to long-term institution building as the GoC continued to make
progress on a wide range of reforms in social insurance, urban (dibao) and rural assistance
programs for vulnerable households, and reforming labor markets, including relaxation of
some barriers to labor mobility.

•

On pensions, Bank-GoC analysis deepened policy-makers’ understanding of system design flaws and reform options to improve sustainability. Evaluation of national policies and an approach piloted in Liaoning province provided concrete proposals to reform policy parameters to restore financial viability, improve organizational structure and administrative procedures, and strengthen financial and information management across the system. Bank assistance has directly led to the es-

– 68 –

tablishment of an actuarial unit in MoF and localized an analytical tool in the Ministry of Labor and Social Security that has been used to assess pension reform
options at central, provincial, and municipal levels across China.

•

On labor markets, Bank TA helped to identify major barriers to labor market integration as well as options to strengthen the unemployment insurance program. The
Labor Market Development Project helped to improve active labor market programs and develop a labor market information system, now widely adopted across
China, that provides expanded access to information and services to people seeking
to acquire new skills and search for new jobs (including workers redeploying as the
result of SOE reforms).

•

On social safety nets, not planned in the CAS, the Bank helped the GoC assess the
urban minimum living allowance program established in 1999 as well as a number
of pilot rural social assistance programs targeted at vulnerable households. These
interventions provided building blocks for ongoing GoC efforts to develop a framework for rural social protection complementing national poverty alleviation programs.

Lessons learned in supporting strengthened social services
•

•

•

•

Reflecting the Bank’s shifting relationship with China, innovation, experimental program
design, and global knowledge-sharing are of primary importance in the social sectors. While
large-scale financing needs remain, new projects should be designed and implemented
with the aim of helping to inform evolving policies. To this end, the newest generation of
projects are being designed with a comparatively heavier emphasis on experimental design
and capacity building.
Sub-national units which currently have responsibility for loan repayment have sometimes
been reluctant to finance bold experimental activities or monitoring and evaluation activities which would contribute to the greater public good. They have perhaps tended to place
a greater emphasis on stretching the investments in infrastructure and hardware in response
to immediate pressures. Options to address this difficulty might include providing national
subsidies for loan repayment, blending IBRD resources with national programs to reduce
loan charges, including larger “central government components” in projects, co-financing,
or targeting assistance only on the most reform-minded provinces.
Reducing IBRD charges for social sector projects in poorer jurisdictions with limited repayment capacities continues to be necessary to enable IBRD demonstration projects to
continue in these areas. The Bank has been encouraged by the GoC’s recently-expressed
willingness to blend resources from the GoC’s central budget with IBRD resources to hold
down loan repayment obligations for poor beneficiaries in selected circumstances. A key
challenge for the new CPS will involve working out the detailed arrangements to realize
this solution, starting with an appropriate pilot project.
In education, further work is needed to help the most vulnerable—the disabled, migrant
children, ethnic minorities and the very poor—achieve 9-year compulsory education. An
improved assessment system is needed to monitor learning over time and inform policies to
improve quality. Frameworks for financing, private sector investment and quality assurance
in secondary and higher education are also required as the pressure continues for these subsectors to grow.

– 69 –

Improving Targeted Poverty Reduction Programs
28.
Strengthen effectiveness of anti-poverty programs in lagging areas. Under the
2003 CAS, the Bank sought to advise the GoC on effective implementation and targeting of
anti-poverty strategies, policies, and programs. CAS objectives were fully achieved as the
Bank continued to build a close partnership with the State Council’s Leading Group Office
for Poverty Alleviation and Development (LGPR) and saw significant impact from its poverty-focused AAA and poverty reduction projects. Ongoing implementation of the GoC’s
rural poverty program continues to align with collaborative Bank assistance, including recommendations for improved targeting (e.g., shifting from county- to village-based targeting
as the GoC designated 148,000 poor villages); strengthened financial monitoring and supervision; increased local participation in project design, implementation and monitoring; stronger outreach to minority nationalities, the disabled, and other vulnerable groups; and further
expansion of the rural poor’s access to basic education and health services. Work on a new
poverty assessment is underway, and will help to improve understanding of the changing
distribution, nature, and causes of remaining poverty in China.
29.
In May 2004, the Bank’s poverty reduction work in China was showcased during the
Shanghai Conference on Scaling-Up Poverty Reduction, organized by WBI. In addition, in
October 2004, the GoC chose the Bank Group to be the first recipient of its Poverty Eradication Award for international agencies. As an outcome of the Shanghai conference, WBI helped
to establish and strengthen the International Poverty Reduction Center in China (IPRCC), a
research and training center that is growing into a repository of knowledge on China’s development experience and a regional hub integrated with a network of similar centers. Other
GoC agencies have requested WBI assistance to package their development knowledge in a
way that is relevant for other countries, particularly in Africa.
30.
While there have been many successes as well as very close agreement with the GoC
on the poverty reduction policy framework, it is clear that more needs to be done to achieve
real change on the ground. Poor villages have been designated and funds earmarked, but
relatively limited funding directly reaches poor households, as most funding is absorbed at
village- or county-level poverty projects. While the GoC’s commitment to a more demanddriven approach is real, much remains to be done to develop practical measures at the local
level to better empower villagers to be more in control of poverty reduction efforts and to
reach the most remote and disadvantaged.

Lessons learned in supporting poverty reduction initiatives
•

•

Further work needs to be done to mainstream poverty-reduction objectives into general
rural development programs and to build a national poverty-reduction program which rolls
out needed reforms across the western and central provinces where most of the remaining
rural poor reside.
Continuing innovation will be needed as the GoC continues to refine targeting of poverty
reduction efforts (e.g., testing household-based rural targeting), to develop multi-faceted
and differentiated approaches to reach remaining groups of rural poor (including the poor
in remote mountainous areas and minority areas as well as specific categories of poor such
as those with limited land, ability to migrate or to work), and to enhance participatory
measures and community-driven development approaches.

– 70 –

F.

MANAGING RESOURCE SCARCITY & ENVIRONMENTAL CHALLENGES

31.
The 2003 CAS emphasized assisting the GoC to achieve more environmentallysustainable development. Shaped by the findings of a major study (China: Air, Land, and
Water) carried out by the State Environment Protection Agency (SEPA) and the Bank, the
second pillar of the CAS defined five dimensions of Bank Group support for the environment: institutional reform, protecting and managing air, land and water resources, and cooperating with institutions to protect the global commons. Bank interventions were largely
successful in supporting policy and institutional reforms and model practices. Even so, concerted GoC efforts and progress in many areas failed to keep pace with China’s rapid economic growth, with the result that resource scarcity and environmental challenges continued
to grow during the CAS period.
Strengthening Effectiveness of Environmental Institutions
32.
As planned in the CAS, the Bank assisted Chinese authorities to strengthen the
country’s environmental law and regulatory framework as well as institutional capacity to
monitor and enforce regulations. The most important achievement during the period was the
enactment of the new (2003) Environmental Assessment Law. As part of an ongoing effort to
prepare implementing regulations for the new law (with completion planned for 2006), the
Bank helped SEPA to prepare guidelines for public participation and information disclosure
(implemented for the first time in early 2005), two areas in which Chinese requirements have
lagged international best practice. Some Bank urban and transport projects have served as
models for state-of-the-art monitoring and enforcement, and WBI provided extensive capacity building to SEPA’s directors and environmental protection bureaus (EPBs). Perhaps most
significantly, environmental and social reviews under the Bank’s safeguards combined with
GEF and other funding mechanisms helped to mainstream environmental concerns into local
planning in some jurisdictions implementing Bank-supported projects.

Lessons learned in strengthening effectiveness of environmental institutions
•

•

Further effort is needed to integrate environmental objectives at the strategic and planning
stages (e.g. through greater use of Strategic Environment Assessments) and in sectoral
investment programs. Mainstreaming environmental considerations in projects has been an
important tool for addressing environmental issues and building local capacity. The Bank
can potentially play a more significant role through greater upstream involvement in the
preparation of sector strategies and planning, when environmental considerations can be
taken into account in a more effective manner.
After closure of the Environmental TA project, the Bank didn’t have a framework for continuous policy dialogue and assistance to environmental policy and institutional development. Trust funds became the primary mechanism supporting analytical work and TA,
imposing constraints on continuity, predictable financing, and scope of work.

– 71 –

Improving Air Quality
33.
Building on its long-term partnership with China in the energy sector, the Bank was
largely successful in providing assistance for energy sector reforms, restructuring, and technology transfer promoting greater use of renewable energy and cleaner fuels, energy efficiency, and expanded air pollution control technologies. While the Bank made important
contributions, mostly through its small energy program with parallel support from GEF, China
struggled to sustain earlier progress toward improved air quality as rapid increases in coal
consumption and industrial production—associated with a rapidly growing economy—increased air pollution.
34.
Assisting conversion to renewable energy and clean fuels. The Bank supported
GoC efforts to promote the expanded use of natural gas, clean coal, renewable energy sources,
and improved energy efficiency through an ongoing program of research and targeted investments:

•

Studies supported by the Bank and GEF paved the way for the 2005 Renewable
Energy Law which, inter alia, sets out the connection, pricing and cost recovery
arrangements for grid-connected renewable electricity.

•

Catalyzed in part by the Bank’s Renewable Energy Development project, the CAS
period saw a significant increase in interest and uptake of photovoltaic (solar) power,
for off-grid electrification, with the project helping to finance 175,000 systems.
Technology transfer and market development activities have approximately halved
prices of photovoltaic systems and Chinese companies are now internationally competitive, with a burgeoning export market.

•

Bank AAA along with IFC investments and TA (targeting the largest private-sector
natural gas distributor) contributed to the development of the gas market and further
expansion of gas distribution infrastructure that is now increasing gas penetration.

•

Bank assistance helped to successfully demonstrate models of sustainable project
financing, commercialization, private sector participation, and the use of carbon financing in supporting medium/small-sized hydropower plants in five poor counties.

35.
Providing efficient energy delivery. China increasingly emphasized energy conservation during the CAS period, including the promulgation in 2004 of China’s new Medium and Long-term Energy Conservation Plan. The Bank served as a core partner for GoC
efforts to design and implement energy efficiency programs in two main areas.

•

The Bank helped to develop an energy performance contracting industry through
helping to develop new investment and financial intermediation mechanisms to
encourage the adoption of financially-viable energy conservation investments. By
2005, some 60 energy performance contracting companies in China held energy
efficiency investments of $100 million.

•

The Bank helped the GoC to develop and implement urban heating system reforms
as well as building energy efficiency standards. AAA and a $18 million GEF operation supported a new central government program to pilot heat billing and pricing
reforms in several northern cities.

•

IFC investments have also demonstrated that environmentally compliant, well-managed private power plants can be financially viable in the Chinese market.

– 72 –

Lessons learned in improving air quality
•

•

•

•

The long-term Bank-China partnership in the energy sector has been an important factor in
Bank contributions and provides the platform for continued assistance. Sustained engagement will be needed to support scaling-up progress in energy efficiency, technology transfer, and implementing the Renewable Energy Law, with a strong emphasis on
capacity-building.
While improving energy efficiency is important to reducing the resource intensity of the
sector and overall economy, addressing serious air quality issues requires an integrated
approach with cross-sectoral coordination. During the CAS period, the Bank lacked appropriate instruments to support such a comprehensive approach.
Future Bank assistance to combat air pollution will need to take into account the shifting
nature of China’s air quality challenges. Residential and vehicular sources of air pollution
are expanding rapidly, and represent areas where China may wish to obtain Bank assistance
in the future. Air pollution reduction efforts now more than ever need to focus on how to
reduce ambient concentrations in the most cost-effective ways.

Moving beyond largely successful efforts to incorporate energy-efficient technologies and more rigorous emission standards in new power plants, the Bank is poised
to help assess and pilot optimal ways to clean up existing plants (the focus of the
Shandong Flue Gas Desulfurization Project planned for FY07).

Managing Water Resources
36.
Improve water management and conservation in agriculture and rural areas. The
CAS aimed to support improved rural water management through investments in water saving, support for improved water pricing, irrigation system modernization, flood control, and
integrated river basin management. Goals for water conservation were largely met within
Bank-financed activities, but there is scope for further mainstreaming successful demonstrations into the GoC’s own programs. Reforms in the sector have been directed at introducing
the concept of real water savings and applying an integrated set of water-saving measures in
irrigated agriculture. Guided by the Country Water Resources Assistance Strategy, CAS goals
were largely met as the Bank helped China to find solutions to traditional water resource
management (WRM) problems using non-traditional approaches. Significant GoC achievements to which the Bank contributed included:

•

Establishing the first river-basin-level institutional arrangements for an intra-provincial river basin (Tarim) through a dynamic and participatory process that involved farmers, agricultural support services and water services providers;

•
•

Establishing a water quota system, including a quota for the environment;

•
•

Expanding the number and viability of Water User Associations;

Increasing attention on the conservation and management aspects of WRM, particularly on the arid north China plain;

Developing a tripartite approach to real water savings involving the use of cuttingedge international technology and engineering, agriculture and management measures. The introduction of a volumetric basis for irrigation water charges as an inte-

– 73 –

Lessons learned in rural/agricultural water conservation and management
•

•

•

•

•

Although much remains to be done, awareness of the need to address water use efficiency
and conservation has grown significantly in China over the past three years. Key factors in
the success of Bank assistance have been institutional commitment and GoC willingness to
adapt cutting-edge technology to address China’s challenges.
The CAS period demonstrated the clear linkages between sustainable water resource management and poverty reduction, the need for institutional reforms at the river basin level to
include an integrated strategy of both top-down and bottom-up measures, and the usefulness of remote sensing in monitoring water waste and defining water rights.
Experiences during the CAS period also reinforce the importance of participatory approaches that align farmer incentives, efficient use of water in irrigated agriculture, and
overall agricultural productivity; of charging for irrigation water on a volumetric basis; and
of developing an effective system of defining rights to water.
The Bank, in partnership with the Ministry of Water Resources (MoWR), should focus
future Bank investments and activities on formulation of WRM and water management
components as an integral part of infrastructure projects; translation of water conservation
and sustainability goals into workable programs, policies and strategies through analytical
assistance and investments; and selection and financing of high-priority infrastructure and
WRM investments, including projects that focus on water re-use for domestic and industrial purposes.
Investment projects have been used as vehicles to help the GoC promote the difficult institutional changes needed to deal with critical WRM issues. However, the Bank in strategic
partnership with MoWR needs to become more involved in upstream dialogue focused on
planning and implementing investments and also in defining the necessary legal, institutional, and policy reforms needed.

gral part of the formation of Water User Associations was a significant step (one
that has now been incorporated in all Bank support for Water User Associations).
37.
Improve urban water quality and management. The CAS supported China’s goals to
expand municipal sewage treatment and solid waste management, clean up the most polluted
waterways, and establish working models of wastewater re-use primarily through financing
model investments.
38.
Wastewater collection and treatment was the largest component of the eight new
urban environment projects approved during the CAS period, and MIGA guarantees during
the period focused on wastewater treatment and water supply projects. Urban environment
projects have contributed to increased capacity in target cities and utilities to deliver wastewater and other services in a more financially- and environmentally-sustainable manner.
Bank projects have enabled the cities to install facilites with appropriate treatment technology and the needed size, thus optimizing investment costs of wastewater treatment (an independent study conducted by Liaoning province found that Bank projects had cost savings of
30-40% compared to similar GoC investments). Other major contributions include: the use
of cost recovery pricing for water demand management; promotion of inter-municipal planning of wastewater services to achieve larger economies of scale; ensuring sewage collection
capacity complements wastewater treatement plants (capacity utilization in Bank-financed
wastewater treatment plants is higher than in non-Bank-financed plants in other cities); and
expanding collection and treatment services to peri-urban areas outside of core cities. Urban
projects have helped the GoC to operationalize decrees on corporatization, introduce com-

– 74 –

mercial principles and cost recovery in wastewater management, and build the capacity of
sector institutions, particularly in provincies and metropolitan areas where there has been
sustained Bank engagement (Shandong, Beijing, Tianjin, and Shanghai). Components of
these projects have also successfully encouraged local industries to invest in pollution control through small loans and so comply with environmental regualtions. Recent Bank AAA
has also laid the initial groundwork for improving solid waste management.
39.
CAS objectives related to wastewater treatment were largely met in target localities,
with the Bank playing a limited but important role in helping the GoC to meet ambitious
targets for expanded wastewater treatment (according to GoC statistics, the daily municipal
sewage treatment rate rose to 43.6% by end-2004, compared to a target of 45% by end-2005).
However, it is difficult to measure the extent to which model practices have been scaled-up.
Progress in meeting CAS benchmarks for cleaning up the three rivers and three lakes has
been slower, because of delays in complementary action beyond Bank project investments.
40.
Despite the progress outlined above, as well as continued strong GoC commitment,
water pollution continues to be a serious problem in China. As a by-product of China’s rapid
growth, wastewater discharge continues to increase; collection systems fail to keep pace with
growth in treatment capacity and continue to lag needs; and so some treatment plants operate
below their design capacity. The water quality situation in China’s 20,000 towns and townships below the city level is a major challenge (and an increasing focus of Bank investments
and AAA). Consideration should be given to monitoring not only the the amount of wastewater treated but also the amount collected to ensure that incentives in the sector support appropriate action. More can also be done to support compliance with regulations on pre-treatment
of industrial waste, particularly for financially-strapped SOEs employing a large local
workforce and for the municipal environmental protection bureaus that are responsible for
enforcement. In this context, the central government is appropriately encouraging underloaded municipal wastewater treatment plants to increase their revenues and their locality’s
wastewater collection and treatment amounts by receiving additional pre-treated industrial
wastewater, particularly in peri-urban areas with mixed industrial and residential development.

Lessons learned in urban wastewater treatment and solid waste management
•

•

•

Further work is needed to support the dissemination and scaling-up of successful practices
demonstrated under Bank projects, in part through the water and wastewater sector study
currently underway and through exposure of Chinese officials and sector agencies to international good practice (inter alia through the IWA Conference in Beijing in 2006).
Management of sludge generated at water and wastewater treatment plants, industrial effluents, and solid waste are increasingly pressing challenges. Assisting in the tighter monitoring of sludge disposal, encouragement of alternative sludge treatment options, increasing
industrial pollution treatment in key sectors, and strengthening solid waste management
are areas where Bank engagement can be usefully expanded.
Improved water quality will also require new approaches to control non-point pollution
sources.

– 75 –

Managing Land and Natural Resources
41.
Bank-supported projects successfully piloted new approaches for natural forest protection, erosion control, and watershed rehabilitation, but were less successful in efforts to
increase commercial timber and economic tree plantations. The Loess Plateau and the Gansu
and Xinjiang Pastoral Development projects demonstrated watershed rehabilitation, erosion
control and measures to prevent desertification, which in turn helped to steer local and national funding toward these activities. Complementing a GoC logging ban, the Sustainable
Forestry Development project provided models for protecting natural forests and sustainable
management in a number of nature reserves (and mobilized resources and know-how from
GEF and the E.U.). Over 700,000 ha of forests were planted under Bank projects. Because of
the size and large-scale of some national programs, the contribution of Bank-funded activities to increase commercial timber and economic tree plantations were modest.

Lessons learned in managing land and natural resources
•
•

•

Community participation and buy-in are important factors to increase the sustainability of
nature reserves.
New tree plantations have potential to reduce pressure on natural forests in China as well as
in the Asia region, but sustainable forest policies are needed to encourage the participation
of financial institutions in commercial forestry.
Clear policies and adequate funding are necessary to improve natural resources conditions
and management. Outstanding issues include the need for improved monitoring and evaluation, linkage between environmental and economic aspects of resource conservation, and
implementation of sustainable forest policies to promote commercial forest plantations.

Protecting the Global Environmental Commons
42.
The Bank supported China’s participation in global environmental initiatives in areas targeted under the CAS: the phase-out of ozone depleting substances (ODS), where China
fully met interim targets; conservation of biodiversity; participation in the Clean Development Mechanism (CDM) and mitigation of greenhouse gas emissions; and phase-out of
persistent organic pollutants (POPs). In addition to providing IBRD resources, the Bank
assisted China in obtaining significant grant funds through GEF to address these globally
significant environmental issues (since GEF was launched in 1991, the Bank has approved
fifteen GEF co-financed projects in China, involving $230 million in GEF grant resources,
the largest GEF funding to a single country in the Bank) as well as through mobilizing dedicated grant resources for ODS phase-out and carbon finance.

•

Reduction of ODS. China’s ODS reduction program, the largest in the world, has
fully met its interim targets, suggesting that enterprise-level activities, coupled with
national policies that address both production and consumption issues, combine for
an effective approach. For the next few years, there will be a need for more effective
enforcement of ODS policies, development of suitable alternatives to ODS, and
cost-effective ODS destruction and conversion technologies.

– 76 –

•

Improved conservation of biodiversity. In support of China’s rapid creation of
nature reserves, which now account for 15% of total land area, the Bank provided
assistance through several GEF projects to strengthen local protected areas management. In parallel, to address systemic problems, the Bank is working with SEPA,
UNDP, the E.U. and other partners to develop a comprehensive Biodiversity Partnership Framework.

•

Mitigation of greenhouse gas emissions. The Bank’s largest GEF Climate Change
Program facilitated passage of the Renewable Energy Law and encouraged use of
renewables and energy efficiency investments (described under the Air Quality section, above).

•

Participation in Clean Development Mechanism (CDM). China’s emission of
greenhouse gases has continued to increase as a function of its rapid economic growth
and continued reliance on coal and oil as major sources of energy. In addition to
Bank contributions in the energy sector, the Bank helped China to assess the opportunities and benefits of participation in CDM, provided technical assistance to support the regulatory and institutional framework for CDM, and supported pilot CDM
projects that have helped lay the foundation for a carbon emissions trading market.
The Bank’s contribution to climate change mitigation is likely to increase with its
involvement in the preparation of a National Climate Change Program, HFC-23
project, Carbon Finance Assist program, and the development of the CDM market.

•

Phase-out of persistent organic pollutants. Bank-supported analytical work, capacity building, and preparation of demonstration projects with GEF support in
selected provinces also supported China’s 2004 ratification of the Stockholm Convention for the phaseout of persistent organic pollutants (POPs). To ensure effectiveness, more effort will be needed to strengthen the involvement of stakeholders,
especially at the province level, increase public awareness of related health and
environmental risks, and extend the program to sectors and substances not covered
by the planned demonstration projects.

Lessons learned in protecting the global environmental commons
•

•

•

•

Adjusting the prices for natural resources and environmental services in line with opportunity costs will be needed to encourage more efficient resource use and the development of
alternatives.
In order to reach planned targets for environmental protection, resource savings, and sustainable management, strong inter-governmental collaboration is needed at both the central
and local levels. Overlapping or unclear institutional mandates for integrating resource
management and environmental protection into the development process, coupled with
weak environmental management and enforcement, are underlining some resource scarcity
and environmental challenges.
Building on poverty-environment linkages, the development of China’s poorer rural regions needs to address poverty simultaneously with degraded natural resources, such as
soil erosion and deforestation.
Although the enforcement of current environmental regulations has improved, their tightening and continuous progress on the monitoring and enforcement side is needed. Strengthening the effectiveness of Environmental Protection Bureaus and coordination among
sectors, particularly at the county and township levels, will be particularly important.

– 77 –

G. REFORMING THE FINANCIAL SECTOR
43.
As part of the broader objective to improve the business environment under pillar 1
of the CAS, the Bank sought to support China’s efforts to transform its financial system to
meet the needs of the country’s market-oriented economy. IFC investments and over $1 million per year of Bank Group analytical support—provided through a wide range of strategic
and policy advice, studies, workshops, and TA—supported these reforms. This contributed
to GoC accomplishments in the reform of state-owned commercial banks (SCBs), financial
sector policy reform (especially regarding interest rate liberalization, a major accomplishment that removes a key impediment to the financial sector), and the improved regulation of
securities firms (including promulgation of a net capital rule, a cornerstone of the regulatory
framework). Assistance also strengthened Bank Group relationships with Chinese counterparts, building the foundation for deeper future collaboration, including a planned project on
medium and small enterprise finance. More work is required to reach the important long-run
benchmarks of capital market development and expanded access to financial services for
small rural businesses and lower-income housing.
44.
Support establishment of an overall financial sector regulatory policy framework. The Bank aimed to help the GoC to reach a consensus on its long-term financial
sector objectives and its appropriate future role in the sector. During the CAS period, the
State Council, MoF, NDRC, PBoC, and the regulatory authorities for banking, securities
and insurance generally took policy decisions that promote a progressive transition to a
diverse and competitive financial system that can meet the needs of firms, households and
governments in a growing market economy. The liberalization of lending interest rates and
the reform of the government bond market were key milestones long advocated and supported by the Bank.
45.
Promote commercialization of the financial services industry. Under the CAS,
the Bank Group also planned to support various aspects of banking system reform, including
assistance with recapitalization and restructuring of the four largest SCBs. During the CAS
period, two SCBs—the Bank of China and the China Construction Bank—were recapitalized, including by transferring NPLs to asset management corporations; they were also incorporated and formal boards of directors were appointed. A similar process is underway for
a third (and the largest) SCB, the Industrial and Commercial Bank. All four of the large SCBs
sought foreign strategic investors in preparation for a global public listing of their shares
during the CAS period, and three of them were turned into joint stock companies in 2005;
commercialization of the fourth—the Agricultural Bank of China—is expected, albeit with
more difficulty. During the CAS period, non-state capital also flowed into other financial
institutions at a reasonable pace though full privatization of a significant portion of these
other institutions is unlikely in the near term. Pioneering IFC investments and TA helped
non-state commercial banks improve corporate governance and risk management and, in
some cases, attract foreign strategic partners. In addition, the GoC created an ownership
agency (Huijin Central Investment), which is pursuing a commercialized approach to SCB
governance. While all of these developments are essentially attributable to the strong leadership of the PBoC and CBRC, the Bank provided a range of SCB-related policy and operational recommendations advocating and supporting them. Bank advocacy has also concerned
reducing political interference in making management appointments or other major decisions in the banks (this is now emerging as a key issue) as well as addressing non-commercial pricing and low real returns in the banking industry (factors which will continue to
constrain the more rapid entry of private capital), but progress has been less evident in these

– 78 –

areas. In addition, while interest rate liberalization has created the space for better pricing,
abundant liquidity will continue to lead to high lending competition (and perhaps underpricing) in the near term.
46.
Throughout the CAS period, the Bank has been a persistent advocate of the principle that commercially-sustainable lending is feasible in China’s more difficult and
underserved markets, such as micro and small enterprises (MSEs) and rural areas. This
principle is increasingly accepted within the GoC, and reasonable progress is being made,
except in rural markets which are poorer and present more difficult access challenges. In
recognition of its work in these areas, the Bank has been invited to pilot a commerciallysustainable MSE finance program, currently under preparation, and it has also assessed the
potential role of the Postal Savings and Remittance Bureau (PSRB) in lending to rural markets and provided advice to PSRB, PBoC and the CBRC in this matter. Despite this progress,
the Bank has been less successful in ensuring that public resources directed toward rural
finance reform and institution-building are adequate for scaling-up financial services in
rural areas.
47.
Other areas of Bank influence have concerned the development of the secondary
housing finance markets, initially through the issuance of mortgage backed securities (MBS);
the creation of a banking regulatory authority (CBRC); and the creation of credit information
registries. Regarding MBS, the Bank has supported policy assessments, the design of an
appropriate regulatory framework, and various decisions on institutional arrangements; further support is anticipated, both with respect to MBS, and also to develop mortgage liquidity
facilities and reform and develop mortgage insurance. Following analytical work that led to
the creation of CBRC, the Bank has been engaged in a sustained institution-building program, and its AAA is expected to be directed to all three regulatory agencies (CBRC, the
China Insurance Regulatory Commission and the China Securities Regulatory Commission
(CSRC)) over the near term.
48.
Continue to restructure banks and other financial institutions while minimizing fiscal and social implications and maintaining stability. During the CAS period, the
PBoC, CBRC and CSRC successfully resolved a number of distressed banks, trust companies, and securities firms. The Bank provided a range of advice, including with respect to
bank failure resolution policies and practices, and more broadly, the means to minimize costs
and moral hazards in resolving distressed institutions. It also supported adoption of a new net
capital rule for securities firms, which further enables CSRC to weed-out weak firms. In
addition, the State Council endorsed a pilot restructuring of the rural credit cooperative (RCC)
system, for which the Bank assessed the plan and offered strategic and policy advice. Restructuring efforts encountered difficulties, which were in many cases anticipated in the
Bank’s assessment, and the program is being refined to address them. IFC supported the
development of the distressed asset market, including financing that demonstrated alternative approaches for resolution of NPLs and distressed real estate assets.
49.
Establish sound capital markets. Many reforms of the government bond market
were implemented with Bank advice, though little progress was made on the reform and
development of the corporate and sub-national government bond markets. A new plan for
resolving the overhang of state and legal person shares on the Shanghai and Shenzhen stock
exchanges has been announced, but its effectiveness remains to be seen. Despite the Bank’s
advocacy and TA, regulatory fragmentation remains a particular problem in capital markets,
especially with respect to bond market reforms, and building the capacity of the CSRC remains a challenge. IFC supported the development of the non-state insurance sector (with

– 79 –

Lessons learned — in supporting the financial sector
•

Important constraints to deeper and faster progress include: the weak finances of many
sub-national governments, which nonetheless need to invest in infrastructure and seek to
undertake other investments; the still important role of SOEs in the economy and their need
for finance; the high number of government agencies with jurisdiction over elements of the
financial system and the consequently fragmented regulatory framework; the burdensome
approval or consent process that applies to nearly all reform and development initiatives;
and finally the sheer magnitude and duration of the institutional and human resource investments required to move to a commercialized financial system.

investments in life insurance, re-insurance, and insurance products serving the consumer
lending and SME insurance needs of rural credit cooperatives). In a landmark event, IFC
issued the first Renminbi (“Panda”) bond by a non-Chinese issuer.

H. STRENGTHENING PUBLIC AND MARKET INSTITUTIONS
50.
The first pillar of the 2003 CAS articulated an integrated set of activities related to
improving the business environment, with sub-objectives on macroeconomic management,
private sector development and enterprise reform, and governance and public sector management. Infrastructure reforms, originally covered under both private sector development
(private sector participation) and governance (public utility performance) sub-objectives, are
consolidated below to reduce duplication and overlap. In contrast to CAS pillars II and III,
the bulk of the Bank’s assistance for theme I was provided through analytical and advisory
services rather than through investment lending.
Strengthening Institutions for Macroeconomic Management
51.
Promote macroeconomic stability. The CAS set general directions for macroeconomic support and planned for a combination of rapid response notes on issues of immediate
concern together with in-depth analytical work, recognizing the need to maintain flexibility
to respond to changing client needs. The Bank supported macroeconomic policies through
regular economic updates, a variety of policy notes (covering, inter alia, macroeconomic
policy stance, fiscal policies, state enterprise reforms, and interest rate liberalization), and
formal reports such as the country economic memorandum. These activities have generally
been successful in putting key policy issues on the agenda as well as in promoting dialogue
on options based on cross-country knowledge and experience. The program matrix set
progress benchmarks in three main areas:

•

Macroeconomic management. As set out in the CAS, the Bank provided advice
on interest rate liberalization, external trade and market regimes, and fiscal
sustainability issues, as well as on investment climate and labor market policies
(see related sections). China maintained a good overall macroeconomic performance
during the CAS period, with strong growth and low inflation as well as efforts to
rein in overheated investment sectors. Key developments to which the Bank contributed included further liberalization of interest rates (a move long advocated by

– 80 –

the Bank), launch of a short-term capital flows monitoring system in the State Administration of Foreign Exchange (SAFE) that will allow a gradual opening of the
capital account, and economic census support (which contributed to China’s recent
improvement of its GDP figures). The Bank also provided advice—through policy
notes and government-organized forums—on fiscal and monetary stances to cope
with external contingencies (e.g., global slowdown, SARS) during the CAS period.
Bank TA in the field of statistics, fuel tax, labor market reforms, macroeconomic
modeling and capital flows monitoring also helped policy makers make informed
choices on the basis of more rigorous technical background analyses while training
a cadre of specialists to carry the work forward. Bank work on the investment climate, SOEs and SCBs, as well as on FDI policies has contributed towards understanding key impediments that remain in bringing about a stronger investment climate.

•

Fiscal management capacity. Aligned with CAS benchmarks and building on prior
analytical work and technical assistance, the Bank advised on improving identification and analysis of risks to China’s state debt and also provided TA to MoF to
enhance its capacity to record and monitor public debt. This work is continuing
with a view towards eventually integrating the external and domestic public debt
databases and using it for making debt management strategy and policy decisions.
The Fiscal TA funded the first phase of the treasury management system, which is
currently being expanded, and an IDF grant supported design of a tracking system
for poverty funding from the center to the counties. At an aggregate level, China’s
fiscal management has been consistent with the maintenance of macroeconomic
stability and high GDP growth rates during the CAS period. At the central level,
fiscal reforms have been undertaken, some in accordance with the recommendations of the Bank’s Provincial Public Expenditure Review (2002). However, quasifiscal activities of local governments remain substantially unrecorded and the TSA
does not cover most of the public service units. Extra-budgetary funds, especially
at the sub-national/municipal levels, are still large.

•

Intergovernmental finance. The CAS set a general benchmark (“Further adjustments in revenue and expenditure assignment and transfers between levels of government”) and strategy (advise on inter-government finance issues) for Bank activities in intergovernmental finance. Building on the Bank’s 2002 Provincial Public Expenditure Review and other earlier analytical work, the Bank sought further
to contribute to understanding key constraints in the fiscal system as well as to
advocate greater equalization in the intergovernmental finance system. The Bank
provided a package of policy papers, at the request of the GoC in 2003, on crosscutting fiscal processes and structural economic reforms. The ongoing Rural Public Finance study and the Liaoning subnational finance study have further contributed to an understanding of the fiscal situation at the sub-provincial level, and WBI
has developed a multi-year program of training for provincial officials in intergovernmental fiscal relations and local finance in local universities together with MoF.
However, despite sustained Bank engagement (and Bank technical work characterized by central authorities as salient inputs in an intensely political process), progress
toward addressing imbalances has been limited. While most expenditure assignments are not any clearer than before, revenue assignments have changed—the enterprise income tax as well as the personal income tax are now shared taxes. In
addition, the central government has started to increase the equalization grant to

– 81 –

Lessons learned on macroeconomic management support
•

•

•
•

As China globalizes further and integrates its highly fragmented national market, the need
to better understand the micro-dimensions of intergovernmental relations and associated
institutional arrangements has become imperative.
Data sources within China remain weak and fragmented, which make the assessment of
macroeconomic risks difficult to gauge on a robust and continuous basis. Work towards
increasing this data availability for research and analysis is underway.
Teaming up with the IMF and OECD has been instrumental in producing high-quality
advice.
Entrenched interests in the current system impede systemic improvements in inter-governmental fiscal system and greater equalization. Working at the provincial level to develop a
comprehensive approach to sub-national fiscal issues may be a way forward.

poor provinces by using part of the revenues of the enterprise income tax to fund
the equalization grants pool, and some of the new earmarked grants (among others
for civil service salary increase and for ethnic minorities) are more targeted at poorer
provinces. However, impact at the sub-provincial level is less clear, as provinces
have significant discretion in sub-provincial distribution. Moreover, the hundreds
of earmarked grants that have been created in recent years limit the transparency of
the system, and may undermine incentives for local governments to seek efficiency
and growth. In addition, local governments continue to lack a significant tax base
with rate authority.
Improving Public Sector Management and Delivery of Services
52.
Objectives for Bank assistance were grouped under three sub-themes: (i) improving
the regulatory environment for good governance, (ii) strengthening the management of cities
(discussed under theme 2 above); and (iii) strengthening the performance of public utilities
in delivering infrastructure.
53.
Improve regulatory and incentive environment. Under this sub-objective, the Bank
sought to support improvements in procurement, auditing, public service delivery, and the
legal profession. Despite relatively limited levels of Bank assistance, CAS objectives to assist with public sector procurement, accounting and financial reporting, and improved capacity in the legal system were largely met. The Bank contributed to strengthening China’s
procurement law, procedures and capacity – including establishment of a procurement training program in five universities – fiscal management, reporting and auditing systems, and
public service standards. Under the Economic Law Reform project, the Bank contributed to
developing and implementing a unified lawyers and judges examination system, curriculum
reform at the national judges college, court administration reforms under review by the Supreme People’s Court, and establishment of a public internet-based legal information system
(www.chinalaw.gov.cn). The Bank also helped to pilot efforts to solicit citizen feedback on
service delivery in a number of cities. Sustained Bank support for GoC efforts to reform
public service units (PSUs)—including a series of reports, a joint conference with the GoC
and OECD, and a major report on the PSU reform strategy—helped to raise awareness of the
need for reform and provided important inputs into the GoC’s reform plan. Originally conceived as an input on the development of China’s small services sector, the PSU work has

– 82 –

Lessons learned in improving the regulatory and incentive environment
•

Bank assistance for procurement and accounting reform increasingly focuses on implementation of the reforms that have been adopted. To better sequence and integrate Treasury
reforms, the GoC is seeking Bank assistance in developing a Strategic Reform Framework
that adapts international best practice and supports GoC efforts to develop an Integrated
Government Financial Management System. For the future, the Bank could further contribute to completion of the legal framework (in which there are still some gaps) and implementation (through inter alia ongoing work to improve the judiciary and access to justice).
The Bank can also further assist the GoC in identifying factors that may contribute to
corruption and identifying structural reforms for addressing them.

played a catalytic role toward clarifying the budget links of public services units and laying
the groundwork for increased private sector entry into the services sector.
54.
Improve infrastructure services and performance of public utilities. The CAS included multiple benchmarks relating to reforms designed to improve the efficiency and
sustainability of infrastructure service delivery. The Bank made important contributions, but
the scale of the Bank’s contributions varied considerably across sectors. Building on its longterm engagement, the Bank largely achieved its objectives and continued to make significant
contributions to sector-wide reform in the energy sector and in railroads through a combination of sustained policy advice and demonstration projects. Progress was more limited elsewhere. Bank support for roads, transport services, and urban utilities contributed significantly
to related reforms at the local and provincial levels, but the Bank’s ability to contribute to
scaling-up successful reform experiences was complicated by decentralized authorities in
these sectors and less substantial engagement in sector-wide analytical work.
55.
Urban utilities. The Bank sought to support improvement of the framework for public-private investment as well as the management and pricing of water supply and sanitation
services. Supported by central government policy, municipalities have made progress in setting up autonomous utility companies, recovering service delivery costs, and experimenting
with private sector participation (PSP) in urban services. The Bank’s urban water supply and
wastewater projects, which comprised 22 projects in 67 cities during the CAS period, supported these priorities through a strong emphasis on utility performance, corporatization of
public utilities, improved cost recovery, and enhanced technical and management skills.
Progress was made toward greater cost recovery (with the introduction of a new progressive
water tariff scheme in Beijing and wastewater tariff adjustments in several other major cities
supported by Bank loans) and private sector participation. Bank contributions were largely
limited to specific municipalities where Bank projects were implemented, but the Bank also
assisted the GoC in preparing for further public utility reforms by conducting the North
China Water Quality Management Study.
56.
Energy utilities. The Bank Group sought to help with implementation of power sector reforms to create new and separate companies, continue unbundling power generation
from distribution, and develop competitive power markets. Building on more than a decade
of engagement in the energy sector, the Group supported China’s efforts to break monopolies
and expand competition in the sector. Key achievements were realized during the CAS period:

– 83 –

Lessons learned in supporting urban utilities
•

•
•
•

The limited autonomy and capacity of many new utility companies, particularly in wastewater, results in their continuing to operate as municipal service companies. The rapid
expansion of private sector participation (PSP) in the absence of an adequate regulatory
framework and independent regulation capacity is also a cause for concern.
Going forward, sustainable urban utility reform will need improved legal and regulatory
frameworks; MoF and NDRC have welcomed planned Bank analytical work in this area.
Expanded use of performance indicators will be needed if efforts to promote cost recovery
and PSP are to bring desired improvements in cost savings and efficiency.
Bank-supported projects need better to anticipate the higher level of required invest-ment
for wastewater compared with water supply and the longer time required to transform staff
of a municipal service into an enterprise. Improved capacity building in Bank projects will
require longer time horizons, greater counterpart ownership, and improved quality in design and delivery of TA.

•

The GoC’s shift from provincial to regional markets in the power sector—with the
establishment of two regional markets in northeast and east China, including principles for the development of transmission pricing, better generation pricing, and
more rational consumer tariffs—is an important step towards increasing inter-provincial trade and improving the use of power resources.

•

Regulation of the power and gas sectors continued to be strengthened. In particular,
a State Electricity Regulatory Commission (SERC) was established and strengthened (including regional branches), and it is now playing a key role in developing
regional power markets.

•

Power and gas companies continue to be the most advanced among China’s SOEs
in terms of corporatization and commercialization (China’s three largest oil and gas
companies were partially listed on international financial markets), and the Bank
has also been active in this area, primarily through strengthening of the reform and
regulatory framework.

•

IFC investments in Shandong’s power sector supported creation of a replicable model
for privatization and efficiency improvements at the municipal level.

Lessons learned in energy
•

•

Bank success in this sector resulted from client interest, long-term engagement, the Bank’s
role as an intermediary in disseminating knowledge and international best practice, strong
synergy between AAA and lending projects, and strategic sector work with timely and
focused policy notes responding to client needs.
Having helped China to shape the principles of energy sector reform, Bank assistance will
need to evolve to focus on implementing the reforms that have been adopted, with greater
emphasis on capacity building. WTO listing provides an opportunity to engage on the need
to develop a regulatory framework for the oil and gas sector, and further dialogue on the
coal sector is possible.

– 84 –

57.
Transport. Bank contributions to national-level reforms in the transport sector were
made primarily in the railroad sector, where significant progress was made in restructuring
and reform through the Bank-supported National Railway project, which, inter alia, included
studies of legal and regulatory framework options for railway modernization, railway labor
productivity, compensation and restructuring. In its continuing reform program, MoR has
decentralized into 18 regional profit centers; spun off many non-core activities (e.g. rolling
stock manufacturing, telecommunications) as legally independent companies or at least as
financially separate subsidiaries; and transferred social services (schools, health centers) to
local governments. Nonetheless, there is potential for improvement. Policy and regulatory
functions could be separated from enterprises running the trains, thus helping to attract private financing, and current rail pricing (including the construction surcharge) could be reformed with a view to improving rail financing. In addition, as argued in Bank analytical
work, private financing of wagons could be a promising entry point for private participation
in railway operations, provided that MoR agreed to allow privately-owned freight cars on its
network. Further work could also be done on analyzing and ultimately implementing policy
and structural options related to institutional separation (including competition policy and
the easing of price controls, options to attract new sources of finance and private sector
participation).
58.
In the road and transport services sector, Bank-funded projects successfully met
project objectives and the Bank provided significant analytical work on consolidating toll
roads, with modest impacts at the national level. Projects helped to improve funding for
maintenance, road management capacity, rural road upgrading and road safety programs.
Scaling-up of provincial results was limited in part because implementation of the fuel tax
has been postponed and Bank involvement on road safety issues at the national level has
been limited. In addition to mobilizing sustainable financial resources for road maintenance,
further work remains to be done to improve the policy and regulatory environment for transport. Private sector participation in China’s highway system is advanced in terms of development models and private capital flows, with the private sector contributing nearly 10% of
China’s total commitment to new construction since the inception of economic reform in the
early 1980s, but the degree of risk transfer from the public sector is less than desirable and
the legal and regulatory framework for private participation in infrastructure presents obstacles to increased flows of funds. Bank analytical work also highlighted the benefits of
consolidating toll road companies into larger networks and setting toll rates to balance financial and economic objectives.

Lessons learned in transport
•

There are good prospects for encouraging private participation in the provision of transport
services—especially trucking and bus services—provided that the legal and regulatory
framework is clarified regarding entry into the industry (to avoid local protectionism) and
tariff-setting (to allow enough flexibility to reward innovation). Private participation in the
financing of highways and railway infrastructure is less promising but can serve as a lever
for institutional reform, especially for railway services.

– 85 –

Promoting Private Sector Development and Enterprise Reforms
59.
The CAS focused Bank support for the private sector on the twin priorities of improving the legal and regulatory environment for businesses and continued corporate restructuring of SOEs. The GoC made significant progress in both areas, though considerable
constraints remain, with the Bank making important contributions through analysis, dialogue, and TA. CAS objectives under this sub-theme were largely met.
60.
Improving the Environment for Private Sector Activity: During the CAS period,
the Bank Group worked at national and local levels to rationalize the commercial law and
regulatory framework and to promote investment climate reforms. The Bank-supported Economic Law Reform project (ELRP) provided TA for drafting and building capacity to implement numerous business laws—including contract, bankruptcy, company, partnership, SME,
trust, antimonopoly, trade, commerce, intellectual property, and others—as well as for related legal professional training institutions. The Bank also contributed a comprehensive
study on e-commerce: an electronic signature law was recently passed, but development of ecommerce is still constrained by gaps in privacy protection and capacity issues. Over the
period, Bank Group assistance focused increasingly at the provincial and local level as Bank
support for rationalizing the commercial law framework successfully drew to a close. Bank
Group efforts intensified to streamline local requirements for business and strengthen the
capacity of investment promotion intermediaries, with a special emphasis on lagging regions. Bank-led investment climate surveys (covering 5,000 firms in 37 cities, primarily in
lagging regions) raised consciousness and spurred competition among local officials to improve the local investment climate, complemented by WBI training, and some cities are now
actively working to improve the efficiency of the court system and reduce barriers to new
business entry. Sustained follow-up engagement with local officials, in the form of detailed
analyses by FIAS and IBRD and MIGA TA, is highly promising. Firm level surveys conducted by IFC’s Private Enterprise Partnership (PEP, formerly CPDF) in Sichuan increased
local attention to improving the business environment and helped local authorities to relax
administrative and licensing requirements. Related PEP China and MIGA assistance to
strengthen provincial investment promotion agencies in Sichuan and to conduct investment
benchmarking studies have helped local officials to promote their locations to potential investors. At the national level, MIGA and FIAS helped the Ministry of Commerce to formulate a national investment promotion strategy.
61.
Corporate Restructuring, Ownership Diversification and Industrial Reorganization: The GoC made substantial progress in corporate restructuring, including reforms in
areas where the Bank provided earlier recommendations. The GoC was successful in developing a comprehensive policy for mergers and acquisitions, applying a harder budget constraint, separating SOEs from government control, and disposing of assets acquired by asset
management companies (AMCs)—but it achieved more modest success in transferring social services out of SOEs, a particular problem in the northeast. Related Bank studies were
conveyed to key stakeholders, and the recent consolidation of shareholder rights and responsibilities in a designated state shareholder (the State-Owned Assets Supervision and Administration Commission, SASAC) increased focus on management performance, financial
management and risk management, and increased consideration of dividend policy by DRC
and SASAC are entirely consistent with the Bank’s earlier recommendations. While bankruptcy reform has been delayed, a combination of trust-funded TA and targeted communications to policy-makers achieved full consideration of global best practices.

– 86 –

61.
Strengthening Corporate Governance: IFC and World Bank analyses since 2002,
as well as IFC investments and involvement in investee boards, have supported good corporate governance practices, including appointment of independent directors, development of
institutional investors, conversion of non-tradable state shares into tradable ones, protections
for minority public shareholders, controls on related party transactions, and better disclosure. Bank support for the development of accounting standards has also contributed. IFC’s
PEP China provided direct assistance to private firms in improving their governance structure and practice. Key post-2002 developments that augur well for corporate governance
include a requirement for more independent directors on listed company boards, independent director and public shareholder approval of related party transactions, introduction of
Qualified Foreign Institutional Investors (QFIIs) into the domestic shares market, some pilot
debt/equity swaps in 2004 to disentangle publicly-listed subsidiaries from state-controlled
parents, and the May 2005 launch of a program to convert non-tradable into tradable shares.
New accounting standards apply to publicly-listed companies and foreign-invested enterprises, but application should be extended to other SOEs as well to improve their financial
transparency. SASAC has indicated support for greater reliance on board governance for
SOEs, even for those that are 100% state-owned, but appointments to SOE boards have been

Lessons learned in promoting private sector development and corporate reform
•

•

•

•

The CAS period highlighted important shifts in demand and reinforced the need for shifts
in the focus of the Bank’s private sector development assistance. While continuing to engage on mature topics, such as corporate governance and SOE reform, the Bank Group’s
private sector effort should shift toward fresher issues—such as corporate social responsibility; the private sector’s role in environmental protection; barriers to entry for rural, micro, and small businesses; and development of supply chain linkages between lagging
regions and markets in coastal China and overseas—as well as toward interventions designed to meet the demands of local officials for assistance in improving local-level investment climates.
The CAS period also demonstrated the need for the Bank Group to embrace a combination
of sustained inter-disciplinary involvement by IBRD, IFC, FIAS, and MIGA at the local
level, reports and engagement with central government technical experts and policy makers, and public dissemination in order to achieve some impact.
Given the incentives for local officials to attract investment (differing levels of FDI are a
major contributor to economic disparities between coastal and inland regions), investment
climate surveys and support have proven useful for building relationships with counterparts. However, reforms take time, and experience suggests that the best approach is to
benchmark China and China’s cities against local and global peers, highlight local success
stories, provide objective information on global best practices, and build the capacity of
investment promotion agencies. A case study examining investment promotion experiences
in coastal China might make sense for western and central regions. The Bank could also
potentially assist in strengthening additional elements of the e-commerce framework.
The Bank does not anticipate committing major additional resources to SOE privatiz-ation
and restructuring in the future: substantial analyses and recommendations have already
been provided, and the key constraint now is not lack of knowledge but rather the need to
finance worker severance, transfer SOE social services, and resolve SOE NPLs. Additional
Bank engagement on SOE reform is likely to remain limited, and Bank Group analysis and
advice on social safety nets and inter-government financing may be the most effective way
to provide further support for SOE reform.

– 87 –

slowed by a lack of qualified candidates. To the extent that appointments of independent
directors and development of corporate boards are impeded by a lack of qualified candidates, the Bank Group could explore the possibility of providing support for directors training. In addition, the Bank Group will continue to participate in public discussion of corporate
governance issues as circumstances warrant.

I. OVERALL PERFORMANCE, MONITORING, EVALUATION
62.
The CAS emphasized the importance of the Bank’s advisory services, anticipated
more active IFC and MIGA roles, and noted the need for selectivity and specialization while
recognizing that the size and diversity of China’s economy would draw the Bank into a wide
range of issues and activities. It also encouraged Bank partnerships with other donors, the
private sector and civil society.
Bank Group Instruments
63.
Lending: The CAS projected IBRD lending in the range of $3.6 billion to $3.9
billion over FY03-05. Actual IBRD lending reached about $3.35 billion, delivered through
25 investment projects and one emergency project responding to the Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS) crisis.1 In addition, the China CT delivered three stand-alone GEF
projects totaling $61 million and one PCF project of $10 million during the CAS period. The
China portfolio has some unique characteristics: (i) loan repayment obligations cascade down
to a project’s ultimate beneficiaries, increasing ownership but also limiting IBRD financing
opportunities in the poorest jurisdictions, where repayment capacities are limited; (ii) partly
as a result, most lending is investment lending; (iii) infrastructure heavily dominates; and
finally (iv), given this preponderance of infrastructure, about 80% of projects fall into safeguards category A (compared to about 8% for the rest of the Bank).
64.
Project performance:
China’s active portfolio of 80
projects is the largest in the Bank
and also one of the best-performing.
Over FY02-05, the disbursement
ratio ranged about 23–24% and the
percentage of problem projects remained low (less than 6% by
amount, and zero as of January
2006). While the average implementation period of about eight
years exceeds the Bank average
(about 5.4 years), this is satisfactorily explained by a number of factors, including: the predominance
of complex and innovative infra-

1

Figure 5: Geographic Focus of Lending
(Number of projects)
80%

77%

60%

58%

40%

42%
23%

20%
0%

FY93–95

FY96–98
Coastal

FY99–01

FY02–05

Inland

The SARS emergency response was financed out of cost-savings realized under six completed IDA projects;
these projects were extended accordingly, with the result that the China portfolio for a period included a high
percentage (13%) of overage projects.

– 88 –

structure projects; the presence of
multi-province projects involving
multiple levels of government (e.g.,
the TB project covers 1,600 counties); the complete absence of fastdisbursing loans; the redeployment
of substantial realized cost-savings;2
and delays and project extensions related to the SARS epidemic in 2004.
Of 50 projects evaluated over the last
five years, OED rated 10% as less
than satisfactory (8% by amount).
China projects consistently rate
higher than Bank averages on
sustainability and institutional development.

Figure 6: Number of Projects FY95-99

Energy/Env 11%

Industry 3%
Rural/Env 29%

Urban/Env 13%

Transport 19%

Social/TA 25%

Figure 7: Number of Projects FY00-05

65.
Compared with regional
targets, IBRD delivered 25 of 29
Social/TA 7%
planned projects: two projects were
Energy/Env 9%
delayed beyond the CAS period, but
Urban/Env 37%
will be delivered; another was delivRural/Env 18%
ered as planned but f inanced
through a trust fund rather than
IBRD resources; and another was
dropped at GoC request. Because
poor jurisdictions have difficulty repaying IBRD loans which do not
Transport 29%
generate a revenue stream, lending
in China is skewed towards incomegenerating infrastructure (of delivered projects, 72% in number, and 80% of commitments, were in urban and transport
infrastructure) and away from the social sectors. Even so, the Bank Group has gradually
shifted lending from the richer coastal areas to the poorer central and western areas (77% of
Bank projects in FY02–05 targeted inland provinces). In the CAS period, per capita Bank
lending was no longer positively correlated with provincial income per capita for the first
time in the Bank’s lending history. Following a trend noted in the CAS, the sectoral composition of new lending has been increasingly weighted toward infrastructure projects in transport and urban/environment sectors.
66.
Analytical and advisory activities (AAA): Organized around a set of sub-themes,
the CAS included a AAA strategy which aimed to be demand-driven, balance support for
longer-term strategic development issues with support for specific policy interventions, employ a greater variety of delivery mechanisms, and increase the use of local experts and
institutions. These goals were largely achieved. During the CAS period, the Bank delivered a
wide range of AAA services requested by the GoC, and China AAA work contributed a total

2

IBRD is required to use GoC unit cost estimates, which frequently overestimate costs; as a result, cost-savings
are a frequent occurrence.

– 89 –

of $19.6 million (24% of all Bank resources spent in China, though below the Bank-wide
average of 34%) during the FY02–04 period. A recent review of the Bank’s AAA program in
China by QAG found that the China AAA program was highly satisfactory for strategic
relevance and satisfactory for quality, dialogue and dissemination, coherence and integration, likely impact, and Bank inputs and processes. The review also found that there is room
for improvement in (Chinese-language) dissemination, cross-sectoral integration, and internal record-keeping. In general, the panel concluded that the Bank clearly remains a credible
partner through the quality of its AAA work and that it has the greatest impact in areas where
experienced staff worked persistently, continuously (often for many years), and sequentially
with GoC counterparts on client priorities, including such matters as power sector regulation, enterprise reform, fiscal issues, financial system reform, corporate governance, and
assistance to poorer regions. Continuing demand across the government for Bank AAA,
including follow-up requests, further supports this conclusion. It is also noteworthy that the
Bank has stepped up analytical assistance—through policy notes, conferences, seminars,
workshops, training programs—that respond quickly and flexibly to GoC requests on topical
issues that could not be foreseen in advance (e.g., support for macroeconomic management
and financial sector).
67.
As the QAG review notes, it has become more difficult for the Bank to influence
policy and institutional change in China. Over time, China has gained its own experience
with the market economy, narrowing the knowledge gap between the Bank and the GoC.
Individuals within China have become increasingly able to offer advice, the policy-making
process has become more open, and the GoC has become more able to attract and screen
outside advice on its own, with the result that the Bank is now competing with multiple
advisors on many issues. The QAG review also found that while the Bank has disseminated
AAA to a broader audience than it reached historically, including through the use of the
Beijing office website, more needs to be done to inform a larger share of Chinese people
about the Bank’s activities. CT members also noted several challenges for the Bank’s AAA,
including: the costs of collaborative research, the need for improved monitoring of AAA, and
the perception that too much time is spent on AAA production, while not enough is devoted
to the implementation of AAA findings.
68.
International Finance
Corporation (IFC). Changes in
IFC’s China program have paralleled the development of the private
sector in the economy. With the
emergence and deepening of
China’s domestic private sector, IFC
has broadened its support for local
financial institutions, indigenous
industrial and infrastructure enterprises, and SMEs. IFC’s annual investments grew rapidly during the
CAS period, from $84 million in
20023 to almost $400 million in
FY2005, as did its overall China

3

Figure 8: IFC Commitments FY03-FY05
500
400
300
200
100
0

FY03

The size of the program in FY2003 was affected by the SARS

FY04

FY05

– 90 –

portfolio, which grew from about $540 million at the end of 2002 to more than $1.1 billion in
January 2006. Growth was particularly strong in the financial sector, where IFC’s portfolio
increased from $118 million in FY03 to almost $300 million as of January 2006, and in the
infrastructure sector, where IFC investments rose from $45 million to $161 million over the
same period. About 40% of IFC’s China portfolio is in general manufacturing and services,
over 25% in the finance and insurance sector, followed by infrastructure with 14%. Most IFC
investments during the CAS period have been with indigenous private enterprises. In line
with IFC’s role to support the adoption of international standards in corporate governance,
environmental and social practices, and efficiency of operations, equity accounts for a higher
proportion of IFC’s investment in China—48% for the CAS period—than the average for
IFC as a whole, because: (a) a significant portion of IFC’s investments, particularly in the
financial sector, have suppported (partial) privatizations, which involved IFC taking equity
stakes; (b) indigenous enterprises, which are IFC’s main partners in China, face limitations
on borrowing in foreign currency; and (c) Chinese companies, particulalry the privatized
financial insitutions, need equity to meet regulatory requirments and support growth.
69.
Particularly noteworthy during the CAS period were IFC’s interventions in the financial sector, where IFC supported best practice models among smaller banks and contributed through investments and TA to the reform of the banking sector; catalyzed private sector
entry into sectors previously held by SOEs (insurance, funds management, investment banks),
and created new institutions to deepen the financial sector (bond markets, markets for distressed assets).
70.
Several non-state commercial banks supported by IFC were able to attract reputable
foreign strategic partners, IFC investments supported the development of the non-state insurance sector and IFC supported the first auction of non-performing loans (NPLs) and the first
investment fund specializing in distressed assets. In a landmark event for capital market
development, IFC together with ADB in October 2005 issued a first renminbi bond by a nonChinese issuer, a benchmark expected to stimulate the development of the bond market in
China.
71.
IFC also deepened its TA in support of China’s business environment, with a focus
on encouraging development of SMEs through capacity building, developing alternative
sources for SME financing, and supporting private sector development in the interior via
IFC’s PEP China. IFC supported greater SME access to finance through targeted TA for a
range of partner financial institutions (PFIs), macro-policy work (including joint work with
FIAS to develop a Secured Transactions Framework, collaboration with other Bank Group
units to help the PBoC to implement a modern credit reporting system, and assistance to the
National People’s Congress to prepare a new leasing law based on international best practice). IFC also stepped up efforts to support private investment in clean energy in China
through partnership and investments to expand natural gas distribution and clean coal technologies.
72.
Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA). MIGA’s work advanced considerably over the CAS period, with a more integrated approach to the provision of guarantees and TA evolving over the past three years. MIGA’s gross exposure in China has grown,
and stood at $130 million as of December 31, 2005, representing 2.4% of its outstanding
exposure. The current portfolio is highly concentrated in the infrastructure sector, which
accounts for 89% of exposure. While anticipated demand for MIGA guarantees in the oil and
gas sectors did not materialize, there has been a recent resurgence in interest for MIGA
guarantee coverage for water and power projects, which involve sub-sovereign risk. This has

– 91 –

proven to be an important and growing niche for MIGA in China, as MIGA is prepared to
cover municipal risk and local government risk, which many other insurers do only on a caseby-case basis. MIGA is also providing strong mediation support to clients, with a notable
track record during the CAS period in working with MoF to resolve potential disputes.
73.
As planned in the CAS, MIGA continued to strengthen its relationship with Sinosure,
China’s export credit agency, with cooperation in joint marketing, cross-training, and initiatives to promote outward investment in support of China’s go-global strategy. MIGA has
provided TA at both the national level, where MIGA assistance to the Ministry of Commerce
contributed to the drafting and promulgation of the National Guidelines for Investment Promotion in 2005, and at the provincial level, where MIGA worked, for example, with the PEP
China (CPDF) in Sichuan in assisting provincial investment promotion intermediaries to
define and target their programs.
74.
World Bank Institute (WBI): During the CAS period, the China program was WBI’s
largest. In response to increasing requests, WBI learning programs averaged about 70 events
per year, directly reaching some 7,000 participants and covering many sectors and themes.
The larger programs focused on environmental sustainability, the investment climate, public
administration, the health sector, and social protection. The interest in WBI’s programs remained high among both government and private sector agencies. Requests grew for learning events related to increasingly advanced and customized thematic activities, particularly
for knowledge and experience sharing with international resource people representing best
practices in their field, with seminars and workshops often ending with a discussion on how
international lessons learned can be applied in China. This was also manifested during the
Global Conference on Scaling-Up Poverty Reduction in Shanghai in 2004.
75.
The programs with the best impact were those where well qualified staff worked
with the same counterparts and on the same issues for a longer period of time, where activities formed part of a strategic partnership with an influential agency (such as MoF, NDRC,
and SEPA) and where distance learning was used to scale-up activities and reach audiences
in remote or otherwise hard-to-reach areas. The creation of knowledge networks (e.g. health)
proved to be a successful mechanism both for implementing and sustaining the learning
efforts after WBI support ended. The WBI program also proved to be a practical forum for
bringing up otherwise difficult issues for discussion in a particular sector context, i.e. public
participation in environmental assessments, or mechanisms for beneficiaries’ feedback and
participatory budgeting at the local level. Other lessons learned include the need to prevent
fragmentation of the program. With high demand for learning and international knowledge,
the available resources are easily spread too thinly across too many sectors. Also, WBI’s
activities carried the most impact when they were properly aligned with the work of the rest
of the World Bank group. Given this track record, WBI intends that future program planning
should emphasize consolidation and alignment.
Country dialogue and donor coordination
76.
Responsiveness to clients and outreach: Reflecting China’s financial circumstances
and its appropriate development program, government demand continued strongly to guide
Bank Group engagement, with the Bank responding where it could add value. Overall, the
Bank Group maintained a strong partnership with the GoC, IBRD exposure issues were
successfully managed, and the Bank continued to expand the role of the Beijing office. Dialogue deepened through a combination of regular meetings with GoC counterparts, annual

– 92 –

discussions on the AAA and three-year IBRD lending program, repeated visits of high-level
Bank delegations to China, and annual training events in the Bank’s offices in DC for GoC
counterparts.
77.
China counterparts have often noted the importance of the heightened role of the
Bank’s country office in the dialogue and effectiveness of the assistance program. The presence in Beijing of the (decentralized) Country Director, growing numbers of highly-skilled
national staff, and some 20 international staff (some with long experience in China) has
made it possible for Bank staff to inculcate China’s unique circumstances and collaborate
with Chinese counterparts over extended periods. Often the Bank’s more innovative work
requires gestation and discussion for GoC counterparts to understand and absorb the full
implications, and frequent interaction between Bank and GoC technical staff helps to facilitate this process. In addition, the presence of national staff with GoC experience who maintain good relations and understand how the GoC operates has helped to broaden the Bank’s
network of contacts in China (where language remains a barrier), ‘translate’ the work of
international Bank experts into the Chinese context, and also bring increasing numbers of
GoC officials and Chinese academics into partnership on major AAA. The Bank/WBI made
a major effort to support China’s interest to share its development experiences with other
developing countries, primarily through the successful Shanghai Conference on Scaling-Up
Poverty Reduction, which showcased poverty reduction experiences from around the world.
The Bank also expanded outreach through Bank staff-led seminars at MoF and Tsinghua
University, a strengthened Chinese-language website with most major Bank Group research
published in Chinese (which has garnered steadily increasing readership, from 20,000 users
in July 2003 to 116,000 in December 2005), establishment of development knowledge centers at GDLN facilities in western provinces, and an internship program for Chinese university students. The Bank also supported local NGOs through its continuing small grants
program, commissioning of the first-ever study of China’s tax rules for not-for-profit organizations (NPOs), translation of NGO/NPO laws of other countries, and initiation of a youth
engagement program.
78.
Donor coordination and trust fund financing: As planned in the CAS, the Bank
continued to deepen its collaboration with other development partners. Reflecting GoC requests, the Bank’s donor coordination activities have focused primarily on developing strategic partnerships with multi-lateral and bilateral donors. Through these partnerships, 68 trust
funds were secured during the CAS period (totaling commitments of $186 million), bringing
total donor commitments in the active trust fund portfolio to over $889 million as of June
2005. The Multilateral Fund for Implementation of the Montreal Protocol/Ozone (OTF), the
Institutional Development Fund (IDF), and the Global Environmental Facility were the top
three contributors to this increase. The trust fund portfolio supports project co-financing
(about three-quarters of total commitments) as well as non-lending technical assistance and
project preparation costs. The Multilateral Fund for the Implementation of the Montreal Protocol/Ozone (OTF) and the Global Environment Facility (GEF) are the largest sources of
trust funds. GEF, which made new grants and commitments totalling $113 million during the
2003 to mid-2005 period, provided a key source of support for Bank-GoC efforts to promote
renewable energy and energy efficiency, control land degradation, address water scarcity and
pollution, and conserve biodiversity. DFID (UK) continued to be the largest contributor to
single-purpose trust funds. Under a partnership begun in FY02, DFID provided grant financing that, blended with IBRD loans, softened the effective interest rate for Bank projects in
human development (Basic Education in Western Areas) and poverty reduction (Poor Rural
Communities Development). Collaboration with DFID expanded during the CAS period

– 93 –

from blending arrangements to a more comprehensive program including AAA and a TA
project. In total, DFID has committed $145 million in funds for co-financing, debt service,
and TA in support of Bank projects and analytical work, and DFID funds account for 67% of
the $18 million of the trust fund portfolio that is Bank-executed. In preparation of the CASCR,
staff recommended further evaluation of trust fund management processes in order to reduce
fragmentation and better integrate TFs with Bank Group strategic objectives, and reduce
transaction costs for both Bank staff and local counterparts.
Client feedback
79.
At consultations held in preparation of the new Country Partnership Strategy, developed in parallel with the CASCR, participants including GoC officials from MoF, NDRC, 23
other central ministries and agencies, 26 provinces, and eight municipalities provided extensive feedback on Bank Group achievements, lessons learned, and areas for improvement.
Also in preparation of the CPS, the Bank conducted a Client Survey between July and September 2005, involving over 200 stakeholders of the World Bank Group in China, including
government officials from central ministries and local government, academia, the private
sector, NGOs, donor agencies, and the media. Feedback included the following:

•

Participants said that the Bank-GoC partnership is strong and highly valued, that
they regard the Bank as an important development partner, and that they welcome
continued and expanded Bank Group assistance to China.

•

The Bank has made many important contributions, beyond filling local financing
gaps, since it began engaging in the early 1980s, including upgrading technologies,
introducing institutional reform and innovation, building human resource capacity,
and supporting policy reform (including through support to the preparation of China’s
11th Five Year Program).

•

The Bank Group’s role in introducing international experience and expertise and as
a provider of knowledge and innovation that catalyze reform is particularly valued.
Respondents to the Client Survey indicated that the Bank’s knowledge was its greatest
value, followed by its financial resources and transfer of new project concepts.

•

The Bank’s role in poverty reduction, the social sectors, and lagging regions are
particularly important, and new mechanisms are needed to enable expanded IBRD
lending in these sectors.

80.
Nonetheless, the GoC (and, in some cases other stakeholders) have criticized the
Bank for its complex operational policies, relatively high costs, and failure to adequately
adapt global knowledge to local conditions. Respondents to the Client Survey said that the
Bank’s greatest weaknesses were being too bureaucratic in its operational policies and procedures and failing to adapt global knowledge to local conditions. CPS consultation participants made similar observations. In particular, the Bank was criticized for:

•

The high cost of doing business, because of rigorous Bank safeguards provisions;
ambitious project objectives (e.g. railway reform); and the imposition of rigid rules
(e.g., requiring that a fixed percentage of a project be devoted to TA or rural roads).

•

HIgh IBRD loan charges, which, because the Chinese system requires these charges
to be passed through to the ultimate beneficiaries, limit opportunities to lend to
poorer jurisdictions, particularly for non-revenue-generating pro-poor interventions.

– 94 –

•

Slow project preparation times, although GoC officials and Bank staff have noted
recent improvements (e.g., in the Ningbo and Shaanxi projects) as well as the need
for joint GoC-Bank efforts, as delays occur on both sides.

•

Not keeping pace with China’s changing development situation nor adequately adapting assistance to the increasing complexity and local realities of emerging development challenges. Client Survey respondents said that failing to adapt global knowledge to local conditions and imposing technical solutions without regard to local
realities were key constraints.

•

Inadequate cross-sectoral teamwork, and a lack of continuity in Bank staff working
on a particular project. The GoC has also urged the Bank to delegate further responsibility to Bank staff located in Beijing and make greater use of local consultants.

81.

The Bank Group is working with the GoC to address all of these issues.

Portfolio management
82.
Costs for CAS implementation: Coefficients for project preparation in China are
higher than the Bank average. The average preparation cost for the 20 investment projects
prepared for China over FY02–05 was about $550,000, compared to $360,000 for projects in
the rest of East Asia and $330,000 for the Bank as a whole. Two characteristics of the China
portfolio—namely, larger average loan size and concentration in category A projects (80% of
China projects are in safeguards category A, compared to 8% for the Bank and 7% for EAP
excluding China)—explain most of the difference between average costs in China and Bankwide.4 In terms of Bank budget spent per $1 million loaned, the China team is actually quite
efficient, as category A projects in China are prepared at about 50% the cost of category A
projects in the rest of the Bank, mainly because the China team avoids preparing category A
projects with small loan amounts (less than $90 million). Further, China’s reduced access to
PHRD funding for project preparation, available only for social/poverty projects, also increased
the proportion of project preparation funded by Bank budget. Given the correct comparators,
project preparation costs in the China program are reasonable, though budgetary allocations
do not reflect the full cost (the region has typically allocated $400,000 for project preparation).
85.
Project supervision costs have been maintained at the EAP coefficient (currently
$75,000 per annum, of which $65,000 is allocated to the relevant sector unit and the remaining $10,000 off-the-top to operational support). This amount appears to be adequate in China,
principally because substantial supervision is managed by national staff out of the Beijing
office and most sectors are able to realize travel-related economies by combining missions.
86.
Given the high (though efficient) cost of project preparation, and the application of
a lower regional norm in allocating preparation budgets, the China CMU typically has difficulty raising AAA allocations to Bank-wide norms. Over FY02–04, the CMU allocated 18%
of Bank budget for country services to AAA—significantly less than comparator countries
such as Vietnam (22%), Indonesia (26%), India (27%), Brazil (28%), and Russia (33%). The
addition of TF resources does not change the overall picture, mainly because the China program can now access PHRD resources only for inland non-infrastructure projects—China
remains the lowest at 24%, with the other countries at or exceeding 31%. To correct this
imbalance, the CMU is seeking to reduce project preparation costs (e.g. through delegating
further responsibility and authority to national staff; monitoring mission composition and
size; accelerating project preparation and dealing promptly and completely with issues, in

– 95 –

consultation with NDRC and MoF), but further efficiencies are likely to be modest.
87.
Safeguards: The FY03–05 CAS identifies “more effective safeguards policy application” as essential to improved portfolio efficiency, and promotes policy dialogue and capacity-building efforts as means to greater harmonization between Bank policies and China’s
regulatory framework and implementation procedures. In the CAS period, environmental
and social safeguards generally have been implemented satisfactorily in the China project
portfolio. Moreover, the Bank’s policy dialogue has been effective in promoting improvements to environmental assessment, as described elsewhere. Similar ongoing efforts are expected to contribute to improvements in involuntary resettlement regulation and practice. A
major AAA activity on overall land policy includes support for revision of China’s National
Land Law, including land acquisition, valuation and compensation aspects. Capacity-building activities include a new IDF grant to support Ministry of Land and Resources efforts to
devise national land acquisition implementation guidelines and to improve oversight of land
acquisition practices. The Bank, in collaboration with ADB and Chinese agencies, also supported publication of a China social assessment manual.
88.
During the CAS period, the Bank initiated efforts to simplify its own safeguards-related procedures (in order to improve implementation efficiency and reduce burdens imposed
on borrowers) and to promote greater reliance on country safeguards systems when consistent
with Bank safeguards policy principles and standards. In terms of simplification, the China
program made limited progress in identifying ways to streamline internal review procedures
and to reduce costly and time-consuming translation processes. GoC counterparts, along with
Bank project task teams, frequently remark that safeguards procedures remain unnecessarily
burdensome. Further steps to improve processing efficiency without diminishing the quality of
safeguards-related preparation or implementation also are under review.
89.
In addition to transaction cost concerns, the GoC has complained that the Bank’s
safeguards procedures are sometimes incompatible with China’s domestic systems. The main
differences between the Bank’s and China’s procedures are: on the social side, the Bank’s
resettlement policies are more generous than China’s (e.g., the Bank’s policy objective is
income restoration rather than compensation for lost assets, and Bank policy requires that
unlicensed businesses and persons lacking residency permits be eligible for assistance); and
on the environmental side, the Bank requires an assessment of alternatives, whereas China
does not. Within provinces or municipalities where no major compliance gaps exist or where
compliance gaps can be overcome, there may be opportunities for expanding the use of country systems with respect to safeguards policies. With regard to environmental assessment and
involuntary resettlement, however, it is likely that some policy differences will remain in
most jurisdictions. Meanwhile, the application of domestic regulations is frequently weak,
such that environmental assessment and resettlement practices in some instances can be less
than satisfactory. For these reasons, the Bank will retain direct responsibility for safeguard
compliance within its portfolio for the foreseeable future.
90.
Procurement: CAS objectives for procurement were largely achieved during the
CAS period. The Bank supported the extension of a sustainable procurement training program, with regular training courses and programs delivered in several universities. As set out

4

Bank-wide, preparation costs tend to rise with loan size (doubling the loan size increases prepar-ation cost by
about one-third) and with increased safeguards assessment (category B projects are about 24% cheaper and
category C projects 44% cheaper than category A projects).

– 96 –

in the CAS, the Bank worked with the GoC and other donors to disseminate China’s 2003
Procurement Law and 2000 Tendering and Bidding Law. The Bank accomplished planned
assistance to the GoC to update model bidding documents in 2003, although resource constraints has slowed the issuance of the updated versions to staff. The GoC introduced an
electronic review process for bidding documents and evaluation reports to increase the transparency and efficiency of the procurement process and established a database of experts to
assist in the technical review process. Finally, as proposed in the CAS, regular workshops
have been organized with the GoC to reach out to contractors, suppliers and consultants.
While contracting for public works and goods in China has improved, with high levels of
competition, procurement in the consulting industry lags behind, with reluctance to promote
domestic private consulting firms and a tendency to award consulting contracts based more
on affiliations rather than quality.
91.
Financial management (FM). The Bank planned a number of steps to improve financial management under the 2003 CAS, including systemic initiatives to support strengthening of China’s FM systems, TA to build capacity of public accountability oversight
institutions, joint Bank-GoC supervision missions, and further decentralization of Bank-related FM and disbursement to the Beijing office. Progress toward planned systemic initiatives—including a planned fiduciary risk mitigation and capacity building strategy and
assistance to strengthen disbursement reporting and the quality of audit reports—was limited.
However, the Bank provided substantial assistance to build the capacity of China counterparts
involved with financial management, including provision of training courses and workshops to
project auditors, overseas training opportunities for some MoF staff on public budget management, and support for the establishment of three residential training centers to improve China’s
accounting and auditing technical competency under a Bank-assisted accounting reform project.
Financial management was fully decentralized to the Beijing office, and all financial management assessments are now conducted and cleared locally in the Beijing office. The Bank has
also started to conduct joint missions with MoF on new projects, but joint supervision missions for existing projects to date have not included the China National Audit Office (CNAO).

J. CONCLUSIONS AND LESSONS
92.
As noted in the introduction, assessing the Bank’s performance and impact in China
under the CAS is complicated by the very short CAS period, the sheer size of China relative to
the Bank’s resources, and the highly leveraged nature of Bank assistance. The Bank’s impact
arises through demonstrating innovative models for addressing specific development problems that are subsequently scaled-up (using GoC or private sector resources) or through influencing policy and institutional reform measures in its extensive formal and informal AAA.
Under these circumstances, this CASCR attempts to capture the Bank’s contribution to key
GoC achievements during the CAS period—even if the Bank contributions predate the CAS
period—as well as the Bank’s shorter-term performance in delivering planned CAS inputs,
recognizing that the results of many interventions will only be clear in the medium-term.

•

By most measures, including portfolio monitoring, internal reviews, and client
feedback, the Bank’s assistance to China was satisfactory or better.


Project implementation has been very good in most sectors, and the China portfolio continues to perform well. Of closed projects evaluated during the CAS
period, IEG found that 87% had satisfactory or better outcomes (compared to a

– 97 –

Bank average of 79%), 94% had likely sustainability (compared to a Bank average of 78%), and 81% had substantial institutional development impact (compared to a Bank average of 54%).








•

In the ongoing portfolio, the number of problem projects was far below Bank
averages (only 1.9% of the China portfolio in FY03–05 compared to 13.8%
Bank-wide), as were the number of projects at risk.
The majority of Bank projects and analytical work planned in the CAS has been
successfully implemented or initiated, though there have been delays, particularly in delivering analytical products. Delays were project-specific, resulting
from factors including complexity of blending arrangements and project design,
local counterpart ownership and repayment capacity, lack of borrowing space as
result of $1–1.5 billion lending cap, and the SARS epidemic.
GoC clients routinely express the value that they attach to Bank Group assistance, noting that Bank projects help to fill local financing gaps and bring a
variety of spillover benefits including: initiating policy reform, introducing institutional reform and innovation, upgrading technologies, and building human
resource capacity.
A QAG review also found that Bank AAA was highly relevant to China’s development needs, of satisfactory quality, and adequately disseminated.

Bank Group assistance continued to address key China development challenges
and contribute to important Chinese achievements. Through a combination of
AAA and knowledge embedded in the Bank’s limited lending to China (less than
0.2% of total investment), reform initiatives demonstrated with Bank assistance
continued to be scaled-up during the CAS period, with benefits far exceeding the
direct benefits of the original projects. Major China developments to which the
Bank was an important contributor during the CAS period included:


A better understanding of growth and equity issues (through the CEM)



A stronger GoC focus on poverty















High-quality poverty analysis assessing the impact of China’s December 2001
accession to the WTO
Financial sector reforms, including the Ocober 2004 decision to liberalize interest rates
Capital market development, including through IFC’s issuance of the first
renminbi-denominated bond to be issued by a foreign institution
Greater emphasis on the private sector and its enabling environment
Greater GoC awareness of resource scarcity and environmental challenges, at
all levels of government, as well as approaches to managing them
GoC improvements in development planning, including through analytical work
supporting the preparation of the 11th FYP
Greater focus on institutional and regulatory issues (e.g. utility cost recovery)

– 98 –






Greater openness and transparency in GoC project management, including procurement, environmental assessment, and resettlement plans
Drafting of the Rural Land Contracting Law
Positioning the World Bank as a knowledge bank, with greater outreach and a
stronger focus on ideas, innovation, and learning

93.
Nevertheless, there is still room for improvement. The Bank has not always succeeded in influencing desired policy and institutional changes, and GoC officials continue to
urge the Bank Group to reposition its assitance to better meet China’s needs. Constraints and
areas for improvement noted during formulation of the CAS CR included:

•

The Bank Group needs to keep pace with China’s rapidly changing development needs. Increasingly, the GoC requests the Bank to address complex multisectoral development challenges with international best practices tailored to meet
China-specific challenges. To address China’s changing needs, GoC officials encourage the Bank to increase its focus on macro-level challenges (e.g., to assist
with regional and provincial development planning), improve the quality and impact of the TA components of its projects, ensure continuity in Bank staff with
China experience, and make greater use of Chinese consultants. Country team members also noted that weak integration of AAA, lending, and trust-funded activities
limited the Bank’s ability to provide sustained cross-sectoral engagement. The GoC’s
desire to spread the Bank Group’s influence broadly, combined with the absence of
an integrated approach targeting a few selected locations, has also contributed to a
degree of geographic and sectoral dispersion of the ongoing portfolio.

•

Projects did not always achieve desired demonstration effects or scale-up. Limiting factors included: insufficient emphasis on innovation or demonstration in project
selection (some provincial officials said that the strong emphasis on repayment
capacity in project selection limited project focus on innovation); fragmentation of
provincial, county, and urban authorities (a constraint noted by provincial officials
at the 2005 CPS consultations, who requested Bank support for regionally integrated infrastructure); and the relative absence of rigorous monitoring and evaluation of project impacts.

•

Though the Bank has a comparative advantage in providing assistance to the
social sectors, the combination of IBRD terms and GoC loan repayment requirements has made it difficult to expand Bank lending for the social sectors
and poverty reduction, and has constrained the Bank’s ability to deploy available
resources in these areas at the same time that GoC emphasis on balanced development has increased. Country team members noted that the level of partnership,
dialogue, and local knowledge that result from demonstration projects could not be
fully replaced by analytical work alone.

•

Continued effort is needed to simplify and streamline Bank procedures, including project preparation, procurement, and safeguards (see Client Feedback above).

94.

Going forward, the Bank can build on success factors...

•

The Bank’s role in bringing ideas, innovation, and knowledge remains its most
valued contribution. While resource transfers are important to the sub-national
governments that are the Bank’s primary clients, the Group’s comparative advan-

– 99 –

tage lies in its role as an international knowledge leader and disseminator of good
practices.

•

Innovations typically emerge from a long-term GoC-Bank partnership founded
on trust, shared commitment, and pragmatic cooperation. Sustained engagement
on priority topics is especially important given China’s gradualist approach to reform. Further emphasis is needed to maintain a strong strategic dialogue with GoC
counterparts, given increasing local expertise and the availability of other advisors.

•

The Bank’s ‘dual-track’ approach—building trust through lending and supporting policy dialogue through sector work—has been a key success factor.
As the CAE noted, combining persuasion through analytical work and demonstration through pilot projects has enabled the Bank to “punch above its weight”. Where
it occurred, synergy between analytical work, TA, and lending enhanced the Bank’s
contributions, such as in Bank support to power sector reform, participatory approaches to poverty reduction, and integrated watershed management. While AAA
served to identify priorities for investment projects, Bank involvement in investment lending (and long-term TA) contributed to Bank staff knowledge of local conditions, relationships with local counterparts, and entrée that, in turn, brought greater
depth and impact to related analytical work.

•

The GoC’s strong ownership and development focus have been key contributing factors to the effectiveness of Bank inputs. The Bank’s relationship with China
is in many respects a model partnership, with the GoC firmly in the driver’s seat in
setting the development agenda, defining the scope of Bank assistance, and determining how Bank inputs are ultimately used. This has ensured country ownership
of the Bank’s assistance.

95.
can:

... and further incorporate lessons learned. To have greater impact, the Bank Group

•

Articulate a more sharply defined set of intermediate results to guide its assistance and dialogue. Although the 2003 CAS set broad strategic directions and a
detailed (21-page) experimental results matrix, it did not clearly articulate intermediate results that the Bank was seeking to influence nor was it used operationally.
The utility of the new CPS can be increased if the Bank Group, in close consultation with GoC counterparts:




Defines a set of priority intermediate outcomes around which ongoing and
new Bank assistance will be aligned. These results, which will need to be stated
largely in terms of GoC policy and institutional reforms rather than as changes
in national or provincial development indicators or service-delivery targets, can
provide the focus for a more integrated package of ongoing and new Bank assistance. Articulation of results will also require realistic expectations of the Bank
Group’s influence, recognizing that causal linkages between Bank Group inputs,
GoC actions, and their outcomes are tenuous and that outcomes must ultimately
be attributed to a combination of GoC actions and exogenous factors over which
no actor has control.
Operationalizes the new Country Partnership Strategy by using the results
matrix as a basis for strategic dialogue with the GoC and for periodic crosssectoral reviews to integrate Bank Group interventions and monitor their impacts.

– 100 –

•

Focus on scaling-up successful innovations and ideas by:






•

Emphasizing the demonstration aspects of Bank work in project and transaction selection (potentially enhanced by greater Bank-GoC upstream dialogue
on the pipeline), implementation, and especially M&E (with more project resources devoted to assessing, distilling, and disseminating project lessons)
Balancing lending with analytical work (e.g., through greater emphasis on
AAA to address sector-specific issues in sectors, such as infrastructure, where
the Bank has invested heavily) as well as by encouraging cross-fertilization between AAA and lending (e.g., through linking AAA more explicitly with lessons learned from lending projects)
Continuing to explore innovative delivery mechanisms, such as focusing a
package of interventions on a particular province or region, or taking a programwide approach in areas such as road transportation

Better integrate Bank Group assistance to help China to address increasingly
complex multi-sectoral development challenges. Responding to China’s requests,
and achieving CPS results, will require strengthened mechanisms to encourage cooperation between Bank Group partners, sectors, and task leaders, including by:




Organizing lending, AAA, and trust-funded interventions on a thematic basis, strategically integrating trust funds, encouraging greater cross-sectoral discussion within the Bank Group of progress toward CPS milestones, and ensuring
that the lessons of demonstration projects are fully reflected in analytical work
and policy dialogue
Where relevant, encouraging greater integration of IBRD, IFC, MIGA, and
WBI activities around the results identified in the CPS, capitalizing on the
comparative strengths of each institution, with IBRD focusing on strengthening
the efficiency, sustainability, and equity with which public goods are provided
and IFC and MIGA focusing on the private sector dimensions

•

Facilitate greater Bank Group engagement in poverty reduction and social sectors by actively working with GoC partners to operationalize new funding arrangements—including the blending of IBRD and central government transfers—that
enable continued innovative IBRD lending in the these sectors. Experience over the
previous CAS period has shown that IBRD lending, when deployed strategically,
brings a depth of local knowledge, practical experience and partnership that increases the effectiveness of Bank contributions—and associated GoC financing—
in ways difficult to achieve through analytical work alone.

•

Seek to further simplify and streamline Bank project processes, including reducing project preparation times and the costs of doing businesses by further integrating Bank procedures with country systems.

– 101 –
CASCR Attachment 1: Planned lending program and actual deliveries (FY03-05)
CAS Plans (January 22, 2003)
b/

FY

Project

IBRD ($m)

FY03

Program planned at time of CAS:
Xinjiang Highway 3
150
Hubei Highway
250
Yi-Xing Pumped Storage
145
Tianjin Urban Development II
150
Shanghai Urban Environment APL (Stage I)
200
Liaoning Urban Development
110
Jiangxi Integrated Agricultural Development
100
Gansu and Xinjiang Pastoral Development
66
Basic Education in Western Areas
100
Regular program subtotal: 1271
Standby program:
Anhui Highway 2
Aquaculture
Standby program subtotal:

250
10
260

Status

Completion Report (June 30, 2005)
IBRD ($m)

Delivered September 2002
Delivered September 2002
Delivered March 2003
Delivered May 2003
Delivered June 2003
Postponed to FY06; under preparation
Postponed to FY04; delivered November 2003
Postponed to FY04; delivered September 2003
Postponed to FY04; delivered September 2003

150
250
145
150
200

Delivered June 2003
Dropped at the request of GoC

250

FY03 delivered program total:
Other:
GEF-Lake Dianchi Biodiversity Restoration
GEF-Energy Conservation 2
Other program total:
FY04

Projects carried over from FY03:
Gansu and Xinjiang Pastoral Development
(GEF $10.5m)
Basic Education in Western Areas
Jiangxi Integrated Agriculture Modernization
(from FY04)
Program planned at time of CAS:
Zhejiang Urban Development
Inland Waterways 4
Wuhan Urban Transport
National Railways 2
Hunan City/Regional Development
Lake Tai Water Quality
Poor Rural Communities Development
Agricultural Technology
Inner Mongolia Highway 2
Economic Reform Implementation
Distance Learning/Knowledge Dissemination

1145

1
26
27

Delivered March 2003
Delivered June 2003

66

Delivered September 2003

66

100
100

Delivered September 2003
Delivered November 2003

100
100

140
95
200
200
150
110
100
100
100
30
4

Delivered January 2004
Delivered March 2004
Delivered March 2004
Delivered June 2004
Postponed to FY05; delivered September 2004
Postponed to FY05; delivered August 2004
Postponed to FY05; delivered June 2005
Postponed to FY05; delivered April 2005
Postponed to FY05; delivered February 2005
Postponed to FY06; under preparation
Dropped, but supported by trust-fund activities

133
91
200
200

Delivered June 2004
Postponed to FY06

128

Other program total:

1
26
27

Regular program subtotal: 1229
Standby program:
Guangdong-Pearl River Delta Environment
Shaanxi Highway 3
Standby program subtotal:

150
200
350

Additional delivered projects:
Hubei Highway 2; delivered June 2004,
advanced from FY05
FY04 delivered program total:
Other Program:
GEF-Hai Basin Integrated Water Management
Other program total:

17
17

Delivered April 2004
Other program total:

200
1218

17
17

(continued on next page)

– 102 –
CASCR Attachment 1: Planned lending program and actual deliveries (FY03-05)
CAS Plans (January 22, 2003)
b/

FY

Project

FY05

Projects carried over from FY04:
Tai Basin Urban Environment
Hunan Urban Development
Inner Mongolia Highway 2
Agricultural Technology Transfer
Poor Rural Communities Development

IBRD ($m)

110
150
100
100
100

Status

Completion Report (June 30, 2005)
IBRD ($m)

Delivered August 2004
Delivered September 2004
Delivered February 2005
Delivered April 2005
Delivered June 2005

Regular program:
Hubei Highway 2
200
Liuzhou (Guangxi) Environment
100
Shanghai Urban Environment APL 2
200
Chongqing Small Cities
150
Henan Medium-Sized Cities
150
Upper Yangtze Watershed Rehabilitation
100
Heilongjiang Dairy Development
100
Fuzhou Urban Transport
100
Henan Highway 4
175
Regular program subtotal: 1275

Delivered June 2004; advanced to FY04
Delivered May 2005
Postponed to FY06; delivered July 2005
Delivered June 2005
Postponed to FY06; under preparation
Postponed to FY06; renamed Changjiang/PRD
Postponed to FY06; delivered January 2006
Postponed to FY06; delivered December 2005
Dropped at the request of GoC

Standbys
Ningbo Water Management
Rural Village/Cities Water Supply & Sanitation
Taiyuan Integrated Urban Development
Irrigated Agriculture Intensification 3
Rural Health
Standby program subtotal:

Delivered March 2005
Postponed to FY07; under preparation
Postponed to FY08
Postponed to FY06; delivered October 2005
Postponed to FY07; under preparation

100
50
150
200
75
575

Additional Delivered Projects:
Renewable Energy Scale Up (GEF $40m),
delivered June 2005
FY05 delivered program total:
Other Projects
GEF-Heat Reform and Building Energy Efficiency
PCF-Jincheng Coal Bed Methane Project
Other program total:

18
10
28

Total (FY03-05 planned regular program): 3775

Delivered
Delivered

61
172
100
100
100

100
180

130

87
1030

Other program total:

18
10
28

Total (FY03-05 delivered program):

3394

Core written output
Status

Economic
management

Economic
monitoring

Dropped; low
GOC interest,
ADB report on
same topic
Completed

FY04:

Public Expenditure
Review/CFAA (D)

Monitoring Briefs (D)

th

Enhancing GoC
Audit Capacity

Completed:

WTO Accession Impacts
Growth, Poverty, Trade,
Investment (A)

Completed

Monitoring Briefs (D)

Completed

CPAR Follow-Up (A)

Procurement Post-Review (A) Completed

Completed
in FY05

PSU Reform (A)

FY03:

Integrated into 11
FYP, NE
Development
Strategy

Development Policy
Review (D)

FY05:

FY04:

Completed

Monitoring Briefs (D)

Completedr
Completed

WBI-Intergov. Relations
and Local Gov. Management of Finance

Completed

Completed

Dropped;
lack of
budget

Completed

Completed

Status

GDLN Devt. fo
Knowledge Management

Building Government
Debt Management
Capacity

SDPC Policy Modeling

FY03:

Improved Indicators
for Social Spending

Completed
WBI-WTO Issues
for China

FY03:

TA

CEM: Sharing Opportunities
and Wealth at the Time of
Globalization (D)

FY03:

CAS theme: Business Environment and Market Economy

AAA theme

CASCR Attachment 2: Planned AAA and actual AAA deliveries (FY03-05)
Status

WTO Accession,
Completed
Policy Reform
and Poverty Reduction

FY03:

Research

(continued on next page)

NE Development
Workshop

Support to 11th FYP

FY05:

Eight policy notes
prepared at GoC
request (note C)

Early Warning
System for
Identifying and
Analyzing MacroFiscal Risks (D)

FY04:

Unplanned delivery

– 103 –

Financial
Sector
Development

AAA theme

Completed
Completed
Completed

Deposit Insurance
System
Debt Resolution for
Banks
IFC Capacity Building
in Securities Industry

Completed

Completed

WBI/DL-Infra. Finance

Government Securities
Market Reform

Completed

Completed

Completed

Completed

Dropped

Completed

Completed

Status

WBI-Non-bank Financial
Institutions

Strategic Framework for
Financial Conglomerates (A)

Completed

Development of Institutional
Investors policy note (A)

APEC Forum TA

FY04:

Completed

State Commercial Bank
Restructuring policy note (A)

Finance for Small Firms

FY03:

Piloting Fiscal Reforms
in Western Provinces

Knowledge Management

FY05:

FY04:

Integrated into
Corporate
Bond Market
Study (D)

Domestic Finance for
Infrastructure policy note (A)

FY03:

Ongoing, scope
extended to
nation-wide

Subnational Fiscal Issues
in Western Provinces (A)
Decentralization
(Regional Project)

Statistical Capacity
Building

Completed

Evaluation, Management of
Domestic Debt Risks (A)

TA
FY04:

Status

FY04:

Core written output

CASCR Attachment 2: Planned AAA and actual AAA deliveries (FY03-05) (continued)
Research
Status

(continued on next page)

Addressing Systemic
Risks and Financial Stability

Legal, Regulatory and
Supervisory Framework
for Lending to MSEs

FY05:

Corporate Governance
of Rural Commercial Banks

Capital Market Development

Improving Risk Management
in Securities Firms

FY04:

Cross-border Capital
Flows Workshop

FY04:

Unplanned delivery

– 104 –

Completed

Completed
Completed

Completed
Completed

Completed

Gas Development (A)

Energy Sector Policy
Notes (A)

Judicial/Legal Reform (A)

IFC/WB: Transformation of
Small and Medium Sized
SOEs (A)

Improving Investment
Climate (WB, IFC, FIAS)

Status

Corporate Governance
of Enterprise Groups (A)

FY03:

Core written output

Revitalizing
Lagging
Economies
Completed

Completed

Trade, Transport Services
and Logistics (A)

PSD Strategy in Lagging
Regions (A)

FY03:

CAS theme: Disadvantaged people and lagging regions

Markets and
enterprises

AAA theme

Causes for
Changes in
Income Distribution
Poverty Monitoring

Completed

Completed

and Evaluation
Land Tenure:
Impact on Farm
Investment

Completed

Completed

Rural Growth and Env.
WBI-Livestock
Management and
Pastoral Dev.
WBI-Rural Dev. Training

Completed in
FY04

Completed

Completed

Uninsured Risk and
Poverty
Dropped

WBI/DL-Ecological
Agriculture and
Development
WBI/DL-Agri. Prod.,

Integrated
in City
Competitiveness

Status

Lagging Poor Areas: Completed
Break-ing Poverty
Traps

FY03:

Industrial
Competitiveness,
the Investment
Climate and
Development
of SMEs

FY03:

Research

Completed

Completed

Completed

Completed

Completed

Completed

Completed

Completed

Status

WBI-Rural Poverty
Reduction in Western
China

Post-WTO Reform of
Ministry of Agriculture

FY03:

IFC Corporate
Governance -Training
for Directors

WBI-Accession to WTO
Issues

WBI/DL-Corporate
Governance/Strategy

State Enterprise Debt
Restructuring and Loan
Workouts

Oil and Gas Sector
Regulation

Power Generation:
Divestiture, Regulation
and Pricing

FY03:

TA

CASCR Attachment 2: Planned AAA and actual AAA deliveries (FY03-05) (continued)

(continued on next page)

Unplanned delivery

– 105 –

Human and
Social
Development

AAA theme
Completed

Development/Improvement of Land Tenure
Reforms

M&E for Better Social Service Completed
Delivery Outcomes

Improving Financing for
Effective Delivery of
Basic Social Services (A)
Completed

Completed
Completed
Completed
Completed
Completed

Social Assessment Manual

WBI-Health Sector
Financing and Reform
WBI-SPS on Rural Health
Training of Local Health
Bureau Directors

Completed

Improving Health Care
Access of Rural Poor
WBI-Poverty Identification,
Policies, and Evaluation

Combined in PA

Dropped; low
GoC interest

Mainstreaming Gender

Capacity Building for
Urban Medical Insurance
Reform

FY03:

(continued on next page)

Completed;
renamed
Fragmentation
of National Product
and Factor Markets

Removing Inter-Provincial
Trade Barriers to Achieve
Market Integration (A)

FY03:

Ongoing

Strengthening Farmers
Associations, Sichuan (A)

Unplanned delivery

Scale-up Poverty
Reduction – Shanghai
Conference

Status

Ongoing

Completed

Strengthening Management of Pov. Reduction
Funds

Research

Skills Development for
Competitiveness (A)

Completed

Lagging Regions
Development Plan

Rural Dev.: Poverty
Completed
Reduction, Env. Protection

Status

TA

FY04:

Status

FY04:

Core written output

CASCR Attachment 2: Planned AAA and actual AAA deliveries (FY03-05) (continued)

– 106 –

Managing Health Sector
Adjustment

Ongoing; expected
in FY06

Poverty Assessment (PA)

Environmental
Management

Completed

Completed
in FY04

Sustainable
Development of
Livestock and
Grasslands in the
Northwest Provinces

Energy Efficiency
in Buildings

Completed

WBI-Urban Project
Analysis/Management

FY04:

Completed

WBI/DL-Urban Air
Quality Management

Completed
in FY05

Completed

WBI-Environmental
Economics and Policy

FY04:

Ongoing,
to be completed
FY06

Reducing Persistent
Organic Pollutants

Industrial Pollution
Control

Completed

Strategic Environment
Assessment (D)

Research

FY03:

CCICED Forestry
and Grasslands
Task Force

Completed

Environmental
Protection-Post
WTO (A)

New Cost Model
for Environment

Completed
in FY04

Policy Note on
Environmental
Administration (A)

FY03:
Expanded;
completed
in FY05

Completed

Empowering Poor
Women in Western Areas

FY03:

Completed

Poverty Mapping

FY05:

Completed

FY04:
Ongoing, merged
with PA

FY04:

Status

Gender Assessment (D)

TA

Status

Core written output

CAS theme: Sustainable development

AAA theme

CASCR Attachment 2: Planned AAA and actual AAA deliveries (FY03-05) (continued)

Expanded;
completed
in FY05

Status

(continued on next page)

Valuation of
Environmental Health
Risks

FY05:

Addressing the
Environmental Effects
of WTO Accession

FY04:

Human Development
to Achieve a Well-off
Society

Reform of Social
Protection Mechanism

Labor Market Study

FY04:

Unplanned delivery

– 107 –

Infrastructure
and Urban
Development

AAA theme

Completed
in FY04

Completed
in FY04
Completed
in FY05
Completed
in FY04
Completed
in FY04

Housing Maintenance/
Operations Policy Note (A)

Urban Transport Policy
Note (A)

Consolidating
Commercialized Toll
Roads Policy Note (A)

Road Traffic Safety
Agenda Note (A)

Status

Urban Restructuring
Policy Note (A)

FY03:

Core written output

Completed

WBI-Environmental
Directors Training

FY03:

City Development
Strategy

FY04:

WBI/DL-Transparency
in Infrastructure
Concession

WBI/DL-Sustainable
Urban Development
and Management

Completed

Completed

Completed
WBI-Regulatory
Reform In China’s
Infrastructure
Sectors

FY03:

Replaced by Water
Pollution Prevention

Industrial Pollution
Prevention

WBI-Environmenta
Completed
Compliance/Enforcement

Completed

Clean Development
Mechanism

Research

Status

TA

CASCR Attachment 2: Planned AAA and actual AAA deliveries (FY03-05) (continued)

Completed

Status

Environmental
Management of SMEs,
Industrial Zones

Unplanned delivery

– 108 –

– 109 –

PRIVATE SECTOR DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY
Recent trends in Private Sector Development
1.
One of the important outcomes of market-oriented reforms in China over the past 25
years is the emergence of the private sector as the leading sector of the economy in terms of
its contribution to GDP and employment. The growth of the private sector and privatization
have transformed the structure of the Chinese economy. Private sector growth remains rapid,
with fixed asset investments by private enterprises expanding at about 50% per annum. Over
2000 to 2004, the number of Chinese private enterprises rose from about 1.76 million to 3.65
million, and today the the workforce employed in the domestic private sector is estimated to
exceed 50 million, of whom more than half are migrant workers that have left the rural areas
in search of better livelihoods in the urban areas. Privatization, which accelerated in the mid1990s, has also been a significant source of private sector growth. Over 1995 to 2005, more
than 50% of all industrial SOEs were privatized, and 26% merged or liquidated; as a result,
the number of industrial SOEs has declined from about 115,000 in 1996 to about 25,000
today, with about 60,000 privatized.
2.
The de novo private sector has also contributed to restructuring of the state-owned
sector. According to a survey by the All China Federation of Industry and Commerce (ACFIC),
about a quarter of the employees in China’s private enterprises are workers who have been
made redundant by the closure of failed SOEs. The ACFIC survey also found that about 6%
of private enterprises had merged with or acquired an SOE, while a further 10% were preparing to do so.
3.
The development of the private sector is uneven across regions. While the coastal
areas boast the most developed and sophisticated private sector, private sector development
is lagging in the western and northeast regions.
4.
There have been some important changes in the legal regime for private sector activities in the last two years. In March 2004 the constitution was revised to include the protection of private property, and in February 2005 the State Council offered substantive legal
parameters for the growth of China’s domestic private sector by issuing Certain Opinions on
Supporting and Guiding the Development of the Private Economy (the Opinion). Table 1
presents estimates of the composition of China’s GDP by ownership types for 1998 to 2003,
during which the share of the official private sector in GDP increased from 20% to 37%,
becoming the largest sector of the Chinese economy.
Critical Issues for Private Sector Development
5.
Based on consultations with
private sector representatives and GoC
officials, surveys of private entrepreneurs (by IFC, IBRD, Chinese organizations and third parties), public
media analysis, and policy documents,
a number of issues emerge as critical
for the development of the private sector in China at this stage. Some of

Composition of GDP by ownership type (%)

State-controlled firms
Collectives (incl. red hat firms)
Registered domestic private firms
Registered foreign firms
Registered private firms
Agriculture (almost all private)
Non-state

1998

2003

41
22
12
8
20
18
59

34
13
22
15
37
15
66

– 110 –
these issues are legacy challenges related to the ongoing transition from a centrally planned
to a market economy—these include, for example, access to market, access to finance, and
the role of the state in the economy (shifting from a direct participant to a regulator). A
second set of issues relate to the growing expectations of Chinese society vis-a-vis the private sector as the latter becomes the leading sector of the economy—these include a demand
for better standards in the area of product quality, corporate governance, social and environmental practices, and contributions to resolving social issues related, for instance, to environmental concerns and social inequality. A third set of issues relates to China’s integration into
the world economy.
6.
Improving the business environment and strengthening regulatory capacity:
Impediments to business that still exist in parts of China include burdensome business licensing procedures and land-use approval requirements; the maintenance of “restricted” sectors, for which the GoC requires a review of foreign investment proposals; high and often
discretionary administrative fees; excessive inspections; elevated transport and logistics costs
(often due to entry barriers); cumbersome customs clearance in in-land cities; inconsistencies between labor laws and implementation; weak and sometimes biased commercial dispute resolution mechanisms; and slow adjudication systems.
7.
Progress has been made in unifying the regulatory regime for enterprises by various
ownership types, but in many important areas such as access to markets, access to finance,
tax treatment and other preferential policies, private enterprises are still at a marked disadvantage when compared to foreign invested and state-owned enterprises (SOEs). Recent
policy documents, such as the Opinion, emphasize that the levying of unauthorized fees by
government agencies is prohibited and that private enterprises can refuse to pay charity contributions, or for services provided by government agencies that they have not requested. The
Opinion requires both central and local governments to improve their performance, publish
supervision regulations and properly regulate their supervision functions.
8.
New demands on the GoC’s regulatory capacity stem from the continuing liberalization of the economy. The opening of new sectors of the economy to foreign competition
requires the GoC to assume the role of a regulator enforcing a level playing field among
various players. In addition, liberalization of interest rates and the exchange rate regime as
well as the gradual opening of the capital account require the development of a regulatory
capacity that is commensurate with the needs of properly functioning financial markets.
9.
Access to markets: While the room for private economic activity has been continuously expanding, private enterprises still face many barriers. The presence of the private
sector is still uneven across the industry spectrum (see figure, next page). In general, large
state enterprises dominate upstream industries, while private enterprises tend to populate
downstream industries. In addition, industries are characterized by low industry concentration ratios.
10.
The GoC is now seeking to remove the obstacles private enterprises have faced. The
recent Opinion confirms that all sectors of the economy that are not restricted by law are
open to domestic private enterprises. Currently, there are few explicit restrictions on private
sector entry, although private enterprises often face internal administrative or economic barriers that effectively preclude or restrict them from entering certain industries. GoC policy is
that Chinese private enterprises should receive the same treatment as SOEs with respect to
investment verification, financing, financial and tax policies, land use, foreign trade, and
economic and technology cooperation. It also states that all sectors that are open to foreign

– 111 –
investors are also open to domestic
private enterprises.

Figure 9: Industry concentration and state share
of gross output (%)

11.
There are already encouragTextiles
ing signs that the domestic private secGarments
tor is obtaining greater market access.
Furniture
For example, the State Administration
Printing
for Industry and Commerce issued a
Plastics
notice on March 21, 2005, facilitating
Food
enterprise registration and administra- Pharmaceuticals
tion services for private enterprises.
Electronics
On April 13, 2005, meanwhile, the
Equipment
State Council issued several decisions
Steel
on Entry into the Cultural Sector of
Transport
Oil refining
Non-publicly Owned Capital to proChemical
fibres
vide clear rules regarding market acTobacco
cess for private enterprises. In the
Oil and gas
refined petroleum sector, private en0
20
40
60
80
100
terprises have been given market access to match that of foreign investors.
Industry concentration
State share in gross output
There have also been developments in
China’s civil aviation business. On
March 5, 2005, China’s first private airline company, Okay Airways Company, made its
maiden flight. In May 2005, two private companies—Yi Yang Group and Hui Run Investments—outbid China’s second largest carrier, Air China, for a 65% ownership stake in
Shenzhen Airlines.
12.
Access to finance and financial sector development: According to survey results, most small and medium-sized private enterprises complain that they have difficulty in obtaining bank loans because of the complex procedures involved, the requirements
for collateral, the unaffordable costs, and the stringent terms and conditions imposed by
banks. The lack of a credit rating system for private enterprises in China aggravates this
situation.
13.
Chinese firms have much less access to formal finance than do firms in any other
Asian country surveyed thus far. Approximately 29% of working capital for large Chinese
firms comes from bank loans, less than firms in Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines, Thailand, or Korea. The situation is even worse for SMEs. On average, only 12% of SME working
capital comes from bank loans; by comparison, 21% of SME capital in Malaysia comes from
loans, 24% in Indonesia, 28% in the Philippines, and 26% in Thailand and Korea. The lack of
formal finance among small firms becomes starkly worse as firm size decreases.
15.
The domestic private sector’s capacity to raise debt was restricted further in 2004,
when the GoC implemented a series of macroeconomic austerity measures to prevent overheating in certain industries. Banks were discouraged from making loans and the one-year
lending interest rate was increased by 0.3%. There exist few other viable means through
which private businesses in China are able to raise capital. For example, the stringent requirements, costs and delays involved in raising finance from domestic or overseas capital markets mean that such financing is out of reach of most private enterprises. As a result, such
businesses often resort to ‘grey market’ financing.

– 112 –
16.
The recent GoC Opinion address the difficulties Chinese private enterprises face in
obtaining financing. City, provincial and municipal governments with sufficient resources
are required to allocate funds for the development of the domestic private sector, while banks
are required to increase the ratio of commercial loans made to such enterprises. Importantly,
the policy also states that domestic private enterprises should be treated equally with regard
to stock market listings, an area where SOEs have traditionally been favored. In addition,
stock exchanges for small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) are to be developed and
qualified private enterprises encouraged to list overseas and issue bonds.
17.
Weaknesses in the financial sector represent the major threat to the sustainability of
China’s economic growth. The financial system in China is too reliant on banks, and nonbanking financial institutions are underdeveloped. State ownership reigns supreme. Reform
in the financial sector has generally lagged the overall pace of market reforms in China,
though there has been a marked increase in attention to financial sector reform in recent
years. In particular, the GoC has injected more than $250 billion to recapitalize the major
banks. The urban credit cooperative system has been reformed. A new regulatory framework
for the banking sector and the capital market has been established. Second-tier banks have
started to attract foreign strategic investors and recently three of the big four banks (accounting for almost half of all financial assets) have attracted strategic investors and are planning
to list on international exchanges. While foreign strategic investors will be allowed to hold
20–25%, another 20–25% would be internationally floated. Moreover, the regulators are
considering lifting the foreign investment limit. It is possible that,within two or three years,
several of the big SCBs will be 40–50%-owned by foreign investors. This would change the
underlying banking structure, especially in regard to corporate governance, management,
and, most importantly, change of ownership, which would gradually break the linkage between the banks and the GoC, especially the local branches of the big SCBs and their respective local governments.
18.
Upgrading corporate practices: To succeed in the long term, the domestic private
sector will have to improve the quality of its management and corporate governance. Many
medium- to large-sized Chinese private enterprises have failed to evolve from their start-up
structures or have adopted management structures that are similar to those of SOEs. In general, managers of private enterprises tend not to emphasize legal compliance, social responsibility or corporate governance issues. It is the GoC’s policy to encourage Chinese private
enterprises to grow “stronger and bigger”. Furthermore, private enterprises are encouraged
to develop into multinational companies.
19.
Fairness and distribution issues related to privatization have been attracting the most
public attention recently. The GoC and the general public are concerned that corruption and
an erosion of state assets have accompanied privatization and restructuring. In response to
rising social demand for fairness and transparency, the GoC has issued a number of regulations that deal in a sensible way with the major conflict of interest situations related to SOE
privatization and restructuring, although some of the measures tend to apply different standards of transparency and regulatory oversight to non-state investors. Thus in the current
environment, there is strong demand for model privatization transactions that set standards
for transparency and efficiency.
20.
New societal demands: Since the reform period started, China’s growth has been
accompanied by growing imbalances between rural and urban incomes, between coastal development and development in the other regions (the center, west and northeast), between
economic and social development, and between human development and its impacts on natu-

– 113 –
ral resources and the environment. Increasingly, the private sector is being expected to contribute to addressing these imbalances.
21.
Environmental sustainability and energy efficiency: In 2004, China accounted for
about half of global growth in metals demand and a third of global growth in oil demand.
Moreover, rapid economic growth in China has produced significant environmental damage.
Managing China’s growing resource demands and their environmental consequences is perhaps the greatest challenge that China faces today. The private sector is expected to contribute to addressing this challenge by helping to develop a circular economy through improving
overall efficiency, upgrading environmental practices, and investing in new environmentally
friendly technologies.
22.
Private participation in infrastructure. From 2002 China added about 20 million
people to its urban population each year, creating huge demand for infrastructure services
such as water supply, wastewater treatment, solid waste disposal, gas and electricity. The
private sector, often in partnership with public entities, is expected to play a bigger role in
providing these services.
23.
Narrowing regional differences. The growing income gap between the coastal areas
and the rest of China is creating social tensions. Private sector development in the west and
northeast is lagging development on the coast. The interior and the northeast have also attracted a disproportionately small portion of China’s FDI. The GoC and the private sector
need to work together to develop a conducive business environment that will stimulate private sector investments in these lagging regions.
24.
Integration in the world economy. As China has opened its economy to outside investment and influence, its growth has had a profound impact on global trade and investment. While China has become one of the largest recipients of FDI globally, it is also
increasing viewed as one of the most important sources of FDI. The GoC’s ‘go-global’ campaign indicates its support for this trend, but outward investors are hampered by administrative obstacles, information gaps, and their relative inexperience with overseas markets.
World Bank Group private sector development strategy
25.
Within the framework of the CPS, the World Bank Group’s private sector strategy
will support private sector development in China with an emphasis on alleviating the constraints discussed above. Private sector development is an area which requires close integration of IBRD, IFC, and MIGA activities around a common set of priorities, capitalizing on
the comparative strengths of each institution (see next page). As China continues to develop,
it is expected that the Bank’s Group’s exposure to China will remain stable or grow slowly
with its relative composition gradually shifting away from IBRD loans towards IFC investments and MIGA guarantees.
26.
Based on the preceding analysis and feedback from consultations with the GoC and
the private sector, the following areas of involvement have been identified:

•
•
•
•

Improving the business environment and strengthening regulatory capacity
Expanding access to markets
Upgrading corporate practices
Expanding access to finance and financial sector development

– 114 –

•
•
•

Enhancing environmental sustainability and energy efficiency
Promoting private participation in infrastructure
Addressing regional imbalances

27.
Planned activities in these areas are integral to the five pillars of the CPS. The first
two support pillar 5 of the CPS, improving public and market institutions. ‘Upgrading corpo-

The World Bank Group and private sector development
IBRD, IFC and MIGA will work together, capitalizing on their comparative strengths, to create
a favorable business environment for the private sector. While IBRD will focus on strengthening
the institutional capacity of state entities that deal with the private sector, IFC and MIGA will
focus on developing model private sector transactions with strong demonstration effects regarding corporate practices in the areas of corporate governance, environmental and social standards; they will also aim to broaden the impact of FDI
In particular, IBRD will use its international knowledge and experience to help the GoC to
complete the transition to a market economy, and develop and implement regulatory practices
and reform options in key areas of the business environment.
IFC will respond to the structural changes accompanying China’s transition, including the shift
of assets into the private sector, consolidation in key business sectors, the development of stronger financial institutions, and the adoption of international standards in corporate governance,
environmental and social activities. Its interventions will focus on completing standard-setting
model transactions for private sector investments, with a view to promoting innovation, creating
demonstration effects, and improving international competitiveness. As in the past, the size and
breadth of the IFC program will be a function of the level of development of the private sector in
the economy. When the private sector was small and informal, and the industrial and financial
sectors were dominated by SOEs and joint ventures with foreign private investors, IFC’s program consisted largely of industrial projects sponsored by foreign investors. The subsequent
emergence of the domestic private sector has given IFC new opportunities to broaden its program to include support for local financial institutions, indigenous industrial and infrastructure
enterprises, and SMEs. Now, the emergence of large indigenous private enterprises is further
expanding IFC’s opportunities to support China’s private sector development to include SOE
privatization and South-to-South investment by Chinese companies. In line with these trends,
most of IFC’s investments going forward are expected to be with indigenous private enterprises.
Moreover, IFC will provide more than money to private indigenous enterprises. These enterprises will also be seeking to improve their management and corporate governance practices,
attract and work with strategic partners, and upgrade their environmental and social standards.
To assist Chinese private enterprises in these areas, IFC interventions will include significant
TA, delivered in combination with financing or as self-standing products, mainly through IFC’s
PEP China.
MIGA’s guarantee activities will be directed towards infrastructure development through FDI in
the water and energy sectors, where MIGA has been active and where investors perceive significant non-commercial risk, especially when sub-national entities are involved. MIGA will also
work with IFC and China’s public and private sectors to draw FDI to underdeveloped regions of
the country, and to encourage outward investment by Chinese companies, through providing
PRI and building the capacity of Chinese financial institutions and investment intermediaries
that support such projects. MIGA’s Small Investment Program (SIP) will play an active role in
helping private enterprises attract foreign investment and go abroad and invest overseas.

– 115 –
rate practices’ maps into several of the CPS pillars, including pillar 1— integrating China
into the world economy; pillar 4—financing sustained and efficient growth; and pillar 5.
‘Access to finance and financial sector development’ is an integral part of pillar 4. ‘Environmental sustainability and energy efficiency’ is part of pillar 3—managing resource scarcity
and environmental challenges, while ‘private provision of infrastructure and addressing regional imbalances’ supports Pillar 2 of the CPS—reducing poverty, inequality, and social
exclusion.
28.
Improving the business environment and strengthening regulatory capacity. The Bank
Group will continue its analytical work in such areas as the investment climate, enterprise
and public sector governance. Bank Group work in these areas will seek to help the GoC to
complete the transition to a market economy, through redefining the role of government visà-vis the private sector; changing the corporate and incentive structure in GoC agencies and
SOEs; and beginning to address failures in in the national system for commercial dispute
resolution, which remains an impediment to inter-provincial trade and investment.
29.
The focus of investment climate work will be on the central and western provinces
and municipalities. Bank-FIAS enterprise surveys already completed in 23 large cities will
be extended to another 100, providing objective ratings of enterprise competitiveness and
governance, promoting government awareness of government impacts on the investment climate, and catalyzing internally-generated reforms to lower barriers and raise competitiveness. Generally speaking, the surveys will focus on identifying and addressing the many
impediments to business that still exist in parts of China. Complementing this work, IFC
together with MIGA and FIAS will help provinces in northeast, central and western China to
attract higher levels of FDI (currently most FDI is directed to China’s dynamic coastal
economy) by improving the investment climate and strengthening investment promotion capacity. MIGA will work with the Bank and IFC to extend its enterprise benchmarking activity beyond Sichuan province to new regions of the country to improve access to information
on sector-specific factor costs and conditions that is critical to investor decision-making. IFC
through PEP China will focus its business environment work on: (i) value-chain studies to
identify key constraints and develop assistance programs for select sub-sectors (starting with
logistics, tourism, and pork); and (ii) legal and regulatory reform in Sichuan and other Western provinces, in particular following up on previous diagnostic work undertaken by PEP
China and other parts of the WBG.
30.
The Bank Group will also help to strengthen the GoC’s regulatory capacity to respond to market liberalization and integration with the global economy. In support of China’s
efforts to balance domestic and international development, the Bank will help the GoC to
participate more fully in multilateral economic institutions, support and share experiences
with other developing countries, and reduce barriers to inward and outward trade and investment. The Group will continue its support to SAFE to improve the monitoring of capital
flows; to the central bank to analyze and improve the monetary transmission mechanism; to
the economic management authorities to develop better business-cycle monitoring mechanisms; and to the National Statistics Bureau to develop better macroeconomic statistics. Bank
Group AAA will also help China to clarify options for selectively lowering trade and investment barriers. This work will examine the rationale and possible roadmap for liberalizing the
capital account, adopting an anti-trust law, and implementing trade facilitation measures,
particularly with a South-South focus.
31.
Access to markets. With the continued liberalization of the Chinese economy, private enterprises see new opportunities to enter into sectors previously reserved for the state.

– 116 –
Recent policy changes encourage Chinese private enterprises to enter industries currently
monopolized by SOEs, such as the power, telecommunications, railway, petroleum, mineral
exploration and mineral exploitation industries. The opening-up of these industries, together
with the GoC’s encouragement of Chinese private participation in SOE reform, demonstrates
a GoC intention to abolish discrimination against the domestic private sector. While the entry
of private enterprises into these sectors is getting easier, difficulties remain, including high
entry barriers (the aviation industry, for example, requires huge initial capital investment);
the vested interests of local governments or government agencies in retaining monopolies;
and a sometimes hostile and suspicious attitude towards private enterprises (a legacy of the
centrally-planned economy).
32.
The Bank Group help private enterprises to enter new sectors of the economy. IBRD
will pursue this objective through providing TA to improve regulations and entry conditions
in sectors such as infrastructure. IFC will support investment by private companies in sectors
such as infrastructure; oil, gas and mining; and other heavy industry, as well as domestic
private sector investment in new and high-tech industries, modern service industries, modern
agricultural industry, and industries that require employment of a large workforce, such as
processing trade, community services, processing of agricultural products and other labor
intensive industries. Health and education are also sectors where private participation is expanding, and the Bank Group will support innovation in private, vocational, and tertiary
education through IFC (and possibly IBRD) investments. In addition, MIGA guarantees can
help private enterprises to attract foreign investments in these new industries where political
risks may exist. IFC and MIGA will continue to work together with GoC partners (MOF,
MOFCOM, Sinosure, China Exim Bank, and others) to support Chinese companies in their
efforts to expand to overseas markets.
33.
Upgrading corporate practices. IBRD and IFC will support improvements in corporate governance practices through investments (IFC) and by helping to create the knowledge and institutional capacity for: (i) strengthening listing requirements on the Shanghai
and Shenzhen stock exchanges; (ii) and assisting large enterprises in adopting and implementing codes of corporate social responsibility. Through its investments and associated
AAA, IFC will help investee companies and regulators to set appropriate standards for corporate governance. In addition, the Bank Group will help the GoC to improve the internal
governance and external regulation of financial institutions (banks, collective investments,
insurance companies and pension funds), as misuse of the funds aggregated in these entities
could lead to serious disruptions in the financial sector.
34.
IFC will promote sustainability by helping clients become role models that demonstrate the business case for good environmental, social, and governance practices. At the
same time, efforts will be made through PEP China to widen the impact by raising awareness, building capacity, and creating incentives in the business community at large through:

•

Linkages: Outgrower development and traceability in agri-business and forestry
projects; community development around large industrial, infrastructure, and extractive projects.

•

Corporate governance: Assistance to improve corporate governance practices of
IFCs’ portfolio companies, carry out assessments of new clients, and identify business leads through training of candidates for listing. The program will also generally build awareness and skills through the development of a Corporate Governance
Toolkit and Resource Center.

– 117 –

•

Environment and social: Supporting energy efficiency investments; developing
opportunities for private participation in environmental industries; building capacity of local E&S consultants; organizing workshops on best practices in key industries; helping the Sichuan Environmental Protection Bureau improve SME compliance.

35.
A major focus of IFC’s work (through PEP China) will be to alleviate the shortage of
management skills for the emerging private sector in China, in particular in less-developed
regions. This draws on three existing IFC product lines:

•

Business Edge management training: Following the successful introduction in
Chengdu in 2003, coverage will be extended to secondary cities in Sichuan and
other Western provinces. In parallel, focus will shift to providing customized, incompany training to achieve commercial viability, and to linking into broader IFC
activities like training SME borrowers of client banks.

•

Global Business School Network: Assist in the roll-out of GBSN for initially two
pilot schools in the interior region.

•

SME Toolkit: Assist with localization and dissemination of the Toolkit, with one or
several partner banks and/or business service providers.

36.
Access to finance and financial sector development: Given the critical importance of financial sector reform and development for the sustainability of China’s growth,
support to financial sector reform will be an important area of focus for the World Bank
Group. IBRD’s intervention will be mainly through AAA work, while IFC’s instruments will
combine investments in private financial institutions with TA to improve corporate governance and risk management practices.
37.
The IFC’s objectives in the financial sector are to create best practice models among
smaller private banks, catalyze private sector entry into sectors previously held by SOEs
(insurance, funds management, investment banks), and create new institutions to deepen the
financial sector (housing finance, bond markets, credit bureaus, securitization, markets for
distressed assets). In pursuing these objectives, IFC has made several innovative and pioneering investments in city commercial banks, national banks, insurance companies, and
other non-bank financial institutions. As a result, IFC is playing a prominent role in the
development of China’s non-state banking sector.
38.
Going forward, IFC is entering the second phase of its China financial market strategy. The approach is to engage more intensively with investee banks to help them develop
best practices. This is a resource-intensive activity requiring significant portfolio resources
and TA content. IFC’s strategy is to consolidate investments in the banking sector by supporting existing clients through both TA and participation in rights issues on a selective
basis.
39.
To execute the strategy, IFC has increased financial market portfolio resources in the
field. IFC has also improved TA interventions by stepping up the Technical Assistance Program to client institutions. So far, $2.5 million in TA has been delivered to portfolio companies and seven projects for $1.6 million are under implementation. IFC has also focused on
clarifying the role of foreign strategic investors in improving the practices in Chinese investee
banks. Action plans for IFC’s portfolio banks have been developed with clear targets on
expected progress in the areas of risk management and corporate governance.

– 118 –
40.
State bank reform remains a key focus of IBRD’s AAA, which aims to help the GoC
to differentiate clearly between commercial and development banks, clarify the mandates of
development banks and ensure operational consistency with them, and commercialize the
SCBs through introducing new ownership and governance arrangements, divesting non-core
assets, and restructuring troubled debt.
41.
A major focus of Bank Group activities in the financial markets will be to help
create new non-banking financial institutions to provide alternative sources of financing and
reduce the dependence on the banking system. IBRD will help expand access to selected
financial services by supporting a project piloting commercially-sustainable lending to SMEs
by formal financial institutions as well as a project launching a secondary mortgage market
to promote the availability of and control the risks in housing finance, while IFC will help to
restructure the rural finance system through pilot transactions involving the rural credit cooperatives. The Bank will also seek to help the Postal Savings and Remittances Bureau to
pilot lending to rural small businesses and households.
42.
In parallel, the Bank Group is helping the GoC to develop sound capital markets,
especially basic equity security, fixed-income (debt) security and derivatives markets. In
particular, the Bank is assisting in the revision of the Securities Law, the drafting of a Futures
Law, and the articulation of an appropriate legal framework (including regulatory institutions) for securitization. Through AAA work the Bank Group will help China develop its
bond market.
43.
In a landmark event for China’s capital market development, IFC in October 2005
issued a first renminbi bond by a non-Chinese issuer. This has helped establish a benchmark
and will stimulate the development of the bond market in China. IFC has also invested in a
credit rating agency, investment banks, and insurance companies and will continue to explore
opportunities to provide funding and TA to development of capital market institutions in China.
44.
PEP China will continue AAA to help strengthen the enabling legal, regulatory and
supervisory environment to promote access and efficient intermediation with the focus on
lagging regions. The objective is to alleviate the severe shortage of capital for private companies, especially SMEs, through four components:

•

TA to partner financial institutions: Comprehensive assistance for partner financial institutions in Sichuan and other western provinces; training IFC client banks
in core topics like risk management and SME lending; and general coordination of
IFC TA to financial institutions in China.

•

Bank training: Structured training program for the city commercial banking sector, in partnership with the China Banking Regulatory Commission. The program
will cover core banking topics and will be delivered through the bankers’ association and local training providers, strengthening their capacity.

•

Non-bank financial intermediaries: Development of viable microfinance initiatives, assistance to IFC investments in leasing, and development of other financial
instruments (trade finance, securitization, etc.)

•

Financial sector policies: Extension of the current work on the secured transactions framework, credit reporting, and leasing law.

45.
Environmental sustainability and energy efficiency: In the energy sector, the Bank
Group will continue to support GoC efforts to optimize China’s energy use. Bank assistance

– 119 –
is expected to involve strengthening the commercial management of energy companies, e.g.
by helping the companies to divest non-core assets and the GoC to reduce monopolistic
practices and clarify the regulatory frameworks. The Bank will also help the GoC to raise
energy efficiency standards where appropriate as well as to develop and introduce pricing
structures that more adequately reflect the opportunity costs of resource, environmental and
ecological externalities (particularly for petroleum, natural gas, and electricity). In addition,
the Bank will continue to manage a large, highly-visible and highly-successful GEF-funded
program supporting the development and scaling-up of clean energy and renewable energy
technologies, including clean coal technologies, flue gas desulpherization, as well as wind
and photovoltaic energy markets.
46.
Complementing this work, IFC AAA and investments will help to expand the use of
renewable energy, develop technologies for clean energy thus reducing China’s reliance on
coal and support the development of a carbon credit market to reduce carbon emissions. IFC
investment in forestry will help to develop models for containing land degradation and the
negative externalities that result.
47.
Bank Group activities will help to demonstrate the potential use of coal-based methane and carbon finance transactions; pilot phaseout projects for PCBs, chlordane and mirex.
Extensive AAA will cover such topics as forestry, carbon finance, recycling, ‘green’ national
accounting, and climate change. In addition, the Bank Group will help the GoC to promote
sustainable cultural and eco-tourism by supporting the development of demonstration sites
and increasing the number of listed heritage sites with environmental protection measures in
place.
48.
Private participation in infrastructure: Working increasingly with secondary cities, which have trouble attracting interest from foreign investors, IBRD financing and MIGAguaranteed FDI will finance urban wastewater treatment plants as well as the associated
collection systems, while providing advice and TA on utility corporatization, wastewater
tariff levels and administration to ensure that the relevant institutions can operate on a sustainable basis.
49.
IFC investment activities will support (i) emerging domestic private companies in
power generation; (ii) private investment in water projects; (iii) private participation in gas
distribution and (iv) (potentially) other infrastructure such as airlines/airports. IFC will continue to explore public private partnership opportunities in infrastructure through the municipal fund and in cooperation with IBRD and MIGA.
50.
Addressing regional imbalances: A FIAS study of the environment for FDI, focused initially on Sichuan and Liaoning, as well as IFC/MIGA/Bank support for local investment authorities in Sichuan and Heilongjiang will aim to develop initiatives for strengthening
the business environment in China’s lagging regions. MIGA and FIAS will continue their
efforts with the Ministry of Commerce to develop a workable implementation plan for a
national investment promotion strategy, that will help to better distribute new investment,
both foreign and domestic to the lagging regions.
51.
The Bank Group will place a greater emphasis on institutional aspects of agricultural productivity, such as strengthening supply chains and piloting public-private partnerships in the provision of agricultural support services, in light of the GoC’s interest in
transferring support services as much as possible from the state to the private sector. Support
will include AAA and TA, including investment climate assessment work conducted by IBRD,
IFC, and MIGA; IBRD lending in support of integrated rural development, including farm-

– 120 –
ing and livestock husbandry; and IFC support for private sector investment in agro-processing. IFC’s work on linkages in agribusiness and resource-based investments is also expected
to enhance benefits to local communities.
Program and resource implications
52.
Given the growing demand for its services IFC is planning a significant expansion
of its program. New commitments are expected to reach $700 million per annum over the
CAS period, with IFC expanding its geographic coverage and increasing its resources in the
field so as to maximize development impact. This is made imperative by the complexity of
regulations as well as language and distance barriers. IFC’s Beijing office expanded significantly in the last two years, and additional staff will be hired during the CPS period to focus
on infrastructure, agribusiness, and environmental/energy related projects and initiatives.
There has also been a recent resurgence in interest for MIGA coverage, particularly for
projects that involve sub-sovereign risk and in areas and regions that are government priorities, e.g. in infrastructure, water in particular.

– 121 –

MILLENNIUM DEVELOPMENT GOALS
1.
China is on track nationally to achieve many of the MDGs for 2015, but national
figures mask large and growing development gaps between the relatively-rich coastal zones
and poorer central and western regions.
Goal 1:

Eradicate extreme poverty and hunger. National poverty reduction goals
have been met. China leads East Asia, though the rate of reduction varies
between rural areas (4.8%) and urban areas (15.6%).

Goal 2:

Universal primary education. China is ahead of target; junior secondary
enrollment has also increased (from 67% in 1990 to 93.6% in 2004).

Goal 3:

Promote gender equality and empower women. China is slightly offtrack on the girl/boy ratio for primary and secondary school, but several
provinces with large minority populations have fallen behind and there are
concerns over the situation of rural women and increasing margin of newborn boys over girls.

Goal 4:

Reduce child mortality. China has made progress, but the 2% rate of reduction achieved in 1990s (using UN data) is lower than 4.3% rate required
to achieve the target by 2015, and gaps between rich and poor provinces
appear to be widening.

Goal 5:

Improve maternal health. China has made good progress, as maternal
mortality dropped from 89 per 100,000 live births in 1990 to 50 in 2001,
but the 4.8% rate of reduction is lower than the 5.4% rate required to achieve
the target by 2015. There are also large contrasts between coastal and western provinces, where women, especially in remote areas, have limited access to emergency obstetric care.

Goal 6:

Combat HIV/AIDS, malaria, and other diseases. China has made good
progress toward containing malaria, but it lags its neighbors in reducing
tuberculosis prevalence (scaling-up and improving the detection rate of an
effective DOTS program remains challenging). China is also taking steps
to reduce HIV prevalence, which is low by international standards but spreading rapidly since 1990s.

Goal 7:

Ensure environmental sustainability. The GoC is committed to reversing
the degradation of land, water, air, and globally significant biodiversity. It
is working hard to achieve challenging targets for access to safe drinking
water and rural sanitation.

Goal 8:

Develop a global partnership for development. The GoC has expressed
strong commitment and undertaken decisive action to integrate into the
global economic system.

– 122 –

CONSULTATIONS ON COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY
1.
Preparation of the new CPS was informed by two sets of formal consultations, a
Client Survey, and ongoing dialogue between the Bank and Chinese government counterparts. From July 11 to 22, 2005, Bank Group staff consulted with GoC officials from the
MoF, NDRC, PBoC, 23 other central ministries and agencies, 26 provinces and 8 municipalities concerning the next CPS for China. From January 9 to13, 2006, a follow-up mission held
consultations with GoC officials from MoF, NDRC, other central ministries and agencies
and four provinces as well as with representatives of donors, academia, the private sector,
and NGOs and CSOs. In addition, the Bank conducted a Client Survey between July and
September 2005, involving over 200 stakeholders of the WBG in China. The new CPS also
benefited from ongoing dialogue between Chinese officials and Bank representatives through
reciprocal visits of high-level officials, meetings between the Bank and GoC counterparts to
discuss the lending and AAA programs, as well as ongoing partnerships on specific lending
projects and analytical work.
2.
During both consultations, participants repeatedly noted that the GoC-Bank Group
partnership remains strong, welcomed the shift from an ‘assistance’ to a ‘partnership’ strategy, and said that the draft CPS is well aligned with the priorities of the 11th FYP. Most
comments consisted in suggestions for placing greater emphasis on specific areas of assistance or results within the framework of CPS objectives.
July 2005 Consultation
3.
During the first round of consultations, GoC participants commented on the overall
impact of past Bank assistance as well as strategic priorities for the upcoming 11th FYP and
future Bank assistance; they also discussed issues affecting the Bank’s ongoing program and
offered suggestions for improvement. In their remarks, GoC officials noted that the GoC’s
overall objectives for the 11th FYP include promoting scientific development and building a
harmonious society, with a strong emphasis on achieving the five balances,1 and they said
that the GoC’s emerging development priorities for the next five years are well captured in
the CPS’s thematic clusters.
4.
Within the proposed CPS themes, GoC officials articulated various areas of emphasis, including: presenting a balanced view of China in the world, supporting South-South
learning, and promoting Chinese investment abroad; coordinating fiscal and monetary policy,
boosting domestic consumption, reforming SOEs and revitalizing industry (especially in the
northeast), and developing the services sector; reducing poverty and income disparities (particularly in the west and among ethnic minorities) through improving public health and education, raising rural incomes, facilitating migration out of rural areas (especially through
vocational training), and managing growing urbanization; addressing resource constraints,
especially through achieving water savings, improving wastewater treatment and solid waste
disposal, and developing clean and renewable energy; and protecting the environment, including China’s biodiversity. Several central ministries and agencies noted that the Bank
would face a large challenge in addressing some of these issues (e.g. transportation management, water resource management, and environmental protection), due to the dispersion of
government responsibility in these areas.
5.
GoC participants agreed that the Bank has made many contributions to China’s development since engaging in the early 1980s. Broadly speaking, these include:

– 123 –

•

Filling a (local) financing gap, enabling provinces and municipalities to address
key infrastructure bottlenecks and implement their overall development plans, and
also improving investment structures (e.g. by leveraging private or grant funds);

•

Upgrading technologies, particularly in areas such as road transportation, waterway navigation, power generation, water supply, wastewater treatment, irrigation,
integrated rural development, and environmental and social safeguards;

•

Introducing institutional reform and innovation, including, e.g., market-based
pricing, distance learning, river basin management, water user associations, professional corporate governance, modern financing models, and participatory approaches
to poverty reduction;

•

Building human resource capacity, e.g. in procurement, disbursement, project
management and supervision; and

•

Supporting policy reform, e.g., in the power sector and in poverty reduction programs, both through financing and through an extensive body of high-quality AAA,
including recently the investment climate surveys and various reports supporting
preparation of the 11th FYP.

In general, GoC counterparts valued the Bank’s assistance in introducing international experience and expertise into their work. They provided many examples where this
had been successful and noted that the need for such assistance remained strong even for
jurisdictions where the need for financial assistance is now weak (e.g. in Shanghai). Some
participants also observed that a few Bank projects (e.g. projects assisting unrestructured
industries or providing direct financial support to rural households) had failed to achieve
their objectives; Bank staff agreed.

6.

7.
In discussing their experiences in collaborating with the WBG, GoC participants
observed that Bank processes, particularly related to lending, could be improved through
undertaking several measures, including:

•

Reducing project preparation times (Bank staff and GoC officials noted recent
improvements, e.g. in Ningbo and Shaanxi, and also that progress requires joint
GoC-WBG efforts, as delays also occur on the GoC side);

•

Reducing loans charges, which can be burdensome (Bank staff observed that
China’s per capita GDP is now much higher than the threshold for IDA eligibility,
that IBRD spreads are already low, and that the front end fee was being reduced to
0.25% in FY06);

•

Simplifying safeguards procedures, e.g. by adopting GoC procedures (Bank staff
noted that simplification is being sought, e.g. by adopting a ‘gap approach’ for
completing environmental impact assessments (EIAs) and resettlement action plans
(RAPs) and also by reducing translation requirements, but that variability in GoC
resettlement standards jurisdiction-by-jurisdiction as well as lower GoC EIA standards for assessing project alternatives, consultations, and disclosure makes harmonization difficult);

•

Accelerating procurement clearances (Bank staff noted that the average elapsed
time for Beijing-based staff to review procurement through national competitive
bidding (NCB) is less than three days, but that procurement through international

– 124 –
competitive bidding (ICB) involves Washington-based staff and so usually takes a
longer time);

•

Reducing counterpart funding requirements (Bank staff noted that a recent change
in Bank policy allows zero counterpart funding in certain cases, and that MoF and
NDRC in light of that policy had agreed to consider lower counterpart funding for
social sector and poverty reduction projects in poor provinces on a case-by-case
basis); and

•

Ensuring continuity in Bank staff working on a particular project, delegating
more responsibility to Bank staff located in Beijing, and making greater use of
Chinese consultants (the Bank is committed to making greater efforts in these areas).

9.
Almost all GoC speakers requested expanded WBG assistance over the next five
years, not only in IBRD, IFC and MIGA investments, but also and particularly in innovation
and knowledge transfer. In this context, they urged that WBG activities play a demonstration
role in implementing forward-looking ideas and practices that align with but extend beyond
GoC initiatives. Several participants noted that the Bank can do better in disseminating the
results of its AAA and the lessons learned in its projects, to ensure that China captures all of
the potential benefits of this work. Some participants urged the Bank to increase its focus on
macro-level challenges rather than micro-project implementation. Many provinces and municipalities and several central ministries requested WBG assistance in articulating their development plans and strategies (as was done recently in Beijing and Hebei), both to engage
decision-makers in taking a long-term view and as a framework for selecting Bank projects.
While most agreed with the WBG strategy to place greater emphasis on lagging regions,
including the revitalization of industry in the northeast, western and central provinces stressed
the importance of coastal linkages, and more developed coastal provinces and municipalities
noted their ability to play a demonstration role in China’s continuing development.
10.
Throughout the consultations, GoC participants stressed several strategic shifts which
they hope to see implemented during the five-year CPS period. Given that the private sector
will be the major driver of future growth, they urged that the Bank seek to leverage its financing to attract more private sector financing and free up public resources for other purposes.
They welcomed the growing consensus within MoF and the affected line ministries that it is
sensible to keep IBRD engaged in public health, education, and poverty reduction projects,
especially in poorer provinces that are already facing repayment difficulties (e.g. Gansu,
Yunnan), by blending public funds with IBRD resources to reduce the effective interest rate
charged to project beneficiaries. Many western and central provinces expressed a desire to
see an appropriate mechanism articulated and implemented as rapidly as possible in support,
e.g., of a demonstration vocational education project. Several more-developed provinces and
municipalities also expressed an interest in new Bank lending instruments, such as programmatic loans and sector-wide approaches (SWAps), which they believe would give them greater
autonomy in project implementation (in this context, it was noted several times that domestic
financial institutions such as CDB already lend on this more flexible basis). Bank staff replied that such approaches, which the Bank uses widely in other countries, are being piloted
in China in the ongoing Shanghai Adjustable Program Loan and the proposed Fujian road
transportation SWAp, and that, if successful, MoF and NDRC might approve more widespread use. GoC participants also expressed interest in working with the Bank to develop and
test an integrated multisectoral approach to addressing some of China’s most common and
pressing development problems in a few geographical areas.

– 125 –
January 2006 Consultation
11.
During the second round of consultations, representatives of the GoC, donors,
adademia, NGOs and CSOs provided oral and written comments in response to drafts of the
CPS and results matrix that had been provided to participants in advance. In general, participants said that the draft CPS adequately reflected comments provided in the July consultation and reaffirmed that the draft CPS objectives and proposed results are aligned with the
priorities of the 11th FYP. Participants generally agreed with the analysis of China’s development challenges in the draft CPS introduction and context, while recommending a number of
revisions to specific CPS data, language, and planned WBG interventions (which have been
incorporated, where agreed, into the CPS document). Participants also requested that the
WBG further emphasize certain areas of interest. In particular:
12.
Private sector consultation participants urged the WBG, and in particular IFC, to
emphasize private sector development more strongly and to expand assistance to the private
sector through a combination of direct loan and equity investments as well as through TA to
improve the investment climate and access to financial services. They noted that the GoC has
increasingly opened markets for domestic private investment (the State Council’s issuance of
Article 36 in 2005 was cited as an important development) and that the contribution of China’s
private sector to the economy, to exports, and to foreign investment is growing rapidly. They
also asked that the CPS acknowledge the substantial criticism that private entrepreneurs still
confront in China, emphasize the role of the private sector in addressing development challenges such as rural employment, and provide greater support to policy changes that would
create a level playing field for the private sector. Participants recommended that the CPS
should emphasize:

•

Scaling up IFC’s lending and TA related to the private sector (such as expanding IFC’s Project Development Facility to more locations across China), deepening
involvement in locally-based research tied to the policy process, and focusing more
on sectors rather than on particular companies. Participants supported IFC’s plan to
increase its investments from $400 million to $700 million per year, while noting
that the quality of IFC’s assistance, which helps to raise standards in the companies
in which it invests as well as to improve the investment climate, is as important as
the quantity of IFC lending;

•

IFC and WBG positioning as pioneers that leverage additional financing, introduce new technologies and management methodologies, and promote better understanding among Chinese companies of how to work with foreign investors; and

•

Further research to support policy reforms (e.g., removing price controls in the
health sector) together with model investments and TA that support key sectors and
demonstrate and build capacity for improved management approaches, systems,
and financing mechanisms (participants noted, inter alia, the development of the
bond market and cited IFC-ADB issuance of the first “Panda bond” as a good
step).

13.
NGO participants generally supported the CPS themes and directions while urging
the Bank to increase focus on priority areas and to further build cooperation with NGOs.
Participants urged greater WBG emphasis on:

•

Poverty reduction including: (i) capacity building and housing for the disabled;
(ii) attention to poverty challenges faced by ethnic minorities (including the preser-

– 126 –
vation of cultural heritage), (iii) gender equity (with increased focus on underlying
causes of gender inequality through, e.g., scaled-up approaches to labor mobility);
(iv) controlling the spread of HIV/AIDS; and (v) sustainable use of natural resources
(through green accounting, greater public participation in formulation of natural
resource projects, including sustainable models that promote conservation and alternative approaches and respect ethnic minorities);

•

Improved governance, including changes in government role and functions, public sector unit (PSU) reform, and institutionalization of social and environmental
impact assessments prior to adoption of policy reforms; and

•

Deepened WBG support to NGOs involved in poverty reduction through facilitating greater GoC understanding of and support for NGOs (e.g., through expanded
procurement of NGO services), direct WBG cooperation such as the China Development Marketplace, and promotion of a greater role for NGOs in the provision of
public goods.

14.
Representatives of academic and research organizations also stated that the CPS
is broadly in line with China’s needs and situation and that the WBG was correctly positioning itself in China’s development. They urged the Bank to increase its emphasis on innovation to adequately reflect the changing nature of China’s development challenges (e.g., the
changing character of poverty, increasing concern with trade disputes); strengthen relations
with senior GoC officials; and make better use of non-government Chinese researchers and
scholars. They suggested that the CPS emphasize:

•

Public sector budget and related performance management systems, with greater
WBG emphasis on strengthening local government implementation of central government policy reforms (e.g., reducing emphasis on capital investments and promoting balanced urbanization through providing housing and services to migrants);

•

Inequalities in public service provision (e.g., through helping government in provision of safe water, education, ICT, rural health insurance coverage, rural infrastructure and services to promote agricultural productivity); and

•

Financial sector reform (including banking sector reforms to address non-performing loans, develop the bond market, and build the capacity of local financial
institutions to expand access to credit).

15.
As a follow-up to July 2005 CPS consultations, provincial representatives from
Guangdong, Henan, Jilin, and Ningxia provided feedback on the draft CPS and matrix. Representatives said that provincial comments from earlier consultations had been well captured
in the draft CPS. Participants recommended greater CPS emphasis on:

•

Regional and provincial development planning, with articulation of how the WBG
will assist selected regions and provinces to conduct comprehensive analyses of
social and economic development options and undertake development planning;
and

•

Differing regional and provincial priorities, noting how various CPS themes and
sub-themes had particular relevance to their provinces and regions (e.g., for the
western provinces, natural resource and environment; for the northeast provinces,
private sector and economic revitalization; for the central provinces, agricultural
industrialization and the role of towns in absorbing surplus labor; and for the coastal

– 127 –
provinces, vocational education, energy, debt management and support for remaining poor communities).
16.
Representatives of line ministries and government agencies, building on their
participation in the July 2005 consultations, also said that the CPS is well aligned with the
new FYP while suggesting a number of revisions, including:

•

Articulation of a more comprehensive approach to addressing water scarcity,
regional development, and labor migration issues;

•

An expanded description of specific poverty reduction challenges faced by ethnic minorities (public health, including access, HIV/AIDS, and drug trafficking;
linkages between poverty and environment degradation; and the protection of traditional cultures);

•

A deeper discussion of the environment, including incorporation of FYP targets
for energy efficiency; more emphasis on linkages between the rural economy and
environmental protection; and capacity-building for environmental management,
especially early warning and response systems for environmental disasters;

•

Additional discussions on tax reform assistance; payment and incentive mechanisms for teachers; and increasing differentiation of public service (and specifically PSU) delivery challenges; and

•

The articulation of new models and approaches to improve partnership (e.g.,
sustained research over a long period of time, linkage of poverty reduction with
community development and environment initiatives).

17.
At a wrap-up meeting, MoF representatives said that they were pleased with the
format, layout, and general directions of the draft CPS as well as the consultation process
through which it had been developed. They reiterated the GoC’s commitment to further
strengthening relations with the WBG, following President Wolfowitz’ October 2005 visit,
and stressed the importance of the CPS as a roadmap for Bank engagement over the next five
years. They said that the CPS is very much in line with the priorities of the new 11th FYP and
China’s internal and external circumstances, is based on sound scientific and technical analysis, and that the five CPS themes are very relevant to China’s development needs. In addition,
MoF recommended four areas as policy priorities for future WBG assistance:

•

Supporting regionally coordinated development by helping regions craft differentiated strategies, reflecting their unique features and development stages, and
bringing cross-country experience in regional development;

•

Supporting rural development, noting that development of rural areas has become a major GoC priority, not only to help rural areas catch up but also to promote
their long-term stability, and that the WBG was well-positioned to help formulate a
new comprehensive approach (rather than a ring-fenced project-based approach) to
improving agriculture and rural development;

•

Supporting innovation and ideas, particularly with a view to helping local governments and enterprises to improve their “self-innovation” abilities and build systems and institutions that encourage innovation as a means to enhancing reform
and competitiveness; and

– 128 –

•

Strengthening the accountability and performance evaluation of government
officials, with an emphasis on preventative rather than ex-post measures.

2005 Client Survey
18.
In mid 2005, 531 stakeholders of the World Bank in China were invited to provide
their opinions on the Bank’s assistance to the country by participating in a client survey. The
227 who responded (43% of those invited) were drawn from among employees of ministries,
ministerial departments, or implementation agencies; local governments; bilateral or multilateral agencies; private sector organizations; NGOs and CSOs; the media, and members of
academia and research institutes. Findings from the survey are particularly interesting when
compared to the results of the 2002 survey, as priorities and views of the Bank have changed
in a number of key areas.

•

In 2002, education, social protection, corruption, government effectiveness and jobs
were of critical importance. In 2005, education remains on top of the minds of
stakeholders, while social protection, jobs and corruption seem to have diminished
as development priorities and challenges for China. Instead, inequality, environmental degradation (and limited natural resources) have climbed into the top ranks—
though the latter is partly due to a very strong consensus among bilateral and multilateral respondents.

•

In 2005, the Bank was most valued first for its knowledge and second for its financial resources (while the central government has ample resources, local governments that work with the Bank generally face resource gaps). By contrast, in 2002,
a plurality of stakeholders said that the ‘transfer of new project concepts’ was the
Bank’s most important contribution to China, followed closely by knowledge, with
financial resources less of a concern.

•

While the 2005 survey shows that there has been improvement in the speed at which
the Bank disburses funds, a large plurality reported that the number and complexity
of the procedures involved in obtaining World Bank financing was the greatest
obstacle to the Bank playing a significant role in China’s development over the
medium term.

•

The 2005 survey suggests that the quality of the Bank’s expertise regarding the
challenges that China faces may need to improve.

•

The survey findings suggest that stakeholders are comfortable with Bank involvement in a range of areas of concern, including governance, education, social protection, and environmental protection, but they also indicate a reduction in ratings
on governance and environmental protection since the 2002 survey. While the rating for the Bank’s work in education did not decrease significantly, it was one of the
lower ratings for the Bank—a serious concern considering how high a priority education is currently in China.

•

While ratings are still extremely high related to the Bank’s relevance and whether
its programs are realistic and sustainable, these numbers have also decreased significantly since the 2002 survey. It is unclear why these perceptions have changed.
Some areas to explore (detailed above) include: the Bank’s expertise, the complexity of its financing, its work in priority areas such as governance and education.

– 129 –
Perhaps this result may reflect the less positive views of relationships, e.g., whether
stakeholders like to work with Bank staff, whether the Bank treats stakeholders
with respect, whether the Bank and GoC work as equal partners, and whether the
Bank maintains consistent messages.

•

A large majority of survey participants uses the internet to gather knowledge and
information about the Bank (in preference to a PIC), indicating that the internet
presents a huge opportunity for the Bank to reach stakeholders in China and that
the Bank’s website needs to continue to be useful and easy to navigate. Survey
findings also indicate clearly that more translation will sustain reading audiences in
China.

19.
Because there is frequently a correlation between familiarity and positive views of
the Bank, it is important to note that while the overall familiarity rating remained about the
same when results from the two years are contrasted, within particular stakeholder groups
there were interesting changes. The media, academia and the private sector are more familiar
with the Bank than in 2002; this may reflect work that the Bank has done to reach out to these
stakeholder groups. By contrast, though, employees of ministries were less familiar than in
2002.

– 130 –
China at a glance
China

East Asia
& Pacific

1,296.5
1,500
1,938

1,855
1,080
2,011

2,655
1,480
3,934

Average annual growth, 1998–04
Population (%)
Labor force (%)

0.7
1.1

1.0
1.1

0.9
1.2

Most recent estimate
(latest year available, 1998–04)
Poverty (% of population below national poverty line)
Urban population (% of total population)
Life expectancy at birth (years)
Infant mortality (per 1,000 live births)
Child malnutrition (% of children under 5)
Access to an improved water source (% of population)
Illiteracy (% of population age 15+)
Gross primary enrollment (% of school-age population)
Male

5
42
71
28
10
77
12
115
115

—
40
69
32
15
76
10
111
112

—
50
69
32
11
81
10
112
113

115

111

111

POVERTY and SOCIAL
2004
Population, mid-year (millions)
GNI per capita (Atlas method, US$)
GNI (Atlas method, US$ billions)

Female

Lowermiddle-income

KEY ECONOMIC RATIOS
and LONG-TERM TRENDS

1984

1994

2003

2004

GDP (US$ billions)
Gro ss domestic investment/GDP
Exports of goods and services/GDP
Gro ss do mestic savings/GDP
Gro ss natio nal savings/GDP
Current account balance/GDP
Interest payments/GDP
Total debt/GDP
Total debt service/exports
Present value of debt/GDP
Present value of debt/exports

256.1
34.4
11.3
34.5
35.3
0.7
0.2
4.7
7.3
—
—

559.2
40.0
24.6
44.4
44.5
1.9
0.7
18.0
7.7
—
—

1,641.0
38.0
29.6
50.3
50.9
2.8
0.3
12.7
7.2
13.3
36.4

1,931.7
39.3
34.0
52.8
53.8
3.6
0.2
12.9
3.5
—
—

1984–94

1994–04

2003

2004

Figure 1: Development diamond*
Life expectancy

Gross
primary
enrollment

GNI
per capita

Access to improved water source
China

Lower-middle-income group

Figure 2: Economic ratios*
Trade

Domestic
savings

Investment

Indebtedness
China

Lower-middle-income group

Figure 3: Growth of investment
and GDP (%)

2004–08
20

(average annual growth)
GDP
GDP per capita
Exports o f goods and services

9.5
8.0
8.1

8.8
7.9
17.3

10.0
9.3
26.8

10.1
9.4
28.4

8.8
8.1
14.0

15
10
5

STRUCTURE of the ECONOMY

1984

1994

2003

2004
0

(% of GDP)
Agriculture
Industry
M anufacturing
Services
Private consumption
General government consumption

32.0
43.3
35.5
24.7
51.4
14.2

19.7
46.6
33.6
33.8
45.8
12.4

12.6
46.0
32.8
41.5
49.0
10.9

13.1
46.2
33.1
40.7
47.9
10.2

Imports of goods and services

11.4

22.7

27.4

31.4

1984–94

1994–04

2003

2004

4.0
12.3
11.7
10.0
8.1
9.4
9.1
9.9

3.3
10.0
10.1
9.7
7.9
8.6
8.4
15.5

2.5
12.7
14.9
9.5
6.5
4.8
18.8
24.8

6.3
11.1
13.2
10.0
7.5
6.8
14.1
22.5

(average annual growth)
Agriculture
Industry
M anufacturing
Services
Private consumption
General government consumption
Gross domestic investment
Imports of goods and services

99

00

01

02

GDI

03

04

GDP

Figure 4: Growth of exports and
imports (%)
40
30
20
10

* The diamonds show four key indicators in the country (in bold) compared with its income-group average. If data
are missing, the diamond will be incomplete.

0
99

00

01

Exports

02

03

04

Imports

(continued on next page)

– 131 –
China at a glance (continued)
PRICES and GOVERNMENT
FINANCE
Domestic prices
(% change)
Consumer prices
Implicit GDP deflator

1984

1994

2003

2004

8.3
4.9

24.1
19.9

1.2
2.1

3.9
6.5

Figure 5: Inflation (%)
10

5

Government finance
(% of GDP, includes current grants)
Current revenue
Current budget balance
Overall surplus/deficit

22.9
—
–0.8

11.9
1.0
–1.2

18.7
1.3
–2.8

19.4
1.9
–1.7

TRADE

1984

1994

2003

2004

0

–5

(US$ millions)
Total exports (fob)
Food
Fuel
Manufactures
Total imports (cif)
Food
Fuel and energy
Capital goods
Export price index (2000=100)
Import price index (2000=100)
Terms of trade (2000=100)

99

00

01

02

GDP Deflator

26,139
3,232
6,027
14,205
27,410
2,331
139
7,245

121,006
10,015
4,069
101,298
115,614
3,137
4,035
51,467

438,228
17,533
11,110
403,560
412,760
5,959
29,214
192,869

593,369
18,870
14,476
552,818
561,423
9,156
48,003
252,624

50
74
68

103
96
107

96
102
95

102
112
91

03

04

CPI

Figure 6: Export and import levels
(US$ mill.)
800,000
600,000
400,000
200,000

BALANCE of PAYMENTS

1984

1994

2003

2004
0

(US$ millions)
Exports of goods and services
Imports of goods and services
Resource balance

98

29,039
29,183
–144

137,378
127,210
10,168

485,003
448,924
36,079

655,827
606,543
49,284

Net income
Net current transfers

1,534
442

–1,036
1,337

–7,838
17,634

–3,523
22,898

Current account balance

1,832

10,469

45,875

68,659

Financing items (net)
Changes in net reserves

–2,363
531

20,058
–30,527

71,148
–117,023

137,705
–206,364

Memo:
Reserves including gold (US$ millions)
Conversion rate (DEC, local/US$)

99

00

01

02

Exports

03

04

Imports

Figure 7: Current account balance
to GDP (%)
5
4

—
2.8

57,770
8.6

416,208
8.3

622,945
8.3

3
2

EXTERNAL DEBT and
RESOURCE FLOWS

1984

1994

2003

2004

(US$ millions)
Total debt outstanding and disbursed
IBRD
IDA

12,082
73
181

100,457
5,933
6,097

193,567
10,657
10,314

177,709
11,035
10,670

2,285
6
4

11,135
679
50

37,073
2,690
219

24,498
1,124
262

112
831
240
1,419

337
3,117
6,691
33,787

—
–3,092
–1,778
55,507

—
–2,485
–13,373
60,906

0

3,915

7,729

10,923

959
197
0
197
9
187

4,035
2,060
323
1,737
406
1,331

1,250
1,616
2,459
–843
450
–1,293

1,250
1,246
999
247
387
–140

Total debt service
IBRD
IDA
Composition of net resource flows
Official grants
Official creditors
Private creditors
Foreign direct investment
(net inflows)
Portfolio equity (net inflows)
World Bank program
Commitments
Disbursements
Principal repayments
Net flows
Interest payments
Net transfers

1
0
98

99

00

01

02

03

04

Figure 8: Composition of 2004 debt
(US$ mill.)
D: 4,962

B: 10,670
A: 11,035

G: 72,967
E: 22,303

F: 55,772
A - IBRD
E - Bilateral

B - IDA

C - IMF

F - Private

D - Other multilateral

G - Short-term

– 132 –
China Environment

Figure 9: Savings

11th Five-year Plan for Environmental Protection prepared in 2006

60

East Asia
Lower
& Pacific middle income

Sustainability
Population below $2 a day, percent
Population below $1 a day, percent
Adjusted net savings (% GNI)

2001
2001
2003

46.7
16.6
34.4

47.4
14.9
27.9

13.2

Natural resources
Agriculture and rural space
Land area (1,000 sq. km)
Agricultural land (% land area)
Irrigated land (% of crop land)
Fertilizer consumption (100 grams/ ha arable land)
Population density, rural (people/ sq. km arable land)

2002
2002
2002
2002
2002

9,327
60
35.7
2,777
559

15,886
50
—
2,297
565

56,103
35
20.8
1,170
497

2003
2003
…2003
…2003

2,183

5,103

8,397

18.7
78

8.2
81

5.9
74

2002
2002
2002
2002
2002
2002

4.6
960
17.7
1
987
77.5

4.6
904
19.6
–4
891
66.8

4.1
1,227
12.3
–22
1,289
42.8

Water
Renewable internal freshwater res. per capita (m3)
Freshwater withdrawal
total (% of internal resources)
agriculture (% of total freshwater withdrawal)
Energy
GDP per unit of energy use (2000 PPP$/kg oil equiv)
Energy use per capita (kg oil equiv)
Energy from biomass products and waste (% of total)
Energy imports, net (% of energy use)
Electric power consumption per capita (kWh)
Share of electricity generated by coal (%)
Forests
Forest area (% total land area)
Annual deforestation (% change, 1990–2000)
Biodiversity
Mammal species, total known
Mammal species, threatened
Bird species, total breeding
Bird species, threatened
Protected Areas: IUCN cat. Ia, Ib, II, % of land area
Protected Areas: IUCN cat. III, IV, V, % of land area
Protected Areas: IUCN cat. VI, % of land area
Protected Areas: IUCN cat. I-VI, % of land area

% of GNI

GROUP DATA
COUNTRY
Year
DATA

40

20

0

1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001
Adjusted savings: excluding particulate emission
damage (% of GNI)
Gross national savings, including net current
transfers (% of GNI)

Figure 10: Land use (% of total) in 2000
1% Cropland

15 % Arable land

43%
Pasture
17%
Forest

24% Other

Figure 11: Annual deforestation
(% of change) in 2000

-0.083638
0.16212

-0.89064

2000
1990–2000

17.5
–1.2

2002
2002
2002
2002
2004
2004
2004
2004

394
79
618
74
—
11.3
0.5
11.8

27.0
0.2

36.2
0.1

-1

-0.8

-0.6

China

-0.4

-0.2

0

0.2

0.4

Lower Middle
Income

East Asia
and Pacific

Figure 12: Electricity production from
different sources (% of total)
90
75

9.2

7.7

60
45

Pollution
Health and people
Under-5 mortality rate (per 1,000 live births)

30
15

2003

37

41

39

1997
Coal

Emissions
CO2 emissions per unit of GDP (kg/2000 PPP$ GDP)
CO2 emissions per capita (mt)
PM10 (pop., weighted average - mg/m3)
Emissions of organic water pollutants, kg/day/worker

2000
2000
1999
2001

0.6
2.2
87
0.14

0.5
2.1
69

Water and sanitation
Access to improved water source (% total pop)
rural (% rural pop)
urban (% urban pop)
Access to sanitation (% total pop)
rural (% rural pop)
urban (% urban pop)

2002
2002
2002
2002
2002
2002

77
68
92
44
29
69

78
69
92
49
35
71

0.6
2.9
49

1998

Hydroelectric

1999

2000

Natural gas

2001

Oil

Nuclear

Figure 13: Source of Industry emissions
of water pollution in 1995
1% Wood

1% Clay

8% Other

82
71
94
60
41
80

28% Food

12% Paper

14%
Chemical
21% Metal
15% Textile

Data from national sources
Total wastewater discharged
2003
35.7
(tons per capita)
COD discharged (kg per capita)
2003
10.4
Ammonia Nitrogen discharged
2003
1.0
(kg per capita)
Wastewater treated
2003
25.8
(% of municipal wastewater)
Industrial solid waste generated
(tons per capita)
2003
0.8
Environmental expenditure
2003
1.39%
(as % of GDP)
Tenth five year plan for environmental protectioni prepared in 2001

46%

54%

38%
31%

62%
69%

Figure 14: CO2 emissions
(metric tons per capita)
4
3
2
1
0
1960

1970
China

1980
Lower Middle Income

1990

2000
East Asia
and Pacific

– 133 –
CAS Annex B2
Selected Indicators* of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
As of January 1, 2006
Indicator

2003

2004

2005

2006

Portfolio Assessment
Number of Projects Under Implementationa
Average Implementation Period (years)b
Percent of Problem Projects by Numbera, c
Percent of Problem Projects by Amounta, c
Percent of Projects at Risk by Numbera, d
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amounta, d
Disbursement Ratio (%)e

93
5.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
25.5

87
4.9
3.4
2.7
3.4
2.7
22.7

85
5.0
2.4
3.6
2.4
3.6
21.6

75
4.5
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
11.1

Portfolio Management
CPPR during the year (yes/no)
Supervision Resources (total US$)
Average Supervision (US$/project)

Memorandum Item
Proj Eval by OED by Number
Proj Eval by OED by Amt (US$ millions)
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Number
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt

Since FY 80

Last Five FYs

186
25,390.0
9.2
8.4

53
8,634.2
9.4
7.8

a

As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY).

b

Average age of projects in the Bank’s country portfolio.

c

Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) and/or implementation progress (IP).

d

As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.

e

Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank’s portfolio at the beginning of the year:
Investment projects only.

* All indicators are for projects active in the Portfolio, with the exception of Disbursement Ratio, which includes all active
projects as well as projects which exited during the fiscal year.

– 134 –
CAS Annex B3, IBRD (as of April 2006)
Pillar

Project
Name

Amt
($m)

Description

Strategic
rewards

Impl.
risks

FY06 Program
2,3,4 Shanghai Urban APL 2*
180
2,3
Inland Waterways 5*
100
2,3
Integrated Agriculture Irrigation 3*
200
2,3
Fuzhou Urban Transport*
100
2,3
Renewable Energy Scale-up 2*
87
2
Heilongjiang Dairy*
100
all
Economic Reform Implementation*
20
2,3
Henan Towns Water
150
2,3
Liaoning Urban Infrastructure 1 (transport) 218
2,3
Jiangxi Highway 3
200
2,3
Changjiang/Pearl River Watershed Rehab. 100
Total 1,455

Metro water supply, waste disposal; innovative financing
Han waterway upgrade; Xiangfan hydropower
Increased water, agriculture productivity in low yield areas
Road and public transport access to Nantai island
Renewable (wind and hydroelectric) power supply
Improved dairy productivity, sustainable herd management
TA to GoC agencies
Water supply, wastewater treatment in 45 towns
Urban transport improvements in second-tier cities
117km Ruijin-Ganzhou mountain highway, local roads
Land and water resource management in river basins

H
H
H
M
H
M
H
H
H
M
H

M
L
M
M
M
M
M
M
M
L
M

FY07 Program
2,3
National Railway 3
200
2,3
Sichuan Urban Development 2
180
3
Guangxi Integrated Forestry
100
2,3
Fujian Transport SWAp
320
2,3
Shaanxi Highway 3
300
2,3
Western Rural Water
25
2,3
Shandong Urban Environment 2
150
2,3
Guangdong Pearl River Delta (Foshan)
100
4
Micro and Small Enterprises
100
Total 1475

Guizhou, Yunnan railway upgrades
Infrastructure expansion in second-tier cities
Improved forest resource management
Longyan highway, rural roads; program approach
103km Ankang-Tiejiangya mountain highway
Improved rural water supply, hygiene, in 2 poor provinces
Water supply, wastewater treatment in second-tier cities
Water supply, waste treatment/disposal, pollution control
Commercially-sustained formal bank lending to SMEs

M
H
M
H
M
H
H
H
H

L
H
M
M
L
M
L
M
M

Standby
2,3
Liaoning Cities Urban Infrastructure 2
200
3
Shandong Flue Gas Desulfurization
60
2,3
Eco-Farming
120
Total 380

Water supply, wastewater treatment in second-tier cities
SO2 emissions reduction in city heat, thermal power sector
Renewable energy, improved agriculture productivity

H
H
H

M
M
M

FY08 Program
2
Rural Health
50
3
Huai River Basin
150
2
Gansu Cultural Heritage
40
2,3
Xi’an Urban Transport
150
2
Jilin Food Safety
100
2,3
Guiyang Urban-Rural Highway
100
3
National Railway 4
300
2,3
Anhui Provincial Highway Network
200
2,3
Guizhou Cultural Heritage
60
2,3
Yunnan Urban Environment
150
3
Hubei Han River Environment
100
3
Shanxi Coal-bed Methane Development
90
Total 1490

Rural health insurance expansion; better spending
River basin flood and waterlogging control, management
Heritage asset protection, sustainable tourism development
City (incl. public) transport upgrade, management
Improved capacity to produce safe cost-competitive food
Upgrade Youzhajie-Xiaobi road and 500km rural roads
Wuhan-Beijing electrified railway upgrade
Upgrad Anhui highways and connected rural roads
Heritage asset protection, sustainable tourism development
Water pollution control in Kunming, Dali, Lijiang, Wenshen
Han river basin water resource planning, management
Pilot use of coal bed methane as cleaner coal substitute

H
H
H
H
M
H
M
M
H
H
H
H

H
M
M
L
M
M
L
L
M
M
M
M

City transport, wastewater treatment, upgrades
Labor migration facilitation
Onlending for firm-level energy conservation projects

H
H
H

L
H
H

Reduced land salinity and enhanced dairy production
Enhanced livestock production
Upgrade Ningxia-Gansu expressway, management
Water supply, solid waste disposal
Flood, water pollution control; heritage management
Water supply, wastewater infra. in second-tier cities
Water resource management

M
M
M
H
H
H
H

M
M
L
M
M
M
M

Standby
2,3
Taiyuan Urban Transport
2
Migrant Skills and Employment
3,4
Energy Efficiency and Development

150
50
200
Total 400

Program for FY09 and beyond
2,3
Shanxi Saline Land Improvement
2,3
Henan Yellow River Eco-Livestock Prod.
2,3
Ningxia Highway
2,3,4 Shanghai APL 3
3
Anhui Bengbu Flood Control
3
Jiangsu Regional Development
3
Western Chongqing Watershed Man.

90
80
250
200
100
150
100

(continued on next page)

– 135 –
CAS Annex B3, IBRD (as of April 2006) (continued)
Pillar
3
3
2,3
2,3
3
2,3
2,3
3
2

Project
Name

Amt
($m)

Guangdong Pearl River Delta (Shenzhen) 200
Liaoning Urban Infrastructure 3 (energy)
200
Forestry Development
100
Poverty 5
100
Qinghai Xining Urban Flood Control
100
Hubei Yiba Highway
150
Jiangxi Inland Waterways
100
Inner Mongolia Renewable Energy
30
Vocational Education
60
Total 2,010

Strategic
rewards

Description
Wastewater treatment, water pollution control
Heating and gas improvements in second-tier cities
Sustainable timber production
County-level poverty reduction in 4 provinces
Build flood control, discharge channels; wetlands
Build 174km expressway
Build Ganjiang Shihutang navigation and electricity hub
Develop 37mw of biomass power resources
Focus provinces of Guangdong, Shandong, Liaoning

H
H
M
H
H
M
H
H
H

Impl.
risks
M
M
M
M
M
L
L
M
H

Notes:* denotes projects approved by the Board. Projects for FY07 and beyond subject to confirmation in annual lending program discussions;
Energy Efficiency as well as last seven projects on list subject to GoC State Council approval.

CAS Annex B3 (IFC and MIGA)
IFC and MIGA Program, FY 2003–2006

IFC approvals (US$m)

2003

2004

2005

2006

102.60

428.31

355.10

540.0*

9
12
0
30

3
6

Sector (%)
Agriculture and For
Chemicals
Collective Investme
Education Services
Finance & Insurance
Food & Beverages
Health Care
Industrial & Consum
Information
Nonmetallic Mineral
Plastics & Rubber
Primary Metals
Professional, Scien
Pulp & Paper
Textiles, Apparel &
Transportation and
Utilities
Wholesale and Retai
Total

100

Investment instrument (%)
Loans
Equity
Quasi-Equity
Other
Total

26
62
12
1
100

MIGA guarantees (US$m)

0.0

*IFC 2006 approvals estimated

2

43
15
17
3

3
30
9

6

9

1
2
10

5
2
9
50

12
1
17

10

15
2
100

14
5
6
11
2
99

101

52
45
2

40
33
16

84
6
9

100

89

99

77.1

6.1

40.0

29

Balance of Payments (US$ millions)
Exports (GNFS)b
Merchandise FOB
Imports (GNFS)b
Merchandise FOB
Resource balance
Net current transfers
Current account balance
Net private foreign direct investment
Long-term loans (net)
Other capital (net, incl.
errors & ommissions)
Change in reservesd

Memorandum items
Gross domestic product
(US$ million at current prices)
GNI per capita (US$, Atlas method)
Real annual growth rates
(%, 1990 prices)
Gross domestic product at
market prices
Gross Domestic Income
Real annual per capita growth rates
(%, 1990 prices)
Gross domestic product at
market prices
Total consumption
Private consumption

National accounts (as % of GDP)
Gross domestic producta
Agriculture
Industry
Services
Total Consumption
Gross domestic fixed investment
Government investment
Private investment
Exports (GNFS)b
Imports (GNFS)
Gross domestic savings
Gross national savingsc

Indicator

8.4
7.4
7.4

7.5
7.2
6.3

–75507

9.5

8.3

–47447

9.1

8.3

365395
325651
328013
281484
37383
12984
35422
46790
–8331
1627

1100

1000

299409
266075
271325
232058
28084
8492
17401
37356
–7868
558

1453824

100.0
13.5
44.8
41.7
58.0
34.8
3.4
31.4
25.1
22.6
42.0
41.9

Actual
2002

1324816

100.0
14.1
45.2
40.7
60.0
33.6
3.2
30.4
22.6
20.5
40.0
39.2

2001

CAS Annex B6: Key Economic Indicators

–117023

485003
438270
448924
393618
36079
17634
45875
47229
–52065
75984

9.3
6.1
6.5

8.6

10.0

1270

1640969

100.0
12.6
46.0
41.5
55.0
37.8
3.8
34.0
29.6
27.4
45.0
45.6

2003

–206364

655827
593393
606543
534410
49284
22898
68659
53131
5316
79257

9.4
6.5
7.5

8.2

10.1

1500

1937963

100.0
13.1
46.2
40.7
53.0
39.0
3.4
35.6
34.0
31.4
47.0
48.0

2004

–204381

833698
762015
731359
633843
102339
22131
129138
50000
6000
19244

9.0
6.8
7.3

9.8

9.9

1730

2258741

100.0
12.5
47.3
40.3
52.0
39.0
2.2
36.8
36.3
31.9
48.0
49.2

Estimate
2005

–225836

981050
897231
877925
733818
103125
20000
148836
50000
5000
22000

8.8
7.0
7.6

9.0

9.2

1940

2669135

100.0
11.9
47.0
41.1
52.0
39.9
2.1
37.8
36.8
32.9
48.0
49.7

2006

–211137

1084817
988929
989623
813184
95194
20000
143137
50000
2500
15500

7.8
7.3
7.8

6.5

8.5

2240

3033877

100.0
11.4
46.9
41.7
52.0
39.3
2.0
37.3
35.8
32.6
48.0
49.6

2007

–146732

1213311
1103614
1185199
940991
28112
20000
86732
50000
2500
7500

6.8
7.7
8.0

7.3

7.5

2510

3371578

100.0
11.1
46.9
42.0
52.0
38.7
2.0
36.7
36.0
35.2
48.0
49.8

Projected
2008

49364

1495410
1353757
1593540
1289448
–98131
15000
–81364
52000
2500
–22500

6.3
7.7
8.0

7.1

7.0

3080

4001763

102.0
10.6
46.5
42.9
54.0
38.1
2.0
36.1
37.4
39.8
48.0
48.4

2010

(continued on next page)

–32410

1341074
1230061
1371696
1107122
–30622
15000
–4090
51500
2500
–17500

6.3
7.7
8.0

5.9

7.0

2930

3673181

101.0
10.8
46.7
42.4
53.0
38.2
2.0
36.2
36.5
37.3
48.0
48.8

2009

– 136 –

15.9
15.1
0.8
3.7
0.0

15.1
14.3
0.8
3.6
0.0

101.3
92.1
110.0
121.4
-0.8
0.6

107.4
97.1
110.6
123.4
0.7
2.1

153.7
16.9

29.7
27.8

9.3
10.8

144.4
17.6

2.6

2.1

1.2
2.6

106.0
101.0
105.0
114.3

162.9
19.6

1.2
3.6
0.0

16.2
15.0

28.6
27.5

2.2

a. GDP at market prices
b. "GNFS" denotes "goods and nonfactor services."
c. Includes net unrequited transfers excluding official capital grants.
d. Includes use of IMF resources.
e. Consolidated central government.
f. "LCU" denotes "local currency units." An increase in US$/LCU denotes appreciation.

Price indices( YR90 =100)
Merchandise export price index
Merchandise import price index
Merchandise terms of trade index
Real exchange rate (US$/LCU)f
Real interest rates
Consumer price index (% change)
GDP deflator (% change)

Monetary indicators
M2/GDP
Growth of M2 (%)

Memorandum items
Resource balance (% of GDP)
Real annual growth rates
( YR90 prices)
Merchandise exports (FOB)
Merchandise imports (CIF)
Public finance (as % of GDP
at market prices)e
Current revenues
Current expenditures
Current account surplus (+)
or deficit (-)
Capital expenditure
Foreign financing

CAS Annex B6: Key Economic Indicators (continued)

3.9
6.9

111.7
111.4
100.2
112.3

158.4
14.5

1.7
3.3
0.4

16.6
15.0

28.6
23.3

2.5

1.8
5.9

113.9
113.8
100.1
—

162.2
16.8

1.9
3.1
0.2

17.5
15.6

25.9
15.1

4.5

1.8
3.1

116.6
116.9
99.8
—

166.1
15.0

1.7
2.9
0.2

17.5
15.8

15.0
12.7

3.9

1.6
2.0

116.9
122.2
95.6
—

172.6
15.0

2.0
3.1
0.2

18.0
16.0

10.0
6.0

3.1

2.6
1.3

119.3
125.3
95.3
—

182.4
15.0

2.0
3.0
0.1

18.5
16.5

9.3
12.9

0.8

1.4
0.8

121.8
129.3
94.2
—

194.5
16.0

1.7
2.9
0.1

18.9
17.2

9.2
14.0

-0.8

1.7
0.8

124.4
133.4
93.2
—

207.5
17.0

1.5
2.8
0.0

19.0
17.5

7.8
12.9

–2.5

– 137 –

287
251
87

–1861
24538
58.3
14.0
7.7
16.0
12.1
23.3
0.5
11660
8654
244
140
113

–3148
27092
48.9
12.2
9.1
20.7
8.7
19.6
0.4
11217
8771
256
109
80

196
314

19.7
39.0
0.5
10781
10314

40.3
12.7
7.2
—

–4637
37179

208666

2003

149

326
452

12.6
28.7
0.2
11103
10670

36.8
12.8
3.5
—

7986
23657

248934

91

466
534

10.0
17.2
0.2
11210
10046

32.6
12.4
3.0
—

1907
25825

281045

Estimate
2004
2005

135

688
610

10.0
18.1
0.1
11420
9840

13.9
5.5
1.6
—

–15461
16738

146544

2006

a. Includes public and publicly guaranteed debt, private nonguaranteed, use of IMF credits and net short-term capital.
b. "XGS" denotes exports of goods and services, including workers' remittances.
c. Preferred creditors are defined as IBRD, IDA, regional multilateral development banks, IMF, and Bank for International Settlements.
d. Includes present value of guarantees.
e. Includes equity and quasi-equity types of both loan and equity instruments.

22.9
32.8
0.8
11374
9423

48.3
12.8
8.1
16.1

–5657
31086

186372

184830

145729

Total debt outstanding and
disbursed (TDO) (US$m)a
Net disbursements (US$m)a
Total debt service (TDS) (US$m)
Debt and debt service indicators (%)
TDO/XGSb
TDO/GDP
TDS/XGS
Concessional/TDO
IBRD exposure indicators (%)
IBRD DS/public DS
Preferred creditor DS/public
IBRD DS/XGS
IBRD TDO (US$m)d
IDA TDO (US$m)d
IFC (US$m)
Loans
Equity and quasi-equity/c
MIGA
MIGA guarantees (US$m)

Actual
2001
2002

2000

Indicator

CAS Annex B7: Key Exposure Indicators

—

900
660

—
—
0.1
11674
9514

11.3
4.4
—
—

–14036
—

132508

Projected
2007

—

1100
720

—
—
0.1
11960
9256

9.1
3.6
—
—

–11085
—

121422

2008

—

1350
790

12326
8975

7.9
3.1
—
—

–7093
—

114327

2009

—

1500
850

12683
8668

6.8
2.7
—

–4763
—

109564

2010

– 138 –

– 139 –
CAS Annex B8 (IFC) for China
Statement of IFC's Held and Disbursed Portfolio (US$m)
As of November 30, 2005
Held
FY Approval

Company

2002
2003
2005
2003
2006
2005

ASIMCO
Anjia
BCCB
BCIB
BUFH
Babei
Babei Necktie
Bank of Shanghai
Bank of Shanghai
Bank of Shanghai
BioChina
CDH China Fund
CDH China II
CSMC
CT Holdings
CUNA Mutual
Changyu Group
Chengdu Huarong
China Green Ener
China II
China Re Life
China Walden Mgt
Chinasoft
Colony China
Colony China GP
Conch
Darong
Deqingyuan
Dynamic Fund
Fang Xin SHMT
Fang Xin Limited
Fang Xin SHDX
Fang Xin SZFX
Fenglin
Five Star
GDIH
Great Infotech
HiSoft Tech
IB
Jiangxi Chenming
Maanshan Carbon
Maanshan Carbon
Minsheng
Minsheng Bank
Minsheng Bank
NCCB
Nanjing Kumho
Nanjing Kumho
New China Life
New Hope
Newbridge Inv.
North Andre
Orient Finance
PSAM
RAK China
SAC

1999
2000
2002
2005
2002
2005
2003
2005
2004
2005
1998
2004
2004
2004
1994
2006
2004
2004
2006
2002
2006
1994
2005
2005
2005
2005
2004
2005
2006
2003
2005
2004
2004
2001
2005
2005
2001
2005
200
1996
2004
2001
2005
1995
2005
1997
2003
2006

Loan

Disbursed
Equity
Quasi

Equity

Quasi

Partic

Loan

Partic

0
0
0
0
8.03
0
11
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

10
0.57
59.2
0
0
5
0
21.76
3.84
24.67
3
2.22
18
7.25

0
0
0
11.88
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0
0
0
6
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0
8.03
0
8.94
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

10
0.57
59.03
0
0
5
0
21.76
3.84
24.67
0.15
0
3.29
7.25

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0
0
0
4.88
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

0
0
0
4.48
20
28
0
0
0
0
0
80.42
10
0
0
7.2
0
1.8
1.2
19
0
50.17
0
0
0
50
6.75
11
15.75
0
0
0
0
34
0
0
0
15
0
0
13
3

0
11.47
18.09
3.2
0
0
0.27
0.01
0
16.07
0.84
0
1.5
2.82
5.56
0
4.67
0
0
0
0
0
1.73
4
52.18
12.9
2
1
0
23.5
2.8
26.58
3.81
2.23
5.83
0
0.22
0
0
1.98
0
1.6

40
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
15
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
6
7
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
45
0
0
2.86
0
0
0

0
0
0
4.69
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
8
0
0
4.8
0
1.2
0.8
14
0
0
0
0
0
40
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
3.57
0
0
0

0
0
0
4.48
11.5
0
0
0
0
0
0
80.42
6.67
0
0
7.2
0
0.6
1.2
12.45
0
50.17
0
0
0
40
6.75
5
0
0
0
0
0
34
0
0
0
0
0
0
10
0

0
0.94
18.07
3.2
0
0
0.27
0.01
0
4.68
0.22
0
1.5
0
3.9
0
4.67
0
0
0
0
0
1.03
3
52.18
12.9
2
1
0
23.5
2.79
26.46
3.81
2.23
5.83
0
0.22
0
0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
6
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
2.86
0
0
0

0
0
0
4.69
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
5.33
0
0
1.42
0
0.12
0.24
11.62
0
0
0
0
0
20
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
3.57
0
0
0

(continued on next page)

– 140 –
CAS Annex B8 (IFC) for China (continued)
Statement of IFC's Held and Disbursed Portfolio (US$m)
As of November 30, 2005
Held
FY Approval

Company

Loan

Equity

2003
2000
2004
2004
1998
2006
1999
2002
2005
2006
2006

SAIC
SEAF SSIF
SHCT
SIBFI
Shanghai Krupp
Shanshui Group
Shanxi
Sino Gold
Stora Enso
TBK
VeriSilicon
Wanjie High-Tech
Wumart
XACB
Xinao Gas
Zhengye-ADC
Zhong Chen

12
0
40
0
22.75
0
12.61
0
50
4
0
12.19
0
0
25
15
0

Total Portfolio:

583.35

Approvals Pending Commitment

Company

2002
2002
2004
2004
2004
2002
2004
2005
2002
2003
2006

IEC
SML
NCFL
SIBFI
CCB-MS NPL
Zhong Chen
China Green
MS Shipping
Sino Mining
Peak Pacific 2
Shanshui Group

2004
2003
2004
2003
2002

Total Pending Commitment:

Disbursed
Equity
Quasi

Quasi

Partic

Loan

0
3.86
0
0.07
0
5.5
0
2.4
0
0
1
0
3.24
20.34
10
0
5

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

0
0
30
0
47.24
0
0
0
25
0
0
0
0
0
0
7
0

12
0
30.86
0
22.75
0
12.61
0
0
0
0
12.19
0
0
25
11.59
0

0
2.17
0
0.07
0
5.5
0
2.4
0
0
1
0
3.24
3.25
10
0
5

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

0
0
23.14
0
47.24
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
5.41
0

413.78

127.74

192.3

414.41

342.6

8.86

127.66

Quasi

Partic

Loan

Equity

0
0
0
0.26
0
0
0
0
5
0
0

0
1
0
0
3
0
0
5
0
10
0

5
0
17.88
0
0
0
10
0
0
0
2.2

Partic
0
0
0
0
0
32
0
0
5
0
0

5.26

19

35.08

37

– 141 –
Annex B8: MIGA's Portfolio
As of December 31, 2005; US$m
As of end of fiscal year

FY01

FY02

FY03

FY04

FY05

Sectoral Distribution
Finance
Infrastructure
Mining
Oil and Gas
Agribusiness/Manufacturing/
Services/Tourism

0.0
70.4
0.0
0.0
42.8
113.2

0.0
50.9
0.0
0.0
36.3
87.2

0.0
46.3
0.0
0.0
33.2
79.5

0.0
123.4
0.0
0.0
25.3
148.7

0.0
77.1
0.0
0.0
13.5
90.6

79.2

54.9

50.3

56.4

15.9

Expropriation
War and Civil Disturbance
Breach of Contract

113.1
91.4
0.0

87.2
65.6
0.0

148.7
64.1
0.0

148.7
64.1
0.0

90.6
20.6
0.0

MIGA's Gross Exposure in China
% Share of MIGA's Gross Exposure
MIGA Net Exposure in China
% Share of MIGA's Net Exposure
Guarantees Issued (US$m)

113.1
2.2%
80.0
2.5%
0

87.2
1.7%
57.9
1.8%
0

79.5
1.6%
51.5
1.6%
0

148.7
2.9%
109.4
3.4%
77.1

90.6
1.8%
77.5
2.5%
6.1

MIGA's Risk Profile
Transfer Restriction

– 142 –
CAS Annex B8
Operations Portfolio (IBRD/IDA and Grants)
As of January 5, 2006
Closed Projects
IBRD/IDA*
Total Disbursed (Active)
of which has been repaid
Total Disbursed (Closed)
of which has been repaid
Total Disbursed (Active + Closed)
of which has been repaid
Total Undisbursed (Active)
Total Undisbursed (Closed)
Total Undisbursed (Active + Closed)

200
4,521.45
204.12
27,430.02
11,644.15
31,951.47
11,848.27
4,889.00
53.78
4,942.79

PSR rating
Project ID Project Name

DO

IP

FY

IBRD

IDA

P051856
P069862
P003594
P075035
P051888
P046564
P071094

S
S
MS
S
S
S
S

S
S
S
S
S
S
S

1999
2005
1996
2004
1999
1999
2005

27.4
100
60

5.61

S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
#
S
S
S
#
MS
S
MS
S
S
S
S
S
S
MS
S
S
S
S
S

S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
MS
#
S
S
S
#
S
S
MS
S
S
S
S
S
S
MS
S
S
S
S
S

1998
1998
1995
2003
2003
1998
2004
2001
2003
2004
1999
1998
2000
2004
2005
2000
2006
1999
2006
2004
2000
2004
2005
1999
2005
2002
2004
1998
2004
2000
1998
1999
2000
2000

100

P003539
P039838
P003409
P076714
P067337
P003619
P075602
P056199
P058847
P077137
P049665
P003566
P042109
P073002
P081161
P049436
P085333
P051705
P070519
P084003
P064924
P077615
P072721
P038121
P067625
P060029
P075728
P036414
P065035
P058843
P003614
P036953
P045910
P058844

Accounting Reform and Development
Agricultural Technology Transfer
Gansu Hexi Corridor
Hai Basin Integrated Water
Ghuangjong Irrigation
Gansu and Inner Mongolia Poverty
Poor Rural Communities
Development
Sustainable Coastal Resources Dev.
ODS 4 Phase-out
ODS 3 Phase-out
Anhui Highway 2
Energy Conservation 2
Inland Waterways 2
National Railways 2, Zhe-Gan Line
Inland Waterways 3
Xinjiang Highway 3
Inland Waterways 4
Anning Valley Agriculture Dev.
Health 8, Basic Health
Beijing Environment 2
Basic Education in Western Areas
Chongqing Small Cities
Chongqing Urban Environment
Inland Waterways 5
Fujian Highway 2
Fuzhou Nantai Island Peri-Urban Dev.
GEF Guangdong PRD Urban Environment
GEF Beijing Environment 2
GEF Gansu and Xinjiang Pastoral Dev.
GEF Heat Reform and Energy Efficiency
GEF Renewable Energy Development
GEF Renewable Energy Scale-Up Program
GEF Sustainable Forestry Dev.
Guangdong PRD Urban Environment
Guangxi Urban Environment
Gansu and Xinjiang Pastora Development
Guangxi Highway
Guangzhou City Transport
Health 9
Hebei Urban Environment
Henan Provincial Highway 3

Disburseda

Original Amount (US$m)
Grant

Canc.

90
17

80
60
100

20
100

13.3

440.4
120.1

2.06
0.1

250
26
123
200
100
150
91
90

37
1

0.46
30
85

349
100
180
200
100
200
100

3.7

10
25
10.5
18
27
40.6
16
128
72
66.27
200
200
10
150
150

20

0.6
13.5

50

19.7
20
0.4

Undisb.

Orig. Rev'd

11.4
94.5
47.9
14.2
10.8
4.6
99.7

11.3
2.7
49.9
1.8
11.1
18.3
15.5

35.3
225.8
22.2
163.5
8.6
6.0
112.3
43.9
57.2
88.1
2.7
16.0
244.1
75.3
180.0
121.8
99.8
33.1
100.0
10.0
22.3
9.1
16.2
17.2
40.2
9.0
113.4
41.0
50.7
22.0
82.8
22.2
61.3
25.6

37.3
44.3
5.2
24.0
7.9
43.0
–31.7
16.4
22.2
10.0
3.8
15.1
223.1
45.4
105.7
2.8
33.1
1.1
21.1
3.2
–0.8
25.0
4.0
–1.1
53.9
13.9l
34.7
102.8
21.5
40.3
23.6

13.7

–11.6

13.6
–13.4
0.5

6.0
–32.7

9.5
–6.2

4.9

14.8

10.5

7.5

25.9
10.0

(continued on next page)

– 143 –
CAS Annex B8 (continued)
PSR rating
Project ID Project Name

DO

IP

P047345
Huai River Pollution
P075730
Hunan Urban Development
P068049
Hubei Hydropower Dev. in Poor Areas
P081749
Hubei Shiman Highway
P070441
Hubei Xiaogan Xiangfan Highway
P084742
IAIL 3
P068752
Inner Mongolia Highway and Trade
P070459
Inner Mongolia Highway
P058845
Jiangxi Highway 2
P065463
Jiangxi Integrated Agriculture
P051859
Liao River Basin
P081346
Liuzhou Environment Management
P003637
National Rural Water 3
P086505
Ningbo Water and Environment
P041268
National Highway 4, Hubei-Hunan
P058846
National Railway
P046829
Renewable Energy Development
P057352
Rural Water 4
P067828
Renewable Energy Scale-up Program
P070191
Shanghai Urban APL 1
P043933
Sichuan Urban Environment
P075732
Shanghai Urban APL 2
P056596
Shijiazhuang Urban Transport
P064729
Sustainable Forestry Development
P057933
Tai Basin Urban Development
P040599
Tianjin Urban Development 2
P056424
Tongbai Pumped Storage
P045788
Tri-Provincial Highway
P071147
Tuberculosis Control
P045915
Urumqi Urban Transport
P056516
Water Conservation
P069852
Wuhan Urban Transport
P064730
Yangtze Dike Strengthening
P068058
Yixing Pumped Storage Project
P066955
Zhejiang Urban Environment
P051736
East China Jiangsu Power
P003606
Energy Conservation
P044485
Shanghai Waigaoqiao
P042299
Technical Cooperation Credit 4
Overall Result

S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
MS
HS
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
#

S
S
S
S
S
S
HS
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S

Disburseda

Original Amount (US$m)
FY

IBRD

S
MS
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
MS
HS
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
#

2001
2005
2002
2004
2003
2006
2005
2002
2001
2004
2001
2005
1997
2005
1999
2002
1999
1999
2005
2003
1999
2006

105.5
172
105
200
250
200
100
100
200
100
100
100

S
S
S
S
S
S
HS
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S

2005
2003
2000
1998
2002
2001
2001
2004
2000
2003
2004
1998
1998
1997
1999

61
150
320
230
104
100
74
200
210
145
133
250
63
400
10
9349.1

IDA

Grant

Canc.

1

54.8

70
130
350
160
13
16
87
200
100
180

30

2

100

1

86

35
537.6

750.5

354.61

Undisb.

Orig. Rev'd

57.3
170.1
36.6
145.0
51.8
200.0
95.5
46.6
29.2
93.4
38.0
99.5
0.2
123.9
32.3
23.4
2.6
6.6
86.6
165.3
61.3
180.0

57.3
11.1
14.6
36.0
–8.2
10.1
3.0
10.6
55.0
24.4
30.2
2.1
3.4
32.3
20.9
2.6
6.4
12.9
37.5
55.3
5.0

50.1
134.8
46.9
10.1
59.5
34.5
9.7
175.7
88.3
126.3
118.4
19.6
15.1
47.5
25.1
5284.0

3.7
21.2
123.1
10.1
23.3
34.5
5.4
153.6
88.3
25.0
2.6
105.6
13.2
47.5
23.5
2245.6

3.0

2.6
–1.2

50.9

88.3

18.6
47.5
262.8

– 144 –

COUNTRY FINANCING PARAMETERS
1.
The country financing parameters for China were agreed with the Government of
China in February 2005 and notified to the Board on March 4, 2005. They have not been
revised since that date.

Item

Parameter

Remarks / Explanation

Cost sharing. Limit on the proportion of
individual project costs that the Bank may
finance

Up to 100 percent

Bank financing of 100 percent may take place in
a few selective cases (e.g., for social sector
projects in the poor provinces or small TA
projects financed by donor’s grants). For
infrastructure projects, significant counterpart
funding by provincial / municipal governments is
expected to continue and the Bank financing
proportion would be modest in most cases. For
social-sector, rural development, and poverty
alleviation projects, the Bank financing
proportion might be slightly higher than the
current level of about 60 percent.

Recurrent cost financing. Any limits that
would apply to the overall amount of
recurrent expenditures that the Bank may
finance

No country-level limit

In China, the Bank will apply this policy flexibly
in well-justified cases. In determining Bank
financing of recurrent costs in individual projects,
the Bank will take into account sustainability
issues at the sector and project levels. It is
expected that the overall proportion of recurrent
cost financing is expected to remain at modest
levels.

Local cost financing. Are the
requirements for Bank financing of local
expenditures met, namely that: (i) financing
requirements for the country’s development
program would exceed the public sector’s
own resources (e.g., from taxation and
other revenues) and expected domestic
borrowing; and (ii) the financing of foreign
expenditures alone would not enable the
Bank to assist in the financing of individual
projects

Yes

Since these two requirements are met in the
case of China, the Bank may finance local costs
in the proportions needed in individual projects
to efficiently achieve the objectives of the project
concerned.

Taxes and duties. Are there any taxes and
duties that the Bank
would not finance?

None for national taxes.
Bank financing of local fees
and levies will be
determined on a case-bycase basis at the project
level.

National taxes are considered reasonable. At the
project-level, the Bank would consider whether
taxes and duties constitute an excessively high
share of projects costs. Further, given the highly
decentralized fiscal administration and the
existence of significant extra-budgetary financing
(EBF) sources at the sub-national levels, some
caution regarding financing of local fees and
levies is warranted. Financing of such local fees
and levies would be assessed at the projectlevel on a case-by-case basis

