Public Disclosure Authorized

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Report No. 38 135-MG

INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION
AND
INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION

Public Disclosure Authorized

Public Disclosure Authorized

Document of
The World Bank

COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
FOR
THE REPUBLIC OF MADAGASCAR
FOR FY2007-2011

Public Disclosure Authorized

March 7,2007

Country Department 1
Africa Region
Sub-Saharan Africa Department
The International Finance Corporation

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance of their
official duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without World Bank authorization.

LAST CAS DISCUSSION: NOVEMBER 18,2003
CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS
Currency Unit: Ariary
US$1 = 2 169 Ariary (January 2007)
WEIGHTS AND MEASURES
Metric System
FISCAL YEAR
January 1 - December 3 1

IDA

Vice President: Hart Schafer (acting)
Country Director: Ritva Reinikka
Task Team Leaders: Lilia Burunciuc

IFC
Edward Nassim
Thierry Tanoh
Henri E. Rabarijohn

This CAS was produced by a core team including Lilia Burunciuc (Task Team Leader), Henri Rabarijohn, Luis
Alvaro Sanchez, Benu Bidani, Eavan O'Halloran, Anna van der Wouden, Guenter Heidenhof, Ganesh Rasagam,
Guy Darlan, Noroarisoa Rabefaniraka, Sofia Bettencourt, Stefano Patemostro, and Wema Jackson. Ritva
Reinikka and James Bond provided overall guidance. Robert Blake, Sascha Djumena, Ruxandra Burdescu, Ann
Rennie, Koro Ouattara, Alain Labeau, Marc Juhel, Janet Dooley, John Donaldson, Isabel Neto, Sarah Keener,
Anne Bossuyt, Anne Claire Haye, Bienvenu Rajaonson, Josiane Raveloarison, Laza Razafiarison, Noro Aina
Andriamihaja, Patrice Rakotoniaina, Patrick Ramanantoanina, Paul Jean Feno, Ziva Razafintsalama, Thomas
Vis, Harifera Raobelison, Hera Anderson, Patricia Ravelomanantsoa, Nathalie Ramanivosoa and other members
of the Bank Group-wide Madagascar Country Team also made valuable contributions throughout the process.
Helpful guidance and advice were provided by Tevfik Yaprak and Christine M. Richaud (OPCS). The CAS
Completion Report was prepared by Eavan O'Halloran and Luis Alvaro Sanchez.

ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS
AFD
AfDB
AGOA
ATC
BADEA
BIANCO
CAE
CAS
CASCR
CDMAP
CEM
CFAA
COMESA
CPAR
CPIA
DBSA
EAP
EASSy
EC
EDBM
EFA
Ell3
EITI
EPZ
ESW
EU
FA0
FDI
FIAS
FID
FSAP
FY
GDP
GEF
GTZ
HIPC
ICA
IDA
IDF
IFAD
IFC
IEG
IOC
IMF
KfW
LAC
FDL
MFN
MAP

French Development Agency
African Development Bank
Africa Growth and Opportunity Act
Agreement on Textiles and Clothing
Arab Bank for the Economic Development of Africa
Independent Anti-corruption Bureau
Country Assistance Evaluation
Country Assistance Strategy
Country Assistance Strategy Completion Report
Capacity Development Management Action Plan
Country Economic Memorandum
Country Financial Accountability Assessment
Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa
Country Procurement Assessment Review
Country Policy and Institutional Assessment
Development Bank of South Africa
Everything but Arms Program
East Africa Submarine System
European Commission
Economic Development Board of Madagascar
Education for All
European Investment Bank
Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative
Export Processing Zones
Economic and Sector Work
European Union
Food and Agricultural Organization
Foreign Direct Investment
Foreign Investment Advisory Service
Funds for Development Interventions
Financial Sector Assessment Program
Fiscal Year
Gross Domestic Product
Global Environment Facility
German Agency for Technical Assistance
Heavily Indebted Pour Country
Investment Climate Assessment
International Development Association
Institutional Development Fund
International Fund for Agricultural Development
International Finance Corporation
Independent Evaluation Group
Indian Ocean Community
International Monetary Fund
Kreditanstalt fiir Wiederaufbau
Latin America and the Caribbean
Local Development Fund
Most Favored Nation
Madagascar Action Plan

MCC
MDG
MDRI
MENA
MFA
MIGA
NPV
OCHA
OECD
OED

oms

OPEC
PEFA
PEP
PER
PGDI
PIU
PPP
PRSC
PRSP
PROFISH
RCIP
SADC
SDR
SIDA
SME
SSA
ST1
TA
UNDP
UNFPA
UNICEF
USAID
VAT
WE31
WFP
WHO

Millennium Challenge Corporation
Millennium Development Goal
Multilateral Debt Relief Initiative
Middle East and North Africa
Multi-Fiber Arrangement
Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency
Net Present Value
UN Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development
Operations Evaluation Department
Office des Mines Nationales et des Industries Stratigiques
Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries
Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability
Private Enterprise Partnership
Public Expenditure Review
Governance and Institutional Development Program
Project Implementation Unit
Public Private Partnership
Poverty Reduction Support Credit
Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper
Global Program on Fisheries
Regional Communications Infrastructure Program
Southern Africa Development Community
Special Drawing Rights
Swedish International Development Association
Small and Medium Enterprise
Sub-Saharan Africa
Sexually Transmitted Infections
Technical Assistance
United Nations Development Program
United Nations Fund for Population Activities
United Nations Intemational Children's Fund
United States Agency for International Development
Value Added Tax
World Bank Institute
World Food Program
World Health Organization

TABLE OF CONTENTS
EXECUTIVE
SUMMARY
.................................................................................................................. I
Introduction........................................................................................................................ 1

I

.

COUNTRY CONTEXT AND OUTLOOK

.........................................................................1

Background ....................................................................................................................... 1
A . RECENTDEVELOPMENTS .........................................................................................................2
Improved social indicators and access to services ............................................................... 2
Better growth performance .................................................................................................. 3
Good progress on governance.............................................................................................. 4
B . CHALLENGES
MOVING FORWARD ........................................................................................... 5
Reaching the MDGs ............................................................................................................ 5
Achieving higher rates of growth ..................................................................................... 7
Access to effective government .................................................................................... 12
Improving service delivery ................................................................................................ 13

.

I1

THE GOVERNMENT PROGRAM

................................................................................... 16

Bank assessment .............................................................................................................

.

I11

WORLD BANK GROUP STRATEGY

17

.........................................................................17

A . LESSONS
FROM THE IMPLEMENTATION OF 2004-06 COUNTRY
ASSISTANCE
STRATEGY
..... 17
........................................................................... 19
B . COUNTRY
ASSISTANCE
STRATEGY
DESIGN
Country Assistance Strategy principles and approach....................................................... 19
CAS approach to governance and capacity building ......................................................... 21
C. BANKGROUPPROGRAM TO SUPPORT THE STRATEGIC OUTCOMES ....................................... 22
Strategic objectives ............................................................................................................ 22
CAS results ........................................................................................................................ 22
CAS instruments ................................................................................................................ 23
Proposed CAS lending and AAA program ........................................................................ 25
Monitoring and evaluation................................................................................................ 30
Indicative IDA program ..................................................................................................... 31
E . THEREGIONAL DIMENSION ....................................................................................................32
F . CONSULTATION
PROCESS ...................................................................................................... 33
G . ALIGNMENT
AND HARMONIZATION ....................................................................................... 33
IV.

RISKS

...............................................................................................................................

34

Program Adjustment .......................................................................................................... 35

TEXT TABLES
Table 1
Table 2:
Table 3:

Trade performance. 1995-2005
Key monitoring and evaluation indicators
Indicative International Development Association program for FY2007-11

9
31
32

BOXES
Box 1
Box 2
Box 3
Box 4
Box 5
Box 6
Box 7
Box 8
Box 9

Poverty in Madagascar
The resource challenge
Rural growth
The state of infrastructure in Madagascar
Governance issues in forestry and mining
The Country Assistance Strategy approach to scaling up
Using an integrated approach: The Growth Poles Project
The current World Bank Group program
Regional Communications Infrastructure Program

FIGURES
Figure 1
Figure 2
Figure 3
Figure 4
Figure 5
Figure 6
Figure 7

Poverty declined during 2002-05, even in rural areas
GDP and investment rates, 1997-2005
Worldwide Governance Indicators, 2005
Share of firms rating cost and access to finance as major obstacle
Aggregate ranking of Doing Business indicators, Doing Business 2006
CAS Pillar I contribution to MAP goals
CAS Pillar I1 contribution to MAP goals

ATTACHMENTS
Attachment 1
Attachment 2
Attachment 3a
Attachment 3b
Attachment 4
Attachment 5
Attachment 6
Attachment 7
Attachment 8

Madagascar CAS Results Matrix
Mapping of IDA Program and Madagascar Action Plan Commitments
Donor Programs
Donor Matrix
Consultations with Stakeholders
Medium Tern Economic Outlook
Madagascar Joint World Bank-IMF Debt Sustainability Analysis
Madagascar Country Financing Parameters
Madagascar 2003 CAS Completion Report

STANDARD CAS ANNEXES

Annex A1
Annex B2
Annex B3
Annex B3
Annex B4
Annex B6
Annex B7
Annex B8
Annex B8

Madagascar At-a-Glance
Key Economic and Program Indicators - Change from Last CAS
Selected Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
IBRDIIDA Program Summary
IFC and MIGA Program, FY2004-07
Summary of Non-lending Services
Key Economic Indicators
Key Exposure Indicators
IBRDIIDA and Grants Operations Portfolio
Statement of IFC's Committed and Outstanding Portfolio

i.
Since the current government took charge in 2002, it has embarked on an ambitious
transformation path that has brought improvements in social, economic and governance
indicators. The economy grew at an average of 5 percent per year and poverty has declined to
69 percent from its peak 80 percent in 2002. These positive developments and the smooth
presidential elections in December 2006 offer hopeful signs that Madagascar has stepped
firmly onto a path to sustained development, breaking with the history of economic
mismanagement and periodic crises that impoverished the people. Madagascar's recent
performance shows how rapidly the right policies and additional resources can propel a
previously lagging nation ahead.

..

But Madagascar still has a long way to go. The macroeconomic situation remains
fragile. Governance continues to be weak. And social indicators are still low and far from the
Millennium Development Goals. Magnifying these challenges is population growth, now 2.7
percent a year, placing enormous demands on the government and the economy-first to
educate people, then to generate income opportunities for them. Furthermore, Madagascar
faces the challenge of preserving its unique environment and biodiversity which are of global
significance.
11.

...

To address these challenges, the Government of Madagascar has put in place a bold
development strategy for 2007-2012-the Madagascar Action Plan (MAP), a secondgeneration Poverty Reduction Strategy. The MAP envisages accelerated and well coordinated
reforms to achieve faster growth and poverty reduction. The immediate breakthrough areas of
the MAP are: (i) reforming public finances; (ii) significantly increasing investment to promote
high growth; (iii) sowing the seeds of a green revolution; (iv) transforming public security; (v)
implementing bold new measures for health and family planning; and (vi) transforming the
judiciary. But Madagascar has limited resources to address its enormous challenges and needs.
A stepped-up effort by the international community will be required to make its
transformation a success.
111.

The World Bank Group already has a solid base in Madagascar, with a well
iv.
performing portfolio, and a critical mass of knowledge and experience. The Country
Assistance Strategy, designed to help achieve the MAP objectives, builds on this base and on
lessons learned and is organized around two main pillars:
Thefirstpillar concentrates on activities that will help remove key bottlenecks to
investment and growth in rural and urban areas.
The secondpillar brings together activities geared toward improving access to, and
quality of, services.
A critical crosscutting element is improving governance and reducing corruption. The
v.
CAS will build on the ongoing efforts in support of the government's far-reaching program to
improve governance. It will seek to consolidate progress on improving the legal and
regulatory framework and will focus on critical implementation aspects of the governance
agenda in: (i) resource mobilization (tax and customs); (ii) public expenditure management;

(iii) management of natural and mineral resources; and (iv) decentralization. In addition, the
CAS will continue supporting the efforts on capacity building.
vi.
The International Development Association's (IDA) indicative annual allocation
during the CAS period is about SDR99 million. These resources will be complemented by
debt relief of over US$30 million a year provided by IDA through the Multilateral Debt Relief
Initiative (MDRI). The Bank Group and the government will need to be creative to ensure that
these limited resources produce a sizeable impact. To increase the CAS's impact in a
resource-constrained environment, the Bank Group will act as a catalyst to attract scaled-up
external support for Madagascar and to improve efficiency in the use of domestic and donor
resources.
vii.
In line with the government's request and consistent with the Paris Declaration on
Harmonization, Bank Group assistance to Madagascar is aligned with that of other donors to
provide a package of coordinated support around the government's MAP. CAS preparation
was closely coordinated with other partners to facilitate maximum harmonization with other
donors, such as the European Commission, French Development Agency, the African
Development Bank, and the Millennium Challenge Corporation.

...

This CAS carries significant risks. The main external risk is Madagascar's
vulnerability to economic and natural shocks. The main internal risks are its fragile
macroeconomic environment, possible political instability, especially if the government fails
to create enough jobs for its youthful and rapidly growing population, and capacity
constraints. The main reputational risk to the Bank Group is that donor assistance may not be
sufficient to help Madagascar overcome its formidable development challenges. Unless the
international community is prepared to increase its support to Madagascar, this risk will
persist, even if implementation of the current CAS program proceeds as planned.
vlii.

The CAS includes elements that help to mitigate these risks. Furthermore, if political
ix.
instability were to seriously impair the capacity of the government to manage the economy, or
if the quality of governance deteriorates, or if significant implementation constraints emerge,
IDA will adjust its program in line with the new circumstances.
x.

The following questions are proposed for discussion by the Executive Directors:
Does the proposed strategy adequately contribute to achievement of priority objectives
of the government's Madagascar Action Plan?
Is IDA'S role as a catalyst to attract additional resources plausible?
Are the risks properly identified and mitigated?

MADAGASCAR:
COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY FOR FY2007-11
Introduction
1.
Madagascar has done remarkably well since it emerged from a political and economic
crisis in 2002. The post-crisis government of President Ravalomanana has embarked on
courageous reforms to address corruption, improve governance, and create an environment
conducive to private investment and growth. As a result, the economy has grown at about 5
percent a year since 2002, and social and welfare indicators have improved.
2.
Stepped-up efforts by the government, the Malagasy people, and the international
community are needed to build on this momentum, to consolidate progress, and to move forward,
as spelled out in the government's new reform program, the Madagascar Action Plan (MAP).
This Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) lays out how the Bank's program intends to support the
implementation of the MAP.

I.

COUNTRY CONTEXT AND OUTLOOK

Background
3.
In the 1960s Madagascar was among the better-off African countries; it had an educated
elite, strong institutions, good infrastructure, and an income per capita above the developing
country average. But it lost this position after several decades of economic mismanagement.
From the 1970s until the second half of the 1990s annual growth of Gross Domestic Product
(GDP) averaged only 0.5 percent compared with population growth of about 2.8 percent. Per
capita income declined from US$473 in 1970 to US$290 in 2005, placing Madagascar among the
world's poorest countries.
4.

Yet, Madagascar's economic potential is enormous:
It is the environmental treasure of the world, with unique flora and fauna. Nearly 40
percent of the birds and 91 percent of the reptiles are endemic, and Madagascar is home
to 25 percent of all African plants. Its unique nature and beautifid beaches make it an
attractive tourist destination.
Its abundant and diversified natural resource base offers strong potential in agriculture,
fisheries, and mining.
It is located near prosperous markets such as Mauritius, Rkunion, and South Africa, is a
member of both Common Market of Eastern and Southern Africa (COMESA) and
Southern African Development Community (SADC), and it enjoys preferential access to
the European and U.S. markets.

Although Madagascar has had difficulty capitalizing on its potential, its prospects of doing so
have improved. The recent progress has shown how rapidly the right policies and additional
resources can propel a previously lagging country ahead.

A. RECENTDEVELOPMENTS
Improved social indicators and access to services
5.
Since 2002 Madagascar has improved dramatically its basic social indicators, albeit from
a low base. More children are in school today than ever before, with net primary enrolment rates
above 90 percent, up from 70 percent in 2002.' The country increased its literacy rate to 70
percent in 2005, above the 61 percent average for Sub-Saharan Africa. But only 57 percent of
children complete primary school, 15 percent complete lower secondary school, and only 5
percent complete upper secondary school. As more children complete primary education, the
country will need to respond to the growing demand for secondary education, which is already
pressuring existing capacity. Moreover, major inequalities exist by region and income groups,
and the quality of instruction is poor at all levels.
6.
Child mortality rates declined significantly, from 159 deaths per 1,000 live births in 1997
to 94 in 2004, and today more women give birth in health centers than ever b e f ~ r e . ~
Immunization rates improved from 46 percent in 1997 to 61 percent in 2004. Rural access to safe
drinking water also improved from 12 percent in 2003 to 16 percent in 2005. Madagascar's
health indicators are better than other African countries of a similar income level, but they remain
low, particularly among the rural population and the urban poor. For example, the 2004 maternal
mortality ratio was below the Sub-Saharan Africa average of 830 deaths per 100,000 live births,
but it is still very high at 469 (per 100,000 births). The social indicators are discussed further in
the section on Millennium Development Goals (MDG) (paragraphs 17-24).
Since reaching a peak level of 80
7.
percent at the 2002 crisis, poverty incidence
has declined to 68.7 percent and is at about
the 200 1 level.3Rural poverty declined to
73.5% in 2005 and is now even lower than it
was in 200 1 (figure 1). Moreover, the
intensity of poverty4 in rural areas declined
from an estimated 53 percent in 2002 to
34.8 percent in 2005, below the pre-crisis
level of 39.7 percent. It is also encouraging
that the rural population's access to reliable
transport rose from 45 percent in 2003 to 57
percent in 2005 as a result of the roads
program. Box 1 describes the poverty
situation in Madagascar.

Figure 1. Poverty declined during
2002-05, even in rural areas

8 100

f

g

'E

2

?

0

80
80
70

so-

g

3010.

2

V)

'

40-

16
x

A

80IL

A

A

2004

2005

A

1001997

I

2001
-+Total

2002
--C Rural

A

Urban

' The Malagasy social data are not fully reliable. Different sources give different numbers. However, all sources confirm the
ositive trends.
'The rate of prenatal consultation was 80 percent in 2004, ranging from 78 percent in rural areas to 91 percent in large
urban centers.
The national poverty line has been used. It is defined as the amount of money needed to buy 2133 calories and includes an
allowance for essential non-food needs. In 2005, the poverty line was 305,300 ariary per person per year. Numbers are based
on the 2004105 household survey.
The intensity of poverty measures the average consumption shortfall of the poor relative to the poverty line.

'

Box 1. Poverty in Madagascar
Poverty in Madagascar is widespread. According to the 2005 household survey more than two-thirds of
the population (68.7 percent) live below the poverty line. The poverty rate in rural areas is significantly
higher than in urban areas: while almost three-quarters (73.5 percent) of the rural population is poor, just
over half (52 percent) of the urban population is poor. Poverty rates also differ by region, with the highest
rates in the coastal regions of the east and south, where over 80 percent of the population is poor. Poverty
is lowest around the capital Antananarivo.
Between 2001 and 2005 poverty declined more rapidly in rural areas than in urban areas, in marked
contrast to 1997-2001, when the small decline in poverty was largely the result of declining urban
poverty. Growth in 1997-2001 was driven largely by the export processing zone sector, based in
AntananarivoIAntsirabe, which improved job opportunities and reduced poverty in urban areas. The
decline in poverty in rural areas between 2001 and 2005 is linked to greater emphasis on rural
development, accelerated implementation of the roads program, and higher rice prices, which gave
incentives to rural farmers. Also, the economic shocks in 2004105 (strong depreciation, high international
oil and rice prices) may have affected the richer segments of society more adversely.

I

The poor have more limited access to education opportunities. Net primary enrolment rates for the poorest
quintile (70.8 percent) are lower than for the richest quintile (99.1 percent). The gap is widest for higher
levels of education-for example, the net secondary enrolment rate is 1.4 percent for the lowest quintile
compared with 14.1 percent for the richest quintile.

8.
Improved policies, economic growth and improvements in the quality of public sector
governance have contributed to the above results on the ground.

Better growth performance
9.
ARer the 2002 crisis GDP growth rebounded to 9.8 percent in 2003 from a 12.7 percent
plunge a year before and continued to grow at an average rate of about 5 percent per year (figure
2). Growth came largely through higher tourism receipts (tourism anivals in 2005 were 2 1
percent higher than in 2004), improved performance in agriculture, especially higher rice
production (rice productivity increased from 2.3 tons per hectare in 2003 to 2.6 in 2005), and
continued public investments. In 2005 the economy grew at 4.6 percent despite a sharp increase
in world petroleum prices. and a financial
crisis at the state-owned electric enterprise
Figure 2. GDP and inwstrnent rates, 1997-2005
Jirama that disrupted economic activity
.
.
.
.
---.
through power cuts and tariff increases.
-

10.
Good macroeconomic management
20
has contributed to this solid growth
z 10
performance. The government contained
E
inflationary pressures and brought year-on2 o
year inflation down from a high of 27 percent
-10
at end-2004 to 10.8 percent at end-2006. In
-20 L-... ..addition, improved foreign exchange policy
m G D P g r o w t h -Investment
as %ofGDP
has smoothed the high variability of the
exchange rate. Improved macroeconomic
Source: INSTAT
stability and business climate led to increased
investment as a share of GDP from 14 percent in 2002 to over 22 percent in 2005 (figure 2).
But Madagascar continues to face fiscal problems. Revenue forecasts have consistently
11.
proved too optimistic because efforts to increase revenue have been less successfU1 than

expected. The resulting revenue shortfalls have increased the uncertainty of resource availability
because midyear expenditure cuts were needed to meet fiscal targets. This uncertainty has
diminished the government's ability to implement its programs.

Good progress on governance
12.
Progress on governance has also been good even though the agenda ahead is still huge.
Madagascar's governance ranking has improved according to several sources. The World Bank
Institute's governance indicators place Madagascar ahead of most low-income countries,
especially on controlling corruption (figure 3). It is among very few low-income countries to be
percentile of Composite Governance Indicator, along with Ghana and Mongolia,
in the 50'-75'
up from the 48thpercentile rank in 2003.~Madagascar's good standing is also confinned by its
2006 Country Policy and Institutional Assessment scores: its overall score is 3.6, with the quality
of public administration, accountability and transparency in the public sector rated 3.5.
Moreover, the 2006 Transparency International Conuption Perception Index for Madagascar is
3.1, ranking it 84thof 163 c~untries.~
This is an improvement over the 2005 ranking of 97thout of
158 countries.

13.
These governance improvements are the result of the government's efforts to fight
conuption and improve transparency since 2002. The country passed anticorruption and antimoney laundering legislation, adopted clear rules for public sector recruitment, and requires
elected and public officials to declare their assets. It also created an independent Anti-Corruption
Commission and an
anticorruption agency,
Figure 3. Worldwide Governance Indicators, 2005
Bureau Independent
~nti-corruption
(BIANCO), which has
investigated scores of
allegations of
corruption by public
officials and
Volce and
Pollllal
Government
Regulatory
Rule of law
Control of
slablliiy
eftectlveneoo
quality
corruption
accountablllly
spearheaded audits of
I
large investment
I
w Madagascar w SSA MENA South Asia w OECD w LAC 1
I
vromams such as
Percentile rank indicates the percentage of countries worldwide that rate below the selected
country. Higher values indicate better governance ratings.
Source: Kaufmann, Kraay, Mastmzzi Governance Indicators for 1996-2005.

.

-

education and
transport.

Simplified expenditure management procedures have reduced red tape and discretionary
14.
decision making. A modem integrated financial management system, deployed in main
treasuries, captures about 80 percent of government expenditures. In addition, a new procurement
code and procurement oversight authority are important steps in ensuring the integrity of the
budget system. On the demand side of governance, a public expenditure tracking survey in
education and health is being used to evaluate the impact of public expenditures. A citizens'
scorecard exercise has been launched to evaluate the efficiency of primary health care delivery.
Finally, efforts are under way to strengthen the subnational tiers of government.

In 1998 Madagascar's Governance percentile was only 30.
Madagascar is ranked higher than Tanzania (93), Mali (99), Mozambique (99), Uganda (105), and Nigeria (142) but lower
than Mauritius (42), South Africa (5 I), and Ghana (70).

However, governance gains remain fragile, and the challenges ahead are formidable,
15.
especially in natural and mineral resources, where reform efforts are sometimes undermined by
powerful vested interests. Also, despite recent progress, pockets of corruption remain in customs,
licensing and some other areas. Transparency of government operations remains inadequate, and
the accountability relationships between service providers or local officials and citizens remains
weak. Justice reform is significantly behind expectations mainly because of strong resistance to
change within the judiciary. Finally, perceptions about potential conflicts of interest, in particular
among elected officials, reflect negatively on Madagascar.
16.
Recent progress on the social, economic, and governance fronts is encouraging and
demonstrates that the economy can respond quickly to improved policies. Also, it shows that
much can be achieved even in an environment of imperfect institutions. This is very pertinent
because in Madagascar the task of building stronger institutions is enormous and the road ahead
is long. The macroeconomic situation remains firagile, overall governance continues to be weak,
and social indicators are still poor. In fact, Madagascar is far from meeting many MDGs.

B. CHALLENGES
MOVING FORWARD
Reaching the MDGs
17.
Sustaining recent progress will not be enough to meet the MDGs, especially given the
ground lost during 1990-2002. A recent assessment shows that to come closer to meeting the
MDGs, economic growth rates must be higher and more resources must be mobilized and used
more e f f e ~ t i v e l ~ . ~
18.
A complicating factor is population growth, currently at 2.7 percent a year. If the
population continues to grow at this pace, in 2050 Madagascar will have a population of over 40
million people. The rapid population growth will make the provision of basic services more
difficult-especially in health, education, and food security-and will make it more difficult for
poor households to escape poverty. Under these circumstances, GDP per capita growth will be
inadequate unless the economy grows much faster than before or the population growth rate
decreases significantly (for example, after a rapid decline in fertility). Fortunately, there are
encouraging signs that fertility may have started to decrease in ~ a d a ~ a s c a r . ~
The prospects of meeting the individual MDG targets vary. With recent progress on
19.
primary school enrollment, universal enrollment by 2015 is within Madagascar's reach if the
current level of effort can be sustained. However, universal primary completion will be more
difficult to achieve, requiring attention to high repetition and dropout rates. At the same time, the
male-female gap in primary education has been closed: 56.8 percent of girls and 56.2 percent of
boys completed primary school in 2005.
The government has successfully piloted approaches to bringing clean water to the rural
20.
population. Assuming the current level of effort, Madagascar will fall short of the target access

'World Bank, "A M M S Approach to Analyzing the MDGs in Madagascar, 2006" (draft)

* Current Malagasy demographic data are not fully reliable. A comprehensive population and housing census is urgently
needed, followed by a high quality demographic and health survey. This would shed more light on the country's fertility
determinants and the demographic transition process.

rate of 70 percent of the population by 10 percent in 20 15 and at best reach the target by 2020.~
Increased resources, however, could help reach the target by 20 15.
The MDGs for health will be difficult to reach. Child and maternal mortality will remain
2 1.
high in particular-in part due to very slow progress in improving water and sanitation coverage.
In addition, hospital overcrowding and a shortage of health personnel continue to place serious
constraints on the accessibility and quality of services. At the same time, Madagascar has
successfully kept the prevalence of HIVIAIDS below one percent thanks to concerted efforts by
the government. But surveys show that prevalence has increased slightly among high-risk
groups-a situation that requires careful monitoring and vigilance. Fortunately, the country has a
broad-reaching HIVIAIDS prevention strategy that to date has proven to be effective.
22.
Halving poverty is the most difficult MDG to reach. Recent progress has merely helped
the country to recover the 1990 poverty rate. Given that the poverty rate stands at slightly under
60 percent today, the 34 percent target is most likely unattainable by 20 15." To reach it,
Madagascar's economy would have to grow much faster, at over 8 percent a year between 2006
and 2015, which translates into per capita growth of over 5 percent.
23.
Madagascar is facing up to the challenge of reversing the deterioration of its unique
environment. The rapidly growing population puts tremendous pressure on the environment, as
Madagascar's fragile environment can only support a limited number of people in the rural areas,
especially given current farming practices." The government has committed to tripling the
surface of protected areas to 6 million hectares (10 percent of total land area) fiom 1.7 million
hectares in 2005. This creates the need for alternative income generation activities to meet the
immediate economic needs of the local population. An additional challenge is the high incidence
of forest fires, illegal extraction of forest products, and weak enforcement of protection rules
inside and outside the protected areas that appear to be increasing.
24.
Madagascar can get closer to meeting the MDGs if it manages to grow faster, mobilize
more resources, and use them more effectively.I2So far, Madagascar has faced a shortage of
public and private resources to finance development (box 2), but things are beginning to change.
Investment is on the rise, and the country's record in using external aid is good. The performance
of the IDA portfolio has improved, and the European Commission ranks the performance of its
Madagascar program among the best. Most important, Madagascar's progress in improving
governance is an encouraging assurance that it can put additional resources to good use. The
challenge for the country will be to create conditions that encourage investment needed to
generate higher rates of growth. Especially, much more foreign investment will be needed given
the low level of domestic savings. Also, it will need to continue improving the quality of its
public expenditure and strengthen the mobilization of domestic revenue.

The overall access rate to clean water was 46 percent in 2004.
These numbers are based on the US$I/day Purchasing Power Parity poverty line.
' l Farmers prefer to expand land under cultivation (often through slash-and-bum) rather than invest in increasing
productivity. Scarcity of capital prevents farmers from investing in mechanization and other inputs; and government
interference in the fertilizer and seeds markets has constrained their use by farmers.
l2 The government can also reduce the funding needs if it can capture the externalities that result from spending on different
MDGs. For example, improving child and maternal health helps education achievement, while the latter creates a more
productive labor force. In turn, growth and higher incomes create more funding for services and increase demand. The result
is a cycle of growth and development that reduces overall funding needs than if each MDG were pursued separately (A
MAMS Approach to Analyzing the MDGs in Madagascar, 2006).
'O

Box 2. The resource challenge
Resources have been inadequate in Madagascar both for the government to provide services and for
investment to generate growth. Gross fixed capital formation averaged only 11.4 percent of GDP during
1970-2003 compared with 18.9 percent for all low-income countries. Consequently, real per capita
capital stock declined by over 40 percent over this period. Very low total factor productivity growth
further suggests that the investment that was undertaken was not well chosen or was of low quality.
In addition, the country has one of the lowest tax revenue-to-GDP ratios (about 10 percent), far below the
average mobilization rate for sub-Saharan Africa. The government has used tax holidays and exemptions
to stimulate the economy in the recent past, eroding the tax base. Efforts to collect more resources did not
prove sustainable, even in the context of recent high growth. Revenues increased to 10.9 percent of GDP
in 2004 but declined to 10.1 percent in 2005. More recently, the government made progress on reforming
customs, but improvements in taxation are yet to come.
Private investment-foreign and domestic-has also been low. Private investment averaged 8.9 percent
during 1996-2005 with foreign direct investment averaging only 0.9 percent of GDP during the same
period. However, the recent reforms are beginning to have an impact. Private investment has increased
recently to 12 percent in 2004-2005 with investments in mining, tourism, and light manufacturing taking
the lead. Hopehlly the mobilization of domestic resources will follow suit.

Achieving higher rates of growth

25.
If Madagascar is to achieve better development outcomes, it must find ways to achieve
high rates of growth for an extended period and make sure that it is inclusive of all segments of
its population. Madagascar's challenges are amplified by the rapidly growing population that
demands new jobs: 300,000 new entrants join the labor force every year.13But these challenges
are not unmanageable.
26.
Madagascar has good potential for agricultural growth as local output is generally
competitive at the farm gate. Its rich natural environment makes it an attractive destination for
tourism. Madagascar also has a natural competitive strength in low-wage, low-to-moderate skill,
and labor-intensive goods such as handicrafts, textiles, and clothing. Overall efficiency is low,
but current wage rates more than compensate for this, making unit labor costs very competitive
with other sub-Saharan Africa countries, and even India and china.I4 In textiles and clothing,
Madagascar continues to benefit from preferential access to the U.S. market under the African
Growth and Opportunity Act (AGOA) and to the European Union market under the Everything
but Arms program (EAP), both of which have clearly been an essential element of the success of
the export processing zones.15 Madagascar is also well positioned to gain from SADC
preferential access to regional markets, especially South Africa. Finally, it has wide possibilities
to profit from the opportunities offered by the Indian Ocean Community (IOC).
The upturn in the late 1990s and the rapid turn around since 2002 (see figure 2 on page 3)
27.
offer encouraging signs. The economy responded very well to policy changes in macroeconomic
management, governance, investment climate, and to investments in infrastructure. Private
investment increased, leading to higher and more diversified production, which was absorbed by
increased exports and domestic demand. New activities around the export processing zone
I3
Out of the 300,000 youth that enter the job market every year, 75 percent are in rural areas. Historically, new rural labor
was absorbed by the rice cultivation expansion, but this has reached its Limits. Textiles and tourism are absorbing about
30,000 new entrants per year. This leaves 270,000 entrants per year that will need new jobs.
14
Integrated Framework 2001, table 4.1, p. 44
The recent extension of the AGOA third party fabric provision to 2013 is good news for the Malagasy textile sector.

''

attracted substantial foreign direct investment to textiles and clothing. Shrimp and more recently
tourism and mining also grew impressively. These activities will continue to generate
opportunities and employment, but they are not likely to provide enough jobs for the country's
growing labor force.
28.
Achieving high rates of employment and income generating growth will also depend on
improving performance elsewhere in the economy. In this regard, rural development will require
an increased focus (box 3). Despite strong potential in agriculture, the sector's contribution to
GDP is low, only 14.8 percent in 2005, and declining. Between 1997 and 2005 the sector grew at
2 percent a year, well below the population growth rate of about 2.8 percent. However, recent
performance improvements in agriculture, in part in response to public investments, offer hopeful
signs but call for a more concerted effort building on the current momentum.
Box 3. Rural growth
Generation of employment and income in the rural areas, where 77.3 percent of the population and 73.5 percent
of the poor live, remains the biggest development challenge in Madagascar. In the middle of the last century
Madagascar had a relatively thriving agriculture sector.
Today, most households live off subsistence activities of
Output and capital per worker
very low productivity, with rice as the main staple food. This
2000 dollars
decline can be attributed to poor policies resulting in low
1600
850
investment and declining capital per worker (see figure). In
800
addition, rapid population growth led to an expansion of land
7 9
under
cultivation rather than productivity increases.
700

jLr

1300

<

650
600
550

Areas with high growth and employment potential in rural
areas include: (i) promoting export-oriented agriculture and
1000
900
agro-industries: particularly promising are exports of fruits,
450
vegetables,
honey, essential oils, shrimp, rice and livestock
800
400
(especially live goats and sheep); (ii) expanding eco-tourism:
1970 1974 1978 1982 1986 1990 1994 1998 2002
currently tourism is primarily linked to visits to national
-Capital
per worker - -Output per worker
parks but it has also been expanding rapidly along the coastal
Source World Bank, WDI
areas of the dry west; (iii) servicing growing towns: rural
areas can supply food as well as services- carpentry, masonry, mechanics, tailors, repair shops, handicraft
shops-to urban markets; and (iv) improving distribution of rents derived from natural resource management:
particularly from forestry and small scale mining.
1200

:z:
1100

To profit from these opportunities and bring higher income and employment to rural areas, some important
barriers will have to be removed, many of which lie outside the rural sector.
@,free competition in key agriculture products and inputs is essential for increasing the profit margins to

farmers. Farmers need better information on production techniques and prices, better organization and
marketing skills, as well as access to competitively priced fertilizers and seeds. Contract farming should be
encouraged and information dissemination be used aggressively to inform farmers of their options.
Second, rural communities need better links to markets by improving national and local roads. Rice yields are
significantly higher in areas in proximity of roads. In addition, other infrastructure, such as irrigation, is in dire
need of repair.

l-

Third, farmers and emerging agro-businesses in rural areas need better access to finance. Economic actors in
rural areas are starved of financial resources today.
Fourth, the preservation of natural resources can be combined with the provision of opportunities to rural
population to unleash the huge potential for eco-tourism and small-scale mining.

Fifth, policies for the rural sector have to be adapted to fit the local circumstances, as well as to facilitate
migration to areas of opportunity by fostering clear property rights and providing basic services in these areas.

29.
To achieve higher rates of growth inclusive of all sectors of the economy, Madagascar
needs to consolidate recent achievements and deepen the policy reforms. An initial analysis of
the constraints to growth in Madagascar points to the need of removing bamers that limit
(i) access to domestic and international markets (transportation, communication, domestic and
foreign monopolies); (ii) access to finance and factor markets (credit, electricity, land); and (iii)
access to effective government (regulations, judiciary).

Access to domestic and international markets
30.
Madagascar is an open economy, and it enjoys preferential access to the European, U.S.
and regional markets. It currently exports textiles and agricultural commodities (table I), but
could potentially export a wider range of products and increase the volume of exports. For
example, it is puzzling that despite high demand for fruits and vegetables in the nearby markets
Mauritius and Rkunion, Malagasy farmers have not geared up to respond to this demand. It is
even more puzzling that they do not even satisfy the local market demand for agricultural and
dairy products.'6 The answer lies in supply constraints-such as inadequate transport
infrastructure, high transportation and telecommunication costs, trade monopolies, deficiencies in
accessing market information, and an inability to meet basic quality and phytosanitary standards
that limit opportunities.

Table 1. Trade performance, 1995-2005
Growth
Commodities
1995-2005
Agriculture
-47.6
vanilla
19.4
73.3
cloves
coffee
-91.5
shrimp
37.5
270.5
Textiles and clothing
-27.0
Mining (chrome & graphite)
Total Trade
53.0

Share of Madagascar exports
1995
31.3
7.4
2.0
16.5
10.5
16.5
3.9
100.0

2001
30.0
17.0
10.0
0.3
14.6
28.7
1.1
100.0

2004
20.1
14.2
2.8
0.5
10.2
40.1
1.3
100.0

2005
10.7
5.7
2.2
0.9
9.4
40.0
1.9
100.0

Source Central Bank of Madagascar

3 1.
For a country as remote as Madagascar, good transportation and communication links are
vital to its better integration into the global and regional markets as well as to profiting from the
existing market opportunities at home. The country has an extensive transport infrastructure (roads,
ports, and airports), but the quality is highly deficient (box 4). The progressive deterioration of
infrastructure, such as the loss of about 1000 kilometers of roads per year during 1970-2000 has
narrowed the scope for profitable investment especially in rural areas, where potential returns are
very high and growth has been particularly weak. Transport from Antananarivo, where the main
productive capacity is located, to the port of Toamasina is expensive and time consuming.
Inefficient management of cargo at ports further increases the cost of maritime transport. For
example, the cost of handling a transshipment container in Toamasina is more than twice that in
Port Louis (Mauritius).

l 6 For example, the increasing demand for fresh fruits and vegetables in Fort Dauphin (due to a new mining development)
cannot be met locally due to poor roads, lack of refrigeration services, inadequate quantity and quality of products, and the
absence of collection and marketing services. As a result these products are brought all the way from the capital.

Box 4. The state of infrastructure in Madagascar
Roads. Many parts of the island have no road access during the rainy season. When it became
independent, Madagascar had 50,000 kilometers of roads, but due to poor maintenance and
underinvestment the national road network now consists of only 31,612 kilometers, of which 4,074
kilometers are paved and 5,855 kilometers are in good or fair condition. Even primary arteries, such as
Antsirabe-Antananarivo and Toamasina-Antananarivo, are inadequate to handle current traffic.
Ports. Madagascar has 17 ports. Toamasina, the primary port, handles more than 70 percent of total port
traffic. It is the least efficient port in the Indian Ocean-loading and unloading are slow, less than 6.3
containers per hour. The port is overstaffed by a factor of six, resulting in high costs despite low wages.
However, there have been some positive developments since the concessioning of the container terminal
two years ago.
Airports. Madagascar has 55 airports, 26 with paved runways, but only one, in Antananarivo-Ivato-is
longer than 3,047 meters. Air service to the rest of the country fiom Ivato is inefficient and uncompetitive
because Air Madagascar has a monopoly on domestic flights and ground handling throughout the country.

IT and telecommunications. Both are limited and expensive. Tele-density stands at only 6 percent and
coverage remains poor, mostly limited to the urban centers. Absence of a reliable and affordable national
backbone significantly limits coverage of telecommunication networks. A new regulator with increased
accountability has been put in place, but the transition has been slow, resulting in a regulatory void.

32.
Air transport and telecommunication links are expensive. Despite an announced policy of
open skies, there is no evidence of increased competition on key air routes (both passenger and
freight). For example, the air freight cost between Antananarivo and Paris is almost twice as
expensive as the cost between Mauritius and Paris. Similarly, the cost of local calls in
Madagascar is very high, the second most expensive in Africa after Kenya. International calls are
also expensive: a three-minute call from Madagascar to the United States costs twice as much as
a call from Mauritius to the United States and four times as much as a call from South ~ f i i c a . ' ~
The telecom company Telma still holds the monopoly in a number of market segments (such as
backbone and provision of public phones). This creates severe obstacles for other private sector
investors to come in, making it paramount to ensure the opening of the sector after Telma's post
privatization exclusivity period ends in June 2008. All this increases Madagascar's isolation from
the rest of the world.
Better logistics to access domestic and external markers are important, but so is free
33.
competition. Monopolies in key sectors hamper growth. In addition to monopolies in
transportation and communications discussed above, trade in key agriculture inputs and products
such as fertilizer, vanilla, cattle, milk, and precious wood is controlled by entrenched networks of
oligopsonists, often with links to influential politicians and, in the case of cattle trade, to
organized crime. As a result, profit margins for farmers tend to be low and barriers to entry
(whether perceived or real) high.''
Finally, poor access to information on prices, technology, standards, and the like hrther
34.
limit growth---especially in rural areas. The inability to meet basic quality and phytosanitary
standards required in advanced markets is a serious impediment to exploiting Madagascar's
comparative advantage in agricultural exports. The dismantling of public agricultural extension
services left a critical institutional vacuum that the private sector and nongovernmental
organizations have yet to fill. Many farmers have simply reverted to subsistence farming with
17

Development Policy Review, World Bank, 2005

'' See Minten & Bart: "How to alleviate rural poverty through agriculture growth" (2006).

occasional local sales or barter. The government has recently tried to disseminate price
information. But knowledge of market prices, quality standards, and veterinary practices remains
scarce. It is thus unsurprising that Malagasy exports of processed foods (as well as other product
categories) tend to have very high import content, and backward links to upstream raw materials
producers are weak.

Access to finance and factor markets
35.
Businesses in Madagascar struggle with access to finance, electricity, land, and skilled
labor.
36.
Although sound, the financial sector in Madagascar is shallow and undiversified.I9Credit
to the private sector stands at only 10 percent of GDP, below the 14.8 percent average for low
income countries. Only the largest enterprises have access to credit from the formal financial
sector, while small and medium-size enterprises have to rely on alternative and more expensive
means of financing. Access to long-term finance is even more restricted, preventing investment
activities by businesses and especially small and medium-size enterprises. The small insurance
sector is weak and poorly supervised.
37.
The recurrent episodes of
political and macroeconomic
instability are reflected in the high risk
premiums that banks charge for credit.
Access to credit is further constrained
by deficiencies in the legal framework,
in land and pledge registries, and in
the judicial system. Therefore, it is
unsurprising that firms cite access to
finance and cost of finance among the
most severe constraints to doing
business in Madagascar (figure 4).

Figure 4: Share of firms rating cost and access to finance
as major obstacle

40%

I

%
,,

Madagascar

Kenya

Tanzania

Access to Financing

Uganda

SubSaharan
Africa

Cost of Financing

Source: World Bank Madagascar Investment Climate Assessment, 2005

The national electricity coverage rate is only around 15 percent of households; tariffs are
38.
high by regional standards; and the service is unreliable. Many enterprises operate their own
generators. Moreover, expanding the system to accommodate demands from new businesses is a
major challenge due to the difficult financial situation of the public power and water utility
Jirama. Notwithstanding the recent near-doubling of electricity tariffs, Jirama continues to rely
on budget transfers of over US$30 million a year.20Unless this situation is dealt with, the country
will likely continue to experience power deficits and power outages that disrupt economic
activity and increase the cost of doing business, hampering the prospects of future growth,
especially in manufacturing and tourism.
39.
While land tenure does not appear to be a major constraint to agricultural productivity,2'
it is a major obstacle to private investors, particularly in tourism-because of the absence of a

l9 The banking sector is highly uncompetitive, with seven banks, six of which are foreign affiliated or controlled. Lack of
new entrants can be explained by a history of macroeconomic and political instability and small market size (see
Madagascar Financial Sector Assessment Program, 2005).
20 The tariffs are still below cost recovery and the efficiency of Jirama is low.
2' World Bank, Madagascar Land and Property Rights Review, 2006

transparent and predictable land allocation process. It also constrains the ability of farmers to use
land as collateral to access credit.
40.
Labor is abundant, and education outcomes are as good or better than those in many subSaharan Africa countries. However, projections indicate that employers will encounter a
substantial shortfall of more educated workers, making it difficult to achieve growth of 6-7
percent a year sought by the government. The Development Policy Review (2005) projects that
78 percent of new jobs in 2004-08 will demand secondary or higher education and that 25
percent of that demand will not be satisfied. Some shortages of advanced technical and
managerial skills already hamper the growth of industrial (textiles and clothing) and more hightech sectors. In addition, government vocational training schemes are inadequate, and the training
provided by individual firms is undersupplied because of high turnover.

Access to effective government
41.
It almost goes without saying that Madagascar's future depends on the quality of its
governance. So far, inconsistent policies, corruption, and a dysfunctional judiciary have
depressed returns to economic activity and created a climate of uncertainty for private
investment. They have also increased the degree of informality in the economy. Despite recent
progress in these areas, more needs to be done to achieve high levels of private investment
needed to fuel high rates of growth.
42.
Government regulations still remain burdensome, and the bureaucracy is unresponsive.
Madagascar ranks 14gthout of 175 countries in ease of doing business (figure 5). For example,
senior management of enterprises spend more than 20 percent of their time with regulators.22Tax
rules are also burdensome.
Although Madagascar's
Figure 5. Aggregate ranking of Doing Business
I
indicators, Doing Business 2006
overall revenue effort is low,
it is unfairly distributed,
since only large-scale civil
firms pay taxes while export
processing zone and
informal sector producers
remain outside the tax base.
For firms that pay taxes, the
burden is onerous. In
addition to the high rates, the
private sector complains
about a lack of stability.
On a positive note, it has become easier to start a business in Madagascar: it now takes 10
43.
steps and an average of 21 days at a cost of 35 percent of annual income per capita to register a
new business compared with the regional average of 11 steps, 62 days, and 163 percent of annual
income per capita. Clarification of rules and rights has recently motivated investment into mining
and tourism. The new proposed changes to investment legislation and the newly established
Economic Development Board of Madagascar, an apex body managed by a joint public-private
board and responsible for investment promotion, is expected to further improve the investment
climate.
22

World Bank, Madagascar Investment Climate Assessment, 2005

44.
The performance of the judiciary remains inadequate, mainly because of procedural and
institutional inefficiencies. Moreover, its credibility is undermined by perceptions of widespread
corruption, confirmed by a recent government anticorruption survey. Despite recent efforts,
progress in addressing these issues has been mixed. On the positive side, the backlog of cases at
the lower courts was reduced in Antananarivo and in some other jurisdictions. However, little
progress has been made on the introduction of service standards. The standards for the lower
courts, developed in 2005, have yet to be validated, and standards for the higher courts have yet
to be developed. Also, efforts at dealing with corruption in the judiciary through the disciplinary
commission in the Ministry of Justice have been ineffective. A key problem is resistance to
change within the judiciary, as well as the lack of a consistent and credible reform strategy.
45.
Efforts are under way to improve the government's policymaking capacity. Concerns
remain, however, that concentrating power in the presidential administration has led to weak
mandates in line ministries. Rebalancing power between the office of the president and the
ministries would strengthen the capacity of ministries, enabling them to support the development
and implementation of national and local agendas. To date, the government has put a priority on
buttressing the technical capacity of the Ministry of Finance and priority sector ministries, such
as transportation, education, and now health. This strategy seems to have worked.
Finally, the government faces the formidable challenge of strengthening the mechanisms
46.
of accountability for state actions.23Domestic and foreign perception is that the country lacks a
clear delineation between the public office and the private interests in certain sectors. As a result,
conflicts of interest can arise even if they do not contravene norms. Regardless of the validity of
these concerns, Madagascar will benefit from strengthened institutions of checks and balances.
The experience of African countries demonstrates that political and economic stability is
endangered when power and wealth are in the hands of a privileged few. The challenge is to
reduce the scope for the use of state power for economic gain. In addition, there is also the
perception that recent efforts at rooting out corruption (BIANCO, for example) have stopped
short of addressing concerns on grand corruption. The consequences of these governance
problems are clearest in the forestry and mining sectors, where political and vested interests
undermine progress (box 5).24
Improving transparency and equity of public institutions and of public services also
47.
requires strengthening the "demand" side of accountability, which remains weak both because of
cultural traditions and because of a lack of information dissemination to citizens in a form that
would enhance their involvement in holding service providers accountable.

Improving service delivery
48.
As demonstrated in numerous countries, high economic growth alone is not enough to
improve poor people's access to basic services or achieve positive development outcomes more
generally.25Nor is the availability of additional resources generated domestically or received
from abroad. Effective public policy and action are also needed.

*' Past reform efforts were hampered by political instability deriving partly from the failure of the leadership at the time to
complement reform with openness and accountability. Political crises every 10 years or so have had a tremendous negative
impact on Madagascar's economy and the lives of Malagasy people. Reversing this historical trend is critical to future
success.
24 An analysis of the country's political economy and sociopolitical factors has been carried out to inform CAS preparation.
25 See the World Development Report 2004: Making Services Work for Poor People.

Box 5. Governance issues in forestry and mining
Forestry. Weak governance has been a chronic problem in Madagascar's forestry sector. A progressive
decline in both quality and efficiency of the forestry administration, formerly proud and well trained,
coupled with a lack of checks and balances in issuing forestry permits contributed to this situation. The
multiplicity of agents entitled to grant tree cutting permits (as well as the diversity of permits) further
complicates monitoring. After cyclone Gafilo in 2005 permits granted to use wood for local construction led
to widespread illegal logging, which resulted in over US$30 million in exports of precious woods, mostly
from protected areas.

There have been recent important efforts to strengthen governance in the forestry sector, including the
creation a new tripartite Forestry-Justice-BIANCOcommission, the seizing of significant quantities of
illegal wood, simplification of judicial procedures to treat illegal cases, development of a system for
tracking forestry permits, streamlining of responsibilities for permit allocation, the establishment of mobile
control units, and the first ever granting of permits under competitive adjudication processes. However, it is
too early to judge the success of these efforts.
Mining. Governance in the mining sector is equally challenging. The government collects only a small part
of the potential revenues from small-scale mining activities, mainly because of a lack of monitoring and
control and because of widespread corruption, despite continuous efforts to improve sector governance. The
Office des Mines Nationales et des Industries Strategiques (OMNIS) has been particularly resistant to
modernization.

Recent reform efforts include the update of the institutional and procedural framework governing the
mining sector in 1999 and 2005. However, the framework needs further improvement, especially in light of
growing interest in Madagascar by major mining operators. Rio Tinto is developing an ilmenite mine in the
Fort Dauphin region, and two other large mines are being considered by potential investors (Ambatovy
nickel mine and Tulear ilmenite mine). To increase transparency in this sector, the government is
considering joining the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative and has expressed its commitment to
improving the legal and regulatory framework, strengthening capacity to manage mining and petroleum
resources, and building the capacity of small-scale miners. However, the seriousness of these efforts
remains to be seen.

49.
The challenges are many. Today, poor people are scattered and difficult to reach,
particularly in rural areas. In addition, rapid population growth makes it difficult to maintain
access to basic services nationwide. Moreover, the poor in Madagascar are exposed to recurrent
economic and nature shocks. Finally, decades of neglect before the mid- 1990s led to poor
coverage and quality of service delivery below the sub-Saharan Africa average (for example, in
clean water and sewerage). Recent progress in service delivery must be consolidated, and the
initiatives under way to improve the capacity of the state to deliver services must be improved by
allowing local governments and communities to participate and by opening the space to thirdparty service providers. This should help the country get closer to meeting the MDGs.

Public sector capacity to deliver sewices
To improve the state's capacity to deliver services, there is a need to mobilize a greater
50.
share of internal resources, put in place a modern system of public expenditure management,
allocate a greater role and resources to the local governments, and increase the voice and
accountability of local communities.
The government is aware of the need to overhaul its tax policies and tax administration to
5 1.
improve the mobilization of internal resources (see box 2) and reduce compliance costs for
enterprises. In addition, the process of improving the management of public resources is
underway. The April 2006 Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability (PEFA) assessment

confirms improvements in the capacity of the Ministry of Finance and advances in setting the
needed legal framework, but it also points to a broad agenda ahead. This includes the
introduction of a definitive budget classification; improvement of treasury management based on
timely reporting by spending agencies and proper commitment control; strengthening internal
and external control; and implementation of the new procurement legislation. Improvements in
the quality of public expenditure are critical for more effective use of public resources and for
greater mobilization of external support.
52.
Madagascar remains a highly centralized country, both administratively and fiscally,
despite the early 1990s decentralization reform effort to empower communes.26Commune
competencies are limited to the basic function of administrative services and waste management
and some cofinancing of social services through conditional grants. Local governments manage
directly only 3 percent of total public resources. Moreover, their authority to raise taxes is
severely limited. Some donor financing reaches communities to help build basic infrastructure
and to meet some immediate needs, but the coverage is limited.
53.
Decentralization in Madagascar will have to go along with building the necessary
financial and administrative foundations at the local level, which will require time. With the help
of donors the government is working on the legal framework for decentralization. Two issues
will need to be resolved in the short term to allow hrther progress in this area: clarification of
competencies of different levels of government and assignment of revenue and expenditure
responsibilities.
54.
Service delivery efforts will have to be complemented by a strong emphasis on partnering
with beneficiaries and clients in the monitoring and evaluation of services, including
dissemination of information on service quality at the local level and strengthening the
accountability links between service providers and users. Strengthening the capacity of civil
society to hold the government accountable and demand stronger institutions will help to finetune service delivery to the needs of the people, leading to better results.
55.
Another area demanding urgent attention is the government's capacity to deal with
economic and natural shocks. Madagascar's economy is vulnerable to price fluctuations of key
commodities, such as vanilla and rice. In addition, it is among the countries with the highest risk
level of natural disasters, such as droughts, cyclones, locust plagues, floods, etc. This situation is
exacerbated by climate change. Madagascar has traditionally responded to these shocks after they
happen, which involves costly repairs of roads, irrigation systems, schools, and other
infrastructure since almost none of the major infrastructure in Madagascar is built according to
cyclone or flooding norms and standards.27
56.
While equipping the state and society with mechanisms to cope with these challenges is a
long-term task, much can be done over the short and medium term to improve the knowledge of
the risks and to develop adaptation measures, particularly climate-proof norms and standards that
minimize the cost of rebuilding. International experience shows that the cost of rebuilding tends
to vastly exceed the cost of climate-proofing in the firstplace. In addition, efforts can be made to
minimize the impact of trade volatility, shielding public expenditures (especially public
consumption) from shocks.
Territorial administration in Madagascar comprises five main levels: provinces, regions, districts, communes and villages.

'' IDA'S Community Development Project has used anti-cyclone construction norms for schools, health facilities, etc. None
of the infrastructure build under this project was destroyed by Gafilo (2004), the most violent cyclone in Madagascar in the
last 40 years.

Involving other actors in service delivery
57.
To achieve better service delivery in an environment of limited public capacity and
resources, nonstate actors must be involved. For example, churches have been involved in the
delivery of education and health services. The private sector has been partially filling the gap in
secondary and higher levels of education, and it is instrumental in financing and managing
infrastructure. Already, Madagascar has made good progress in engaging the private sector
thorough public-private partnerships in power, ports, and railways. Still, there is substantial scope
for increased private sector participation, especially in power and transportation.

11.

THE GOVERNMENT PROGRAM

58.
To deal with the challenges discussed above, the government has put in place a bold 5year development plan-the Madagascar Action Plan (MAP+which is the second-generation
Poverty Reduction Strategy. The MAP envisages accelerated and better coordinated reforms, and
outlines the "strategies and actions that will ignite rapid growth, lead to the reduction of poverty,
and ensure that the country develops in response to the challenges of globalization and in
accordance with the national vision-Madagascar Naturally-and the Millennium Development
~oals."~'
59.
The MAP was prepared in a participatory way, with workshops organized in all 22
regions that culminated in a national launch workshop in November 2006. The MAP includes
eight commitments: (1) responsible governance; (2) connected infrastructure; (3) educational
transformation; (4) rural development and a green revolution; (5) health, family planning, and the
fight against HIVIAIDS; (6) high growth economy; (7) cherish the environment; and (8) national
solidarity. For each commitment, the government identified key challenges, goals and strategies,
priority projects and activities, and key monitoring indicators. The MAP identifies six
"breakthrough initiativesm-that is, areas requiring immediate attention: public finance reform;
significant increase in investment to promote high growth; sowing the seeds of a green
revolution; transforming public security; implementing bold new measures for health and family
planning; and transforming the judiciary.
60.
The programs for implementing the MAP commitments are being elaborated in greater
detail in sector strategies. Some of these strategies are already in place-such as the strategies in
rural development, health, primary education, rural water, transport, and HIVIAIDS. The
government is working on a risk management and social protection strategy, a financial sector
strategy, and is revising the education strategy, including post-primary education, in line with the
MAP. Implementation of the MAP is guided by the annual budget laws, which include annual
results agreements between the president and cabinet ministers.
The MAP recognizes the importance of public participation, fighting corruption, building
61.
leadership capacity and skills, and mobilizing resources (financial, technical, material, and
human) to make it a success. Two key new institutions have been put in place to support MAP
implementation: the Economic Development Board of Madagascar to facilitate and promote
private domestic and foreign investment and the National Leadership Institute of Madagascar to
build capacity in government and other sectors of society.
-

'*Government of Madagascar, Madagascar Action Plan, 2006
- 16-

Bank assessment
62.
Madagascar's decision-makers face a classic and immensely difficult tradeoff. Of course,
Madagascar needs to do many things at once: reduce corruption in the judiciary and customs
service, privatize inefficient and loss-making state-owned enterprises, build roads, increase
access to education, improve availability of credit, reduce tax and customs evasion, enhance
tourist infrastructure, increase labor flexibility, ensure environmental sustainability, strengthen
public sector management and budget execution, and so on. However, in light of the
government's limited capacity and resources, it must focus on areas where significant progress is
possible at relatively low cost-such as streamlining the regulatory environment, improving
public sector efficiency, and rooting out corruption. Elsewhere, reforms must attract donor
support or make use of public-private partnerships to expand the resource envelope.
63.
The MAP objectives are linked to the high growth scenario, with growth of 7-10 percent,
which is linked to significantly higher donor assistance, higher domestic revenue mobilization
and higher public and private investment than currently projected. The baseline scenario,
supported through the International Monetary Fund's (IMF) Poverty Reduction and Growth
Facility, includes a more realistic scenario based on identified external assistance flows and more
conservative levels of domestic revenue and investment. For 2007, the MAP growth objectives
are identical in both scenarios, reflecting the most up-to-date information. The annual finance
laws provide the opportunity to update the medium-term macroeconomic framework in light of
identified foreign assistance flows, improved domestic revenue mobilization and progress in
growth enhancing structural reforms. The base case medium term economic outlook is presented
in attachment 5, and the 2006 joint Bank-Fund debt sustainability analysis is presented in
attachment 6.

111.

WORLD BANK GROUP STRATEGY

A. LESSONS
FROM THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE
2004-06 COUNTRY
ASSISTANCE
STRATEGY
64.
The 2 0 0 4 4 6 CAS offers valuable lessons. The CAS was h l l y aligned with the PRSP,
including the existing portfolio that was re-oriented to ensure that it supported the PRSP. This
alignment was key in ensuring that good progress was achieved.
65.
Most progress was made in areas with high government ownership (for example,
education). Progress was also made in areas where the Bank has been engaged over a long-term
period with a concerted effort on improving capacity and providing reliable and continuous
financial support (for example, nutrition, environment, health, and roads). However, with the
benefit of hindsight, one can note that the CAS was somewhat optimistic about the government's
capacity to implement reforms. In some instances, the goals were too ambitious; in others,
commitments to reform were constrained by capacity in the government. The Bank's work on
capacity building has been well targeted and is showing incipient results but this is a long-term
undertaking given the enormity of the task.
The introduction of the Poverty Reduction Support Credits (PRSCs) during the CAS
66.
provided an important forum for policy dialogue and significantly improved many aspects of how
the Bank and other donors supported the country. The credits increased the focus on
strengthening of country systems, greatly improved the reliability and predictability of foreign

aid, and strengthened donor collaboration. However, reliance on PRSCs for the transition of
programs related to human development to the government's budget proved premature because
the failure to mobilize planned resources had a negative impact on the execution of these priority
programs (e.g., nutrition). As a consequence, the Bank has become more cautious with regard to
transferring sector programs to budget support.
The use of the sectonvide approach in specific sector interventions has worked well,
particularly in education, HIVIAIDS, and transport. This approach has allowed for better
institutional strengthening and greater donor-government harmonization around agreed sector
strategies. In addition, the growth poles approach-focusing assistance on specific geographical
areas to ensure the complementary of initiatives on the ground-seems promising, but it is too
early to ascertain its fbll effectiveness.
67.

68.
The Bank undertook a broad range of analytical and advisory work to ground its
interventions, especially the PRSCs. With hindsight, a greater emphasis on dissemination could
have increased its impact. Also, certain areas remained relatively undeveloped, such as the link
between growth and poverty and key strategic growth priorities. This work is now under way.
69.
During implementation of the CAS, the Bank and other donors adopted a more resultsoriented approach, led by the PRSP, gradually increasing focus on critical indicators and key
results in selected areas. However, the weakness of the statistical system has been a serious
impediment to accurately assessing impact. In addition, some IDA-financed interventions were
designed to test new policies and approaches (for example, rural water and microfinance). To
move fiom these successfbl pilots to nationwide coverage, the new strategy will need to scale up
the program and increase the impact of donor and government resources.
70.
An important lesson is that the increased staff presence in the Bank's Country Office
strengthened the relationship with the government, facilitated timely responses, improved
coordination with other donors, and improved the quality of implementation through
empowerment of Country Office staff and through a strong local fiduciary and safeguards team.

Integration within the World Bank Group improved. IDA and the IFC are working
7 1.
particularly closely in the energy and financial sectors, with emphasis on innovative guarantee
mechanisms, microfinance, and leasing. The World Bank Institute (WBI) and IDA have worked
together on various fionts, including public expenditure management, leadership training, and
public private partnerships. The experience confirms that WBI learning activities work best when
they are fblly integrated with IDA programs. The full CAS Completion Report can be found in
attachment 8.
The Independent Evaluation Group completed a Country Assistance Evaluation in July
72.
2006 of IDA'S involvement in Madagascar for 1995-2005. While the Country Assistance
Evaluation provides a valuable assessment of IDA'S program, its 10-year horizon does not, by its
nature, allow for a separate assessment of the last CAS. Still, it provides relevant
recommendations to: (i) include a CAS response in case of renewed political instability; (ii)
better understand the determinants of growth, especially in rural areas; (iii) focus governance
interventions on a few critical areas; (iv) limit the role of budget support until there is a sustained
improvement in collecting and managing public resources; and (v) pay greater attention to
monitoring and evaluation.
73.

Based on these lessons, there are some important implications for the new CAS:

Align the CAS to the government's program (MAP) and increase focus on results and on
tracking impact. However, be realistic about what can be achieved given the capacity
constraints and the limited financing envelope.
Sharpen understanding of the underpinnings for shared growth, especially in rural areas,
and focus on removing the main constraints to growth.
Support the government in its efforts at scaling up and leveraging additional resourcesinternal and external, public and private (expanding on positive donor harmonization
experiences and public-private partnerships).
Focus governance interventions on a few but critical areas (for example, public
expenditure management, forestry, mining, tax, and customs).
Increase efforts at knowledge dissemination of existing and future analytical work.

74.
This CAS comes at a propitious time. Capitalizing on the successes of the last few years,
the country has embarked on a new ambitious reform program-the Madagascar Action Planspearheaded by President Ravalomanana, who won reelection for another five years in December
2006. The CAS seeks to build on this momentum and, jointly with other donors, support
Madagascar's efforts to solidify its gains and make further progress in transforming the economy.
Fortunately, the World Bank Group has a solid ongoing program in Madagascar and has a critical
mass of knowledge and experience. While building on this solid foundation, the CAS recognizes
the inherent risks. A critical challenge to the government and the donor community is how to
align the country's vast development needs with its limited financial and institutional resources.
75.
Madagascar has an absorptive capacity well beyond the existing IDA envelope. The
government has requested IDA advice and assistance in many aspects of the MAP, especially
given that there are few donors engaged in Madagascar to the point that in some areas IDA is the
only relevant external player. Therefore, it is difficult for IDA to exit some areas, a challenge also
recognized in the Country Assistance Evaluation (2006). The assistance strategy presented in this
document has been formulated with regard to these constraints. To increase the strategy's impact
in a resource-constrained environment, the Bank Group will build on its convening power to act
as a catalyst and attract additional external support to Madagascar. However, this is a risky
strategy in that it assumes that Madagascar will be able to attract more attention from donors than
before.
Country Assistance Strategy principles and approach
76.

The CAS will be guided by the following set of basic principles:

Aligning with the governmentprogram (Madagascar Action Plan): As the review of the
77.
last CAS suggests, government ownership remains essential to successful implementation. To
strengthen ownership, the CAS was designed in parallel with the MAP in terms of timing,
duration and substance. This included sustained discussions with the government during 2006,
including the presidential administration, cabinet, sector ministries and civil society. The CAS
covers almost the same time period as the MAP (2007-12) and supports the attainment of the
MAP results. In doing so, the CAS supports the aspects of the government program that are of
the highest priority and where the Bank Group has a comparative advantage.

78.
Harmonizing and aligning with other donors: In line with the government's request and
consistent with the Paris Declaration on Harmonization, the Bank Group's assistance to
Madagascar is aligned with that of other donors to provide a package of coordinated support
around the government's MAP. Specifically, the preparation of this CAS was closely coordinated
with other partners and is designed to facilitate maximum harmonization with other donors and
the use of the country systems. The work on the latter will build on the ongoing efforts to
strengthen the public expenditure management, public procurement and other fiduciary aspects of
the country systems. The use of the sectorwide approach in policy and investment lending and
phasing out of project implementation units will contribute to moving this agenda forward.
79.
Acting as a catalyst for scaling up results: The Bank will help the country position itself
to profit from scaling-up opportunities as they arise and play a catalytic role in leveraging
additional resources (public and private) for Madagascar. In this regard, it will work through two
channels: (i) the World Bank's Africa scaling-up initiative and (ii) direct mobilization of donor
resources to concrete sectors and programs (this channel is expected to yield more results).
Building on its convening authority and comparative advantage as a global knowledge
institution, the Bank will assist the government with the development of credible sector
strategies and programs which are important for attracting donor and private sector support. In
addition, IDA will help improve the country's own capacity to mobilize resources and to spend
them effectively. The CAS approach to scaling up is described in box 6.
Box 6. The Country Assistance Strategy approach to scaling up
Four issues are critical to Madagascar's scaling up agenda, all of them supported by the CAS.
First, the government needs to increase internal resource mobilization. But more transparent public
procurement and monitoring of program results are also critical.
Second, the government needs to attract more private resources. To do so, it should continue to improve
the investment climate and attract private-public partnerships in infrastructure.

Third,the Bank Group and other development partners will help the government develop sector strategies
and programs and put in place pilot programs that can serve as a platform for harmonizing and scaling up
donor programs. To this end, the CAS will seek ways to increase donor collaboration, including the
promotion of the sectorwide approach and of the menu of options (syndication model) proposed in the
Africa Action Plan. Under the latter, IDA will prepare projects that would be financed by other
development partners.
Fourth, the Bank will work with the government to increase the capacity for program implementation in
ministries and agencies.
Several areas are ready for scaling up today. In these areas, the sector programs are in place, the
institutional framework is functioning, and the approach is successfully piloted. By and large, the only
element missing is funds to replicate these successful programs at a national scale:
Rural water supply: sector strategy and institutional structure in place and piloted.
Microfinance: approach successfully piloted, a good basis for scaling-up.
Transport: strong institutions in place, good donor coordination.
In addition, there are several potential areas such as health, environment and the local development fund
that should become ready for scaling up during the CAS period.

Moving gradually to greater selectivity: Given the difficulty of exiting abruptly some of
80.
the areas of IDA involvement presently, the strategy is to move gradually to greater selectivity as
part of the scaling up process. During the CAS period, a special emphasis will be placed on

gradually building the basis for transferring initiatives to the government and other partners in
areas such as nutrition, finance, and Local Development Fund.
8 1.
Using an integrated approach: The CAS will use an integrated approach to deliver
results at the national and regional levels. This approach will work in two ways. To deliver
nationwide results in areas such as health or education, it will combine various instruments
(PRSC, investment operations, technical assistance, community interventions, analytica1,and
advisory assistance) needed to meet the sector objectives. And to deliver results in specific
geographical areas with high growth potential, it will focus on removing the key bottlenecks to
unleashing the area's growth potential. A good example of this latter approach is the Growth
Poles Project started under the previous CAS (box 7). In both cases, the interventions will work
at both national and local levels and seek to involve all key stakeholders.

Box 7. Using an integrated approach: The Growth Poles Project
The Integrated Growth Poles Project (US$129.8 million, FY2005) is a joint IDA, IFC, Foreign
Investment Advisory Service, and Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency effort that aims to stimulate
growth in three geographical regions with high potential by addressing the key bottlenecks to investment.
The three poles are: Nosy Be for tourism-led growth, Fort Dauphin for mining and tourism-led growth,
and Antananarivo-Antsirabe for export-led growth.
In Nosy Be, the project invests in minimum infrastructure (road network and urban infrastructure) to kick
start growth and supports the creation of a regulatory environment conducive to tourism expansion.
In Fort Dauphin, it focuses on the development of a new port to support tourism and the ilmenite mining
operations and to facilitate market access for local production, upgrading of the road network and urban
infrastructure and strengthening capacity of the municipality.
In Antananarivo-Antsirabe it supports export-led growth through technical assistance to potential
industrial and agribusiness zones, private-public partnerships to establish an ICT business park in
Antananarivo, and support to the municipalities of Antananarivo and Antsirabe through technical
assistance and training.

1

In addition to specific activities in each growth pole, the project supports cross-cutting activities critical to
all three growth poles such as business climate and access to finance.

CAS approach to governance and capacity building
82.
A critical cross-cutting element of this CAS is improving governance and reducing
corruption. The CAS will build on the efforts started under the previous CAS in support of the
government's far-reaching program to improve governance in a holistic and consistent manner.
Future governance interventions will seek to consolidate the current gains and continue to
support the governance agenda in a more targeted and selective manner. At the regulatory level
efforts will focus on closing the gaps in the legal and procedural framework to combat
corruption, in particular on regulating conflict-of-interest issues. At the same time, support will
focus on critical aspects for the implementation of the governance agenda in (i) resource
mobilization (tax and customs); (ii) public expenditure management; (iii) management of natural
and mineral resources; and (iv) decentralization.
In each of these areas, the Bank Group and the government will work to improve
83.
government capacity and efficiency by emphasizing measures that increase transparency, reduce
discretionary controls, encourage the participation of users in the provision of services, and
involve citizens in monitoring the quality of service delivery. For example, in health and

education, it will particularly emphasize transparency of public financial transactions through
public expenditure tracking exercises and participation and oversight by users, and dissemination
of information on services to allow for greater citizen involvement in monitoring services.
Details on specific governance interventions are included in the description of CAS pillars
presented in the next section.
Building on the ongoing capacity building efforts that include both supply and demand
84.
side, the World Bank Group will continue to integrate specific training and capacity building
measures across sectors, projects, and analytical and advisory activities, in line with the Capacity
Development Management Action Plan (CDMAP) of the Africa Action Plan. It will continue to
strengthen local training institutions and help the government further develop the capacity of the
National Leadership Institute, the civil service training colleges and the justice training school.
To improve cross-sector collaboration it will continue to support the 'rapid results' methodology
as an important tool to improve administrative efficiency. It will pay special attention to building
capacity in the key ministries involved in implementing CAS programs such as the Ministries of
Finance, Health, and Education.

C. BANKGROUPPROGRAM TO SUPPORT THE STRATEGIC OUTCOMES
Strategic objectives
As the earlier analysis suggests, this CAS will continue the Bank Group's focus on
removing the bottlenecks for sustainable and shared growth, anchored in good governance, with
corresponding improvements in welfare indicators, in line with the MAP goals. The specific sets
of results supported by the CAS have been organized around two main pillars. The first pillar
concentrates on activities that will help remove constraints to investment and growth in rural and
urban areas. The second pillar brings together activities geared toward improving the scope and
quality of service delivery to people. A brief outline of the expected CAS results and proposed
program to deliver them follows.
85.

CAS results
The CAS results framework developed by the government and the Bank Group supports
86.
the MAP objectives. The results matrix (attachment 1) summarizes the MAP objectives that the
CAS seeks to support, the results that the Bank Group hopes to achieve through its interventions,
and the instruments that the Bank Group will use to implement the program. The government is
hlly committed to achieving these goals, but it is also aware that meeting them will be a
challenge given resource and institutional constraints. The results framework does not reflect
possible acceleration of outcomes as a result of scaling up donor assistance. If additional
resources become available, the framework will be revised accordingly in the CAS Progress
Report.
The instruments and programs that the Bank Group will use to deliver the CAS results are
discussed below. The ongoing World Bank Group portfolio will play an important role in the
delivery of the CAS objectives (box 8).
87.

Box 8. The current World Bank Group program
As of January 3 1,2007, the IDAIGEF portfolio consists of 16 IDA and one GEF project with total
commitments of US$974 million. Of that, a total of US$368 million remains undisbursed. The portfolio
quality is good with all projects rated Satisfactory. About one third of the portfolio is concentrated in the
human development sectors and one quarter in infrastructure. The Madagascar Country Office is in charge
of portfolio management with a decentralized team covering fiduciary and safeguards issues, a portfolio
manager and cluster leaders for each Bank network. The portfolio continues to disburse strongly with the
disbursement ratio averaging about 33 percent. The table below shows how the current portfolio supports
the CAS pillars.

IDA and GEF portfolio: Undisbursed commitments as of January 31,2007, Million US$
Governance
Removing bottlenecks to
Improving services to people
investment and growth
Mineral Resource Govern.
6.8 Integrated Growth Poles
106.7 Community Dev. Fund
13.7
8.9 Microfinance
0.6 Nutrition 2
10.5
Governance & Inst. Dev.
Private Sector Dev. 2
3.1 Health Sector Support 2
2.8
Rural Transport
24.2 HIVIAIDS
0.2
Transport Infrastructure
81.1 HIVIAIDS 2
30.0
PowerIWater Sector Restr.
10.0
Irrigation and Watershed
30.0
Environment 3 lDA&GEF
28.8
Rural Development Supp.
10.6
TOTAL

15.7

295.0

57.2

IFC has a strong program that includes a full range of investment and technical assistance services mainly
in support of the first CAS pillar. IFC's committed portfolio is US$26.6 million. It is building an
investment pipeline in mining, infrastructure and financial sectors. IFC is a major player in the energy
sector. In the financial sector, IFC and IDA are working together to improve access to finance through
guarantees and credit lines, and support new lines of business, such as leasing. The IDA-IFC Risk Sharing
Facility, approved in April 2006, was the first joint IFC and IDA instrument developed in the history of the
Bank. In addition, IFC established a Small Medium Enterprise (SME) Solutions Center and has put in place
a US$10 million SME Fund, which should be l l l y operational soon. In infrastructure, the LFC Advisory
Services conducted the successful concession of the container terminal of the Toamasina port in June 2005.
It is now helping the government to attract the private sector to the 12 main country airports. Private
Enterprise Partnership (PEP) Africa is implementing programs in entrepreneurship development, leasing
and export promotion and is currently developing proposals covering tourism and rural electrification.
MIGA 's outstanding portfolio in Madagascar consists of five guarantee contracts, issued to French and
Mauritian investors in agribusiness, power generation and tourism. The total gross exposure is US$6.3
million. In addition, MIGA is finalizing an insurance project with a French investor for a small hydropower
project, a second investment in this priority sector. The anticipated gross exposure is up to U S 2 0 million.
Madagascar is one of 11 African countries participating in MIGA's Enterprise Benchmarking Program,
which gauges a country's ability to compete with other potential locations for foreign investment. All these
activities support the first CAS pillar.
The WBI program is increasingly integrated with IDA, especially after the selection of Madagascar as a
focus country three years ago. WBI and IDA have worked together on leadership training and capacity
building in public expenditure management, public private partnerships, social protection, health, and
education. The focus is now shifting to building capacity in regional trade integration and social
accountability, while the attention to public-private partnerships and social risk management continues.

CAS instruments
The CAS will make use of all available World Bank Group instruments. A brief
88.
description on the use of some of the instruments is presented below.

The next Poverty Reduction Support Credit cycle
89.
The PRSCs will continue to serve as a forum for policy dialogue with the government and
as a platform for donor harmonization. The next series will hrther emphasize removing the main
policy bottlenecks to achieving the MAP and CAS objectives. Given the breadth of the potential
agenda, the PRSCs will seek to avoid dispersion and focus on a few critical issues (such as
governance and public resource management). It will provide US$40-50 million a year, which will
complement the IDA debt relief under the Multilateral Debt Relief Initiative of over US$30
million a year during the CAS period. In response to the lessons learnt from the previous PRSC
cycle that transition to budget support needs to happen more gradually, budget support will be
scaled up gradually to encompass other sectors in tandem with improvements in the public finance
system.

Use of sectonvide approaches
90.
The CAS will increase the use of the sector-wide approach that has proven effective in
Madagascar-especially in areas that require joint efforts by the government and donors to
strengthen the strategic framework and enhance capacity building.

Public-private partnerships and guarantees
The limited availability of public and donor resources to cover the country's immense
9 1.
infrastructure needs calls for greater involvement of the private sector. IDA, IFC, and the
Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA) will use a variety of instruments to attract
private sector investment-such as political and partial risk guarantees, equity investments, as
well as support the creation of an environment conducive to private sector participation. Special
attention will be paid to public-private partnerships (PPP) for promising infrastructure projects.
This work will build on the positive experience with PPPs, ports, electricity and railways sectors.

Analytical and advisory services
Important analytical work needed to support the key objectives of this CAS is still under
92.
way. A Country Economic Memorandum on growth, a programmatic Public Expenditure
Review, a Tax Policy Note, and studies on labor markets and post-primary education will provide
the basis for strengthening the dialogue and the design of CAS programs.
The CAS will seek to improve the effectiveness of its analytical and advisory activities as
93.
an important component of the Bank's institutional and capacity building effort in Madagascar.
The interaction with counterparts and dissemination of analflcal and advisory activities will
receive the same level of attention, if not more, than the analytical part of the work.
Dissemination will also cover work completed under the previous CAS. This means that the
Bank will produce fewer high-end reports and more just-in-time short policy notes focused on
answering the questions of the day. The high-end reports will be carried out only on key
strategic, forward-looking issues and disseminated more effectively. The analytical and advisory
activities will also serve to improve working with other donors, including joint preparation of
analytical work.

Proposed CAS lending and AAA program

Pillar I: Remove the bottlenecks to investment and growth in rural and urban areas
94.
Based on the diagnostics in the first part of the CAS, IDA will assist the government's
efforts to attract investment to Madagascar and to set the basis for long-term economic prosperity.
In doing so it will support the following MAP commitments: high growth economy; rural
development and green revolution; connected infrastructure; cherished environment; and
responsible governance (see figure 6 for pillar I contribution to MAP goals and attachment 2 for a
mapping of the MAP goals and CAS interventions). The upcoming Country Economic
Memorandum on growth will enrich the current growth diagnostics and help fine-tune future
World Bank Group interventions in support of growth. The Country Economic Memorandum will
emphasize the determinants of employment-based growth, especially in rural areas.
95.
Eliminate the barriers that limit access to domestic and international markets. The Bank
Group will step up its assistance to better integrate the economy into the global and regional
markets and to profit from the existing market opportunities at home. This will include continued
technical assistance to build government capacity and to help producers adopt improved quality
standards under the ongoing Trade Integrated Framework Program. In addition, the World Bank
Group will finance investments in irrigation infrastructure and support marketing and other
services to increase agricultural productivity and diversification. The Bank Group will also help
the government to reduce the cost of the logistics in the economy. In this regard, the World Bank
Group, in cooperation with the European Commission and other donors, will continue to support
policy reforms and investments in transportation - roads, railways, ports, etc. In doing so, it will
place special emphasis on the sustainability of the investments (for example, road maintenance
rather than road construction) and on involving the private sector through public-private
partnerships. Finally, the Bank Group will continue its programs aimed at lowering air transport
and telecommunication costs and improving accessibility through an open sky policy and
upgrades to the telecommunications sector, including through the development of a national
backbone, connected to the regional communications network via a East Africa submarine system
(EASSy).
96.
As to instruments, IDA will continue to provide assistance in an integrated fashion
through ongoing operations4rowth Poles Project (FY06), Watershed and Irrigation Adaptable
Program Loan (FY07), and two transport operations-followed by new planned transport and
growth operations. If the ongoing growth pole approach shows good results, the new growth
operation could support its replication in other regions in collaboration with development
partners and private sector. The PRSCs will complement, as needed, the implementation of progrowth policies, help sort out priorities, address coordination issues, and provide budget support.
Analytical work will supplement these efforts by carrying out a comprehensive infrastructure
review to identify the main bottlenecks and develop a strategic vision as well as to evaluate the
impact of the undertaken investments. Cross-cutting technical support on strengthening the
demand side of governance through social accountability mechanisms will be carried out by IDA,
with additional support from WBI on capacity building. WBI will also help improve
communication and information sharing with the rural areas through a community radio program.
To facilitate public private partnerships (PPP), WBI will help restructure the current privatization
agency into a PPP unit.

Figure 6. CAS Pillar I contribution to MAP goals

Madagascar Action Plan
commitments

f

High growth
economy

Responsible
governance
\

I

Reduced
corruption
Strengthened rule
of law
Improved capacity
of regions and
communes to
productively address
all regional and local
matters

1

\

MAP
goals to
which
CAS
Pillar I
contributes

I

Rural development
and green

Connected
infrastructure

1 \

\
I

A more
competitive business
environment
Increased
employment
opportunities
A banking system
capable of meeting
financing needs of the
private sector
Enhanced SME
contribution to
economic growth
Increased regional
integration
Increased revenue
generated by tourism

I

Improved rural
incomes
Increased
diversification of rural
activities
Increased
agriculture
productivity
Improved access
to affordable rural
financing
Improved
information and
opportunities offered
by the market
Increased
agriculture value
added by promoting
agribusiness

I

Increased number
of communes with
accessibility to allseason roads
Thriving
competitive
environment for
transport services
A more accessible
and adequate energy
supply at affordable
and competitive cost
More reliable,
accessible and
affordable
communication

Increased areas
under protection for
the conservation of
land, lake, marine and
costal biodiversity
Increased
financial sustainability
of the management of
the protected areas and
biodiversity

97.
Improve access tofinance and factor markets. IDA, working with the IFC and the
Millennium Challenge Corporation as well as other donors, will increase its support to the
financial sector, addressing bottlenecks that are preventing the emergence of a financial services
industry that meets the needs of all market segments, from microfinance to large enterprises. For
IDA, this work will include the provision of technical assistance to improve the supervision and
regulatory framework, payment and credit information systems, and the institutional capacity of
the sector. The cooperation between IDA and the IFC will continue to facilitate access to credit
and other financial services including such emerging areas as guarantees and leasing. In addition,
building on the FSAP recommendations and the successful implementation of the on-going
microfinance pilot project, the Bank Group will continue assisting the government to develop the
strategy and programs for scaling up and expanding coverage of the financial sector interventions
using a sectonvide approach with other donors. Given the IDA resource constraint, IDA will look
into alternative possibilities to support this priority sector, such as the Africa Action Plan menu
of options (syndication model) under which IDA would develop a financial sector project that
would be entirely financed by other partners. A supplemental IDA credit for the ongoing
microfinance project will be put in place in FY07 to provide bridge financing until the multidonor sectonvide support is in place.
98.
The Bank Group will continue its efforts at improving the situation in the energy sector.
To this end, the IFC and IDA will work together with the government on a concession
arrangement for the power company Jirama and on attracting private agents to generate and sell
electricity. The main instruments are the Energy and Water Adaptable Program Loan 1&2
(FY07109) and an IFC-IDA Partial Risk Guarantee for public-private partnership investments in
hydropower (FY09). Additionally, MIGA intends to support its second guarantee in the energy
sector in FY08. WBI will help strengthen the capacity of Jirama in carrying out its mission.
Access to land for investors will be tackled under the Growth Poles Project.

Reduce regulatory burden and foster competition. IDA will continue to assist the
99.
government's efforts to improve its business climate and bring in higher levels of foreign direct
investment. This will include continued assistance to the Economic Development Board and
other agencies to improve the regulatory environment, achieve greater transparency in issuing
licenses and concessions (especially in mining, fishing, tourism, and forestry), and improve the
quality of governance in extractive industries, including the country's joining of the Extractive
Industries Transparency Initiative (EITI). A key objective is to balance the economic potential in
these sectors with sustainable development. IFC, Foreign Investment Advisory Service, and
MIGA assistance will complement these efforts. Some important areas such as the reform of the
judiciary will be mainly covered by other partners such as the European Commission and the
U.S. Agency for International Development in line with agreed division of labor among donors.
The IDA instruments will include the ongoing and new Growth Poles, Mining, and Governance
and Institutional Development projects. Through its Radio Learning Program WBI will support
the fight against corruption by providing a learning platform for municipal officials, mayors, and
representatives of civil society on anti-conuption and good governance.
100. Achieve sustainable development and minimize the impact of shocks. IDA will build on
the progress made so far to preserve Madagascar's unique natural environment by supporting the
expansion of the System of Protected Areas of Madagascar to 6 million hectares. It will
encourage development of a concession policy to engage the private sector in managing the
protected areas. In addition, IDA will help the government develop national capacity to increase
the country's resilience to frequent natural calamities. During the CAS period, implementation of

the government's strategy in this area will begin on a pilot basis. The Bank Group will start with
reinforcing climate modeling, developing climate-proof standards and adhering to them in its
own projects. It will also help the government assess the feasibility a Risk Insurance Scheme and
its piloting. The ongoing as well as a follow-on IDA project in the environment sector, together
with Global Environment Facility (GEF) projects and analytical and advisory activities, will
support these ongoing efforts.

Pillar 11: Improve access to, and quality oJ services to people
101. The World Bank Group will complement the growth-generating activities under the first
CAS pillar with activities aimed at increasing the availability of, and facilitating access to,
services. Specifically, it will seek to assist the government in improving revenue mobilization
and budgetary practices to help address the resource shortage and to scale up the social programs,
achieve better outcomes in health and education, improve the management of weather shocks,
and gradually move service delivery closer to people. In doing so it will support the following
MAP commitments: educational transformation; health, family planning and the fight against
HIV/AIDS; and good governance (see figure 8 for pillar I1 contribution to MAP goals and
attachment 2 for a mapping of the MAP goals and CAS interventions).
102. Increase internal resource mobilization and transform the budget into an effective
instrument of developmentpolicy. Helping to improve all aspects of public finances will be a
high priority for the CAS. Working jointly with other partners, such as the IMF and France, IDA
will continue to assist the authorities' efforts to increase the level of internal resource
mobilization. Work on taxation and customs will seek to streamline the rules, create a level
playing field for all taxpayers by reducing tax exemptions, and facilitate compliance with tax
norms. In addition, IDA, jointly with other donors, will continue to help the government better
align the allocation of resources with MAP priorities. Further assistance will be provided to
institutionalize the public finance and procurement reforms with the focus on timely budgetary
reporting by spending agencies and proper commitment control, strengthening internal and
external control and implementation of the new procurement law. Periodic PEFA assessments
will monitor progress. IDA instruments will include Poverty Reduction Support Credits, the
ongoing and new Governance and Institutional Development projects, and complementary
analytical and advisory work such as the programmatic Public Expenditure Review, the Country
Financial Accountability Assessment, social accountability program, as well as continued close
portfolio management.
103. Achieve better outcomes in education and health. IDA, jointly with other donors, will
continue to assist the government in its efforts to reach universal enrollment in primary
education, increase completion rates, and improve the quality of education at all levels to better
prepare the workforce for a more advanced economy. The primary avenue for assistance will be
the Education for All Fast-Track Initiative with Africa Catalytic Fund resources. IDA assistance
will also include advice and investments in post-primary education and review of the labor
market.
104. In health, it will help the government make further progress on reducing child and
maternal mortality by offering access to reproductive services, reducing child malnutrition,
improving the availability of clean water and sanitation services, and keeping HIVIAIDS and
sexually transmitted disease rates under control. This will be achieved through the ongoing
operations in health and HIV/AIDS as well as a new series of health operations using a

Figure 7. CAS Pillar I1 contribution to MAP goals

Madagascar Action Plan
nitments

Responsible
governance

Educational
transformation

J \

\

I

goals to
which
Pillar 11
contributes

A more efficient and
effective government
budgetary process
A strengthened
provision of public services
Increased authority
and resources of
communes and regions to
address local and regional
needs

1

'

Health, family
planning and the fight
against HIVIAIDS

J \

I

Universal primary
education of seven years
Better secondary
education aimed at
strengthening
competencies and key
knowledge necessary to
prepare the country for
rapid economic growth
High quality higher
education

1

I

Improved quality of
health services to ensure
easy access, affordability
and reliability
A more effective
control of malaria
HIVIAIDS prevalence
kept below 1 percent
Reduced infant and
maternal mortality
Reduced malnutrition
among children under 5

Increased civil society
participation in social,
cultural and political affairs
Improved provision of
basic services to the
vulnerable
Promoting gender
equality and empowerment
of women
Lessened impact of
catastrophes

sectorwide approach. In addition, IDA will continue to work with the government on
institutionalizing the nutrition program and the extension of nutrition support sites nationwide
initially through the ongoing nutrition project and then through general budget support. Progress
in service delivery both in health and education will be measured through public expendituretracking exercises, audits, surveys, and direct participation and oversight by beneficiaries.

Gradually move service delivery closer to thepeople. IDA will assist the authorities in
105.
decentralizing the provision of basic services. The assistance will focus on fine-tuning and
implementing the decentralization strategy, including assigning revenues and expenditure
responsibility across different levels of government. IDA, the European Union, and other donors
will provide financial support for the Local Development Fund (FY08) which is a new
harmonized and government-led mechanism for infrastructure finance at the local level that
builds on the experience of the ongoing Community Development Project. The technical
assistance will be provided through the Governance and Institutional Development Project,
Community Development Project, and sector dialogue. The Poverty Reduction Support Credits
will provide budget support to key sectors and assist with identifying priorities and tracking the
implementation agenda. The social accountability technical assistance will identify opportunities
for enhancing citizen involvement, support regional exchange of experience on social
accountability and technical support to national level learning and awareness raising on social
accountability initiatives. W I will support this overall strategy directly (through links with
regional programs such as the African Network for Social Accountability) and through support
for workshops and regional learning and by helping build the capacity of the parliament, media
and other national bodies to exercise their oversight functions and increase the demand for good
governance. W I will also continue supporting the implementation of the social protection
strategy.
Monitoring and evaluation
106. Monitoring and evaluation will receive special attention given the results-based nature of
the CAS and the MAP. Establishing credible baselines in Madagascar is a big challenge. The
Bank Group will work in close cooperation with other donors to help the government improve its
monitoring and evaluation capacity. Currently, the government is developing a MAP monitoring
system. The government is also elaborating a national statistics strategy to rationalize the
statistical system, strengthen statistical capacity, improve the quality of statistics, ensure greater
access and use of data for policy making, and coordinate external assistance. An ongoing
Institutional Development Fund grant for monitoring and evaluation and the Governance and
Institutional Development Project are supporting the development of a results framework for the
MAP and the national statistics strategy. IDA, through the Governance and Institutional
Development Project, will help the Statistical Agency implement the national statistics strategy
and to undertake preparatory actions for conducting a population census in the near future.
107. The Bank Group will strengthen the monitoring and evaluation of its own projects,
including beneficiary surveys to evaluate user satisfaction. IDA and the IFC will continue their
surveys of the business environment to monitor progress in that area. They will also seek to
involve local communities in monitoring and evaluation, which will also require greater
dissemination, in appropriate forms, of information on norms of service, targets, and resource
transfers. Table 2 summarizes the main CAS indicators expected during the next five years.
Progress on meeting the CAS indicators will be reviewed annually jointly with the government
and development partners in tandem with the review of the MAP implementation.

Table 2. Key monitoring and evaluation indicators
Country Assistance
Strategy objectives
Removing the
bottlenecks to
investment and
growth in rural and
urban areas

Improving services to
people

I

Main results
Reduced cost of doing business as measured by surveys
Issuance of licenses in mining, fishing and forestry follows transparent rules
Improved rural roads network by providing additional 1,550 krn of enduring
rural roads
Increased crop diversification in irrigated areas by increasing areas dedicated
to crops other than rice from 40% to 60%
Increased surface under the System of Protected Areas of Madagascar from
3,850,000 hectares to 6,000,000 hectares
Improved revenue mobilization fiom 10.1% to 13.1% of GDP
Increased primary school completion rate from 57% to 75%
Decreased incidence of malaria fiom 29.3%
Reduced under-five underweight malnutrition from 35% to 30%

Indicative IDA program
108. Table 3 summarizes IDA'S proposed lending program for the CAS period. The size of the
program is driven by the IDA performance allocation system. If the government slips on core
elements of reforms, such as governance or structural policies, this will adversely affect its
performance-based allocation under IDA. The quality of the IDA portfolio, particularly as
regards procurement, will also be an important determinant of the IDA allocation. The indicative
annual IDA envelope during the CAS period is projected at around US$145 million (SDR 99
milli~n).~'
In addition, the government will benefit fiom the Multilateral Debt Relief Initiative
(MDRI) supported by IDA in the amount of over US$30 million a year.30The FY07-08 IDA
lending program presented in table 3 is slightly higher than the currently estimated allocation in
anticipation of an increased IDA allocation in FY08 due to improved country performance. The
FY08 project amounts will be adjusted based on the availability of IDA resources.
109. The IDA allocations to each project should be seen as indicative. Given the need to be
catalytic, the CAS program will necessarily be flexible in the choice and number of instruments
and will try to maximize prospects for cofinancing. As mentioned before, the ongoing World Bank
Group program (see box 8) will play an important role in the delivery of the CAS objectives as
most of these projects will continue to be implemented during the CAS period.

The IDA allocation may be reduced if Madagascar is classified as a country with moderate debt distress for IDA grant
allocation purpose in the future. The updated Debt Sustainability Analysis will be produced jointly with the International
Monetary Fund in the first half of 2007.
' O This year, thanks in part to resources freed up by MDRI, the share of priority spending (health, education, infrastructure,
justice, agriculture and environment) in total government spending has increased.
29

 able 3. Indicative International Development Association program for FY2007-11
Amount by fiscal year (US$ million)
2007~'
2008
2009
2010
2011
Project name
Cross-cuttingprojects
Poverty reduction support credit
40
40
40
50
50
Governance and institutional dev.
30
Pillar I: Removing bottlenecks to investment and growth
Energy adaptable program loan 1&2
10
30
Power guarantee
10
Growth, transport, infrastructure
16
34
50
Regional communication infrastructure 10
Irrigation and watershed 1&2
30
25
Microfinance supplemental
5
Environment
20
Pillar 2: Improving services to people
Health SWAP 1&2
10
30
Postprimary education
40
18
26
Community dev.1 Local dev. fund
Nutrition
10
Total
149
100
160
165
110

E.THEREGIONAL DIMENSION
110. Improved regional cooperation is critical to Madagascar's economic prospects. As
mentioned before, Madagascar is a member of several regional organizations including the
African Union, the Common Market of Eastern and Southern Africa, the Southern Afncan
Development Community, and the Indian Ocean Commission. The World Bank Group will step
up its assistance to enhance regional cooperation and to enable the country to profit from the
trading opportunities in the regional markets. Through the ongoing Trade Integrated Framework
Program and the new Diagnostic Facility for Shared Growth, IDA will continue to help the
government harmonize its trade and economic policies with the regional frameworks. It will also
mobilize grant funding to help build capacity in the government (effective participation in
regional forums, stronger commercial relationships with region partners, programs to assist
potential exporters) so that Madagascar can take fuller advantage of its participation in regional
organizations. IDA will work closely with the European Commission which is also active in this
area. The fact that Madagascar is now part of the country department in the Bank that also covers
South Africa and other countries of the Southern Africa Customs Union should help facilitate
greater regional integration.
111. The Bank Group will supplement its programs outlined in this CAS with additional
initiatives through the Africa regional program in such areas as telecommunication, trade,
fisheries, and environment. IDMIFC support to Madagascar to participate in the East Africa
Submarine System (EASSy) cable project through the proposed Regional Communications
Infrastructure Program is an example of such regional initiatives (box 9). In addition, Madagascar
is one of eight countries in the proposed regional Southwest Indian Ocean Fisheries Project,
supported by the GEF, NonvaylFAO, and the French GEF, totaling about US$26 million. This
3 ' IDA is also planning to put forward additional financing for several ongoing successful operations such as
Mineral Resource Governance, Environment 111, Governance and Institutional Development and Private Sector
Development if more IDA money becomes available.

Box 9. Regional CommunicationsInfrastructure Program
The proposed Regional Communications Infrastructure Program (RCIP) is a World Bank Group effort in
partnership with seven other development partners (African Development Bank (AfDB), Development
Bank of South Africa (DBSA), French Development Agency (AFD), European Investment Bank (EIB),
Kreditanstalt fiir Wiederaufbau (KfW), and Swedish International Development Association (SIDA)) to
leverage investment for improving international connectivity in Eastern and Southern Africa.
RCIP will bring together 23 countries and 30 telecommunications operators A consortium comprised of
IFC, EIB, DBSA, AfDB, AFD and KfW will contribute private investment alongside the
telecornmunications operators to finance the East Africa Submarine System cable, which will link Durban
and Port Sudan and connect South Africa, Madagascar, Mozambique, Tanzania, Kenya, Somalia, Sudan and
land-locked African countries to the rest of the world. A programmatic engagement by IDA will finance
roll-out of sub-regional and related national backbone linkages as well as finance pre-purchase of capacity
for use by governments, for example by schools and universities. A first phase of support under the project
is expected to be presented to the Bank's Board in FY07 and will include Kenya, Burundi and Madagascar.

could be followed by a sub-regional or national fisheries project for Madagascar closer to the end
of the CAS period. The Bank will also work closely with the regional organizations (e.g., Indian
Ocean Commission) to improve their capacity to offer specialized technical assistance to member
countries, including Madagascar. The mid-term review of the CAS will take stock of the progress
made in promoting regional integration and put forward suggestions for scaling up this effort.

F. CONSULTATION
PROCESS
112.

The Bank team carried out extensive consultations on this CAS with the government and
civil society. This work was done in tandem with the MAP preparation process, including a twoday high level workshop with essentially the entire team of government decision makers and
donors. The World Bank Group held several rounds of consultations with representatives of civil
society organizations (including religious groups and media) and the private sector. The objective
of these discussions was to receive feedback on the Bank's current program and to hear views
about the country's main challenges and priorities and what role they see for the World Bank
Group in Madagascar. The participants identified rural development, water and sanitation,
agriculture, roads, education, health, investment climate, and microfinance. IDA also carried out
a web-based survey which asked several question on the Bank's program in Madagascar,
including a question on the priority areas for the Bank future involvement. Infrastructure (roads,
power, telecommunications), education, rural development, and good governance came at the top
of the list. Attachment 4 describes the consultation process with civil society.

G . ALIGNMENT
AND HARMONIZATION
113. The success of this strategy will depend on working closely with the government and
other donors; Madagascar's difficult development challenges and limited resources demand a
coordinated donor response. The main goal will be to attract scaled-up assistance to Madagascar
while improving the effectiveness of existing resources. To date, the government has been
moving toward a leadership role in development assistance coordination. It has asked donors to
align their programs with the MAP and is strengthening its own capacity to coordinate donor
assistance primarily through its efforts to lead dialogue on a common policy framework for
budget support. External partners have established sector groups with rotating chairmanship that

meet monthly to coordinate activities. The alignment and harmonization agenda is being
streamlined on a pilot basis in the rural and environment sectors, with good results to date.
114. Moving forward, however, much greater efforts at harmonization will be necessary to
ensure effective implementation of the ambitious goals of the MAP. The government has asked
IDA and the European Commission (the two largest donors in Madagascar) to assist with
organizing a MAP Financing Conference. This conference is expected to be held in mid-2007
and will include donors, private sector and other development partners.
115. Work will continue on developing common arrangements and procedures with
development partners, building on several existing examples. The partnership agreement signed
by the government, AfDB, European Commission, France, and IDA outlines modalities for a
multipartner approach to budgetary support that includes joint missions. For the Education for
All Fast-Track Initiative, external partners are using a common results framework, financial
management and procurement procedures. In addition, a sectorwide approach arrangement is
operational in the transport sector, and other sectorwide approaches are under development in
water, agriculture, and health. Finally, efforts are underway to establish sectorwide approach in
environment that would use a harmonized monitoring and evaluation system.
116. Increased attention will be paid to harmonizing the analytical work. There are already
several examples of analytical work undertaken through partnerships. IDA completed a Country
Financial Accountability Assessment in 2003 with the participation of the European
Commission, the IMF, and the AfDB. In addition, the PEFA initiative is a joint undertaking by
the government and donors. IDA and the government are conducting a programmatic Public
Expenditure Review and have invited all other external partners to participate. As of October
2006, external partners have posted 25 documents on the Country Analytic Work website
(www.countryana1yticwork.net).
117. It is important to note that this strategy is coordinated with the European Commission,
which is developing its own strategy at the same time. The Bank and the European Union have
harmonized the strategy preparation schedules, shared the diagnostics, and coordinated the
proposed assistance programs. More information about the donor programs in Madagascar can be
found in attachments 3a and 3b.

IV.

RISKS

118. There are some important risks that may hamper progress in Madagascar and may affect
the results of this strategy. A brief discussion of these risks and CAS mitigation measures
follows.
119. Macroeconomic instability. The country's macroeconomic stability can come under
pressure from low revenue collection and overly optimistic fiscal programs. Attention to realistic
revenue forecasting and public finance management reforms should help mitigate this risk.
120. Shocks. As discussed, Madagascar has a high risk of external economic and natural
shocks. Major shocks could slow economic growth, with an ensuing threat to domestic stability.
Madagascar already has some experience on addressing the macroeconomic consequences of
shocks, and IDA, jointly with the IMF, will continue providing advice in this area. In addition,
the CAS' emphasis on preventive mechanisms should help minimize the consequences of natural
shocks in the longer term.

121. Political instability. Although a new political crisis is not imminent, the possibility of
political instability should not be discarded, especially given Madagascar's history. Highly
concentrated economic growth that does not benefit the broader population could lead to
instability, particularly given Madagascar's growing and youthful population that presents both
an opportunity and a looming threat. On the one hand, healthy, well educated youth could drive
future development. On the other hand, if the economy creates too few jobs for the emerging
generation, disappointed and disillusioned youth could become a formidable source of instability.
The CAS strategic emphasis on employment-generating growth and improved basic service
delivery seeks to lower these risks, but its effectiveness will depend on implementation.
122. Governance. Lack of progress in addressing the perceived unclear delineation between
public office and private interests, as well as high levels of corruption and red tape may block the
badly needed investments critical to Madagascar's future prosperity and stability. The experience
of African countries demonstrates that political and economic stability is endangered when power
and wealth are in the hands of a privileged few. The government's demonstrated commitment to
improving governance and the strong focus of this CAS on governance should help mitigate this
risk.
123. Weak implementation capacity. In low-income countries such as Madagascar there is a
perennial risk that weak implementation capacity will slow the program. The Bank Group is
working to mitigate this risk by strengthening the focus on capacity building at the project
implementation level, supported by a strong team of national and international staff based in the
country. While there has been significant success to date, the challenge will be to maintain
standards in program implementation.
124. Country Assistance Strategy risk. There is a risk that IDA, even with other donors, may
not generate a level of support sufficient to help Madagascar overcome its development
challenges. Failure to mobilize additional funds (private, donor, government revenue) may
jeopardize the country's efforts to implement the MAP. The Bank Group will continue to work
with the international community to attract additional resources to Madagascar. To begin, IDA
will assist the government in organizing a MAP Financing Conference to gather support for the
implementation of the MAP.

Program adjustment
125. The Bank will make adjustments in the program (i) if political instability were to
seriously impair the capacity of the government to carry out the program, (ii) if the quality of
governance deteriorates, or (iii) if significant implementation constraints emerge. The quality of
governance will be tracked using the Country Policy and Institutional Assessment (CPIA)
ratings, especially regarding the transparency, accountability and corruption in the public sector.
The quality of the portfolio will be used to determine whether the government's implementation
capacity remains adequate. If more than half of the portfolio becomes at risk, the CAS program
will be adjusted. Examples of program adjustment may include project restructuring as well as
shifts in the allocation between policy lending and project financing within the existing envelope.
A special CAS Progress Report would be prepared if more serious program adjustments would
be needed.

Attachment I
Page I o f 1 2

Attachment 1. Madagascar CAS Results Matrix
CAS outcomes

Milestones

World Bank Group
interventions

I

Pillar I: Removing the bottlenecks to investment and growth in rural and urban areas
Responsible Governance

MAP Commitment: We will
have a government that evely
citizen and the international
community can trust and have
conjdence in. The government
and the civil service will have
integrity, be efficient, and act
totally professional in all
pursuits, activities, and
provision of services

MAP Indicators:
Improvement in
Transparency International
corruption perception index
from 2.8 to 5.0

"Grand corruption" remains
a challenge (e.g., natural
resource management)
Poor governance in tax,
customs, judiciary, etc.
Insufficient transparency
and participation in
government policy design and
implementation
Lack of feedback
mechanisms for nongovernment stakeholders

1.1. Improved governance in
natural resource sectors:

Streamlined and transparent
rules for licensing adopted

Issuance of licenses
(mining, jshing, forestry)
follows transparent rules
according to anticorruption
surveys and audits

Corruption perception
surveys conducted every two
years

Establishment of a
transparent mechanism for
revenue tracking as a result of
Madagascar joining the EITI
1.2. Improved voice and
accountability:
Improved voice and
accountability as measured by
WBI Governance indicators

Independent anticorruption
audit of the forestry and mining
sector conducted
Restructuring of OMNIS
based on the recommendations
of the independent audit began
Madagascar joins the EITI
Implementation of
community scorecards, citizen
report cards and tracking
surveys

Ongoing:
PRSC
Governance & Inst.
Development
Mineral Resource
Governance
WBI capacity building
programs
Social accountability
pilots

New:
PRSC (FY08-11)
Governance & Inst.
Development 2 (FY07109)
Mineral Resource
Governance Supplemental
(FY07)
WBI programs for
Parliament, media, radio
Monitoring and
evaluation TA (FY08-10)
Extractive industries
TA (FY08-10)
Social accountability
TA (FY08-09)
Partners:
EC, UNDP, Norway, US,
AfDB, France

Attachment I
Page2 of 12

Strategic country goals by
2012
High Growth Economv

MAP Commitment:
Madagascar will have a high
growth economy with growth
rates reaching between 7% and
10% by 2012. We will ensure
that we have a diversified and
strong private sector driven by
local and international
investment and trade. The
Government will generate the
fundamental conditions that
will support the facilitation of
business. We will encourage the
pursuit of the best ideas and
cutting edge techniques.
technologies, and strategies to
ensure that we as a nation are
responsive to the challenges of
globalization,productive in the
workplace, and gain a
competitive advantage.
MAP Indicators:
Increase in economic
growth rate from 4.6% to 7% to
10%
Increase in GDP per capita
from $309 to $476
Increase in FDI from $84
million to $500 million
Increase in number of direct
jobs created within the tourism

Challenges in reaching the
goals
Low private sector
confidence leads to low private
investment levels (2005 ICA:
40% of current firms are not
investing)
Unclear rules and red tape
(tax, customs, licensing, land
administration)
Uneven playing field for
investors
Current incentive structure
keeps enterprises in the
informal sector
Constrained access to credit
and other financial services
(Private CreditlGDP is only
10%)

CAS outcomes

1.3. Improved business
environment:
Sustained improvements in
business creation, inte$ace
with tax and customs
authorities, and import-export
regulations as measured
against the baseline
established in the 2005 ICA
1.4. Better economic
outcomes in the "growth
poles" areas:

Milestones
Economic Development
Board of Madagascar (EDBM)
fblly operational
New Investment law in
place
Clear framework for
engaging in PPPs in
infrastructure to support
tourism, mining and export
oriented activities developed

International tourist
arrivals increased:
Nosy Be: from 40,000
to 80,000
Fort Dauphin:from
13,000 to 30,000
Number of new tourismjobs
created
Nosy Be: 4,000
Fort Dauphin: 1,500
1.5. Improved access to
finance:

Regulatory framework for
leasing in place (IFC)

Achieve 25% increase in
private sector credit/GDP and
150 % increase in leasing
operations (IFC & IDA)

Establishment of leasing
companies (IFC)
New law and regulation for
microfinance implemented

Increase number of
beneficiaries of microfinance
from 800,000 to 1 million (IFC

Establishment of
microfinance banks providing
loans up to $50,000 (IFC)

World Bank Group
interventions
Ongoing:
Private Sector
Development 2
Integrated Growth
Poles
IFC programs
Microfinance
WBI program on PPP
and regulations
New
PRSC (FY08-11)
Growth project (FY 1 1)
IFC investments
Microfinance
Supplemental (FY07)
IFCODA Partial Risk
Guarantee (FY07)
CEM on Growth
(FY08)
IFC PEP Africa TA
MIGATA
ICA (FYIO)
Labor market review
(FY07-08)
Trade TA (Integrated
Framework Program
Trust Fund) (FY07- 11)
FSAP(FY10)
Country development
review (FY 11)
Partners:
AfDB, AFD, USAID,
MCC, EC

Attachment 1
Page3 of 12
-

Strategic country goals by
2012
sector from 2 1,167 to 40,100

Challenges in reaching the
goals

CAS outcomes
& IDA)

More eficient payment
system as measured by reduced
settlement times for "remote"
instrumentsfrorn 21-60 days to
5- I0 days

Increase in the number of
enterprises created from 882 to
2,000
Increase in exports of goods
as percentage of GDP from 16.7
to 22.3

Milestones

World Bank Groul
interventions

New regulatory framework
for banking supervision
developed
New payment system
developed

Increase in number of
tourists visiting Madagascar
from 150,000 to 500,000
Increase penetration rate of
financial institutions in rural
areas from 6% to 13%

Rural Development and a
Green Revolution

Unfavorable business
environment

MAP Commitment: Dynamic
rural development and real
poverty alleviation is at the
core of the government S
endeavors. Our rural areas will
flourish and prosper through a
green revolution that will
substantially increase
agriculture production. Agribusiness centers will be
established in eveT region to
assist in training and the
provision of farming resources
such as irrigation, seeds,
fertilizer, and storage facilities.
Tofurther support rural
development, better roads and

Government interference in
input markets (fertilizers and
seeds)

1.6. Increase competitiveness
and diversification in
agriculture:

Rural areas isolated from
markets

Competitive markets in
inputs Ifertilizer) as measured
by increase in fertilizer use
from 20.000 mthear to 60.000
mthear

Low competitiveness of
exported products (unstable
quality and h g h cargo costs)

Improved rice yields in
irrigated project areas (in
MT/ha):

Shocks (commodity prices
and natural disasters)
Lack of extension services
Lack of irrigation, storage
facilities and other productive
infrastructure and equipment

- Andapafrom 2.0 to 3.5

Maorvay from 2.0 to 3.5
- Lac Alaotra from 3.5 to 5
- Itasy from 3.0 to 4.5
-

Increased diversification in
irrigated project areas as
measured by increased areas

National fertilizer policy
adopted and implemented
Seed multiplication centers
in target areas privatized
Norms and quality
standards adopted and contract
farming initiated for major
export products
Prices on major agriculture
products disseminated in real
time
Master plans for four major
watershed areas developed and
adopted
Two large agribusiness
projects in place by 2009 (IFC)
Outgrowers schemes linked

Ongoing:
Rural Development
Support
Rural Transport
Irrigation and
Watershed APL 1
CEM on Growth
(FYO8)
Rice Policy TA
(FY06-07)
Fisheries TA
Land and Property
Rights Review (FY0607)

New
Irrigation Watershec
APL2 (FY 10)
Growth/infrastructu
project (FY 10111)

Attachment l
Page 4 of 12

Challenges in reaching the

Strategic country goals by
2012
communication networks will
be established and the
Government will work to create
conditions that allow private
sector initiatives to flourish.

weak institutions (MAEP,
MCIPSD, other ministries)
Farmers have insufficient
information on markets

MAP Indicators:
Increase in percentage of
farmers having land titles or
certificates from 10% to 75%
Increase in productivity
(average tonnage yield per ha)
from 1.8-2.57 to 3-5 in 2012

MAP Commitment: We will be
a connected nation. We will
build quality roads, and
information technology systems
all across the country to enable
the process of rapid
development, thefacilitation of
business and trade,
communication amongst our
citizens and visitors, and to
ensure that the standard of
living and the access to
resources and global
knowledge will improvefor all.
MAP Indicators:

World Bank Group
interventions

investments established

dedicated to crops other than
rice gram 40% to 60%)
Increased number of small
farmers operating at
international standards and
able to supply and to partner
with large agribusiness
companies (IFC). Baseline will
be established as part of IFC
projects

National Fisheries Strategy
and Policy adopted in
consultation with major
stakeholders
Follow up independent
institutional audit of the
Fisheries Administration
carried out (20 11)

Country development
review (FY 11)
WBIcornmunityradio
Program
Fisheries
Administration Capacity
Strengthening IDF
(FY08)

Strengthened capacity of
the Fisheries Administration as
measured by an independent
institutional audit (a baseline
audit was carried out by
PROFISH in 2006)

Connected infrastructure

I

Milestones

CAS outcomes

Limited operational road
network

1.7. Improved accessibility
and reliability of roads:

Inadequate road
maintenance

Increase in sustainable
rural access around
Antananarivo and two selected
secondary cities (1,550Km of
additional enduring rural
roads)

Sector capacity remains
low in part due to lack of
qualified staff
Railways are in very bad
shape with frequent derailment

I

Improved road
maintenance: 750Km of roads
maintained annually under
long tern output based
contracts and annual
allocation from the Road
Maintenance Fund

Functions of the Ministry of
Transport revised to focus on
policy and strategic oversight
Road Maintenance Fund
reformed and properly staffed
Roads authority and Land
transport agency operational
Road Master Plan in place
Schedule on increases of
road user charge agreed
New approach for road
investments using
performance- based contracts
adopted

More efficient and
I 1.8.
reliable r a i l w a y o ~ e ~ ~ n s _
-----------------

--

Ongoing:
Transport
Infrastructure
Rural transport
Growth Poles
Energy APL 1
MIGA Guarantees

New:
Growth1 Infrastructure
(FY08/ 10)
Energy APL 1&2
(FY07110)
IFC Advisory Services
on power sector
IFC investments in
IPPs
Regional IDA4FC

Attachment 1
Page5of 12

Strategic country goals by
2012
Increase in new or
rehabilitated national roads
from 805km to 7,800km

Challenges in reaching the
eoals

along the corridor between
the capital and Toamasina
port:

Increase in regularly
maintained national roads from
5,700km to 12,OOOkm

Railway corridor between
the capital and Toarnasina port
rehabilitated

High costs of air transport
and maritime cargo

1.9. Improved
competitiveness of air
transport:
Reduced cost of air
transportation of goods and
people. Baseline will be
established by end-2007

Increase in hydro energy
production from 64% to 76%
Increase in electricity
coverage of communes from
4% to 10%
High telecom costs

1.10. Lower
telecommunication costs and
improved accessibility:

Reduce price of
international bandwidth from
US$8000 today to below
US$2500 in 2011
Increased number of
connected localities bv more

World Bank Group
interventions
Telecom project (FY07)
Infrastructure Review
(FYO8)
Telecom TA (FY07)
PPP Framework TA
(WBI)
Partners:
EC. AfDB

Increased share of goods
transported by rail on
Northern Railwayfrom 21 % in
2006 to 32% in 2011

Increase in regularly
maintained ruraYgrave1 roads
from 1,300km to 18,000km

Improvement in the
Composite Index of connection
cost from 100 to 70

Milestones

Signrficant reduction of
derailment on the Northern
Railway as measured by trainhours lost because of
derailmentform 1900 in 2006
to 300 in 2011

Increase in new or
rehabilitated rural roads from
977km to 12,oookm

Increase in percentage of
communes with accessibility to
all-season road all year long
!?om 35% to 64%

CAS outcomes

2 new international airlines
operating
At least 3 airports
concessioned

Regional fiber-optic cable
(EASSy project) operational

Attachment 1
Page 6 of 12

Strategic country goals by
201 2

Challenges in reaching the
noals

CAS outcomes

Milestones

World ~ a n Group
k
interventions

than 50%

Cherish the Environment

MAP Commitment:
Madagascar will be the world
leader in the development and
implementation of
environmental best practice.
After many decades of
exploitation and neglect, we
have begun to turn the tide. We
will become a "green island"
again. Our commitment is to
care for, cherish and protect
our extraordinary environment.

MAP Indicators:
Increase in number of
protected areas from 1.75 m ha
in 2004 to 6m ha in 2012
Increase in the rate of

----------------------------------

. - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -.-.- . ---- --.- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -

Access to and quality of
power supply inadequate

1.11. Improved efficiency of
power supply:

JIRAMA restructuring
completed

Financial situation of
JIRAMA is a drain on public
resources and does not allow
for proper system operation
and expansion

Reduction of electricity
losses from 23.7% today to
19% in 201 1

Sustainable tariff policy in
place

Continuous pressure on
land for agriculture and
pastures
Illegal logging and exports
of natural products
Degradation of marine
areas
Low capacity of the
Ministry of Environment and
partners to manage and
financially sustain the System
of Protected Areas of
Madagascar
Lack of clear policies for
concession and tenure transfers
in state forest lands
Low public environmental
awareness

..................................

Improved electricity
generation efficiency as
measured by reduction in
diesel generation over total
generation from 31 % today to
13% in 2011

1.12. Better management of
environment:
6,000,000 ha established
under System of Protected
Areas of Madagascar up from
3,850,000 ha today

Partial risk guarantees for
private power projects issued

Independent Forestry
Control Unit established and
staffed

On-aoing
Environment 3
Multi-donor secretariat

Concession policy around
the System of Protected Areas
of Madagascar adopted

New

More transparent and
competitive forestry concession
and control system functioning
(as measured by regular
publication of lists ofpermits
with amounts and revenues to
the state)

Sustainable financing
framework for the System of
Protected Area of Madagascar
developed

Better integration of
environmental issues in the
design of investment projects
as illustrated by the fact that
environmental impact
assessments are applied to

Environment zoning
mainstreamed into Regional
Development Plans

Environmental Units
established in 22 regions

Establishment of a network
of 5 to 6 eco-lodges in ANGAP
managed parks

Environment 3
supplemental (FY07)
Environment 4
(FY 10)
GEF (FY08)
IFC PEP Africa
Investment Facilitation
program
IFC Investments in
eco-lodges
Partners: Environment
project partners

Attachment I
Page 7 of 12

Strategic country goals by
2012
reduced burned areas from 17%
to 70%
Maintenance of the level of
forest and wetland areas at
current level of 9 mn ha.

Challenges in reaching the
goals
Environmental Impact
Assessments not applied to
public investments and not
carried out systematically for
private investments

Increase in reforested areas
from 360,000 ha to 540,000 ha

CAS outcomes

Milestones

World Bank Group
interventions

certain types of both private
and public investments
Forest and bush fires
reduced as measured by
reduction in surface of
annually burned areasfrom
680,000 ha to 200,000 ha by
201 1
40% increase in eco-tourist
visits in National Parh (IFC)
Improvedprotection of
priority marine areas as a
result of their establishment as
part of the System of Protected
Areas of Madagascar

----------------------.-----------------------------------------------

Hazard management
Lack of proactive hazard
risk management systems
Lack of hazard standards in
major sectors (e.g. roads,
irrigation, housing)

1.13. Better preparedness to
deal with natural disasters:
Climate-proof standards
followed in areas covered by
Bankprojects

Climate-proof standards
designed for pilot areas and
key sectors (transport,
oiant.).
Risk insurance feasibility
and climate trends analysis
completed and reflected in
major national strategies
National Adaptation
Program of Action approved

Ongoing:
Rural Development
Support

Adaptation and risk
management TA (FY0708)
Climate change work
(FY07-09)
New:
GEF operation (FY09)
Partners:
FAO, WFP, OCHA,
CARE, CPGU, PANA

Attachment I
Page 8 of 12

I

I

Pillar 11: Improving access to, and quality of sewices to people
A. Mobilization and use of public resources
Responsible Governance

MAP Commitment: seepg.1
MAP Goal: Establish an
eficient and efective
Government budgetaly process

MAP Indicators:
Increase in fiscal revenue or
GDP from 10% to 15%

Low revenue collection -at 10% of GDP it is far below
the sub-Saharan Africa average

2.1. Improve the effectiveness
and fairness of the revenue
collection system

Discretionary behavior in
granting tax and
exemptions

Improved tax
administration performance as
measured by increased revenue
mobilization from 10.1% to
13.1% of GDP

I
Madagascar meets only 11
of the 3 1 PEFA indicators
standard B and above

Increase in education budget
as percentage of GDP from 3.8
to 6

Expenditure allocations and
execution not linked to
government priorities
The Cabinet plays a limited
role in deciding on priorities
Implementation of program
budgeting has proven more
challenging than expected
Weak financial resource
management capacity in line
ministries

1

,

Tax policies streamlined

I

Begin implementation of a
strategy to strengthen revenue
administration

More streamlined tax
system through reduced tax
exemptions. (Baseline will be
established through the Tax
Administration audit)

Increase in PEFA Index to
20

I

Tax and customs
exemptions made public and
baseline established

Overly complex and

2.2. More efficient pubIic
expenditure management:

An adequate system of
public expenditure
management, including
Budget adequately reflects
expenditure and commitment
priorities of the government as
1
control, and reporting
measured by increase in
developed and implemented
expenditure allocation (in real
terms of the budget) to priority
Regular audits of public
sectors: educationfiom 18.9% expenditure procedures
(2005); health from 7% (2005); conducted
nutrition fiom 2.17% (2005)
Line ministry capacity
Budget law implemented in building program scaled up
a transparent manner (law and (public expenditure
information on its execution is
management, procurement,
widely available to the public)
monitoring and evaluation)
Public procurement
conforms better to established

Independent procurement
reviews conducted in major

On~oing:
PRSC
Governance & Inst.
Development
Programmatic PER
(FY07-08)

New:
PRSC (FY08-11)
Governance & Inst.
Development (FY09)
AAA on tax
Partners:
IMF. France
Ongoing:
PRSC
Governance & Inst.
Development
Programmatic PER
(FY07-09)

New:
PRSC (FY08-11)
Governance & Inst.
Development (FY09)
PEFA (CFAAICPAR)
(FY08110)
Partners:
IMF, EC, France, Norway

Attachment 1
Page 9 of 12

bureaucratic expenditure
management procedures

rules as measured by audits

investment programs

Streamlined expenditure
management procedures are
followed (as evidenced by
audits)

New procurement
legislation and regulations
under implementation

Improved internal and
external controls as measured
by improvements in PEFA
indicators (baseline assessment
was carried out in 2006)

MAP Goal: Strengthen the
provision ofpublic services
MAP Indicators:
Improvement in the World
Bank Public Service indicator
from 30 to 60

Service delivery overcentralized

2.3. Improved public service
delivery:

Capacity to deliver services
at the sub-national levels is low

Improved delivery of key
public services (primary
health, education, land titling)
as measured by community
scorecards or citizen report
cards

Lack of resources at the
sub-national level - only 3% of
total public expenditures
Low revenue mobilization
at the commune level

MAP Goal: Decentralize
government administration
MAP Indicators:
Increase in public spending
by Communes as percentage of
total public budget from 1.5%
to 10%

Accountability framework
at the sub national level is
inadequate

Increasedpublic resources
managed by communes from 3
to 7 %
Sub-national governments
operate according to clear
legal and administrative
framework

Develop streamlined
expenditure management
procedures

Service standards for key
public services (judiciary, land
titling, customs) applied and
published
Decentralization strategy
developed and adopted
New local government
finance regulations approved
New decentralized tax
recovery mechanisms piloted
Local Development Fund
fully operational
Communes publish their
budgets and investment plans
annually
Scorecard mechanism and
other participatory monitoring
mechanisms successfully
piloted

Ongoing:
Governance & Inst.
Development
Community Dev.
Rural Dev. Project
WBI support for
Social Protection Strategy

New:
PRSC (FY08-11)
Governance & Inst.
Development 2 (FY09)
Local Dev. Fund
(FY08)
WBI community radio
program
Decentralization study
(FYO8-10)
Social accountability
TA (FY08-09)
Partners:
EC, France, Germany,
Norway, US, UNDP

Attachment I
Page 10 of 12

B. Social Services
Educational Transformation

MAP Commitment: We will
create an educational system
with world-class standards in
qualify and in eflectiveness,
which stimulates creativify and
helps our students to transform
their dreams into realify, and
which provides Madagascar
with the necessary human
resources to become a
competitive nation and a
successful player in the world
economy.

MAP Indicators:
Universal primary education
(7 years) by 20 15
Increase in primary
education completion rates
fiom 57% in 2006 to 85% in
2012
Decrease in primary
students repeating class fiom
20% in 2006 to 10% in 2012
Increase in lower secondary
completion rate from 19% in
2006 to 56% in 2012
Increase in upper secondary
school completion rate from 7%
in 2006 to 14% in 2012

Limited participation in
education by poor
Obsolete curricula and
teaching methods
Lack of qualified teachers,
text books, and teaching
materials in primary education
Lack of infrastructure and
trained teachers to meet
demand in secondary education
Limited access, long
duration and high cost
programs in vocational training
Lack of diversification of
institutions/courses in tertiary
education

2.4. Improved access to, and
quality of, primary and post
primary education:

Strategy for the transition
from 5-year to 7-year primary
education in place

Increased primary
completion rate from 57% to
75%

Training systems for
teachers in place

Improved student/ teacher
ratio from 52 to 45

Learning assessment testing
developed and baseline
assessment carried out

Number of books per
subject per childfrom 0.9 to 1

Post primary education
strategy in place

Better learning outcomes as
a result of modernization and
diversification ofprograms and
curricula measured by testing
on main subjects

Regulatory environment for
private sector participation in
education developed and
adopted

Ongoing:
PRSC
Education for All
Fast-Track Initiative
(Catalytic Fund)
TA on post primary
education strategy

New:
PRSC (FYO8- 11)
Postprimary
education (FY09)
Labor market review
(FY07-08)
Post-primary
education ESW (FY08)
Education impact
evaluation (FY07)
Poverty assessment
(FY 10)
Partners:
EC, France, Norway,
Japan, UMCEF, USAID,
AfDB,

Attachment 1
Page I1 of 12

Health, Family Plannin~and
the Fight Against HIVIAIDS
MAP Commitment: We will

work to ensure that all of our
~ e o p l eare healthy and can
contribute productively to the
development of the nation and
lead long andfruitful lives. The
problems of malnutrition and
malaria will be brought to a
halt. HIV and AIDS will not
advance any further; safe
drinking water will become
accessible; and, through
education and the provision of
health services the average size
of the Malagasy family will be
reduced.
MAP Indicators:

Decrease in infant mortality
rate from 94 per 1,000 to 47
Decrease in maternal
mortality from 469 per 100,000
to 273
Increase in average life
expectancy from 55 to 65
Decrease in HIV prevalence
among pregnant women from
0.95% to <0.8%
Decrease in percentage of

Despite recent
improvements, health
indicators remain low
Health system management
capacity needs to be
strengthened both at the central
and sub-national level
The utilization of public
health facilities remains low
(0.43 for primary health care)
Quality of the health
services is poor
Inadequate human and
financial resources
HIVIAIDS prevalence rate
remains low (0.95% among
pregnant women in 2003), but
exceptionally high rates of
classic sexually transmitted
infections, together with risky
sexual behavior, represent
major risk factors

2.5. More effective delivery of
health services:

Health sector strategy
developed and approved

Increased utilization of
primary health care (baseline:
0.41 contact/inhabitant/year in
2006) andfirst level referral
(baseline: 40.8% in 2006)

A comprehensive program
to increase use of slulled birth
attendance is put in place and
implementation started

Increased availability of
essential drugs as measured by
the Ministry of Health
administrative data and
surveys
Decreased incidence of
malaria (baseline: people
coming to the health centers
with a diagnosis of malaria
confirmed with a biological
test- 29.3% in Nov. 2006)
Decreased hospital
mortality rate from 4% for the
first referral level and 5.3%for
the second referral level (2005)

2.6. Incidence of HIVIAIDS
and sexually transmitted
infections kept under control:
Increased number of
commercial sex workers
reporting use of a condom in
their last act of sexual
intercourse with a client from
76% to 90%.

Coverage and effectiveness
of immunization campaigns
and essential drugs availability
increased
HIVIAIDS awareness
campaigns camed out in most
high risk communes

Ongoing:
PRSC
HIVIAIDS 1&2
Community
Development Fund
Governance & Inst.
Development

New,
Health SWAP
1&2(FY07/09)
Health sector study
(FY07)
Poverty assessment
(FY 10)
Partners: UNICEF, AfDB,
WHO, UNFPA, PNUD.
Global Fund, Japan,
JICA, USAID, US, AFD,
French Cooperation, COI

Attachment I
Page 12 of 12
--------------.------------------.

. - - - - - - e m - - - - - - . - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -

malnutrition among chldren
under 5 years from 42% to
28%*

Rates of underweight
children reduced over past
years but still remain high at
35% (anthropometric survey
2004)*
Ratesofstunting
rnahutrition is still high at
43.5% (2004)
Nutrition programs suffer
from inadequate funding by
national budget

2.7. Reduced underweight
malnutrition:

Malnutrition among
children under 5 years
reducedfiom 35% to 30%*

* The institutionalization of

nutrition is accomplished
Extension of nutrition sites
at community level to cover at
least 50% of the target
population
A national nutrition
surveillance system is
operational

Institutional set up not yet
finalized

*The MAP and CAS numbers on nutrition are not comparable because they comefiom dzflerent sources.

c&p&:
PRSC
Nutition I1
PRSC (FYOS-11)
Partners:
UNICEF; WFP; WHO

Attachment 2
Page I of 2

Attachment 2. Mapping of IDA Program and Madagascar Action
Plan Commitments
MAP commitments
Governance
Good governance

Existing IDA lending Proposed
IDA Lending
AAA

1

Poverty Reduction
Support Credit
Governance &
Institutional
Development
Mineral Resource
Govern
Community
Development Fund

I

Bottlenecks to investment and growth
High growth economy
Integrated Growth
Poles
Microfinance
Private Sector
Development 2
Irrigation and
Watershed

Connected infrastructure

Transport
Infrastructure
Rural Transport
Powermater Sector
Restructuring
APL 1
Integrated Growth
Poles

Microfinance
supplemental
Growth/Infrastructure

I

1
Rural Development
Support
Rural Transport
Irrigation and
Watershed APL 1

Poverty Reduction
Support Credits
Governance &
Institutional
Development 2
Governance &
Institutional
Development
supplemental
Mineral Resource
Governance
supplemental
Local Development
Fund

Growthiinfiaslmcture
project
Power/Water Sector
Restructuring APL2
IDAIIFC Power
Guarantee
Regional
Communications
Infrastructure
(EASSy)
Irrigation and
Watershed APL2
Local Development
Fund

I

Programmatic PER
Tax policy TA
Monitoring and
evaluation TA
Civil service pay
policy note
PEFA
(CFAAICPAR)
Programmatic
decentralization
study
Extractive industries
TA
Social
accountability TA
GrowthCEM
Labor market
review
Trade (Integrated
Framework
Program Trust
Fund)
FSAP
ICA
Country
development
review
TelecomTA
PPP Framework TA
Infrastructure
review

Growth CEM
Infrastructure
review
Country
development
review

Attachment 2
Page 2 of 2

Cherish the environment

Service Delivery
Educational transformation

Health, family planning,
and the fight against
HIVIAIDS

National Solidarity

Environment 3
Environment 3 GEF

Environment 4
GEF Environment 4

Fisheries policy
advice
Environment TA

Poverty Reduction
Support Credit
Education for All
Fast-Truck
Initiative (outside
IDA envelope)
Community
Development Fund

Poverty Reduction
Support Credits
Education for All
Fast-Truck
Initiative (outside
IDA envelope)
Postprimary
Education
Local Development
Fund
Health SWAP 1&2
Poverty Reduction
Support Credits
Local Development
Fund

Labor market
review
Post-primary
education
Education impact
evaluation
Poverty assessment

Health Sector
Support 2
HIVIAIDS 1&2
Nutrition
Poverty Reduction
Support Credit
Community
Development Fund

Health sector study
Poverty assessment

Adaptation and risk
management TA
Social protection

Attachment 3a
Page 1 of 2

Attachment 3a. Donor Programs
1.
The main external partners are the European Commission, France, the
International Monetary Fund, and the United States. Together with IDA, they accounted
for approximately 86 percent of gross official development assistance to Madagascar in
2004. The matrix in attachment 3b presents the full picture of donor involvement in
Madagascar.

European Commission. The European Commission has a very large program
2.
in Madagascar. The 9th European Development Fund, which is closing at end-2007,
encompasses a program of 447 million euros, a substantive increase over the original
projected 345 million euros as a result of strong performance reflected in the 2004
midterm review. The current program concentrates on budget support (approximately 30
percent of the total program), transport and infrastructure, rural development, food
security and decentralization, good governance, support to nonstate actors, and the
Education for All Fast-Track Initiative. The European Commission is currently preparing
an
Fund covering 2008-1 3; it intends to
its strategy for the 1oth~ u r o ~ e Development
continue with the same focus areas.
3.
European Investment Bank. In 2006, the European Investment Bank's
portfolio covered 16 loans totaling 117.5 million euros, focused on private sector
investment and public infrastructure, including JIRAMA.
4.
France. The priority sectors for 2 0 0 6 1 0 are education, rural development,
infrastructure, health, and private sector development. In addition, three cross-sector
themes targeted are governance, strengthening capacity for higher education and
research, and cultural diversity. The indicative financial envelope for the five-year period
is 249-278 million euros.

United States. Madagascar was the first country to benefit from the U.S.
5.
Millennium Challenge Account in May 2005. Financial support of about $100 million is
focused on three areas: land tenure, financial sector, including payment system and
microfinance, and agricultural investment projects.
African Development Bank. In September 2005 the African Development
6.
Bank approved its new strategy for 2005-09, which focuses on budget support, rural
development (especially rural infrastructure), governance and decentralization, and water
supply and sanitation. Other sectors covered by the current portfolio include education,
health, and HIV/AIDS. Capacity building is a cross-cutting element of the program.
Germany. Germany supports environment and natural resource management,
7.
governance, and HIV/AIDS. The environment and natural resource management
activities are integral elements of the Third Environmental Plan, collectively supported
by IDA and other donors. The German program comprises financial support of about
10.5 million euros and technical support of 8 million euros.

Attachment 3a
Page 2 of 2

8.
Other bilateralprograms. Switzerland and Norway are focusing on
governance and human development issues-mainly education (Education for All) and
health. Norway is also financing the transport sector in collaboration with other donors
active in that sector. Japan is supporting Education for All, rural development, fisheries,
and private sector development. And the Kuwait Fund finances small infrastructure
investments.
9.
Other International Organizations. The United Nations Children's Fund, the
United Nations Development Programme, the United Nations Population Fund, and the
World Health Organization all have programs in Madagascar, although their financial
assistance is relatively limited, except for the United Nations Children's Fund, which has
a relatively large program.

Attachment 4
Page 1 of 3

Attachment 4: Consultations with Stakeholders
1.
During the CAS preparation the World Bank Group held several rounds of
consultations with representatives of civil society organizations (including religious groups)
and the private sector. The objective of these discussions was to receive feedback on the
Bank's current program and to hear views about the country's main challenges and priorities
and what role they see for the World Bank Group in Madagascar.

2.
The participants identified the following areas as main priorities, in order of
importance:
Rural development
Water & sanitation
Agriculture
Roads
Education
Health
Investment climate
Microfinance

3.
To achieve the above priorities, a wide range of opinions were expressed falling under
three broad categories:
improving productivity: rice and sugar, land reform, markets for agricultural
produce, access to finance (even a 2 percent monthly interest rate is unaffordable),
investment climate and agricultural competitiveness, sustainable social protection
strategy for the vulnerable population, quality education, improved recruitment
policy for teachers.
involving local communities: local communities should be empowered to
implement and make decisions, improve effective decentralization, work within the
country's biodiversity and prioritize, integrate faith-based organizations into
donors' decisions making process, donors should trust the Churches more.
improving transparency in Bank's processes: observe Bank's evaluation
meetings, better understanding of Government's budget process for an average
person, better information flow on Bank's projects, studies, and the Bank itself.
Involve civil society in monitoring governance, anti-corruption and service
delivery programs. Collaboration between the Bank and the IMF on joint
performance criteria.
4.
The private sector stakeholders stressed that private sector investment faces major
constraints, including access to finance, lengthy and costly business procedures, lack of skilled
labor force and transparency, poor law enforcement and absence of good governance. The
participants emphasized the importance of sustainable economic growth and sound fiscal

Attachment 4
Page 2 of 3

policy as prerequisites for investment. The energy gap for the next five years and slow
progress in decentralization constitutes hrther bottlenecks to improving investment. They
further stressed the need for secure property rights and investment in human capital
(education). Finally, the private sector representatives felt that it made sense to focus on
specific high growth potential sectors such as tourism, manufacturing, agribusiness and
mining.
5.
On the Bank support, the private sector representatives felt the Bank could play a role
in promoting dialogue and consultations between public and private sectors. Support to local
investors was also highlighted as an area for Bank intervention.

6.
In the area of collaboration between the civil society and the Bank, the participants
expressed a wish for improved communication with the Bank and increased role of civil
society in project preparation and implementation. Monitoring was highlighted as potential
area for greater involvement of civil society organizations. Finally, the stakeholders urged the
Bank to invest more in training and capacity building of civil society organizations.
7.

As part of consultations, IDA also carried out a web-based survey1that included the
following questions:
What are the most urgent development challenges in Madagascar?
Where do you think the World Bank can be most effective?
How familiar are you with World Bank activities in Madagascar?
What value does the World Bank involvement add to Government programs?
Should Government of Madagascar borrow from the World Bank?

The chart on the next page shows that infrastructure (roads, power,
8.
telecommunications), education, rural development and good governance came at the top of
the list of priorities for the future World Bank Group involvement.

I

396 respondents

Attachment 4
Page 3 of 3

1

Where do you think the World Bank can be most effective?

Question
42-8
Improvement in access to infrastructure services
q2-9
Quality of education/access to education
42-6
Agricultural competitiveness and rural development
q2-5
Governance
q2-3
Financial sector development
q2-1
Diversification of economy
q2-11
Urban & rural water supply & sanitation
q2-12
Quality and availability of health services
q2-4
Civil service reformrrraining of government officials
q2-13
Social assistance
(72-2
Trade policy developmentlregional cooperation
(42-10
Environment and natural resources management
q2-7
Decentralization/Supportto local governments
q2 14
Other
Total

238
224
203
178
173
165
139
138
107
91
90
85
76
18
1925

1

12.36
11.64
10.55
9.25
8.99
8.57
7.22
7.1 7
5.56
4.73
4.68
4.42
3.95
0.94
100.00

Attachment 5
Page 1 of 2

Attachment 5. Medium Term Economic Outlook
Macroeconomic forecast
1.
The medium term growth prospects are optimistic. The post-2002 recovery has shown that
the economy has diversified its sources of growth, and is more resilient to shocks, having grown at
around 5 percent despite negative exogenous shocks. Madagascar is investing wisely in upgrading
its infrastructure network, particularly roads, is encouraging greater public-private partnerships in
infrastructure provision (energy, airports, ports etc), and is investing in educating its young, thereby
solidifying further the foundations for growth.
2.
Baseline macroeconomic projections forecast an average growth rate of about 5.6 percent
over 2007-1 1, assuming that the government stays the course on macroeconomic and structural
reforms (table A).' The main sources of growth include tourism, mining, construction, and, most
important for the poor, improved prospects in agriculture. Tourism is expected to continue to grow,
given the ongoing investments under the Integrated Growth Poles projects, private investment in
hotels, and the increasing number of tourists. Improving the backward linkages in the tourism
sector, such as sourcing products from the local economy by hotels, is a key aspect in the strategy
for the sector. In mining, the ilmenite project financed by Rio Tinto in the Fort Dauphin region is
under way and two other large-scale mining investments are being considered. Agriculture will
continue benefiting from investments to improve the irrigation systems and the surrounding
watersheds in four most promising sites and from additional support for agri-business development
in five regions in the country with support from the Millennium Challenge Corporation. At the
same time the export processing zone sector is going through a consolidation phase and is not
expected to grow in the short term. However, a hopeful sign that the sector can remain a source of
growth is that textile exports have been stronger than expected because the industry is diversifying
and moving toward higher value-added products.

Table A. Selected macroeconomic indicators for the baseline scenario, 2004-11
(% of GDP unless otherwise noted)

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011 2007-11

Inflation (end of period)
27.3
11.4
10.8
8.0
6.0
5.0
5.0
5.0
Inflation (period average)
14.0
18.4
11.3
9.4
7.1
5.9
5.0
5.0
Gross Domestic Investment
22.0
22.1
22.3
24.3
22.5
21.8
22.1
22.3
Private Investment
11.8
12.3
10.8
11.8
11.9
12.0
12.2
12.4
Gross Domestic Savings
9.4
8.9
8.7
9.3
9.7
9.6
10.0
10.4
Government Deficit (cash
basis, excluding grants)
-13.9 -10.1 -10.7
-9.5
-8.6
-8.0
-7.8
-7.8
Government Deficit (cash
-5.7
-4.3
36.7
-4.4
-4.5
-4.2
-4.1
-4.8
basis, including grants )
Current Account (exc'. grants) -12.9 -1 1.7 -1 1.2 -10.7 -10.6 -10.6 -10.4 -10.3
Current Account (incl. @ants)
-9.1 - 11.2 - 10.4 - 10.0
9.9 - 10.0 - 10.0
-9.8
Government Debt
48.4
41.8
36.4
33.2
30.5
28.0
25.7
23.6
Sources: Ministry of Economy, Finance and Budget and IMF staff estimates and projections, December 2006
1

5.8
9.5
22.2
12.1
9.8
-8.3
0.6
-10.5
-7.6

This macroeconomic framework is based on currently identified external financing and realistic progress on
domestic revenue mobilization. The macroeconomic scenario is explicitly designed to be realistic to avoid
the pitfalls of over-optimism in the macro-economic framework, which in 2004-06 led to mid-year
expenditure cuts, generated unpredictability and hampered budget execution.

Attachment 5
Page 2 of 2

3.
Investment needed to generate this growth will average 22 percent of GDP, driven mainly
by an increase in private investment, which is expected at 12.1 percent of GDP during 2007-11.
Exports are projected to increase by 6 percent a year over the same period. Overall, investment is
expected to be facilitated by the new investment code and the newly established Economic
Development Board of Madagascar. Emphasis on governance through more transparent issuance of
licenses, the creation of a fair playing field-free of political interference-and access to land
should facilitate further investments in mining, tourism, manufacturing, and ago-industry.
Continued investment in transport and irrigation infrastructure by government and donors should
increase rural income. Tax reform is also planned for the next year, including simplifying the tax
system and administration and raising revenues while facilitating investment. Over the medium to
long-term these investments should contribute to a stronger and more dynamic export sector.
4.
The Madagascar Action Plan foresees a higher growth scenario, where growth gradually
accelerates to 7 to 10 percent over 2007-1 1. Higher growth is driven by implementation of
breakthrough policy initiatives, including tax and public finance reform, a green revolution, bold
action on health and family planning, and transforming the judiciary. Higher internal revenue
mobilization, higher levels of donor support, and an improved environment for the private sector
are all expected to expand the resource base, leading to higher levels of investment and improved
factor productivity, and translating into higher sustained growth. This CAS lays out a program
based on the baseline scenario.

Debt situation
Madagascar's outstanding external debt has been reduced significantly-from about
5.
US$4.8 billion at end-2003 to about US$1.2 billion at end-2006. Two major initiatives contributed
to this result: the Enhanced Heavily Indebted Poor Country (HIPC) Debt Initiative concluded in
October 2004 and the Multilateral Debt Relief Initiative, supported by the International Monetary
Fund, African Development Bank, and IDA.
Presently, Madagascar's risk of debt distress is moderate. If Madagascar implements sound
6.
macroeconomic and structural policies, as the baseline assumes, the debt sustainability analysis
undertaken in mid-2006 shows that Madagascar's external debt indicators will remain well below
the HIPC thresholds throughout the projection period.
7.
But external debt indicators could deteriorate with inappropriate policies or adverse
shocks. For instance, the recent global trade liberalization trends render exports highly vulnerable
due to the high export share of textiles and clothing. The baseline projections assume that structural
weakness in this sector will be somewhat offset by export increases in mining and diversification.
The rapid response of exports to the devaluation in 2004 has shown that export supply is highly
elastic in Madagascar. Borrowing at nonconcessional terms as well as new borrowing beyond the
.~
levels assumed in the baseline scenario could also raise Madagascar's risk of debt d i ~ t r e s sThe
full analysis of the debt situation appears in attachment 6. Overall, foreign assistance is expected to
remain important in macroeconomic management and poverty reduction in Madagascar. This
includes assistance under the enhanced HIPC Debt Initiative and the Multilateral Debt Relief
Initiative.

Some reliance on debt may be unavoidable given the investment needs in sectors like energy. This points to
the urgent need for the government to develop a strategy based on their contracting external debt on
concessional terms, keeping internal borrowing low and fully accounting for contingent liabilities.

Attachment 6
Page 1 of l l

Attachment 6. Madagascar: Joint World Bank-IMF Debt Sustainability Analysis
Madagascar's risk of debt distress is moderate, albeit in the low range of the moderate category.
Madagascar's external debt burden indicators under the baseline scenario remain below the
relevant policy-dependent indicative thresholds. The stress tests, however, reveal that external debt
sustainability is sensitive to export shoclrs. The inclusion in the analysis of the small domestic debt
does not change the assessment of country S risk of debt distress.
A. Introduction

This debt sustainability analysis (DSA) has been prepared jointly by IMF and World
1.
Bank staff. It is based on the framework for low-income countries approved by the respective
Executive Boards. The framework takes into account indicative thresholds for debt burden
indicators determined by the quality of the country's policies and institutions.' It comprises of a
baseline scenario (which assumes, among others, implementation of the Multilateral Debt Relief
Initiative (MDRI) by the African Development Fund, IDA and the IMF) and a set of alternative
scenarios.
B. Recent Developments and Current Debt Situation
2.
Madagascar reached its completion point under the Enhanced HIPC Initiative in
October 2004. The resulting debt relief, including additional bilateral debt relief from most Paris
Club creditors, reduced the end-2003 net present value (NPV) of debt-to-exports ratio to an
estimated 137
' At that time, the ratio was projected to increase to 154 percent in 2004
and decline thereafter.

At end-2005, Madagascar's external public debt (including arrears) amounted to
3.
US$3.5 billion in nominal terms. The decline from the end-2003 level (US$4.8 billion) was due
to debt write-offs granted by most Paris Club creditors, and has consequently been accompanied by
a drastic change in the creditor composition. As of end-2005, bilateral and commercial creditors
represented only 23 percent of total outstanding obligations (with Paris Club creditors accounting
for less than 5 percent), compared to about 46 percent by end-2003. The bilateral Paris Club debt
that remains is mainly to Russia. Conversely, the share of multilateral creditors has increased to
more than 75 percent at end-2005 from 54 percent at end-2003.'
1

According to the World Bank Country and Policy Institutional Assessment (CPIA) Index, Madagascar is
rated as a medium performer. The indicative thresholds applicable for that category of countries are: (i) 150
percent for NPV of debt-to-exports ratio, (ii) 40 percent for the NPV of debt-to-GDP ratio, (iii) 250 percent
for the NPV of debt to fiscal revenues ratio, (iv) 20 percent for the debt service to exports ratio and (v) 30
percent for the debt service to revenue ratio.
Total debt relief to Madagascar under the Initiative amounts to U S 8 3 6 million in NPV terms. To date,
Madagascar has secured about 90 percent of that amount through agreements reached with all multilateral
and Paris-Club creditors, as well as some non-Paris Club creditors.
Most Paris Club creditors have written-off their outstanding claims after full delivery of HIPC debt relief,
reducing claims on Madgascar by further U S 4 6 6 million in NPV terms.
As of end-2005, Madagascar has estimated U S 4 0 5 million in arrears towards non-Paris Club and private
creditors that are not delivering HIPC debt relief (Algeria, Libya and Iraq are the largest). Madagascar
continues to make efforts to contact these creditors, regularize the payments and obtain full debt relief under
the HIPC Initiative.
The change in creditor composition also reflects the fact that multilateral creditors deliver their share of
HIPC debt relief primarily trough debt service reductions instead of debt write-offs.

Attachment 6
P a g e 2 o f 11

4.
Full delivery of debt relief
under MDRI will significantly reduce
Madagascar : External Debt Outstanding 2005
Madagascar's external debt. IMF's
debt relief under the MDRI became
Creditor
~rnounts
In percent
(millions of $US)
of GDP
effective in January 2006 and amounts
to US$197 million.6 MDRl debt relief
Total external debt
from IDA is expected to be
implemented starting in July 2006
Bilateral Creditors
784.4
15.6
Paris
club
163.4
3.2
through the 100 percent reduction of the
Other countries
620.9
12.3
debt outstanding and disbursed as of
end-2003. Total MDRI debt service
Private creditors
18.1
0.4
relief from IDA is estimated at SDR1.2
Multilateral
2707.8
53.8
billion (equivalent to about US$1,878
million).' As for the African
Development Fund, debt relief under the Source: Madagascar authorities and ~ u n dStatrestirnates
MDRI will be delivered though a writeoff of the outstanding obligations as of end-December 2004, with retroactive application to January2006. Estimated MDRI debt relief from the African Development Fund amounts to US$327
million. The implementation of MDRI by the lMF, IDA and the Ahcan Development Fund is
expected to reduce Madagascar's outstanding debt at end-2006 by almost two thirds compared to
end-2005.

C. Baseline Medium- and Long-Term Scenario
The baseline scenario is built on a number of key macroeconomic assumptions, the
5.
implementation of sound macroeconomic and structural policies and external financing that
is through grants and highly concessional loans. Key macroeconomic assumptions are indicated
in Box 1. With respect to external financing, new borrowing is projected to remain largely at highly
concessional terms. External assistance as a share of GDP which had climbed very rapidly to close
to 14 percent as a share of GDP in 2004 due to large inflows of external aid and borrowing to
finance recovery after the 2002 political crisis, will remain relatively high in the short term (close to
8 percent on average of GDP in 2005 and 2006 based on recent information from donors) and
gradually decrease to about 6 percent of GDP by the end of the projection period. The borrowing is
largely for financing infrastructure projects, improvements in ports and other facilities aimed at
lowering costs and enhancing competitiveness, and to help Madagascar attain the Millennium
Development Goals (MDGs).
Under the baseline scenario which includes MDRI, Madagascar's external debt
6.
indicators remain well below the thresholds throughout the projection period (Figure la and
Table la). The debt indicators drop sharply (by about 50 percent) in 2006 as result of the MDRI
(Table la). The NPV of debt to GDP ratio which was at about 36 percent in 2005 (a level already
below the threshold for moderate performers) drops to 15 percent in 2006 (Figure 1a and Table 1a);
it increases subsequently to peak at 24 percent in 2016 and drops after to about 20 percent in the
outer years. The NPV of debt-to-exports and NPV of debt-to-revenue ratios (Table 2a) exhibit a
similar profile. The increase in these ratios in the initial years (from the low post MDRI levels)
reflects relatively high new borrowing albeit at concessional terms to finance needed investment
expenditures. The slow performance of the Export Processing Zones (EPZ) sector due to the textile
shock and also the weak performance of agricultural prices for the projection period, limits the
6
7

See www.1for details on the implementation of the MDRI by the IMF.
For details on the implementation of the MDEU by IDA, see IDNSecM2005 and IDNSecM2006-013 1.

Attachment 6
Page 3 of 11

increase in the value of exports and the improvements in the debt indicator based on exports. Given
the highly concessional nature of the existing debt and new borrowing, the debt service ratios are
well below the indicative thresholds throughout the projection period but show a rising trend due to
the accumulation of new debt.

Madagascar's total public debt ratios, including domestic debt, also stay well below
7.
the external debt sustainability thresholds under the base case scenario (Figure 2a and
Table 2a). The domestic debt is projected to remain under 10 percent of GDP through the projection
period, as primary expenditure is assumed to be broadly kept in check with available financing
from tax revenue and external assistance, and the fiscal deficit is projected to remain predominantly
financed by external assistance on concessional terms.
D. Sensitivity Analysis
External public debt indicators
8.
The sensitivity analysis suggests that the external debt indicators could deteriorate
with inappropriate policies, and/or if confronted by adverse shock^.^

The debt indicators in the historical scenario (Scenario A1 in Figure 1A and Table l b
based on the average of the years 1999-2005) follow a lower trajectory than under the base line It
should be noted, however, that the years leading up to 2005 include years of political turmoil, large
terms of trade shocks, cyclones and natural disasters. Given the above and the limited availability of
data, only the last five years have been kept for the purpose of this scenario. During that period, real
growth averaged only about 3 percent, imports and the current account deficit were also low a as
the EPZ sector (recently put in place) was growing at very high growth rates from a very small
base. These factors explain the relatively benign trajectory of the debt indicators under the historic
scenario. If the years of the political crisis (decline of 12.7 percent in 2002) and the recovery from
this (growth of 9.8% in 2003) are excluded, the average growth is significantly higher at 5 percent,
which is much closer to the baseline scenario.
The financing scenario (Scenario A2) reveals that Madagascar's external debt indicators
are particularly sensitive to the terms of new borrowing. Under this scenario, the NPV of debt to
GDP remains below the threshold but peaks at 34 percent in 2016, and remains at about that level
through 2026. The NPV of debt to exports ratio, however, does breach the threshold and remains
above it, stabilizing at about 155 percent in the outer years i.e. 2025 and 2026. The projected path
of these two ratios, together with the continuous rising trend of the debt service ratio, points to the
risks to debt sustainability from new borrowing at less favorable terms than assumed in the baseline
scenario. 9

The bound tests also reveal some underlying vulnerabilities. These are underscored
under the most extreme stress tests represented by the combined exports and growth shock
(Scenario B5) on the NPV of debt-to-GDP ratio, and the exports shock (Scenario B2) on the NPV
8

The stress tests performed under the sensitivity scenario assumed permanent modifications of key
baseline assumptions ("alternative scenarios") as well as temporary deviations ("bound tests"). The
"alternative scenarios" include a "historical scenario", under which the main variables that determine the
debt dynamics are assumed to remain at their historical average, and a "financing scenario" that depicts the
impact of lower concessionality in new borrowing. The "bound tests" are designed examine the impact on
debt and debt service indicators of shocks, based on the country's historical volatility, to key variables.
This scenario is similar to a sharp decline in grant financing, compared to the baseline, compensated by
loans.

Attachment 6
Page 4 of I1

of debt-to-exports ratio. The NPV of debt-to-GDP increases significantly (to 36 percent) but does
not cross the threshold level. On the other hand, the export based indicator--the NPV of debt to
exports, crosses the threshold and remains above the threshold throughout the period. The shock to
exports is somewhat extreme (the standard deviation is about 35) as it is influenced by the rapid
increase in exports in the historical period from textiles exports in the export processing zones, and
the large decline in exports that took place during the political crises and the subsequent rapid
recovery . The implications for vulnerability are nevertheless to be noted, as it illustrates the impact
of shocks to certain export commodities (such as textiles) which have become large as a share of
total exports in Madagascar (about 40 percent in 2005), as a result of exogenous factors such as the
termination of the Agreement on textiles and Clothing (ATC) and AGOA. The risks stemming from
the potential volatility to exports is also demonstrated by the result that the debt indicator based on
exports would reach the threshold even if the standard deviation is reduced to a third of that in the
above extreme bound test (i.e., to 10 as opposed to 35-Scenario ~ 7 " ) .While declines in textile
exports (largely from the export processing zones) could in reality have offsets in terms of imports
(which are not captured given the partial nature of the shock), the bound tests point to some real
potential risks.

Total public debt indicators
9.
Total public debt indicators are most sensitive to economic growth shocks. A
temporary or permanent deviation from the baseline real GDP growth path would put the total
public debt on an unsustainable path, if spending plans were kept unchanged, which is unlikely in
view of past experience (Table 2b, Scenarios A3 and Bl).

E. Debt Distress Classification and Conclusions
Madagascar's risk of debt distress is moderate, albeit in the low range of that
10.
category. In the baseline scenario Madagascar's debt indicators are below the thresholds. The debt
situation, however, appears vulnerable to shocks. The export based indicator reaches the threshold
if borrowing is undertaken at non-concessional terms. Debt sustainability also appears vulnerable if
large export shocks materialize, which is a risk in the medium term given the expected termination
of AGOA.
11.
In conclusion, the debt situation seems under control but is not exempt of risks. In that
regard, there is a need not only for implementing the policies underpinning the baseline scenario,
but also for careful monitoring of borrowing policies and export performance. The latter is critical
given the concentration of exports in textiles and clothing and the termination of the ATC and
AGOA renders exports highly vulnerable given the concentration of exports in textiles. The
baseline projections assume that the current structural weakness in this sector will be offset by
export increases and diversification, given a positive response to the large depreciation which has
taken place in 2004 and from the policies put in place which would enhance competitiveness.
Borrowing at non-concessional terms as well new borrowing beyond the levels assumed under the
baseline could also raise Madagascar's risk of debt distress.

-

-

This scenario is equivalent to excluding the exceptional crisis years 2002-03 from the historical scenario.

lo

- 62 -

Attachment 6
Page 5 of l l

Box 1. Baseline Macroeconomic Assumptions
Real GDP growth is projected at a little under 6 percent on average, accelerating fkom
5.5 percent in the initial years to 6 percent subsequently as the reform measures take hold.
Inflation as measured by the GDP deflator averages about 6 percent, with higher rates
8 percent in the initial years and decelerating to 5 percent subsequently.
Export volumes grow a little under 6 percent on average and support GDP growth, despite a
sharp slowdown in the initial years to about 4.5 percent due to a slowdown in textiles exports
(impact of the shock related to the termination of the AGOA and ACTA). Subsequently
exports accelerate to slightly above 6 percent, supported by exports of commodities related to
mining, agro industry products, shrimps, gems and other commodities.
Import volumes average about 6 percent for the period. Imports slow down to under 4 percent
in the initial years due to declines in 2005 and 2006 largely in response to the winding of tax
related effects which raised the levels of investment related imports to very high levels in
earlier years. After this initial slowdown, imports grow at a higher pace than GDP, reflecting
disbursements of external support for infrastructure and other projects and the associated high
levels of investment activity.
The current account deficit is projected to gradually decline from its high level of over
12 percent in 2005 to about 11 percent by 20 11 and further to about 7 percent by the end of the
projection period.
Tax revenues are projected to increase fkom 10.1 percent of GDP in 2005 to about
16.4 percent of GDP in 2026, owing to the termination of ad hoc tax and import duty
exemptions and steadfast improvements in tax and custom administration.
Non-interest expenditures are broadly kept in check with available financing fkom tax
revenue and external assistance, resulting in a moderate increase of about 1.5 percent of GDP
over the projection period.
External assistance progressively unwinds from the exceptionally high level of about
11 percent of GDP reached during the period 2004 to 2006 to about 6 percent of GDP observed
during the late 1990s. The share of grants gradually increases from less than half in the initial
years to more than half in the later years.

Attachment 6
Page 6 of I 1

Figure la. Madagascar : Indicators of Public and Publicly Guaranteed External Debt
Under Alternative Scenarios, 2006-2026
(In percent)
50

NPV of debt-to-GDP rabo

-

--

IIILI------

B a s e l ~ n e

H~stoncalscenano

-LIC DSA threshold

Most extreme stress test
I

I

1

,

NPV of debt-to-exports ratio

B a s e l i n e

--

~

i

~

~

~

-

w---

~ ., w, Most
~ extreme
~ l stress test
'?,

I

Debt servlce-to-exports raho

-

Baselme

-

H~stoncalscenano
ost extreme stress test
LIC DSA threshold

I

I

I

Source: Staff projections and simulations.

-LIC DSA threshold

Table l a . Madagascar: External Debt Sustainabillty Framework. Baseline Scenario. 2006-2026
(Percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated)
Actual

'

Externaldebt (nominal)
OFW plblic and puMidy guaranteed (PPG)
Change in extemal debt
Identified net debt-creating flows
Non-lnterest current account dwlcit
Deficit in balance of goods and services
Exports
Imports
Net current transfers (negative =inflow)
Other current account tlom (negative =net inflow)
Net FDI (negative = Inflow)
Endogenousdebt dynamlcs
Conlnbuticm from nominal interest rate
Contributionfrom real GDP grmlh
Contributicm from price and exchange rate changes
Residual (34)
o h exceptional finannng

'

'

vl
I

NPV of external debtu
In percent d exports
NPV of PPG external debt
In percent of expons
Debt seMce-twxports ratio (in percent)
PPG debt service-to-exports ratio (In percent)
Total gross financing need (billions of U.S. doilan)
Noninterest currenl account deficit that slabilizes debt ratio

1998

1999

MOO

103.7

118.4

103.7

118.4
14.7
4.7

Historical
Average

'

'

2002

104.1

87.5

92.7

83.2

78.9

69.7

25.6

28.8

104.1
-14.3
-3.8

87.5
-16.6
-16.8

92.7
5.2
1.2

83.2
-9.5
-15.4

79.9
-3.3
-66

69.7
-10.2
-7.0

25.6
4.1
1.2

28.8
3.1
4.1

4.2

4.3

0.4

5.0

42

8.1

10.0

10.0

10.2

10.0

9.9

9.7

7.3
307
38.0
-35
0.5

3.2
29.1
32.3
-32
0.4

6.6
16.0
22.6
-2.2
0.6

9.0
23.1
32.1
-5.5
0.7

15.1
32.6
477
-7.6
0.6

13.0
23.8
36.8
-3.5
0.4

12.7
23.5
36.2
3.4
0.4

...

1.8

-2.9
-14.3

4.2
0.4

4.9
-14.6

37.0
22.4

13.7
24.6
383
4.4
0.7
42

132
24.1
37.3
-3.6
0.4

-5.1
3.1

14.1
26.7
40.7
4 8
0.8
-7.2

13.5
24.4
380
3.7
0.4

3.4

8.0
24.4
32.4
3.5
-0.3
-6.8

-5.S
-1.1

4.3
-1.2

...

1.4
4.9
5.3

1.3
-54
10

0.9
-5.4
-9.8

10
11.0
-116

0.8
-7.8
-7.8

15.4

10.4

0.2

4.0

...

-1.5

-2.0

0.0

0.0

...
5.2

78
21.4
29.3
-2.3
0 3

2004

ProjecUons

Skndard

Deviatbn

2001

.

2003

'

2005

2006

52

2.9

4.1

1.8

4.9

11.4

2007

2008

2010

2011

31.1

33.2

35.0

36.8

41.1

35.5

31 1
2.3
3.4

33.2
2.1
3.0

35.0
1.9
22

36.8
1.8
20

41 1
0.3
0.4

35.5
-1.2
0.6

9.5

7.4

6.2

12.5
23.1
35.6
-3.3
0.4

10.0
23.8
33.8
-2.9
0.4

7.4
21.7
29.1
-2.5
1.2

6.3
-1.3

4.3
-1.7

4.1
1.7

0.6

-2.2

0.4
-2.0
...

-9.9

-2.7

4.3
4.8

-5.6
-1.0

1.2
-5.5
26.6

0.8
-3.2
-7.5

0.4
3.1

05
-1.3

0.5
0.5
0.5
-1.5
-16
-1.7
. . . . . . . .

0.6
-1.8
...

5.9

3.3

3.2

45.3

-1.0

-1.1

-0.9

4.3

4.2

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

00

0.0

0.0

0.0

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . .
. . . . . .

35.8
134.3

145
58.8

16.4
67.2

17.9
74.3

193
81.3

14.5

16.4

17.9

58.8
53
5.3
278.5
54.1

67.1
3.6
3.6
339.4
7.1

74.3
3.6
36
329.5
7.7

...

..

...

.....................

35.8

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 134.3
23.9
17.3
13.3
88
17.5
10.2 107.0
8.4
23.9
17.3
13.3
8.8
17.5
10.2 107.0
8.4
2.5 162.1
& 9 260.1 257.5
...
62.8 128.8
. . -10.4
18.6
17.0
0.2
114
20.2
13.7

...

4.6

20.6
87.6

21.7
938

24 5
102.9

20.8
95.9

19.3

20.6

21.7

24.5

20.8

81.3
3.8
3.6
333.0
7.8

87.6
3.9
3.9
313.5
7.8

93.8
31
3.1
315.5
7.7

102.9
4.8
48
382.2
7.2

95.6
5.3
5.3
583.6
7.4

Memorandym ifem:
Nominal GDP (billionsof US dollars)

Source: Slaff simulations

' Derived as [r - g - r(l+g)Y(l+g+r+gr)times previous period debt ratio. with r = nornlnal interest rate; g = real GDP g r m h rate, and r = growth rate of GDP deflator in U.S. dollar terms.
' Includes exceptional financing (i.e.. changes in arrears and debt rdief); changes in grms foreign assets; and valuation adjustments. For prqeclions also includes wntributlcmfrom price and exchange rate changes
Current-yearinterest payments devided by previous period debt stock

'Historical averages and standarddeviations are generally derived wer the past 10 years, subject to dala availability.

...

2026

0.0

Real GDP growth (in percent)
GDP M a l o r in US dollar terms (change in percent)
Effective interest rate (percenl)"
Growth of exports of GBS (US dollar terms, in percenl)
Gmwth of imports of GBS (US dollar terms. In percent)
Grant element of new public S&OT borrowing (in percent)

'Assumes that N W of private sectw debt is equivalent lo its face value.

2016

42
0.0

Key mauoeconomlc assumptions

' Indudes public sector extemal debt.

2006-11
Average

2009

0.0

2012-26
Average

7.0

-2.8
-5.2

Attachment 6
Page 8 of 11
Table 1b. Madagascar: Sensitivity Analyses for Key Indicators o f Public and Publicly Guaranteed External Debt,
(Percent)

2006-26

Proiections

NPV o f debt-to-GDP ratio
Baseline

14

16

18

19

21

22

24

22

21

14
14
14
14
14
14
14

18
20
19
18
21
23
20

21
28
24
22
30
25
28

23
30
26
23
32
27
30

24
30
27
24
33
29
30

26
31
29
25
34
31
31

29
31
33
27
36
35
31

25
24
29
23
29
31
24

25
23
28
22
28
29
23

59

67

74

81

88

94

103

98

96

59
59
59
59
59
59

67
115
67
75
85
67
88

74
225
74
90
123
74
132

81
237
81
97
132
81
139

88
247
88
103
139
88
145

94
257
94
108
146
94
151

103
251
103
113
149
103
147

98
211
98
103
132
98
124

96
204
96
100
128
96
119

5

4

4

4

4

3

5

6

5

4
4
4
4
4
4
4

3
4
3
3
3
3
3

3
6
3
3
4
3
4

3
8
3
3
4
3
4

3
8
3
3
4
3
4

3
5
7
7
7 1 3 1 5 1 5
3
5
7
7
3
6
7
7
4
8
9
9
3
5
7
7
4
8
9
9

41

41

41

41

41

A. Alternative Scenarios
A l . Key variables at their historical averages in 2007-26'
A2. New public sector loans on less favorable terms in 2007-26

*

B. Bound Tests
81. Real GDP growth a( historical average minus one standard deviation in 2007-08
82. Export value growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2007-08
83. US dollar GDP deflator at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2007-08
84. Net non-debt creating flows at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2007-08
85. Combination of 84-84 using one-half standard deviation shocks
86. One-time 30 percent nominal depreciationrelative to the baseline in 2007
87. Export value growth at historical average minus one third of standard deviation in 2007-08

'

NPV of debt-to-exports ratio
Baseline
A. Alternative Scenarios

A l . Key variables at their historical averages in 2007-26
A2. New public sector loans on less favorable terms in 2007-26
B. Bound Tests
81. Real GDP growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2007-08
82. Export value growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2007-08
83. US dollar GDP deflator at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2007-08
84. Net nondebt creating flows at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2007-08
85. Combination of 81-84 using one-half standard deviation shocks
86. One-time 30 percent nominal depreciation relative to the baseline in 2007
87. Export value growth at historical average minus one third of standard deviation in 2007-08-59

'

Debt service ratio
Baseline

A Altematlve Scenarios

'

A l . Key variables at their historical averages in 2007-26
A2. New public sector loans on less favorable terms in 2007-26
B. Bound Tests
81. Real GDP growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2007-08
82. Export value growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2007-08
83. US dollar GDP deflator at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2007-08
84. Net non-debt creating flows at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2007-08
85. Combination of 81-84 using one-half standard deviation shocks
86. One-time 30 percent nominal depreciation relative to the baseline in 2007
87. Export value growth at historical average minus one third of standard deviation in 2007-08
Memorandum item:
Grant element assumed on residual financing (i.e.. financing required above baseline)

'

41

41

41

41

Source: Staff projections and simulations.
'Variables include real GDP growth, growth of GDP deflator (U.S. dollar terms), non-interest current account in percent of GDP, and non-debt creating flows.
Assumes that the interest rate on new borrowing is by 2 percentage points higher than in the baseline., while grace and maturity periods are the
same as in the baseline.
Exports values are assumed to remain permanently at the lower level, but the current account as a share of GDP is assumed to return to its baseline
level after the shock (implicitly assuming an offsetting adjustment in import levels).
Includes official and private transfers and FDI.
Depreciation is defined as percentage decline in dollar/localcurrency rate, such that it never exceeds 100 percent.
'Applies to all stress scenarios except for A2 (less favorable financing) in which the terms on all new financing are as specified in footnote 2.

Attachment 6
Page 9 of 11
Figure 2a.Madagascar:Indicators of Public Debt Under Alternative Scenarios, 2006-2026 11

NPV of debt-to-GDp ratio

B a s e l i n e

- - - No Reform
extTeme stress test

-Most

NPV of Debt-to-Revenue Ratio 2/

B a s e l i n e

- - - No Reform
--

Mast extreme stress t e t

Debt Senice-to-Revenue Ratio 2/

,----------B a s e l i n e

- - - No Reform
-----Most

Source: Staff projections and simulations.
11 Most extreme stress test is test that yields highest ratio in 201 6.
21 Revenue including grants.

extreme Stress t s t

Table 2a.Madagascar:

Public Sector Debt Sustainability Framework, Baseline Scenario, 2003-2026
(Percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated)
Actual

'

Public sector debt
O
foreign-currency
IW
denominated
Change in public sector debt
Identifed debt-creating flows
Primary deficit
Revenue and grants
of which : grants
Primary (noninterest) expenditure
Automatic debt dynamics
Contribution from interest ratelgmwth differential
of which: contribution from average real interest rate
of which : contribution from real GDP growth
Contribution from real exchange rate depreciation
Other identified debtcreating flows
Privatization receipts (negative)
Recognition of implicit or contingent liabilities
Debt relief (HIPC and other)
Other (specify, e.g. bank recapitalization)
-.esidual, induding asset changes

I

Historical
Average

Standard
Deviation5

2005

2006

92.3
80.0

80.2
69.7

34.2
25.6

35.8
28.8

37.1
31.1

38.4
33.2

39.6
35.0

40.8
36.8

44.7
41.1

42.8
35.5

-7.9 -0.8
-18.9 23.4
2.0
2.0
15.4 20.3
5.1
8.2
17.4 22.2
-18.Q 23.8
-9.4 -5.8
0.2 -0.8
-9.5 -5.0
-9.5 29.6
-2.0 -2.4
-0.2
-0.4
0.0
0.0
-1.8 -2.0
0.0
0.0
11.0 -30.2

-12.2
-4.6
2.0
16.7
5.7
18.7
-4.9
-5.0
0.9
-4.1
0.1
-1.7
0.0
0.0
-1.7
0.0
-7.6

-46.0
46.3
2.6
17.3
5.7
19.9
-4.3
-4.0
0.3
-3.6
-0.4
-44.5
0.0
0.0
-44.5
0.0
0.3

1.7
1.9
3.5
16.0
4.2
19.5
-1.5
-1.4
0.4
-1.8
-0.1
-0.1
0.0
0.0
-0.1
0.0
-0.3

1.3
1.6
3.2
16.3
3.9
19.5
-1.6
-1.5
0.4
-1.9
0.1
-0.1
0.0
0.0
0.1
0.0
-0.2

1.3
1.4
3.2
16.8
3.9
20.0
-1.7
-1.6
0.3
-2.0
-0.1
-0.1
0.0
0.0
-0.1
0.0
0.1

1.2
1.3
3.2
17.2
3.8
20.4
-1.9
-1.8
0.2
-2.0
-0.1
-0.1
0.0
0.0
-0.1
0.0
-0.1

1.2
1.2
3.3
17.5
3.7
20.8
-2.0
-1.3
0.8
-2.1
0.7
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
-0.1

0.5
0.5
3.1
18.2
3.5
21.3
-2.5
-1.7
0.8
-2.5

-1.0
-1.0
1.8
19.7
2.9
21.5
-2.8
-1.6
0.9
-2.5
...
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

9.8
1.1
7.5
-11.4
2.8
41.8
0.0

4.6
1.5
-1.4
0.1
18.3
-12.1
43.2

5.3
2.0
-2.3
37.6
14.3
34.7
0.0

3.2
2.0
0.5
4.2
10.8
9.2
4.3

5.9
0.9
4.7
14.8
5.2
21.2
13.7

Sources: Malagasy authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections.
Central government. Gmss public debt.
Gross financing need is defined as the primary deficit plus debt service plus the stock of short-termdebt at the end of the last period.
Revenues including grants.
Debt service is defined as the sum of interest and amortization of medium and long-term debt.
Historical averages and standard deviations are generally derived over the past 10 years, subject to data availabildy.

2009

2010

2026

99.2
83.2

'

2008

2016

2004

'

2007

Projections
20061 1
2011 Average

2003

PV of public sector debt
olw foreign-currency denominated
olw external
NPV of contingent liabilities (not included in public sector debt)
Gross financing need
NPV of public sector debt-to-revenue ratio (in percent)
olw external
Debt service-to-revenueratio (in percent) '.
Primary deficit that stabilizes the debt-to-GDP ratio
Key macroeconomicand fiscal assumptions
Real GDP g r M h (in percent)
Average nominal interest rate on brex debt (in percent)
Average real interest rate on domestic currency debt (in percent)
Real exchange rate depreciation (in percent, + indicates depreciation)
Inflation rate (GDP deflator, in percent)
Growth of real primary spending (deflated by GDP deflator, in percent)
Grant element of new external borrowing (in percent)

Estlmate

3.2

...
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

2012-26
Average

2.8

Attachment 6
Page 11 of 11
Table 2b.Madagascar: Sensitivity Analysis for Key Indicators of Public Debt 2006-2026
Projections
2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2016 2026
NPV of Debt-to-GDP Ratio
Baseline

23

23

24

25

25

26

28

28

23
23
23
23
23

26
23
23
29
32

31
23
24
29
32

34
24
24
28
32

36
25
25
28
32

38
25
25
28
32

48
28
26
29
33

58
28
25
28
31

133

146

147

147

146

146

154

143

133
133
133
133
133

161
143
144
181
202

183
143
144
176
196

193
143
142
170
190

201
143
139
164
185

210
143
138
160
181

254
152
140
158
178

287
142
124
144
155

18

12

10

9

8

7

8

10

18
13
12
18
12
10
1 8 1 3 1 0
18
13
11
18
12
15

11
9
9
10
12

11
8
8
9
11

10
6
6
8
9

13
8
7
9
8

17
10
9
11
10

A. Alternative scenarios
A1 . Real GDP growth and primary balance are at historical averages
A2. Primary balance is unchanged from 2006
A3. Permanently lower GDP growth
B. Bound tests
61. Real GDP growth is at historical average minus one standard deviations in 2007-2008
62. Primary balance is at historical average minus one standard deviations in 2007-2008
63. Combination of 81-82 using one half standard deviation shocks
64. One-time 30 percent real depreciation in 2007
B5. 10 percent of GDP increase in other debt-creating flows in 2007

NPV of Debt-to-Revenue ~ a t i o ~
Baseline

A Alternative scenarios
Al. Real GDP growth and primary balance are at historical averages

A2. Primary balance is unchanged from 2006
A3. Permanently lower GDP growth 11

B. Bound tests
61. Real GDP growth is at historical average minus one standard deviations in 2007-2008
B2. Primary balance is at historical average minus one standard deviations in 2007-2008
63. Combination of 61-62 using one half standard deviation shocks
64. One-time 30 percent real depreciation in 2007
65. 10 percent of GDP increase in other debt-creating flows in 2007

Debt Service-to-Revenue Ratio
Baseline

A. Alternative scenarios
Al. Real GDP growth and primary balance are at historical averages

A2. Primary balance is unchanged from 2006
A3. Permanently lower GDP growth

'

B. Bound tests
61. Real GDP growth is at historical average minus one standard deviations in 2007-2008
62. Primary balance is at historical average minus one standard deviations in 2007-2008
B3. Combination of 61-62 using one half standard deviation shocks
64. One-time 30 percent real depreciation in 2007
65. 10 percent of GDP increase in other debt-creating flows in 2007

Sources: Country authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections.
Assumes that real GDP growth is at baseline minus one standard deviation divided by the square root of 20 (i.e., the length of the projection period).
Revenues are defined inclusive of grants.

Attachment 7
Page 1 of 3

Attachment 7. Madagascar: Country Financing Parameters

1

Item
Cost sharing
Limit on proportion of
individual project costs that the

Recurrent cost financing
Any limits that would apply to
the overall amount of recurrent
expenditures that the Bank may
finance.

Local cost financing
Are the requirements for Bank
financing of local expenditures
met, namely that (i) financing
requirements for the country's
development program would
exceed the public sector's own
resources (e.g. from taxation
and other revenues) and
expected domestic borrowing;
and (ii) the financing of foreign
expenditures alone would not
enable the Bank to assist in the
financing of individual projects.
Taxes and duties
Are there any taxes and duties
that the Bank would not
finance?

I

Parameter
Up to 100%

RemarksIExplanation
At the project level, 100 percent financing is
expected to be used taking into account (i) the
Government's financing of the development
program for the sector concerned; (ii) high
transaction costs or anticipated delays in project
implementation due to counterpart funding; and
(iii) co-financing by development partners. Project
teams will be encouraged to seek co-financing
from other development partners in all projects.
Cost-sharing for individual operations will be
discussed and determined on a case-by-case basis
at the Project Concept Note stage after
consultations with the Government.

No countrylevel limit

The Bank will continue to monitor the aggregate
fiscal and debt situation and its implications for
recurrent cost financing. The Bank will take into
account sustainability at the sector and project
levels, including future budgetary outlays, in
determining the Bank financing of recurrent costs
for individual Bank projects.
The criteria for Bank financing of local costs are
met. Therefore, the Bank may finance local costs
in any proportion needed in individual projects.

None

Taxes or duties are judged to be reasonable. At the
project level, the Bank would consider whether
taxes constitute an excessively high share of
project costs.

Attachment 7
Page 2 of 3

Madagascar: Country Financing Parameters
1.
The Country Financing Parameters for Madagascar were first established in May
2005, and reviewed during the preparation of this CAS. The policy on expenditure
eligibility (OPIBP 6.00) moves the focus from restrictive policy framework to an enabling
one by creating flexibility in financing expenditures that are appropriate in the country
context and necessary to meet the development objectives of operations supported by Bank
loans. Thus far the experience from the added flexibility has been positive allowing to
address implementation issues more effectively.

2.
Cost sharing. In Madagascar, government counterpart funding is not an accurate
proxy of the Government's commitment to its development program. The quality of the
Government's reforms and dialogue with the donors leave little doubt of its commitment
and ownership. Currently, the Government hnds over half of its overall development
program while the donors, including the Bank, finance the remaining 45 percent. The
Bank's portfolio performance has been satisfactory further reflecting the government's
commitment to its development program. Hundred percent financing improves project
implementation by (i) providing more flexibility for projects to achieve their development
objectives; (ii) abolishing implementation delays caused by counterpart funds; and (iii)
ensuring full payment to project service providers. The increased flexibility also reduces
transaction costs and supports the Government's move to a programmatic budgeting. Given
the above, Bank financing for individual operations will continue to be up to 100 percent.
The Bank's overall financing envelope as well as allocations to individual
3.
operations will continue to be determined in the Country Assistance Strategy and portfolio
implications will be carefully considered as the IDA envelope will remain unaffected. At
the project level, 100 percent financing is expected to be used taking into account (i) the
Government's financing of the development program for the sector concerned; (ii) high
transaction costs or anticipated delays in project implementation due to counterpart funding;
and (iii) co-financing by development partners. Project teams will be encouraged to seek
co-financing from other development partners in all projects. Cost-sharing for individual
operations will be discussed and determined on a case-by-case basis at the Project Concept
Note stage after consultations with the Government.

Recurrent cost financing. Foreign financing will remain an important element for
financing Madagascar's development program for the foreseeable future. However, with a
prudent debt management strategy, and borrowing only on concessional terms or grant
financing, Madagascar's debt situation is likely to remain sustainable. Bank projects are
also integrated into the Government budget, and are therefore included in the fiscal and debt
sustainability analysis. Madagascar has made efforts, and is continuing public finance
reforms, to better align its investment and recurrent cost budgets. Nevertheless, in some
sectors the level of recurrent spending is insufficient and the Bank may, as needed, finance
recurrent costs. Likely levels of recurrent cost financing would not create undue fiscal
burden or compromise Madagascar's ability to service its debt. This principle will be
applied on a case-by-case basis taking into consideration impact on medium term fiscal
sustainability as well as sustainability issues on project and sector levels, including the
implications for future budgetary outlays.
4.

Attachment 7
Page 3 of 3

Local cost financing. The local cost financing as share of total disbursements has
5.
been significant: 7 1 percent, 57 percent and 70 percent of Bank financing in FY02, FY03
and FY04 respectively was local expenditure. In Madagascar, the financing requirements
for the country's development program exceed the Government's capacity to raise
resources through taxation and domestic borrowing. Based on the latest IMF estimates, the
total expenditures for Madagascar's development program in 2005 were estimated at 2 145.5
billion Ariary, of which 1102.7 billion Ariary (or 5 1 percent) was financed by tax and nontax revenues, and the remainder largely through external project grants and concessional
loans. Financing of foreign expenditure alone would not be sufficient to enable the Bank to
finance individual projects. Furthermore, the Bank and the Government encourage the use
of local contractors as this creates employment opportunities and builds local capacity. In
view of the above, Madagascar meets the two criteria for local cost financing. Therefore,
the Bank may finance local and foreign cost in any proportion needed in individual projects.
6.
Taxes and duties. There are no taxes and duties that are considered as
unreasonable or discriminatory and there is no discriminatory adverse treatment of Bankfinanced projects. The Madagascar tax system is dominated by low distortion taxes such as
the VATIretail taxes (which formed 40 percent of the taxes in 2005), and personal income
taxes (19 percent). Property taxes are low (1.2 percent), and continued trade liberalization
has reduced the share of trade taxes to around 27 percent in 2005. In 2006, the tariff
structure included 3 non-zero tariff bands (5, 10,20 percent) a reduction from 4 bands
ranging from 5 to 25 percent in 2004. The VAT has been reduced from 20 percent to 18
percent. In line with continued simplification, in 2005, the customs and import taxes were
merged into a single tax. The personal income tax brackets range fiom 0 to 30 percent.
Taxes on profits for enterprises are 30 percent. The Bank may finance all taxes and duties
associated with project expenditures. At the project-level, the Bank would consider whether
taxes and duties constitute an excessively high share of project cost.

Attachment 8
Page I of 33

Attachment 8. Madagascar 2003 CAS Completion Report
Date of last CAS:
Progress report:
IEG CAS evaluation:
Period covered by CAS:
Period covered by the present report:

October 20, 2003
None
Spring 2006
FY04-06
FY04-06

I. INTRODUCTION
1.
The Madagascar Country Assistance Strategy Completion Report (CASCR) reviews the
implementation experience and the overall effectiveness of the Country Assistance Strategy which
covered the FY04-06 period. The conclusions of this report are based on:
A critical review of the Bank's previous CAS to determine the Bank's strategic objectives and
their link to the country's PRSP.
A series of meetings with project teams in the Bank and in government.
An analysis of portfolio performance, the annual Country Program Reviews and the Region's
overall portfolio monitoring reviews.
Feedback and analysis from government, donors, stakeholders and other development
partners to ensure a broader assessment of the Bank's program.
Finally, the CASCR draws from the Independent Evaluation Group's (IEG) Country
Assistance Evaluation (CAE) report, which was discussed by the Committee on Development
Effectiveness in October 2006.~

11. MADAGASCAR CONTEXT AND CAS OBJECTIVES
A.

Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper

2.
The 2002 Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (PRSP) outlined three key priorities (i)
improving governance; (ii) promoting broad-based growth; and (iii) providing human and material
security. The first PRSP priority of improving governance aimed to create an institutional framework
for good governance to foster fast and sustainable development and allow the State to assume its role
as the facilitator and driving force of the economy. The main activities under this pillar included anticorruption, democracy, the rule of law and decentralization. The second PRSP priority sought to
foster macroeconomic stability and broad-based growth through revitalizing the private sector and
promoting the development of new growth sectors. The main focus was on improving the road
network with the goal of fighting rural poverty through connecting farmers to markets. The third
PRSP priority focused on the social welfare system encompassing food security, health, education,
nutrition, housing and the environment.

The CAE report covers a ten-year time period (1995-2005) and its conclusions are thus different from this CASCR which
covers a three-year period (2003-2006).

Attachment 8
Page 2 of 33

B.

Political context

3.
The FY04-06 CAS was elaborated as the country just had emerged from a deep political and
economic crisis in 2002. The new government of President Marc Ravalomanana embarked on
reforms that marked a break with the past. The willingness and commitment of the new government to
change and to act quickly brought hope that Madagascar was finally moving to a new chapter in its
development. Donors responded enthusiastically to these political developments, expecting real
changes.
4.
During CAS implementation, the political scene was quiet, with the exception of some
cabinet reshuffles. The main constraints to the implementation of the reform agenda came from the
shortage of qualified personnel in public office and silent foot-dragging from vested interests.
Because past attempts at reform had proven short-lived, the bureaucracy and the general public were
initially skeptical of the likelihood of successful reform. These complications slowed down the reform
drive and tempered the initial optimism. President Ravalomanana was re-elected in December 2006,
in what international observers have considered to be fair elections.
C.

The Millennium Development Goals

The PRSP objectives were consistent with the MDG targets. However, due to hardly any
progress made towards the MDGs from 1990 to 2002, the prospects of reaching the MDGs looked
daunting. In 2003, Madagascar was among the poorest countries in the world with a national per
capita income at around US$240 and approximately 80 percent (2002) of the population classified as
poor. Seventy percent of the rural population could not afford to buy a basic food basket even if they
spent all their income on food; almost half the population of children under five was stunted. Only
about one third of children completed primary school and just over half the population could read and
write. Electricity connectivity was extremely low at 15 percent. Madagascar ranked 149 out of 175
on the UNDP's Human Development Index. See Annex 2 for an update on the MDGs.
5.

D.

CAS objectives

The main objective of the FY04-06 CAS was to support the implementation of the PRSP's
6.
three key priorities (i) improving governance; (ii) promoting broad-based growth; and (iii) providing
human security. The CAS laid out five guiding principles for the strategy:
focusing Bank interventions on having a much larger impact on rural poverty through support
to agricultural diversification and intensification, as well as rural infrastructure;
(ii) tackling governance and capacity building centrally and in all the Bank's operations through a
specific governance and institutional development project, as well as through specific targeted
improvements to all on-going and planned lending operations;
(iii) continuing to place the environment at the center of the strategy by building on the positive
linkages between poverty reduction and environmental management through the envisaged
Environment Project as well as through special attention to environmental safeguards in all
Bank projects;
(iv) transitioning to programmatic lending with a focus on education, nutrition, health and water;
and
(v) linking loan amounts to performance and continuing to reduce the number of active lending
operations by FY06. The goal was to have just 14 active lending projects, the loan amounts
and scope of which could be adjusted in line with performance.
The existing portfolio at the time of the CAS was re-oriented to better support the PRSP.
(i)

Attachment 8
Page 3 of 33

E.

CAS results framework

The FY04-06 CAS was a well-prepared strategy but, as was the case with most Country
7.
Assistance Strategies at that time, it was not a results-based CAS. Nevertheless, the CAS developed a
detailed policy matrix that outlined (a) the main objectives of the PRSP; (b) the PRSP's key policy
actions and programs that were specifically supported by the Bank; and (c) the timing and intended
outcome of these actions and programs. Furthermore, it distinguished itself from the previous CAS
through its stronger emphasis on achieving country-wide rather than project specific outcomes. At the
strategic level, the Bank selected a few key PRSP monitoring indicators to evaluate the success of the
CAS implementation. Section IV of this report evaluates progress on the policy matrix and these
indicators. Annex 4 also provides details.

111. MADAGASCAR'S PROGRESS TOWARDS ITS GOALS
A.

Economic progress during CAS implementation

8.
Growth: During the CAS period, good macro-economic management created a solid basis for
economic growth of around 5 percent p.a. despite significant exogenous shocks from high oil prices,
collapse of the electricity supply, and two cyclones in 2004. Growth came largely through improved
performance in agriculture, especially higher rice production, htgher tourism receipts, and a higher
level of public investments. However, the textile sector stagnated with the phasing out of the Most
Favored Nation (MFN) status agreement.

Rural development: Following the 2004 rice crisis, the rice market stabilized after the
9.
government removed a 10 percent tariff on imports. Since then, production has increased steadily (an
estimated 13 percent growth in 2005 according to official figures), and Madagascar is close to
becoming a net rice exporter. Rice productivity increased from 2.3 tonshectare in 2003 to 2.4
tonshectare in 2004, and is now officially at 2.57 tonshectare (surpassing the CAS target of 2.4
tonshectare).
10.
Impact on poverty reduction: The 2004/05 household survey shows a decline in poverty
from 80 percent in 2002 (estimated at the peak of the crisis) to 68.7 percent in 2005, slightly lower
than the level of 2001 (69.7 percent). The decline in rural poverty from 77.2 percent in 2001 to 73.5
percent in 2005 is impressive, as is the decline in the intensity of poverty in rural areas, which went
from an estimated 53 percent in 2002 to 34.8 percent in 2005, below the level in 2001 (39.7 percent.)
Various factors appear to have contributed to the reduction of rural poverty: (a) the increase in
agricultural productivity through improved rice cultivation practices; (b) better roads that improved
linkages to markets; and (c) public programs in the rural areas.
11.
Governance: Today Madagascar ranks well amongst its peers on the quality of its
governance. Transparency International ranked Madagascar 84 out of 163 countries in 2006.
Madagascar out-performs a host of Afiican countries often referred to as best performers-it ranks
higher than Tanzania (93), Mali (99), Mozambique (99), and Uganda (105). A broad effort to improve
governance contributed to achieving these results. The government embarked on a multifaceted
strategy that covered public expenditure management, fight against corruption, de-regulation, and
improved service delivery. The implementation proceeded at a pace slower than anticipated, but still
the efforts generated substantive results.

Attachment 8
Page 4 of 33

Infrastructure: Since 2003, nearly 2,000 km of national roads have been improved,
12.
increasing the percentage of the national road network in fair and good condition from 49 percent in
2003 to 61 percent in 2005. The percentage of the rural population with reliable access to transport
has increased from 45 percent in 2003 to 57 percent in 2005. In 2004 and 2005, the Road
Maintenance Fund contracted for the maintenance of 6,800km and 7,000km respectively. In addition,
the government initiated an institutional overhaul of the Ministry of Transportation and its executing
agencies to assure permanent attention to the maintenance of road infrastructure.
13.
Investment. Traditionally the level of investment in Madagascar has been quite low at 11.4
percent of GDP on average between 1970 and 2003. During this CAS period investment has increased
to 22.5 percent in 2005, driven by public and private investment and by increasing foreign direct
investment, which as a percentage of GDP increased from 0.2 percent in 2002 to 1.7 percent in 2005.
It must be noted, however, that there have been a number of firm closures and the free zone
(garments) sector is still going through a period of adjustment in the face of increased competition
from Asian exporters in the post-MFA environment. However, there is quiet optimism amongst the
garment industry that prospects to consolidate and grow in Madagascar are amongst the best in sub
Saharan Africa taking advantage of established market linkages and a skilled labor force. With the
launching of the QMM mining investment in Fort Dauphin, the prospects for growth of the mining
sector are promising and there is considerable interest from new investors.

B.

Progress on social sectors and MDGs

14.
Annex 2 compares the MDGs at the time of CAS preparation and their estimated status today.
While the analysis is not comprehensive due to lack of updated data, it shows that Madagascar is
progressing towards the MDGs -particularly in education and nutrition. Progress on the healthrelated MDGs is also encouraging. Nevertheless, Madagascar is unlikely to reach most of the MDGs
even if this trend continues. A scaled-up and more intensive effort will be needed to consolidate and
build on the gains achieved to date.

Health and nutrition services: The 2005 Demographic and Health Survey provides broad
15.
evidence of Madagascar's success in improving many health indicators. Immunization rates improved
from 62 percent in 2002 to 87 percent in 2005. Infanuchild mortality has decreased from 164 per
thousand in 1997 to 123 in 2004. A well-designed malnutrition program has helped reduce chronic
malnutrition from 43 percent in 1997 to 35 percent in 2004105. Policies favoring the empowerment of
women have shown positive changes in reproductive health behaviors leading to good progress to
lower fertility. Recent data (Demographic and Health Survey, 2005) shows for instance that
contraceptive prevalence rate for modem methods has increased from 9.7 percent (1997) to 18.3
percent in 2004. The gap in the use of contraceptives between the capital and rural areas has been ,
reduced by half. The rate of antenatal consultation for pregnant women has increased from 63 percent
in 200 1 to 80 percent in 2004 and approximately half of the births (5 1 percent) have been attended by
skilled staff.
16.
Education: Since the government's declaration on free and compulsory primary education in
2002, the net enrollment rate has increased significantly from 70 percent in 2002 to more than 90
percent in 2005 and the completion rates increased from about 40 percent to 60 percent.5 Such
successes contributed to donors' agreement to mobilize additional funds for Madagascar from the
Still, repetition and drop out rates remain high (around 30 percent), teaching and learning conditions are still problematic,
with an average ratio of 60 students per teacher, and even higher ratios in remote areas.

Attachment 8
Page 5 of 33

Education for All Fast Track Initiative in July 2005. In general, there is no major gender disparity in
terms of access to education.

HIVIAIDS: Thanks to the government's commitment to the fight against HN/AIDS
17.
Madagascar has been able to keep the threat at bay (HIV prevalence rate is below one percent).
Awareness of the disease and knowledge of ways of avoiding infection has increased, and significant
institutional gains have been made. The multi-sectoral HIVJAIDS Secretariat created within the
President's office is fully operational. Implementation of the national strategy is progressing well and
harmonization among bilateral and multilateral partners has been strengthened. Collaboration with
numerous NGOs, community-based organizations and Faith-Based Organizations has also improved.
The national monitoring and evaluation system is being strengthened.

IV. HOW THE CAS CONTRIBUTED TO MADAGASCAR'S GOALS
18.
The FY04-06 CAS was closely aligned with the PRSP and supported effectively the
implementation of the PRSP priorities. The CAS developed a detailed policy matrix that linked the
PRSP's objectives with the Bank's program and also included monitoring indicators with the baseline
values and the expected targets for the end of the CAS period. A review of the PRSP and CAS Policy
Matrix below shows that the expected outcomes for 2006 have, been achieved for the most part.
Annex 4 provides a comprehensive update on the monitoring indicators, as well as an assessment of
performance and lessons learnt.
Table 1: PRSP and CAS Policy Matrix
PRSP

Policy or Program

PRSP
objective

Strategic
Focus
Governance

Reduce
corruption

Improve
judiciary

,
1

Improve
management of
public funds

Make anti corruption
functional and develop
comprehensive anticorruption strategy
Develop comprehensive
shategy which includes
in particular expedition
of judicial proceedings
lnhoduce integrated
financial management
system; shengthen
internal / external
controls; public
procurement reform

Timing of
policy or
program
Ongoing

Actual outcome

Expected outcome
in 2006
Lower levels of
corruption

Madagascar international
governance rankings have
improved.

7
Ongoing

Strengthening of
internal conhols to
combat corruption

Progress on judicial reform has
been slow.

Overall, the government's budget is
aligned well with the PRSP
priorities and pro-poor
expenditures have increased.

more pro-poor
Larger share of
public funds reach
intended destination

Ongoing
service

decentralized delivery
of services in key areas
in particular the social
sectors

areas with large
public-private
interface has
improved as

communities to 3.6 percent but
overall resources available are still
modest.
Surveys confirm that 1 out of 2

and independent

services being received.

Higher revenue1GDP
ratio

2003,5.3 percent in 2004,4.6
percent in 2005 and is projected at
4.7 percent in 2006.
Overall revenues/GDP ratio
remains low at around 10 percent.

special incentives to
Strengthening of tax
administration

Increase fiscal
revenues
I

I

I

Reduce Rural
Poverty

Ongoing

Increase access to
markets for farmers

I

Ongoing

1

Reduced rural
poverty

Rural poverty declined from 77.2
percent in 2001 to 73.5 percent in

Attachment 8
Page 6 of 33
PRSP
Strategic
Focus

PRSP
objective

Timing of
policy or
program

Expected outcome
in 2006

Strengthen extension
services

Ongoing

Increased rice yields

Improve access
to roads

Refonn of road
maintenance fund

Ongoing:
new road
maintenance
fund set up
and
functioning

Improved
infrastructure
Improved access
Increased krn of
maintained roads
Reduction in
Transport costs

Increase
agricultural
productivity
and ensure
competitiveness
of locally
produced rice

Delegation of
implementation
authority to (i) Roads
Authority; (ii) Aviation
Authority; (iii)
Transport Authority and
(iv) Ports and River
Authority
Concessioning of key
infrastructure
(Railways, Ports,
Airport)
Enforce existing duty
and VAT rate on
imported rice
Establish a fund for
operations and
maintenance of dams,
primary channels etc.
Scale up dissemination
of conservation
technologies and
practices
Provide incentives
(more social services,
infrastructure) to those
communities that are
able to enforce the
existing laws on
deforestation

Ongoing

Increased agricultural
productivity

Ongoing

Increased agricultural
productivity

Implement Education
for All policy

Ongoing

Implement new
education sector policy

Ongoing

Continue to provide free
access to primary
education
Continue literacy
campaign

Ongoing
Ongoing

Higher literacy rates

Provision of text books

Ongoing

Higher # of
textbooks/student

Stop
deforestation

Improve access
and quality of
education

Human and
material
security

Policy or Program

Actual outcame
2005. The intensity of poverty in
rural areas has declined from 53
percent in 2002 to 34.8 percent in
2004105.
Rice yields increased from 2.3
tonsiha in 2003 to 2.57 tonstha at
end-2005
61 percent of road network in good
condition in 2005, compared to 49
percent in 2003.
Percent of rural population with
reliable access to transport
increased from 45 percent in 2003
to 57 percent in 2005 and is
estimated at 65 percent in 2006.
Ports, Maritime and River Agency
operational since October 2004.
Civil Aviation Authority has been
restructured and is more efficient.
Laws creating the Roads Authority
and the Land Transport Agency
were voted by Parliament in 2005
but have not yet been ratified.
Northern Railway was
concessioned to Madarail

Ongoing

Rice importers have paid their
duties

Ongoing

Not yet completed - fund is being
designed

Ongoing

Increase in reforested
area

Higher access to
primary school and
increased quality of
education
Higher completion
rates; higher cost
effectiveness of
provision of
education service

The reforested area has increased
from 348,000 ha in 2004 to
360,300 ha in January 2006
Communes that successfully
control forest fires are labeled
"green communes", and should in
principle receive preference for
rural development projects. In
practice, however, some projects
have not always respected these
labels in giving preference to green
communes.
Primary net enrolment rate >90
percent in 2005
Primary school completion rate
increased from 39.5 percent in
2003 to 60 percent in 2005.

On-going. Education for All
being satisfactorily implemented
The 2004105 Household survey
registered a literacy rate at 59
percent
No data available

Attachment 8
Page 7 of 33

(0Improving Governance
19.
The IDA strategy to improve governance in Madagascar was broad and ambitious, reflecting
the aspirations of the authorities and the expectations of the international community. The
government program evolved into a comprehensive strategy emphasizing the rule of law, ethical
standards, anti-conuption and transparency and accountability of government actions. Bank assistance
focused on both developing the legal and regulatory frameworks and its implementation. IDA'S
assistance focused primarily on anti-conuption, improving public expenditure management,
developing leadership in government and removing targeted capacity constraints. In the second part of
the CAS period, the Bank's assistance also focused on customs, taxation and decentralization.
20.
The PRSC series and the Governance and Institutional Development Project (PGDI) provided
support in the area of governance. These interventions were complemented by a broad range of
analytical work, including: Public Expenditure Review (FY05), H P C tracking (FY03, FY04) and
Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability (FY05).

21.
Most progress has been made in developing and approving required regulatory frameworks.
In the area of public expenditure management IDA, jointly with other donors, has supported the
implementation of a comprehensive reform program, which included actions to improve budget
preparation, budget execution, and internal and external controls. A recently concluded PEFA took
stock of the status of public expenditure management practices. Out of 28 chapters, the PEFA
assigned three As and six Bs. During the CAS period, the government set a legal and institutional
basis for a modem public expenditure system. Procurement legislation is in place and a Procurement
Oversight Authority was created. Madagascar's budget is comprehensive, with very limited offbudget items, and incorporates a very large percentage of donor activities. The budget is prepared in
consultation with the spending ministries although more efforts are needed to improve quality and
timeliness of the consultation process. Partial progress has been made in aligning the budget
allocations with national priorities, but it still remains to be fully aligned to national and sector
priorities. On budget execution, integrated financial management has been put in place in the six main
treasuries and basic budgetary procedures have been streamlined. Control over budget execution, and
transparency are the weakest links. Lastly, the central government continues to control most of the
public resources; only 3 to 4 percent of the national budget is managed by the communes.
22.
Several factors slowed down the pace of public expenditure management improvement: (a)
the introduction of sophisticated budgeting procedures (program budgeting) in mid-course and at an
accelerated pace6; (b) the initial lack of technical skills in key ministries; and (c) conflicting advice
provided by donors. To harmonize donor support, annual Action Plans (2004,2005,2006), with the
agreement of all stakeholders, now guide the public expenditure agenda. The pace of improving
public expenditure management has to pick up in order not to curtail the ability of the international
community to support Madagascar through budget support and, likewise, the ability to scale up
successful pilot interventions by using domestic and/or international resources.
Efforts to increase the relative levels of customs and tax collection did not prove sustainable;
23.
in fact, the share of tax revenues in GDP declined from 10.9 percent in 2004 to 10.1 percent in 2005.
The persistent problems in revenue mobilization have hampered the government's ability to
implement its ambitious Poverty Reduction Strategy, with mid-year expenditure cuts necessary to
maintain overall fiscal discipline. These developments complicated the transfer of social programs to
-

-

-

In 2005 Madagascar introduced a program budget framework which intends to project public expenditures over the
medium term and to link all expenditures to specific activities and outcomes.

Attachment 8
Page 8 of 33

the budget as intended in the CAS. Towards the end of the CAS period, IDA and other donors have
assisted the authorities in the development of detailed action plans to improve performance in customs
and taxes. More accurate revenue forecasts should help improve budget implementation.
To fight corruption the government developed a modem legislative framework, in particular
24.
it passed an anti-corruption umbrella legislation and an anti-money laundering law, instituted
regulations for the declaration of assets of public officials, and put in place decrees to regulate
transparent recruitment and promotion of the public sector. IDA supported the development and
implementation of this framework. A key development included the establishment of the Independent
Anti-Corruption Bureau (BIANCO) in 2004. Implementation of the new anti-corruption program has
commenced-focused on the examination of corruption complaints (roughly 7,500 in 2005.) At the
same time the National Integrity Committee continued to review and strengthen the regulatory and
administrative framework for the fight against corruption by streamlining legal proceeding and by
preparing to increase transparency and accountability. Corruption does not rank as high on surveys as
it had in the past; however, several areas of high concern remain: customs, taxes, natural resource
management and the judiciary. IDA reduced its support to reforming the judiciary as the EU has
taken the lead in this area. Overall, the work on reforming the judiciary is just beginning. The efforts
in reforming customs have been perhaps the most notable.
IDA also supported efforts to improve the capacity of government to design and implement
25.
policy. Two efforts stand out. First, IDA provided leadership training for senior management within
government aimed at strengthening consistency and cohesion of the core government team. With the
support of the Bank's PGDI project, the government has set up a National Leadership Institute to
provide high quality training for hture managers in the public and private sectors. Second, IDA has
focused its assistance on strengthening the capacity in key ministries such as finance, education,
health, transport and the environment, with emphasis to ensure adequate application pf the new public
finance regulations. The objective has been to address existing bottlenecks in policy planning and
implementation. The assistance to capacity building contributed to preparation of the development
strategy (the MAP).
26.
With hindsight, IDA support for the governance agenda can be considered satisfactory, even
if was ambitious and dispersed. Given that improving governance is a long-term undertalung and
success in all areas cannot be expected in the short time-frame of the FY04-06 CAS. The assessment
of this CASCR is similar to that of the CAE which recognized that significant efforts at improving
governance have been launched by the government and are being supported by the Bank but that the
results in great part are still to come. Future efforts should acknowledge far more explicitly the
technical limitations, seek more forcehlly the political commitments to reform, and prioritize
engagements to guarantee achievement of concrete results that help the reform process move forward.
(ii) Promoting broad-based growth
27.
As noted above, the rebound of the economy after the 2002 crisis met the expectations set in
the CAS, despite natural and economic shocks. Economic growth contributed to reducing poverty,
notably in rural areas. Both existing and emerging lines of economic activity-tourism, mining and
non-traditional exportscontributed to growth. Also, there is increasing awareness of the need for
improving the capacity of the government to handle the periodic shocks that affect Madagascar. IDA

Attachment 8
Page 9of 33

has supported the authorities to set the basis for sustained growth through a wide range of
interventions: policy and investment lending, analytical work, as well as debt relief.'
IDA supported investment and institutional reform in transportation through three
28.
operations, with one of them completed. Organizational changes in the Ministry of Transportation
introduced by the government in 2003 and problems encountered in the operation of the project
implementation unit slowed down the ability of IDA to support the transportation sector in the early
stages of the CAS period. Despite these early difficulties, the accomplishments during the current
CAS period have been considerable. First, IDA supported an institutional rehrbishing of the state
agencies responsible for transportation including the Ministry and the creation of the road agency and
transport agency.' Second, IDA supported the government in bringing the private sector to
infrastructure (railways, ports), thus showing that public-private partnerships can help the country in
managing and building needed infrastructure. Madagascar's progress in public-private partnerships is
remarkable in the Ahcan c ~ n t e x tWBI
. ~ provided technical assistance to build government capacity
to negotiate and manage publiclprivate partnerships. Third, IDA operations have directly contributed
to the repair of part of the road network, especially in rural areas. The coordination between IDA and
the EU, the main donor in the road sector, has been effective (see Section V.E.).
29.
IDA'S support has brought results in improving the business environment. For instance, the
registration of enterprises is far easier now. A one-stop shop for enterprise creation - GUIDE - was
established and within a year the number of days to open a business decreased from 60 days to about
20 days. The IEG CAE recognized that the Bank support has been of critical importance in helping to
improve the investment climate and support growth in some export-oriented sectors. Despite these
improvements, as revealed by surveys, many factors still constrain economic activity: dealing with
customs and the tax authorities, access to land (especially, for foreign investors), and a weak
judiciary. For these reasons, Madagascar continues to rank low overall in the Cost of Doing Business
database-1 3 1 out of 155 for the 2007 report.''
30.
IDA has supported the reform of the energy sector for some time now without significant
success." The poor administrative and financial practices in JIRAMA, the electricity and water stateowned utility, have contributed to the poor quality and reliability of the electricity supply and the

'

After having reached the Heavily Indebted Poor Country Initiative Completion Point in October 2004, Madagascar is now
benefiting from the G8 Multilateral Debt Relief Initiative (MDRI), with significant debt relief and improved prospects to
maintain sustainable debt levels in the medium term.
Marked progress has been made in setting up the autonomous sub-sector agencies. The Ports, Maritime, and River Agency
has been operational since October 2004. The Civil Aviation Agency, which has been operational since 2000, has been
restructured based on an organizational audit, to be more efficient and to enhance the capacity of the technical personnel.
Laws creating the Roads Authority and the Land Transport Agency were voted by the Parliament during 2005 but were not
ratified during the CAS period. Lastly on the institutional front, two separate ministries were created: the Ministry of Public
Works and Transport and the Ministry of Decentralization and Regional Planning. This reorganization has provided a better
focus for transport sector policy and planning.
Air Madagascar is operating under a management contract and is performing well and thus the privatization of the
company can now be considered. The concession of the airports is under way. The Northern Railway was concessioned in
2002 to Madarail. Government, in agreement with the donors, has decided to delay the concession of the Southern Railway
because the tender did not result in an acceptable offer. It will be under management contract with Madarail for the next two
years at which time a new tender will be issued. The main port of Toarnasina, which handles more that 80 percent of the
country's total traffic, has been restructured,: its container terminal was concessioned and is now operated by the Pilipino
company MICTSL. The operations of the secondary ports TulCar, Mahajanga, and AntsiranandNosy BelAnkify will be
concessioned soon.
' O The privatization of the telecommunications company TELMA in 2004 has led to significant improvements in
communications coverage and has reduced costs by about 30 percent in 2005.
11
Some of this work was supported by the Private Sector Development Project 11.

Attachment 8
Page 10 of 33

limited nationwide coverage. Some progress had been made by the end of the CAS period. JIRAMA
presented a financial recovery plan in January 2006 and implemented two tariff increases for
electricity. The government turned over the management of JIRAMA to a private operator, and is
committed, after the contract ends in April 2007, to a longer-term public-private partnership solution
(e.g. a concession or affermage) for JIRAMA. The IFC and the Bank have been actively advising the
government on these matters and are preparing options for future assistance, which will include
emphasis on reducing the dependence on diesel generated electricity by relying more on hydro-power.
The joint IDA-IMF Financial Sector Assessment Program (FSAP) showed that the banking
3 1.
system is generally adequately capitalized, highly profitable and liquid, with low-risk short-term
assets. Stress tests suggest that the banks are relatively resistant to market risks, and most of them
could withstand substantial shocks in exchange or interest rates. However, the financial system could
be vulnerable to sector- or economy-wide downturns (e.g. from periodic cyclones, changes in world
prices for Madagascar's exports, or changes in international trade arrangements), On the other hand,
small and medium enterprises have only limited access to finance; with access virtually non-existent
in rural areas. To remedy this, donors are supporting the development of the micro-finance sector.
IDA'S pilot operation in micro-credit has exceeded expectations. The IFC is also catering to the
financial sector, in some areas in collaboration with the IDA-supported Growth Poles Project. Overall,
observers point to the positive progress in the micro-credit sector in Madagascar; however, the efforts
are at an incipient stage and at a level below the country's needs.

32.
In agriculture and rural development, rice productivity increased faster than foreseen by
the CAS (see Table 1). However, direct IDA lending for rural development was dispersed and lacked
an integrative framework. The rural development support project (close to completion) provided
investment grants to increase incomes and reduce poverty in rural areas. The micro-credit pilot
project created a good institutional framework and improved access to financing in the rural areas it
serviced. Rural roads, funding of local projects through the Bank-supported Community Development
Project and other interventions had an impact on the rural sector. The lessons from an evaluation of
the impact of the Community Development Project is underway and should allow improved
integration of the work on community driven development, transportation (especially rural roads) and
rural development to generate synergies and break the isolation of the rural areas.
33.
To support increases in rice productivity, IDA prepared a Watershed and Irrigation project
(that was approved just after the CAS period, in 4 2 of FY07) which covers the chain from
infrastructure maintenance to production and distribution for markets. It also emphasizes the need for
diversification beyond rice. How best to assist the country in the development of the rural sector
continues to be a challenge for the authorities, IDA, and the donor community. The recent CAE
highlights the need to support rural development in order to reduce poverty.

34.
IDA has supported the effort of the authorities and the country to manage and protect its
precious natural resources. IDA was quite successful in meeting the targets set in the CAS (reforestation, protected areas, etc.) and good progress was made on improving natural resource
management. Support was provided through the Third Environment Support Program. Also, IDA has
assisted the country in carrying out new mining activities in a sustainable way through the Mineral
Resources Governance Project under implementation.
To build synergies across interventions, the IDA Growth Poles Project (FY06) supports a
35.
wide-range of inter-connected activities (infrastructure such as ports and roads, business regulation,
labor practices, training, etc.) around three growth poles in the country. This operation only began
implementation late in 2005 and the full results will accrue during the next CAS. Economic and

Attachment 8
Page I 1 of 33

sector work related to growth has been limited relative to other pillars.1zThe forthcoming Country
Economic Memorandum will seek to cover this gap.

(iii) Providing human and material security
36.
The IDA program has contributed directly to the positive progress in the social sectors
discussed earlier (see Table 1 and Annex 4). IDA assigned a high priority to improving the overall
service delivery capacity in the social sectors through the PRSCs, the Governance and Institutional
Development Project, the Health and Nutrition investment projects and the AAA program, in the
context of the public expenditure reform. As a result, pro-poor expenditures increased, especially in
education and some in health. Since 2001, traclung surveys indicate that the execution rates have
been high (99 percent for 2003) and that one in two beneficiaries report to be satisfied with the
services delivered. Geographical distribution of expenditures, however, still shows a strong urban
bias.
37.
The Bank supported institutional reforms in primary education, building on the lessons
learned from previous operations, such as the Education Sector Development Project (which closed at
the end of March 2005.) This support contributed to the development of a coherent strategy for the
Education for All initiative. The development of this strategy paved the way for the SWAP in the
education sector adopted through the Fast-Track Initiative and Education for All Catalytic Fund.
Education for All has been the main contributor to reaching over 90 percent of effective primary
enrollment. Completion rates, however, hover around 60 percent, and progress in the quality of
education has been slow. The elaboration of a post-primary education strategy is also advancing and
should be completed in FYO8.
38.
In the health sector, as noted, indicators improved, despite the challenges of inefficient and
unequal service delivery (also highlighted in the CAE). The Bank's Second Health Sector Support
Project supported reform of the institutional delivery mechanism, but progress has been slow. The
health sector's transition toward direct budget support through the PRSCs has been more difficult than
anticipated13. Budget execution, while improving, is still low compared to other sectors, and the
planning and budget management functions must be further strengthened at all levels of the health
system administration. Bank's analytical work (a results-based health policy, national health accounts
study, equity and efficiency of public health facilities studies) to identify bottlenecks in budget
execution, and monitoring and evaluation provided recommendations to help reform budget
management. The results of this analytical work are incorporated in the design of the forthcoming
health sector SWAp.
39.
The Bank also supported efforts at malaria prevention and control with positive results. IDA
has been b d i n g indoor spraying on the highlands with insecticides other than DDT and targeted
distribution of 3.9 million bed-nets financed by the Global Fund. The Tuberculosis control program
continues to ensure adequate supplies of drugs. The successful implementation of a pilot rural water
supply program also had a positive impact on the health outcomes by improving access to safe potable
water.14
Results on nutrition have been truly commendable, setting Madagascar apart from many
40.
other countries. If this trend continues, Madagascar will achieve the nutrition MDG. At the national

l3

Development Policy Review (FYO5);ExportProcessing Zone Report (FY03); Tourism Sector Study (FY03)
IDA approved a supplemental credit of $1 8 million in FY05.

l4

The African Development Bank is supporting the water sector in the southern part of the country.

IZ

Attachment 8
Page 12 of 33

level, underweight rates went from 43 percent to 35 percent between 1997 and 2005. The PRSC and
the Second Community Nutrition Project (which received a supplemental credit of $10 million in
FY05) were the main instruments of IDA support. The latter supported improvements in the
nutritional status of children under three, primary school children and pregnant and lactating women
in the target areas. The impact evaluation reveals that malnutrition rates have been reduced by 10
percentage points in the areas where the project has been implemented for 2 years. Nutrition activities
have been gradually migrating to the general budget with mixed results to date, despite the support of
the PRSCs. It took over two years to create a functioning institutional setting and reach an acceptable
level of budget implementation. This necessitated the provision of the IDA supplemental credit to the
project to ensure continued financing until such time as satisfactory budget implementation was in
place.
41.
The government allotted a high priority to fighting HIVIAIDS . Prevalence rates have
remained low at the national level but have reached a critical threshold in some regions, which require
special vigilance. Consciousness-raising through mass media communication and through local
response activities is considered to be quite successful. The Bank supported the government through
the Multi-Sectoral HIVIAIDS Project which concentrated on hot spots areas and aimed to scale up the
national response to both HNIAIDS and sexually transmitted infections (STIs). The latter is a key
risk factor and contributor to the spread of HNIAIDS.
42.
The Community Development Project, (US$110 million FYO1) funded the Fonds
d 'Interventionpour le Dhelopprnent (FID), an executing agency created in 1993. During the CAS,
FID supported local development on a large scale through funding community sub-projects such as
schools, health facilities, feeder roads, potable water schemes, small scale irrigation, markets, etc.
Also, FID has been the main instrument for responding to natural shocks. In 2004105, the Bank
provided US$50 million in supplemental financing to the project to cover the additional costs for
emergency work to rehabilitate/reconstruct infrastructure that was destroyed during the cyclones.
While it is clear that the FID is having an impact at the local level, there are concerns about the
sustainability of its activities without IDA, especially given the highly centralized public finance
system.

V. BANK PERFORMANCE DURING THE CAS PERIOD
A.

Lending volume, instruments and scenarios

Nearly all the projects envisioned at the time of the CAS were delivered in the period
43.
reviewed for this CASCR.'~The modifications to the program were the following: (i) the Watershed
and Irrigation Project was originally planned for FY06 but was approved in the second quarter of
FY07; (ii) supplemental credits were provided in FY05 to the Health Sector Project (US$] 8 million),
the Nutrition Project (US$10 million) and the Community Development Project (US$5O million); (iii)
support to education was mainly channeled through the Education For All Initiative which began in
2004 but which was not foreseen at the time of the CAS; and (iv) the Integrated Growth Poles project
was delivered in early FY06 instead of FY05.
As shown in the table below and in Annex 1, the CAS proposed US$505 million in the Base
Case and US$650 million in the High Case. The triggers for the high case were met (see Table 2)
which was the main driving factor ensuring increased availability of resources for Madagascar.
44.

" Annex

I (a) presents the planned lending program and actual delivery (FY04-06)

- 84 -

Attachment 8
Page 13 of 33

Moreover, the amount lent (US$663 million) exceeded the amount for the high case due to important
changes that took place during the CAS implementation period. First, sharp improvements in the
CPIA ratings led to significant top ups at the beginning of the CAS period under IDA 13 (impacting
FY04 and FY05). Second, the resources available to Madagascar from IDA 14, although smaller than
in IDA 13, were front-loaded heavily in FY06.

Table 2: Triggers and Key Assumptions of the CAS
Policy Area
Overall

Governance

Broad based
growth

Conditions for the Base
Case
Maintenance of sound macroeconomic framework and
satisfactory implementation of
PRSP
Maintenance of good Bank
Portfolio performance
Continued progress in improving
transparency and accountability of
government operations as outlined
in the PRSP, in particular more
efficient use and management of
public resources in PRSP priority
sectors

Maintenance of favorable terms of
trade for agriculture especially
rice
Continued progress in improving
road maintenance
Maintenance of conditions that
would facilitate a resumption of
pre-crisis levels of economic
activity in manufacturing

Human and
material security

Maintain the upward trend in
primary school completion rates

Total Lending
(US$ million)

B.

505

High Case Triggers
All base case assumptions

Progressive implementation of
government's expenditure
management reform program;
implementation of basic
recommendations in CPAR and
CFAA

Same as base case plus:
substantially higher levels of
road maintenance so as to reach
a total of 8,200 km of
rehabilitated roads by 2006
Operation and maintenance of
non-transferable imgation
infrastructure ensured through
fully operational FERHA
(Fonds d'Enlrelien des Rbeaux
Hydroagricoles)
Substantially higher service
delivery in health and education
services
Implementation of Education for
All on track
Substantially reduced leakages
of public funds for social sectors
650

2006 Status
All conditions satisfied -annual IMF
assessments of satisfactory macroeconomic performance as evidenced by
PRGF on-track.
Portfolio performing well -only one
problem project
Overall, the government's budget is aligned
well with the priorities outlined in its
Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper. The
2005 budget allocates 20.9 percent of the
budget to education, 7.8 percent to health
and 18 percent for transport.
PRSCs 1 , 2 and 3 delivered as result of
satisfactory performance on these criten'a
CPAR and CFAA recommendations being
implemented
Rice sector - record prices in 2005
Nearly 2,000 km of national roads have
been improved, increasing the percentage
of the national road network in fair and
good condition from 49 percent in 2003 to
61 percent in 2004
FERHA to be supported through proposed
Watershed Project (FY07)

Primary net enrolment rate has risen to
more than 90 percent and completion rate
has risen to 60 percent.
Education for All on-track.
Progress achieved on many health
indicators
663

Portfolio quality

As of June 2006, the Bank's portfolio consisted of 14 IDA projects and one GEF project with
45.
total commitments of US$906 million. Of that, a total of US$463 million remained undisbursed. A
summary of the portfolio indicators is provided in Annex 3. These portfolio indicators show that the
portfolio by-and-large performed well although there were some problem projects at various points in
time. Throughout the CAS period, however, an important achievement of the portfolio was that it
continued to disburse strongly with the disbursement ratio averaging about 33 percent. Total
disbursements to Madagascar were also very high as shown in the table below.

Attachment 8
Page 14 of 33

CAS P i a r

Commitments Disbursements

Governance
Growth

$30m
$320m

$17m
$270m

Human Dev.

$2 13m

$406m

Total

$663m

$693m

In 2005, the Quality Assurance Group selected Madagascar as one of the countries for a
46.
Portfolio Improvement Program due to the fact that the performance of the portfolio had deteriorated
from 2004. In addition, there was one case of misprocurement in FY06 which was appropriately
addressed. Since then, the efforts to improve the quality of the portfolio have yielded positive results:
(i) the number of problem projects was reduced to one at the end of the CAS period; (ii) the
percentage of problemlpotential problem projects was reduced from 28 percent to 7 percent; (iii) the
amount of commitments at risk was reduced from US$3 19 million to US$90 million (40 percent to 10
percent); and (iv) the disbursement ratio continued to be high at 33 percent. The restructuring of two
Transport Sector APLs in late-2005learly-2006 was key to achieving these improvements.
47.
The Bank carried out joint Country Program Reviews in 2004 and 2005. The reviews were
effective in drawing the attention of senior government officials to portfolio issues, particularly to
thematic weaknesses such as procurement problems, delays in counterpart funds and weak monitoring
and evaluation. The Bank intensified efforts to improve implementation capacity with regular
workshops and hands-on training, as well as independent procurement audits on several projects.
These efforts were greatly facilitated by the presence of senior financial management and
procurement specialists in the Madagascar office and the hiring of a safeguards specialist at the Bank
office.
48.
Despite the intensive management of the portfolio, project implementation continued to be
hampered by delays in the availability of counterpart funds due mainly to weaknesses in revenue
generation on the part of the Government. These delays are not a sign of lack of ownership or
commitment on the part of government. The application of the new Country Financing Parameters in
May 2005, allowing for 100 percent Bank financing of projects, is already solving the problem of
counterpart funds.

C.

Use of instruments

49.
Some important trends emerged regarding the use of instruments during CAS
implementation. First, as noted, the number of active operations was reduced to 14 in line with the
target set in the CAS. Second, IDA moved to provide assistance in an integrated fashion rather then
through a narrow sector approach (e.g. the Growth Poles Project). Third, the attempt to move some
project-supported activities to the PRSC proved premature. This experience plus the drop in the IDA
envelope called for a re-alignment between investment operations and budget support. As a
consequence, PRSC financing declined from US$120 million in FY05 to U S 8 0 million in FY06
(though the provision of additional debt relief through the Multi-Lateral Debt Relief Initiative (MDRI)
is helping to off-set the decreased PRSC amounts). Fourth, the Bank has increasingly been using the
SWAP approach for sector involvement (transport, health). Fifth, the Bank showed flexibility by
adapting to changing country circumstances; it helped Madagascar deal with the devastating impact of
the 2004 cyclones through the approval of the US$50 million supplemental credit to the Community
Development Project.

Attachment 8
Page I5 of 33

The PRSC has become a central piece of the policy dialogue between the Bank and the
50.
government. It also has become an important instrument of donor harmonization, especially in critical
areas like governance and public expenditure management. The PRSC dialogue has also served to
better structure work across all areas of IDA involvement. The AAA program (see Annex lb) has
supported the policy dialogue and project design. As noted, an ample range of analytical work had
supported assistance on governance. The PGDI has provided additional resources to undertake needed
diagnostics and to respond quickly to emerging needs. The on-going Country Economic
Memorandum will provide more insights into the underpinning of employment generating growth in
Madagascar.

D.

The World Bank Group

IDA and the IFC have established productive partnerships, most notably in the financial
5 1.
sector and the power sector. The IFC program is broad. In the financial sector, it seeks to cover all
ranges of the market through guarantees, finance to SMEs and credit lines; it also seeks to introduce
new lines of business, like leasing. In infrastructure, the IFC Advisory Services conducted the
successful concession of the container terminal of Toamasina in June 2005. It assists now with the
involvement of the private sector in the 12 main airports of the country. The IFC is actively exploring
participating options in the oil and mining sector. As noted, IFC is a main player in the reform of the
energy sector, hoping to conclude a PPP for JIRAMA. Madagascar is one of the few countries in
Africa where the IFC is deploying its full range of products and services, both technical assistance and
investment.
52.
The designation of Madagascar as a WBI Focus Country in FY04 led to a better integration of
WBI and IDA activities and a substantial increase in WBI activities. During the CAS period, WBI
has worked especially closely with IDA project teams as follows:

Support to the PGDI Project Team: WBI's support aimed at introducing a framework that links
capacity with development outcomes, and aligning and coordinating resources to meet identified
needs. This framework is being applied for strengthening local training institutes and training
newly appointed Chefs de Rkgions.
Education: The support to the ministry of education aimed at improving financial management,
the monitoring system, coordination with the Ministry of Finance, donor coordination, and
evaluation and assessment. There has also been support for higher education sector reform.
Health: WBI supported the development of alternative financing mechanisms to better protect
populations from the impoverishing effects of illness and the introduction of the main concepts,
instruments and strategies for improving the financing of health services. WBI also focused on
equipping participants with the knowledge and tools needed in their work on developing hospital
policies in relation to the health related MDGs, so that these would be better adapted to on-going
or projected health sector reforms, to shifts in donor support from projects to programs, and to
poverty-reduction strategies.
Social Protection: In the Social Protection area, WBI's support consisted of developing the
country's Risk Management and Social Protection Strategy and the National Social Protection
Policy.
Regulation and Public-Private Partnerships in Infrastructure: The main objective has been
to share and disseminate knowledge on PPP options in delivering sustainable and affordable
infrastructure in Madagascar.

Attachment 8
Page 16of 33

The number of people trained by WBI increased from 74 in FY03 to 485 in FY04, and stayed
53.
at that high level since then. The rapid increase in the number of participants came mainly as a result
of efforts to organize Madagascar-specific activities in the country, as opposed to inviting selected
numbers of Malagasy nationals to attend regional events held elsewhere as was the case before FY03.
Although WBI's efforts to customize its support to Madagascar are yielding good results, more can be
done to better integrate WBI activities with IDA operations. This will be a key objective under the
next CAS.

E.

Donor coordination

54.
Donor coordination greatly improved during the CAS period, particularly with respect to
budget support, education and transport. The donor community is supporting Madagascar through a
range of technical assistance grants and training initiatives designed to enhance the implementation of
the PRSP. The key donors involved include the World Bank, European Union, UNDP, French Cooperation, the African Development Bank (AfDB), GTZ, USAID, and the MCC.

Budget support and fighting corruption: Lack of initial donor coordination delayed
55.
progress in improving public expenditure management. To remedy this situation, the government and
the key budget support donors-World Bank, European Union (EU), France (Agence Franqaise de
Dheloppernent, and the French Co-operation), and the AfDB-signed a partnership agreement
(Cadre de Partenariat) in 2004 to provide a framework and to lay out procedures and modalities to
work together. The agreement has been implemented through yearly action plans and periodic
reviews of results undertaken in joint supervision missions for the PRSC and the EU's program of
budget support. Key reforms in public financial management and fighting corruption are being
supported by financing from IDA together with technical assistance from the EU, GTZ and the French
Cooperation. Donor coordination around implementing customs reforms has also improved.
Education and health: The Ministry of Education has continued to lead the dialogue with
56.
donors in the education sector (UNICEF, French Co-operation, AfDB, AFD, Japan, USAID and
World Bank), mainly around the Education for All initiative. Whilst they support diverse activities,
donors take a holistic approach and coordinate well overall progress under the Education for All as
well as under individual projects. In addition, the key donors are coordinating their support in health
and are moving towards a sectonvide approach starting in 2007. HIV/AIDS, water, agricultural and
environmental sector reforms and investment continue to be approached together with other partners.
57.
Transport: The Bank is collaborating closely with the EU in the transport sector to support
the implementation of the country's Transport Sector Strategy. The Bank provides support to all subsector activities- in roads, ports, railways and airports - while the EU is the main financier of the
national road network. The EU and Bank provide coordinated and consistent advice on institutional
and sector reforms and there are flexible financing arrangements in place with agreements on the
financing of Technical Assistance and recurrent costs.
IMF: The Bank closely collaborates and coordinates activities with the IMF. The staffs of
58.
the two institutions conduct regular joint assessments of the PRSP implementation and also work
closely together on (i) public finance management; (ii) tax and customs; (iii) privatization program;
and (iv) trade.

Attachment 8
Page 17 of 33

VI. LESSONS LEARNT FOR SUBSEQUENT CAS DESIGN
59.
Assistance is more effective in the areas that are true priorities of government. Alignment
with the PRSP was a critical factor in ensuring that the Bank's program supported the development
priorities of the country. Still, the contribution to results varied. Assistance was most effective in the
areas that the government put on top of its agenda, such as transportation, education and the fight
against HIVIAIDS. Difficulties arose in other areas, particularly with regard to rural development
where more progress could have been made had the government provided stronger leadership.

In a highly uncertain environment,flexibility during implementation favors effectiveness.
60.
The experience of the CAS implementation showed that dealing promptly and adequately with
unforeseen events requires a flexible and adaptive approach. For instance, the Bank adapted its
lending program in response to the two cyclones of 2004 by providing a supplemental credit to the
Community Development Project to deal directly with the impacts of the cyclone.'6 Also, CAS
implementation reduced the weight of budget support to accommodate the slow pace of improving
public expenditure management.
Overly ambitious goals lead to an uneven performance. The CAS reflected the high
61.
expectations generated by the political changes and reform commitments of the new government.
Some of these expectations have materialized (as in the social sectors), while others have progressed
at a slower pace (as in rural development and governance). Several factors have contributed to this
uneven performance. First, goals in some areas (e.g. governance) were ambitious and covered a wide
range of initiatives. Second, Madagascar has limited capacity to accompany political commitment
and the country is left over-extended and pursuing multiple initiatives. Third, the capacity of the Bank
and other donors to adjust their strategies is limited by the quality of data, as well as by donors'
bureaucratic procedures. Fourth, in some cases there may be a gap between the open and the true
commitment of the authorities, for political economy reasons.
62.
When the Bank is the largest donor in certain sectors, it is very difficult to be as selective as
it should. The scarcity of donors in Madagascar has left the Bank as the main external actor in several
critical areas. Therefore, the Bank's project portfolio and AAA continued to encompass a wide range
of activities,17lacking the focus of other donors (e.g. the EU). The result from this approach has been
that the Bank has implemented some very successful projects but often their impact has been confined
to limited geographical areas (rural water, microfinance).

Transferring investmentprojects to the budget required greaterpreparation. The gradual
63.
transition of programs related to human development and governance issues to the government's
budget through the support of the PRSC was not smooth. The original agenda was over-optimistic at
the design stage, with insufficient prioritization of actions, and under-estimation of the capacity
constraints and implementation lead times. The failure to increase the mobilization of internal
resources made it difficult to secure adequate resource allocation to ensure sustainability of programs
transferred to the budget (e.g., nutrition), as well as to support capacity building in areas where
l 6 It is recommended that, in the future, the CAS treat these risks as an integral risk to the country's development and the
Bank's program, given that natural disasters such as cyclones are quite prevalent in Madagascar. The OED's CAE concluded
likewise.
" In some respects this was unavoidable as the Bank was either already engaged in sectors from which it could not exit as it
was one of the only donors active, e.g. health, or it engaged in activities at the urgent request of Government and when called
upon as lender of last resort, e.g. Community Development Project supplemental to respond to the cyclone, support to
Madarail.

Attachment 8
Page 18 of 33

assistance moved from sector projects to the general budget.'' In addition, the slow progress in
modernizing the public expenditure system made it difficult to track the final use of resources as
opposed to budgetary allocations.

Bank presence in thefieldproved timely and contributed significantly to achieving results.
64.
The Bank (IDA and IFC) built up its decentralized team in the Antananarivo office throughout the
CAS period. The greater presence in the field led to a strong relationship with the government, based
on trust and openness. In this manner, the Bank has been effective in leveraging its comparative
advantage as a knowledge institution, responding on a timely basis to the requests from government.
Likewise, the Bank presence on the ground has allowed it to react faster to unforeseen events like the
two cyclones of 2004 and the JlRAMA energy crisis. There is a strong fiduciary team and a
safeguards expert based in the Country Office which has ensured a concerted and timely focus on
these issues as part of overall portfolio management. The field presence facilitated the dialogue and
the coordination with the private sector and civil society.
65.
Lack of information limits monitoring and evaluation. During the course of the CAS, as the
Bank and other donors jointly adopted results-oriented programs, the need arose to define a few
critical indicators. In parallel, it was recognized that better statistics and M&E systems were critical
in order to be able to monitor the results, follow the impact of the interventions and introduce
corrections as needed. Unfortunately, the quality of the statistics in Madagascar is poor due both to
the institutional weakness of the National Statistical Office and the lack of a recent national
population census.

VII. RECOMMENDATIONS
66.
Support the government strategy but be realistic. The strategy to align the CAS with the
PRSP worked and should be continued with the MAP. The Bank will do well to heed IEGYscaution
against over-optimism presented in the Country Assistance Evaluation. Consequently, it is important
for the Bank to move early and advise the government on the realism of the expected results under the
MAP to ensure that unrealistic ambitious do not drive the strategy. In this regard and as already
recommended in the IMF program, a preferred approach would be to outline several scenarios.
67.
Focus on only a few but strategic objectives. As noted, Bank assistance to Madagascar
cannot be as selective as desired, because the Bank is now involved in a broad range of areas and
there are few donors active. However, it can move gradually to greater selectivity. To begin, the new
CAS could identify more sharply the strategic objectives it seeks to support and the results it seeks to
achieve. Greater precision here will help to ascertain the relevance or priority of existing and future
Bank engagements. Then, as the on-going portfolio ages, as certifiable progress is made even on a
pilot basis, and as the available envelope expands the Bank program can gradually gain selectivity.

Support the government in its efforts to scale up successful initiatives. The Bank should
68.
develop a comprehensive strategy to support scaling-up. Progress in using the budget as an effective
instrument of development policy will be the basis for scaling up. This implies attention to credible
sector strategies, continuing to improve the delivery capacity of sector agencies, improving the
capacity to track expenditure, and malung definite progress in the implementation of the new
procurement legislation. In addition, a higher level of internal domestic revenue will signal to donors
18

The Implementation Completion Report of PRSC-I assesses the achievements and experiences to date of providing budget
support and these lessons are informing the design of the future PRSCs.

Attachment 8
Page 19 of 33

the government's commitment to its own agenda. Increasing domestic resource mobilization will
support sustainability without the Bank.

Sharpen the strategic agendas. As noted in the CAE, the agenda on growth needs to be
69.
further developed, especially to improve the understanding of linkages across sectors and
interventions and to help bring dynamism into the rural sector where most of the poor live. Such
work should help steer policy towards the promotion of employment generating growth. In addition, a
better understating is needed of the impact of the rapid population growth and the prospects for a
demographic transition. Also, as noted by IEG, the governance agenda should focus its interventions
on the most critical areas -customs, procurement, licensing, etc. Again, the available international
experience shows that governance improves faster when targeted to key priorities. In this regard,
assistance to address issues of high corruption or conflict of interest should be a priority.
70.
Follow apragmatic approach regarding the use of instruments. Moving forward it is
advisable to increase the use of SWAps. The experience of SWAp-type approaches has been positive
in education, HIV/AIDS, transport, water and sanitation sectors as they have allowed for better donor
harmonization. The next CAS can continue with sector-wide programs in the following areas: (i)
assistance to the on-going Education for All initiative in primary education; (ii) a proposed SWAP in
the health sector; and (iii) further harmonizing the transport sector projects with those of other donors.

71.
Put greater emphasis on dissemination of the results of analytical work. IDA has
undertaken a broad range of analytical work, some in the context of project implementation. This
analytical work can be utilized more effectively to broaden the development dialogue in Madagascar
and involve all local development partners.
72.
Emphasize results and monitoring of outcomes. The next CAS will necessarily be results
based: the effectiveness of the results approach for the MAP and the CAS will hinge to some extent
on the quality of the information. Hence, the next CAS should address the issue of the quality of
information in cooperation with the development community and the authorities.

Attachment 8
Page 20 of 33

Annex 1 (a) Planned Lending Program a n d Actual Deliveries (FY04-06)
CURRENT STATUS
Status

CAS PLANS

IDA*
30.0

Actual
Assistance
Actual

Transport Infrastructure
Investment (APL3)
Third Environment

1

Actual

40.0

1

40.0

1

Delivered in FY06

Integrated Growth Poles
PRSC 1(education, nutrition)

1

Actual

70.0

1

Additional Actual Projects
Second Health Sector Supplemental

125.0

18.0

Community Development Project
Supplemental
Nutrition Supplemental

1

60.0

1 Moved to 4 2 of FY07

PRSC 2 (education, nutrition,
health)
j

70.0

Actual

Watershed Management

I

I

(

TOTAL

I

* All amounts in US$ million

1

505

1

10

1

80.0

Additional Actual project
Second Multisectoral HIVIAIDS

30.0

~ c t u aProjectfrom
l
another FY
/Integrated Growth Poles

1

129.8

1

1

662.8

I

Attachment 8
Page 2I of 33

Annex 1 (b) Analytical and Advisory Activities (AAA)
Planned and Actual Deliveries (FY04-06)

FY
2004

CAS Plans
Integrated Framework
Health Sector Review

Current Status
Actual
Deferred to FY05 "Health Study"
Additional Actual Products:
EPZ Supply Chain Management

2005

Public Expenditure Review
Development Policy Review
Land Tenure Review

Actual
Actual
Deferred to FY06 "Land and Property Rights"
Additional Actual Products:
HTPC
Investment Climate Assessment
Health Study
Irrigation and Land Management Review

2006

Risk and Social Protection Review

Actual ("Risk Management & Social Protection
Strategy")

Additional Actual Products:
FSAP
Land and Property Rights
Land Titling

Attachment 8
Page 22 of 33

Annex 2. Madagascar's progress and outlook for reaching the Millennium Development Goals

Millennium Development Goals

Present Status

1990-2015

- Reduce extreme poverty by

level, exaeme poverty increased sharply after the
2002 political and economic crisis. This trend is
now being reversed with the 2004105 Household
Survey results showinga decline"....................
in poverty
..
......................................................................................
"......-..
Child malnu!xition in children aged 0-5 decreased
Reduce underweight rate by half
only very slightly between 1992 and 1997. Since
then, good progress has been made, with the support

1

0:f::at

.Low
(1 992)

(1 997)

percent

>PO percent
(2005)

Increase net enrollment ratio
in primary school to 100

and secondary school to 100 percent

Benchmark

Current
Estimate

Estimate

1

-

-

-

1

Likelihood of
achieving goals
if past policles
and finance

-

60 percent
(2005)

School completion rates almost doubled yet

I

1

Good

/

97perceni

I
I

103.5
percent

I

1

I

percent
100

I

100
nercent

100
percent
.........................

> 0.35

1

.......................................................................

/

land)
1

2
3

Demographic and Health Survey, 1997
Ibid
2004105 Household Survey

Stable
forest
area by

Attachment 8
Page 23 of 33

Annex 3
Selected Indicators* of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
as of 06/19/2006

Indicator
Portfolio Assessment
Number of Projects Under
Implementation a
Average Implementation Period (years)
Percent of Problem Projects by Number a'

2003

2004

2005

2006

15

17

14

14

Yes
1,688
80,000

Yes
1,861
103,000

No
2,309
128,000

Yes
2,140
126,000

Since FY 80
72
2,103.3

Last Five
FYs
13
805.4

37.5

30.8

29.1

16.8

C

Percent of Problem Projects by Amount
C

Percent of Projects at Risk by Number
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount a,
Disbursement Ratio (percent)
Portfolio Management
CPPR during the year (yeslno)
Supervision Resources (total US$000)
Average Supervision (US$/project)

Memorandum Item
Proj Eval by OED by Number
Proj Eval by OED by Amt (US$ millions)
percent of OED Projects Rated U or HU by
Number
percent of OED Projects Rated U or HU by
Amt

As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY).
Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio.
Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives and/or implementation progress.
As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the
beginning of the year: Investment projects only.
* All indicators are for projects active in the Portfolio, with the exception of Disbursement Ratio,
which includes all active projects as well as projects which exited during the fiscal year.

a.
b.
c.
d.
e.

Attachment 8
Page 24 of 33

Annex 4: Madagascar CAS FY2004-06 Performance Report Card
Monitoring
Indicators

1

"

I

Expected outcome in 2006

i

More than 10 budget management
benchmarks met in particular in the
areas of reporting (Treasury submits
statement of financial accounts and
final accounts within the relevant
statutory framework, Auditor General
submits audited accounts to Parliament
within the statutory timeframe) and
procurement (new procurement
legislation and revised institutional
framework for public procurement
implemented)

Budget management
benchmarks met as
defined in HIPC and
CFAA

1

Pillar I: Improving Governance
Status in 2006
Not achieved: Madagascar continues to
fulfill only 5 HIPC benchmarks although
substantive reforms are under way to
address (i) deficiencies in budgetary
reporting, (ii) reduction of the deviation
between voted budget and actual
allocations, (iii) expenditure management
and control issues, and (iv) to improve
public procurement

Performance

Comments

Marginally satisfactory:
government developed a
comprehensive reform program to
address the many deficiencies of the
public finance system. Some
important elements of this reform
program have been implemented or
are under way

Initial reform target was overly
ambitious and did not
adequately reflect absorptive
capacity
There is the need to prioritize
better and sequence intended
reforms
Initial design should tackle the
capacity issues upfront for the
progress to accelerate as in

I

I

Sustainability should be part of
resources in line with strategic
efforts to increase allocations for
priority sectors but progress has

spending in high
poverty relevant areas

1

I

1

Government has
introduced and
published service
delivery standards in
key services with a
large public-private
interface (especially
customs, land titling,
primary education,

I

I Allocations for the recurrent budget I

I

Transparency and service delivery
significantly improved as evidenced by
independent audits

1

Tracking system is inherent to
measure impact

1

have not increased at the same level
as allocations for the investment
budget which raises sustainability

Partially accomplished: government has
introduced some service standards in
selected services (customs, land titling and
lower courts) but this has not yet been
expanded more broadly into the public
sector. Transparency and service delivery
have improved in the targeted sector but
impact beyond these pilots remains weak

Marginally unsatisfactory: as
overly bureaucratic procedures, red
tape, non-transparent decision
making and lack of service
orientation continue to negatively
impact effectiveness of the
administration

I

Improve support to government
to conceptualize service
delivery oriented reforms
Increase focus on
deconcentrated and
decentralized service delivery

1

I

Attachment 8
Page 25 of 33

I

Monitoring
~ndicatorsGDP Growth

below poverty line and

Expected outcome in 2006

Status in 2006

Satisfactory: Growth was
satisfactory despite external shocks
(cyclones, high oil prices, impact of
expiry of MFA on textile exports)

Avg: 2003-5: 6.6 percent
Avg: 2004-5: 5 percent

Susceptibility to external shocks
remains high

Not achieved:
Poverty level (headcount)
2001 2002 2004
Agg 69.7
80.7 72.1
Urb 43.9 61.6 53.7
Rur 77.2 86.4 77.3
Poverty (depth ofpoverty)
2001 2002 2004
Agg 34.9 47.6 31.6
Urb 18.1 29.3 20.2
Rur 39.8 53.0 34.8

Target of 16,900km by 2006
maintained and/or
rehabilitated

Performance

2004=5.3 percent
2005=4.6 percent (estimated)
2006=4.7 (projected)

2003-2006 Average of 6 percent

index from 73 percent (2003) to 68
percent (2006).

I

Likely: At the end of June 2005, about
12,300km have been improved and it
appears likely that the target will be reached

Sustainability and stability of
growth remains a question. 2003 is
an outlier being above average.
Without 2003, objective not met
Unsatisfactory: Overall, poverty
levels in 2004 renmin higher than
the 200 1 levels, with rural poverty at
the same level as in 2001 and urban
poverty higher than the level in
2001. Between 2002 and 2004,
rural poverty has declined more than
urban poverty (partly due to the
nature of shocks -depreciation, high
inflation, esp. rising prices for rice
in 2004/5 and petroleum prices; and
perhaps the implementation of the
roads program which improved
access to markets and higher
producer prices for rice which gave
incentives to farmers to increase
production
Unsatisfactory: Further progress
required, especially regarding
maintenance works (including
strengthening of the Roads
Maintenance Fund). Performance
based contract to be experienced

Comments
Diversified sources of growth
important
Better measurement of impact
on growth from all sectors

Attachment 8
Page 26 of 33

Monitoring
Indicators

Pillar 11: Promoting Broad based Growth

I

Expected outcome in 2006

Year around access to ] Target of 75 percent of district capitals
road transport of district accessible by2006
capitals

Institutional reform and I -

Government budgetlgovernance
framework for transport fully
functional and sustainable
Barriers to entry for private
invcstment reduced

1

Status in 2006

I Not likely: This indicator will not be met

Achieved:
Vicc Prime Minister's Office dissolved
and two separate ministries were created:
Ministry of Public Works and Transport
and Ministry of Decentralization and
Regional Planning
A national transport council is being set
up that will be a permanent consultation
platform for the ministry, private sector, and
civil society
All road maintenance and improvement
works are carricd out by the private sector
Ports, Maritime, and River Agency
became operational in October 2004 under
an independent board
Civil Aviation Agency, operational,
restructured to increase accountability and
transparency
Roads Authority and the Land
Transport Agency were established and
both laws were ratified by parliament. It is
expected that both agencies will be
operational towards the end of 2006
As a precursor to the Roads Authority,
the ministry has strengthened its Large
Works Unit and is improving its
procurement and contract management
capacity
Road Maintenance Fund (RMF)was

Performance

I

The rural roads program has
significantly ~ n d e ~ - ~ e r f o r m e d
which is primarily due to slow
execution and higher than expected
costs

Marginally satisfactory:
There is a significant funding
shortfall for the Roads Maintenance
Fund that needs to be addressed,
esp. as a higher share of the road
network will come under
maintenance in the foreseeable
future. Government has run up
substantial VAT and own-fund
arrears with the private sector which
undermine credibility of the ministry
and present a serious cash-flow
problem for the firms. Ministry of
Finance is now working with the
IMF and the private sector to find an
acceptable solution

Comments

I Further capacity building
required fir both the public and
the private sectors
Support needed to improve
fiscal management
Need for solid monitoring and
evaluation system
The government has withdrawn
as the supplier of services

Attachment 8
Page27of 33

lar 11: Promoting Broad based Growth
Monitoring

Expected outcome in 2006

Public transportations improved either
lmprove transportation
services delivery

Private management of
SIRAMAIHASYMA

through private management or
operations

Privatization completed

Status in 2006

Performance

reformed with improved internal controls;
planning and programming capacity in the
Road Administration was strengthened
Partially achieved:
( Mixed performance:
~esults-seenonly in targeted
Northern railway and container port at
schemes which are still delayed due
Toamasina concessioned
to ~oliticalPressures. Impact on
Management contract signed for the
cost reduction and improvement in
national airline, Air Madagascar.
Management contract in preparation for services is unclear
the southern railway
Partially achieved: HASYMA(cotton)
I Mixed performance:
HASYMA privatization has helped
was privatized in 2004 and SIRAMA
(sugar) placed under management contract
increase textile production from
local cotton
-

Comments

-

I

Greater emphasis on improving
investment climate and
strengthening investment
promotion
Concentrated efforts to enhance
competitiveness of key sectors
such as textiles, mining and
tourism
Privatization of SIRAMA and
JIRAMA requires clear
political commitment

Improve investment
climate

Improve access to
financial services for
low-income populations

businesses reduced

one stop business registration agency) and
successful reduction of time and costs for
registration of new enterprises

- 102 retail microfinance institutions Achieved:
created serving 362,500 beneficiaries
120 retail microfinance institutions
- Savings and Loan Associations and created serving 121,428 members or more
their networks developed in four of
than 600,000 beneficiaries
Madagascar's six provinces
Five microfinance networks have been
- Regulatory framework and capacity established which attract 62 percent of all
for supervision and strengthening built microfinance clients and 63 percent of all
microfinance savings in Madagascar
Operational self-sufficiency of the

the agency and removal of
administrative barriers has increased
the number of new businesses

Good performance: but only in
targeted areas. Mainstream impact
is unclear

The rate at which new
businesses grow and the impact
on the bottom line of increase
in employment and fiscal
revenues remains to be seen
Access to finance across
sectors especially rural areas
remains to be seen
Project has been extended and
disbursements have been slow.
Comparison to other countries
and similar impact would be
useful

Attachment 8
Page 28 of33

lar 11: Promoting Broad based < rowth
Monitoring

Expected outcome in 2006

Status in 2006

Performance

Comments

1

microfinance networks ranges between 65
percent and 200 percent, greatly exceeding
the 60 percent initial goal set by the project
and comparing favorably against
performance of microfinance institutions of
the same age globally
The legal, judicial and regulatory
framework for microfinance has been
developed and strengthened
The competence of the Secretariat for
Banking Supervision Commission for
microfinance supervision has been
strengthened
A pilot training program for microfinance
practitioners has been successfully
implemented
- More than 280,000 people have
Achieved:
access to water in targeted areas
About 400.000 people have gained
- Set up policy and institutional
access to safe water through the
framework at the central level to
construction of 627 boreholes equipped
achieve the MDGs
with hand pumps and 320 gravity schemes
- Create sustainable ways to increase 1
New policy and a legal framework
access to water supply and sanitation
(water law and related decrees) to support
services beyond donor support and
its water supply strategy developed
beyond pilots
National water supply and sanitation
- Promote private sector investment
program endorsed and aimed at reaching the
in delivery WSS services
MDG for water supply and sanitation sector
Number of tools developed to allow a
smooth transition from a "pilot" Bank
project to a "programmatic" and "budget
support" approach. These tools include : i)
service delivery arrangements to expand
sustainable and cost effective water supply ;
ii) medium term results oriented program
budget, iii) national manual of procedures;
iv) baseline data and monitoring
information system; and v)annual
stakeholder's sector reviews

Cross sectoral approach is
needed

1

Improve access to water
supply and sanitation
services

m
Good performance:

Total budget for the sector has
continued to substantially increase
over the past years, confirming the
importance of the sector for the
government. Expenditures increased
from US.Sl0.6 million in 2004 to
US$15.9 million in 2005, providing
respectively 324.00 and 233.000
persons with potable water. In 2006,
the sector total budget is estimated
at US$21.1 million, representing an
increase of 33 percent

Attachment 8
Page 29 of 33

P lar 11: Promoting Broad based Growth
Monitoring
Indicators

Expected outcome in 2006

Improve access to
energy

Privatize JIRAMA

1 Remove barriers to

TELMA privatized

Status in 2006

Performance

Improved long term sustainability and
management of water services: first by
promoting public private partnerships in
small towns and second by preparing an
action plan to hand over the distribution of
water produced by the South Water Supply
Agency to small providers
Not achieved

I
entry of telecom
services providers and
reduce costs

New telecom law passed
Independent regulator set up and
operational

Increasing rice
productivity

Partially achieved:
New Telecom/Tnformation Technology
law passed in parliament and promulgated
The current regulator is being replaced
by a new one with increased accountability.
Investment from operators (over
US$30million in 2005) increased
TELMA, the incumbent fixed operator,
privatized. Licenses of mobile operators
Madacom and Orange renewed in 2005
(without unreasonable license renewal fee).
Telecommunication prices reduced:
lower interconnection tariffs and removal of
a tax previously being charged on the
number of subscribers (which was acting
- as
a disincentive for customer subscnption)
Achieved: average official rice productivity
was 2.57MTha in 2005

1

Unsatisfactory:
JIRAMA is under a management
contract. The energy crisis is
continuing
Investment in fixed lines and
basic national backbone increased.
TELMA has started to implement its
re-launch plan, with investments
geared towards enhancing quality of
basic services and acquire
subscribers in urban centers

Average rice yield has surpassed
CAS goals
The rice market has stabilized
after the government removed the
import tariff in mid-2005 and
stopped subsidizing imports
A new Rice Observatory and
public-private sector platform
(PCRiz) were established
Prospects for Madagascar
a

Comments

I

I

The Bank joined hands with
other key donors
(FAOIECJWFP) in providing
targeted policy advice on rice
market. This technical
assistance contributed to a
stable market in 2005106 and
higher competitiveness of
domestic rice
Political will to tackle major

Attachment 8
Page 30 of 33

-

~onitoring
Indicators

-

~ x ~ e c t outcome
ed
in 2006

lar II: Promoting Broad based ( rowth
Status in 2006
Performance
becoming a net rice exporter in the
near future are good

'

1

Improve institutional
and policy framework
in rural development

Decrease the average
annual deforestation
rate

1.2 percent in 2003 to 0.6 percent in
2004-2006

The National Program for Rural
Development was adopted in December
2005
New Agriculture Census was carried
out in 2005
Food security is being strengthened
through the Action Plan for Food Security
About 6,000 farmers associations
were assisted with productive sub-grants.
Of these, 79 percent have reported at least
30 percent increase in revenue, although the
increase in agriculture productivity is lower
than initially targeted
A new Land Policy Letter was adopted on
May 2005, and the new National Land
Tenure Program has been launched, based
on the principles of decentralizing and
simplifying land tenure certification
Achieved: average official deforestation
rate in 2004-06 was 0.0 14 percent20

BUT
Yields remain modest when
compared with other rice producing
countries with similar conditions
Need to disengage government from
fertilizer distribution, privatize seed
distribution centers, and rehabilitate
irrigation in key rice growing areas
Donor collaboration in rural
development has strengthened
through the Multi-Donor Secretariat,
with joint initiatives launched in the
areas of rice policy, fisheries, land
tenure, avian influenza,
decentralized financing and
extension support, and donor
harmonization
The rice market has been
liberalized, partially as a result of
technical assistance provided during
2005 and the support of the MultiDonor Secretariat. A new Rice
Observatory has been established,
disseminating weekly price data,
and rice prices have been relatively
stable during the 2005106 season
In general, the targets have been
achieved
BUT
Forest fires have increased in
2005 and are likely to increase
further in 2006 due to elections

--I

Comments

distribution) needs to be in
place for policy advice to
succeed
Investment projects in
irrigation were deemed
unsustainable in the absence of
institutional strengthening of
water user associations and
related watershed management

Multi-partner investments in
protected areas have worked
BUT
Need high-level and macro-

1

Attachment 8
Page 31 of 33

PilIar 11: Promoting Broad based Growth
Monitoring
Indicators

Nationally protected
areas as percent of land
area increased

Expected outcome in 2006

from 1.9 percent in 2003 to 4 percent
to 2006

Status in 2006

Achieved: 4.7 percent by beginning 2006
Foundation for Protected Areas was
created in January 2005 to help finance the
System of Protected Areas in Madagascar

Performance

Comments

Illegal exploitation of forest
products has increased in 2005106
following a ban on legal permits and
2004 permits

economic attention to forest
governance and further
attention to economic
development around protected
area system
Presidential declaration
(Durban Vision) has been a
positive motivation to reach 6
million ha of protected areas by
2010

Target has been slightly
surpassed with the preliminary
establishment of new protected areas
covering 1,050,000 ha
BUT
Much remains to be done to
finalize the establishment of new
protected areas
The Ministry of Environment,
Water and Forestry is undertaking a
reform program focusing on
strengthened forestry and
environmental governance.
Although many challenges remain,
this includes the establishment of a
Forestry Observatory and a Mobile
Control Unit, development of a
more competitive and transparent
forest exploitation adjudication
system, recruitment of new staff for
the deconcentrated forestry offices
and establishment of new
environmental units in the 22
regions (on-going)
The area reforested increased
only minimally since the last CAS
(from 348,000 ha to 360,300) due to
delays in the reforestation activities.
The surface burnt decreased by 17
percent relative to 2002 (about
556,000 ha in 2005)

BUT
Rush to meet Durban Vision
has surpassed institutional
capacity and neglected other
critical areas (such as resource
management outside protected
areas)

Attachment 8
Page 32 of 33

Pillar 111: Providing Human and Material Security
Monitoring
Indicators

Expected outcome in 2006

Status in 2006

Performance

Increased literacy rate

54 percent of population above 15 can
read and write in 2003 to 56 percent in
2006

Achieved: the 2004 Household survey
published in January 2006 registered a
literacy rate about 59 percent

The performance is high because
the literacy rate was higher than
expected

Increase in primary
school completion rate

44 percent to 58 percent in 2006

Achieved: Primary completion rate in
200412006 was 60 percent

Performance is good because target
was achieved

Monitoring Indicators
Number of textbooks
per primary school
student

Expected outcome in 2006
From lbook per 3 children to 1 book
per child

Status in 2006
Not achieved: The ratio textbooks per
primary school student is lower than 1: I at
the school level

Performance
No reliable data are available at the
school level, but field visits suggest
that performance is inadequate
mainly because books do not reach
schools in sufficient quality

Under 5 mortality rate

141 per 1,000 to be to reduced to 120
per 1,000

Achieved

Good

Increase in proportion
of people knowing at
least three ways to
prevent getting infected
by HlV

From
57 percent to 80 percent (women)
44 percent to 90 percent (men)

Achieved

Good

Lessons

:

Administrative measures to
reduce repetition helped to
raise the primary completion
rate. For better student
retention, (i) the
decentralization process and
empowering local communities
for education should be
pursued, (ii) provision of
schools budget should be done
on a regular basis and (iii)
better communication about
policies~strategieslactionsis
needed both for teachers,
education administrators and
parents
Lessons
It is not sufficient to monitor
the indicator at the national
level. The planning and
distribution of textbooks must
be improved, with greater
monitoring and reporting by
school committees and parents
There is still a debate on the
reliability of recent data. Still
progress seems evident
question remains on the scale
of progress
Prevention is just a first step.
Behavioral change is necessary.
This is integrated in the Second
Multisectoral STUHIVIAIDS
project

Attachment 8
Page 33 of 33

Piiiar 111: Providing Human and Material Security
Monitoring
Indicators

Expected outcome in 2006

DTP3 vaccination rate
of children below 1 year
Reduction in child
underweight rate (MDG
indicator)

Increase from 55 percent to 65 percent

Stunting, chronic
malnutrition (poverty
indicator)
Expand local service
delivery and reduce
susceptibility to
external shocks

Performance

Lessons

Achieved

Good

Reduced from 40 to 35 percent

Achieved: for MDG indicator

Reduced from 48 to 40 percent

Not achieved, for chronic malnutrition
indicator (long-term commitment needed)
Good performance:
Firstly, by transferring large amount of
resources to rural areas, the project has
contributed to reduce the gap in basic
social and economic service delivery
between rural and urban areas, thus
reducing rural poverty and inequities,
especially in remote and underserved
areas
Secondly, the project has allowed to
restore basic services delivery
(transport, education, health, potable
water etc.), quickly after the major
2004 cyclones
Thirdly the project has provided a
flexible safety net instrument to help
the population cope with major
weather and economic risks,
preventing them from falling deeper
into poverty. Finally, by successfully
piloting the transfer of block grants
communes, the project has paved the
way and guided the process of
mainstreaming support to communes,
planned under the Local Development
Fund

Good progress but more and longterm commitment needed to achieve
chronic malnutrition outcome
indicator. Monitored by impact
evaluation and anthropometric
surveys

lnstitutionalization of nutrition
at central and community level
takes time and requires long
term sustained commitment
and adequate budget allocation
from national resources, not
solely from donors
Need to harmonize community
driven development approaches
and to put a stronger focus on
building capacity of communes
for more sustainable ways of
delivering basic services

These activities overall contributed to
the improvement of several indicators
under the various CAS goals

Status in 2006

Good

Madagascar a t a glance

2/12/07

Key Development Indicators
Madagascar

SubSaharan
Africa

Age dlstrlbutlon, 2005
Male

Population, mld-year (millions)
Surlace area (thousand sq. km)
Population growVl (YO)
Urban population (% of total population)

Female

70.74
8044

s
5
u

4n44
9x34

GNI (Atlas method. US$ billions)
GNI per capita (Atlas method. US$)
GNI per capita (PPP, international $)

2C-24
1014
M

GDP growlh (%)
GDP per capita growth (76)

20

10

20

10

0

percent

(most recent estrmate, 2000-2005)
Poverty headcount ratio at $1 a day (PPP. YO)
Poverty headcount ratio at $2 a day (PPP. %)
Life expeclancy at birth (years)
Infant mortality (per 1.000live births)
Ch~ldmalnutrit~on(YO of children under 5)

Under-5 mortality rate (per 1,000)

Adult literacy, male (% of ages 15 and older)
Adult literacy, female (% of ages 15 and older)
Gross primary enrollment, male (% of age group)
Gross primary enrollment, female (% of age group)
Access to an improved water source (4' of population)
Access to improved sanitation facilities (Oh of population)

I

Obiadwascar

I

Sub-SaharanAfrica

Net Ald Flows

(US$millions)
Growth of GDP and GDP per caplta (%)

Net ODA and official ald
Top 3 dmors (in 2W4):
France
Italy
United States

20
10

Aid (% of GNI)
Aid per capita (US$)

0
10

Lonp-Term Economic Trends

-20
80

Consumer prlces (annual % change)
GDP implicit deflator (annual % change)

-+GDP

Exchange rate (annual average, local per US$)
Terms of trade index (2000= 100)

M

85

05

-

GDP per capta

2,003.0
72
1980-90 1990-2000
200045
(average annual grobvth %)

Population, mid-year (mill~ons)
GDP (US$ miillons)

12.0
3.081

16.2
3.878

18.6
5,041

2.8
1.1

3.0
2.0

(% of GDP)

Agriculture
Industry
Manufacturing
Se~ces

28.6
12.8
11.2
58.6

29.2
14.2
12.2
56.6

Hwsehold final consumption expenditure
General gov't final consumption expend~ture
Gmss capital formation
Exports of gwds and services
Imports of goods and servlces
Gross savings
Note: F~guresin italics are for years other than those specified. 2005 data are preliminary estimates. .. indicates data are not available
a. Aid data are for 2004.
Development Economics, Development Data Group (DECDG).

2.8
2.0

Madagascar
Balance o f P a y m e n t s a n d T r a d e
Governance Indicators, 2000 and 2005
(US$ rnillmns)
Total merchandise exports (fob)
Total merchandise imports (cif)
Net trade in goods and services

Voice and acmuntabllity
Polltlcal stabl~ty

Workers' remittances and
compensation of employees (receipts)

Regulatory qual~ty
Rule of law

Current account balance
asa%ofGDP

Contml of corruption

Reserves, induding gold

25

0

812005

Central G o v e r n m e n t Finance

2000

(% of GDP)
Revenue
Tax revenue
Expense

50

75

100

Countrfs percentile rank (0-100)
h,gher vduea,mply beuw d
,m+

Source KaU(mann.KraayMastruzz~W o r l Bank

Technolopy a n d I n f r a s t r u c t u r e
Cash surplusldeficit
Paved roads (% of total)
Fixed line and mobile phone
subscribers (per 1,000 people)
High technology exports
(% of manufactured exports)

Highest maqinal tax rate (%)
Individual
Corporate
E x t e r n a l D e b t a n d Resource F l o w s

Environment
(us$ mi,/ions)
Total debt outstanding and disbursed
Total debt service
HlPC and MDRl debt relief (expected; flow)

Agricultural land (% of land area)
Forest area (% of land area. 2000 and 2005)
Nationally protected areas (% of land area)

Total debt (% of GDP)
Total debt service (76 of exports)

Freshwater resources per capita (cu. meters)
Freshwater withdrawal (% of internal resources)

Foreign direct investment (net inflows)
Portfolio equity (net inflows)

C02 emissions per capita (mt)
GDP per unit of energy use
(2000 PPP S per kg of oil equivalent)

Composltlon of total external debt, 2005

Energy use per capita (kg of oil equivalent)

(US8 millions)
IBRD
Total debt outstanding and disbursed
Disbursements
Principal repayments
Interest payments
U S millions

P r i v a t e Sector D e v e l o p m e n t
Time required to start a business (days)
Cost to starta business (% of GNI per capita)
Time required to register property (days)
Ranked as a major constraint to business
(% of managers surveyed who agreed)
Cost of financing
Macroeconomic instability
Stock market capitalization (76 of GDP)
Bank branches (per 100.000 people)

2000

2006

-

21
35.0
134

-

-

..

..
..

66.9
64.4

07

IDA
Total debt outstanding and disbursed
Disbursements
Total debt service
IFC (fiscal year)
Total disbursed and outstanding p d d i o
of which IFC own account
Disbursementsfor IFC own account
Portfoliosales, prepaymentsand
repayments for IFC own account
MlGA
Gross exposure
New guarantees

2,298
221
29

8
8
1

6
6
0

2

1

1
0

1
0

$;~~~~,;?:;:$~[g:~$:~;!fi~:::,;.:,\~f~~~
::;!- ;,:; y;:
~;~~.;$;$;>i<>~~;<:'
,:,; !;,

Note: Figures in italics are for years other than those specified. 2005 data are preliminary estimates.
.. indicates data are not available. -indicates observation is not applicable.
Development Economics, Development Data Group (DECDG)

1.378
94
27

Millennium Development Goals
Wrfh selected f a r g e f s f o achreve b e t w e e n
(esbmate dosed lo date shown, +/- 2 years)

Madagascar

1990 and 2015
$ :~i$'~&;~l?j&p>:~$f

.Goal 1: halve the rates for $1 a day poverty and malnutrltlon

1990

Poverty headcount ratio at $1 a day (PPP. % of population)
Poverty headcount ratio at national poverty line (YOof population)
Share of income or consumption to the poorest qunitile (YO)
Prevalence of malnutrition (%of children under 5)
Goal 2: ensure that chlldren are able to complete prlmary schoollng
Primary school enrollment (net, %)
Primarycompletion rate (% of relevant age group)
Secondary schocl enrollment (gross, %)
Youth literacy rate (% of people ages 15-24)

1995
46.3
73.3

41

34

64
35
17

28

2000
61.0
69.7
4.9

2004
68.7
42

65
36
14

89
47
70

Goal 3: ellmlnate gender dlsparlty In edueatlon and empower women
Ratio of girls to boys in primaryand secondary education (%)
Women employed in the nonagriculturalsector (% of nonagricultural employment)
Proportion of seats held by women in national parliament (%)

98
24
7

97
4

8

7

163
93
47

159
96
55

56

94
58
59

Goal 4: reduce under-5 mortality by two-thlrds
Under4 mMtality rate (per 1,000)
Infant mortality rate (per 1,000 live births)
Measles immunization (proportion of one-year olds immunized. %)
Goal 5: reduce maternal mortallty by three-fourths
Maternal mortality ratio (modeled estimate, per 100,000 live births)
Births attended by skilled health staff (% of total)
Goal 6: halt and begln to reverse the spread of HIVIAIDS and other major dbeases
Prevalence of HIV (% of population ages 15-49)
Contraceptive prevalence (% of w m e n ages 15-49)
Incidence of tuberculosis (per 100.000 people)
Tuberculosis cases detected under DOTS (%)

--17
192

19

19

51

70

0.5
27
218
74

Goal 7: halve the proportion of people without sustainable access to basic needs
-Access to an improvedwater source (% of population)
Access to improved sanitation facilities (% of population)
Forest area (% of total bnd area)
Nationallyprotectedareas (% of total land area)
C02 emissions (metric tons per capita)
GDP per unit of energy use (constant 2000 PPP S per kg of oil equivalent)

40
14
23.5
0.1

Goal 8: develop a global partnership for developme......-..
Fixed line and mobile phone subscribers (per 1,000 people)
Internet users (per 1.000 people)
Personal computers (per 1,000 people)
Youth unemployment (X of total labor fone ages 15-24)

Educatlon lndlcators ('A)

'1:

22.4
0.1

.
.
.

3
0

Measles lmmunlzatlon (% of l y e a r olds)

46
32
22.1
4.3
0.1

3
0
1

0.1

-

.
-

7
2
2

ICT indlcatom (per 1,000 people)

J

,

50

ZMIO

1898

-+Primary

-Ratio

ZWZ

2034

net enrollment ratio

of girls to bays in primry 8
semndary educalion

I

Note: Figures in italics are for years other than those spedtied.
Development Economics, Development Data Group (DECDG).

Madagascar

SubSaharanAfrlca

.. indicates data are not available.

I I

OFlxed + mblle subscribers
Ink,net

19
5
5

Annex Al- Madagascar
Key Economic and Program Indicators -change from Last CAS
Prepared for all CASdProgress Reports, but included in Board version of Progress Reports Only
As of 0211212007

Economy (CY)
Growth rates (Oh)
GDP
Exports (f.0.b)
Imports (c.i.f)

Forecast in Last CAS
2004~
2005~
2006~

Inflation (%)
National accounts (%GDP)
Current account balance
Gross investment
Public Finance (% GDP)
Fiscal balance
Foreign financing
International reserves
(as months of imports)
Program (Bank's FY)
Lending ($ million)
Gross disbursements
($ million)
a. Estimated year
b. Projected year
c. Actual outcome

~

---------

2003'

2004'

Actual
2005'

2006a

2007~

Current CAS Forecast
2008~
2009~
2010b

2011b

6.0
13.1
17.9

6.0
16.8
15.3

6.0
15.8
16.2

9.8
79.4
73.7

5.3
0.1
20.1

4.6
-15.9
-2.0

4.7
11.0
5.0

5.6
2.6
5.8

5.6
6.0
5.6

5.6
6.2
6.4

5.7
6.1
5.6

5.7
6.0
5.8

5.0

4.3

4.4

-1.1

14.0

18.4

10.8

9.4

7.1

5.3

5.0

5.0

-5.7
19.0

-5.4
20.0

-5.3
21.O

-4.9
17.9

-9.1
24.3

-10.4
22.5

-10.0
21.8

-9.9
22.1

-10.0
22.3

-10.0
22.0

-9.8
22.1

-9.8
22.3

6.1

5.7

5.5

-4.8
2.8

-5.7
6.4

-4.3
3.8

36.7
-33.7

-4.4
4.1

-4.5
4.4

-4.2
4.2

-4.1
4.1

-4.1
4.1

2.7
2.8
0 ~4 ~~ 0 ~ 5 ~ ~ 0 FY03'
6 ~ FY04'
162
230
Not done in last CAS---------216.5
166.4

3.0
FYOSC
193
324.3

2.9
FYOG*
239.8
213

~

~

3.0
3.0
3.0
3.0
3.1
~
0 ~ 7 ~ ~ 0 ~ 8 ~ ~0 FY1ob
9 ~ FYllb
149
100
160
165
110
230
185
200
200
210

-

CAS Annex B2 Madagascar
Selected Indicators* of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
As of 211 212007

Indicator
Portfolio Assessment
Number of Projects Under Implementation a
Average Implementation Period (years)
Percent of Problem Projects by Number a ' C
Percent of Problem Projects by Amount a ' C
Percent of Projects at Risk by Number a . d
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount
Disbursement Ratio (%)
Portfolio Management
CPPR during the year (yeslno)
Supervision Resources (total US$000)
Average Supervision (US$OOOIproject)

Memorandum Item
Proj Eval by OED by Number
pro, Eval by OED by Amt (US$ millions)
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Number
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt

2004

2005

2006

2007

17
3.8
5.9
1.8
5.9
1.8
34.5

14
4.2
28.6
39.8
28.6
39.8
35.7

14
4.2
7.7
10.1
7.7
10.1
31.3

17
4.2
0
0
5.8
4
22

1861
yes
103

2309
yes
128

Yes
2140
126

no
1710
101

Since
FY80

73
1,936.5
38.4
32.2

Last Five
FYs
13
606.9
30.8
18.9

As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY).
Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio.
Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) andlor implementation pro
As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at tt
beginning of the year: Investment projects only.
* All indicators are for projects active in the Portfolio, with the exception of Disbursement Ratio,
which includes all active projects as well as projects which exited during the fiscal year.

a.
b.
c.
d.
e.

-

-

CAS Annex B3 IBRDllDA Program Summary Madagascar
As of 111412007
Proposed IBRDIIDA Base-Case Lending Program a
Fiscal year
2007

Proj ID

US$(M)

Strategic Rewards b
(HIM)

Implementation b
Risks (!-l/WL)

PRSC
Energy APL 1
lrrigation and Watershed 1
Community Development
RCIP - Madagascar
Health SWAP APL 1
Microfinance Additional Financing
Transport Additional Financing
Nutrition Additional Financing
Sub-Total

2008

2009

2010

201 1

PRSC
Local Development Fund
Transport SIL (FYOB)
Sub-Total
PRSC
Governance & Inst. Dev. II TAL (FY09)
Power Guarantee
Energy APL 2
Environment
Health SWAP APL 2
Sub-Total
PRSC
Post Primary Education
Growth and Infrastructure
lrrigation and Watershed
Sub-Total
PRSC
Growth and lnfrastructure
Sub-Total

TOTAL

884.0

a. This table presents the proposed program for the next five fiscal years
b. For each project, indicate whether the strategic rewards and implementation risks are expected to be high
'(H), moderate (M), or low (L)

CAS Annex B3 (IFC & MIGA) for Madagascar
Madagascar- IFC and MIGA Program, FY 2004-2007

IFC approvals (US$m)

16.20

12.93

12.20

0.00

57
12
0
31
0

0
0
100
0
0

0
0
100
0
0

0
0
0
0
0

100

100

100

o

88

100

1.O

0.8

Sector (%)
Agriculture and For
Collective Investme
Finance & Insurance
Textiles ,Apparel
Utilities

Total
Investment instrument(%)
Loans
Equity
Guarantee
Quasi-Equity
Other

0 .

0

Total
MIGA facilitated investments into MG
Gross exposure (US$mil)

6.0

6.1

-

-

CAS Annex 8 4 Summary of Nonlending Services Madagascar
As of 1/14/2007
Product

Completion FY

Cost (US$000) Audience (a) Objective (b)

Recent completions
KG
KG, P
KG, P
KG, P
KG, P
KG, P
KG
KG, P
PS, KG

Development Policy Review
Irrigation and Land Management Review
Investment Climate Review
PER
FSAP
Land Titling in Madagascar
PSlA
Risk Management & SP Strategy
Land & Population Rights Review
Underway
Trade TF (Integrated Framework Program)
MAP Support
Health Sector ESW
Telecom Strategy TA
Programmatic PERICFAAICPAR
Growth CEM
Post Primary Education Strategy
Fisheries Policy Advice
Education Impact Evaluation
Programmatic Labor Market Review

FY06-11
FY07
FY07
FY07
FY07-08
FY08
FY08
FY08
FY08
FY08

PD, P
PD, P
KG
PD, P
KG, P
KG, P
KG, PD
PD, P
KG
KG

FY07
FY08
FY08
FY08
FY08
FY08-09
FY08-09
FYO8-10
FYO8-10
FYO8-10
FYO8-11
FYO8-11
FYlO
FYlO
FYlO
FYll

P
P
KG
KG
KG, P
P
KG
P
P
P
P
P
KG, P
KG
KG
KG

Planned
Donor Conference
Tax Policy TA
Infrastructure Review
Policy Note on Civil Service Pay
Adaptation and Risk Management
PPP Framework TA
Social Accountability Work
Monitoring and Evaluation
Programmatic Decentralization AAA
Extractive Industries TA
Environment TA
PEFA (CFAAICPAR)
FSAP
ICA
Poverty Assessment
Country Development Review

a. Government, donor, Bank, public dissemination.
b. Knowledge generation, public debate, problem-solving.

Madagascar
CAS Annex B6 - Key Economic Indicators

Gross domestic product'
AbJculhI~
lndushy
Services
Total Consumption
Gross domestic fixed inveshnent
Government investment
Private investment

EXPO^^^ (GNFS)~
Imports (GNFS)
Gross domestic saving
Gross national savings'

hfemorandum items
Gross domestic product
(US$ million at current prices)
GNI per capita (US$, Atlas method)

4397

5474

4364

5041

5480

6243

6787

7330

7947

220

280

290

290

280

300

320

350

370

Real annual growth rates (%, calculated from 84 prices)
Gross domestic product at market prices
-12.7
-11.9
Gross Domestic Income

9.8
9.5

5.3
8.0

4.6
5.1

4.7
6.2

5.6
6.5

5.6
6.5

5.6
5.5

5.7
6.3

Real annual per capita growth rates (%, calculated from 84 prices)
Gross domestic product at market prices
-15.1
6.8
-6.7
4.7
Total consumption
-5.7
2.7
Private consumption

2.4
0.4
2.0

1.8
1.7
1.5

2.0
4.7
3.9

2.9
4.1
2.7

2.9
4.1
3.1

3.0
2.7
1.1

3.1
3.6
2.2

Balance of Payments (US$millions)
Exports (GNFS)~
Merchandise FOB
lmports (GNFS)~
Merchandise FOB
Resource balance
Net current transfen
Current account balance
Net private foreign direct investment
Long-term loans (net)
Official
Private
Other capital ("a,incl crmm & ommissiom)
Change in reservesd

Memorandum items
Resource balance (% of GDP)
Real annual growth rates ( YR84 prices)
Merchandise exports (FOB)
Primary
Manufactures
Merchandise imports (CIF)

730
499

1261
94 1

1423
997

1336
837

1498
923

1584
958

1684
1019

1791
1085

1029
620
-299
99
-272

1752
1131
-491
303
-268

2070
1436
-647
330
-397

2024
1407
-688
242
-524

2210
1468
-712
238
-546

2357
1571
-773
240
-597

2504
1663
-820
243
-653

2694
1774
-902
257
-730

9

13

53

86

90

128

164

202

158

I82

484

154

94

75

85

57

53

-17

-I8

-1

-32

-71

-75

-93

-6.8

-9.0

-14.8

-13.6

-13.0

-12.4

-12.1

-12.3

-50.0
-34.9
-58.8
-29.8

87.8
12.2
155.7
58.3

0.3
-24.4
9.2
3.2

3.8
29.2
-2.7
-2.9

0.7
-0.3
0.8
-10.8

-0.8
-16.3
4.4
11.9

5.3
3.5
5.8
6.3

6.0
3.3
6.7
7.3

-133

-

CAS Annex B6 Key Economic Indicators
(Continued)

Public finance (as of GDP at market prices)'
Current revenues
Current expenditures
Current account surplus (+) or deficit (-)
Capital expenditure
Foreign tinancing

8.8
10.3
-1.5
5.3
5.0

12.8
11.4
1.5
8.2
5.4

16.0
12.6
3.4
12.5
10.7

16.2
15.3

-1.1
2.8

14.0
14.3

Monetary indicators
MZIGDP
Growth of M2 (%)
Private sector credit growth /
total credit growth (%)
Prlce Indices( YR84 4 0 0 )
Merchandise export price index
Merchandise import price index
Merchandise terms of trade index
Real exchange rate (USIE~LCU)'
Real interest rates
Consumer price index (% change)
GDP deflator (% change)

a. GDP at factor cost
h.
c.
d.
e.
f.

"GNFS'denotes "goods and nonfactor services."
Includes net unrequited transfers excluding official capital grants.
Includes use of IMF resources.
Consolidated central government.
"LCU" denotes "local currency units." An increase in US$/LCU denotes appreciation

Madagascar
CAS Annex B7 - Key Exposure Indicators

Total debt outstanding and
disbursed (TDO) (US$m)a
Net disbursements (US$m)a
Total debt senice (TDS)
(US$m)a
Debt and debt service indicators
("A)
TDOIXGSb
TDOIGDP
TDSIXGS
ConcessionalITDO
IBRD exposure indicators (%)
IBRD DSIpublic DS
Preferred creditor DSlpublic
DS (%)c
IBRD DSIXGS
IBRD TDO (US$m)d
Of which present value of
guarantees (US$m)
Share of IBRD portfolio (%)
IDA TDO (US$m)d
IFC (US$m)
Loans
Equity and quasi-equity lc
Guarantee
MIGA
MIGA Gross Exposure in
Madagascar (US$ m)

a. Includes public and publicly guaranteed debt, private nonguaranteed, use of IMF credits and net shortterm capital.
b. "XGS" denotes exports of goods and services, including workers' remittances.
c. Preferred creditors are defined as IBRD. IDA, the regional multilateral development banks, the IMF, and the
Bank for International Settlements.
d. Includes present value of guarantees.
e. Includes equity and quasi-equity types of both loan and equity instruments.

-

CAS Annex B8 Madagascar
Operatlons Portfolio (IBRDIIDA and Grants)
As of 2/28/2007
Closed Projects

83

Total Disbursed (Active)
of which has been repaid
Total Disbursed (Closed)
of which has been repaid
Total Disbursed (Active + Closed)
of which has been repaid

607.95
0.00
2142.32
285.54
2750.27
285.54

Total Undisbursed (Active)
Total Undisbursed (Closed)
Total Undisbursed (Active + Closed)

365.7
0.00
365.7

Active Projects
Last PSR
Supervision Ratlng

I

Original Amount i n US$ Millions

Difference Between
Expected and Actual
Disbursements

"

L
C

m

Project ID

Project Name

PO83351
PO95240
PO55166
Po01568
PO74235
PO74236
PO74448
PO51741
PO74086
PO52186
PO76245
PO90615
PO72987
PO72160
PO51922
PO73689
PO82806
Total

lnteg Growth Poles
Pwr/Wtr Sect. Recovery and Restruct.
Com Dev Fund SIL (FYOl)
Community Nutrition 2 (FY98)
Env Prgm 3 (FY04)
GEF Env Prgm 3 (FY04)
Gov & lnst Dev TAL (FY04)
Health Sec Prgm Supt 2 (WOO)
Irrigation & Watershed Project (FY07)
Microfinance(FY99)
Mineral Res Gov SIL (FY03)
MultiSec STIIHIVIAIDS 2 (FY06)
MultiSec STIIHIVIAIDS Prev APL (FY02)
Priv Sec Dev 2 (FY02)
Rural Dev Supt SIL (FYOl)
Rural Transp APL 2 (FY03)
Transp lnfrastr Invest Pq (FY04)

Development
Objectives

lmplernentatio
n Progress

Flscal Year

IBRD

IDA

GRANT Cancel. Undisb.

Orig.

Frm
Rev'd

CAS Annex B8 (IFC) for Madagascar
Madagascar
Statement of IFC's
Committed and Outstanding Portfolio
As of 11/30/2006
(In US Dollars Millions)
Committed
FY
Approval
1997
1995
2006
199112005
2000
2004
2006
Total

Oustanding

Company
Loan
Equity
Quasi
Guarantee Loan
Equity
Quasi
Guarantee
AEF GHM
0.43
0.43
AEF Karibotel
0.19
0.19
BFV-SocGen
6.69
BNI
6.57
2.09
2.09
BOA-M
0.82
0.75
0.82
0.75
BP Madagascar
3.60
0.35
CREDIT LYONNP
6.69
7.19
6.51
0.75
13.39
0.62
3.26
0.75

MAP SECTION

IBRD 33439

-

0

b

?'his map wns prmlxed by
he Map DeriQ" Lhil of The
World lbnC The bo&ms

80

40

4

120

160 2 0 0 K i h h

b

B Mile3

o

SELECTED CITIES AND TOWNS

o

PROVINCE (FARITANY)CAPITALS

@

NATIONAL CAPITAL

-.---,/
RIVERS
PROVINCE (FARITANY)BOUNDARIES
INTERNATONAL BOUNDARIES

