Public Disclosure Authorized

Document o f
The World Bank

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

-

Public Disclosure Authorized

Public Disclosure Authorized

Report No. 40742 BY

INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT
INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION
COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
FOR
THE REPUBLIC OF BELARUS
FOR THE PERIOD FYO&FY11

Public Disclosure Authorized

November 7,2007

Belarus Country Management Unit
Europe and Central Asia Region
The International Finance Corporation
IFC Department for Central and Eastern Europe
This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance o f their
official duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without World Bank authorization.

The date o f the last Country Assistance Strategy was March 14,2002

CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS
Belarus Rube1 (BYR)
November 2,2007: U S $ l = BYR 2,151
FISCAL YEAR
Government: January1 -December 3 1
ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS

AAA
APR
BEEPS
CAS
CAS PR
CEE
CEM
CFSP
CIS

cvs

DOTS
EBRD
EC
ENP
ENPI
EU
FDI
FH-NIT
FSAP
GAC
GDP
GEF
GFATM
GFSM 2001
GHG
GOB
HIV
IISEPS
ICRG
IFC
IFIs
IMF
ICRG
JI
KRU
MDG
MIGA
MTEF

Analytical and Advisory Activities
Administrative Procedures Reform
The EBRD-WB Business Environment and Enterprise Performance Survey
Country Assistance Strategy
Country Assistance Strategy Progress Report
Central and Eastern Europe
Country Economic Memorandum
EU Common foreign and security policy
Commonwealth o f Independent States
Corruption and Vulnerability Scan
Directly Observed Treatment, Short-course
European Bank for Reconstruction and Development
European Commission
EU's European Neighbourhood Policy
European Partnership and Neighbourhood Instrument
European Union
Foreign Direct Investment
Freedom House - Nations in Transition
Financial Sector Advisory Program
Governance and Anticorruption
Gross Development Product
Global Environment Facility
The Global Fund to Fight AIDS, TB and Malaria
IMF Statistics Department's Government Finance Statistics Manual 2001
Greenhouse Gas
Government o f B e l a m
Human Immunodeficiency Virus
Independent Institute o f Socioeconomic and Political Studies, Belarus
The International Country Risk Guide
International Finance Corporation
International Financial Institutions
International Monetary Fund
International Country Risk Guide
Joint Implementation
Control and Revision Department o f the Ministry o f Finance
Millennium Development Goal
Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency
Medium Term Expenditure Framework

ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS

NGO
OSCE
QAG
PA
PBA
PEFA
PEIR
PER
PFM
POPS
PPP
PSED
SCC
SDDS
SEPA
S IDA
S IRP
SME
SOEs
TACIS
TB
TCM
TEMPUS

TI
UNAIDS
UN
UNDP
UNECE
USAID
WBG
WHO
WGI
WTO

Vice President
Country Director
Task Team Leader

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

N o n governmental Organization
Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe
Quality Assurance Group
Poverty Assessment
Performance Based Allocation
Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability Initiative
Public Expenditure and Institutional Review
Public Expenditure Review
Public Finance Management
Persistent Organic Pollutants
Public Private Partnerships
Program o f Social and Economic Development
State Control Committee
Special Data Dissemination Standard
Swedish Environmental Protection Agency
Swedish International Development Association
Social Infrastructure Rehabilitation project
Small and Medium Enterprise
Government-owned Enterprises
Technical Assistance for the Commonwealth o f Independent States
Tuberculosis
Thousand cubic meters
EU higher education initiative for the non-associated countries o f south-east
Europe
Transparency International
Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS
United Nations
United Nations Development Programme
United Nations Economic Commission for Europe
United States Agency for International Development
World Bank Group
World Health Organization
Worldwide Governance Indicators Project
World Trade Organization

IBRD
Shigeo Katsu
Paul Bermingham
Sergiy Kulyk

IFC Vice President
Director

IFC
Declan Duff
Jerome Sooklal

This CAS was prepared by a core team that included Paul Bermingham, Sergiy Kulyk, Elena Klochan,
Marina Bakanova, Dejan Ostoic, Ivan Velev, Irina Oleinick, Luis Alvaro Sanchez (consultant), Oksana
Nagayets and Craig Bell.

distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance o f
their official duties. I t s contents may not be otherwise disclosed without W o r l d Bank authorization.

COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY FOR BELARUS
TABLE OF CONTENTS

...............................................................................................
I.COUNTRY CONTEXT ................................................................................................

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

A.
B.
C.
D.

Background .............................................................................................................
Recent Economic Developments ............................................................................
Poverty Profile and Delivery o f Social Services.....................................................
Governance and Anti-Corruption ............................................................................

I
1
1
1
3
4

...........

11. CHALLENGES AND COUNTRY DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM
6
A. Structural and Sectoral Issues: Progress and Challenges ........................................ 6
B. Country Priorities and Agenda.............................................................................. 12

........................................................

111. BANK GROUP ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
A. Implementation o f the last CAS ............................................................................
B. Objectives and Principles ......................................................................................
C. Proposed Assistance Strategy and Results............................................................

15
15
17
17

IV. CONSULTATIONS..........................................................................

26

........................................

.27

V. MANAGING RISKS

Tables
Table 1: Main Economic Indicators, 2003-2007
Table 2: Increase in energy tariffs for different consumers from January 2007
Table 3: Key Economic Indicators through the CAS period (2007-201 1)
Attachments
Attachment 1: CAS Completion Report
Annexes:
Annex A2:
Annex B2:
Annex B3:
Annex B3:
Annex B4:
Annex B5:
Annex B6:
Annex B7:
Annex B8:
Annex B8:
Annex B9:

At a Glance Table
Selected Indicators o f Bank Portfolio and Management
IBRD/IDA Program Summary
IFC Investment Operations Program and MIGA
Summary o f Nonlending Services
Social Indicators
Key Economic Indicators
Key Exposure Indicators
Committed and Disbursed Outstanding Investment Portfolio
Operations Portfolio (IBRD/IDA and Grants)
CAS Results Matrix

REPUBLIC OF BELARUS - COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

i. T h i s document presents the Belarus Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) for the
period FY08 to FY 11. The previous strategy concluded in FY04. As limited progress
had been made with i t s implementation, the Bank postponed preparation o f a new CAS
to allow further time for discussion with the authorities o n an agreed framework for

cooperation, completion o f key items o f analytical work, and finalization o f the
planned but delayed Chernobyl project.

ii. Rapid and broad-based economic growth since 2002, reduced poverty in Belarus

to among the lowest levels in the region. Comprehensive social security and good
basic health and education services have been sustained since independence and
remain available. Belarus maintains a strong, centralized state capable o f mobilizing
resources and allocating them to (centrally-determined) priority uses in the context o f
generally prudent budget management. Belarus has access to large and growing export
markets, i s located in a strategic corridor linking Russia to Europe, and has a skilled
and highly capable labor force. However, it faces several challenges, a number o f
which have global or regional dimensions:

...

e

T w o decades after the Chernobyl accident, the affected areas are amongst the
poorest in the country. Selected rehabilitation o f the region continues, absorbing
significant budget resources. Water supply contamination i s widespread and
flooding a permanent threat.

a

Belarus i s both highly energy intensive and dependent, despite significant recent
gains. Rapid energy price increases present challenges to macroeconomic
stability and underline the need for even stronger efforts to reduce energy
intensity and dependency. Strong institutions are needed to help preserve the
ample natural wealth o f the country and profit from the opportunities offered by
the Kyoto Protocol.

a

Exports are highly concentrated and competition i s mounting in i t s main market
(Russia).
The Bank considers it unlikely that Belarus can sustain the
achievements o f recent years and meet the ambitious new goals i t has set without
undertaking transition reforms that have so far proved elusive. These reforms will
pose many social and economic challenges.

Belarus faced challenges since independence similar to those faced by other CIS
countries. These included the transition from plan to market, the opening o f the
political process, and the challenge o f continued delivery o f basic services in an
environment o f enormous change. I t has a highly centralized political system. Many
external organizations and commentators are highly critical o f what they describe as an
absence of freedom and failure to meet democratic standards. On the other hand,
results o f internal surveys tend to be more benign. The Bank’s assessment o f
transparency, accountability and corruption in the public sector shows Belarus as being
among the countries with the lowest rating in the E C A Region. Strong central
government control extends to measures against corruption, and a scan o f the

111.

ii
vulnerability o f the Bank’s lending portfolio to corruption concluded that the overall
risk i s relatively low. Negative impacts on the Bank’s program are most likely to
come from the limited opportunities for civil society participation and the impact o f
certain government interventions and restrictions on the enterprise sector on overall
prospects for sustainable growth.
Belarus has articulated a medium-tern economic and social strategy that foresees
improved competitiveness relying on technology gains and the dynamism o f the small
and medium enterprise sector. It foresees as well a more comprehensive and efficient
delivery o f social services and an enhanced capacity to manage environment
challenges. Reducing energy dependency and increasing energy efficiency are key
priorities.

iv.

Since 2002, the Bank has had an active analytical and advisory program,
including reports on competitiveness, social issues, public expenditure, and the
environment. Reports were generally well received and served as the basis for
dialogue with the authorities. None o f the lending planned materialized during the
CAS period (the Post Chernobyl Recovery project was finally approved in April
2006). IFC continued to deliver an active advisory program, with several investments.
The CAS Completion Report concludes that the World Bank Group (WBG) can make
a valuable contribution in a number o f areas.

v.

vi.
The WBG has limited ability to influence significant change in either transition to
a market economy or governance reforms. Within this context, the CAS proposes a
modest engagement in selected areas. The Bank would continue as an objective
provider o f analysis and advice, to advocate the changes i t considers are needed for

sustainable development, and to deliver limited financing interventions to advance
issues o f global interest as well as to help vulnerable groups o f the population.

Investment lending would generally not exceed average levels o f one operation or
vii.
U S $ l 00 million per year, and would have a strong focus on energy efficiency, water,
and environmental protection. IFC would continue to lead on advice to and
investments in the enterprise sector. The Bank would work closely with the Fund in
calibrating and delivering i t s assistance in macroeconomic areas, especially advice on
managing emerging macroeconomic risks. The Bank would also work closely with
other international players active in Belarus. Country conditions and program
implementation would be the subject o f a structured review through the CAS Progress
Report in mid-2009. T h e WBG would maintain a dialogue with the private sector and
civil society, including wide dissemination and discussion o f results o f analytical
work.
viii.

The following issues are suggested for Board discussion:

Are the risks to the program properly identified and are the proposed remedies
credible?
I s the strategy to maintain a presence in the country and to be ready to respond to
demand warranted?

I. COUNTRY CONTEXT
A.

Background

1. Since independence, Belarus has faced challenges similar to those faced by other CIS
countries: the transition from plan to market, the opening o f the political process, and the
continued delivery o f basic services in an environment o f enormous change. Belarus
undertook limited, yet sufficient reforms, in an increasingly benign external environment,
to deliver significant economic growth and avoid the sharp drop in per capita incomes
experienced by many o f i t s neighbors. The country has now one o f the highest income
levels among CIS countries. The GNI per capita according to the Atlas method increased
from 1610 dollars in 2002 to an estimated 3980 dollars in 2007. Basic services continue to
be delivered broadly to the population.

2. The success in generating income growth and maintaining service delivery helped to
keep in place a highly centralized system o f economic management. The bulk o f the
productive assets remain the property o f the state, even if formally held by enterprises with
a separate legal status. Likewise, the political system i s concentrated around the Office o f
the President with limited delegation o f powers and limited political opposition. External
observers consistently rank Belarus l o w regarding political and economic rights.
B.

Recent Economic Developments

3. Economic Growth. The economy grew at about 10 percent in 2006, averaging 8.2
percent in 2002-05. K e y drivers o f growth were (i)
a favorable external environment
(including, improvements in the terms o f trade); (ii)
rapid increases in wages and salaries;
and (iii)
structural reforms and economic restructuring o f key enterprises.'

4.

Up to 2007, the increases in the price o f energy benefited Belarus in several ways.
First, the market for Belarusian products in Russia expanded. Second, Belarus profited
from importing Russian o i l at preferential prices, processing it and exporting i t s byproducts at international market prices. Third, external prices for metals and fertilizers
(both relatively important export items) increased as did labor remittances from Russia.
The merchandise terms o f trade index increased by around 20 percent from 2003 to 2006.
5. By taxing the large terms o f trade gains the Government supported a policy o f rapid
salary increases, which expanded domestic demand benefiting construction, agriculture and
services. In addition, with these resources, the Government channelled credits to industries
and undertook investments in areas such as energy efficiency.
6. The devaluation o f the currency and the unification o f the exchange rate set an
environment favourable to economic growth. In addition, key enterprises were restructured
and energy efficiency increased. As a result, labor productivity has been increasing rapidly
supporting rising salaries. Still, since 2000, the currency has been revaluing gradually by
an accumulated 15 percent by early 2006.

7. Macroeconomic performance. An improved macroeconomic environment also
supported economic growth. Price controls and the peg o f the Belarus Rube1 to the dollar
helped lower inflation from high double digits in 2001 to 7.0 percent in 2006. In addition,
'World Bank Belarus: Window of Opportunity to Enhance Competitiveness and Sustain Economic Growth.
Country Economic Memorandum. Report No. 3246-BY, October 2005.

2
a prudent fiscal position has led to l o w levels o f public sector debt. After 2003, fiscal
budgets have been roughly in balance, with surplus generated in 2006 (Table 1.) By the
end o f 2006, total public debt accounted for 18.2 percent o f GDP, o f which three quarters i s
short-term. The prospects o f a Union State with Russia aided stabilization by providing a
fiamework o f macro-economic objectives.
Table 1: M a i n Economic Indicators, 2003-2007

I

GDP (nominal, US$m)
GDP per capita (current US$)

Current account balance
Gross Domestic Investment

2003

I

I 17,755

I

I

I

1,803

-2.4
25.1

I

I

2004

I

22,880
2,335

I

-5.2
27.6

I

I

I

2005

I

30,220
3,099

I

1.7
27.0

I

1

I

2006

36,945
3,804

-4.1
28.3

I
I

I

I

I

2007e
43,052
4,103

-7.8
30.4

*Officially registered.
Sources: National Statistics, IMF, WE3 Staff estimates.

8. Drastic Shift in Energy prices in 2007. Russia’s recent policy o f bringing energy
prices to market levels has hit Belarus in three ways. First, the natural gas import price
more than doubled in 2007 to U$100 per thousand cubic meters (tcm), and, most likely, it
will be gradually increased to the European market level by 201 1. Second, Belarus began
to pay 29 percent o f Russia’s o i l export tax (rising to 36 percent by 2009). Third, since the
export tax rendered pre-existing consignment arrangements for processing Russian oil
unprofitable, Belarus must now pre-finance most o f its crude o i l imports. All o f this is
reducing the profitability o f the o i l processing industry. As a consequence o f these three
factors, the 2007 energy terms-of-trade shock i s estimated at over 5 percent o f GDP
Increasing export prices for some other important Belarus’ exports (such as fertilizers and
metals) only marginally compensated for energy trade losses: overall merchandise terms o f
trade index deteriorated in 2007 by about 15 percent. Economic growth is likely to
slowdown only marginally to around 7.8 percent in 2007 due the dynamism o f the
economy and the capacity o f the country to finance the current account deficit, which i s
likely to widen to about 8 percent o f GDP. The external debt will increase to 26 percent o f
GDP .

3
9. T h e authorities have passed through some o f the energy price increases, but the
increase has not been uniform (Table 2). While tariffs for natural gas for the real sector
were raised by 89 percent, for households, the increase was only 20 percent. Electricity
tariffs were increased by approximately the same proportion (20 percent) for all users,
while the rate o f increase in tariffs for heating was four times higher for enterprises than for
households. At the same time, energy-intensive enterprises continued to enjoy privileged
tariffs o f 15-30 percent lower than industrial average.
Table 2: Increase in energy tariffs for different consumers
from January 2007 (in percent)2

C.

Poverty Profile and Delivery of Social Services

10. Poverty rates in Belarus are amongst the lowest in Europe. Strong growth in laborintensive sectors (such as services, food processing, and machinery), backed by
government wage and income policies, ensured broad sharing o f recent growth across the
population. The result has been a
rapid decline in poverty rates
Chart 1: Belarus: dynamics of poverty
(% population below national poverty line)
with inequality remaining stable
__ 45
and l o w (Gini coefficient 0.262
41 9
40
in 2006). The poverty headcount
ratio (national definition) fell
from 41.9 percent o f the
population in 2000 to 11.1
percent in 2006 (three million
people moved out o f povertyChart l).3
The areas affected by 1 5 i
ii
04
the Chernobyl disaster have the
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
ZOOS
2006
highest
rates
of
poverty
Sources: National Statistics and UNDP
incidence. In 2006, registered
unemployment fell to a record l o w o f 1.2 percent o f the economically active population
(Table 1).

11. An extensive system o f basic service delivery and social assistance reaches the poor,
but i t i s un-targeted and costly. Belarus ranked in 2006, 67th place (out o f 177 countries) in
the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) Human Development Index. Among
the key concerns are the decrease in life expectancy from 71 to 69 years and the increase in
the mortality rate from 11 to 14.3 per 1,000 people. The key challenge i s increasing the

’Source: Government o f Belarus Statistics

Poverty, measured by international standards o f 2 o r 4 dollars per day, i s far lower.

4
efficiency o f social expenditure. A s energy prices increase, the government is moving to
better targeting social assistance and required legislation has been approved in 2007.4

D.

Governance and Anti-Corruption

12. The role o f the state in the economy has not changed much since 2002. The state
continues to own the majority o f the productive assets and regulate heavily the private
sector. The hikes in energy prices, competition in the Russian market and an appreciating
exchange rate are testing this approach to economic management. The authorities are
responding to these challenges with changes such as relaxation o f the “golden rule”
especially in banking, facilitating the registering o f new enterprises and resuming
privatization. The recent 2008 Doing Business Report highlights and acknowledges these
reforms, placing Belarus amongst the top ten reformers in two categories. The smooth
transition towards a market economy remains as the major governance challenge.
However, the authorities are likely to face this challenge in a gradual and piecemeal
fashion rather than through enacting major overhauls all at once. As a consequence,
Belarus will most likely continue to be ranked as a slow reformer by external observers.
13. Many external organizations are highly critical o f what they describe as an absence o f
fi-eedom and failure to meet democratic standards. They perceive the political situation in
Belarus as one that has remained stable at the cost o f widespread perceptions o f limited
political freedoms.
The recently adopted European Bank for Reconstruction and
Development (EBRD) Country Strategy notes that, in some aspects o f democratic
governance, Belarus witnessed “significant ba~ktracking”.~
14. There are also concerns with the limited voice in the country. While some nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) and a few independent media outlets continue to
function, state agencies have been increasing registration and operating requirements over
the last two years, making i t difficult for non-state media and c i v i l society organizations to
operate. A s a consequence, the number o f independent media outlets has declined and the
activities o f some civil society organizations have been suspended. Still, c i v i l society in
Belarus has demonstrated resilience and adaptability and has played a critical role in the
progress that has been made in the environmental and public health sectors, especially in
combating the spread o f HIV/AIDS.

15. Notwithstanding external assessments o f the non-competitive political situation,
which place Belarus l o w among E C A countries6, Belarus appears to be a country where
day-to-day corruption i s kept well under control. Moreover, recently the government has
been tightening controls on corruption through revised legislation and tighter enforcement.
In addition, as noted, the state provides extensive services t o the population. N o t

Belarus has committed to the MDG objectives through its ‘National Strategy for Sustainable
Development for the period up to 2020’, which was adopted in 2004 and published in 2005. The
document reported that Belarus had already met or was on track to meeting most o f the global MDGs
and therefore, the national report introduced a set o f more ambitious M D G targets.
Strategy for Belarus, European Bank for Reconstruction and Development, December 2006
See for instance, Kaufmann, Daniel, Kraay, Aart and Mastruzzi, Massimo, “Governance Matters VI:
Governance Indicators for 1996-2006” (July 2007). World Bank Policy Research Working Paper No.
4280. Upon examination, i t appears that perceptions about governance in Belarus are highly correlated
and driven mostly by the assessment o f political freedoms. They do not reflect on the capacity o f
government.

5
surprisingly, the population ranks high their satisfaction with the delivery o f public services
and the overall management o f the e ~ o n o m y . ~

16. The modernization o f the system o f public expenditure management has advanced: (a)
the coverage o f the budget i s extensive; with only some minor accounts off the budget and
(b) program budgeting has been introduced on a pilot basis. The Parliament i s involved
early on in the budget process until final approval o f the budget. The level o f execution o f
the budget i s quite high; a system o f strict financial oversight i s in place, and the reporting
on budget execution to Parliament takes place no later than 5 months into the next fiscal
year. The treasury has national coverage; in 2005 it introduced an automated system o f
contract registration and commitment control, which helped strengthen fiscal discipline and
reduce arrears. Weaknesses, however, persist in financial planning and cash management.
17. Internal audit and control are the responsibility o f the Control and Revision
Department o f the Ministry o f Finance (KRU); the external audit function corresponds to
the State Control Committee (SCC), reporting directly to the President. In 2006, for
instance, the KRU reported irregularities for a total amount o f 25.3 billion Belarus rubelsaround US$1.2 million. The SCC carries around 10,000 inspections a year, and refers
crime cases to courts. Both the KRU and the SCC focus on compliance with regulations.
18. There i s no single comprehensive procurement law or public procurement agency and
therefore practices can vary depending o f the types o f goods and services being requested.
Multiple regulations and frequent changes in the legislation governing public procurement
make the procurement cycle difficult to manage. Still, mechanisms are in place to protect
the integrity o f the procurement system; these regulations are posted in the government
website. Implementing agencies are required to report regularly to the line ministry and the
ministry o f finance. There i s a tight control over investment project activities. The bidders
have the right o f appeal. Tenders are advertised in the national press. An anti-comption
law was enacted in 2006.

’ See Salient Findings o f the L i f e in Transition Survey, Europe and Central Asia Region, World Bank,
February 2007.

6

11. C H A L L E N G E S AND COUNTRY DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM
A.

Structural and Sectoral Issues: Progress and Challenges

19. Belarus has the potential to provide very high levels o f income for i t s population.
Located strategically in the corridor between Russia and the EU, Belarus i s a major transit
route for energy and other products. I t has access to growing regional markets. I t can
benefit from a greater degree o f regional integration in trade, energy, environment, etc. The
country has ample natural resources (wood, etc.). Above all, the population i s highly
educated. However, to benefit from these opportunities, the country needs to address a
number o f critical challenges.

(i)

Increasing Energy Efficiency and Self-Sufficiency

20. Together with Ukraine and the Russian Federation, Belarus is one o f the most energy
intensive economies in the world. Highly dependent on energy imports, Belarus produces
only 17 percent o f what it consumes. Gas, which i s all imported, satisfies 60 percent of
energy needs and produces 80 percent o f the electricity. The limited but significant
opportunities for energy diversification remain to be fully exploited. These include some
o i l and alternative energy resources like wood, peat, small hydropower and wind. Belarus
could also integrate i t s grid with those o f the neighbors.
21. The Government policy has been to increase energy efficiency and reduce energy
dependence. The recent increases in the energy prices give added urgency to reducing
energy intensity and increasing energy self-sufficiency. Already, energy intensity fell by
25.5 percent from 2000 to 2005. The Government plans o f a further reduction of 31
percent by 2010 (compared with 2005) are well advanced-only over 8 months o f 2007,
the drop i s estimated at 11.2 percent. The concurrent strategy to increase the share of
energy generated from domestic sources from 17 percent today to 25 percent by 2012
requires sizeable investments (around US$6 billion by 2012.) In the past six years, the
Government already invested around US$l.79 billion in energy efficiency. However, the
increases in energy prices are limiting the capacity o f the Government to undertake needed
investments.

*

22.
In 2006, the Bank helped the government in taking stock o f the barriers and risks to
achieving these objectives and identified as the main obstacle the lack o f a proper enabling
and regulatory environment, including a highly distorted tariff system. Laws on electricity
heat supply are under preparation to establish a regulatory agency. The Governmentowned utility BELENERGO, on a pilot basis, is separating the accounting o f i t s main cost
centers-electricity and heat production, transmission and distribution-as a prelude for
possible unbundling.
23. K e y actions needed in the energy sector that can help increase self-sufficiency and
lower energy intensity are:

*

The government was financing energy efficiency investments with the resources i t obtained from the
difference between the price i t paid and the price i t charged in the domestic market. With the increase in
international energy prices, this wedge has decreased.

7

revise the legal regulatory framework for energy to (a) realign tariffs and reduce crosssubsidies; (b) allow greater enterprise autonomy; (c) promote private sector
participation, and (d) setting the basis for non-conventional energy production;
continue with the unbundling and restructuring o f the major energy companies;
take stock o f the potential alternative energy sources;
explore opportunities to strengthen connections with neighbors; and
identify financing mechanisms to undertake the refurbishing o f the sector and
investments in alternative sources o f energy.

(ii) Facing up to the Global Environment Challenge
24. Belarus inherited a difficult environmental situation, further complicated by the longlasting consequences o f the Chernobyl accident. It has made progress in addressing these
deficits and protecting the environment, in certain areas in cooperation with civil society
organizations and the international community.
25. First, Belarus has not been shy to allocate resources for the environment. Around 2.1
percent o f GDP yearly has financed (a) energy efficiency measures in all sectors, (b) a
switch to using local sources o f energy (e.g., biomass), (c) acquisition and installation o f
pollution abatement equipment, and (d) raising the level o f environmental education and
awareness o f the public. Resources allocated on a continuous basis have been addressing
the consequences o f the 1986 Chernobyl accident (cleaning, monitoring, etc.), as about 20
percent o f the country remains contaminated with long-lived isotopes o f caesium above
acceptable level^.^
26. Second, the authorities have improved the institutional capacity o f the sector, making
progress in aligning practices with international norms and focussing on" improving
administrative, economic and regulatory mechanisms o f environmental protection and
management, combating soil and water contamination and improving overall energy
efficiency. The country acceded to the Stockholm Convention on Persistent Organic
Pollutants (POPS) (December 2003), joined the Kyoto Protocol by accession in August
2005, and became a party to the Convention on Environmental Impact Assessment in a
Transboundary Context (Espoo Convention, November 2005).
27. The 2005 United Nations Economic Commission for Europe (UNECE) Second
Environmental Performance Review highlighted the results achieved in the areas o f
compliance and enforcement mechanisms; information, public participation and education;
and environmental management in industry, energy, transport, agriculture and ecotourism.
Most o f these efforts have to continue to reach full effectiveness. Hence, challenges
include:

lo

The international community has provided modest levels o f support for Belarus' efforts to improve the
environment, amounting to approximately US$25 million from 1996 to 2005. The Global Environment
Facility (GEF) and EU TACIS are the largest donors to Belarus in this area, with contributions o f over
US$15.7 million and US$8.1 million, respectively. EU TACIS support has gone to policy development,
legislation, and capacity-building mostly in the water sector.
These are the National Action Plan on the Rational Use o f Natural Resources and Environmental
Protection for 2001-2005 and the National Strategy for Sustainable Development for the period up to
2020.

8
0
0
0

0

0

continuing to redress the economic and social consequences o f Chemobyl;
building further the institutional capacity o f environmental institutions;
participating in and ensuring that i t profits from the Kyoto Treaty provisions;
controlling and reducing water pollution, soil contamination and waste generation
from industrial, agricultural and household sources;
improving the capacity to face up to natural hazards, including floods;
environmentally safe management o f industrial and municipal waste; and
reducing emissions from mobile sources, industry and energy generation.

(iii) Enhancing Competitiveness
28. A key challenge for Belarus is to generate a continuous increase in productivity, while
building a sturdier and more diversified economy. The Country Economic Memorandum
(CEM, 2005) that took stock o f the economic performance since 1996 labelled Belarus’
economic performance a “puzzle” within the context o f transition to the market in
European countries. Belarus has posted a good economic performance accompanied by
limited restructuring o f the economy. Belarus achieved this by utilizing i t s existing
industrial infrastructure and natural resources to profit from the opportunities in the
Russian market. In addition, i t undertook selective restructuring o f enterprises (e.g.,
energy) within the framework o f a planned economy. The unification o f the currency and a
devaluation in 2000 helped growth as well.

29. Looking forward, the C E M organizes recommendations to improve competitiveness
around two strategies direction.
30. The first direction i s to impose stricter market discipline. Belarus can s t i l l gain
much from improved utilization o f i t s existing capacity and resources. Therefore, the focus
o f the first set o f recommendations i s on a tighter discipline for enterprises through the
reform o f the rules and incentives that affect the allocation o f resources. Priority areas o f
attention would include:
0

0

0

0

0

restructuring and drastically downsizing the existing system o f state support to the
real sector;
accelerating the exit o f non-viable firms;
strengthening the financial viability and efficiency o f energy sector companies;
pursuing further trade liberalization to expose local producers to international
competition;
allowing the price system to provide signals for the allocation o f resources and thus
reduce the administrative measures to guide production and investment;
advancing the government’s international integration efforts in the direction o f the
World Trade Organization (WTO), the EU and the CIS; and,
initiating the preparation o f a pilot program o f large-scale enterprises privatization.

35. With the increases in energy prices and the need to maintain competitiveness, the
authorities are beginning to put into place some o f these policies. The emphasis o n energy
efficiency, noted already, i s a k e y competitiveness pillar. The government resumed large
scale privatization with the partial sale, in 2007, o f BELTRANGAZ. Recently i t sold the
second-largest mobile phone firm to westem investors. Lastly, the government i s
beginning to tighten constrains o n non-performing enterprises by introducing hard budget
constraints.

9
36. T h e second direction i s to encourage new Business Growth. Competitiveness i s
greatly constrained by unnecessary business costs that severely hinder opening new
businesses and make it difficult to operate existing ones. These limitations explain to a
great extent the inadequate role o f the private sector in the economy and especially the
small and medium enterprise (SME) sector.
37. The SME sector in 2006 accounted for 8.8 percent o f GDP. As a consequence, the
economy relies excessively o n large enterprises, in contrast to the situation in economies
with similar or higher income per capita."
According to the International Finance
Corporation (IFC), the S M E sector employed approximately about 15.4 percent o f the
economically active population in 2006, showing the potential o f the sector to generate
employment.
38. A strong S M E sector could become a substantial source o f employment, facilitating
the restructuring o f the traditional enterprise sector. It would increase the resilience o f the
economy as small- and medium-sized enterprises can adjust more quickly to changing
market conditions by adopting innovations promptly. Small- and medium-sized businesses
can play a key role in channelling the savings o f the population to new investments
complementing the efforts o f large companies.
39. The government strategy i s that by the end o f 2010 the share o f small and medium
enterprises in the total volume o f proceeds received in the economy from sales o f goods
and services will constitute 30 percent, and the number o f people employed by SMEs will
increase to 23-25 percent o f the total number o f the economically active population.12
40. Analytical work undertaken with the assistance o f the Bank Group has identified
constrains to the creation o f new enterprises and the operation o f existing ones.13 Recent
efforts by the government to remove some o f these constraints lifted Belarus from 129 to
110 in the ranking o f the 2008 Doing Business report. Indeed, the 2008 Doing Business
report places Belarus among the top 10 reformers in two areas: (a) starting a business and
(b) protecting investors. Despite this notable improvement, in the E C A region, only
Ukraine, Uzbekistan and Tajikistan rank below Belarus. The 2008 Doing Business report
presents a mixed picture o f the situation today. In fact, Belarus ranks quite well regarding
enforcement o f contracts (16), employing workers (42) and closing a business (69); the
country ranks poorly though on paying taxes (178) and trading across borders (137.) This
i s consistent with the perception that taxation and customs need a major overhaul.
41. The C E M and other recent analytical work recommends:
0

'I
l2

l3

reducing the high level o f taxation;
phasing out the practice o f mandated wage increases that constrain the reallocation
o f labor;

The number o f SMEs per 1,000 population in Belarus i s 4, while it i s 38 in neighboring Poland.
The Belarusian Social and Economic Development Program until 2010. As medium-sized companies
are not defined in Belarusian legislation, their contribution to GDP i s not possible to calculate with
precision.
The Civil Code, the Banking Code, the Bankruptcy Law, the Investment Code as well as special laws
regulating investment activities, for example the copyright law, are in place in Belarus.

10
0

0

(iv)

reducing burdensome regulatory costs that affect SMEs; l4
reducing the unpredictability in the application o f rules, particularly laws governing
taxation, customs and business permits;
reducing the preferential treatment given to state-owned companies; and
providing sufficient safeguards to property rights.
Improving the Effectiveness of Government

42. The state absorbs a large share o f national production. In 2005, tax revenues
accounted for about 47 percent o f GDP compared to 35 percent in Russia, 29 percent in
Lithuania, 32 percent in Poland, and 29 percent in Ukraine.” The challenge for Belarus i s
to open space for productive activities by reducing the size o f the state while maintaining
and improving the quality o f service delivery and social assistance.16 This implies (a)
improving the effectiveness o f public expenditure, (b) up-grading the capacity o f the public
administration and the civil service, and (c) reforming the tax system.
43. The Government has commenced steps to improve expenditure and budgetary
practices. Budget coverage i s broader with the inclusion o f the Social Protection Fund
(2004) and sector innovation funds (2005).
The functional classification i s fully
compatible with Government Finance Statistics Manual 2001 (GFSM 2001) and the
treasury system covers all central government transactions (except police functions and
defence ministries) and budgets o f local governments. The Ministry o f Finance
commenced a “program budgeting” experiment in 2005 and i s expanding it across
g ~ v e r n m e n t . ’ ~The agenda ahead includes aligning the economic classification o f the
budget with international standards, further extending the coverage o f the budget, and
approving a new budget code. Building on previous work, the Government i s now in a
position to make improvements to the effectiveness o f public expenditure to reach intended
social objectives. The effectiveness o f these efforts can increase with complementary
actions to decentralize the use o f resources, increase the accountability o f local authorities
and involve the communities, which i s already part o f the government’s agenda.
44. The streamlining o f public expenditure needs to pay attention to certain priority areas.
The first is the reduction o f quasi-fiscal deficits, especially those that arise in the financial
sector from directed credit. Second, as has already has been noted, Belarus needs to rethink
and redesign the support for the productive sectors to seek a greater impact on competitiveness,
shifting from a firm or sector-specific to a thematic approach. Third, tighter resources make i t
imperative to improve the effectiveness o f capital budgeting (9.6 percent GDP in 2006).
The SME survey conducted by IFC in 2006 revealed that 72 percent o f entrepreneurs found complying
with administrative procedures a major obstacle to doing business. Only 35 percent o f those polled noted
problems with securing bank loans.
Data for neighboring countries i s from 2004 (the latest year available) and taken from E C A regional
fiscal dataset. Social security tax, VAT and corporate income tax account for 55 percent o f total tax
revenues The rest comes from PIT, excises, taxes on international trade and transactions, small business
tax and a number o f other small taxes.
The quality o f the public goods provision ranks higher inBelarus than in Russia or Ukraine, but the delivery o f
social services (health; recreation, culture and religion; education; social security and welfare services)
account for more than 50 percent o f general government expenditures or 25.8 percent o f GDP, more than
in the two other countries.
The assessment i s made based on the conclusions o f the IMF Fiscal Affairs Department mission o n
Budget Preparation and Execution in the Republic o f Belarus, September 2006.

11
Fourth, efforts at targeting expenditure now under way have to be completed by finding
effective ways o f dealing with the mounting pressures o f the rapidly aging population must
be devised.
45. Lastly, Belarus needs a major overhaul o f its tax system. I t needs to reduce rates in line
with the reforms that neighboring countries have introduced. Belarus runs the risk o f losing
competitiveness in the region. It should also seek the elimination o f existing exemptions and
special treatments and easier compliance to reduce the cost o f doing business. As
previously noted, according to the 2008 Doing Business report Belarus ranks as one o f the
most intrusive practices in the world.
Consolidating Gains in Fighting HIV/AIDS and Tuberculosis

(v)

46. Belarus, like most countries in the region, faced a mounting threat o f TB and AIDS
during the second half o f the 1990s. This threat has receded. In 2007 the HIV prevalence
rate was 0.3 percent (among adults aged 15 to 49)18-a rate comparable with that o f
Austria, Denmark, the Netherlands and Belgium and one-sixth that o f Estonia, one-third
that o f Ukraine and almost one-quarter that in Russia. This achievement i s the result o f a
concerted effort o f the Government, civil society and the international community that has
focussed on (a) active preventive interventions among high risk groups; (b) a massive
information and education campaign; and (c) provision o f anti-retroviral treatment and
palliative care to HIV/AIDS patients. T h e Global Fund to Fight AIDS, TB and Malaria
(GFATM) HIV/AIDS Prevention and Treatment grant has provided and will continue to
provide the bulk o f the external assistance. Belarus has successfully implemented Phase 1
o f this grant, and received approval for Phase 2. The grant in total amounts to US$17
million for the period 2004-2009.
47. In addition, the country has made progress in fighting TB and incidence i s lower than
in Russia, Moldova and Ukraine, but i t i s more than double the rate in Europe. T h e main
concern is that progress has stagnated. Thus, from 2002 through 2006, the TB prevalence
rate remained stagnant at around 62 per 100,000 p o p ~ l a t i o n . ' ~The
. most critical situation
i s in prisons, with a risk o f TB/AIDS co-infection. The number o f HIV-associated TB
cases has quintupled in the last 5 years. A GFTAM grant to address the TB situation was
approved in 2006 for US$14.2 million. I t will help extend and strengthen directly observed
treatment, short course (DOTS) and assist the most vulnerable groups.
48. Some o f the recommended actions for the future are":
0

0

0

total number o f registered HIV cases - 8,350. See: htttx//w.hiv-aids.bv/infoI, the number o f people
living with HIV i s estimated at 20,000,
See also h t t p : / / w w w , u n a i d s . o r g / e n / R e g i o n s _ C o u n t r i s . a s p
Source: WHO report o n Global TB Control.
http://www. who.int/tb/publications/global~reportl2007/en/index.
html
See more at: http://un.by/en/undp/db/OOO39172.html

l8 The

l9

2o

strengthening multi-sectoral response to HIV and HIV/TB through vertically
oriented health system;
increasing coverage o f prevention and treatment services to lower the profile o f the
epidemic;
addressing efforts to prevent HIV transmission and thus prevent the spread o f HIV
from high-risk groups (e.g., IDU, sex workers);

12
addressing issue o f voluntary counseling and testing, including informed consent
for being tested to ensure human rights;
addressing the growing trend in TB multi-drug resistant form cases and TB/HIV coinfection cases, especially in the penitentiaries; and
addressing the issue o f increased TB instances in rural areas.

B.

Country Priorities and Agenda

(i)

National Development Strategy Objectives

49. The Program o f Social and Economic Development (PSED) for 2006-201021defines a
medium-term development agenda, which includes the following priorities the Bank
program supports:
0

Budgetary and fiscal policies that create conditions for economic growth and for
business to grow by lowering the tax burden, improving and simplifying tax
collection, cutting the number o f control and supervisory bodies, and reducing the
frequency o f inspections. The state will limit support and subsidies to the real
sector o f the economy and will phase out cross-subsidies in the communal sector
through revision o f tariffs and rationalization o f price-setting. The state will
introduce transparent and clear procedures for public procurement.
Social security system development will be designed to provide further increases
o f the real income o f the population, to introduce targeted assistance mechanisms
that support needy segments o f the population, undertake an active employment
policy and control unemployment. Lastly, the state will further adapt i t s social
security system to balance i t s social responsibility with financial soundness.

0

0

Further growth o f the S M E sector is sought to yield the fastest and most tangible
impact o n growth and employment. The target i s that the SME sector will employ
up to 25 percent o f the total workforce within three years2'. T o that end, the
Government will improve the regulatory and legal environment for SMEs,
minimize administrative and other barriers that complicate and impede their rapid
development, and create conditions for the unimpeded access o f SMEs to the credit
and financial resources, micro financing and credit insurance.
Improvement of the environmental situation through active air and water
protection measures and introduction o f energy saving technologies in industry. I t
i s targeted that by 2010, the release o f pollutants in the air from stationary and
mobile sources will increase by 10 to 15 percent and wastewater discharge into
surface reservoirs by 8 to 9 percent, compared to the industrial production growth
o f 43 to 51 percent and agricultural production growth o f 34 to 45 percent. The
state will stimulate water and energy savings by domestic and industrial users
through the introduction o f widespread metering as well as flexible tariff setting.
Energy intensity o f the economy i s targeted to decline by 26 to 30 percent. The
aim i s to strengthen energy security through capital investments in asset renovation,

2'
22

Program o f Social and Economic Development o f the Republic o f Belarus for 2006-2010. Decree o f the
President o f Belarus N o 384, June 12,2006.
In 2006, SMEs employment, including individual entrepreneurs, comprised 15.4 percent o f total
workforce.

13
efficient utilization o f fuel and energy resources, and more extensive use o f
domestic, alternative and renewable sources o f energy, such as biomass.
(ii) Medium Term Perspectives
50. The PSED puts forth ambitious macro-economic and social targets under the
assumption o f a broadly unchanged external environment and the preservation o f key
elements o f the centrally planned economic model. The PSED target i s to increase
production by 55 percent during the five-year period. The Government plans to achieve its
target growth o f around 8 to 9 percent per annum on the basis o f accelerated investments
(domestic and foreign). Inflation i s envisaged to fall further to 3 to 5 percent annually and
average wages in the budget sector to reach US$500 per month at the end o f the period.
Estimate

Real GDP growth (percent change)
Inflation, annual average (percent change)
General Government Balance (percent o f
GDP)
Current account balance (percent o f GDP)
External Debt (percent o f GDP)
Merchandise Terms o f Trade Index
(2000=100)

2007
7.8
8.1

I

-0.6
-7.8
25.8

I

Source: IMF, World Bank Staff Estimates and Projections.

106.2

2008
6.4
10

I
I

-1.5
-7.6
31.3

I

98.5

Projections

2009
5.7
10.2

I
I

92.6

I
I

-1.5
-7.6
41.8

-1.8
-7.5
36.9

I

2010
5.2
9.4

I

88.7

2011
4.8
8.2

-0.8
-7.4
46.1

I

85.4

51. The projections under the Government Program were prepared before the 2007
substantial increase in energy prices. The recent and expected further increases in energy
prices combined with the weakness o f the private sector call for a revision o f the initial
PSED projections. Table 3 puts forth a revised set o f projections, taking account the
expected 2007 outturn, where, despite the 15 percent terms o f trade shock the economy is
likely to grow by close to 8 percent. The carry-over dynamism from 2006 when the
economy grew at close to 10 percent and the fact the country has been able to mobilize
sufficient resources to finance a current account deficit that will come to 8 percent o f GDP
in 2007 will support the high growth rate. Fiscal deficit i s expected to be moderate, about
0.6 percent o f GDP.
52. The impact over the medium-term will depend on (a) the final arrangements on prices
and payment modalities with the main supplier o f gas and oil, Russia; (b) the availability o f
external finance, (c) progress in opening opportunities for the private sector and greater
efficiency in the existing enterprises, and (d) realignment o f the exchange and wage rates.
53. Based on the assumptions that energy prices continue to increase to reach
international levels by 201 1 (a) the economy will be able to mobilize the necessary external
funds, (b) macroeconomic objectives (fiscal position) are met and (c) the current package
o f measures effectively reduce energy intensity and maintain competitiveness, the economy
is likely to continue to sustain a high but decreasing rate o f economic growth; i t i s foreseen
that by 201 1 Belarus will be growing at around 5 percent. Still, given stagnant level o f the
population, this mean a high rate o f per capita income growth-by 201 1, Belarus could
well have an GNI per capita over 5000 dollars by 201 1. A key concern over the medium

1

14
term i s the expected rapid increase in the stock o f external debt, which may reach almost
50 percent o f GDP by 201 1, given that the current account deficits are foreseen to remain
around 7.5 percent o f GDP.

54. The country has a very l o w external debt to GDP ratio, less than 20 percent now.
Hence, does not have any structural debt problem. The forecast current account deficit of
around 8 percent o f GDP, over the medium term, will present a challenge; but the country
has addressed the challenge in the short to medium term. First, the partial sale o f
BELTRANGAZ and now the second largest mobile telephone operator are providing
around U S $ 5 billion. Second, some western banks that are financing purchases o f Russian
o i l for refining and re-exporting. They are providing short-term trade financing as well.
Third, Belarus could obtain significant financing from bilateral sources. Russia would be
the main source, but recent examples include large scale investment project financing from
China.
55. The high level o f the current account i s explained not only because o f the increasing
energy prices but mostly because o f the high level o f investments needed to increase
energy efficiency and refurbish the economy. The expectations today are that the country
will be able to finance this level o f current accounts. The country has shown this year that
it has the capacity to mobilize resources in the external markets and selected large scale
privatizations are providing additional resources.

56. In August 2007 for the first time Belarus received sovereign credit rating from two
international rating agencies Moody ’s Investors Service (B 1 for foreign exchange debt
obligations o f the Government o f Belarus) and Standard and Poor’s (B+ as the long-term
foreign exchange credit rating). Both agencies’ estimates o f changes in ratings are similar
(“stable”). Acquisition o f the grading o f the long-term government debt i s expected to
facilitate the government and the domestic enterprises and bank accessing international
credit markets.
57. The foreseen growth path i s sustainable because the Russian market will continue to
expand and the o i l processing business in Belarus will remain profitable. The authorities
are seeking to maintain the competitiveness o f the country in i t s main markets by
controlling unit labor costs in foreign currency and conserving energy. Emphasis on
privatization, tighter budget constraints on the enterprise sector and development o f the
small and medium enterprise sector is beginning. The IMF last Article I V has encouraged
the government to consider greater exchange rate flexibility.
58. Given the resilience the economy has shown in the past, the gradual approach o f the
government most likely will in the short- to medium-term. The success over the long-term
will depend on their ability to reduce external financing to limit the growth o f national
debt. Should the gradual approach fail to deliver the expected results, the country will face
the need for a more accelerated adjustment and fundamental reforms.

59. The authorities continue to forecast higher growth over the medium term. Higher
growth will depend greatly on the capacity to generate further export growth, which in turn
requires measures to remain competitive and diversify. This implies a major shift, since
recently domestic demand has been a major driving force o f economic growth. A shift to
exports requires not only containing domestic costs and major investments to refurbish the
productive sectors but increasing the level o f competition and opportunities in the country.

15
III.BANK GROUP ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
A.

Implementation o f the last CAS

(i)

What Worked Well and What Worked Less Well

60. Past Bank assistance to Belarus has been limited. While not all planned activities
were implemented, those that did proceed were generally effective. The last CAS set six
core indicators to measure progress.23 Very good progress was made in containing the
TB and A I D S epidemics and in complying with environmental requirements. Some
progress was made in improving budget transparency through greater budget coverage,
wider treasury coverage, improved budget classification, and pilots in budget
programming. The government made selective efforts in targeting social expenditure,
supported by Bank assistance. Some important results were achieved in improving the
business environment, but substantial scope for further reforms remains. Limited progress
was made in fostering the active participation o f c i v i l society.

61. The performance o f investment projects was satisfactory and has contributed to
development objectives. N o major fiduciary concerns arose. Lending focused on
forestry management, energy efficiency, and Chernobyl affected areas. AAA work was
well received, and the government has taken the recommendations into account-if not
always accepting them-in policy decisions and implementation. AAA covered a broad
range o f themes: social assistance; Chernobyl; poverty analysis; competitiveness;
business environment; health; the impact o f potential increases in the price o f energy;
public expenditure management; and the environment.
62. The last CAS set benchmarks on public expenditure management and the business
environment as pre-conditions for scaling up assistance. The benchmarks were not fully
met, but significant progress was made especially in the area o f public expenditure
management. Less progress was made in improving the business environment or
bringing greater financial discipline to the enterprise sector. Experience has shown that
the Bank's leverage to induce structural change i s at best modest, and this i s unlikely to
change significantly in the near future.
63. T w o major complications during implementation o f the previous CAS were: (a) the
significant absorption o f resources in the preparation o f the TB and AIDS project which
never materialized, and (b) the inclusion in the CAS program o f lending operations for
technical assistance that did not meet the government criteria for borrowing. Both o f
these affected the lending program, and no new loan was approved during the CAS
period (although the loan to support Chernobyl affected areas, o n which work
commenced during the CAS period, was subsequently approved). Given the slow pace o f
CAS implementation, in 2004 the Bank agreed with the government on a more limited
scope o f engagement in the short term that would focus on approval o f the Chernobyl
23

These six indicators were (i)
improved fiscal transparency measured by enhancing budget coverage,
containment o f Tuberculosis and AIDS
including reporting and auditing o f a l l off-budget funds; (ii)
epidemics; (iii)
enhanced compliance with international environmental requirements; (iv) introduction
o f a targeted system o f social protection (v) better business and investment environment as evidenced
by surveys; (vi) active c i v i l society participation in the country's life.

16
Support project and the completion o f selected analytical work underway-the
the Financial Sector Advisory Program (FSAP) Update.

C E M and

(ii) Lessons f r o m the C A S Completion Report
64. The CAS Completion Report (CAS CR) drew the following conclusions and
recommendations:
The Bank can play an important role in Belarus. The WBG can make a valuable
contribution to assist Belarus in facing current challenges that may imply major
rearrangement o f economic institutions, and to manage the associated risk o f possible
distress to population groups in the short-term.

Align program with government priorities and Bank mandate. WBG engagementtechnical assistance, analytical work, and lendinglinvestment-will be more effective
if aligned with government priorities. As noted in the last CAS, there i s “little to be
gained by pushing the policy dialogue (and conditionality) beyond what the
government can consider part o f its o w n program.” In areas considered by the WBG
as important for sustainable welfare gains, but where there i s limited ownership or
interest on the part o f the authorities, the WBG could s t i l l maintain an advocacy
presence.
Continue AAA and actively disseminate. The Bank’s impact can be enhanced by
continuing to emphasize AAA targeted to critical areas to increase the knowledge base
and to provide policy options to the government. AAA work already has had an
impact in selected areas like social assistance, poverty, Chernobyl, public expenditure
reform, pensions, and environment. The Bank, however, must not expect that AAA
work alone will trigger any major structural changes, as the Quality Assurance Group
(QAG) pilot AAA review has pointed
I t can, however, raise awareness o f the
options available to face emerging challenges. The Bank has been effective in
dissemination efforts and should emphasize dissemination even more.
Maintain Presence in Lending. Although the scope for lending is narrow, lending
should continue selectively as an instrument o f Bank engagement. There i s clear need
and demand for investment funds. Belarus knows well how to implement programs.
Fiduciary risks are considered manageable. O f the possible investment opportunities,
the Bank program could include projects with direct impact o n the poor or with
substantial national and regional benefits. Lending i s also a door to a broader dialogue
in the country.
Work with others. In difficult policy areas, like business environment and regulation,
the WBG should j o i n forces with other IFIs such as the EBRD and the International
Monetary Fund (IMF).

(iii) Portfolio Management
65. T o date, World Bank lending commitments in Belarus total US$243 million, with
US$17.5 million provided as grants. The active portfolio includes two ongoing
operations-the Social Infrastructure Retrofitting project (US$22.6 million.) and the Post
24

Quality of ESW in FY02: A QAG Assessment, April 16, 2003

17
Chernobyl Recovery project (US$50 million). The latter became effective on August 11,
2006. Since Belarus joined IFC in 1992, IFC has invested a total o f US$108.5 million in
nine projects, mostly over the course o f the past five years, in the financial and
agribusiness sectors.
66. Non-lending activities include extensive analytical work. The most recent work
includes the report entitled Belarus: Chernobyl Review (2002), a Public Expenditure and
Institutional Review (PEIR, Belarus: Strengthening Public Resource Management, 2003),
a Poverty Assessment Update (Belarus Poverty Assessment: Preparing for the Future,
2004), a C E M (Belarus: Window o f Opportunity to Enhance Competitiveness and
Sustain Economic Growth, 2005), an FSAP report (2005), an Energy Sector Review
(Belarus: Addressing Challenges Facing the Energy Sector, 2006) and Policy Notes in
Selected Issues in Public Finance (Taking Stock o f Intergovernmental Fiscal Relations:
Issues and Challenges, and Improving the Quality o f Capital Expenditures to Sustain
Growth, 2007). IFC has provided a range o f advisory services, from privatization o f small
businesses to business association development, to improvement o f the business enabling
environment.
B.

Objectives and Principles

67. During the proposed CAS period (FY07 to F Y 1l),
the WBG will aim to assist
Belarus to address global environment and energy challenges and enhance the
competitiveness o f its economy to assure rising incomes and to protect the welfare o f the
weakest. In doing so, the WBG will be guided by the following principles:
0

0
0
0

C.

The CAS program will be aligned with selected government priorities consistent
with the Bank’s mandate;
The WBG will be cautious but ready to step up assistance;
The WBG will work with other international bodies present in the country;
The WBG will reach out to all in Belarus.
Proposed Assistance Strategy and Results

68. Analytic and advisory work will continue to form a core element of the
program. The Bank will continue as a leading external source o f economic and social
analysis and will utilize this analysis to discuss policy choices with the authorities. The
Bank will focus i t s analytical work on needed structural reforms and on those issues most
critical to reducing the risks to the population posed by transition and external shocks.
I F C will continue to deliver an active advisory program around challenges facing the
private sector, and international “best practices” for improving the business regulatory
environment will be utilized.
69. The Bank will maintain a limited and selective presence in lending. The CAS
foresees an investment lending program o f roughly one operation per year, with
commitments not to exceed US$lOO million per annum on average”. If this materializes,
25

The l o w case lending limit under previous CAS was $US 65 million. The ceiling was issued under
expectations o f very l o w economic growth and possibly a major crisis; none o f these events took place.
The expectations today are that the economy will continue to grow despite the energy price increases
and that the country will access needed resources to finance producing and investment.

18
IBRD disbursed and outstanding debt will reach levels last seen at the end o f the nineties.
N o development policy lending will be contemplated. The Bank will consider financing
projects with regional or global goods components. The country has a well structured
public investment program that includes increasing energy efficiency, improving the
quality o f water supply, improving the management o f waste, dealing with the
consequences o f Chernobyl, profiting from the opportunities the Kyoto Protocol
provides, and reducing the environmental impact o f obsolete technology. The I F C will
continue to examine possible investments in private enterprises.

70. During the current CAS period, IBRD exposure i s expected to increase. If the
envelope is fully used, IBRD disbursed and outstanding debt will reach in FYlO levels
seen at the end o f the nineties, and a historical peak o f over US$l80 in FY11 (see Table 5
below).
5: I B D Portf&
Commitments
Disbursements
Principal Repayments
Net Flows
Memo
Total Debt Service
Debt Disbursed and Outstanding
Source: World Bank estimates.

P

. o.

r

FY07

0
8
16
-8

19
46

..

m (US% mllll~&

FY08
FY09
FYlO
FYI1
77
100
100
100
17
31
50
65
16
10
1
2
1
21
50
64
20
48

14
68

6
118

11
181

71. Alignment with Global Initiatives. The design o f the C A S i s consistent with the
Bank’s evolving approaches to global public goods. The C A S concern with global

includes attention t o reducing energy intensity, access t o the benefits from the K y o t o
Protocol and other international arrangements and incentives, attention to environmental
challenges , follow-up work o n dealing with the Chernobyl consequences, trade and
adjustment to shocks. In doing so, the CAS combines analytical work, policy dialogue
and lending.

72. The CAS PR, planned for mid-2009, will take stock o f progress made in structural
reforms, and review lending scenarios and parameters in that context. The CAS PR
would focus o n (a) improvements in the quality o f the regulatory environment for small
and medium enterprises; (b) regulatory changes in the energy sector to facilitate the use
o f domestic resources for energy production and to reduce energy intensity; (c) reduction
in the level o f resources absorbed by the public sector and efficiency and transparency in
i t s use; (d) tighter budget constraints on public enterprises; (e) progress towards accessing
benefits from K y o t o Protocol and other international agreements. Based o n the outcome
o f the review, the Bank could consider increasing support in areas where prospects for
successful interventions are judged to be good.

19

(i)

Governance and Anti-Corruption

73. The Bank’s work on governance and anti-corruption will be consistent with the
Bank’s recently approved corporate strategy.26 As with other key reform areas, country
ownership and leadership i s critical in this area, and it i s not expected that the Bank’s
program alone will make a decisive difference in the period o f the proposed engagement
strategy. Consistent with the guiding principles o f the recently approved strategy, the
Bank will remain engaged in Belarus. The proposed engagement will (a) include an
advocacy role for reforms on governance and measures to address corruption, (b) seek to
develop areas in which the government and the Bank have common goals, (c) and ensure
that appropriate fiduciary oversight i s applied to proposed resource transfers from the
Bank. Among the specific activities undertaken by the WBG would be the following:

Risks and Vulnerability challenges. The Bank would assist with country
readiness to deal with potential external shocks and vulnerabilities, strengthening
institutions for macroeconomic management, and increasing the flexibility and the
competitiveness o f the economy which i s highly dependent on external markets. The
Bank would continue to advocate an approach o f easing state control, and
restructuring o f the productive sectors intended to reduce the risks o f economic
disruption, which can affect broad segments o f the population.
Encouraging the private sector. The Bank and IFC, as appropriate, would play
a leading role in conducting surveys o f the enterprise sector, and advocating a more
enterprise friendly business climate. I F C would continue to take the lead in
engagement with private enterprises.
Improving service delivery to help all citizens in Belarus. Bank activities, in
particular i t s lending operations, will seek to benefit the widest group o f citizens,
especially the most vulnerable. In addition, the Bank would continue to provide
support in the form o f advice and technical assistance to the government’s efforts to
improve the management o f public finances, including budget execution. In FY08,
the Bank would seek to respond to the government’s request for assistance with a
Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability (PEFA) review. Based on the
results o f the assessment, the Bank could help in the implementation the resulting
action plan. In addition, the Bank would respond to the request o f the government to
aid in strengthening the capacity o f local governments to deliver services, as well as
increase the participation o f the communities.
Fiduciary oversight of Bank lending. The Bank would continue to use World
Bank procurement guidelines for the International Bank for Reconstruction and
Development (IBRD) loans, with overall fiduciary oversight calibrated by assessed
risk, taking into account the results o f the corruption vulnerability scan completed in
FY07. In addition, the Bank could assist with procurement reform more generally.

26

See Strengthening World Bank Group Engagement on Governance and Anti-Corruption, March 2007

20
Advocacy based on independent analysis. The Bank would continue to be a
leading source o f objective analytic work o n selected social and economic dimensions
o f Belarusian life, with active dissemination o f findings both domestically and
externally. The results o f the analytical work would support the assistance in areas
agreed by the government. In areas (such as transition to a market economy and
governance reforms) in which government agreement has yet to be reached, the Bank
will maintain an advocacy position based on relevant international experience,
especially in transition countries.
Encouraging a broad national dialogue. While the government will remain the
principal counterpart, the Bank would continue to engage a broad range o f business
and c i v i l society stakeholders. The Bank would involve as far as possible and as
agreed with the government, civil society organizations in the preparation and
implementation o f i t s investment interventions, analytical work, and (to increase
transparency) strengthen participation and third party monitoring o f Bank-supported
activities. Despite the limited scope o f i t s operations, the Bank will continue to reach
out t o civic organizations via the small grants program.
Working with others. The Bank would work together with other donors and IFIs
to ensure a coordinated approach based o n respective mandates and comparative
advantage.
Specifically, the Bank would work closely with the European
Commission (EC), UNDP, EBRD, the United States Agency for International
Development (USAID) and other bilateral and multilateral agencies o n strengthening
the c i v i l society and assisting Belarus to fulfill i t s international obligations.

(ii)

Result and Program

Ta l e 4: Planned Bank Group Lendin
NO8
Public Expenditure Notes-I
Non
lending
Energy Efficiency Notes-I
Social Assistance and Social
Security Review
I F C Advisory services o n Business
PEFA
Enabling Environment

Lending SIRP Additional Financing
Water Supply Management
I F C direct investments in private
sector companies

I F C Advisory services o n
Business Enabling Environment
Energy Efficiency and Selfsufficiency
I F C direct investments in private
sector companies

74. Annex B 9 presents the key results to be achieved by the program. Table 4 l i s t s the
program o f lending and AAA work. Below is a description o f how the Bank Group
supports achievement o f the key expected results.

21

(iii) Environment
75. The Bank will continue to support Belarus' efforts to strengthen i t s environment
institutions, address key public health challenges, and comply with i t s international
commitments. During this CAS period, the potential for Bank support i s likely to be in
the following areas:
76. Improve the quality o f water available to rural and urban populations. The
proposed Water Supply Management project (FY08) will finance investments in well
field development and rehabilitation, water treatment, distribution network rehabilitation
and wastewater treatment. The project i s well aligned with the Government's priorities as
laid out in the 2006-2010 Government Clean Water Program (and other similar
government initiatives such as the Program o f Rural Revival 2005-201 0, and the Program
o f Small Towns Development and National Environmental Protection Action Plan for
2006-2010). Government support and commitment for the project i s strong. The
ongoing water assessment as part o f the international benchmarking exercise being
undertaken by the Bank would provide valuable inputs into project formulation and
results framework. Overall, the project would be expected to enhance management o f the
water sector and generate tangible benefits for the least advantaged groups through
improved household water supply.
77. Protecting Water Resources from Contamination: In addition, the country faces
challenges in protecting i t s natural water resources including groundwater contamination
from minerals (iron and radionuclides) and eutrophication o f i t s water bodies. The excess
nutrient loads from both agriculture run-offs and municipal wastewater not only cause
eutrophication o f the national rivers but also impacts downstream transboundary water
bodies such as the fragile Baltic Sea in the north and the Black Sea in the south. The
opportunity to develop a project which looks at these transboundary issues, including
assisting the government reduce nutrient discharges into international waters through
GEF funding, will be explored.
78. Reducing the negative environmental impact from waste management:
According to the Ministry o f Housing and Utilities, among 170 municipal solid waste
landfills, 36 landfills (2lpercent) have been used for over 30 years, and 48 landfills (28
percent) have practically used up their capacity. N o t all landfills follow sanitary practices,
such as using waterproof liners and collections systems for leachate, leading to concerns
over possible groundwater contamination. O f 170 municipal solid waste landfills, 112 (66
percent) have been equipped with the protective waterproof beds and inspection wells.
Communal waste separation covers 47 percent o f town and town settlement population.
The Ministry o f National Resources and Environment reported that out o f 80 industrial
waste landfills over 75 percent do not meet national standards. Three largest landfills
near Minsk have exceeded their capacity by 2 to 3 times, and are s t i l l in use. The
Ministry o f National Resources and Environment reported that about 2 million tons o f
solid waste has been accumulated annually during the last years in uncontrolled damps
scattered around the country. The World Bank could assist the government in addressing
the solid waste and disposal problems facing major cities possibly in FY10.

22
79. Strengthening Environmental Institutions. The Bank will continue to support
Belarus’ efforts to strengthen its environment institutions, and comply with international
commitments. In this regard, the Bank would assist Belarus in i t s effort to implement the
Kyoto Protocol, which was ratified in November 2005. Should the amendment to Annex
B of the Protocol become effective, Belarus could be eligible for joint implementation
arrangements or carbon emission trading. The Bank would provide technical assistance
to facilitate establishment o f the legal and institutional basis for the issuance o f integrated
environmental permits, building on the pilot experiences supported by the Swedish
Environmental Protection Agency (SEPA).

80. Global Environment Facility (GEF) activities. The government has expressed
interest in support under the revised GEF Resource Allocation Framework for promoting
l o w greenhouse gas emission technologies and/or a follow-up activity to the GEF POPS
Enabling Activity already implemented.
(iv)

Energy Efficiency and Self-sufficiency

81. The Bank would continue to support the government’s efforts to improve energy
efficiency. First, i t will continue to provide assistance to the refurbishing o f schools and
hospitals for energy efficiency. A proposal to provide additional financing o f US$15
million for the SIRP project i s under preparation for approval in FY08. In addition, the
Bank will develop further the analytical work on energy it completed in 2006 as a basis to
support the institutional upgrading o f the sector. This would include options for the
reform o f existing tariff policy (cross-subsidies), energy regulation, and current levels o f
budgetary support for investment programs particularly in the context o f rising energy
(gas) prices.
82. The Post-Chernobyl Recovery project (FY06), now under implementation, seeks
improvements in the living conditions o f inhabitants in selected affected areas. The
project reinforces efforts at energy efficiency and at upgrading environmental standards
in the areas o f intervention. The design builds on the recommendations o f the Bank’s
Chernobyl Review (2002) and the UN Chernobyl
especially the emphasis these
reports have placed on economic recovery o f the affected areas. In addition, the project
seeks to convene greater support o f the international community for the affected regions
o f the country.
83. The Bank would also seek to contribute to the Government’s objective o f increasing
the domestic (renewable energy sources, especially bio-fuels and small hydro) share o f
energy production. The Bank contribution would center on (a) technical assistance to
build the institutional capacity o f the Ministry o f Energy, including the development o f
regulation and the preparation o f a Renewable Energy Master Plan, and (b) support for
strategic or pilot investments to diversify energy sources, use o f renewable energy, biofuels (wood waste, wood chips etc.) for municipal heating and combined heatlpower
27

The Forum i s a consultative body made up o f 8 UN specialized agencies, including the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), World Health Organization (WHO), United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP), Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO), United Nations Environment
Programme (UNEP), United Nations Office for the Coordination o f Humanitarian Affairs (UNOCHA), United Nations Scientific Committee on the Effects o f Atomic Radiation (UNSCEAR), and
the World Bank, as well as the governments o f Belarus, Russia and Ukraine.

23
generation and hydropower and other renewable sources for small scale power
generation. Based on progress made, an operation to support investments in energy
diversification could be considered in FY09. In addition, the CAS PR would consider
further support through investment, including areas such as regional energy integration.
(v)

Competitiveness

84. The WBG would continue to undertake analytical work and provide technical
advice o n options to deliver sustainable growth while diversifying the economic base o f
the country. The Bank would develop further the work initiated by the 2005 C E M o n the
transition challenges Belarus faces. The update would focus o n selected topics that might
include the quality o f the business environment, the tax system, options to support
industry, and other drivers o f competitiveness. Based o n results o f the analytical work,
the results o f the policy initiatives under implementation and dialogue with the
authorities, the WBG could provide additional support. Areas o f extended assistance
may include improvements in logistics to enhance competitiveness and benefit from the
position o f Belarus as a transit country, including a possible review o f customs. It may
also include assistance in areas like bankruptcy regulation and implementation, reform of
the financial system, development o f special zones, etc.
85. The WBG will give priority to support the development o f the SME sector. It will
focus o n promoting simplification o f the regulatory burden o n business ensuring rules
that encourage competition, stronger f i r m s and better public services. The WBG will
partner with the EBRD, whose strategy pursues similar objectives. The quality o f these
efforts will be tracked through domestic and external surveys like BEEPS.

86. The I F C will take a lead role in supporting private sector development, building o n
their substantial experience over the last ten years. I t s strategy would continue to foster
private sector development through advisory services and investment operations. From
2007 to 2009, advisory services supported by the IFC and SIDA would leverage recent
achievements, strong relationships with government counterparts, and emerging
momentum to continue improving the business environment. The focus would be o n
reform o f business registration, permits, and the system o f inspections, while retaining
flexibility to respond to other government requests to improve the business environment.
In addition, I F C would continue to support BEL.BIZ (www.bel.biz), the web portal
providing access to business and legal information which also currently serves as the
platform for public-private dialogue to simplify and reduce business-related
administrative procedures. Lastly, the I F C will continue efforts to mobilize donor
resources that support providing technical assistance to small and medium enterprises.

87. Despite limited opportunities, I F C would be ready to invest in enterprises with
strategic foreign investors and with promising local companies. The objective would be
to support the nascent private sector by selectively tapping into the sizable local
economic potential and catalyzing foreign direct investment. Current prospects include
investments in agribusiness and retail sectors, although all opportunities would be closely
explored as they arise.

88. In the financial sector, I F C assistance would aim to improve access to finance and
increase the depth and soundness o f the financial system. Given the structure of the

24
economy, SME and microfinance lending would remain an important component. IFC,
along with other IFIs, may support the creation o f a new microfinance institution. Over
time, I F C would promote new financial products, replicating i t s experience in
neighboring countries in the areas o f housing and energy efficiency finance, as well as
exploring prospects in leasing.
89. MIGA may consider selected opportunities to support foreign direct investment in
Belarus through the provision o f guarantees, focusing o n areas closely aligned with the
CAS strategy and government development priorities. In particular, MIGA could support
projects which are expected to contribute to the development o f the SME sector. MIGA
could also consider opportunities in the financial sector to support investments which
would improve industry standards and increase access to finance.
(vi)

Improving the effectiveness o f the State

90. The Bank will continue to provide assistance to increase the transparency o f the
budget, building o n the progress and the lessons learned during the past CAS. T h e
objective i s to move towards a smaller and more effective government. The Bank will
apply appropriate fiduciary measures in the implementation o f the projects i t finances or
grants it may execute. The Bank will focus o n further improving the country systems’
procedures and controls. I t will also put emphasis o n improving the quality o f the
institutions in the areas where it intervenes. The Bank, upon government request, could
provide support to the modernization o f the public procurement system.
91. The Bank i s currently preparing a Public Expenditure Review (PER, FY07-08) in
the form o f short policy notes, focused o n two areas: (i)
increasing efficiency in public
capital expenditures; and (ii)reforming intergovernmental fiscal relations. Upon
completion o f these notes, the Bank would respond to the government’s request to
undertake a Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability (PEFA) review. The results
from the PEFA would help the government outline a strategy to strengthen further the
public finance institutions as a basis to further improve service delivery. The Bank could
support implementation o f selected elements o f such a strategy, including improving the
debt management capacity o f the Ministry o f Finance, if requested by government. The
CAS PR would determine the scope and scope o f further assistance in this area.
92. The Bank would also consider, if requested by the government, a review o f the
social assistance and social security system (FY09). In addition, the Bank would stand
ready to provide technical assistance, as requested by the government, o n strengthening
the capacity o f local authorities and communities to delivery basic services, especially in
rural areas and intermediate cities. The CAS PR could explore further assistance in the
improvement o f service delivery in the least advantaged areas.
(vii)

Monitoring and Evaluation

93. Annex B 9 presents the expected outcomes o f Bank assistance. The Bank would
measure the success by the provision o f timely and quality analytical work addressing the
most critical policy choices. Specifically, the Bank would seek to measure the impact o f
i t s assistance o n (a) improving the living conditions and economic opportunities o f the
population living in the Chernobyl-affected areas; (b) reducing energy intensity and
increasing energy self-sufficiency; (c) greater state effectiveness in service delivery while

25
reducing the size o f the state; (d) improved business environment that facilitates the
creation of new companies and finds i t easier to operate, especially in the area o f taxation
and (e) increased availability o f financing for private sector companies.
(viii)

Fiduciary Issues

94. The Bank would continue to use and improve the systems now in place to
implement on-going projects. Financial management arrangements for new projects
would build on the lessons of existing practices but would be cautious in any move to
make use of country systems. Project implementation arrangements would seek to
strengthen procurement procedures and to link project activities with development
outcomes.
(ix)

Partnerships

95. The IMF conducts annual Article IV consultations (the last consultation was held in
M a y 2007) but has no formal program with Belarus28. Belarus authorities have shown a
keen interest in technical cooperation with the Fund. Recent technical assistance
missions have provided advice on banking supervision issues, government finance
statistics, monetary policy and monetary operations, monetary transmission mechanism,
and selected other areas. Important milestones include foreign exchange liberalization,
disinflation, subscription to the IMF’s Data Dissemination Standard (2004) and
completion, jointly with the Bank, o f the FSAP2’.
96. T h e EBRD adopted i t s current strategy for Belarus on December 12, 200630. It will
continue to remain engaged in Belarus, despite what it reports as persistent lack o f
progress in advancing democracy and market principles. The strategy noted that i t will
continue to concentrate i t s operations in the private sector where i t s investments can have
the greatest impact in developing a dynamic and entrepreneurial class. At the same time,
i t will remain ready to expand i t s operations outside the private sector, should domestic
circumstances allow. The strategy identified clear, measurable, political and economic
benchmarks that the Bank will monitor regularly and specified the operational response
that could follow in the event o f significant progress.
97. The UNDP’s Country Programme Document for Belarus covers the period 2006 to
201 0. I t focuses on five priority areas: economic growth and increase in living standards;
effective and accountable governance; environmental sustainability; rehabilitation and
sustainable development o f Chernobyl affected areas; and cross border cooperation.
98. The EU relations with Belarus have been limited since 1997, when the EU
suspended the ratification o f the Partnership and Cooperation Agreement in response to
the authorities’ failure to observe international democratic commitments from the
country’s membership in the OSCE. In the period 1997-2006, assistance to Belarus from
the TACIS program and other EU instruments was restricted to support to institutional,
administrative and legal reforms and support to addressing the social consequences o f
transition. This included actions such as Small Project Programs, education, alleviation
o f the consequences o f the Chernobyl accident, fight against and prevention o f trafficking
See Attachment 4 o n IMF relations.

*’Belarus: Financial Sector Assessment Program, W o r l d Bank/IMF,
28

30

2004

See http://www.ebrd,com/about/strategy/country/belarus/index.htm

26
in human beings, and cross-border cooperation.

Other EU programs were more
specifically focussing on strengthening democracy and the respect for human rights.

99. The EU's European Neighbourhood Policy (ENP, 2004) covers Belarus. The ENP
is a framework for closer cooperation and economic integration between the enlarged EU
and neighboring countries. Continuing restrictions imposed by the EU Council has
prevented Belarus from profiting from the ENPS3l From 2007, Belarus will receive
limited assistance under the European Neighbourhood Partnership Instrument (ENPI).
The annual allocation is EUR 5 million and focuses on (i)social and economic
development, including actions to alleviate the consequences o f the Chernobyl accident;
and (ii)
support for strengthening democracy and good governance. The latter covers
civil society and people-to-people contacts. In addition, Belarus will be eligible for
assistance under the ENPI Eastern Regional Programme, which may provide support for
sectors such as environment, transport, energy, border management and the fight against
organized crime. Belarus will also benefit from ENPI-wide programs such as the EU
higher education initiatives TEMPUS and the Erasmus Mundus External Co-operation
Window. Other EU programmes will continue to focus more specifically on
democratisation and human rights.

I V CONSULTATIONS
100. From September 10 to September 14 2007, the CAS team met, in Minsk,
government representatives, members o f the international community residing in Minsk,
civil society and business associations, and economic experts. The team, in addition, met
in Brussels September 18, 2007, officials o f the European Commission to obtain a
feedback on the draft CAS.

101. The written comments the CAS Working Group, under the Deputy Minister of
Finance, provided the team commended the Bank for aligning the CAS agenda with key
objectives o f the Government Program, in particular the emphasis on energy efficiency,
environment and competitiveness. The authorities emphasized the sturdiness of the
Belarusian economy, its capacity to withstand the sharp increases in energy prices and
noted various reforms under way or under preparation to best address this and other
challenge^.^^ National experts and representatives o f the business community and the
civil society concurred that the economy had the reserves to withstand the o i l price shock,
and thought that the greater challenge i s to maintain competitiveness in the long-term.
102. The authorities acknowledged their appreciation for the Bank advice during the
implementation o f the previous CAS, despite the limited lending. Both civil society and
business community representatives called o n the Bank to remain engaged in Belarus,

31

32

Additional restrictions on official contacts with the Belarusian authorities were introduced by the EU
Council in November 2004. Further sanctions against certain Belarusian officials were imposed after
the elections o f March 2006, according to CFSP Common Positions 20031276lCFSP o f April 10,2006
and 20061276lCFCP o f M a y 18, 2006. In June 2007 EU withdrew Belarus' trade preferences under the
Generalized System o f Preferences (GSP), because Belarus did not comply with i t s International Labor
Organization (ILO) obligations relating to freedom o f association for workers.
The authorities highlighted that past pessimistic forecasts on the performance o f the economy had not
come true.

27
praised i t s analytical work, and pointed business development and regional issues as
areas where greater involvement i s possible.

103. The European Community representatives concurred with the proposed CAS
priorities and highlighted the importance to focus on energy efficiency and transparent
management o f public funds. The E C expressed desire to collaborate with the Bank,
even if the E C engagement remains limited. The several possibilities o f cooperation
include analytical work such as the foreseen PEFA exercise.
V. MANAGING R I S K S

104. Reputational Risk. Concerns with the openness o f the political system, the rights
o f the opposition, and the slow pace o f transition to a modern market economy have

resulted in smaller donor programs than the size and development needs o f Belarus
would otherwise justify. For instance, the EU has not signed the Neighbourhood Action
Plan with Belarus. Donors that remain work mostly with c i v i l society organizations. The
Bank would be one o f the few international agencies dealing directly with the central
government. The international community, however, appreciates the analytical work o f
the Bank and also its involvement in issues o f wider global interest such as Chernobyl.
Continued engagement could represent a reputational risk if the political situation
deteriorates and c i v i l liberties are further curtailed. If the political or economic situation
to deteriorate significantly, an early Progress Report or other reporting to the Board
would be undertaken.

105. Creditworthiness. In late August 2007, Standard’s & Poor assigned Belarus a B+
long-term foreign currency issuer rating. Moody’s followed, by assigning a B 1 for
foreign currency debt obligations o f the government. Both rates placed Belarus four
notches below investment grade with stable outlook. On the positive side, the ratings
reflect Belarus’ high income level and good development indicators, l o w debt ratios, and
the existence o f high capital stocks and skilled in the country. On the other hand, they
also reflect the main elements o f country risk in Belarus which include slow privatization
process, still cumbersome business environment, significant contingent liabilities, and the
weak external liquidity position, in particular, with rising energy prices in an energyintensive economy.
106. Strong growth in recent years has been underpinned by terms o f trade gains from
Russian energy imports significantly below market prices, which the government
redistributed through mandated wage increases, state-directed lending and subsidies to
the SOEs. With the price o f energy imports set to rise to international levels, the risks o f
macroeconomic imbalances emerging escalate. Furthermore, the very l o w levels o f
foreign exchange reserves significantly increase the vulnerability o f the country in the
current environment. 33
107. If Belarus i s able to implement priority measures to improve competitiveness and
reduce energy dependency, then i t will have a window o f opportunity to undertake a more
ambitious modernization program. T h i s requires fiscal discipline, incentives to attract and
33

International reserves in Belarus are low, below one month o f imports, even though they have increased

69.5 percent in the first 6 months o f 2007 and the IMF foresees further increases.

28
establish a business community, measures to enhance competition and a greater autonomy
and accountability for the enterprise sectors. It also requires reducing risks to the financial
sector-already the dollarization o f the economy i s decreasing but extensive public sector
guarantees bear high fiscal risks. If successful, Belarus could stabilize its external debt at
reasonable levels over the medium and the long-term while generating a sustainable growth
path.
108. From IBRD’s perspective, the stock o f debt disbursed and outstanding i s now l o w
(U$46 million) and would increase to reach US$18 1 m i l l i o n by 2011, if the country were
to use all o f the resources the Bank could make available. Therefore the Bank would
limit commitments significantly if risks and uncertainties were to materialize. The Bank
will monitor, jointly with its partners, the evolving situation. The CAS PR will access the
situation and revise the lending ceiling if necessary.
109. Bilateral integration with Russia. Despite an apparent slowdown in the process o f
bilateral integration between Belarus and Russia since the conclusion o f a treaty on a
Union State in 1999, the issue remains on the bilateral agenda. Several o f the treaty’s
institutional provisions (e.g., adoption o f a Union State Constitutional Act) have not been
implemented and previously set target dates for monetary union have not been met.
Should the union proceed, the Bank would undertake a fundamental re-assessment o f its
engagement.

29
Attachment 1: CAS Completion Report

1.
This CAS Completion Report (CCR) examines the implementation o f the 20022004 Country Strategy Assistance (CAS) for Belarus. The CCR draws lessons for the
design o f strategy for the period FY08 to FY11. This CCR also draws on an internal
review that the C M U did in FY05 to take stock o f the progress made in implementing the
2002-2004 CAS and to recommend options for the preparation o f the new Country
Assistance Strategy (CAS). The review recommended postponing the preparation o f a
new CAS until completion o f on-going Analytical and Advisory Activities (AAA) and
presentation to the Board o f a project supporting regions affected by Chernobyl. T h i s
CCR covers Bank activities both in the formal CAS (FY02 through FY04), as well as in
the subsequent period through the end o f FY07.
I.

THE BASIC CAS STRUCTURE: OBJECTIVES AND DESIGN

2.
The 2002-2004 CAS, presented to the Board in February 2002, was the third CAS
since Belarus joined the Bank, and followed the FY99 CAS update that called for the
unification o f the exchange rate as a condition prior to the Bank lending to Belarus.
Belarus unified the exchange rate in September 2000. The CAS was prepared thereafter,
jointly with the International Finance Corporation (IFC). O n a parallel track, the
International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the Government agreed on a Staff Monitored
Program (SMP), which ran between April and September 2001, but was not implemented
in full, although the country met the majority o f the SMP conditions.
3.
The design o f the CAS took into account (a) the stated government policy to
advance slowly towards a modern market economy, and (b) emerging dialogue, between
the World Bank and the Belarusian authorities, mainly on environmental issues and
social sectors reform. The CAS noted that there was “little to be gained by pushing the
policy dialogue (and conditionality) beyond what the Government can consider part o f its
own program.7y34 The CAS consultations were extensive; the Government and civil
society representatives participated jointly with other international donors.35

4.
The CAS was prepared in a l o w case scenario and focused on areas compatible
both with government priorities and the Bank’s corporate mandate-global public goods
and interventions with a high social content. The CAS left open the possibility for a
broader assistance program should the government advance in undertaking structural
reforms, and to move to the base case, i t set triggers on macroeconomic performance, the
quality o f the business environment, and transparency in the management o f the public
resources. The World Bank Group (WBG) stood ready to support government efforts to
achieve these triggers.
34

35

Belarus CAS 2002-04, World Bank Report ## 23401, February 2002, page 16, p. 54
CAS consultations took place between February and December 2002 in two rounds and were held in 14
cities in all regions o f the country. Over 1,500 individuals attended the meetings representing civil
society organizations. A wide variety o f issues were discussed: health, environment, social protection,
Chernobyl, private sector development, Internet communications, and media. A CAS website in
Russian and English was set up. A summary o f these consultations was annexed to the CAS document
presented to the Board for approval.

30
11.

COUNTRY OUTCOMES DURING THE CAS PERIOD

5.
Progress towards long-term development outcomes was mixed during the period.
On the positive side, economic performance was satisfactory-high
economic growth
and improved macroeconomic indicators. In addition, the level o f poverty incidence fell
to amongst the lowest in the region. Significant progress was made in the face o f the
Tuberculosis (TB) and AIDS threats. O n the negative side, however, i t continues to be
difficult for civil society organizations to function in Belarus and the limited political
freedoms in the country are a matter o f considerable international concerns. This section
summarizes key long-term development outcomes during the CAS period.
A. Economic Performance

6.
From 2002 to 2005, Belarus’ Gross Domestic Product (GDP) grew on average at
around 8 percent per annum, a strong performance on par with i t s neighbor^.^^ On the one
hand, the country experienced improved terms o f trade (up to 2006), high increases in
wages and salaries, and continued support from Russia, via discounted energy prices. On
the other hand, increased capacity utilization and rapid increases in labor productivity
supported higher incomes. A tight fiscal policy, the stabilization o f the market for
foreign exchange, the National Bank o f Belarus’ (NBB) policy o f maintaining positive
real interest rates, and the cessation o f NBB direct financing o f the budget deficit since
2004, lowered average annual inflation from 42.5 percent in 2002 to 7.0 percent in 2006.
7.
These results notwithstanding, the economy remains vulnerable to shocks (e-g.,
from upward energy price pressures). These vulnerabilities are rooted on the large size o f
the public sector, the high dependency on the Russian market and vulnerabilities in the
banking sector. High quasi-fiscal deficits have created sizeable amounts o f hidden
liabilities that put financial and fiscal stability at risk.37 Limitations on business entry
have prevented the needed diversification o f the economy. The aging population i s
straining the fiscal accounts.38
B. Poverty
8.
A pattern o f broad economic growth that covered labor-intensive sectors (such as
services, food processing and machinery, and generous government wage and income policies,
spread evenly the benefits o f growth across the population. Poverty rates declined
substantially, while inequality remained stable and moderate. The poverty headcount ratio
(national definition) was more than halved -- from 30.5 percent o f the population in 2002 to
11.1 percent in 2006; which meant that approximately 3.0 million people moved out o f
poverty. Based on poverty analysis conducted by the Bank, Belarus has one o f the lowest
levels o f poverty incidence in the region.39 T h i s decline in poverty incidence i s in line
36 The

CAS had foreseen much lower rates o f economic growth-2.3 percent on average for the 2002-2004
CAS period. The Bank’s absence from Belarus previous to the CAS weakened i t s understanding o f the
workings o f the economy and led to overly dim economic forecasts.
37 The Financial Sector Assessment Program (FSAP, FY05) and the Public Expenditure Review (PER,
FY03) looked into t h i s issue.
38 A t the beginning o f the CAS period, the objective was to reach US$lOO for an average monthly salary by
the end o f 2002; it exceeded US$260/ month by the end o f 2005.
39 See, Growth, Poverty and Inequality: Eastern Europe and the Former Soviet Union. World Bank,2005.

31
with the regional trends; transition economies have been gaining the ground lost during
the 1990s. Further growth, through productivity increases, is needed to solidify these
gains.

C. Civil Society

The status o f civil society deteriorated during the CAS period. In 2003, the
9.
Government closed 5 1 influential non-governmental organizations (NGOs). It issued
warnings to 810 NGOs; 6 times more than in 2002. Pressure on the N G O sector
increased before the presidential elections in 2006 and has continued since. Taxation o f
non-for-profit organizations i s high. Strict registration and review procedures for NGOs
are in place and affect all donors including the Bank, TACIS, the United Nations (UN),
the United States Agency for International Development (USAID) and others. Still, the
capacity o f the small number (2,200) o f organizations in the country has grown and they
are having an impact on the environment, social issues and local development.
10.
Quite often the social rehabilitation, training and other programs developed by
civil society organizations have no analogues in the public sector. For instance,
environmental organizations have succeeded in establishing two institutions that maintain
dialogue between the Government and civil society-the Non-Governmental Council
under the Ministry o f Natural Resources and Environmental Protection, the Advisory
Board o f the Joint Sustainable Development Project o f the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP) and the Belarusian Government.

D. The Relationshipwith Russia
11.
In 1999, Belarus and Russia agreed to form a union and had put forth an
implementation timetable. The CAS foresaw that the prospects o f an economic union
with Russia would speed macroeconomic stabilization and facilitate structural reforms,
leading to a convergence o f institutions between the two countries. The timetable for
unification did not materialize as expected. Still, the prospects o f unification provided a
benchmark that contributed to the macroeconomic stabilization o f the economy. The
future o f the union i s uncertain today. However, the issue i s amply discussed in both
countries.
111.

CAS-RELATED OUTCOMES

12. This section examines the impact o f the country assistance program. Appendix C
presents a summary o f the results, compares planned and realized activities and assesses
the progress in meeting expected progress benchmarks during the CAS period.
A.

Global Public Goods

13.
TB/AIDS. Belarus, like most countries in the region, faced a rising trend o f TB
and AIDS infections in the middle o f the 1990s. Today both o f these trends have
subsided. The incidence o f AIDS, 78.3 per 100,000 o f population, i s lower than
Ukraine, Russia, Moldova and Estonia, and similar to the European average. Similarly,
the incidence from TB, 66.2 cases per 100,000 o f population, i s lower than Ukraine,
Russia and Moldova, but i s almost twice as high as the European average. Moreover,
the decreasing trend has slowed down in recent years. Incidence i s high in prisons,

32

where the risk o f co-infection between TB and AIDS i s high,
progress has been substantial.

Overall, however,

14.
Given the urgency TB/AIDS represented at the time, the Bank began preparing a
TB/AIDS operation upon Government’s request, almost two years before the CAS4’. The
Bank redesigned the project several times to incorporate government objections,
initiatives and ideas. The Bank acceded to the Government’s request to drop the AIDS
component, once the Global Fund Against Tuberculosis and Malaria (GFATM)
committed i t s support,4’ and to focus on TB control and refurbishment o f primary health
care. The Bank assisted in the preparation o f the application for the GFATM grant. It
also helped to obtain grants to prepare the project, but the government did not use them.42
15.
In early 2004, after issuing three invitations to negotiate, the Government
informed the Bank that the TB Control and Primary Health Care Development project
a 25 percent decrease in the notification rate in the
had lost i t s initial urgency given (i)
period o f 1998-2003, and (ii)
the availability o f sufficient budgetary resources to finance
TB programs and implement the Primary Health Care component. Still, the Government
reiterated during CAS consultations, that the support o f the Bank provided to the
government and the country was critical to advance the programs o f AIDS and TB
control and to implement health reform.
16.
In hindsight, neither the Bank nor the government acted promptly to terminate the
project preparation. On the government’s side, a lack o f consensus between the Cabinet
o f Ministers and the Presidential Administration delayed government decisions. O n i t s
part, the Bank took the delays and redesigns as normal, given that other TB/AIDS
projects in the region facing similar difficulties during preparation were eventually
approved. In addition, the Bank took approval o f the proposed TB/AIDS project as a
s i g n o f government commitment to work together. Perhaps the Bank should have trusted
more the capacity o f the government to work with its own resources and the support
provided by GFATM. The grant was implemented with success and a subsequent grant
was approved.

17.
Environment. The Bank, the Government and NGO representatives, have
maintained a productive dialogue and cooperation on environmental issues with positive
results. The Bank completed a key piece o f ESW “Building Blocks for a Sustainable
Future: A Selective Review of Environment and Natural Resource Management” (June
2002), which provided the basis upon which to build the environment institutions in the
country. The report engaged the Government and local stakeholders in a dialogue on the
l i n k s between the technical aspects o f environmental management and the national policy
framework. It reviewed water, energy, waste and natural resources management-areas
with potential for follow-up by the Bank. QAG rated the report as satisfactory. Based on
this report, the Government in 2004 adopted the Second National Strategy for Sustainable
Development, which places a particular emphasis on mainstreaming environmental
concerns into various sectors o f the economy.
Starting in November 2000.
The G F A T M grant was signed in 2004 for an amount o f US$6.8 million for two years. The grant has
been replenished since i t s completion in 2006.
42 Japan Policy and Human Resources Development (PHRD) grant and a grant from the Swedish
International Development Association (SIDA).
40
41

33
18.
In addition, the Bank supported implementation o f several environmental grants
in line with the recommendations o f Bank environmental ESW. The key was to build
capacity at the national and local levels for a more effective implementation o f the
National Environment Monitoring System and for an improved environmental
performance o f enterprises. The partial achievements include changes in the institutional
framework (rules) and training o f officials and c o m m u n i t i e ~ . ~ ~
19.
The 2001-2003 Global Environment Facility (GEF) Climate Change Enabling
Activity Project (CCEA) helped prepare the first national inventory o f GHG sources and
sinks under an internationally recognized methodology, and helped identify priorities o f
potential vulnerabilities to climate change. The grant also assisted in the preparation o f
the First National Communication, which was judged satisfactorily by the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC). The results o f this project
prepared the country for the ratification o f the Kyoto Protocol in 2005. The government
i s seeking amendment o f Annex B o f the protocol, which would make i t eligible to trade
on carbon emissions.
20.
In December 2003, availing on the advice and technical support o f the Bank,
Belarus acceded the Stockholm Convention on Persistent Organic Pollutants (POPS).
Since that time, the country directed i t s efforts to development o f i t s National
Implementation Plan (NIP) on (POPs) using financial support provided under a GEF
Enabling Activities (EA) grant with the World Bank acting as Implementing Agency.
The N I P has been developed and submitted to the Convention Secretariat providing a
basis for pursuing further GEF support with the World Bank assistance.
Energy eflciency. The country has made good progress in reducing energy
21.
intensity-25 percent lower in 2005 than in 1999. The Bank contributed some effort to
achieving these results through the Social Infrastructure Retrofitting Project, which the
government i s implementing s a t i ~ f a c t o r i l y . ~The
~ project has contributed to a more
efficient use o f energy in schools and hospitals as part o f a broader government
investment program. A Rapid Social Assessment (RSA), initiated during the mid-term
review, confirmed the need for energy efficiency measures in social institutions and
found that as result o f the project interventions, the chosen schools and hospitals have
warmer and better lighted environments. Energy consumption has decreased up to 50
percent in these institutions. Several factors have contributed to the successful
implementation. First, the Bank financed a slice o f a small portion o f the government’s
programs to reduce energy consumption. 45 Second, the Government generally values
engagement with the Bank that provide tangible results, such as reduced energy
43

44

45

These included: (a) IDF Grant for Environmental Enforcement and Compliance Capacity Building
(2001-2003), (b) a Climate Change Enabling Activity (GEF), (c) a POPs Enabling Activity (GEFfinanced), and three Social Infrastructure Retrofitting Project related grants (SIRP) which included
PHRD Climate Change Pilot (approved 2003), an Energy Sector Management Assistance Program
(ESMAP) grant (approved 2004), and a Public Private Infrastructure Advisory Facility (PPIAF) grant
(approved in 2005), to pilot the development o f small-scale electricity generation with private sector
participation.
A greenhouse gas reduction element was added to the on-going SIRP through a PHRD grant o f
US$996,559 for climate change mitigation.
Total energy consumption in the country has not increased since 1997. A decrease o f 25 percent took
place in the ratio o f energy consumption to real GDP from 1997 to 2005.

34
consumption, rather than TA, where the benefits are less obvious and tangible. Third, no
significant structural or policy reforms were required for project implementation.
22.
Lastly, in 2006, the Bank undertook a thorough review o f the energy sector taking
stock o f the current situation and providing the government with some recommendations
to advance in the twin goals o f increasing energy self-reliance and decrease energy
dependency.
23.
Financial Sector. The 2002 CAS stated that the knowledge on the financial sector
was limited. The Bank and IMF undertook jointly the 2004 FSAP and i t s update (2006)
to improve that knowledge. The PER, undertaken jointly with the IMF in 2003,
examined linkages between the financial and fiscal sectors. IFC contributed to the
development o f the financial sector by providing almost $60 million in long-term funding
to Priorbank and Belgazprombank to support their expansion and SME lending
operations. I F C investments in Belgazprombank was accompanied by a tailored advisory
program, helping the client to optimize i t s operations, improve credit underwriting
processes and introduce consistent risk management systems. By focusing on SME
lending, the financial sector investments have allowed IFC to reach a large number o f
private companies while strengthening the country’s financial system. The combined
analytical work shows that although the financial sector i s sound on paper, there are
considerable risks. The F S M states that the key systemic vulnerability for the banking
sector i s the government’s continued support to the state banks, in the form o f both
liquidity and equity. Government recommendations and guarantees continue to guide the
allocation o f bank loans to sectors and enterprises. As long as the Government remains
in a position to promptly honor i t s guarantees and/or to recapitalize the systemically
important banks, the current system can withstand credit, market or liquidity shocks. If,
on the other hand, the government’s fiscal position would limit the possibility o f
providing further support to banks, the current financial sector would not be well
positioned to respond to shocks.
B.

Mitigation o f Social Risks

24.
Chernobyl. The Bank prepared the Chernobyl Review in FY02 in close
coordination with the authorities, civil society and the international community. The
Bank team disseminated the analysis and conclusions broadly. A survey as part o f the
Review, showed that the Chernobyl accident had induced a pessimistic worldview among
the population, both outside and inside the affected areas. The Review called on Belarus
to emphasize economic development in affected areas, where around 20 percent o f the
Belarus population resides, and to streamline social assistance. QAG rated the Chernobyl
Review as highly satisfactory.
25.
The Government restructured the institutional arrangements by eliminating the
Chernobyl Committee and turned i t s successor, the Chernobyl Department in the
Ministry o f Emergencies, from an implementing agency to a coordinating agency. I t
transferred other functions (administration o f cash benefits, recuperation, and agricultural
protection measures) to line ministries and local governments. Consistent with the report,
the Government has announced a new approach to development o f the affected regions
with economic development as a key priority.

35
In April 2006, the WBG approved an operation for US$50 million to support the
26.
Post-Chernobyl Recovery. The project finances energy efficient and reliable heat and hot
water services in affected areas, which are some o f the poorest in the country--Brest,
Gomel and Mogilev Oblasts. Investments in residential gas connections will provide
clean and improved space heating to households that are currently burning wood inside
homes with negative environmental and health consequences. Project implementation
just commenced and hence results are yet to come.
Social Safety Nets. The dialogue on social assistance and social security prior to
27.
and during the CAS, produced positive results because the reform o f social assistance
programs was a priority o f government. An Institutional Development Fund (IDF) Grant,
concluded in June 2003, helped with the design o f a Unified Targeted Social Assistance
(UTSA) system. Simplification o f the social assistance system i s underway, including
the recent decision to rescind the Chernobyl surcharge. A pilot project tested UTSA and
helped prepare the corresponding legislation and r e g u l a t i ~ n .This
~ ~ legislation has now
been approved and i s ready for implementation in 2008. This legislation will help the
government better target social assistance and face rising energy prices, helping the
country maintain both fiscal probity and assure that the poor are protected. Lastly, the
government i s using the advice the Bank provided on the options for pension reform as it
seeks to address the demographic challenge to the system o f social security.

28.
The 2004 Poverty Assessment Report (PAR) took stock o f the evolution o f
poverty since 1995. The Report took a comprehensive view o f poverty incidence and
examined the links with health, education, social protection, and social assistance. The
Report also identified risks to poverty and emphasized sustaining economic growth based
on labor productivity increases to solidify the gains. The Report provided a basis to
develop a system o f poverty monitoring that complements social assistance and social
protection reforms. The system o f poverty monitoring i s in place.
29.
The CAS lending program in the social sectors did not materialize. The program
included several possible operations to support social assistance and social security
reforms. First, the government declined the Social Assistance Learning Innovation Loan
(LIL), programmed for 2002, which was intended to focus on “experimentation o f a new
approach or mechanisms for social
Rather the Government used i t s own
resources and the support o f an IDF grant to test the pilot.48 Second, the authorities chose
not to proceed with the Social Investment Fund (SIF), originally intended for 2004.
Third, the Government informed the Bank that i t would use budgetary resources to
develop and implement the forthcoming social assistance reform and hence that the
intended Social Assistance Project proposed for 2004, would not be needed. A key
lesson from this experience i s that the government i s not interested to borrow for TA.
Health Reform. A Health Policy Note (HPN) (2002) provided the Government
30.
with reform options. Policy dialogue and TA provided during the preparation o f the H P N
helped build the capacity o f the Ministry o f Health and draft a mid-term reform strategy
for health. The internal Bank Quality Assurance Group (QAG) gave the H P N a highly
In addition, the design established a link between the proposed U T S A and the measurement o f poverty
C A S for the period FY02-FY04.
48 Communication to the Bank December 11,2002.
46

4’

36
satisfactory rating. The Government informed the Bank that the recommendations o f the
joint work have been under implementation, especially primary health care reform.
Regretfully, absence o f consensus among key stakeholder groups precluded undertaking
more substantive reforms in clinical and public health managerial practices. Belarus
faces rising health costs and the need to streamline and modernize the delivery o f
services, and take better account o f the impact o f health practices on the poor.
C.

Fostering Private Sector Development

31.
The CAS committed the WBG to assist Belarus in adopting market institutions.
The CAS set triggers to measure progress in improving the business environment and to
access the base case.49 Formally, these triggers were not fully met. The WBG carried
out analytical work, provided TA, and invested selectively. The assistance helped to
improve the diagnostics o f the economy and to strengthen the small but dynamic private
sector. However, progress fell short o f expectations.
32.
The Government had announced in 2003, a policy o f encouraging private sector
participation in manufacturing and facilitating the creation o f new enterprises. T o begin,
the Government simplified the licensing regime. It did not follow through on initial
efforts with measures in business registration and inspections. Certain policies have
slowed down the transition to a market economy. Changes in bankruptcy procedures
blocked the process o f economic restructuring and the reallocation o f resources from the
non-profitable to the more profitable sectors o f the econom In addition, in M a y 2004, a
Presidential Decree extended the scope o f the golden share to include already privatized
companies. Although the impact on the ground o f this measure remains to be seen, i t has
raised considerable concerns, both domestically and abroad. As a result, surveys do not
detect improvements in the business environment. According to Doing Business 2008,
Belarus ranks 110 in the ease o f doing business ahead in the Commonwealth of
Independent States (CIS) region only o f Ukraine Uzbekistan and Tajikistan. O n the other
hand, Doing Business 2008 notes major recent improvements regarding ‘starting a
business” and “protecting investors rights”, where Belarus i s presented as one o f the
reformers in the world over the last year.

i%

33.
The I F C supported private sector development by providing TA and made
investments. From 2002 to 2004, IFC’s advisory work supported the development o f
self-sustainable business associations, which would be capable o f improving the business
environment, protecting the interests o f the business community, and rendering
informational, legal and other services to small- and medium-sized enterprises. Since
2004, IFC has focused i t s advisory efforts on improvement o f the investment climate and
business enabling environment for Small and Medium Enterprises (SMEs). IFC has also
been an active member in the Foreign Investment Advisory Committee (FIAC), which
provides ideas for the government on how to improve the business climate and attract
49

Results on this pillar were part o f the triggers for the base case as follows: “Positive track record in the
implementation o f a credible plan to significantly improve business and investment climate, covering (a)
registration, (b) licensing, (c) inspections and control, (d) exit, and (e) other relevant areas.” “Continued
liberalization o f price controls on goods and services.”
The golden share rule was introduced in Belarus in 1997 and allowed the state to veto shareholders’
decisions on restructuring and liquidation o f enterprises, changing capital, use o f net profits, and
appointment o f managers.

37
Currently, it i s implementing the SIDA//IFC
investments.
Environment Phase I1activity (2007 - 2009).

Business Enabling

34.
I F C investment activity in Belarus also started to expand during the CAS period.
While only one project was signed before 2002 (and cancelled shortly thereafter), IFC
has been investing an average o f US$22 million in Belarus each year between 2002 and
2007. To date, IFC has extended almost US$l10 million worth o f loans for 8 projects
with four different clients. The portfolio i s currently divided almost equally between
financial markets and agribusiness investments. In the agribusiness sector, I F C has
invested in modernization and refurbishment o f Dednovo brewery facilities and
supported the establishment o f a first private juice factory in a market previously
dominated by imports. The poor quality o f the business environment and small private
sector, however, has been a deterrent to a more active role in the country.
35.
Given the limited knowledge o f the workings o f the economy and a performance
that defied the critics, the Count Economic Memorandum (CEM, 2005) sought to shed
light on the Belarusian “puzzle”?; The C E M identified critical gradual reforms that had
fostered growth and noted that certain segments o f the economy are very competitive,
especially in the CIS markets. However, i t concluded that, while economic growth has
been impressive, the strategy that the authorities have been following could erode economic
competitiveness unless two inter-related challenges to strengthen the competitiveness were
met: (i)
imposing stricter market discipline on existing enterprises in order to accelerate
its restructuring and productivity growth at the micro level; and (ii)
encouraging the
expansion o f both new and fully restructured traditional f i r m s that have proven to be
competitive without state support. Finally, the C E M made the point that, despite the
extensive ownership o f productive assets by the state, asset stripping and corruption have
been under control. The C E M was well received by the authorities and civil society.
D.

Transparency in Public Expenditure52

36.
The CAS set triggers on the transparency o f public expenditure for the program to
reach the base case. These triggers focused on the completeness and transparency of the
budget. Major progress was made towards meeting the base case triggers. The proposed
agenda was based on on-going work by the Ministry o f Finance with IMF assistance to
build up a unified Treasury. The Bank, jointly with the IMF, prepared a PER (FY03),
which (a) analyzed fiscal sustainability with emphasis on quasi-fiscal operations and
pension liabilities and (b) undertook a thorough review o f the public expenditure process
and some o f the main expenditure items. The Government, especially the Ministry o f
Finance, participated actively in the preparation o f the PER and the follow-up seminars
and workshops. The PER findings and recommendations were discussed with the
Government and an Action Plan was developed. The Ministry o f Finance could not use
IDF grants to implement the recommendations o f the PER, due to internal regulations
The capacity to maintain good economic progress while retaining a planned and controlled economy with the
sate as the major owner
52 The CAS did not include formally this pillar. The triggers for the base case stated: “Satisfactory progress
in increasing the accountability in the use o f public resources. The 2003 budget to quantify the size o f
quasi-fiscal accounts and eliminate budget resources for line ministries, including the innovation funds.”
The innovation funds would eventually be included in the budget.
”

38
limiting the use o f foreign exchange. Still, the authorities made progress in implementing
the PER recommendations.

37.
The Government undertook steps towards further budget consolidation by
incorporating into the budget major remaining off-budget funds (SPF from 2004, and
sector innovation funds from 2005); treasury coverage has been expanded - regional
budget accounts were incorporated igto the treasury system during 2000-02 and local
budget accounts have been gradually incorporated as well. SPF accounts were
transferred to the Treasury in 2004, and innovation funds were transferred in 2005. The
NBB stopped financing the budget as o f 2004; and the budget classification i s improved.
38.
Upon Government’s request, the Bank provided TA in the drafting o f the Budget
Code, which has already been submitted to the Parliament. The Bank also provided
limited TA in the area o f intergovernmental fiscal relations and expertise o f some
regulatory documents for introduction o f performance-based budgeting. T h i s assistance
has been supporting an increased priority o f the authorities for regional and local
development.
39.
Still, a number o f fiscal weaknesses remain. The overall size o f the government
budget remains large even when compared to other countries in the region. Although
considerably reduced in some sectors (e.g., energy), quasi-fiscal activities continue to be
significant (e.g., state support via directed credits from the banking sector and tax
exemptions). Government interventions in credit allocation remain extremely high.
E.

T h e Bank Civil Society Program

40.
The CAS Civil Society Program, implemented in difficult circumstances,
consisted o f three pillars: (a) coordinating mechanisms to establish continuous contact
with civil society representatives; (b) specific programs targeted to support civil society
representatives, and (c) involvement o f civil society representatives in project preparation
or AAA work, as well as dissemination. The Belarus program also benefited from the
coordination o f activities with other countries, especially with Ukraine and Moldova.
Coordinating Mechanisms. The Bank maintained contact with civil society
41.
through a core team o f civil society organizations serving as an advisory body. The small
contact group (seven to ten representatives) has a wide reach and has assisted the Bank in
the development and implementation o f civil society programs in Belarus.
SpeciJic Programs. The Bank implemented the following: Small Grants Program
42.
(SGP) in 2000-2004; Capacity Building for NGOs and cooperation with local authorities
in February-June 2002; and a decentralized Development Marketplace in 2003. The
activities supported by the SGP were aimed at empowering the development o f small
communities, encouraging partnership across sectors, and facilitating the cooperation
between the civil society and the local authorities. This program serves as a springboard
for starting new NGO initiatives and produced results on the ground.53The complicated
procedures the government introduced for registering grants have reduced the number o f
53

Between 2000 and 2004, the SGP supported 40 projects (out o f 400 applications) with US$200,000. The
grants have covered a wide variety o f areas, including: environment education, business development,
women participation, local self-government, disabled children, etc. Emphasis has been given to
education, dissemination and development o f participatory methods in local communities.

39
In addition, the denial o f tax-exempt
applicants.
implementation. 54

status i s limiting program

43.

Civil Society and Bank Programs.
The Bank involved civil society
representatives during preparation and dissemination o f i t s activities, which was an
important contribution to the quality and effectiveness o f AAA work. Focus o n specific
(technical) issues facilitated the participation o f c i v i l society in the preparation and
dissemination of AAA. The I F C has likewise been involved in building capacity o f
business associations to provide assistance to their members and serve as a voice with the
Government.

44.
Although, government restrictions made the work with c i v i l society organizations
difficult, the experience shows that within the context o f narrow and targeted
interventions, working with c i v i l society organizations can be quite effective, especially
in social and environment areas and working at the local level.
F.

Information Society a n d e-Development Programs

45.
The Bank supported aspirations o f the Government and NGOs in building
information society and e-development programs. In FY03, the Informatization Fund,
under the National Academy o f Sciences, received and successfully implemented a grant
from InfoDev to produce an E-Readiness Assessment and Action Plan. The Belarusian
NGO "Information Society" received a planning grant from the Development Gateway
Foundation; however, it has not been registered, despite continuing perceived support o f
the Cabinet and the Administration o f the President. The Government continues to be
interested in further development o f the e-development agenda.
G.

T h e Base Case Triggers"

46.
The triggers to scale-up assistance focussed o n macroeconomic developments,
The Government
transparency o f public expenditure and business environment.
advanced but did not meet the triggers. In summary, progress was made in improving the
public expenditure practices and achieving macroeconomic stability. However, serious
limitations on the business environment remained by the end o f the CAS. The
transparency and comprehensiveness o f public expenditure, the quality o f the business
environment, and a stable macroeconomic framework, continue to be critical to the
sustainability o f economic growth in Belarus and highly relevant to a more extended
program o f assistance in the country.

54 Four FY03 and three FY04 SGP winners and one decentralized Development Marketplace program were

refused tax-exempt status.

" The base case would be triggered by (i)
maintaining

a satisfactory macroeconomic environment; (ii)
an
adequate track record in improving the business environment, according to a program elaborated jointly
with the Bank, and (iii)
implementing the agreed measures to improve accountability o f public finances.

40
IV.

BANK GROUP PERFORMANCE

A. IBRD and IFC Lending

47.
Only the Chernobyl Recovery project (2006) was approved. As noted, the
preparation o f the TB and HIV/AIDS project took time and resources, but the
government dropped itss6Intended lending to the social sectors did not take place.
48.
Various factors explain the l o w level o f lending. First, the government budget
provided the resources necessary to carry out an investment program o f around 9 percent
o f GDP, making Bank financing marginal. Second, Belarus declined to borrow for TA;
preferring to borrow to finance expenditures that are seen as having a more tangible
benefit or require foreign exchange. Third, cumbersome decision-making reduces the
commitment capacity o f the Government; the Presidential Administration can override
the decisions o f the Prime Minister and Cabinet o f Ministers. The experience during the
preparation o f the TB and AIDS project shows that agreements with government are not
always final. On the contrary, implementation o f the SIRP has performed better because
it did not call for major institutional changes as the TB and AIDS project did. Most o f
the projects in the pipeline did not fit these requirements. Lastly, despite the fact that
most o f the projects in the pipeline did not come through, during CAS consultations, the
authorities expressed their appreciation for the TA the Bank provided.
49.
The only one IFC project that has reached operational maturity shows a positive
development outcome. Other projects are showing preliminary positive results. IFC’s
financial sector investments have contributed to the development o f two important
market players that are currently among the top ten banks in the country by asset size.
These two banks have served as conduits to finance small and medium enterprises.
Agribusiness investments were in line with the goal o f providing post-privatization
support and resulted in a creation o f strong businesses with positive implications for
employment generation and development o f supply chains.
B. IBRD and IFC Advisory Work

50.
Q A G rated as satisfactory the FY00-FY03 AAA program in Belarus57. ”Strategic
Relevance”, “Dialogue and Dissemination”, and “Bank Inputs and Processes” were rated
as highly satisfactory. QAG highlighted the emphasis the country program placed on
AAA, noting that 40.1 percent o f country services and direct costs went for AAA,
compared to 24 percent for Bank-wide average and to 26.4 percent for ECA-wide
averages. QAG commended emphasis on dialogue and communications, which enhanced
the role o f the Bank as an interlocutor in Belarus on a broad range o f policy issues. QAG,
however, rated the likely impact only as marginally satisfactory, pointing to the scarcity
o f “meaningful and sustainable changes in government policy, spending and investment
programs, project design and undertaking deep structural reforms.” Q A G cautioned
against high expectations. However, it encouraged the government to maintain at least a
modest AAA program.
Expenditures under the TBiAIDS project absorbed 89 percent o f the resources allocated for project
preparation during the CAS period-FY02-04. Project preparation cost o f over US$400,000, compared
to the average preparation costs for dropped projects o f around US$24 1,000 in the ECA region. This
suggests that the project should have been dropped earlier.
57 Quality o f ESW in FY02: A Q A G Assessment, April 16,2003
56

41

5 1.
Table 1 in Appendix B lists the pieces o f analytical work completed by the Bank
during the CAS period. It should be reiterated that QAG rated as highly satisfactory the
Chernobyl and the Health Reports. All o f the analytical work was prepared in
collaboration with Government. The Bank discussed the conclusions with the authorities.
The Bank’s analytical work i s a principal source o f public information on economic and
social developments in Belarus. The ability o f the Bank to carry out a more permanent
dialogue and provide technical advice was curtailed by the limitations on the
implementation o f grants, as the authorities could not utilize all o f the resources
available.
52.
Despite the challenging environment, IFC’s advisory operations succeeded in
achieving some important results positioning the corporation as a trusted and reliable
source of expertise. The results o f IFC’s work with business associations between 2002
and 2004 included a 54 percent increase in membership o f the partner business
associations and the adoption o f nine amendments to improve business-related
legislation. Advisory work after 2004 has focused on reducing regulatory burden on
SMEs and boosting SME access to information and business support services through a
dedicated on-line resource. To better assess the Belarus business environment, two
nationwide SME Surveys were conducted to identify primary obstacles for businesses,
monitor changes, provide analysis and make recommendations for improvement.
53.
The most significant results were attained in the regulatory areas o f business
registration and permits. Partnering with the Ministry o f Justice, a one-stop shop for
business registration was introduced as well as a reduction in the notary fees payable by
SMEs for registration. This in turn led to a 58 percent reduction in the cost o f registration
and a 27 percent decline in i t s time duration. The estimated annual cost savings amount
to over US$3.4 million per year for SMEs, primarily from improvements in business
registration.
54.
The recognition o f Belarus by Doing Business 2008 as the top 10 reformer in the
category o f Starting a Business could be attributed to IFC’s work with the Ministry o f
Justice. IFC’s extensive advocacy work on business permits reform at the sub-national
level has elevated the necessity o f permits reform to the national agenda. I t s dedicated
on-line resource (www.bel.biz) has become one o f the most popular business information
sites in Belarus, attracting 2,500 visitors per day and over 600,000 visitors since i t s
launch on May 3 1,2005.
C. Portfolio Performance

55.
Only one project, the SIRP, has been fully under implementation during the CAS
period. Implementation has proceeded without complications, although the pace has
been slower than expected. Implementation capacity is adequate and it helps that the
project i s fully aligned with the national investment program. Implementation o f the
Chernobyl project has just begun.

42

D. Working with Partners
56.
The IMF. T h e IMF and Bank have worked closely and effectively in Belarus
during this CAS period. The two institutions cooperated in the preparation o f the PER.
The IMF was active in providing TA in tax policy (2003); fiscal reports on the Reports o f
Observance o f Standards and Codes (ROSC), 2003; budget code and budget classification
(2004); technical aspects o f the currency union (2003); bank supervision and bank
restructuring (2003); balance o f payments statistics (2003); data report on the ROSC
(2004), and the Anti-Money LaunderingKombating the Finances o f Terrorism
(AMWCFT) legislation. T h i s TA was appreciated by the Government. The annual
Article IV Reports have provided valuable information and evaluation o f the performance
and perspectives o f the Belarus economy. The Government does not have an interest in a
stand-by or other financing facility from the IMF.
57.
The European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD). The EBRD
maintained a limited engagement in Belarus, with 11 investment projects covering
energy, transport, telecoms, communications, general industry and banking, for a total
commitment o f EUR203.3 million. The new strategy, approved in December 2006,
focuses on operations in the private sector where investments can have the greatest
impact in developing a dynamic and entrepreneurial class. At the same time, EBRD
remains ready to expand its operations outside the private sector, should domestic
circumstances allow. The strategy identified clear and measurable, political and
economic benchmarks that the Bank will monitor regularly and specified the operational
response that could follow in the event o f significant progress. The WBG, through the
IFC, has coordinated i t s work with that o f the EBRD as the two agendas are quite
complementary.
58.
European Union (EU). Belarus now borders the EU. Due to the failure to
comply international democratic commitments made by Belarus as a member o f the
Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE), the EU has not negotiated
an agreement with Belarus in the context o f the ENP.
V.

LESSONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS

The majority of the key results set under the CAS to measure success were met.
59.
The CAS put forth six indicators by which to access progress. These are:

0

0

Improved fiscal transparency measured by enhancing budget coverage, including
reporting and auditing o f all o f the off-budget funds;
Containment o f the TB and AIDS epidemic;
Enhanced compliance with international environmental standards;
Introduction o f a targeted system o f social protection;
Better business environment as evidenced by surveys; and
Active civil society participation in the country’s life.

60.
This review o f the program shows that progress made in these areas has been
mixed. Progress was made in containing TB and AIDS and compliance with
environment norms. Some improvements was made in fiscal transparency and targeting

43
o f social assistance and provide a good basis for future progress. Belarus’ business
environment remains highly constrained and much more progress could have been made.
The I F C had an impact helping the small but dynamic private sector with finance and
technical advice, but intended actions to facilitate entry o f new enterprises did not occur.
The productive sectors continue to operate under soft budget constraints blocking the
needed reallocation o f resources. I t i s in regards to the participation o f civil society
where results have fallen short o f objectives.

61.
The WBG contributed to the achievement of these results through its analytical
work and TA. The good quality o f the AAA, the involvement o f local partners and the
efforts at dissemination contributed to having an impact. The absence o f lending
operations did not diminish the effectiveness o f the advice, as the government allocated
its o w n resources or obtained grants from other sources, as was the case o f TB and AIDS.
The only project under implementation-SIRP-contributed
to increase the energy
efficiency in schools and hospitals as well as to improve the operating environment for
students and patients.
The decision to postpone preparation of the CAS proved adequate. The mutual
62.
decision o f the authorities and the Bank to postpone preparation o f a new CAS until
approval o f the Chernobyl project and the completion o f the key analytical work-CEM
and FSAP-proved correct. The approval o f the Chernobyl project dispelled concerns
that i t was incredibly difficult to prepare operations in the country as long as they align
with country priorities and focus on hard investments. At the same time, the analytical
work has provided a clearer understanding o f the Belarus puzzle, the capacity o f the
economy to compete and to deal with the energy price shocks.
The Bank can continue to play an important role in Belarus. Belarus faces
63.
major challenges ahead as the energy prices increase and pressures mount to be more
competitive and deliver higher incomes. As the country adjusts to the emerging
circumstances, good policy and quick actions will be needed to avoid hardship among the
population as the funds for social assistance are tightening and inefficient companies
need to shed labor to compete. In addition, the situation o f the Chernobyl areas continues
to require attention and improving the environment continue to be a national and
international priority. Belarus has a rich ecosystem, with extensive marshes and forests,
whose preservation means gains for the region. The quality o f water also benefits the
country and their neighbors. In these circumstances, the Bank can continue to play a
cautious but positive role building on the lessons o f the past.

64.
To be effective the WBG must align its program with Governmentpriorities that
fall within its mandate. WBG engagement-TA, analytical work and lending-will be
more effective if aligned with government priorities. Proposals o f drastic policy changes
are not likely to be effective as all recent evidence and dialogue suggests that the
authorities are only willing to very partially implement reforms proposed by the Bank
and others. I t continues to be the case, as pointed out in the CAS, that there i s “little to be
gained by pushing the policy dialogue (and conditionality) beyond what the Government
can consider part o f i t s own program.” However, given the significant distortions in the
economy and limited transparency, the WBG, while remaining within i t s mandate, can
s t i l l take an advocacy position in areas i t deems relevant to national economic and social
development objectives. Meanwhile, IFC should continue to respond to the needs o f i t s

44
primary stakeholder-the private sector-through
investments, where possible.

provision o f advisory services and

65.

Quality AAA is a prerequisite for a solid dialogue with Government and to
effective advocacy. The Bank should continue to emphasize AAA in critical areas to
increase the knowledge base and to provide policy options to the Government. Bank
work has to be timely, especially in regard to the impact o f the external economic shocks,
the competitiveness o f the economy, the efficiency o f public expenditure, energy
efficiency, and the commitment to a better environment. It can raise awareness o f the
options available to face emerging challenges. The Bank has been effective in
dissemination efforts and should emphasize these even more.

66.
Maintain presence in lending. Although the scope for lending i s narrow, lending
should continue to be an instrument o f Bank engagement. Belams knows well how to
implement programs and although fiduciary matters require continuous vigilance, they
are not today a subject o f significant concern. The government program includes projects
with direct impact on the poor or with substantial national and regional benefits. Past
experience shows that when lending slows down, there i s a spill-over effect on other
types o f engagement (TA, policy dialogue, G A C support, civil society outreach).

67.
Work with others. In difficult policy areas, for example, business environment
and regulation, the WBG should j o i n forces with other IFIs such as the EBRD, IMF and
other bilateral donors with significant programs in the country.

1

45
APPENDIX A

THE LENDING PROGRAM

Table 1: IBRD Projects Approved in FY 2001-2006
I

Project

Social
Infrastmctu
re
Retrofitting
Pro’ect
PostChernobyl
Recovery
Overs Result

Approval
Date

Effective
Date

Commitment
Amount

Project Preparation
BB costs

=

6/5/200 1

418.8

+100
11/08/2006

72.6

Table 2: IBRD Projects Dropped in FY 2001-2004

F

Project

Approval
Date

3/7/2003
2003 SOC Asst LIL
2004 TB & Prim Health Care 3/10/2004
2004 Social Sector TA
7/21/2003
Overall Result

16
14

12
10

g s
I

3

6
4
2
0

620.4

Project Preparation BB
costs
(US$ thousand)

Commitment
Amount
(US$ million)

5 .O
26.8
10.0
41.8

52.7
419.5
0
472.2

Table 3: Gross Disbursements of the IBRD Loans by Fiscal Year
Figure 1: IBRD Net Flows by Fiscal Years
IBRO and IM Net Flows

201.6

I

I

Gross Disbursements
(us$million)

f i l
2003

2004
2005
2006
Total

0.66
4.7
5.89
25.55

I

46
Table 4: IFC Lending
Year

Project Name

2003

1 1719-Priorbank

2004

20 141- Detroit Belarus Brewing Company (DBBC)

2005

20 141- Detroit Belarus Brewing Company (DBBC)

2005

22652-Belgazprombank

2005

23848-Reifeizen (RZB) Priorbank

I 2005 I 2385 1- Belarus Brewing Company (BBC)

1 1

Project
Status

Department
Financial
Markets

Total Net
Commitment

ACTIVE

14.0

Agribusiness

ACTIVE

10.0

Agribusiness

ACTIVE

(7.0)

ACTIVE

5 .O

ACTIVE

20.0

Financial
Markets
Financial
Markets

I Agribusiness I ACTIVE I

I

I

7.0

2005

24275-Priorbank11

Financial
Markets

2006

2492 1-BBC increased 2

Agribusiness

ACTIVE

2.0

2006

24995-DBBC Rights Issue

Agribusiness

ACTIVE

0.5

2007

25 113-Detroit Invest

Agribusiness

ACTIVE

35.0

ACTIVE

I 2007 1 25447- Detroit Belarus Juice Company (DBJC) I Agribusiness I A C T I V E I
I

Belarus Total

I

I

20.0

2.0
108.5

47
APPENDIX B

ECONOMIC AND SECTOR WORK
Table 5: IBRD E S W Delivered in FY 2001-2007

FY

Title

FY02 Environmental Strategy Update
Health Policy Note
Chernobyl Review
FY03 Private Sector Bus Assessment
PER
FY04 Poverty Assessment
FY05 C E M
Non-Banking Financial Inst Assessment
FSAP
FY07 Energy Sector Update
Overall Result

Date
3/14/2002
5/29/2002
5/28/2002
1/31/2003
1/24/2003
5/24/2004
11/03/2005
03/30/2006
11/08/2005
11/06/2006

Cost (BB)
(in US$ thousand)
151
150
267
182
215
236
293
22
254
92
1862

Table 6: I F C Advisory W o r k (Programmatic)
Business Line - Sub area

Project ID

Project Name

Status

FY

532983

Belarus Business
Enabling
Environment
Project

Closed

2005

Business Enabling
Environment - BEE Policy,
Regulation and Institutions;

548425

Belarus Business
Enabling
Environment
Phase 2

Active

2007

Business Enabling
Environment - BEE
Diagnostic and M&E;BEE
Policy, Regulation and
Institutions;

508 134

Belarus Business
Associations
Closed
Capacity Building
Project

2002

Business Enabling
Environment

48
APPENDIX C
RESULTS MATRIX
STRATEGIC
OBJECTIVES

the TB and AIDS
epidemic

Comply with
international
environment
commitments

Reduce Energy
intensity and increase
self-reliance.

COUNTRY
PROGRESS

BANK
PERFORMANCE

TheBank advised on the
design o f the TB and
AIDS strategy. The
advice helped design the
government strategy and
obtain international grantbased hnding. The
Government has
Progress on TB i s such acknowledged the
relevance and timeliness
that now Belarus
o f the Bank advice.
outperforms CIS
neighbors; though still
The government
above EU average.
terminated preparation of
the Bank project on TB
and AIDS. Preparation of
this project absorbed
resources that could have
gone to alternative uses.
Bank analytical work
Environment.
provided a basis for the
Progress made in
building up the quality government to draft an
environment strategy.
environment
institutions. The
country i s now
signatory to the Kyoto The Bank engaged in a
productive dialogue with
Protocol, but
the authorities and
ratification o f the
involved civil society
amendment by the
organizations.
parties i s needed for
the country to start
benefiting from it.
C i v i l society
involvement in the
area o f environment
has broadened the
dialogue and helped
strengthen institutions.
The project SIRP
Energy Efficiency
The country has made contributed to increase
major progress in
energy efficiency in
schools and hospitals and
improving energy
improve the
efficiency. Energy
environmental conditions
intensity in 2005 was
(lighting and heating) for
25 percent lower than
students and patients.
in 1999.

TB/AIDS.
Outstanding progress
in fencing o f f the
AIDS threat.
Incidence in Belarus i s
now at the level o f the
EU average.

Bank analytical work

OVERALL
ASSESSMENT&KEY
LESSONS

The Bank should have
trusted more the
commitment and capacity o f
the authorities to face the
twin TB and AIDS
challenge. Had they done so
they could have shifted
assistance to other areas.

Project design should not
seek major institutional
changes.
The country needs to remain
vigilant despite the
substantive progress.
Government leadership,
national interest, civil
society participation and
international support have
helped improve institutions
supporting a better
environment.

The Bank’s l o w key
approach to assistance has
been effective and provides
the basis for scale-up
assistance in an area critical
for the well being o f
Belarus.

49
STRATEGIC
OBJECTIVES

COUNTRY
PROGRESS

Financial sector. The
parameters o f the
financial sector are
sound, but there are
considerable concerns
about the risks
deriving from
mandated government
loans and public sector
euarantees.
B Mitigation of Social Ssks
Ameliorate life o f the
The Government
population living in
maintained i t s
the affected areas and commitment to
improve the welfare o f
provide them with
inhabitants in the
greater economic
Chernobyl affected
opportunities
areas. I t reformed the
supporting
institutional
framework with
greater emphasis on
economic
development.
Chernobyl programs
have been streamlined
into regular
government programs.
The Government has
piloted targeted social
assistance
mechanisms.

Good financial sector
performance and
reduce risks

C. Fostering Private
Sector Development

Legislation that
facilitates streamlining
o f social assistance
programs to improve
targeting has been
approved. (2007)
The authorities
implemented pilots
intended to create
options in the reform
o f the health care
sector, primarily basic
health.
Despite rapid
economic growth o f
around 8 Dercent ma.

BANK
PERFORMANCE
(2006) examined choices
to further reduce energy
intensity and increase
self-reliance.
The Bank and the IMF
conducted an FSAP,
including an update.

QAG graded the
Chernobyl Review (2002)
highly satisfactory and
the international
community lauded it.
The Bank continued
support with the approval
o f a Post Chernobyl
Recovery project (2006).

OVERALL
ASSESSMENTLQKEY
LESSONS

The status o f the financial
sector continues to be a
matter o f concern.

Concerns with the
consequences o f the
Chernobyl accident remain
high, both with the
population lining in the
affected areas and the
country as a whole.

Social Assistance LIL
(2002) and grants assisted
the authorities in
redesigning the system o f
social assistance to
improve targeting to the
poor.)

Improving the efficiency o f
public expenditure so as to
reduce the absorption o f
resources by the public
sector remains a priority in
Belarus.

The Bank provided
reform options in health
based on analytical work,
which the Q A G gave the
highest rate.

Vested interests stand on the
way o f reforms to increase
the effectiveness o f the
social sectors.

The IFC has maintained a
permanent and active
Dresence throueh

Competitiveness remains
m e o f the key challenges for
Belarus. The Drivate sector

50
STRATEGIC
OBJECTIVES

COUNTRY
PROGRESS

BANK
PERFORMANCE

on average, the
participation o f the
private sector in the
GDP remains around
10 percent.
The government
policies to encourage
private sector
development have
moved back and
fonvard.

financing and investment
to foster private sector
development, especially
the SME. The IFC has
coordinated with the
EBRD that follows a
similar strategy.

Still, the small private
sector has proven
sturdy, generating 25
percent o f total
employment.

D. Transparency in
Public Expenditure

Overall, the major
changes the CAS
expected did not take
place.
Belarus has made
progress in broadening
the coverage o f the
budget and the
treasury as well as the
classification.

OVERALL
ASSESSMENT&KEY
LESSONS
i s likely to play an
increasing role; this,
however, w i l l require
significant institutional
changes that may not come
about smoothly.

The Development Policy
Review (CEM, (2006)
analyzed growth
performance in Belarus
and evaluated option for
continued productivity
increases and capacity to
withstand shocks.

The PER provided the
GOBwith a review o f i t s
budgetary practices and
main fiscal risks. The
GOBhas utilized this
framework in their efforts
to improve the existing
system.

Major strides are needed to
improve the efficiency o f
public sector expenditure
and release resources for
investment.

44

0

Y

e,
o

v)

.r(

4,

0

5;
n

9

r-

t
..5
3

9
5

Page 1 of 3

Belarus a t a alance

9/28/07

Key Development Indicators
(2006)

Belarus

Europe 8
Central
Asia

Lower
middle
income

9.7
208
-0.6
73

460
24,114
0.0
64

2,276
26,549
0.9
47

33.8
3,470
8,810

2,206
4,796
9,662

4,635
2,037
7,020

9.9
10.6

6.8
6.8

8.8
7.9

c2
c2
68
10

1
10
69
28
5

71
31
13
93
85
117
114
81
55

Age distribution, 2006
Female

Population, mid-year (miilions)
Surface area (thousand sq. km)
Population growth (%)
Urban population (% of total population)
GNI (Atlas method, US$ billions)
GNI per capita (Atlas method, US$)
GNI per capita (PPP, international $)
GDP growth (%)
GDP per capita growth (%)
(most recent estimate, 2000-2006)
Poverty headcount ratio at $1 a day (PPP, %)
Poverty headcount ratio at $2 a day (PPP, %)
Life expectancy at birth (years)
Infant mortality (per 1,000 live births)
Child malnutrition (% of children under 5)
Adult literacy, male (% of ages 15 and older)
Adult literacy, female (% of ages 15 and older)
Gross primary enrollment, male (% of age group)
Gross primary enrollment, female (% of age group)

103
100

99
96
103
100

Access to an improved water source (% of population)
Access to improved sanitation facilities (% of population)

100
84

92
85

I

10

15

1980

(US$ mi/lions)
Net ODA and official ald
Top 3 donors (in 2005):
Germany
Sweden
Poland
Aid (% of GNi)
Aid per capita (US$)

1990

2000

187

40

0.3
4

1.0
I8

Under-5 mortality rate (per 1,000)

2006 a

I"1

L
0 Europe 8 Central Asia

54

Growth of GDP and GDP per caplta (%)

14
6
4

2o

-20

1

85

90

168.6
185.3

7.0
10.8

717.1
100

2,144.6
124

10.0
12,737

9.7
36,945

103.6

Exchange rate (annual average, local per US$)
Terms of trade index (2000 = 100)

Population, mid-year (millions)
GDP (US$ millions)

T

0.2
5

Long-Term Economic Trends
Consumer prices (annual % change)
GDP implicit deflator (annual % change)

0.0

9.6

10.2
17.370

-0-GDP

05

W

-

GDP per capita

1980-90 1990-2000
2000-06
(average annual growth %)

0.6

-0.2
-1.6

-0.5
a. 1

Agriculture
Industry
Manufacturing
Services

(77 of GDP)
23.5
47.1
39.2
29.4

14.2
39.2
31.6
46.7

9.3
42.0
32.8
48.7

-4.0
-I
.a
-0.7
-0.4

6.5
11.5
11.6
6.1

Household final consumption expenditure
General gov't final consumption expenditure
Gross capital formation

47.4
23.8
26.5

58.6
19.5
25.4

53.9
19.9
30.4

-0.7
-1.9
-7.5

10.1
1.2
15.4

Exports of goods and services
imports of goods and services
Gross savings

46.0
43.6
28.8

69.2
72.4
23.0

59.9
64.2
26.3

-4.8
-8.7

8.1
10.9

Note: Figures in italics are for years other than those specified. 2006 data are preliminary.
a. Aid data are for 2005.
Development Economics, Development Data Group (DECDG)

10

percent

0 Belarus

Net Aid Flows

5

0

5

.. indicates data are not available.

Page 2 of 3

Belarus
Balance of Payments and Trade
(US$ millions)
Total merchandise exports (fob)
Total merchandise imports (cif)
Net trade in goods and services

2000

2006

Governance indicators, 2000 and 2006

7,331
8,646
-446

19,739
22,323
-1,566

139

370

Regulatory quality

Current account balance
as a % of GDP

-338
-2.7

-1,512
-4.1

Rule of iaw

Reserves, including gold

357

1,363

Workers' remittances and
compensation of employees (receipts)

Voice and accountability
Political stability

Control of corruption

Central Government Finance
(% of GDP)
Current revenue (including grants)
Tax revenue
Current expenditure
Overall surplus/deficit

44.2
40.8
35.3

48.2
45.7
37.2

0.2

1.4

Highest marginal tax rate (%)
Individual
Corporate

External Debt and Resource Flows
(US$ millions)
Total debt outstanding and disbursed
Total debt service
Debt relief (HIPC, MDRI)

25

0

Dl 2006

I

50

75

1w

Country's percentile rank (0-100)

2000

higher values imply better ratings

Source: Kaufmann-Kraay-Mastruzzl, Wodd Bank

Technology and Infrastructure

2000

2005

Paved roads (% of total)
Fixed line and mobile phone
subscribers (per 1,000 people)
High technology exports
(% of manufactured exports)

95.6

67.0

280

755

3.7

2.6

45
37.8

43
38.0
6.3

Environment
2,140
369

4,734
6 79

Total debt (% of GDP)
Total debt service (% of exports)

16.8
4.7

15.7
3.7

Freshwater resources per capita (cu. meters)
Freshwater withdrawal (% of internal resources)

7.5

Foreign direct investment (net inflows)
Portfolio equity (net inflows)

119
1

305
f

C 0 2 emissions per capita (mt)

5.9

6.3

GDP per unit of energy use
(2000 PPP $ per kg of oil equivalent)

2.0

2.4

2,460

2,725

IBRD
Total debt Outstanding and disbursed
Disbursements
Principal repayments
Interest payments

105
6
14
6

50
5
15
3

IDA
Total debt outstanding and disbursed
Disbursements
Total debt service

0
0
0

0
0
0

0
0
0

60
60
24

0

3

0
0

23
0

-

-

Composltion of total external debt, 2005

Agricultural land (% of land area)
Forest area (% of land area)
Nationally protected areas (% of land area)

Energy use per capita (kg of oil equivalent)

3,805

Bilateral 485 037

(US$ millions)

Pnvate 884 614

3503 1

US$ millions

Private Sector Development
Time required to start a business (days)
Cost to start a business (% of GNI per capita)
Time required to register properly (days)
Ranked as a major constraint to business
(% of managers surveyed who agreed)
Access tolcost of financing
Economic and regulatory policy uncertainty
Stock market capitalization (% of GDP)
Bank capital to asset ratio (%)

2000

-

..

2006

69
26.1
231

..

29.5
23.3

15.1

20.5

IFC (fiscal year)
Total disbursed and outstanding portfolio
of which IFC own account
Disbursementsfor IFC own account
Portfolio sales, prepayments and
repayments for IFC own account
MiGA
Gross exposure
New guarantees

Note: Figures in italics are for years other than those specified. 2006 data are preliminary.
.. indicates data are not available. -indicates observation is not applicable.
Development Economics, Development Data Group (DECDG).

9/28/07

Page 3 of 3

Millennium Development Goals

Belarus

With selected targets to achieve between 1990 and 2015

(estimate closest to date shown, +/- 2 years)

Goal 1: halve the rates for $1 a day poverty and malnutrition
Poverty headcount ratio at $1 a day (PPP, % of population)
Poverty headcount ratio at national poverty line (% of population)
Share of income or consumption to the poorest qunitile (%)
Prevalence of malnutrition(% of children under 5)
Goal 2: ensure that children are able to complete primary schooling
Primary school enrollment (net, %)
Primary completion rate (% of relevant age group)
Secondary school enrollment (gross, %)
Youth literacy rate (% of people ages 15-24)

I990
<2

I995
<2

10.4

9.5

86
82
95
100

Goal 3: eliminate gender disparlty in education and empower women
Ratio of girls to boys in primary and secondary education (%)
Women employed in the nonagriculturalsector (% of nonagricultural employment)
Proportion of seats held by women in national parliament (%)
Goal 4: reduce under-5 mortality by two-thirds
Under-5 mortality rate (per 1,000)
Infant mortality rate (per 1,000 live births)
Measles immunization(proportion of one-year olds immunized, %)

93

Goal 7 : halve the proportion of people without sustainable access to basic needs
Access to an improved water source (% of population)
Access to improved sanitation facilities (% of population)
Forest area (% of total land area)
Nationally protected areas (% of total land area)
C02 emissions (metric tons per capita)
GDP per unit of energy use (constant 2000 PPP $ per kg of oil equivalent)
Goal 8: develop a global partnership for development
Fixed line and mobile phone subscribers (per 1,000 people)
Internet users (per 1,000 people)
Personal computers (per 1,000 people)
Youth unemployment (% of total labor force ages 15-24)

I

Educatlon lndlcators (%)

:j

0

Measles immunization (%of I-year olds)

,

2
m

+Primary
+Ratio

,
2w2

,

,

,
2,326

net enrollment ratio

of girls to boys in primary 8
secondary education

,

Note: Figures in italics are for years other than those specified.
Development Economics, Development Data Group (DECDG).

0 Europe 8 Central Asia

.. indicates data are not available.

89
100
95

102
56
5

100
56
29

19
16
94

20
17
93

16
14
98

12
10
99

35
100

100

50
54

38

0.3
73

62
46

100
83

100
83
37.8

10.6
1.2

6.2
1.4

5.9
2.0

100
84
38.0
6.3
6.3
2.4

154
0

194
0

280
19

755
347

100
35.6

ICT Indicators (per 1,000 people)

L
DBeiarus

93
99
85
100

56

1
,

2005

56

Goal 5: reduce maternal mortality by three-fourths
Maternal mortality ratio (modeled estimate, per 100,000 live births)
Births attended by skilled health staff (% of total)
Goal 6 : halt and begin to reverse the spread of HlVlAlDS and other major diseases
Prevalence of HIV (% of population ages 15-49)
Contraceptive prevalence (% of women ages 15-49)
Incidence of tuberculosis (per 100,000 people)
Tuberculosis cases detected under DOTS (%)

2000
<2
41.9
8.5

n

Fixed + mobile subscribers
EI Internet users

9i 28/ 07

-

CAS Annex B2 Belarus
Selected Indicators* of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
As Of Date 0911812007

indicator
Portfolio Assessment
Number of Projects Under Implementation a
Average Implementation Period (years)
Percent of Problem Projects by Number
Percent of Problem Projects by Amount a,
Percent of Projects at Risk by Number a , d
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount
Disbursement Ratio (%)
Portfolio Management
CPPR during the year (yeslno)
Supervision Resources (total US$)
Average Supervision (US$/project)
Memorandum Item
Proj Eva1 by OED by Number
Proj Eva1 by OED by Amt (US$ millions)
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Number
YOof OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt

a.
b.
c.
d.
e.

2005

2006

2007

2008

1
4.1
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
23.1

2
2.6
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
37.7

2
3.6
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
12.6

2
3.8
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
4.0

no

no

no

no

Since FY 80

5
158.0
40.0
94.9

Last Five FYs
0
0.0
0.0
0.0

As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY).
Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio.
Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) and/or implementation progress (IP).
As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the
beginning of the year: Investment projects only.
All indicators are for projects active in the Portfolio, with the exception of Disbursement Ratio,
which includes all active projects as well as projects which exited during the fiscal year.

-

CAS Annex B3 IBRDADA Program Summary

Belarus

As Of Date 0911812007

Proposed IBRDllDA Base-Case Lending Program
Fiscal year
2008

Proj ID

US$(M)

Integrated Water Supply

50.0

Result

65.0

SOC. INF RETROFIT - ADDL FINANCING

Overall Result

Strategic Rewards b
(H/M/L)

Implementation b
Risks (H/M/L)

15.0
65.0

a. This table presents the proposed program for the next three fiscal years.
b. For each project, indicate whether the strategic rewards and implementation risks are expected to be high (H), moderate
(M), or low (L).
Template created on 11/06/2007.

Annex B3
Belarus: IFC Investment Operations Program
2005

2006

5.00
5.00

2.52
2.52

100
100

Net Commitments bv Investment Instrument (%)
Equity
Loan
100
Total
100

Commitments (US$m)
Gross
Net**
Net Commitments bv Sector (%)
EQUITY
LOAN
Total

2007

2008*

20.53
79.47
100

0

0

20.53
79.47
100

0

0

26.8

20.1

18.4

* As of Aug 29,2007
** IFC's Own Account only
MlGA Outstanding Exposure (Gross Exposure, $ m)
As of end of fiscal year
28.5

Annex 84

-

-

CAS Annex 8 4 Summary of Nonlending Services Belarus
Product

As Of Date 09/18/2007

Completion FY

Cost (US$OOO)

Recent completions

Environmental Strategy Update
Health Policy Note
Chernobyl Review
Private Sector Bus. Assessment
PER
Poverty Assessment
CEM
Non-Banking Fin. Inst. Assessment
FSAP
Energy Sector Update

FY02
FY02
FY02
FY03
FY03
FY04
FY05
FY05
FY05
FY07

Total

a. Government, donor, Bank, public dissemination.
b. Knowledge generation, public debate, problem-solving.

151,000
150,000
267,000
182,000
215,000
236,000
293,000
22,000
254,000
92,000
1,862,000

Audience a

Objective

Annex 85

Belarus Social Indicators
Latest single year

POPULATION
Total population, mid-year (millions)
Growth rate (% annual average for period)
Urban population (% of population)
Total fertility rate (births per woman)

Same regionlincome group
LowermiddleIncome

1980-85

1990-95

1999-2005

Europe &
Central
Asia

10.0
0.7
61.8
2.1

10.2
0.0
68.0
1.4

9.8
-0.4
72.2
1.2

471.8
-0.1
63.7
1.6

2,474.6
I.o
49.5
2.1

4,143
127

1,923
131

POVERTY
(% of population)
National headcount index
Urban headcount index
Rural headcount index

41.9

INCOME
GNI per capita (US$)
Consumer price index (2000=100)
Food price index (2000=100)

1,370
2
2

2,760
384
268

21.6
10.8
33.0

29.7
8.5
38.3

5.7

4.6
6.0

4.5
4.4

2.6
4.3

86
88
84

89
91
88

91
92
90

93
94
93

100
100
100

100
100
100

92
99
80

82
94
71

93
96

99
99

96
95
5

86
86
12

71
67
76

68
63
74

68
63
74

69
65
74

71
68
73

20
23

17
20

10
12

27
32

31
39

255
95

254
98

357
128
35
100

320
136
58
94

176
111
163
86

lNCOME/CONSUMPTlON DISTRIBUTION
Gini index
Lowest quintile (% of income or consumption)
Highest quintile (YOof income or consumption)
SOCIAL INDICATORS
Public expenditure
Health (%of GDP)
Education (% of GDP)
Net primary school enrollment rate
(% of age group)
Total
Male
Female
Access to an Improved water source
(% of population)
Total
Urban
Rural
Immunization rate
(% of children ages 12-23 months)
Measles
DPT
Child malnutrition (% under 5 years)
Life expectancy at birth
(years)
Total
Male
Female
Mortality
Infant (per 1,000 live births)
Under 5 (per 1,000)
Adult (15-59)
Male (per 1,000 population)
Female (per 1,000 population)
Maternal (modeled, per 100,000 live births)
Births attended by skilled health staff (%)

Note: 0 or 0.0 means zero or less than half the unit shown. Net enrollment rate: break in series between 1997 and 1998 due to
change from ISCED76 to ISCED97. Immunization: refers to children ages 12-23 months who received vaccinations before one
year of age or at any time before the survey.

-

World Development Indicators database, World Bank 27 April 2007.

Annex B6
Page 1 of 2

-

Belarus Key Economic Indicators

Indicator
National accounts (as YOof GDP)

Actual
2004
2005

2003

100
10

Industry

100
10
39

Services

51

Total Consumption
Gross domestic fixed investment
Government investment
Private investment

Estimate
2007

2006

41

100
10
42

100
9
42

100
9
41

49

48

49

79
24
4
20

78
25
4
22

71
27
4
23

E X P O ~ ~(GNFS)”
S

Imports (GNFS)

65
69

68
74

Gross domestic savings

21

Gross national savings‘

22
17825

Projected
2009
2010

2008

2011

100
8

100
8

100
8

100
7

50

38
54

36
56

34
58

33
60

74
28
3
25

81
26
7
19

81
26
6
20

80
26
6
21

80
27
22

79
27
5
22

60
59

60
64

58
67

61
70

63
72

65
73

67
75

22

29

26

24

3Q

26

19
21

19
21

20
21

20
21

21
22

23142

30210

36945

43052

45600

47852

48941

49046

1610

2150

2780

3470

4200

4730

5130

5330

5440

Real annual growth rates (%, calculated from 00 prices)
Gross domestic product at market prices
7.0
10.5
Gross Domestic Income

11.4
13.0

9.4
18.0

9.9
3.9

7.8
-2.2

6.4
2.1

5.7
2.7

5.2
3.8

4.8
4.0

Real annual per capita growth rates (“h,calculated from 00 prices)
7.6
12.0
Gross domestic product at market prices
Total consumption
6.7
11.9
8.4
15.0
Private consumption

10.0
8.2
10.0

10.6
10.6
10.6

8.4
4.7
4.0

7.0
1.1
-0.4

6.3
1.6
0.4

5.8
3.2
2.6

5.4
3.7
3.5

27862
23209
31976
30156
-41 14
474
-3469

30094
23969

31657
24388

32983
24579

34241
32235
-4147
569
-3575

35809
33634
-4151
682
-3701

36901
34573
-3917
819
-3631

1092
2296
195
2102
615

1139
1654
22 1
1433
1027

1065
1131
265
865
1540

-429

-118

-105

Gross domestic producta
Agriculture

Memorandum items
Gross domestic product
(US$million at current prices)
GNI per capita (US%,Atlas method)

5

Balance of Payments (US%millions)
E X P O ~ ~(GNFS)~
S

Merchandise FOB

11576
10076

15689
13942

18182
16109

22137
19838

25032
21633

Imports (GNFS)”
Merchandise FOB
Resource balance
Net current transfers
Current account balance

12239
11324
-663
222
-427

17184
16126
-1495
303
-1194

17844
16599
338
162
556

23723
22237
-1586
182
-1512

29028
27389
-3996
395
-3369

170
58
-3 1
89
185
14

163
189
95
94
1098
-256

303
298
94
204
-617

351
0
-3 1
31
1159

1011
2840
144
2697
20 1

-539

1

-683

1050
2278
165
2112
583
-442

-3.7

-6.5

1.1

-4.3

-9.3

-9.0

-8.7

-8.5

-8.0

10.8

15.2

-1.2

8.3

5.5

7.3

6.9

5.2

4.0

13.7

21.2

-3.1

21.6

0.9

2.2

4.0

3.4

2.1

Net private foreign direct investment
Long-term loans (net)
Official
Private
Other capital (net, incl. errors & omissions)
Change in reservesd
Memorandum items
Resource balance (% of GDP)
Real annual growth rates ( YROO prices)
Merchandise exports (FOB)
Primary
Manufactures
Merchandise imports (CIF)

(Continued)

Annex 86
Page 2 of 2

-

Belarus Key Economic Indicators
(Continued)

Indicator

2003

Public finance (as % o f GDP at market prices)e
42.0
Current revenues
Current expenditures
35.3
6.7
Current account surplus (+) or deficit (-)
Capital expenditure
8.3
Foreign financing
-0.3

Actual
2004
2005

2006

Estimate
2007

2008

-Projected
2009
2010

2011

44.1
36.4
7.7
7.7
0.5

47.3
37.8
9.5
9.1
0.3

48.2
37.2
11.1
9.9
0.0

47.5
39.6
8.0
8.6
0.9

46.8
40.7
6.1
7.6
0.6

46.3
41.1
5.2
7.0
0.8

45.8
40.8
5.0
6.4
0.8

45.5
40.4
5.1
5.9
0.8

16.1
54.3
64.1

17.4
47.9
93.1

19.1
42.5
94.6

21.9
39.9
78.2

21.7
18.4
67.6

21.7
17.0
I91.3

21.7
16.5
125.5

21.7
14.0
59.3

21.7
12.2
75.0

Price indices( Y R O O =loo)
Merchandiseexport price index
Merchandise import price index
Merchandiseterms o f trade index

104.1
99.7
104.4

125.2
117.4
106.6

146.9
122.7
119.7

167.7
134.9
124.3

174.1
164.0
106.2

174.0
176.7
98.5

168.2
181.6
92.6

162.7
183.3
88.7

Real exchange rate (US$iLCU)'

88.5

87.5

87.1

85.0

89.8

88.7

87.4

84.3

157.7
184.6
85.4
80.1

Real interest rates
Consumer price index (% change)
GDP deflator (% change)

28.4
30.7

18.1
22.7

10.3
18.9

7.0
10.8

8.1
10.8

10.0
10.0

10.2
10.2

9.4
8.4

8.2
7.1

Monetary indicators
M2IGDP
Growth o f M2 (%)
Private sector credit growth I
total credit growth (%)

a. GDP at factor cost
b. "GNFS" denotes "goods and nonfactor services."
c. Includes net unrequited transfers excluding official capital grants.
d. Includes use o f IMF resources.
e. Consolidated central government.
f. "LCU" denotes "local currency units." An increase in US$/LCU denotes appreciation.

Annex 87
Page 1 of 1

-

Belarus Key Exposure Indicators

Indicator
Total debt outstanding and

2003

Actual
2004
2005

Estimate
2007

2006

Projected
2009
2010

2008

2011

3232

4028

4734

7912

11089

14258

17656

20453

22618

Net disbursements (US$m)a

181

1013

1017

233

2990

2293

2313

1672

1151

Total debt service (TDS)

419

372

356

405

583

732

874

1497

2115

(%)
TDOIXGS~

27.5

25.3

25.6

35.2

43.0

49.3

56.3

61.8

65.6

TDO/GDP

18.1

17.4

15.7

21.4

25.8

31.3

36.9

41.8

46.1

TDS/XGS

3.6

2.3

1.9

1.8

2.3

2.5

2.8

4.5

6.1

ConcessionaVTDO

3.9

3.2

3.1

disbursed (TDO) (US$m)'

(US$m)"
Debt and debt service indicators

IBRD exposure indicators (%)
IBRD DS/public DS

Preferred creditor DS/public

9.5

8.3

8.3

8.9

6.8

7.7

3.1

3.4

5.1

37.9

23.2

24.9

15.1

8.8

9.0

4.6

5.1

6.8

DS (%)'
IBRD DS/XGS
IBRD TDO (US$mld

0.2

0.1

0.1

0.1

0.1

0.1

84

73

59

52

45

70

0.0

131

0.0

216

0.1
311

Of which present value of
guarantees (US$m)
Share of IBRD portfolio (%)

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

IDA TDO (US$m)d

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

IFC (US$m)
Loans
Equity and quasi-equity /c

a. Includes public and publicly guaranteed debt, private nonguaranteed, use o f IMF credits and net short-

term capital.
b. "XGS" denotes exports of goods and services, including workers' remittances.
c. Preferred creditors are defined as IBRD, IDA, the regional multilateral development banks, the IMF, and the

Bank for InternationalSettlements.
d. Includes present value o f guarantees.
e. Includes equity and quasi-equity types o f both loan and equity instruments.

BB (IFC) for Belarus
Belarus
Committed and Disbursed Outstanding investment Portfolio
As of 08/29/2007
(in USD Millions)
Committed

Dlsbursed Outstanding

Loan
Eaug!
I
gg~& *GT/RM
pant
1
FY
v
m n
-

EQ!l!s!

I"Quasl

2005
0104106
010304

Beigazbank
Dbbc
Priorbank
Total Portfolio:

5
7.2

0
3.45
0

0
0
0

0
0
0

0
0
0

5
7.2
39.22

0

39.22

3.45
0

0
0
0

0
0
0

0
0
0

51.42

3.45

0

0

0

51.42

3.45

0

0

0

' Denotes Guarantee and Risk Management Products.
Quasi Equity includes both loan and equity types.

MAP SECTION

24°E

26°E

B ELAR U S

28°E

30°E

L AT V I A

SELECTED CITIES AND TOWNS
VOBLAST' CAPITALS

To
Rezekne

To
Daugavpils

NATIONAL CAPITAL

32°E

To
Nevel

BELARUS

RIVERS
MAIN ROADS

Braslau

LITHUANIA

RAILROADS
VOBLAST' BOUNDARIES

Hlybokae

Postavy

Lepel

To
Vilnius

RUSSIAN FED.

V ili y

Dzyarzhynskaya
Hara (346 m)

To
Alytus

54°N

a
vin
Dz
a
v
a
y
Vitebsk
V
itebsk
odo
kh
Za

VITEBSK

To
Utena
To
Vilnius

INTERNATIONAL BOUNDARIES

Poloysk

Navapolack

To
Smolensk

Casniki

a

Talacyn
Talacyn
Borisov

Gorky

B
ina
ez
er

Lida

MINSK

Ne
m

Grodno

RUSSIAN
F E D E R AT I O N

Orsha

Vilejka
V
ilejka
Molodechno

Mogilev

Berazino

MOGILEV

an

MINSK

Krichev

So

Slavharad

GRODNO

To
Bialystok

Bobruysk

Baranovichi

zh

Kascjukovicy

Osipovichi

Volkovysk
Volkovysk

Slonim

Dovsk
To
Klintsy

Slutsk
To
Bialystok

Svetlahorsk

BREST

POLAND

GOMEL

Kobrin
To Biala
Podlaska

Brest

To
Chelm

Luninets

To
Klintsy

Dobrus

Kalinkavicy
Pinsk

DneprovskoBugskiy Canal

Turov
Turov

yat
Prip

52°N

Mozyr
Hojniki

Stolin

To
Sarny

To
Kovel'

To
Sarny

0

25

50

25

75

50

26°E

To
Chernigov

To
Chernihiv
To
Chernobyl

100 Kilometers
This map was produced by the Map Design Unit of The World Bank.
The boundaries, colors, denominations and any other information
shown on this map do not imply, on the part of The World Bank
Group, any judgment on the legal status of any territory, or any
endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.

UKRAINE

75 Miles

28°E

30°E

32°E

34°E

IBRD 33370

JANUARY 2005

0

24°E

Gomel'
Rechitsa

Micasevicy

To
Ovruch

22°E

r
ep
Dn

Soligorsk

Bjaroza

52°N

Zabalocce

Zlobin
Ivattsevichi

54°N

To
Roslavl

