Public Disclosure Authorized

Document o f
The World Bank

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Public Disclosure Authorized

Report No. 39719-KG

INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT
INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION
INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION

Public Disclosure Authorized

Public Disclosure Authorized

MULTILATERAL INVESTMENT GUARANTEE AGENCY

JOINT COUNTRY SUPPORT STRATEGY
FOR THE
KYRGYZ REPUBLIC
(2007-2010)

May 23,2007

Central Asia Country Unit
Europe and Central Asia Region
Asian Development Bank
Swiss Cooperation
UK Department f o r International Development
United Nations Agencies

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the
performance o f their official duties. I t s contents may not otherwise be disclosed without
World Bank authorization

Last CAS Discussion: April 22,2003

Currencv Equivalent
(Exchange Rate effective March 14,2007)

Currency Unit - Soms
US$l.OO = 3 8

Weights and Measures

Metric system

Fiscal Year

January 1 - December 31

Vice President
Country Director
Task Team Leader

IBRD
Shigeo Katsu
Annette Dixon
Roger Robinson

IFC Executive Vice President
Vice President
Director
Task Team Leader

IFC
Lars H. Thunell
Edward A.Nassim
Shahbaz Mavaddat
Gorton D e Mond, Jr.

ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS
AAA
ADB
ADF
AIDS
APR
ASSP
BEEPS
CACO
CAREC
CAS
CASCR
CDF
CDM
CDS
CEM
CG
CIS
ESW
EurAsEc
FDI
FSAP
GDP
GEF
HIPC
IDA
IF1
IOM
IPO
IsDB
JCSS
KfW
MDGs
MDRI
MIGA
MSMEs
MTBF
NBKR
NGOs
' NPRS
NPV
OECD
PBA
PEFA
PERs
PFM
PIP
Plus
PRSGs

Analytical and Advisory Assistance
Asian Development Bank
Africa Development Fund
Acquired Immune Deficiency System
Annual Progress Review
Agricultural Services Support Project
Business Environment and Enterprise Performance Survey
Central Asia Cooperation Organization
Central Asia Regional Economic Cooperation Program
Country Assistance Strategy 2007-2010
Country Assistance Strategy Completion Report
Comprehensive Development Framework
Clean Development Mechanisms
Country Development Strategy
Country Economic Memorandum
Consultative Group
Commonwealth o f Independent States
Economic and Sector Work
Eurasian Economic Community
Foreign Direct Investment

Financial Sector Assessment Program
Gross Domestic Product
Global Environment Facility
Heavily Indebted Poor Countries
International Development Association
International Financial Institutions
International Organization for Migration
Initial Public Offering
Islamic Development Bank
Joint Country Support Strategy

Kreditanstalt fir Wiederaufbau
Millenium Development Goals
Multilateral Debt Relief Initiative
Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency
Micro-, Small and Medium Enterprises
Medium-Term Budget Framework
National Bank o f the Kyrgyz Republic
Non-governmental Organizations
National Poverty Reduction Strategy
Net Present Value
Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development
Performance Based Allocation

Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability program
Public Expenditure Reviews
Public Financial Management
Public Investment Program.
Project Implementation Units
Poverty Reduction Support Grants

ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS
SDC
SMEs
SOEs
SWAPS
TA
TB
TIC1
TVET
UMB
UN
UNDP
WBI
WBG
WUA

Swiss Development Corporation
Small and Medium Enterprises
State-owned Enterprises
Sector-wide Approach
Technical Assistance
Tuberculosis
Transparency International Corruption Index
Technical, Vocational Education and Training
Unified Monthly Benefit
United Nations
United Nations Development Programme
World Bank Institute
World Bank Group
Water Users’ Associations

2

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JOINT ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
FOR THE
KYRGYZ REPUBLIC
(2007-2010)
TABLE OF CONTENTS

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

.......1
........................................................................................................ 1
.......................................................... 1
.............. 13
.............. 19
............................................... 30
Annex 1. JCSS Results Framework f o r the Kyrgyz Republic ...................................
39
PART I1. THE WORLD BANK GROUP ASSISTANCE PROGRAM ...................51
I
. INTRODUCTION...................................................................................................... 51
I1. IMPLEMENTATION OF THE LAST CAS..........................................................
51
I11. SUMMARY OF LESSONS LEARNED ...............................................................
55
I V. PORTFOLIO PERFORMANCE...........................................................................
56
V . WBG SUPPORT FOR IMPLEMENTATION OF THE JCSS ..............
56
V I. IDA FINANCING AND INSTRUMENTS............................................................
65
VI1. CAS CONSULTATIONS......................................................................................
65
VI11. MONITORING IMPLEMENTATION AND MANAGING RISKS ..............66
I X. CONCLUSIONS......................................................................................................
67
Annex 1. World Bank Group CAS Results M a t r i x for the Kyrgyz Republic..........68
Annex 2. Kyrgyz Republic CAS Completion Report. FyO3-06 .................................
76
Annex 3. Standard CAS Annexes ...............................................................................
115
PART I:KYRGYZ REPUBLIC JOINT COUNTRY SUPPORT STRATEGY
I INTRODUCTION
I1 POLITICAL AND ECONOMIC CONTEXT
I11 THE COUNTRY DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY 2007-2010
I V DEVELOPMENT CHALLENGES AND OPPORTUNITIES
V THE JOINT COUNTRY SUPPORT STRATEGY

.
.
.
.
.

MAP

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance o f
their official duties. I t s contents may not be otherwise disclosed without W o r l d Bank authorization .

ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS
AAA
ADB
ADF
AIDS
APR
ASSP
BEEPS
CACO
CAREC
CAS
CASCR
CDF
CDM
CDS
CEM
CG
CIS
ESW
EurAsEc
FDI
FSAP
GDP
GEF
HIPC
IDA
IF1
IOM
IPO
IsDB
JCSS
KfW
MDGs
MDRI
MIGA
MSMEs
MTBF
NBKR
NGOs
* NPRS
NPV
OECD
PBA
PEFA
PERs
PFM
PIP
Pnrs
PRSGs

Analytical and Advisory Assistance
Asian Development Bank
Africa Development Fund
Acquired Immune Deficiency System
Annual Progress Review
Agricultural Services Support Project
Business Environment and Enterprise Performance Survey
Central Asia Cooperation Organization
Central Asia Regional Economic Cooperation Program
Country Assistance Strategy 2007-2010
Country Assistance Strategy Completion Report
Comprehensive Development Framework
Clean Development Mechanisms
Country Development Strategy
Country Economic Memorandum
Consultative Group
Commonwealth o f Independent States
Economic and Sector Work
Eurasian Economic Community
Foreign Direct Investment

Financial Sector Assessment Program
Gross Domestic Product
Global Environment Facility
Heavily Indebted Poor Countries
International Development Association
International Financial Institutions
International Organization for Migration
Initial Public Offering
Islamic Development Bank
Joint Country Support Strategy

Kreditanstalt fiir Wiederaufbau
Millenium Development Goals
Multilateral Debt Relief Initiative
Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency
Micro-, Small and Medium Enterprises
Medium-Term Budget Framework
National Bank o f the Kyrgyz Republic
Non-governmental Organizations
National Poverty Reduction Strategy
Net Present Value
Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development
Performance Based Allocation

Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability program
Public Expenditure Reviews
Public Financial Management
Public Investment Program.
Project Implementation Units
Poverty Reduction Support Grants

ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS
SDC
SMEs
SOEs
SWAps
TA
TB
TIC1
TVET
UMB
UN
UNDP
WBI
WBG
WUA

Swiss Development Corporation
Small and Medium Enterprises
State-owned Enterprises
Sector-wide Approach
Technical Assistance
Tuberculosis
Transparency International Corruption Index
Technical, Vocational Education and Training
UnifiedMonthly Benefit
United Nations
United Nations Development Programme
World Bank Institute
World Bank Group
Water Users’ Associations

2

JOINT ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
FOR THE
KYRGYZ REPUBLIC
(2007-2010)
TABLE OF CONTENTS

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
PART I:KYRGYZ REPUBLIC JOINT COUNTRY SUPPORT STRATEGY
I INTRODUCTION
I1 POLITICAL AND ECONOMIC CONTEXT
I11 THE COUNTRY DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY 2007-2010
I V DEVELOPMENT CHALLENGES AND OPPORTUNITIES
V THE JOINT COUNTRY SUPPORT STRATEGY

.......1

........................................................................................................
1
.
.......................................................... 1
.
.............. 13
.
.............. 19
.
............................................... 30
Annex 1. JCSS Results Framework for the Kyrgyz Republic...................................
39
PART I1. THE WORLD BANK GROUP ASSISTANCE PROGRAM ...................51
I
. INTRODUCTION...................................................................................................... 51
I1. IMPLEMENTATION OF THE LAST CAS..........................................................
51
I11. SUMMARY OF LESSONS LEARNED ...............................................................
55
I V. PORTFOLIO PERFORMANCE...........................................................................
56
V. WBG SUPPORT FOR IMPLEMENTATION OF THE JCSS ..............
56
V I. IDA FINANCING AND INSTRUMENTS............................................................
65
VI1. CAS CONSULTATIONS......................................................................................
65
VI11. MONITORING IMPLEMENTATION AND MANAGING R I S K S ..............66
I X. CONCLUSIONS...................................................................................................... 67
Annex 1. World Bank Group CAS Results Matrix f o r the Kyrgyz Republic ..........68
Annex 2. Kyrgyz Republic CAS Completion Report. FYO3-06.................................
76
Annex 3. Standard CAS Annexes ...............................................................................
115
.

MAP

BOXES
PART I : KYRGYZ REPUBLIC JOINT COUNTRY SUPPORT STRATEGY
B o x 1: Doing Business in the Kyrgyz RZpublic ...............................................................
12
Box 2: Transport Corridor Performance Measurement .................................................... 28

.

PART I1 THE WORLD BANK GROUP ASSISTANCE PROGRAM
Box 1. Addressing Poverty at the Village Level in the Kyrgyz Republic .......................

53

FIGURES
PART I : KYRGYZ REPUBLIC JOINT COUNTRY SUPPORT STRATEGY
Figure 1. GDP Growth Rate. 1996-2006 ...........................................................................
Figure 2 . Fiscal Performance in CIS 5, 1996-2005 ............................................................
Figure 3 . Regulatory Polices as a Problem to Doing Business ........................................
Figure 3 . Business Licenses as a Problem to Doing Business .........................................

4
5
24
24

TABLES
PART I : KYRGYZ REPUBLIC JOINT COUNTRY SUPPORT STRATEGY
Table 1: GDP Growth Rates and Structure .........................................................................
4
Table 2: Progress toward the MDGs................................................................................ 10
Table 3: Summary Financial Sector Statistics for Selected Transition Economies .......... 21
Table 4: Annual Funding Requirements for Road Maintenance ...................................... 22

.

PART I1 THE WORLD BANK GROUP ASSISTANCE PROGRAM
Table 1. IDA Lending and Non-Lending Program for FY07-FY10 ................................

58

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

i.

Development Challenges. The Kyrgyz Republic, a land-locked mountainous
country, faces formidable geographic barriers to obtain a high, sustained rate o f economic
growth. I t s isolation i s a significant barrier for international trade and transport, which i s
further hampered by inadequate physical infrastructure and protectionist policies in
neighboring countries. In addition, poor governance and l o w institutional and technical
capacity have limited implementation o f reforms in many areas.
Despite these
challenges, the country succeeded in achieving economic growth around 4 percent and
reducing poverty significantly during the late 1990s and early 2000s through prudent
macroeconomic management and structural reforms in some areas.

ii.

The Kyrgyz Republic i s still in the process o f building the State. The political
environment i s turbulent, marked by the 2005 March revolution and subsequent
instability with on-going disputes for power within and between Government, Parliament
and civil society, In this complex political environment, identifylng appropriate reforms,
and building consensus around their implementation i s difficult.

iii. T h e existence o f a vibrant civil society, and active political debate and
participation, will assist the process o f consolidation o f the State. Political stability and
the sustainability o f the current government will depend upon making urgent and visible
improvements in economic and social conditions, as well as clear results in attacking
corruption, that meet the expectations o f the population. In addition, consolidating basic
market reforms already carried out, together with dynamic regional growth provides
opportunities for accelerating growth.
iv.
Strategic Priorities. The Government’s CDS for the period 2007-201 0 focuses
on four strategic pillars-economic development, governance and transparency in public
administration, human development, and environmental sustainability-and builds on the
strategy laid out in the National Poverty Reduction Strategy (NPRS) for 2003-2005.
v.
The CDS focuses on consolidating the macroeconomic stability attained during
implementation o f the NPRS, and accelerating structural reforms to foster further growth
and poverty reduction. The CDS places improving governance high on the agenda, and
on fighting and reducing corruption in particular. T h e CDS emphasizes the importance
of improving the accountability o f officials to the people and reforms to the legislative
and budget processes to reduce the capture of the state by powerful economic groups.
Government ineffectiveness and poor performance in delivering basic social services will
be tackled by deregulating the economy and strengthening public administration. Human
and social development priorities in the CDS include access to increased and affordable
education and health services; favorable living conditions with access to water, sanitation
and basic social services, and social protection for vulnerable groups in the population.
vi.
The Kyrgyz Republic Joint Country Support Strategy (JCSS). This joint
strategy o f five development partners-the Asian Development Bank (ADB), the Swiss
Cooperation (SC), the UK Department for International Development (DfID), the World
Bank Group (WBG) and. the United Nations Agencies-is closely aligned with the
Government’s development goals. Certain strategic choices have been agreed among the
development partners and have been applied across all donor groups, including the World
Bank’s program: (i)
focus on areas where support €or reforms i s already embedded; (ii)

mitigate risks associated with high indebtedness and growth volatility; (iii)
focus on basic
reforms, as opposed to complex operations; and (iv) focus o n ESW and capacity building.

vii.
The Kyrgyz Republic Joint Country Support Strategy program focus. The
JCSS partners will focus their programs on four areas identified in the CDS as
particularly important for achieving the overarching goals, including:
0
Economic management consistent with strong and sustained pro-poor growth:
strengthening the budget process and cross-cutting reforms in public financial
management, and aligning financial management with government priorities;
Reducing corruption, improving governance and effective public administration:
0
deregulating the economy, increasing transparency, improving the capacity o f the
civil service and public administration, and legal reform;
Building sustainable human and social capital through improved health and education
0
outcomes, including access to and improving the quality o f health, education and
social protection services; and
0
Ensuring environmental sustainability and natural resource management.
viii.
The World Bank Group Program. This i s the first joint country strategy for the
Kyrgyz Republic and the Europe and Central Asia region. The WBG program
contributes to the strategic goals outlined in the JCSS, with a focus on supporting the
Government’s efforts to improve the environment for business and economic growth and
improve the quality o f and access to basic services (health, education, water and
sanitation). The WBG strategy emphasizes selectivity given the limited IDA resources
and limitations placed on the Government’s public investment program. Building on
lessons learned, and in line with the principles o f the JCSS, the Bank Program adopts a
sequenced and long-term approach to development challenges, building on results
achieved in first generation projects, targeting activities where projects can show visible
results to the population, and leveraging our lending and analytical work to attract
financing from other development partners.
ix.
Risks. Risks to CDS and JCSS implementation include those related to political
instability, weak implementation capacity, and exogenous shocks. The JCSS proposes a
number o f measures to mitigate the risks.
x.
Monitoring and Evaluation. The commitment to a results-based framework
represents a step forward for the authorities and the JCSS partners. The WBG, ADB and
other partners are working together with Government to develop a robust monitoring and
evaluation framework in line with the CDS framework under preparation. The annual
joint country portfolio review process and joint annual review o f the CDS will provide
opportunities to review progress. T o the extent possible, the review will use existing
government processes as the main avenues for detailed discussion, dialogue and
generating information.
xi.
Conclusion. The need for donors to present a joint position to their client i s
greater now than ever. The new Government i s under pressure to deliver, and the
development community i s struggling to work out how best to provide support without
overburdening the administration. The JCSS i s a first step to further harmonization
efforts and achieving results based on the principles framed in the Paris Declaration on
aid effectiveness.

..

11

PART I:KYRGYZ REPUBLIC JOINT COUNTRY SUPPORT STRATEGY

I.INTRODUCTION
1.
The Joint Country Support Strategy (JCSS) for the Kyrgyz Republic presents a
core strategy o f five development partners to support the Kyrgyz’s development agenda
for the period 2007-10. The strategy i s a joint effort o f the Asian Development Bank
(ADB), the Swiss Cooperation (SC), the UK Department for International Development
(DFID), the World Bank Group (WBG) and the United Nations Agencies.
2.
The JCSS i s a medium-term framework for managing cooperation between the
Government o f the Kyrgyz Republic and development partners to achieve national
development and poverty reduction goals. It has been formulated in the spirit of national
and international commitments and initiatives on aid effectiveness, particularly the Rome
Declaration on Aid Harmonization and the Paris Declaration on Aid Effectiveness. I t s
objectives are to: align partners’ support with the goals o f the Kyrgyz Republic’s Country
Development Strategy 2007-1 0 (CDS); present the underpinnings o f the group’s support;
to reduce transaction costs, and ensure a coherent, well-coordinated response to support
the implementation o f the CDS.

3.

The JCSS i s results oriented, with a monitoring and evaluation framework derived
from the CDS. The reform agenda in the JCSS draws upon the authorities’ own stated
commitments, explicitly articulated in the CDS, which w i l l be supported by donor
engagement, policy dialogue, financial assistance and analytical work. The JCSS broadly
outlines the ways in which partners will support the Government’s efforts to achieve the
CDS outcome targets.
11. POLITICAL AND ECONOMIC CONTEXT

A. The Political Context

4.
From October 1990 to March 2005, the Kyrgyz Republic was governed by an
increasingly authoritarian presidential regime’. The President mediated the competition
between diverse groups within the elite for influence and economic rents. T h i s resulted
in frequent changes in personnel at the political level and contributed to l o w capacity in
implementing policies and reforms. The Government was less openly repressive and was
perceived to be more disposed to economic reform than others in the region.
5.
During the period 1990 to 2005, the Kyrgyz Republic made considerable progress
in i t s transition to a market based economy. The economy began to recover from the
I

F r o m October 1990 to March 2005, eleven governments h i v e been appointed and forced to resign,
In that time, there have been 10 Prime Ministers, and the average duration o f cabinets was just over a year.

.

break-up o f the Soviet Union in 1990, which was associated with severe declines in
output, high inflation and breakdown o f the supply chains. The macroeconomic situation
was stabilized and economic reforms laid the ground for a transfer o f land and other
assets into private ownership and generated private sector-led growth since the mid
1990s.
6.
Progress in reforms was mixed. In some areas, significant reforms were carried
out during the mid 1990s. These successes, together with a willingness o f the
Government to engage in dialogue in most reform areas, probably encouraged donors to
overestimate the depth o f reforms and contributed to an overambitious reform agenda on
the part o f donors, The Government meanwhile was readily accepting o f all donor
suggested reforms, even those that i t was neither able nor committed to implement, in
order to maintain external financial flows. The result was that, while some real economic
reforms were carried out, many reforms remained on paper, either as policy statements or
as legislation, were not implemented, were unfinished, or would be undermined by ad
hoc policy interventions, given the weak ownership o f the reforms.

7.
The generally unexpected and so-called Tulip Revolution o f March 2005, when
President Akaev was ousted from power, was triggered by public dissatisfaction with the
fraudulent February 2005 elections. Underlying dissatisfaction with a lack o f tangible
impact from economic reforms, poor governance, corruption and increasing nepotism,
were probably also significant. T h e revolution itself had nationalist connotations which
have since been manifested in a growing distrust o f the international community. The
donors were perceived as having been too close to the old regime, and implicitly as
having fbeled corruption without achieving significant development.
8.
The revolution also set in motion a process o f more open political conflicts
between the Presidency, Government and parliament, and within these institutions, with
the active participation o f civil society. There have been some change o f personalities in
many government positions and some important gains in terms o f political freedoms have
been made; however, the initial effect o f the revolution was to worsen the governance
environment. The country’s assets are in demand by various interest groups, and there
have been several disputes over property rights. In many instances, the consequences
have been violent.

9.
Since April 2006, there have been repeated large rallies and demonstrations in
which protesters have demanded implementation o f promised reforms and expressed
general resentment against ineffective policy, corruption and growing criminality. These
protests culminated with the implementation o f delayed constitutional reforms in
November 2006. The new constitution transferred some o f the President’s powers to
Parliament; however, amendments that restored the Presidential powers were reintroduced by his supporters in Parliament and passed in December 2006.
10.
The combination o f resurgent nationalism and a lack o f trust by civil society in
the International Financial Institutions (IFI’s) were important elements in the
Government’s decision in February 2007 not to seek assistance under the Heavily

2

Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC) debt relief initiative. The decision indicated a more
cautious and skeptical attitude to engagement with donors particularly as regards widereaching policy reforms.
11.
Constitutional debates are ongoing, where other leading opposition movements in
the country are demanding the authorities to undertake constitutional reform (with
reinstatement o f the spirit o f the November 2006 Constitution) and early presidential
elections. Large protests were organized to this effect in April 2007. The President and
his Government, led by opposition representative Almazbek Atambaev, re-established
control, but the direction o f future constitutional reform is s t i l l unclear.
12.
The Kyrgyz Republic i s s t i l l in the process o f building the State. In this complex
political environment, identifylng appropriate reforms and, importantly, building
consensus around them will be difficult. Nevertheless, there are a number o f areas where
support for change i s already embedded. The existence o f a vibrant civil society, which
i s the most robust in the Central Asian region, will assist the process o f consolidation o f
the state. Political stability and the sustainability o f the current Government w i l l depend
upon making urgent and visible improvements in economic and social conditions, as well
as clear results in attacking corruption, that meet the expectations o f the population.
13.
The Government’s new CDS was endorsed by the National Development
Council and launched by Presidential decree on M a y 16, 2007. The document attributes
the limited pace o f economic development and the skewed distribution o f wealth to the
unfinished development agenda (including the delays in privatizing state enterprises that
are deemed to be o f strategic importance, fostering energy sector efficiency and forging a
friendly business climate conducive to private sector growth) which was undermined by
weak governance. The challenge for the new Government will be to provide a coherent
framework to implement this development agenda, while that o f the donors will be to
ensure that their support i s effective in improving the economic and social conditions o f
the population.

B. Economic Developments
14.
Despite a sound record o f macroeconomic performance in recent years,
economic growth has been modest and volatile; a large burden o f external debt has been
accumulated and integration into global production and trade remains limited. These
outcomes reflect the pattern in economic reforms. While over 1994-98 the Kyrgyz
Republic had been among the fastest reformers among the Commonwealth o f
Independent States (CIS) economies, the period between 1999-2006 witnessed reversal
and stagnation in reform efforts. The paragraphs that follow present an assessment o f the
Kyrgyz Republic’s growth performance since independence.
15.
Few economies face initial conditions as challenging as in the Kyrgyz Republic:
with a small population (just over 5 million) and one o f the least accessible locations in
the world. I t s isolation i s a significant barrier for international trade and transport, which
i s hrther hampered by inadequate physical infrastructure and protectionist policies in

neighboring countries. Only about seven percent o f the country's land is arable. The two
major natural resources are hydropower and gold. Known gold reserves are being
depleted and, without new discoveries, they will be close to exhaustion within a decade.
Output o f hydropower has been constrained by depletion o f assets that has taken place
over the past 15 years.
16.
Against this background, the trajectory o f Kyrgyz output since transition i s
similar to that o f the other small, resource poor CIS countries (see Figurel). After an
initial decline, real Gross Domestic Product (GDP) started to recover in 1996 and reached
80 percent o f i t s pre-transition level by 2005. The initial output shock in the Kyrgyz
Republic (50 percent) was less severe than in other small resource poor CIS countries2
(where i t was more than 60 percent).
17.
Output growth was rapid
only during the first years o f
adjustment. Subsequently modest
growth was combined with high
volatility. The Kyrgyz Republic
grew at an annual rate o f 4.7
percent during 1996-2005 (at less
than 4 percent in 2000-2005). This
growth rate was lower than in
similar CIS countries (Le., 6-7
percent over the whole period and
-~-KyrgyzRep~Mb - ' e .Georgia
--x--Armenia
above 8 percent since 2000). There
"'*.'Moldo\e
--Tajikistan
have been three major decelerations
in 1998, 2002 and 2005 due to Source: World Bank, ECA Regional Tables.
various exogenous shocks, including the 1998 regional financial crisis, the 2002 drop in
gold production and the 2005 political events.
Table 1: GDP Growth Rates and Structure
1991-1995

1996-1999

2000-2006

GDP (growth rate, %)
Agriculture
Construction
Gold'
Power
Manufacturing and non-gold mining
Services

-12.5
-5.9
-12.4
0.0
NA
-21.1
-10.3

5.7
9.6
-11.7
10.6
-1.9
0.2
1.9

3.9
2.5
10.6
-3.9
1.1
1.4
6.9

Non-Gold GDP (growth rate,%)

-12.5

4.2

4.7

Source: NSC, staff calculations
11Gold growth rate refers to 1998-99 only. Gold output was zero in 1996 and increased to 6.4

percent o f GDP in 1997
2/ Gold production was disrupted in 2002 and declined in 2005.

2

Data refers to an average for Armenia, Georgia, Kyrgyz Republic, Moldova and Tajikistan.

4

18.
Services, gold and agriculture have been the main drivers o f economic growth in
the Kyrgyz Republic over the past decade. Growth relied primarily on agriculture in the
1990s (above 9 percent in 1996-1999) supplemented by the initiation o f gold production
(Table 1). After 2000, growth was dominated by services (driven by a growth o f
aggregate demand fuelled by remittances) at 6.9 percent compared with 1.9 percent from
1996-1999. For the same reason, construction has also been growing strongly since
2000, at an average o f over 10 percent annually. In contrast the high agricultural growth
rates o f the 1990s declined to just 2.5 percent since 2000. W h i l e gold s t i l l contributes
significantly to the balance o f payments, i t has had a negative overall impact on growth
rates since 2000.

19.
This growth pattern mirrors progress in the following economic reforms during
the early years o f transition: (i)tight monetary policy and reduction o f inflation; (ii)
public finance reforms including termination o f direct budget subsidies; (iii)
land reform
and transfer o f two-thirds o f all land into private ownership; (iv) privatization o f small
and medium enterprises; (v) establishment o f a two-tier banking system; (vi) initial tax,
customs and licensing reforms; (vii) trade liberalization; and (viii) WTO membership in
1998.
Figure 2. Fiscal Performance in CIS 5,1996-2005

The initial period o f growth and
Georgia
reforms was interrupted by the regional
2
financial crisis o f 1998, which had a
0
disproportionate impact on the Kyrgyz
.2
Republic. This was partly due to the
.4
Kyrgyz Republic’s
close
economic
-6
linkages with Russia and the most liberal
4
trade regime in the CIS, but also l o w
.10
capacity for coherent and timely policy
-12
responses3. From 1998 macroeconomic
.14
stabilization was renewed.
However,
weak
institutions for implementing
economic policy undermined the ability o f the state to deepen structural economic
reforms. Fiscal reforms were slower than in other CIS countries, which stabilized their
fiscal accounts by 2000 while undertaking second generation reforms. The Kyrgyz
Republic continued to run fiscal deficits around 10 percent throughout the late 1990s.
Even in 2001 when the Kyrgyz fiscal accounts strengthened, through increased tax
collection, its fiscal position remained weak compared to the other CIS comparators.

20.

21.
Lower than expected growth and delayed fiscal adjustment resulted in longer and
heavier reliance on foreign credits than in other CIS countries. The debt burden i s high at
over 70 percent o f GDP in nominal terms in 2006 even after significant debt relief
through two consecutive Paris Club restructurings. In 2005 the N e t Present Value (NPV)
3

An example o f this i s the 1999 imposition o f a 100% export tax o n wheat and flour exports - so
that the government could replenish their own reserves at lower price - which stopped wheat exports at a
time when the som had recently depreciated, making Kyrgyz goods highly-competitive in regional markets.

5

o f debt to government revenues was 304 percent, making the Kyrgyz Republic eligible to
seek debt relief under the HIPC, but strong revenue performance in 2006 has reduced
debt ratios to below those required for HIPC eligibility. About 13 percent o f government
revenue was required for debt service in 2006, and even without HIPC and Multilateral
Debt Relief Initiative (MDRI) debt relief, this will decline to around 10 percent in 2010.
Had the Government decided to participate in the HIPC initiative, this would have been
cut to about 4 percent o f revenues by 2010.
22.
Some reforms were partial and remain unfinished. Relative prices in non-tradable
goods, particularly utilities, remain suppressed, hampering the gradual transformation o f
these sectors into profitable entities which generate savings and attract investments.
Unlike in some other CIS countries, market signals continue to be distorted in the Kyrgyz
Republic and resources are therefore only partially re-allocated to sectors with the highest
potential returns, further hampering diversification o f the economy.
23.
In addition, the blurred distinction between public and private sector activity,
poorly defined property rights in practice, and the absence o f effective mechanisms for
conflict resolution through the judicial system, both inhibit investment and contribute to
pervasive corruption. According to official estimates, the private sector now accounts for
75 percent o f GDP and 80 percent o f employment. However, the amount o f quasi public
activities remains large, and many “private” businesses are linked to senior officials, thus
creating a large informal public sector from which officials derive rentsV4

The above fuels interference by public officials in the economy. There are
24.
numerous mechanisms for this including arbitrary decisions, multiple inspection,
discretionary issue o f licenses, delays in issuing permits and documents and even direct
manipulation o f prices o f inputs and outputs. The response o f the private sector i s to
operate informally. Responsiveness o f the private sector to changes in formal policies,
including tax cuts, is therefore small. I t i s estimated that about 53 percent o f output i s
produced in the shadow economy.
25.
Institutional weaknesses and widespread corruption in the public sector also
diminished the ability and incentives o f the public administration to act in the public
interest and respond to the needs o f the emerging private sector. This was the case in
agriculture, where despite the liberalization o f market and prices and an initial strong
supply response to reforms, the absence o f supplementary services, market access and
shortsighted trade policies became a constraint for further growth and diversification,
once the domestic market was saturated. In addition, the agricultural sector experienced
a decline in i t s terms of trade, similar to other transition economies. In the absence o f
alternative sources o f growth and employment in the economy, agriculture absorbed
surplus labor released from other sectors and remained a l o w productivity activity.
In contrast to other similar CIS countries which adopted more liberal price and
26.
market policies and more rapid fiscal adjustment, gross domestic savings remained low,
4

ADB. Private Sector Developmentin the Kyrgyz Republic: Issues and Options. March 2007.

6

while foreign savings have had to be gradually curtailed due to the growing indebtedness
as a result o f l o w savings. The slow pace o f reform, particularly in the budget and public
enterprise sector, i s an important factor in both reducing corporate savings directly and
reducing investment. Even the recent growth in remittances’ (which estimates suggest
may amount to at least 19 percent of GDP), was insufficient to guarantee an adequate
level o f gross national savings, as they have mostly been channeled to consumption. As a
result, investment remains at only 20 percent o f GDP and foreign direct investment has
been channeled almost exclusively into gold mining which by i t s nature was less affected
by market distortions.
27.
The Kyrgyz Republic’s close proximity to three fast growing countries (China,
Russia and Kazakhstan) has provided an opportunity for the expansion o f exports. Even
after a decade and a half transition, production in the Kyrgyz Republic i s mostly
concentrated in non-manufacturing groups: primary agricultural goods (cotton, tobacco,
hides and skins), electric power and gold. However, due to the above constraints,
Kyrgyz’ export supply has not adapted well to the shifting demand in these markets for
increasingly sophisticated and high quality food products and manufactures, Instead, a
steady and growing flow o f migrants has led to significant remittance flow into the
Kyrgyz economy, mainly from Russia and Kazakhstan.

C. Poverty and Inequality

28.
Poverty remains high in the Kyrgyz Republic though extreme poverty i s
moderate. According to official government data for 2005, as defined by consumption per
capita, an estimated 43 percent o f the population lived below the poverty line and 11
percent in extreme poverty The poverty line i s a national poverty line chosen on the
basis o f the food and non-food consumption pattern o f the lower income group o f the
Kyrgyz population, and not based on international poverty lines. The unit o f observation
for poverty statistics i s the individual. Almost three-quarters o f the poor and extreme
poor live in rural areas due not only to the higher proportion o f the population living in
this sector but also the higher prevalence o f poverty: 51 percent o f the rural population
lived in poverty compared to 30 percent o f the urban population. The incidence o f
poverty i s over 50 percent in five out o f the eight oblasts (Batken, Naryn, Osh, Jalal-Abad
and Issyk-kul) both in the northern and southern parts o f the country. Poverty and l o w
incomes are prevalent in those areas where geography (Le., mountains), poor
infrastructure and cross-border issues constrain access to markets. A large number o f the
total poor live in rural Osh and Jalalabad, which are the most populous oblasts. Bishkek
has the lowest poverty rates estimated at 11 percent.

-

29.
Economic growth has resulted in falling poverty over the last half-decade. In
2000 according to official government estimates, poverty was estimated at 63 percent o f
the population and over the next five years fell by a remarkable 20 percentage points 5

According to the International Organization for Migration (IOM), some 300,000 migrant workers
from the Kyrgyz Republic work in the Russian Federation; the number for Kazakhstan is 50,000
(Unofficial estimates are higher, at 400,000 - 700,000 in the Russian Federation, and 70,000 in
Kazakhstan).

7

though this may in part be a reflection o f a change in surveys. Even over the last three
years, for which comparable data are available, poverty responded strongly to economic
growth: for every 1 percent increase in GDP per capita during 2003-2005, extreme
poverty fell by 5 percent and overall poverty fell by 2 percent. The reduction in poverty
has also been assisted by the decline in the real prices o f utilities, which continue to be
heavily subsidized and are far below their cost recovery levels. M u c h o f the decline in
poverty stems primarily from the fall in extreme poverty, especially in rural areas.
Moderate poverty (the difference between overall poverty and extreme poverty) declined
marginally from 33 percent to 32 percent and largely due to a decrease in urban moderate
poverty rates.

30.
Concurrent with changes in poverty, inequality has fallen slightly during 20002005. Official estimates o f the Gini coefficient show a decline from 0.30 to 0.28 during
this period, Inequality levels in the Kyrgyz Republic remain lower than in other E C A
countries reflecting the welfare system o f large social direct and indirect transfers. Direct
expenditure on social protection has been high, though declining-20 percent o f GDP in
1995 and 12 percent in 2001 and was topped up with indirect subsidies through utility
prices estimated at 7-8 percent o f GDP. Inequality in urban areas has seen the greatest
improvement in this period though the sources o f improvement require further analysis.
This phenomenon may be driven by the greater employment opportunities available in
the services sectors, greater access to subsidized utilities in the urban areas or due to the
higher remittance income that has helped to raise incomes among the lower quintiles.
31.
Both off-farm and on-farm income have been important to the reduction in rural
poverty. The agriculture sector grew by an annual average o f 2.6 percent during 20002005. The rural sector harbors many o f the Kyrgyz Republic’s poor who are dependent
upon their farm production for both their own household consumption and to generate
income. Furthermore, in the early years o f this decade, income from household
production, livestock, and property sales was an important source o f income for the rural
population and more so for those in the lower quintiles. However, over time, earned
income from labor or entrepreneurial activity has significantly increased in importance
for the rural population and now comprises three-quarters o f total income - indicating the
growing importance o f off-farm income in rural areas.
32.
Poor domestic labor market outcomes linked to l o w output growth and l i t t l e
economic diversification have hindered a faster reduction in poverty and led to greater
out-migration. L o w wages, underemployment and outright unemployment are important
explanatory factors o f poverty in the Kyrgyz Republic. Almost half o f the employed
work in the informal sector - agriculture and services - where productivity and wages are
low. Furthermore, a large share o f the population in the lower quintiles suffers from
under-employment which prevents them from increasing total income. Thus, i t i s not
surprising that more able-bodied workers are leaving the Kyrgyz Republic to work
abroad with the result that remittance income i s becoming an important source o f income
for those remaining behind.

8

33.
Despite important gains in poverty and inequality reduction, the rate o f
improvement i s likely to decelerate unless the economy can begin to create better higher productivity -jobs. The Kyrgyz Republic’s growth has been too l o w for a country
that must s t i l l achieve large gains before reducing the income gap with i t s neighboring
countries. Without sustainable growth in wages and employment, the population will be
held hostage to relatively low-productivity job environment thus constraining their future
welfare.

D. Progress Towards Achieving the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs)
34.
The Kyrgyz Republic has a mixed track record in i t s progress towards achieving
the national MDGs. I t i s unlikely that many o f the MDG targets will be reached by 2015
if the country continues along i t s current path. The country can potentially achieve its
targets on poverty reduction, universal enrolment in primary education and literacy, and
ensuring environmental sustainability. However, the Kyrgyz Republic i s a long way
from achieving i t s targets on child mortality, maternal health and combating HIV/AIDS,
TB and other infectious diseases and in providing safe drinking water. Problems o f
malnutrition and under-consumption persist, especially among rural children and women.
In addition, considerable effort will be needed to achieve gender equality at the posteducation level.
Making sustainable progress towards MDGs will require the
development and implementation o f a concrete plan o f action and targeted investments in
priority areas.
35.
Enrolment rates in basic education in the Kyrgyz Republic are almost 95 percent,
and the literacy rate i s 99 percent. The 2003 household survey data show some disparity
in the enrolment rates o f school-age children (age 7-15) by household welfare, ranging
from 88 percent for the poorest quintile to 94 percent for the richest quintile. However,
over the past 5 years, the enrolment rate has been declining, coupled with the declining
and uneven quality o f education and a lack o f qualified teachers in rural areas. The
inability to provide good textbooks continues to be a pressing issue, as i s the maintenance
and development o f school infrastructure. Their lack o f access to quality education and
opportunities for sustainable employment makes the youth one o f the most vulnerable
groups.
36.
Healthcare reform in the Kyrgyz Republic has been ongoing for 10 years within
the framework o f the Manas National Healthcare Reforms (1996-2005).
The
implementation o f Manas Iresulted in the development o f an internationally recognized
primary healthcare reform model with the following building blocks: increasing the focus
on primary health care and family medicine, restructuring service delivery and
introducing a new healthcare financing model. Public healthcare facilities are now
available throughout the country; although access o f the poor to general medical services
remains a significant issue due to high out-of-pocket costs.
37.
There has been general improvement in health outcome indicators, such as infant
(IMR), child (USMR) and maternal mortality (MMR). Variation o f the IMR and U 5 M R
since 2004 can be explained by methodological changes in the calculation o f the

9

mortality rates, with a move to internationally comparable methods. Additionally, the
data for these indicators are extremely volatile from year to year: for example, the MMR
reached 61 in 2005 and improved to 44 in 2006. Further, health statistics can often take
several years to show improvements in response to reforms; and negative variations may
reflect the under-funding o f previous years. Ensuring universal access to qualified
obstetrics and childbirth services i s s t i l l a problem, especially in rural areas, as i s access
to preschool institutions and programs.

Goals

Indicators

1996

2004

Target in
2015

Performance

Promote gender equality
and empower women

Improve maternal health

Ensure environmental

Enhancement o f governance
efficiency and democracy

* On a scale o f -2.5 (the lowest point) to 2.5 (the highest point)
** On a scale o f 1 (highest degree o f democratic development) to 7 (the lowest level)
*** Estimated by UNDP Kyrgyz Republic based on the technical note to the MDG Report for Europe and the CIS
38.
T h e country has integrated national systems for combating HIV/AIDS, TB and
other infectious diseases (including under the “Three Ones Principle” o f the UN).
Progress on reducing TB prevalence and slowing the rate o f progress the HIV and AIDS
epidemic over recent years i s encouraging. Problems remain, particularly in prisons, and
effective implementation o f national strategies, together with continued donor support
will be needed to meet the MDGs. Porous borders and increased drug trafficking
increase the susceptibility o f the country to HIV/AIDs, TB and other infectious diseases.

10

.

39.
The Kyrgyz Republic can potentially reach the MDG targets for environmental
sustainability. Progress on this fiont, however, has been very slow, largely due to the
lack o f political will and commitment to institutionalize and effectively implement
measures for protecting the environment. Achieving the MDG targets on providing
access to potable water and sewage facilities i s an important area that needs effective
policy measures and increased financial investments.
40.
Gender equity has been maintained in the education system with adequate female
participation at all levels o f education. However, achieving gender equality remains a
serious issue at post educational level; in fact, the Kyrgyz Republic has experienced an
increased deepening o f gender inequality since the fall o f the Soviet Union. Women
constitute 54 percent o f the unemployed, and their wages make up 66 percent o f those o f
men. Also, there has been a drastic decline in women's participation in decision-making
processes and politics. Currently, there are no women members in Parliament, or in the
national Government, and only one woman at the Ministerial level.
41.
Progress towards achieving the MDG targets for the Global Partnership for
Development i s mixed. The country has shown considerable progress in the area o f
information and communication and w i l l most likely achieve the targets.

E. Governance and Corruption
42.
As a result o f weak capacity and poorly defined institutional responsibilities,
mechanisms to resolve conflicts over policy are underdeveloped and the ability o f the
Government to effectively enforce policies and laws i s limited. Within the civil service,
extensive patronage networks and l o w pay have made i t difficult to establish a
professional merit-based civil service. Moreover, since the March 2005 revolution, in
many institutions technocrats have been displaced by administratively inexperienced
officials, and thus public administration has been weakened. I t i s only recently that the
importance of a merit-based civil service has been recognized, and steps have been taken
to implement reforms with regard to requirements for the competitive selection o f civil
servants.
43.
Many of the potential benefits o f a market economy have not been realized as
businesses are subject to numerous inspections and requirements, with often different
agencies inspecting the same aspect o f the business. Tax regulations are numerous,
inconsistent, and are constantly being amended. Inconsistencies in the tax code create
opportunities for rent-seeking behavior by tax inspectors, auditors, and tax police.
Political instability has also contributed to rent seeking through the redistribution o f
assets held by officials o f the previous regime. In addition to endemic administrative
corruption, there i s widespread rent extraction through key state owned enterprises,
particularly in the mining, energy and communications sectors, which undoubtedly
creates strong interests opposed to reforms. Problems with governance and corruption
have been exacerbated since the 2005 revolution.

11

...

2006 rank

2005 rank

Change in rank

i)/t,np Bf2\illt,\5

90

104

11.4

Starting a Business

41

34

-7

Dealing with Licenses

143

138

-5

Employing Workers

63

64

+I

Registering Property

31

54

+23

Getting Credit

65

96

+3 1

Protecting Investors

33

33

0

Paying Taxes

150

152

+2

Trading Across Borders

173

171

-2

Enforcing Contracts

38

37

-1

127

129

+2

Ease of

ying unofficial payments are frequent

..,.

Source: World BanWEBRD Business Environment and Enterprise P e r f o m c e Survey 2005.

44.
According to the 2005 Business Environment and Enterprise Performance
Survey (BEEPS), 59 percent o f businesses cited corruption as a significant obstacle to
doing business. This figure i s the highest in the region and indicates a worsening
compared to the 2002 survey. I t was also ranked at 142 out o f 163 countries on the 2006
Transparency International Corruption Index. Corruption covers a wide range o f
activities. In the provision o f education and health services corruption has a corrosive
effect and affects service delivery in these important areas. The new Government has

12

supported calls for a stronger line against corruption at all levels o f government, but not
yet implemented any new policies.
45.
Despite the problems described above, the Kyrgyz Republic does have relatively
liberal legislation in many areas, low formal government interventions, and a formally
deregulated business environment. This environment has created a basis for a steadily
developing business community that in turn has helped stimulate a buoyant civil society,
opening the way for increased voice and accountability. Following the March 2005
revolution, civil society has consistently called on the authorities to fulfill their
commitments to fight corruption and organized crime, and the authorities have in turn
engaged in active dialogue with civil society. The mass media i s freer now, and an
environment o f active political debate prevails.

46.
Numerous initiatives, focusing largely on legal frameworks, have been
undertaken in recent years included adoption o f an anticorruption law, establishment o f
Councils on Good Governance (in 2003 and 2004) to advise o n anticorruption policy,
legal reform to improve the business environment, establishment o f an anticorruption
commission in 2005, and a law on the declaration o f income and assets o f high state
officials, among others. However, there has been relatively little attention paid to
implementation, capacity building, and upgrading o f managerial skills. Practical
enforcement and implementation have been slow, and in practice, these actions have not
yet had significant impact.
47.
Implementation o f the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative (EITI) to
which the Kyrgyz Republic signed on in July 2004, i s a potentially important measure.
However, overly ambitious commitments combined with a lack o f capacity have implied
only partial compliance with the EITI. Nevertheless, the authorities have renewed their
commitment to the EITI in the CDS and are receiving technical assistance in its
implementation.

111. THE COUNTRY DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY 2007-2010

F. CDS Development Vision and Priorities6
48.
The CDS for the period 2007-10, prepared by the Kyrgyz authorities, builds on
the policy experience from the National Poverty Reduction Strategy (NPRS). The CDS
i s anchored on four pillars-growth-oriented economic development and improving the
business environment, governance and transparency in public administration, human
resource development, and environmental sustainability and natural resources
management.

49.
The CDS was prepared in a participatory manner, building on extensive
consultations with a broad range o f stakeholders, including representatives from

6

Government of the Kyrgyz Republic, 2006. Country Development Strategy, 2007-201 0

13

parliament, the private sector, and civil society organization^.^ The JCSS development
partners have likewise provided comments on the earlier versions CDS, but the vision
and the spirit o f the document remains that o f the authorities. While recognizing that
some CDS targets are overly ambitious, and/or in need o f further justification, the JCSS
partners share the right emphasis o f the CDS on labor productivity, competitiveness, and
governance improvement in achieving these targets.’

G. Growth-Oriented Development

50.

The CDS focuses on consolidating the macroeconomic stability attained during
implementation o f the NPRS, to foster further growth and poverty reduction. Continued
fiscal prudence should support long-term growth and help maintain macroeconomic
stability. The primary deficit o f the general government i s expected to decline to an
average o f 2% percent o f GDP during 2007-10, reflecting continued improvements in
revenue mobilization and streamlining o f expenditures. Success in improving the legal
infrastructure and tax administration would yield higher tax revenues in support o f the
projected fiscal path. A t the same time, fiscal savings will be sought through enhanced
budget management and prioritization o f spending. The CDS also identifies improving
public financial management (through tax reforms and prudent expenditure management
including better targeting of social spending) and improving governance as crucial for
establishing a stable and transparent environment that i s conducive to private investment.

5 1.
T h e authorities are also committed to contain inflation in the l o w single digits and
enhance financial intermediation. Inflation, which bottomed out at 2.2 percent in 2002,
averaged 4.2 percent in 2003-06 and i s expected to stabilize around 4 percent in the long
term. At the same time, the National Bank o f the Kyrgyz Republic (NBKR) plans to
enhance the effectiveness o f the payment system, champion legislative amendments to
strengthen the legal foundations (including for collateral use and recovery in the case o f
default) for risk-taking, and step up bank supervision.
52.
The CDS underscores the need to diversify the economy, given recent swings in
productivity and F o w t h stemming from performance variations in a single dominant
industry-mining.
To achieve significant reductions in poverty, the CDS focuses reform
7
The government launched the CDS preparation process in January 2006, and set up a working
group comprising representatives from these various groups with an explicit mandate to update and extend
the poverty strategy to 2010. This mandate involved drafting a poverty reduction strategy that reflects the
renewed aspirations o f the populace in the aftermath o f the March 2005 “Tulip Revolution.” During the
preparation process, the working group consulted development partners and representatives o f the IFIs and
completed a final draft o f the CDS in December 2006 incorporating comments from a preliminary review
by the IFIs.
8
A detailed assessment o f the CDS, shared by the JCSS partners, i s provided in the IMF-IDA Joint
Staff Advisory Note (April 2007).
9
The CDS envisages the following measures for promoting diversification o f the economy:
measures directed at export promotion, including those o f the agricultural processing enterprises and
service industry; better understanding o f the countries’ comparative advantages; proper regulation o f the
foreign investments process; reducing production and transaction costs and facilitating access to foreign
markets for locally produced goods and services, improving customs-tariff policy and participation o f the
Kyrgyz Republic in formation o f the single customs tariff o f EurAsEc.

14

efforts on sectors and industries that can provide the maximum cumulative contributions
to GDP growth. The CDS envisages a target economic growth rate o f 8 percent in 200708, and 8.5-9 percent in 2009-10. Nonetheless, it will be important to identify the right
combination and sequencing o f policies for attaining the required economic
diversification; general improvements in the business environment could help in this
direction. The focus will be on improving labor productivity, diversifying the economic
base, pursuing a liberal trade policy and accelerated growth in key sectors described in
succeeding paragraphs.

53.
The CDS places a very high priority on the energy sector as an engine o f growth,
and broadly identifies the necessary policy and investment measures for further
development o f the sector. The objectives are to: (a) deliver a reliable, sustainable long
term energy supply, while strengthening the sector’s financial situation by reaching cost
recovery tariffs by 2010; (b) enable the sector to play i t s role in underpinning strong
economic growth; and (c) ensure that the poor have the resources to pay for energy
required to satisfy basic needs. The Government will also foster private sector
participation in the energy sector. The cabinet has established a Ministry o f Industry,
Energy and Fuel which will be responsible for energy policy. Some decisions, such as a
medium-term tariff policy, measures to improve financial discipline, and improve
corporate governance and transparency have been taken recently, which shows a renewed
commitment.
The CDS places a high emphasis on private sector participation. However,
54.
implementation o f the chosen policies and measures-which are not new-remains a
concern, especially given the lack o f legal framework, political consensus on private
sector participation, etc. The desired investment levels are too high at US$3.5 billion for
the energy sector alone, and the country would be extremely fortunate to mobilize
perhaps a tenth o f such amount.

55.
To enable the mining sector to play i t s rightful role in spurring strong economic
growth, the Government i s committed to creating a suitable legal and regulatory
environment that provides security o f tenure through an efficient licensing system for
local and external investors. The CDS proposes new legislation that will create
transparency in the sector in the award o f concessions as well as the regulation and
supervision thereof and the adoption o f a fiscal regime consistent with international
norms. Publishing audited financial reports o f state revenues originating from the mining
sector in accordance with the country’s obligations under the EITI will lend credibility to
the Government’s stated commitments.
56.
The CDS focuses on agriculture as a key sector for output and employment. The
Government i s committed to completion o f land reforms and new legislation in support
o f agro-processing industry development. Irrigation i s a critical input for profitable and
market oriented agricultural production, but i s dealt with very briefly in the CDS. In
addition, specific proposals in the document bear no apparent relevance to their
underlying goals and do not take into account the institutional weaknesses and lack o f the
resources needed to implement them.

15

H. Improving Governance and the Business Environment

57.
The CDS places improving governance high on the agenda, and on fighting and
reducing corruption in particular. I t recognizes that a principal constraint on economic
development i s corruption. Government ineffectiveness and poor performance in
delivering basic social services will be tackled by undertaking political reform,
deregulating the economy, effective public administration, and legal reform. A key
element i s the creation o f an impartial and effective judicial system. T h e CDS envisages
moving away from authoritarian approaches in public governance and a transition to a
genuinely democratic management model in partnership with civil society. Fiscal
decentralization w i l l be pursued actively, including by giving local communities greater
authority over spending priorities, and strengthening their budgets so that poverty
reduction can be achieved more effectively on the ground.
58.
Policies and actions will focus on creating a favorable business environment that
supports private sector development and an investment climate that will attract foreign
investment. Reforming the tax system, including lowering taxes, increasing the tax to
GDP ratio, improvements in tax administration to minimize harassment o f taxpayers and
boost compliance, and improving the efficiency o f customs administration will be
priorities, In addition, continued effective financial sector supervision to forestall risks
and boost financial intermediation would be necessary to underpin improvements in the
business climate. The authorities plan to use the Public Investment Program (PIP) as a
key vehicle to channel resources to the infrastructure that will help development o f the
agricultural, industrial and social sectors,

.

59.
T h e CDS recognize the importance o f public administration and civil service
reforms and the necessity o f building an effective and professional Government to ensure
a favorable environment for private sector development and economic growth. The
document includes a range o f activities, such as optimization o f the Government’s
structure based on functional reviews, cadre rightsizing, and strengthening capacity o f
civil servants. However, the Government has conducted such horizontal functional
reviews o f all ministries and agencies in the past with some support from donors, but
failed to implement the most critical recommendations o f these reviews.

I. Human Resources Development
60.
The CDS recognizes that the future o f the Kyrgyz Republic i s dependent on the
quality o f i t s labor force and the well-being o f i t s population. Human and social
development priorities in the CDS include access to increased and affordable education
and health services; favorable living conditions with access to water, sanitation and basic
social services, and social protection for vulnerable groups in the population. However,
the authorities will need to translate these rather broad policy statements into a set o f
time-bound actions with adequate allocation o f resources in the context o f the annual
budgets, with a clear and appropriate pro-poor focus.

16

61.
The CDS summarizes key issues facing the health sector and how the
Government's comprehensive Manas Taalimi plan will address this during the CDS
period, T h e country has shown strong performance o n health reform over the part 10
years, and the Government i s committed to continued good performance on budget
planning and execution that w i l l broaden and deepen these efforts to address the
remaining issues in this sector, including achieving the health-related MDGs. The
Government i s also committed to continue the upward trend in overall financing for the
sector to compensate for the declines witnessed from 2000 to 2004.
62.
The CDS lays out a series o f important tasks facing the education sector. It
identifies providing access and improving the quality o f basic secondary education
provided, including the availability o f good textbooks and appropriate school
infrastructure. The Government intends to bolster targeted support for children from
vulnerable households, and gradually increase financing o f primaryhecondary education,
while introducing a capitation financing model that incorporates minimum standards.
The Government is committed to raising expenditure o n education from 4.9 percent o f
GDP in 2005 to 5.5 percent o f GDP by 2010.
63.
The CDS correctly identifies poor targeting as one o f the main problems in the
social assistance system, Consistent with good international practice, the Kyrgyz
Republic had implemented a system to identify low-income households - the Unified
Monthly Benefit (UMB)-providing
guaranteed minimum income to 534,000 persons
(10.4 percent o f the population) in 2005. An improved UMB methodology has been
submitted for parliamentary approval, and i t s implementation would improve targeting
and reduce beneficiaries by at least 15 percent, using the savings to increase benefits.
64.
The analysis o f environment sustainability in the CDS-the
fourth pillaridentifies many issues including the risks o f natural disasters from earthquakes,
mudslides and avalanches (the latter two linked to the problem o f deforestation) and the
threats to health from uranium tailing and other hazardous wastes. A key government
priority i s the appropriate management o f natural resources. However, the l i n k s to
economic and social development are less well articulated.

J. Results of and Lessons Learned from NPRS Implementation
65.
The CDS builds on the results achieved during the implementation o f the NPRS.
Solid results were achieved in poverty reduction, as described in the section on poverty
and inequality. The Government's record on improving governance has been weaker that
what was hoped for. Measures to increase efficiency, transparency and fiduciary controls
within the public sector have proceeded reasonably well at the technical level, but
commitment to drive through core policy reforms-particularly with respect to corruption
and civil service reform-has decreased considerably.
66.
Two key lessons became apparent during the second review" o f NPRS
implementation: (i)the need for sound resource planning and mobilization, and (ii)
the
lo

Government of the Kyrgyz Republic. Second Review ofNPRS Implementation, 2006

17

need for an effective monitoring mechanism. The NPRS and the policies to implement i t
were not linked strongly enough to the state budget and resource planning. Government
and donors also need to become more outcome focused, through the adoption o f a
common monitoring framework, and link sector reforms and investment operations much
more closely with the national budget process.

67.
The reform agenda, particularly with respect to energy, the civil service and the
business environment, was too complex and overly ambitious in an environment of
limited political will. Implementation in most sectors has been weak; however, there have
been good results in the areas of health and social protection, community managed
development, land registration and irrigation. Significant improvements in donor
coordination notwithstanding, projects and programs being spread across too many areas,
adversely impacted implementation capacity. Greater government ownership, along with
better cross-sectoral diagnosis in areas such as investment climate, improved service
provision and public sector transparency i s crucial.
68.
This experience suggests that the most useful interventions will be those that
support basic reforms rather than second or third generation reforms where institutional
capacity has not yet been developed. Thus, greater selectivity i s called for, both in the
areas of engagement and between donor programs, that do not place a heavy burden o n
the Government. I t i s also important that a very careful examination o f institutional
arrangements such as the establishment o f Project Implementation Units (PIUs) or policy
units staffed by consultants be undertaken before interventions are agreed to with the
Government.

K. Monitoring and Evaluating Progress o f the CDS
69.

In identifylng approaches for mitigating poverty and social deprivation, the CDS
sets up benchmarks consistent with the MDGs. The CDS has enhanced the mechanisms
for monitoring and evaluating progress, although these are s t i l l not fully articulated; the
strategy includes plans to involve civil society and development partners in evaluating
progress during implementation.

70.
Monitoring indicators for the CDS concentrate largely on macroeconomic
outcomes, governance and business environment outcomes. In addition, there are
monitoring targets in some o f the production sectors, such as agriculture and energy,
which w i l l assist in implementing the CDS. The CDS also proposes monitoring o f the
strategy both through official channels and by civil society.

18

IV. DEVELOPMENT CHALLENGES AND OPPORTUNITIES
71.
Drawing on the analysis in the preceding sections, a number o f key challenges
emerge that need to be addressed and overcome. First, shoring up political commitment
and country ownership .of the reform agenda w i l l be crucial. Second, capacityresources, technical and implementation capacity-will
need to be developed. Third,
prioritizing and sequencing the implementation o f the reform agenda will have to be
worked out in each o f the priority areas identified by the Government. The following
paragraphs outline in greater detail specific challenges that the Government faces and
will have to address in implementing the CDS.

(i) Supporting Growth over the Long-Term
72.
A key macroeconomic challenge for the Government i s to overcome the
remaining structural weaknesses o f the economy and to move toward sustained output
growth. The Government i s committed to reduce the general government primary deficit
to an average o f 2.7 percent o f GDP during 2007-10, reflecting continued improvements
in revenue mobilization and streamlining o f expenditures. During the JCSS period,
assuming the reforms outlined in the CDS are implemented, growth is expected to
average 5 percent supported mainly by a recovery o f the gold sector and continued
growth in services. Growth in external aggregate demand fueled by continued benign
economic conditions in neighboring Russia, Kazakhstan and China would help maintain
export growth and the flow of remittances. Acceleration o f export growth should help
reduce the external current account deficit.'
73.
The debt sustainability analysis suggests that debt ratios are likely to improve
over time. However, this will take place gradually, despite the Government's decision
not to seek HIPC debt relief, assuming that macroeconomic targets can be maintained and
crucially, that structural reforms facilitate growth o f GDP and government revenues. I t i s
estimated that using data for the end o f 2006, the N P V o f debt to government revenues
had already declined to 240 percent (below the HIPC eligibility threshold). Nevertheless
the debt outlook remains highly vulnerable to exogenous shocks or reversal o f the
prudent macroeconomic policies.
In the event o f strong implementation o f structural reforms i t i s possible that high
74.
productivity growth-stemming
from improvements in resource efficiency that result
from correcting relative price distortions and improvements in the business climate-will
provide additional stimulus to output growth and non-gold exports. Reforms that are
envisaged to promote diversification and boost long-term competitiveness include (i)
developing the necessary infrastructure to support private sector activity particularly in
the area o f trade and agriculture; (ii)
reducing regulatory burden on the private sector;

'I

The current account deficit has recently increased considerably. While imports increased rapidly
and gold exports somewhat declined, the current account deterioration may partly reflect a revision in the
statistical series o n shuttle trade, which i s mirrored by a large increase in net financial capital inflows,
including errors and omissions. Also, recorded remittances maybe underestimated.

19

(iii)
strengthening the judiciary and championing legislative amendments to strengthen
the rule o f law and property rights.
75.
The Kyrgyz Republic can further extend i t s growth potential over the medium
term if i t revitalizes reforms in the key growth generating sectors. Agriculture remains
the strongest component o f the Kyrgyz Republic’s economy and should remain an
important focus area for the future.It i s also the most important sector because o f i t s
essential role in providing employment, food security and consumer price stability. Since
1996, the agricultural sector has been characterized by a reduction in subsistence food
orientation and the emergence o f commercially oriented peasant farms. These small
family farms have been the engine o f agricultural growth, and in a supportive policy and
public investment environment their contribution could increase further.
76.

There i s considerable but largely unexploited potential for the development of
agri-businesses in food, cash crops and horticultural processing, and in inputs for light
industry. This will require diversification towards high value-added production and a
wider range o f better quality processed products. The Government has outlined various
policies for promoting agricultural development, including measures to strengthen private
property rights in land ownership and facilitating the sale and use o f land as collateral.
Irrigation services and water resource management will likely be decentralised and
privatised to local users. Experience suggests that farmers and local communities are
willing and capable to assume responsibility for many aspects o f local development. The
growing role o f Water Users’ Associations (WUAs) in irrigation and the response o f
farmers to opportunities provided by the formation o f service cooperatives are further
evidence of that willingness and capacity. Recent sector studies12 have underscored the
importance of a vigorous development o f the non-farm rural economy.

77.
Major reforms are s t i l l needed in the utility sector to put i t on a sound financial
footing. The Kyrgyz Republic has considerable energy resources. I t s hydroelectric
resources are o f the order o f 26,000 M W o f which only about 10 percent i s exploited; it
also has coal reserves in the order o f 1.2 billion tons. In addition, the country has a
developed electricity transmission and distribution system that has ensured that 100
percent o f the population has access to electricity.
Premised upon progress in
implementing the Government’s energy sector reforms, i t may attract Foreign Direct
Investments (FDIs) to finance construction o f new hydroelectric stations and transmission
lines to potential export markets in South Asia. The first step in tapping this potential
w i l l be to undertake the financial and technical rehabilitation o f the domestic electricity
sector to restore i t s viability. The energy companies have accumulated a huge amount o f
debt-leading to a quasi-fiscal deficit amounting to 7.6 percent o f GDP in 2005-that
needs to be resolved. Actions to reduce losses both financial and technical, and improve
cash collections-through
a combination o f policy and investment measures-will be
necessary to attract the considerable financing that large projects will require. Critical
actions in the CDS period that focus o n financial rehabilitation o f the sector could lay the
foundation for the longer term growth.

’’

Government o f the Kyrgyz Republic, Agricultural Sector Strategy, 2006 (prepared with ADB
assistance); World B a r k Agricultural Policy Update and Livestock Review

20

78.
T o take better advantage o f the potential o f the country’s mineral resources,
reform needs to continue in the mining sector. The CDS identifies the mining sector as
another potential area for supporting long-term growth if FDI can be attracted to exploit
new gold deposits (e.g., at Jerui), rare earth minerals and sub-surface resources. The
development o f a robust mining industry i s perceived as key to economic development
and the social welfare o f the population in mountainous areas. The task (which i s a
difficult one) i s to enact new legislation and adopt a fiscal regime consistent with
international
Publishing audited financial reports o f state revenues originating
from the mining sector in accordance with the country’s obligations under the EITI will
lend credibility to the Government’s stated commitments.
79.
Continued improvements to the lending environment that expands access to
finance are necessary, as the level o f financial intermGdiation remains low. The
Government needs to design and implement a comprehensive financial sector policy and
institutional reform that focuses on the following priorities, among others: (i)
strengthening the financial sector supervisory framework; (ii)
adoption o f international
standards o f governance for financial intermediaries as well as full disclosure o f
beneficial ownership; (iii)strengthening deposit taking institution through increasing
minimum capital requirements: (iv) weaning micro-credit institutions away from a
reliance o n concessional funding towards market-based funding; (v) developing access to
alternative financing instruments for Small and Medium Enterprises (SMEs), including
equity markets; (vi) reforming the legal and regulatory framework for insurance, and (vii)
supporting a voluntary funded pension pillar.
Table 3: Summary Financial Sector Statistics for Selected Transition Economies a
NPLsC
(%of
total
loans)

Country

No.of
Banks

Interest
Spreadb

KYrLWz
Republic

19

22.6

7.0

Armenia

20

14.0

N0.0f
Credit
Unions

Bank
Assets

306

18

19

8.6

0.2

1.5

7.2

-

15

19

6.0

0.4

0.8

12.0

0.8

0.1

Azerbaijan

42

8.9

8.2

28

18

18

Kazakhstan

35

9.0

13.1

52

21

49

Mongolia

17

11.2

Bank
Insurance
Deposits
Premium
Yo of GDP

Equity
Market
Cap.

Broad
Money

0.7
7.5
30.0
11.0
570
47
61
39.0
0.5
1.4
1.5
Uzbekistan
33
3.5
9.3
37.8
2.1
0.3
4.4
GDP = gross domestic product, No. = number, NPL = nonperfonning loan.
a Data in Table 3 i s for 2003 or 2004, depending on availability.
Difference between average lending rate and average deposit rate, as published in International Financial Statistics.
Official figures provided by national banking sector supervisory bodies. Independent estimates for Uzbekistanare much higher.
Calculated as the total capitalization of the most actively traded companies listed at the stock exchange.
Sources: National Authorities, International Monetary Fund (IMF) International Financial Statistics, Financial Sector
Stability Assessments, Article I V Consultation Reports, and European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD)
Transition Report 2004.
l3

Recent hearings and approval in the first reading by Parliament of the draft l a w o n the gold mining
sector have raised concerns o n the side o f the business community over the risks o f expropriation and
feasibility o f future investments in ,mining sector. These concerns were expressed by the business
community to the authorities in April 2007.

21

80.
Deepening and diversifying the financial sector and improving access to credit i s
a critical path to achieve rapid growth. As o f June 2006, there were only 232,900 bank
accounts for a population o f 5.1 million people. The assets o f banks and non-bank credit
institutions were 22 percent and 4 percent o f GDP respectively in 2005. The turnover in
the payment system i s low, at 1.45 times GDP in 2005, compared to 5 times GDP in
middle-income countries and a turnover equivalent to GDP every three to five days in the
high-income industrialized economies.
8 1,
Effective measures must be taken to properly maintain the road network in the
Kyrgyz Republic with limited resources. Due to fiscal constraints, funding for road
maintenance has been inadequate since 1991. Consequently, only 11 percent o f the
current network i s in good condition, while 51 percent i s in poor to very poor ~ o n d i t i o n ’ ~
requiring immediate strengthening or rehabilitation. Under the present maintenance
funding regime, the road network w i l l continue to deteriorate, resulting in significant
increases in vehicle operating costs and travel time.

Table 4: Annual Funding Requirements for Road Maintenance
Total Cost ($ ‘000)

Type

Unit Cost ($/km)

Routine maintenance on primary roads (5,697 km)

3,850

680

Routine maintenance on intermediary roads (5,093 km)

2,470

485

Routine maintenance on local roads (8,059 h)
Emergency repair

403
2,000

50
N o t available

Design and administration (10%)

870
9,593

Total

510

Source: ADB. 2005. Technical Assistance to Kyrgyz Republicfor the Institutional Support in the Transport Sector. Manila.

82.
The priority actions in the transport sector should include broadening financial
resources, prioritization o f the road network and the introduction o f preventative
maintenance management.” Active participation in the Central Asia Regional Economic
Cooperation (CAREC) program and other regional cooperation initiatives such as the
Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO) will be necessary. Priority needs to be given
to (i)improving regional transport corridors; (ii)improving border facilities; (iii)
harmonizing and simplifymg cross-border transport regulations, procedures, and
documentation and (iv) building transparency and the capacity and transparency o f
border officials. l6

14

Core Road Network Survey and Strategic Economic Analysis. World Bank, 2005 (unpublished).
Government o f the Kyrgyz Republic. Roads Sector Strategy. Draft March 2007 (prepared with
ADB assistance).
l6
ADB. Central Asia Regional Economic Cooperation Strategy and Program Update 2006-08.
Manila. 2005.

22

(ii)

Building a Transparent and Reliable Institutional Framework

83.
Dealing with poor governance (and corruption) will be fundamental to achieve
sustainable growth in the Kyrgyz economy. The two critical challenges that have to be
addressed in moving the growth agenda forward will be in developing a coherent policy
making framework, and-perhaps more importantly in the short to medium termaddressing issues o f property rights and rent-seeking that inhibit investment and output
growth.
84.
T o improve government effectiveness, establishing mechanisms at the center o f
Government to resolve conflicts over policy are essential, so that while there may be
divergent opinions, coherent policy formation i s s t i l l made possible. Mechanisms also
need to be put in place for translation o f government policy choices into law, ensure that
the laws and regulations are relatively unambiguous and non-contradictory, and that the
state has more effective mechanisms for implementing them.
85.
Since independence, the Government o f the Kyrgyz Republic has struggled with
vested interests, particularly those o f high-ranking officials who systematically
undermined ownership o f reforms. Public administration reform that threatened the
power patronage and rents o f senior officials was systematically opposed and
manipulated. Similarly reforms in the energy sector were also undermined and opposed
by officials. To fight and reduce corruption, the Government needs to begin to confront
these entrenched interests, eliminate the ambiguities and arbitrary powers delegated to
officials. I t also needs to effectively separate economic and political interests o f the
many senior officials in some o f the key sectors o f the economy, including particularly
power generation, banking, gold mining, and transport and communications. In this
respect transparency in these sectors w i l l be fundamental, but will have little impact
unless there i s strong political w i l l to oppose vested interests and ensure that individual
ministers, members o f Parliament and other high-ranking officials are no longer able to
oppose changes that threaten their own business interests.
86.
One o f the key tasks going forward i s ensuring transparency and accountability o f
the civil service. The Government has begun to implement the legal framework for
competitive and merit-based appointments to the civil service. An important aspect will
be to ensure that due process i s followed in all appointments and dismissals. Another
important step in promoting accountability will be the publishing o f income and assets
declarations by high level state officials in the mass media.
87.
Resolving many o f the difficulties o f budget execution will reduce rent-seeking
opportunities and corruption. W h i l e the Medium Term Budgetary Framework (MTBF)
has been partially successful in meeting priority needs, the Government i s planning to
improve budget execution through i t s Public Financial Management Action Plan. I t i s
also updating the budget classification and including a more precise definition o f povertyrelated expenditure in line with the CDS. In addition i t is introducing sector-level

23

education, agriculture, labor and social protection,
facilitate alignment o f budget allocation with sector priorities.

MBTF’s in five ministries-health,
and transport-to

88.
One o f the key problems identified in all aspects o f institutional reforms and
governance i s the so-called implementation gap. The Government i s taking some action
to address this important issue, with a limited civil service reform program focusing on
merit-based appointments and promotions. There have also been some attempts to take
forward the recommendations o f a series o f functional reviews; however, the outcomes
have been patchy.

89.
A sustained effort to create a more conducive business environment and eliminate
key governance shortcomings that hamper domestic and foreign investment i s ~ r u c i a 1 . I ~
Regulations that have emanated from different ministries and agencies need to be
rationalized. Recent assessments by donors have highlighted a number of priority
measures’8, including lowering administrative barriers (taxation and inspections),
enforcement o f creditor and property rights, modernizing the customs regime (reducing
clearance and other border delays), reducing and rationalizing the licensing and permits
regime and targeting investments in infrastructure that promote trade and development.
I t has been estimated that lowering trade barriers and costs by 50 percent would increase
GDP by an estimated 55 percent over 10 years”.
Figure 3.

Figure 4.

Regulatory Policies as a Problem Doing Buslness
Percent of firms indicating uncertainty about regulatory
policies as a proMein doing business

CIS

Business Licenses as a Problem Doing Business
Percent of firms indialing business licensing and permits
as a problem doing business

ECA

CIS

ECA

90.
The legal inconsistencies that undermine regulatory reform process in the Kyrgyz
Republic need to be addressed. In many instances, the regulatory and legal changes
contradict existing legislation without specifically stating the hierarchy o f legal and
normative acts. The entry mechanisms for enterprises are not particularly cumbersome,
. but existing and running businesses often face difficulties from licensing requirements
and inspections, excessive regulation, and overlapping functions on ministries and
enforcement agencies. All o f these inconsistencies and requirements allow opportunities
for corruption.

’*

ADB. Private Sector Development: Issues and Options. March 2007.
W o r l d Bank - Kyrgyz Republic Country Economic Memorandum: An Integrated Strategy for
Growth and Trade, June 2004
l9
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) - Central Asia Human Development Report
2005

24

91.

Legal and judicial reform targeted at better contract enforcement and the
institutional strengthening o f agencies and professional services will ensure
predictability, efficiency and transparency o f law enforcement. Currently, reform o f the
judicial system i s not high on the political agenda, despite wide and deep criticism o f the
system. Such reform should include (i)improving court infrastructure and court
facilitating the timely disclosure and publication o f
management and administration; (ii)
building the capacity o f judges and the legal profession and (iv)
court decisions; (iii)
supporting enforcement services (police, tax and customs administration, etc.). W h i l e
overall legal and judicial reform w i l l take a number o f years, a system o f alternative
dispute resolution should be adopted to allow for impartial, fair and rapid dispute o f
commercial disputes which would support a more rapid growth o f the private sector.

92.
A more coordinated cross-sector approach that increases the scope o f potential
interventions to support private sector development is needed.
Private sector
development depends as much on contract enforcement (an effective judiciary) as on
enterprise access to reliable physical infrastructure (roads, efficient energy supply) and
transparent and efficient administrative services (customs and border administration).
With better logistical and higher value-added service infrastructure (financial services,
processing and packaging, etc) higher revenues could be generated from current and
future trade and transit flows. Strengthened regional trade cooperation could expand
access to regional or new markets.
(iii) Improving Public Service Delivery

93,

The Kyrgyz Republic i s currently off-track on achieving the health-related
MDGs, and several important issues remain to be addressed during Manas Taalimi
implementation in the CDS period. The importance o f addressing human resource
constraints in the health sector, including the internal and external migration o f health
workers, rural-urban imbalances in health worker availability and the declining quality o f
medical education cannot be understated. Ongoing attention will also be required to
ensure fiscal balance in the government’s commitments under the State Guaranteed
Benefit Program; this can be done by avoiding ad hoc, fiscally unsupportable decisions to
expand entitlements without ensuring the availability o f additional resources to cover
them.

94.

Clearly, greater progress needs to be made on poverty-related health issues. In
addition there are regional disparities across the country in service utilization and access
to affordable medicines, exacerbated by the increase in out-of-pocket expenses as a share
o f household resources (from 4.7 percent to 7 percent per capita in 2001-04). Under the
Health Sector-wide Approach (SWAP), the authorities are committed to increase national
budget allocations to the health sector gradually from 2.5 percent o f GDP in 2006 to 2.75
percent in 2007 and 3.5 percent by 2010.

95.

The Kyrgyz Republic i s on-track to achieve the MDGs in education. However,
several hurdles remain, including limited financing for education, inefficiencies in the use
o f resources, and the decline in the quality o f education at all levels and in the enrollment

25

in upper secondary education. A key priority will be to target poor, rural and
disadvantaged schoolchildren to ensure universal access to quality education. Expanding
a network o f alternative preschools i s an important measure for increasing access to
preschool programs. The possibility o f a SWAP for the education sector is under serious
consideration.

96.

Curriculum modernization i s a pre-condition for improving the quality o f
education. The development and implementation o f a revised curriculum requires a new
generation o f textbooks and learning materials. The shortage o f teachers in rural schools,
the aging o f the teaching corps, the inability o f the system to provide adequate in-service
training, outdated teaching techniques and learning assessments and the limited use o f
information and communication technologies are some o f the constraints that need to be
addressed to improve the quality o f education.

97.
Early reforms in the social protection system included the introduction o f a
notionally defined contribution pension system, monetization o f privileges and moderate
changes to the main poverty benefit-a Unified Monthly Benefit (UMB) Scheme. The
Government i s making serious efforts to improve the system and i t s administration to
improve targeting, but much work remains. Taking a comprehensive view o f social
protection that l i n k s multiple areas rather than addressing them in fragmented fashion
(ie., avoiding separate social protection mechanism for different sectors such as energy)
w i l l be central to any approach. Strengthening the capacity o f implementing agenciesthe Ministry of Labor and Social Protection for social assistance programs and the Social
Fund for pensions-will be important for having real impact on the ground.
98.
Due to population aging, an increasing dependency burden poses serious longterm sustainability issues for the pension system in the absence o f remedial measures.
Moreover, the current system i s financed by a high payroll tax, which the authorities plan
to continue reducing gradually in order to stimulate employment. The Government
intends to develop a reform program consistent with fiscal sustainability, the mobilization
o f private savings, and long-term growth, with technical assistance from the World Bank,
based upon a comprehensive assessment o f alternative options: for example,
strengthening the link between contributions and benefits, introducing a funded and
transparently managed pension pillar, or greater flexibility in retirement ages, with
appropriate adjustments in benefits or contributions.

(iv)

Strengthening Regional Cooperation2*

99.

Increased cooperation among the Central Asian republics stands to produce big
gains for the people o f the region. The benefits from reducing trade costs, increasing
remittances from migrant workers, and more efficient use o f water and energy resources
could generate a regional economy twice as large and well o f f 10 years from now. The
price o f non-cooperation could also be large, a heavy toll extracted from the spread o f
disease, lost economic opportunities, natural disasters and environmental destruction, as
2a

UNDP 2005 Central Asia Human Development Report

26

well as conflict and insecurity.
region’s poorer populations.

Both costs and benefits will be felt most among the

100.

The Kyrgyz Republic i s an active member o f a number o f regional
organizations, including the Eurasian Economic Community (EurAsEC), the SCO and
the CIS. The Kyrgyz Republic i s also an active member o f the CAREC program led by
the ADB and supported by other multilateral institutions.21
101.
Since 1991, the country has been developing extensive economic and trade
relations with i t s neighbors and the Russian Federation. Exports to Kazakhstan, Russia,
Uzbekistan and the People’s Republic o f China account for almost half o f total exports
and just under 15 per cent o f GDP, mainly in the form o f construction materials, textiles,
agricultural products and energy (electricity). Facilitation o f trade and transit, and the
establishment o f effective transport and energy networks are the main focus o f the
country’s regional economic policy. While opportunities for quick “win-win’’ situations
appear to be relatively few, concerted efforts to prioritize and exploit them can yield good
results. Perhaps the greatest prospects for quick win-win initiatives at the regional level
appear to be in electricity trade22. Successful exploitation o f such opportunities for
bilateral trade will build a track record o f cooperation and momentum for larger-scale
initiatives. There are also possibilities for one or more “bold stroke” projects with large
benefits for a number of countries and significant private sector p a r t i ~ i p a t i o n . ~ ~
102.
Strengthened relations within the region help create a positive investment
climate and facilitate trade, tourism, business enterprise and other developments essential
for creating productive employment and reducing poverty. Despite the Kyrgyz
Republic’s own liberal trade policy, difficulties with border crossing, customs clearance,
and unofficial charges make trade with neighboring countries - and transit trade to more
distant markets - difficult, and undermines the competitiveness o f Kyrgyz products (see
Box 2).
103.
The country’s economic dependence on imports o f o i l and gas f i o m Kazakhstan
and Uzbekistan further underscores the importance o f effective regional economic
cooperation. Similarly, the need for cooperation in the use o f the regions trans-boundary
water resources i s important so that the Kyrgyz Republic receives adequate compensation
for the operation and maintenance o f water storage services and to mitigate the risks o f
regional environmental disasters such as receding o f the Aral Sea’s shores.

21

CAREC i s an initiative to encourage economic cooperation in Central Asia, and it includes
Afghanistan, Azerbaijan, PRC, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyz Republic, Mongolia, Tajikistan, and Uzbekistan as
participating countries, and i s supported by ADB, EBRD, IMF, Islamic Development Bank, UNDP, and
World Bank. Begun in 1997, the program has so far focused on regional initiatives in transport, energy,
trade facilitation, and trade policy.
22
World Bank 2006, Economic Cooperation in the Wider Central Asia Region, Working paper No.
75
23
The Urumqi Declaration adopted by Afghanistan, Azerbaijan, PRC, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyz
Republic, Mongolia, Tajikistan, and Uzbekistan at the CAREC’s 5th Ministerial Meeting in October 2006.

27

Measurement, June 2006

104.
The rapid spread o f tuberculosis and HIV/AIDS, and the impending threat from
other communicable diseases such as Avian flu, can be more effectively countered
through cooperation across the region. The U N D P concluded in a recent report24that the
increase in communicable diseases in Central Asia represents one o f the most critical
health problems facing the countries. Given that the target date for achieving the MDGs
i s set for 2015, i t is likely that the Central Asia region will not be in a position to meet
A further point o f tension,
health targets unless effective approaches are adopted
associated with Intra-Venous Drug U s e and HIVIAIDS, i s the increasing flow o f drugs
from Afghanistan.
(v)

ImplementationChallenges and Strategic Choices

105.
Given the fractured politics and weak country ownership, efforts should be made
to build consensus for reforms through extensive dialogue and broad consultation. Given
24

UNDP, 2005. Central Asia Human Development Report. Bringing down barriers: regional
cooperation for human development and security
25
Millennium Development Goals for Health in Europe and Central Asia, World Bank Working
Paper No. 33, June 2004, and Millennium Development Goals, 2005: Progress and Prospects in Europe
and Central Asia, World Bank

28

current capacity and institutional constraints, the proposed reforms will have to be
modest and sequential, focusing on step-by-step improvement over a long period o f time
with a focus on tangible results. For effective implementation o f the CDS, the
Government faces some key strategic choices that are outlined in the following sections.

106.
Policies that have a visible impact as perceived by beneficiaries are more likely
to generate broad public support for reforms. Skepticism towards the Governmeht and
development partners highlights the importance o f engaging with and supporting nongovernment stakeholders to build greater demand for reforms. The key will be to initiate
sustainable reform processes that will provide a catalyst for broader reforms, and build
champions for them among the public.
Within each o f the four pillars o f the CDS the Government will have to identify
the most pressing needs and make strategic choices that build upon the lessons learned
and experience acquired from implementingthe NPRS.

107.

0

Tb achieve sustainable economic growth over the long-term, two overarching
challenges will have to be addressed: debt sustainability and economic
diversification. On the first challenge, any economic program will have to
address the issue o f the sources o f financing development, whether through a
tighter fiscal stance, measures to encourage domestic savings or the search for
alternative sources o f external finance. T h e second strategic choice i s between an
approach which confronts vested interests, introduces clear boundaries between
the public and private sectors, promotes transparent market price setting and
enforces property rights or the one which favors vested interests o f those linked to
the power structures at the expense o f wider economic development.

0

Two analyses-ne
by the International Crisis Group26 and the other sponsored
by DflD-underscore
that the Kyrgyz Republic has been subjected to a
progressive fragmentation o f authority, characterized by regional rivalries and a
blurring o f the boundaries between criminal, economic and political life. T h e
continuing turbulence in the aftermath o f the “Tulip Revolution” has brought
these realities to the surface. Under these conditions, far-reaching governance
reforms are neither feasible nor likely to show results in the time horizon o f the
CDS. The urgent need i s for actions capable o f contributing rapidly to greater
perceived legitimacy o f state institutions.

0

26

There i s an urgent need to stem the deterioration in key infrastructure and social
services that will reduce non-income dimensions o f poverty. Systemic reform i s
critical, particularly in improving service delivery for making progress o n those
social development indicators which are crucial to sustaining economic
development in the Kyrgyz Republic: health, education and social protection.

International Crisis Group, Kyrgyzstan on the Edge - Asia Briefing No. 55, November 9, 2006,

29

V. THE JOINT COUNTRY SUPPORT STRATEGY

A.

The Strategic Framework

108.
The JCSS assistance i s closely aligned with the Government’s development
goals. JCSS partners w i l l continue to assist the Government to translate the CDS into
clear priorities within a credible medium-term expenditure framework and annual budget.
Development partners will strive to enhance country ownership and capacity. All
analytic and lending support will be scrutinized to assess how i t achieves the goal o f
greater ownership, if i t can be produced jointly or how others’ work can be leveraged.
109.

One area with considerable potential for enhancing aid effectiveness through
better cooperation includes the harmonization o f fiduciary requirements, e.g., common
procurement arrangements, documents and procedures, along with common accounting,
reporting and auditing arrangements. Establishing project implementation units to
manage fiduciary arrangements and secretariats o f paid consultants within government
structures to develop and implement policies has failed to build sustainable capacity
within the administration, while attracting away the most potentially capable officials.
Further, country systems w i l l be used to the extent possible and partners w i l l work to
build and strengthen country capacity.

110.
The JCSS partners will channel their assistance through pooled financing
arrangements, where favorable policy frameworks are in place. Project aid w i l l be used
to support capacity building and institutional strengthening, community-driven initiatives
and support for infrastructure investments. All project aid, except that channeled through
Non-governmental Organizations (NGOs) and UN agencies will be recorded explicitly on
budget.
111.
In a small country with heavy donor presence, “business as usual” puts a strain
on the limited resources available. Some donors might consider reducing their presence
in some sectors, or become silent partners, Le., continue to provide resources but giving
the leadership to another donor, within an agreed aid framework. The Government has
signaled i t s desire to do this; a good start has been made in the Health SWAp, with on budget financing from five donors. All JCSS partners will be proactive across the entire
donor community to encourage further selectivity and harmonization. Furthermore, the
five JCSS partners will encourage other donors to j o i n the joint strategy process.
112.
The JCSS partners will continue to support policy analysis and engage in
dialogue to help the Government prioritize expenditures and reform policies to more
rapidly achieve CDS goals. The m i x o f instruments used by JCSS partners will include
straightforward repeater projects and other investments, supported with targeted technical
assistance and analytical services. The JCSS partners will adapt the level and nature o f
support in response to emerging national developments and needs, taking a flexible
approach to providing assistance. These adjustments will be made in consultation with
the Government and other partners. An annual JCSS review process will provide the
opportunity to identify and agree on any changes.

30

113.
All projects will include components to strengthen governance, transparency and
accountability. In practical terms this could mean that sector projects could only go
forward after an analysis o f the implications for overall governance (including fiduciary
risk) has been made and shown to be positive-in addition to the analysis o f the other
benefits o f the project. Using a governance lens approach also requires that donors be
willing to say no to requests for assistance that may undermiqe overall governance. T h i s
also extends to supporting reforms for which the foundations are not in place; donors
should hold back if there are no clear signals indicating government ownership o f reform,
and seek to scale up where strong support and a positive track record i s evident.
114.
The public and contentious debate over HIPC within the country highlights the
need for developing an information dissemination and communications effort that will
improve the credibility o f the Government and the international donors. Skepticism
about a reform process that has little legitimacy among the broader public will reduce the
chances o f success and for building ownership o f the reform agenda. T h i s approach
might mean going beyond the consultation process with civil society to a more sustained
and long-term communication effort, including more effective working with the national
media, and with communication units within Government.

B.

Program Focus

The JCSS partners will focus their programs on four areas identified in the CDS
115.
as especially important for achieving the overarching goals. These are:
0

0

0

Economic management consistent with strong and sustained pro-poor growth:
strengthening the budget process and cross-cutting reforms in public financial
management, and aligning financial management with government priorities;
Reducing corruption, improving governance and effective public
administration: deregulating the economy, increasing transparency, improving
the capacity o f the c i v i l service and public administration, and legal reform;
Building sustainable human and social capital through improved health and
education outcomes, including access to and improving the quality o f health,
education and social protection services; and
Ensuring environmental sustainability and natural resource management

31

(i) Economic Management Consistent with Strong and Sustained Pro-Poor
Growth
116.
JCSS partners will provide financial and analytical support aimed at improving
budget and public financial management, ensuring debt sustainability and developing a
robust financial system. They will continue to support a range o f core diagnostic work to
improve fiscal sustainability, including public expenditure reviews, fiduciary assessments
and expenditure tracking surveys. Such support will extend to strengthening the financial
system and improve access to finance for small and medium enterprises, and
modernization o f the payments system.
The JCSS w i l l support the adoption and implementation o f a new tax code that
removes ambiguities and contradictions and fosters a business friendly regulatory
environment. JCSS partners will support the Government to implement legislation aimed
at reducing the number o f technical regulations and mandatory standards and introduce
limits on the number and duration o f inspections. Streamlining licensing and permit
procedures and introducing mechanisms for reviewing new regulations will also be
necessary. These actions will be conducive to promoting increased private sector
activity.

117.

118.
The JCSS partners will support the implementation o f the agriculture sector
strategy and the development o f rural auxiliary services. Programs will improve
livestock productivity, enhance marketing systems and improve land registration.
Programs will also support the development o f an agro-processing industry for export,
including in higher value-added products. Emphasis will be placed o n sustainable use o f
water resources and soil quality. T o promote rural development more broadly, JCSS
partners w i l l support sector reforms and investments in rural roads, and measures to
improve access to rural credit.

119.
The JCSS will support the creation o f transparent tariff structures, an improved
legal and regulatory framework, good corporate governance and financing arrangements
consistent with cost-recovery that w i l l help attract private capital into the energy and
mining sectors. JCSS partners will provide analytical and advisory support; however, i t
should be recognized that political commitment and support across the Government will
be necessary for making sustained progress.
120.
The JCSS partners will continue to provide financial and technical support to the
transport sector that w i l l facilitate trade and transit. The support includes the preparation
o f a transport sector strategy-with
a focus on the roads sub-sector-that
takes into
account operations and maintenance needs, the prioritization o f a road network that
improves transport corridors, strengthening regional transport linkages, and a reform
program for road maintenance systems and practices. Support will be provided for
creating infrastructure that reduces the cost o f doing business, and l i n k s the various
regions o f the country to the broader economy. Investment and policy advice to improve
transport corridors that will allow access to markets and improve cross-border trade w i l l

32

also form part o f JCSS support. The JCSS partners may provide assistance in developing
the framework for public-private partnerships to support infrastructure development.
121.
The JCSS partners will continue to provide financial and technical support to
strengthen the financial sector. Technical assistance will focus on governance, risk
management, as well as new financial products such as housing finance and insurance.
Support w i l l also be given to increase microlending activities, particularly in the rural
areas.

(ii) Improving Governance, Effective Public Administration and Reducing
Corruption
122.
The JCSS support for good governance will focus on dialogue with Government
and assistance to build and strengthen the capacity o f institutions critical to achieving the
CDS outcomes. The central pillar o f JCSS support for governance i s not an ambitious
reform agenda, but rather a rapid; bottom-up push for development results. The
Government should be seen to be delivering visible benefits to citizens in ways that are
seen to be transparent and fair. These include civil society, parliament, the media and
local government. Some programs w i l l also focus on increasing voice-including
that o f
women, in particular-and accountability.

123.
The JCSS financial support will contribute to the strengthening o f public
financial management (PFM), procurement and accounting. Strengthened P F M and
reduced corruption are critical for development o f the Kyrgyz Republic. The JCSS
partners will support implementation o f the National P F M Action Plan, with a particular
focus on budget reform.
The JCSS will also support fiduciary and budget
efficiencyhracking analyses, and work on increasing public demand for better
management and use o f budget finds.
124.
The JCSS partners will support the Government in undertaking comprehensive
judicial reform, a crucial underpinning and foundation for successful development.
Support will be provided for programs that build up the capacity of judges-including on
human rights-the
development o f an effective pre-trial supervision process and an
overall strengthening o f the courts system. Support may also be provided to develop an
alternative dispute resolution mechanism to support a more rapid growth o f the private
sector.
125.
The JCSS partners will support improvements in business environment and
investment climate, which would alleviate constraints on market mechanisms, improve
the efficiency o f allocation o f resources, and facilitate private sector investments into
profitable sectors. Capacity building o f the authorities in economic policy formulation
and implementation will be critical for pursuing an open development policy. The JCSS
partners will support the Kyrgyz Republic’s efforts to h l l y implement i t s commitments
under the provisions o f EITI. Greater transparency in the mining sector and management
o f prospective mining areas are considered a pre-condition o f a more mature and
environmentally responsible approach to exploration and mining activities.

33

(iii) Building Sustainable Human and Social Capital
126.
In education, the JCSS partners will support preparation o f the Government’s
national human resource strategy that seeks to link labor market needs to education and
training. Other instruments o f support will include investments in pre-school, primary
and secondary education that improve access, quality and learning outcomes, including to
poor and vulnerable groups in the population, particularly in rural areas. A study
focusing on the Government’s priority o f introducing a 12-year system will be
undettaken under the ADB’s Second Education project.
127.
If appropriate, the JCSS partners will work towards developing a SWAP in the
education sector that will improve financing o f education through a different approach in
allocating resources to schools, teachers’ salaries and teachers’ training. In addition,
support will be provided to better target poor, rural and disadvantaged students to ensure
universal access to quality education. The JCSS support will seek to improve internal
efficiency in the utilization o f limited resources, and link all interventions to results on
the ground.
128.
The JCSS partners will support Manus Tualimi-a five year program that covers
the JCSS period and reinforces the directions, achievements and results o f Manus Ifocus on population involvement in health issues and the increased emphasis on social
mobilization to empower communities to resolve health needs at the local level.
Emphasis in the ongoing Health SWAP is also being placed on reorienting the public
health system and simultaneously strengthening and integrating priority programs such as
TB, reproductive health, child health, and HIV and AIDS, to achieve better health
outcomes.
129.
Support will be provided to strengthening the role o f the Ministry o f Health in
the areas o f health policy formulation, inter-sector cooperation and donor coordination.
Given the Government’s commitment to increasing the national budget allocation to the
health sector fr6m 10.6 percent in 2006 to an optimal 13 percent in 2010, and to 100
percent execution o f the budget allocation. Five donors, including three from the JCSS
group, are committed to providing on-budget finds till 2010 to meet the financing gap for
successfil implementation o f Manus Taalimi.
’

130.
Technical assistance and policy dialogue support will be provided for
comprehensive pension reform and the implementation o f the Children’s Code. The
JCSS partners intend to support the development o f a pension reform strategy consistent
with fiscal sustainability, the mobilization o f private savings, and long-term growth,
based upon a comprehensive assessment o f alternative options, including for example,
greater flexibility in retirement ages, with appropriate adjustments in benefits or
contributions. Other key reforms that will be supported include: (a) developing
satisfactory legislation and implementation of parametric changes in the pay-as-you-go
system; (b) adopting and implementing a phasing-in action plan for any pension pillar;

34

(c) strengthening pension administration and financial management, and (d) pension
policy reviews.
13 1,
Support to social assistance reforms-through TA and sector work-will help to
develop a more effective and simpler benefit structure for improving the presently l o w #
living standards among the poorest households, without undermining incentives for selfsufficiency. This w i l l also include defining a more carefully differentiated set o f
eligibility conditions and building an administrative system for delivering benefits to
eligible households.
(iv)

Environmental Sustainability and Natural Resources Management

The JCSS w i l l support more effective disaster risk management, where the
132.
priority lies in creating adequate environmental safeguards. JCSS partners will support
efforts to help policy makers-including the entire Government more broadly-to take
environment-oriented concerns into consideration into key budget policies and processes.
133.
The JCSS will support new initiatives in energy conservation and renewable
power provision, which presents promising opportunities in rural areas. Such support
however, will be provided without any loss in the urgency o f further reforms in the
energy sector: the development o f renewable energy cannot be a substitute for the weak
management o f the existing system in the electricity sector. The JCSS will also support
efforts to utilize the Clean Development Mechanisms (CDM) to secure grant funding for
energy efficiency and carbon sequestration activities.
134.
The JCSS partners envisages further support to irrigation modernization that
goes beyond physical infrastructure (including drainage) remodeling and extends to
modern methods o f managing and paying for irrigation supplies. The JCSS partners will
support continued investment in those areas of water management-including
transboundary water management-where the policy and institutional framework i s well
defined (irrigation rehabilitation, rural water and sanitation) and will support further
development of a coherent framework built around the concept of integrated water
resource management.
135.
The development o f local capacity for the Environmental and Natural Resources
Management (ENRM) and related activities (such as rural finance, agro-processing, rural
extension, etc.) has rightly attracted large and diverse donor support. Capacity building
needs to remain close to the center o f donor assistance-including
that from JCSS
p a r t n e r s 4 u r i n g the period of the CDS. The detailed structure and evolution o f that
assistance i s best left to individual donor agencies and their government and civil society
partners.

C.

Monitoring and Evaluation

136.
JCSS partners and the Government will regularly monitor and evaluate their
performance relative to actions, indicators and targets outlined in the JCSS matrix in

35

order to assess their progress towards achieving CDS goals. Monitoring and evaluation
w i l l take the form o f a joint annual review o f t h e CDS and indicators could include, for
example, increased sector coverage o f joint analytical work and building on the SWAP
approach and increasing coverage to other sectors. T o the extent possible, the review will
use existing government processes as the main avenues for detailed discussion, dialogue
and generating information. These include the CDS monitoring and evaluation
framework, the national budget, the MTEF and Public Expenditure Reviews (PERs).
137.
The annual report w i l l bring together the results including progress, remaining
challenges and the way forward, and will be made available in a timely fashion to all
stakeholders. The monitoring indicators chosen will also reflect the internationally
accepted Paris Declaration indicators adapted to the context o f the Kyrgyz Republic.
This will facilitate debate, discussion and public accountability. A joint mid-term review
will be undertaken during the JCSS period.

D.

Financing Scenarios

138.
Approximately US$80 million per annum will be available from the JCSS
partners; there would be a m i x o f instruments including budget support (possibly in the
form o f Development Program Grants), and an investment program with a m i x o f
straightforward repeater projects and other “simple” investments along with more
complex policy oriented projects, supported with targeted TA and analytical services.
Should the Kyrgyz Republic successfully undertake rapid reforms (significantly
addressing governance and business climate issues, etc.,) consideration would be givenconsistent with the Performance Based Allocation (PBA) methodology o f the WBG and
ADB-to increasing IDA and ADB allocations and the greater use o f budget support
instruments (e.g., Poverty Reduction Support Grants (PRSGs) or Program Development
credits/grants. A Development Forum meeting i s planned for M a y 3 1,2007.
139.
Joint policy dialogue on structural reforms between the donor community and
the Government has generally been good and is improving. Opportunities for the JCSS
donors to engage in dialogue occurs around projects and programs and includes subsector and sector dialogue (where progress has been greater) and dialogue on major
structural reforms (where there has been less progress to date).

E.

Risk Mitigation

140.
Various factors may put the implementation o f the JCSS at risk. The significant
risks can be categorized into political risk, institutional and operational risk, and the risks
from exogenous shocks. The risks and their mitigation mechanisms are summarized in
the paragraphs that follow.

36

(i) Political Risk
141,
Continuing political instability and upheaval and other adverse events may
hinder the Government’s commitment to implement the reforms supported by the JCSS,
including possible changes in the political leadership. The existence o f vested interests in
key sectors may also block reforms. In addition there i s a significant risk that the
authorities may move away from a market based approach to economic policy to a more
interventionist approach. Skepticism o f the IFI’s may also result in the Kyrgyz Republic
turning to non-traditional development partners, thus rendering the support o f the JCSS
irrelevant and ineffective.
Political risk can be mitigated in the following ways:

142.
0

0

By opening a dialogue with the different branches o f power on the obstacles
to implementing the reform agenda of the CDS; when requested, providing
capacity building to help the Government to build mechanisms to resolve
conflicts over policy;
By helping to improve governance and accountability; building o n lessons
from past experience and embedding governance elements into programs;
By helping the Government and civil society build broader and deeper
ownership o f the reforms through tramparent and wide consultations; and
By raising awareness o f the JCSS among parliamentarians and civil society
and listening to their concerns on the reform process; and
By implementing an effective communication strategy for the JCSS partners,
and by the wider donor community.

(ii) Institutional and Operational Risk
143.
The lack o f implementation capacity may undermine the impact o f the JCSS;
implementing i t requires substantial changes in behavior at all levels o f government, and
at the individual, organizational and institutional levels. Limited economic resources
may also similarly impact implementation o f reforms.
144.
These risks can be mitigated by ongoing and proposed interventions and build
upon successes generated in specific areas, including:
Supporting the Government in retaining qualified personnel and meritocracy;
the JCSS will help the Government build on measures already taken to
develop a professional and effective civil service;
Stemming migration o f qualified labor by supporting private sector
development; this includes support for small and medium enterprises in the
rural areas;
Developing interventions that support economic diversification; and
Supporting regional cooperation initiatives in trade, transit, economic
development and security.

37

(iii) Exogenous Shocks
145.
External economic, political and social factors pose additional risks to the
development process in the Kyrgyz Republic. Political and religious turmoil in
neighboring countries can threaten stability, and crises stemming from them could
spillover into the Kyrgyz Republic. Limited regional cooperation in the management o f
key natural resources could also jeopardize economic and political stability. A major
macroeconomic shock due to a drop in gold production or a fall in GDP due to political
instability, might generate a renewed threat o f debt unsustainability and emergency
funding requirements.
146.
Given i t s size compared to those o f i t s neighbors, the Kyrgyz Republic’s ability
to manage the risks o f exogenous shocks i s limited. Nevertheless, these risks can be
managed to some degree by:
0

0

JCSS support for regional cooperation initiatives, and help the country
leverage the existing regional forums such as CAREC, EurAsEC, SCO, etc;
Donor investments and support through regional programs, including on
sustainable environmental management; there are also regional health and
security initiatives that could be leveraged;
Financial support from donors in the event o f emergencies when shocks occur
in terms o f trade or natural disasters; and
Support for regional infrastructure initiatives to facilitate trade and transit
could facilitate greater regional and economic cooperation.

38

21.

...

B
ci
0

.
L"

s

0
d

0

m
e,

!3

.

. .

I I

E .

.

.I
I

El.

Q)

PI

...

. .

a

0

ru
0

0

B

0

.

0

.

0

l
i
l

. .

.

B

2 .
D

.

...

.

0

.

0

0

0

.

.

... .

P

ri

0

E

e

e

.

0

e

3

0

.

c

0

.

.

.

.

W

d

...

*
m

s

. . .....

.. . .

... .

-0

.E 8

0

IA

PART 11. THE WORLD BANK GROUP ASSISTANCE PROGRAM

I.INTRODUCTION
1.
The JCSS supports the Kyrgyz Republic’s efforts to meet the targets set out in the
Government’s CDS for the period 2007-2010 and make progress towards achieving the
MDGs.

2.
The WBG program contributes to the strategic goals and outcomes outlined in the
JCSS, and focuses on supporting the Government’s efforts to improve the environment
for business and economic growth and improve the quality o f and access to basic services
(health, education, water and sanitation). Achieving the outcomes in the Results
Framework depends on improving governance at all levels, reducing corruption and
strengthening the state’s institutional capacity. The challenge, for the Bank and other
donors, i s in finding effective ways to support the Government in a time o f political
upheaval and uncertainty.
3.
The need for donors to present a joint position to their client i s greater now than
ever. The new Government i s under pressure to deliver, and the development community
i s struggling to work out how best to provide support without overburdening the
administration. The JCSS i s a first step to further harmonization efforts.

11. IMPLEMENTATION OF THE LAST CAS
4.
The 2003 CAS was aligned with the areas o f focus described in the Government’s
NPRS, with significant attention to poverty reduction. The CAS priority areas included:
supporting private sector led growth, stemming the deterioration in key infrastructure and
social services and finally addressing governance constraints to growth and poverty
reduction. A CAS Completion Report (CASCR) for the 2003 CAS was prepared in
February 2007 (Annex 2). The CAS performance i s rated as satisfactory.

5.
T o date, the Kyrgyz Republic has made good progress on economic reform,
despite the fact that there was no clear majority in favor o f reform, due to the centralized
decision-making process. Most notably, the Kyrgyz Republic has liberalized price,
foreign exchange and trade regimes and has instituted a generally equitable land-reform
agenda, including transferring about 60 percent o f the land to private ownership, which i s
now available for rent or sale. Despite this progress the Kyrgyz economy remains fragile
with l o w living standards, high level o f corruption and debt.
6.
The overall effectiveness o f the Bank’s FY03-06 program was positive.
Considerable progress was made in achieving the overarching CAS objective o f poverty
reduction. All CAS supported NPRS targets have seen a marked improvement with the
exception o f health. Poverty-measured using consumption expenditures-declined
from an estimated 63 percent in 2000 to 43 percent in 2005. Although reforms are well
underway in the health sector this deterioration may be due to reporting or statistics
issues or lagged effects o f past under-financing in the sector (see paragraph 17 in Annex

2).

51

7.
The Bank’s support to the Kyrgyz Republic in the areas o f health, education and
social protection, has been complemented by the community driven development
approach including providing assistance for rural water supply and sanitation, small town
infrastructure, rehabilitation o f power and district heating systems, and urban transport
and maintenance.

8.
The second Health Reform project was critical in building institutions necessary
to enable the Ministry o f Health to function as a steward o f the sector rather than an
implementer. The IDA’Sconvening role i s evident in the exemplary collaboration among
donors which led to the success of the reform program and not just the project itself.
Partly due to close coordination, the current IDA-supported operation i s being
implemented under a SWAP which includes donor support for financing o f
recurrent/operational costs and efforts to harmonize procedures and strengthen fiduciary
systems in the health sector.
9.
Under the Rural Education project, new student and class achievement tracking
instruments have been developed and 100 fellowships for rural teachers have been
created, Schools in two pilot regions are being trained in new skills and abilities o f joint
strategic planning for school development with engagement o f school staff, parents and
boards o f trustees. The WBG and ADB, whose education projects share the same goals,
committed to’move towards a joint project implementation unit within 2007.

IDA operations in the agriculture sector have been explicitly aimed at improving
10.
the operating environment for private farmers and agri-businesses and at refocusing the
public sector on policy and enabling functions in a market economy. Some 70 percent o f
farm land i s now privately owned as a result o f the generally equitable land reform,
supported by the Agricultural Services Support project (ASSP). The institutional,
operational and policy framework presented in the multi-component ASSP has allowed a
number o f other donors (e.g., DffD, TACIS, SIDA and UNDP) to attach, their related
operations to this project.
11.
The IDA-financed Land and Real Estate Registration project has been successful
in increasing land tenure security, improving access to investment capital and more
efficient use o f land and real estate assets, stemming from an efficient system for land
and real estate transactions. These results are impressive given that a transparent land
and real estate market did not exist prior to the project approval in 2000. Access to credit
has improved-the number and value o f mortgages have increased, with over 40,000
mortgages valued at more than US$418 million equivalent registered during 2005 alone.
12.
Empowerment of local communities has progressed well through the introduction
o f community driven initiatives in several areas, notably through the Bank’s Village
Investment Project (VIP) and On-Farm Irrigation Project (OIP). Under the On-farm
Irrigation project, water user association (WUA) creation, registration, and strengthening
continue. A t the end of 2006,436 WUA’s have been legally registered, serving 710,000
ha out o f the developed area o f 1.1 million ha. The WUA concept has now been fully
accepted in the country and the foundation i s laid for sustainable WUA development in
the future. The Bank’s VIP has been having a major impact on governance at the local
level, rapidly spreading and institutionalizing concepts and practices such as
transparency, citizen involvement, and public accountability (Box 1).

52

13.
The Government’s record on and commitment to improving governance has been
relatively weak. Measures to increase efficiency, transparency and fiduciary controls
within the public sector have proceeded reasonably well at the technical level (through
the development o f the Treasury, elimination o f many special means accounts and extrabudgetary funds, improved classification and reporting), but there was no commitment to
tackle core policy reforms. In retrospect i t was clear that there was no ownership o f

53

reforms which would threaten vested interests in different areas. Public administration
reforms which affected the power, patronage and rents o f senior officials were
undermined. T h i s holds true particularly for structural reforms in the energy sector for
example. The NPRS recognized the importance o f the reduction o f losses (much o f
which were due to organized theft by officials) and the need to have a medium term tariff
policy so that investment needs could be covered. During the period o f the NPRS, no
progress was made on these issues.
14.
Failure to increase electricity tariffs and an increase in commercial and technical
losses to around 43 percent by 2004, meant that the Government’s objective o f financial
viability, operational efficiency and private investment in the energy utilities was not
achieved. Parliamentary elections at the beginning o f 2005 were a one reason why the
Government deferred i t s planned tariff increases, which were also politically difficult in
the period following the change o f Government. In addition it i s recognized that
entrenched rent seeking and interests within the energy sector have meant that
Government commitments to reform have often not been carried out. As a result, the
Bank’s GSAC facility was closed before the third and final tranche was released.

15.
The authorities have recently developed and made some progress in implementing
a focused action plan to strengthen public finance management. This work i s supported
by all development partners and i s based on the (PEFA) findings. The action plan
recognizes that the priority i s to deal with a few basic issues which will allow spending
agencies to implement their budgets in a predictable way and with a solid internal control
framework.
The Bank has supported this work under the programmatic public
expenditure review (PPER), which has focused on providing practical technical
assistance to the authorities.

16.
The Bank has also been supporting the judicial system through an IDF grant
which has enabled the development o f a court information and management system. This
will allow all court cases to be publicized while improving the functioning o f the court
system.

17.
The IFC projects in the financial sector, mining, agribusiness and manufacturing
have been successful, however, all have faced difficulties as a result o f issues related to
the business environment and the absence o f regional cooperation which limits market
opportunities for and thus the economic viability of Kyrgyz enterprises. Projects
generally require significant levels o f technical assistance to ensure the economic
viability and long-term sustainability o f IFC investments.
Impediments in the business and investment climate include: (i)
poor quality o f
18.
tax administration; (ii)
uncertainty and unpredictability o f economic policy; (iii)
high
level of corruption; (iv) high cost o f financing; (v) macroeconomic instability; (vi)
customs and foreign trade regulation; (vii) criminality and lack o f law and order; (viii)
l o w qualification o f workers; (ix) difficulties o f access to finance; (x) judicial system and
conflict resolution. There i s also overregulation by a number o f ministries and agencies
that has created multiple layers and high administrative barriers, driving economic
activity outside the formal sector. Inadequate investments in maintenance o f physical
infrastructure, including transport and communications, have constrained the growth o f
business enterprises.

54

19.
The absence o f privatization o f energy and infrastructure projects as well as a
non-transparent legal and regulatory framework in the extractive industries sector are
obstacles to increased foreign and IF1 investment in these sectors.
20.
The most effective means o f providing financing to SMEs i s through effective
financial intermediaries. Unfortunately financial intermediation i s weak in the Kyrgyz
Republic which limits opportunities for using the system for IF1 support to micro and
small business enterprises. The banking system, with US$670 million o f total assets or
about 25 percent o f GDP at the end o f 2006, i s weak with limited trust among the
populace and business community. The sector offers limited products and needs to
develop leasing, housing finance, private pension funds factoring and insurance in order
to better support the private sector.
111. SUMMARY OF LESSONS LEARNED

21.
Greater selectivity i s needed given the limited IDA resources and the limitations
placed on the Government’s own PIP. In this respect, the WBG strategy focuses on
building on successful results achieved in first generation projects, targeting activities
where the Bank can show visible results to the population, and leveraging our lending
and analytical work to attract financing from other development partners. The Bank
programs in the Kyrgyz Republic should assume a sequenced and long-term approach to
development challenges and reflect this in i t s operations focusing on basics before
attempting more complex reforms.
An important lesson learned i s that policy reform o f the governance and
institutional framework often takes longer than expected. There are many reasons for
this, including the limitations o f the country’s implementation capacity, the absence o f
prerequisites for sustained and durable reform, and the time lag between altered
incentives and behavioral response. Exogenous factors can delay implementation, but
there are very few that can accelerate change. Expectations, and related performance
indicators, on the pace o f reform and response to reform should reflect that experience.

22.

23.
Project and program conditionalities remain important but have proven to be a
blunt instrument in persuading the Government to carry out major institutional (and
particularly governance) reforms where significant vested interests remain. The Bank
intends to move away from development policy operations with conditionality in
exchange for budget support towards focused technical assistance and investment with
concrete results. The use o f instruments like Development Policy Lending or Poverty
Reduction Support Credits (PRSCs) as a lever for change needs to be reconsidered in the
context of the Kyrgyz Republic. The reluctance o f the authorities to participate in the
HIPC and MDRI initiatives also indicates the poor chances o f success for development
policy operations. Attempts should be made to build consensus for reform through nonlending activities, and supporting the reforms that are already o n the Government’s own
agenda.

24.

For this reason the Bank’s lending program for FY07-10 includes primarily
investment lending. That being said, the positive experience o f implementation o f the
Health SWAP needs to be continued, supported by further capacity building in the area o f
public expenditure management. Broadening the consultative process and multi-donor

55

financial support to other elements o f the Government program to build local capacity
may be supported through SWAPSin other areas (e.g., education). The Bank intends to
take a programmatic approach with a focus on results, to ensure the amount o f financial
support i s commensurate with real progress to support long-term reforms and institution
building.
25.
One o f the most important achievements during the FY03-06 CAS period was
improved donor coordination and harmonization. T h i s was seen particularly following
the change in Government in March 2005 when donors came together with one voice to
provide support to the new Government and help quickly identify development priorities.
Greater harmonization has also translated into the development o f a joint country support
strategy as well as the preparation o f joint projects, such as the Heath SWAP and joint
Technical Assistance (TA) in Public Financial Management (PFM) reform.

IV. PORTFOLIO PERFORMANCE
26.
Efforts were made to improve portfolio performance during the period of the
previous CAS and as a result there are currently n o projects at risk. T w o o f 19 projects in
the portfolio are rated as highly satisfactory: the VIP and Land and Real Estate
Registration project. The size o f the Bank’s portfolio grew over the last CAS period from
16 projects in 2003 to 19 as o f March 1, 2006. Total commitments slightly decreased
from almost US$286 million in FY03 to US$254.3 million in March 2006.
Disbursements have improved substantially compared to the previous CAS period.
Throughout FY03-05, the disbursement ratio was consistently higher than the E C A
average, increasing from around 20 percent in FY03 to almost 27.5 percent in FY06.27
The average project age o f 3.8 years i s slightly higher than the E C A average o f 3.4
years.**
27.
CPPRs have evolved into an effective tool for managing portfolio performance.
Most systemic issues identified, Le., compliance with procurement, disbursement and
financial management requirements, have been resolved through regular CPPRs. The
most recent CPPRs have put a greater emphasis on results-based approaches in portfolio
management and launched the discussion with the Government o n how the portfolio
contributes to achieving CAS outcomes. In addition, CPPRs focused attention on more
specific issues, such as taxation of project resources, P I U inspections, and insufficient
coordination of donors and portfolio by the Government. With respect to the latter,
progress i s being made as CPPRs are now being conducted jointly with other
development partners, for example ADB, IsDB and KW.

V. WBG SUPPORT FOR IMPLEMENTATION OF THE JCSS

28.
The Bank’s proposed program during the JCSS period will continue the current
CAS focus on economic growth and poverty reduction with an emphasis on the following
four outcomes envisioned in the JCSS: (i)
promoting economic management consistent
with strong and sustained pro-poor growth; (ii)
improving governance, effective public

’’
28

Average disbursement ratio in ECA was 19.7 in 2003, 18.3 in 2004, and 23.8 in 2005.
As o f March 1,2007.

56

administration and reducing corruption; (iii)
building sustainable human and social
capital; and (iv) environmental sustainability and natural resources management.
Certain strategic choices outlined in the JCSS have been applied across all donor
29.
groups and have helped to guide the World Bank’s program:
0

0

0

Focus on areas where suuuort for reforms i s alreadv embedded: The Kyrgyz
Republic i s s t i l l in the process o f becoming an effective state. Economic
management and government ownership i s weak and fragmented. In this
environment, moving reforms i s difficult and the Bank intends to build on
successful programs already in place.
Mitigate risks associated with high indebtedness and growth volatility. The JCSS
identifies growth as a priority for poverty reduction, but also recognizes the
constraints in moving towards a sustainable growth path. The Bank will continue
to provide support to the Kyrgyz Republic to overcome these challenges.
Focus on basic reforms, as opposed to comulex ouerations: Lessons learned
among development partners have shown that given Kyrgyz Republic’s uncertain
political environment, complex reforms are not feasible and are unlikely to show
results in the time horizon o f the JCSS. The Bank will focus on generating rapid
and visible results for the population, in particular in providing basic social
services such as health, education, water and sanitation, while IFC will focus o n
reforms which lead improvements to the business environment, such as licensing,
permits and inspections.
Focus on ESW and capacity building: The discussions in the first part o f this
JCSS indicate that a weak institutional framework and weak implementation
capacity play a significant role in constraining growth potential. The Bank w i l l
focus significant attention on providing a strong level o f analytical work that w i l l
help build capacity and address problems, constraints and issues in sectors with
high growth potential, including electricity and mining.

57

Irrigation 2 (US$ 16 m)

Rural Water 2 (US$lO m)
Education SWAP (US$15 m)
Land and Real Estate Registration 2 (US$6 m)
Judicial Reform Project (US$10 m)

Financial Sector Assessment Update
C E M follow-Up
PPER
Social Protection Strategy
Public Expenditure Tracking Survey
Poverty Assessment
Heating Strategy
Fiduciary Assessment Education
User Survey Access to Health
Judicial Reform Study
CEM
Poverty Assessment Update
Corporate Governance ROSC

* T he programs are indicative and annual commitments w i l l depend on the availability o f IDA resources through the
Performance Based Allocation exercise.

(i) Promoting economic management consistent with strong and sustained pro-poor
growth
Economic Management

30.
The Bank in collaboration with the IMF will continue to support macroeconomic
stability and fiscal management in the Kyrgyz Republic. The Bank will assist the
Government in addressing constraints to growth through an Economic Management TA
project and the C E M follow-up under implementation with the possible participation o f
other partners. The project will have two main axes. The first will focus on providing
technical assistance to strengthen the economic management and policy making capacity
in the newly established Ministry o f Economy and Development. This part o f the project
w i l l focus on building capacity to develop and implement measures to improve the
business and regulatory environment so as to support economic growth and strengthen
the responsiveness o f the Government to the private sector needs. The assistance would
also include support to the Ministry o f Economy and Economic Development to
restructure i t s activities in line with international practice. The second axis o f support
would be to provide assistance to the Ministry o f Finance to develop modern personnel
management and incentive systems, and build the capacity o f staff o f the Ministry, to
develop and implement macroeconomic and fiscal policy. T h i s project will build on
previous and on-going donor assistance in the area of growth and private sector
development. In particular, the TA w i l l support implementation o f the findings o f the
Bank’s 2005 CEM, the ADB’s 2007 Private Sector Study, the Bank’s 2007 C E M TA
follow-up and the Statistical Capacity Building Project which provide insights in
identifylng and measuring the obstacles to sustained pro-poor growth. In addition, the
assistance would build on and complement on-going public finance reforms supported by
all the JCSS partners and other donors.

58

Financial Markets

31.
The WBG, in close cooperation with other partners will continue the ongoing
policy dialogue and selective TA for developing the financial sector. The Financial
Sector Assessment Program (FSAP) update undertaken in 2006 recognized that
substantial progress has been made in the Kyrgyz banking system. I t appears well
capitalized and resilient to moderate shocks; the supervisory framework for banks under
the NBKR has generally been strengthened; and the payment system reform i s making
good progress, Areas demanding substantial further progress have been identified
however: (i)
access to finance; (ii)
development o f public confidence to attract deposits:
(iii)increased skills in risk management and credit analysis: (iv) full disclosure o f
beneficial ownership: (v) new financial products including housing finance, factoring and
insurance; (vi) the institutional strengthening o f the N o n Bank Financial Institution
Regulatory and Supervisory Agency (SAFSR). In addition, special attention will be
given to governance in both the corporate and banking sector, with a Corporate Report on
the Observance o f Standards and Codes (ROSC) planned in FYlO. Ongoing investment
operations w i l l be limited to support improvements in the payments systems.
32.
The IFC will continue to help increase access to finance to medium-, small- and
micro-sized enterprises (MSMEs) by strengthening local financial institutions, by
expanding microfinance and by developing leasing facilities. The IFC financing and
advisory services w i l l continue to focus on strengthening and expanding existing local
financial intermediaries which provide a micro lending program that otherwise may not
have access to the formal financial system. Deepening the financial system would
contribute positively to growth in the Kyrgyz Republic and increase financial access
especially for small- and medium-scale enterprises. The IFC will continue to assist in the
development o f leasing and housing finance as well as initiate technical assistance to
develop good governance in the financial and real sectors. The IFC’s investments in
local intermediaries demonstrates best practices in the market by: (i)
demonstrating that
lending to SMEs i s not only beneficial to the economy but also for profitable business,
and (ii)
highlighting the importance o f operating policies, credit technology, transparent
corporate governance and environmental screening procedures in creating sustainable
financial intermediaries. IFC has also selected the Kyrgyz Republic as one o f the frontier
countries in which selected opportunities for direct SMEs investments are actively being
pursued. The MIGA could also provide guarantees for foreign banks interested in
entering the Kyrgyz Republic financial market. The MIGA would seek to support
financial institutions that would improve MSME’s access to finance and contribute
towards strengthening standards o f corporate governance.
Agriculture

33.
An important element in the drive to foster pro-poor growth and maintain the
momentum in poverty reduction will be an increase in productivity in agriculture and an
improvement o f market mechanisms in production and processing. The Agricultural
Investment and Services Project, the WBG’s second operation to improve agricultural
support services, especially in the livestock sub sector, will bring benefits to some o f the
poorest regions in the country which have few alternatives for income generation.
Ongoing operations in agribusiness and marketing and in land and title registration will
continue throughout the life of this CAS. In the latter case, a second operation to support

59

completion o f the state cadastre and improve land use planning and management i s
envisioned. To support this lending program analytical and advisory activities (AAA)
will include policy notes designed to encourage development o f agro-processing,
improvement in input quality (for example in seeds and livestock breeding) and in export
development.

34.
The IFC w i l l support small companies in the agricultural sector through local
microfinance institutions. The IFC w i l l also continue to explore opportunities for making
direct investments in viable agro-processing companies which demonstrate potential for
production o f value-added products for both the domestic and export markets. The
MIGA would also consider supporting foreign investment that would have a significant
development impact in the agribusiness, manufacturing and services sectors.
35.
The WBG program, in concert with other partners, will also address constraints in
the enabling infrastructure for growth in the agriculture sector through supporting the
irrigation networks and improving water resource management. In addition to assisting
the Government in rehabilitating the main irrigation systems the WBG will also provide
technical support leading to increased cost-effectiveness and reduction o f waste in
irrigation for longer-term sustainability. The Bank’s lending program includes a second
operation to improve irrigation systems and build on the substantial progress achieved in
this sector.
Transport

36.
The WBG program, in concert with other partners, will address constraints in the
enabling infrastructure for growth: in particular in the road networks. Within the
transport sector the Bank, in collaboration with other partners, will provide advice to help
the Government develop a roads sub-sector strategy to improve sustained maintenance o f
the road network and an appropriate framework for regional cooperation in transport and
trade facilitation. In conformity with Government priorities under the CDS and other
donor efforts, an investment operation i s planned for the rehabilitation o f the Osh-Isfana
trunk road which i s a strategic road whose rehabilitation will encourage and facilitate
inter regional trade. The Bank’s interventions in the transport sector will contribute to
increasing the present share o f reconstructed strategic roads and improving overall
condition o f roads throughout the country. The Bank’s assistance will also lead to
concrete results in enhancement of road budget management in the Ministry o f Transport
as measured by application and use o f the Highway Development and Management
Model (HDM-4).

Energy
The Kyrgyz Republic i s endowed with massive electricity generation capacity that can
serve regional needs, but this potential will require large investments that are beyond
domestic resource mobilization capacity. Attracting much-needed investment will
however require substantial reform and financial rehabilitation o f the existing structures
and systems. The Bank will provide support through a range o f AAA services, including
support for the Government’s electricity sector strategy, assessment and encouragement
o f regional energy collaboration, a heating strategy study and an ongoing assessment o f
the feasibility o f carbon finance opportunities. In the event that the Government shows a

60

strong commitment to fundamental reform o f the electricity sector, including for
public/private partnerships, the Bank would consider an Energy Loss Reduction
Investment project in partnership with other development partners (e.g., KfW). A further
project in the electricity sector would also be dependent on the availability o f IDA
resources through the Performance Based Allocation exercise.

37.
The IFC will seek to support investment in private or public-private infrastructure
projects, particularly privatizations in the power and communications sectors. Such
investments, however, will depend on significant legal and regulatory reforms and
transparency in the award o f concessions or licenses for such projects. The MIGA i s also
prepared to support foreign investment in the energy sector. However, private sector
interest and IFC’s and MIGA’s assistance and support would depend o n the Government
making significant steps towards improving the sector’s financial health and
transparency.
(ii) Improving Governance, Effective Public Administration and Reducing
Corruption

38.
Rather than pursuing an ambitious agenda o f governance reforms, the Bank
intends to focus on areas that can achieve rapid development results, with the
Government being seen to be delivering visible benefits to citizens, and doing so in ways
that are transparent and fair. Experience has demonstrated that far reaching institutional
reforms are neither feasible nor likely to show results in the short- to medium-term.
Governance reform will be embedded in specific investment operations, including
consideration for capacity enhancement and institutional strengthening in public sector
counterparts. This w i l l encompass organizational and functional reviews o f central
government ministries, as well as efforts to enhance the capacities o f local government.
Public Financial Management and Public Administration

39.
The Bank, in close collaboration with the other development partners will build
on ongoing work and programs that enhance the national public financial management.
Specifically, support will be provided to implement the public finance reform action plan
adopted in June 2006 to: (i)
strengthen mechanisms to ensure that annual budgets clearly
implement mechanisms to enhance expenditure accounting,
reflect CDS priorities; (ii)
tracking and reporting; (iii)develop internal control system and introduce effective
internal audits; and (iv) strengthen public procurement. The Banks’ interventions in this
area will help the authorities to considerably improved the PEFA ratings, particularly in
the area of budget execution, measured by PEFA indicator PI-16 and accounting and
auditing, PI-25. The Bank i s willing to support the authorities’ efforts to improve the
financial transparency o f operations in SOEs and in this context could provide advice to
strengthen the asset management strategy and help guide and sequence government
reforms.

40.
In public administration reform, the authorities have recently recognized the
importance o f a merit-based civil service and begun to implement the new legal
framework for competitive and merit-based civil service appointments. Deepening o f
this process and setting public sector remuneration and ensuring that public servants
receive adequate remuneration will take considerable time and will require gradual
improvement in reform management capacity. The Bank will continue to support

61

creating a professional civil service through technical assistance o n the restructuring and
implementation o f new systems o f remuneration in pilot public agencies. These pilot
programs will be evaluated and subsequently extended to the rest o f the public sector.
41.
The bulk o f the Bank’s engagement to support this CDS goal will be through
comprehensive AAA activity. This will include the ongoing PPER, the Country
Fiduciary Update, an expenditure tracking review in key social sector service providers,
and a comprehensive corruption diagnostic to be undertaken by the WBI in FY08. T h e
Bank’s ongoing PPER will support economic management by bringing about changes in
budget performance and monitoring, and contributing to the dialogue on spending
priorities. Ongoing support under existing operations will support continued capacity
building in budget management and internal and external audit.
Improving the Business Environment

42.
An important element in the fight against corruption will be to increase the
momentum o f deregulation in the economy and reduce the scope for rent-seeking
behavior. T h e Government’s CDS envisages a wide range o f reforms in tax and customs
administration, business procedures and licensing regulations. The WBG will assist the
Kyrgyz Republic in improving i t s business environment and moving to a regulatory
framework based upon transparent laws, reducing inspections and streamlining license
requirements and establishing clear and transparent procedures for new laws and
regulations affecting businesses. In the context of BEEPS and other periodic business
surveys, there will be a close monitoring o f progress in changes in the business
environment that will guide the ongoing policy dialogue. Ongoing investment operations
in this area w i l l be limited to assisting the authorities in reducing technical barriers to
entrepreneurship and trade. The IFC’s advisory services will also seek to improve the
business environment. Such assistance may include surveys o f the business environment
as viewed by micro and small business enterprises; reforms to the licensing and permit
regime; or work to limit inspections. IFC w i l l also support direct investment into
manufacturing, infrastructure and extractive industries which demonstrate good
governance, financial and economic viability and environmental sustainability.
43.
Mining (and particularly gold) i s a significant resource o f the Kyrgyz economy.
The sector now accounts for 10 percent of GDP, 11 percent o f budget revenues, and over
40 percent of exports and i t holds considerable potential for growth. However,
conditions for further development o f the sector are hampered by lack o f transparency
and excessive discretionary authority by government agencies as well as a lack o f clear
vision concerning the role o f the state mining company (KyrgyzAltyn). Mining licenses
(also outside the gold sector) remain a source o f rents. Disputes are currently on-going
for the licenses for the Jerooy and Taldybulak gold mines.

The Bank will assist the authorities in implementation o f the EITI to increase the
44.
transparency in the mining sector. An appropriate licensing and regulatory framework
could encourage large investments for exploiting new resources (e.g., gold deposits in the
Jerui mine) and stimulating economic growth. An ongoing policy dialogue and TA
program for reform of the basic mining regulatory and licensing structure will continue
under the Bank program to help the country conform to international practices and
standards, in particular to develop a coherent and unambiguous mining code, consistent

62

with international practice. Subject to the success o f the TA program to increase
transparency in the mining sector, the IFC may consider sustainable investments in the
sector with qualified private sector sponsors.
45.
Weak property rights and a lack o f effective mechanisms for conflict resolution
through the judicial system inhibit investment, exacerbate corruption and represent a
major constraint to private sector operation. Foreign investors have faced difficulties in
enforcing private property rights in the Kyrgyz Ripublic and have suffered due to
interventionist actions o f the Government. Over the past two years, MIGA insured
investors have experienced difficulties with regards to their investments which have
resulted in two claims situations. MIGA has been active in mediation efforts between the
investors and the Government to resolve the disputes and i s working towards finalizing a
settlement agreement between the two parties in two o f i t s projects.
46.
Ongoing and follow-up operations to support completion o f the state cadastre and
improve land use planning and management are part of the Bank program. A Judicial
Reform Study (FY09) and Judicial Reform project (FY10) are also envisioned to
modernize the judicial system and improve i t s effectiveness and transparency.
Developing Alternative Dispute Resolution Systems for example under this project will
enhance access to the legal system, facilitate contract dispute resolution and provide
avenues for small and medium scale f i r m s to seek remedies against excessive regulation
or arbitrary administrative actions that are being driven by rent seeking objectives.

(iii)Building Sustainable Human and Social Capital
47.
The Bank will continue to focus on improving the quality o f service delivery o f
public services and broadening the access to these services for all members o f society.
The emphasis will be on achieving rapid improvements in access by the poorer
households. The ongoing Health SWAP operation will continue throughout this
assistance strategy and w i l l be supported by public expenditure tracking analysis and
household expenditure and user surveys to evaluate access levels. Furthermore the
recently approved Avian Flu project and the Bank’s engagement (with others) on
implementation of the National AIDS strategy will complement the broad sector wide
approach under the Health project. These interventions should contribute toward
improving the more problematic MDGs o f reducing child and maternal mortality rates
and stemming the spread of HIVIAIDS. The Bank will assess the progress toward
achieving outcomes by monitoring the budget allocation to the health sector and the level
o f qualified personnel in the sector.
48.
The Bank will also continue to have strong engagement in the education sector. If
the necessary fiduciary conditions and commitment and capacity o f the Government are
seen to be in place, the Rural Education project may be followed by an Education SWAP
in FYlO that will address both secondary and primary education. A multi-donor
“Education For All Fast Track Initiative” (EFA-FTI) for US$15 million has just been
approved which will further enhance the support provided by the Bank to support the
education goals set out in the CDS. Financial operations in education will be
complemented by AAA activity inciuding a fiduciary assessment o f the education sector.
TA will be provided to facilitate further development o f the country’s education strategy
and develop monitoring and evaluation mechanisms to monitor progress in implementing

63

this strategy. The FY07 programmatic PPER also looks at expenditures in the education
sector.

49.
The Government’s desire to improve the effectiveness and efficiency of social
assistance and pension schemes w i l l be supported by comprehensive Bank analytical
work. T h i s will include support for developing a comprehensive Social Protection
strategy that addresses targeting o f beneficiaries and pension policy reform, a Poverty
Assessment and a Poverty Update. Annual household expenditure surveys will track
effectiveness o f social protection programs on poverty and access to public services.
Finally analytical work will be undertaken to develop a Heating Strategy for the country
and will include a proposed social protection scheme to ensure that the most vulnerable
households are provided essential utility services as reforms are undertaken to improve
the financial viability o f these utilities.

50,
The JCSS agrees on the need to support the Government’s efforts to ensure and
enhance provision o f and access to essential public services. Ongoing operations in rural
potable water and sanitation and small town infrastructure and capacity building will
continue throughout the CAS period. A second Rural Water project i s planned following
completion o f the first, Furthermore, an Urban Infrastructure project will be initiated in
Bishkek and Osh in FY08 to bring basic public services to sections o f these cities that
have witnessed significant in-migration from rural areas. These areas lack basic services
such as potable water, sanitation, solid waste removal and appropriate drainage systems.
A second Village Investment project was approved in FY07 that builds on the
achievements o f the first (see Box 1). T h i s provides a strong community-based element
and includes capacity building and institutional development components designed to
ensure future financial sustainability and appropriate maintenance.
(iv) Environmental Sustainability and Natural Resources Management

5 1.
The ongoing Disaster Hazard Mitigation project will continue throughout the life
o f this JCSS. A new regional operation, the Tien Shan Natural Resources project, i s being
developed and will focus on biodiversity and natural resource management in
conjunction with GEF and other regional funds. In addition, land use planning and
sustainable management practices together with integrated water resource management
will be enhanced under the planned second Land and Real Estate Registration project and
the ongoing Water Management Improvement project.
Regional Initiatives

52.
As mentioned in the JCSS, the Kyrgyz Republic i s a member o f several regional
initiatives including the CAREC program. A wide range o f issues are addressed in this
regional forum, including regional security, trade and transport facilitation, the
watedenergy nexus, migrant worker issues, environmental protection and disaster
preparedness and drug trafficking. The World Bank will endeavor to ensure a greater
flow o f benefits from this array of regional agreements, given that benefits in the past
have been limited. This will be achieved primarily through regional analytical and
advisory work; however, regional program objectives on environment protection and
natural resource management will be achieved through individual country lending.

64

VI. IDA FINANCINGAND INSTRUMENTS
53.
Bank financing during fiscal 2007 to 2010 i s expected to average about US$35
million in new commitments annually. These commitments are balanced across all
primary CDS goals, although the CDS goal on environmental sustainability represents the
smallest area o f Bank engagement. This reflects other donor involvement, both JCSS and
non JCSS partners, and of course the need for selectivity given the finite amount o f
available IDA resources. Furthermore the Bank will continue to solicit trust finds and
other sources of funds to complement both the identified TA and the planned AAA
activity.
54.
The IDA allocations will be determined annually based upon the performance
based allocation system, which includes the Country Policy and Institutional Assessment
(CPIA) rating, governance and measures o f annual portfolio performance, including
procurement. The Kyrgyz Republic had a slight improvement in i t s CPIA rating which i s
expected to increase to 3.6 in 2006, however further improvement will require very
strong efforts and achievements in improving performance in areas o f governance,
property rights and rule-based governance, transparency and accountability in the public
sector and the quality o f public administration. The strong focus on governance issues in
this CAS together with the emphasis on the delivery o f public services will form a solid
foundation for the policy dialogue to improve the overall CPIA rating.

55.
Lending limits are determined annually based upon the I D A 1 4 performance based
allocation system, which in turn depends on country performance, i t s performance
relative to the performance of other IDA countries; the amount o f overall resources
available to IDA during the I D A 1 4 and IDA15 replenishment periods; changes in the l i s t
of active IDA-eligible countries; and the terms (grants or loans) for which the Kyrgyz
Republic qualifies under the grant eligibility and allocation framework. The Kyrgyz
Republic i s currently characterized as a high risk country in terms o f debt distress and all
IDA allocations are on grant terms.
56.
There will be a move away from general structural budgetary support in this
assistance strategy, because past experience has shown these instruments to be less
effective in the Kyrgyz environment given lack o f ownership and weak institutional
capacity. T o improve the Bank’s impact reform efforts will be addressed through sector
specific investment projects, technical assistance and analytical work where assistance
can be focused on fewer issues and a sequenced approach can provide flexibility. This
would allow for better measurement o f step-by-step improvements and for timely
adjustments if necessary. Sector-wide programs could be expanded into new areas such
as education ifcurrent arrangements in the health sector continue to bear fruit and if the
fiduciary environment i s conducive.

VII. CAS CONSULTATIONS

57.
The World Bank Program has been broadly discussed with the Government and
the authorities f i l l y support the proposed strategy as it i s closely aligned with the
Government’s development goals as outlined in the CDS. Discussions centered on the
implementation o f the 2003-2006 CAS and particularly lessons learned, on portfolio
performance and WBG support for the JCSS. The Government f i l l y shares the WBG’s

65

approach centered on JCSS principles to: align the WBG’s programs with national
priorities, harmonize processes and procedures, use results-based approaches, and to be
more selective. In particular, the Government enthusiastically supported the Bank’s
intention to move away from development policy operations with conditionality towards
focused investment projects with concrete tangible results for the population within a
relatively short period o f time.

VIII. MONITORING IMPLEMENTATION AND MANAGING R I S K S
58.
Several mechanisms are in place for monitoring and evaluating the Government’s
implementation o f i t s reforms and poverty reduction strategy. The Government itself
plans to undertake quarterly reviews of budget implementation and bi-annual reviews o f
CDS progress and implementation. There are a number o f well established sector
working groups that meet periodically to review progress in implementing sector
strategies. An ongoing sector level dialogue will feed into the Government’s monitoring
and evaluation framework which i s continually being upgraded since completion and
approval o f the CDS.
59.
The JCSS will undergo an annual review o f performance, and a joint CPPR will
be developed and discussed at length with the Government. The local Donors Council
meets every month where i t takes stock o f overall implementation o f all partner
programs. T h i s helps to harmonize dialogue with the Government and to reach consistent
positions in response to possible deterioration in performance or delay in reforms.

60.
In addition to participating in the implementation reviews o f the CDS and the
JCSS, the WBG will assess the results o f i t s specific interventions through more
intensified outcome-oriented management o f the portfolio. The results framework
outlined in Part I 1 Annex 1 establishes a more direct link between specific CDS
outcomes, and the contribution o f Bank inputs to these targeted outcomes.

61.
The risks associated with the evolving political environment, poor governance,
weak public sector capacity and external shocks are outlined in the JCSS. An additional
risk which the Bank faces i s a reputational risk relating to growing skepticism among the
population in terms o f the Bank’s development effectiveness. T h i s culminated recently
in the Government’s decision not to pursue HIPC. T o mitigate this risk the Bank has
focused i t s assistance strategy on achieving concrete results which are visible to the
population. In addition the Bank i s embarking on a targeted and robust communications
campaign. The mid-term review of the JCSS progress will also include a review o f the
implementation o f this communication strategy and an assessment o f i t s effectiveness.

62.
T h e WBG communication strategy includes partnering with the Government and
strengthening the dialogue on results that will ensue from investment lending and AAA.
I t also includes reaching out to new partners in the Parliament, civil society, the multi
faceted array of NGOs, the private sector and their various business associations and the
media. Outreach w i l l focus on some key goals which include hrthering trust and
credibility, and showing positive results and outcomes o n the economy and peoples lives.
Besides pursuing an intensified dialogue on development issues, the strategy will build
partnerships that encourage ownership and accountability for results. The WBG will also
seek to build capacity in key Ministry counterparts to communicate results and reforms.

66

In addition all new projects w i l l feature an effective communication program that w i l l be
followed during project preparation and implementation. For ESW stronger efforts will
be made to strategically disseminate analytical work to wider audiences than previously
might have been the case.

IX. CONCLUSIONS
63.
The next four years will be a critical period for the Kyrgyz Republic, which faces
challenges on economic, social and political fronts and Government commitment will be
critical to propel the country to higher sustained growth rates and achieve the MDGs.
The WBG and other development partners have been asked to provide advice and support
the implementation of the reform agenda outlined in the Government’s CDS. JCSS
partners agree with the broad direction o f the strategy but recognize the targets are
ambitious and w i l l require extraordinary efforts. The WBG and i t s development partners
are ready to stand behind the Government in order to maximize their respective
contributions to overcome these challenges and help the Kyrgyz Republic achieve its
development potential.

67

0

0

dl0

0

e

e

I

e

I

0

0

.

c

I

e

0

4

e

e

1

I

I

I

9

5
0

I

,

..

Part 11: Annex 2. Kyrgyz Republic CAS Completion Report, FYO3-06

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
i.
The World Bank’s 2003 CAS program was built upon the areas o f focus outlined
in the NPRS with an overarching objective to support poverty reduction in the Kyrgyz
Republic. T h e three pillars o f the country’s poverty reduction strategy were: the
Formation o f an Effective State; Building a Fair Society; and Promoting Sustainable
Economic Growth. The three CAS priority areas were:
Supporting private sector-led growth, with a focus on agriculture, industry and energy
as the main drivers o f growth, and helping develop an enabling business environment
conducive to small and medium enterprises;
Providing essential services through community driven development initiatives-for
example, as through the water supply and sanitation project-that
support local
capacity development and investment, and arresting the deterioration in key
infrastructure, and
Strengthening the governance framework: improving the efficiency and transparency
o f the budget process, streamlining and improving the professionalism o f the civil
service and helping address governance constraints to growth and poverty reduction

The CAS was approved acknowledging the weaknesses in political stability and
the risk o f economic shocks. However, the strategy did not and could not have envisaged
the degree o f political and economic dislocation that took place in March 2005 and the
following years. The political situation started to deteriorate seriously in 2004 and
culminated in the overthrow o f President Akaev’s regime in March 2005; continuing
political instability led to a number o f serious and continuous political crises in 2005 and
2006. These upheavals have had an adverse effect upon the Kyrgyz economy and the
ability o f the Government to implement i t s policies.

iii. The CAS was over optimistic in assessing the institutional capability and
technical capacity of the Government to implement an ambitious and wide-ranging
reform program. These difficulties were exacerbated by the fragmentation o f the political
structures before and after the March 2005 events, including the deadlock between the
Government and the Parliament, making the approval and further implementation o f
reforms very difficult.
iv.

The CAS outcomes have been mixed. Considerable progress was made in
achieving the overarching CAS objective o f poverty reduction. Growth performance,
however, was highly volatile and fragile. CAS-supported NPRS targets for social
indicators have seen marked improvement, with the exception o f health, where indicators
showed some deterioration. However, this deterioration may represent changes in
reporting o f health statistics-including
the adoption o f internationally accepted
methodologies for compiling them-and the lagged effects o f past under-financing o f the
health sector.

76

*

v.
The Government’s record on and i t s commitment to improving governance has
been very weak. Measures to increase efficiency, transparency and fiduciary controls
within the public sector have proceeded reasonably well at the technical level. However,
commitment to tackle core policy reforms, particularly with respect to reducing
corruption and civil service reform, was weak and superficial under the previous
Government. In retrospect, it i s clear that there was n o ownership o f reforms and
powerful vested interests played a role. Public administration reforms, which affected the
power, patronage and rents o f senior officials, were undermined, A number o f structural
reforms, including energy reforms in particular, were stalled for a number o f years.
vi.
Nevertheless there were some achievements improved donor coordination and
harmonization. T h i s progress has translated into the development o f a JCSS and also
preparation o f joint projects, such as the Health SWAP and joint technical assistance for
public financial reform.
Important lessons were learned during the CAS implementation and these have
vii.
been considered in the preparation o f the JCSS:

The risks of continued political instability suggest having a more realistic set o f
expectations with regard to reform implementation. T h i s implies that more modestrather than wide-ranging-reforms have a greater chance o f success.
The fragmented political environment also reflects the lack o f consensus that i s
necessary for true country ownership o f reforms. Under such circumstances,
conditionality i s a blunt and less effective instrument for major institutional reform.
Experience in the health sector has shown that reforming institutional arrangements i s
much more feasible when supported by an integrated strategy and sustained
investment over several years.
Support for public finance reform through the programmatic public expenditure
review demonstrated how sustained dialogue and engagement can help build
consensus for reform. It also illustrated how technical knowledge can be transferred
better through hands-on technical assistance rather than through large pieces o f
economic and sector work.
Community driven approaches-such as the Village Improvement Project-have
illustrated the opportunities for building on successful reforms at the local level.
Similarly, targeted interventions-in clearly defined areas such as land registrationare also successful models.
These community-driven projects have also demonstrated how governance
approaches at the local level can be successfully implemented and insulated from
political instability at the national level.
Future assistance should include ways o f assessing the extent o f true country
ownership and take into account the institutional and technical capacity o f the
Government to implement reforms. CAS implementation suggests that the most
useful interventions are those that support basic reforms with limited objectives.
Finally, the resurgent nationalism and more interventionist economic approach o f the
new authorities may require a more flexible economic dialogue, in which the Bank
examines the most effective way to support a government which sees a greater role
for state participation in economic activity.

77

INTRODUCTION

1.
This Completion Report reviews the FY03-06 CAS for the Kyrgyz Republic,
discussed by the World Bank Board in April 2003. The CAS evaluation has been carried
out by the Bank Group country team in close cooperation with the Government and other
donors.
I. KYRGYZ REPUBLIC’S LONG TERM GOALS AND OUTCOMES

A. Strategic Goals
2.
In 2001, the Kyrgyz Republic prepared an inclusive 10-year Comprehensive
Development Framework (CDF), which provided the broad vision and directions o f i t s
long-term development path. The overarching objective o f the CDF was to achieve
political stability and social well-being, economic growth alongside democracy, human
development and improved opportunities for all citizens o f the Kyrgyz Republic.
3.
T h e NPRS was the first phase in implementation o f the CDF. The three pillars o f
the NPRS were:
e

Formation of an Effective State: The overall vision in the NPRS was for a
smaller, more professional and accountable state apparatus. I t identified the need
to address corruption, enhance democratic institutions and improve the
effectiveness and integrity o f the state.

e

Building a Fair Society: The NPRS focused on increasing access to quality
education (particularly pre-school, primary and secondary education) in rural
areas, on health reforms, emphasizing primary health care, and on creating a
targeted system o f social protection. This was to be achieved through increasing
funding for human development and greater efficiency and targeting,

e

Promoting Sustainable Economic Growth: The NPRS envisaged the
implementation o f structural reforms to support economic growth. Improving
productivity in agriculture, including agro-processing, was a key focus area.
Other sources o f growth identified were small-scale industry and services
(telecom, transport, energy, etc.).

4.
T h e Boards o f the IMF and IDA considered the NPRS in February 2003, and
indicated that i t provided an appropriate vision for development, while emphasizing the
need for further prioritization. The World Bank’s CAS and program built upon the areas
o f focus outlined in the NPRS.
B. Progress Towards Achieving Goals

5.
Overall, the borrower’s performance could be considered moderately satisfactory
during this CAS period. Government has made mixed progress in advancing the NPRS
agenda. The incidence o f poverty in the Kyrgyz Republic-based on a consumption
aggregate and defined by a national poverty line-fell from 63 percent in 2000 to 43

78

percent in 2005, with extreme poverty falling from 24.7 percent to 11 percent. Poverty
has declined in both rural and urban areas, and across all regions. However, poverty rates
among oblasts as well as within the oblast, i.e., urban and rural sectors, are highly
unequal. Rural poverty remains extremely high at 51 percent in 2005.
The reduction in income poverty was achieved due to economic growth. The
6.
decline in extreme poverty has been notably high during 2003-04, when the economy
grew by 7 percent. Growth was driven mainly by services, light industry and construction
sectors, and reflected the favorable nexus o f a stable macro-environment and increased
demand from fast-growing neighboring markets. However, this was not fully taken
advantage o f due to deteriorating political stability, increased rent seeking and stagnation
o f reforms in some key sectors, especially energy. The high agricultural growth rates o f
the 1990s declined to just 2.5 percent since 2000.
7.
Although buoyant, economic growth was volatile and less that o f other CIS
countries, Average GDP growth was 4.1 percent per year during 2003-2006, but varied
between 7 percent in 2003 and -0.2 percent in 2005 largely reflecting gold output
volatility due to a number o f natural disasters. Non-gold GDP grew on average by about
5.1 percent per year during the same period. T h i s growth was driven mainly by services,
light industry and construction sectors, and reflected the favorable nexus o f a stable
macro-environment and increased demand from fast-growing neighboring markets.
Nevertheless, average growth over the period was considerably less than in other CIS
countries, indicating that the economy was not able to take full advantage o f these
conditions due t o deteriorating political stability, increased rent seeking and stagnation o f
reforms in some key sectors, especially energy. Agricultural production has also been
volatile and experienced a significant fall in 2005 (4.6 percent) partly in response to the
turbulent political situation o f that year. Trade disruptions caused by adverse political
developments in the neighboring Uzbekistan have also negatively affected agricultural
performance during the same period,
8.
The CAS period was characterized by broad macro-economic stability; the 4
percent per annum target for inflation was met. The country’s debt outlook has also
improved to around 83 per cent o f GDP in 2005 from 111 percent o f GDP in 2002. T h i s
was due to a reduction in the Government’s primary fiscal deficit and streamlining o f
externally financed public investment projects. The debt position, however, remains
difficult. Despite the stabilization o f debt ratios, they s t i l l remain high and constitute a
serious macroeconomic risk to the Kyrgyz economy.
9.
Progress towards achieving the NPRS human development goals was also mixed.
Despite under-funding o f the health sector since 1996-2003, health sector reforms led to
significant improvements in performance and in the health services people receive.
These improvements are reflected in improved equity o f access t o health services, greater
transparency, improved efficiency and quality o f service provision, reduction in mortality
from infectious disease and improved administrative efficiency. Nevertheless, the 2005
health outcome indicators, such as infant (IMR), child (USMR) and maternal mortality
(MMR) showed deterioration. This i s because these health outcome indicators cannot be
improved by reforms in the health sector alone. Increases o f IMR and U 5 M R since 2004
can also be explained by methodological changes to the calculation o f the mortality rates
with the move to internationally comparable methods o f calplation. Further, health

79

statistics can often take several years to show improvements in response to reforms; these
results also almost certainly reflect the previous years of under-funding. For example, the
MMR i s very volatile from year to year, reaching 61 in 2005 and improving to 44 in
2006. The Government i s addressing this under the second generation Manas Taalimi
program, 2006-2010. Some positive progress has been recorded in education, with
improvements in aggregate enrollment ratios for basic education.

Table 1: M a i n NPRS Poverty Alleviation Targets29
2005

Indicators

I

2005

Source: NPRS
a Based o n expenditure

patterns, targets were set using the expenditure methodology to calculate poverty
levels Since 2003, the National Statistics Council (NSC) uses only consumption base for officially
reporting the poverty indicators, according to the 2005 poverty level which i s 43.1 percent.
Figures for 2005 are derived from a new methodology that is based o n international requirements which
have more strict requirements for defining live births. This makes comparison o f data for 1999 and 2005
difficult.
'Data for this indicator i s volatile from year to year. MMR in 1999 was the lowest it had been since 1996.
MMR for 2006 is 44 despite reaching 61 in 2005.
Reflects administrative data for the registered unemployed. The expected increase by 2005 is explained
by improvements in coverage o f data, making comparison between 1999 and 2005 difficult.
e Based o n household survey
fNumber o f computers in legal entities

*

10.
The Government's record on and commitment to improving governance has been
relatively weak. Measures to increase efficiency, transparency and fiduciary controls
within the public sector have proceeded reasonably well at the technical level. However,
commitment to drive through core policy reforms, particularly with respect to tackling
corruption and civil service reform, was weak and superficial under the previous
Government.
The new Government expressed a strong commitment to improve
governance and reduce corruption following the revolution, but turbulent political
29

All numbers in percentages unless otherwise indicated.

80

I

conditions and a fragmentation o f state power during this period has meant that there has
been little observable improvement during the CAS period. Empowerment o f local
communities has progressed reasonably through the introduction o f community driven
initiatives in several areas, notably with assistance from the Bank’s Village Investment
and On-Farm Irrigation projects.
Persistent corruption remains a daunting challenge. The Kyrgyz Republic was
11.
ranked 142 out of 163 countries on the 2006 Transparency International Corruption
Perceptions Index, a worsening from a ranking o f 130 out o f 159 countries from the
previous year. The World BaWEBRD BEEPS showed corruption as a significant
obstacle to doing business between 2002 and 2005. While this represents a slight
improvement over previous years, it i s clear that addressing and reducing administrative
corruption has been difficult. In 2004, the Kyrgyz Republic became a signatory to the
EITI. However, overly ambitious commitments combined with a lack o f capacity have
implied only partial compliance with the EITI.
12.
Despite political uncertainties, the Prime Minister and the President have publicly
stated that NPRS priorities remain valid for the new Government, with a renewed focus
on addressing corruption, unemployment, and social inequality. Poor governance,
including public anger over the conduct o f parliamentary elections in early 2005, led to
the overthrow of President Akaev in March 2005, and civil unrest and disturbances in
many areas of the country. Although the subsequent Presidential elections in July 2005
were deemed by OSCE to be free and fair, political instability has increased and made i t
difficult for the Government to set more than a short term agenda.

11. CAS OUTCOMES
A. CAS Objectives
13.
The CAS for 2003-06 focused on three key priorities. Each i s aligned with the
key long-term goals identified in the Kyrgyz Republic’s NPRS and the CAS builds on the
areas o f focus by further refining critical reform priorities within them. Bank support for
private sector led growth was crucial for helping sustain poverty reduction and to
increase employment opportunities. Arresting the deterioration in public services
delivery and in key infrastructure has a positive impact on the non-income dimensions o f
poverty, and Bank support in these areas builds on the success o f past interventions and
impels progress towards achieving the MDGs. Improving public financial management,
the effectiveness o f public administration and o f public service delivery are all critical
factors for successful implementation o f reforms in other areas.

14.
The highest priority was supporting private sector-led growth. Three key drivers
o f economic growth - agriculture and agro-processing, industry and energy, and small
and micro enterprises - were identified IDA and I F C aimed to help the Kyrgyz Republic
reduce bureaucratic barriers, moving to market pricing, rehabilitate key infrastructure and
increase access to market information and financing. IDA and I F C would help strengthen
existing financial institutions and create a framework conducive to attracting investments,
capital formation and savings. IFC would continue its advisory services directly and
through i t s Private Enterprise Partnership (PEP) to improve the regulatory framework for

81

leasing and t o help financial intermediaries build institutional capability. IDA was to
complement these activities with Community Driven Development (CDD) projects which
should help to diversify the economy, increase farm productivity and growth in non-farm
jobs outside the main cities.
15.
A second key priority was to help arrest the deterioration in key infrastructure and
social services that had been slowly worsening since independence. The Kyrgyz
Republic could not afford to put o f f this rehabilitation; at the same time, i t could not
afford to rehabilitate i t all, and required to be selective and to undertake systemic
reforms. IDA sought to support overall systemic changes to make service provision more
efficient, while empowering local communities to identify priorities, in keeping with the
decentralized vision in the NPRS.

A third priority was to address governance constraints to growth and poverty
16.
reduction, while recognizing that this was going to be a long term challenge. In IDA’S
client survey, poor governance was identified as among the most important issues
limiting returns to structural reforms. Increasing transparency and accountability,
building technical and implementation capacity at the central and local levels, and
supporting the continued development o f the NPRS and public finance reform as vehicles
for government planning and budgeting were the key objectives.
B. CAS Outcomes
17.
Progress towards achieving CAS outcomes has been mixed, and could be
considered moderately satisfactory during the CAS period. Considerable progress was
made in achieving the overarching CAS objective o f poverty reduction. Several CASsupported NPRS targets for social indicators have also improved (see Table 1). Growth
performance was volatile, in part due to the political situation, but nevertheless the
average annual GDP growth remains at about 4 percent. The Government’s commitment
to moving forward with political reforms and improving governance, however, has been
weak during the CAS period.

1. Poverty Reduction
18.
Progress toward achieving the poverty reduction - an overarching outcome under
the Government’s development strategy-has been generally satisfactory during the CAS
period. Key poverty indicators showed a significant declining trend. Poverty-measured
using consumption expenditures-declined from an estimated 63 percent in 2000 to 43
percent in 2005. Extreme poverty has also fallen and was 11 percent in 2005. The urban
and rural poverty both fell significantly during this period.
19.
Poverty rates among oblasts, as well as within the oblast, Le., urban and rural
sectors, are highly unequal. The urban poverty rates fell faster, and were at a
significantly lower level: 30 percent o f the urban population, compared to 5 1 percent o f
the rural population, i s living below the poverty line in 2005.

20.
The authorities are closely monitoring poverty reduction indicators, including
non-income dimensions o f poverty. The National Statistics Committee’s poverty
statistics and measurement methodology have improved considerably since the
82

introduction o f the Kyrgyz Integrated Household Survey in 2003, supported by DfID.
The Bank i s also providing continuous methodological technical assistance in poverty
measurement through i t s Poverty Assessment.

21.

The linkage between poverty monitoring and policy formulation remains weak.

Although the authorities recognize that sustained poverty reduction depends on
broadening sources o f economic growth through continued reform and support to private
sector development, more needs to be done to understand the growth-povertyemployment linkages and to inform policy actions in this area. To this end, the
authorities are working with the World Bank on the elaboration o f a poverty profile data
linked with labor force data that i s expected to be completed in FY07.

83

2. Supporting Private Sector-Led G r o w t h

2.1 Macroeconomic Environment
22.
During the CAS period, a generally stable macroeconomic environment was
achieved. Overall macroeconomic management during the CAS period has been in
accordance with the IMF agreements under the Poverty Reduction Growth Facility
(PRGF) program. Fiscal and external policies have kept internal and external balances at
sustainable levels. The fiscal deficit was reduced from 4.7.percent o f GDP in 2003 to 3.9
percent in 2005, while the current account deficit increased from 4.2 percent o f GDP in
2003 to 8.3 percent in 2005; the balance o f payments has been financed by significant
inflows on the capital account. The Government has also achieved good tax collection
performance. Tight fiscal and monetary policies have kept inflation at l o w rates o f 3-4
percent throughout.
23.
The debt outlook improved as a result o f the reduction in the general government
primary fiscal deficit, the streamlining o f externally financed public investment projects,
and limiting public debt to loans. In March 2005, Paris Club creditors granted a debt
relief on Evian terms for bilateral public debt. T h i s agreement i s expected to result in a
36 percent reduction in the N P V o f official bilateral debt. The conversion to 100 percent
grant for FY06 has also contributed to the improvement. Despite the improvement, the
Kyrgyz Republic’s debt-service capacity remains stressed over the medium term; the
N P V o f public debt currently stands at around 180 percent o f exports and over 360
percent o f budget revenues, Le., above the HIPC threshold o f 150 percent and 250
percent respectively.

2.2 Business and Financial Environment
24.
The recently completed Investment Climate Assessment (ICA) confirms that
administrative barriers are an important hindrance to private sector growth. Overall,
businesses are constrained by unpredictability and corruption, particularly relating to
regulations and legal enforcement. More specifically, the current licensing and
inspection regimes undermine firms’ competitiveness and ability to grow. The Bank’s
RTBET, approved by the Board in July 2006, includes targeted support to the
Government’s deregulation efforts by streamlining and revamping the burdensome
standards regime and promoting enterprise competitiveness. In 2006, FIAS completed a
review on FDI Law and conducted a workshop for the Government and private sector to
discuss its results, however, the Government has not acted on the report and i t s
recommendations.
25.
The tax system i s perceived as a major impediment: regulations are numerous,
inconsistent, and are constantly being amended (over 300 times since 2000). In addition,
inconsistencies present throughout the tax code create the opportunities for rent-seeking
behavior notably by tax inspectors, auditors, and tax police. Major revisions to the Tax
Code were proposed in 2006, including simplification through the reduction o f nuisance
taxes and key tax reductions in the context o f the agreed IMF PRGF program. However,

85

the continuing deadlock between the Government and the Parliament has made the
approval o f this and other legislation very difficult.
26.
There have been improvements in the financial environment. The overall level o f
private financing to the economy has increased during the last three years from 15.8
percent o f GDP in 2003 to a projected 17.2 percent o f GDP in 2005. Foreign direct
investment has also increased, although from a very l o w base, but domestic savings have
decreased slightly, from 18.5 percent o f GDP in 2003 to 16.8 percent in 2005. Bank loans
and deposits increased as a percentage o f GDP from 3.5 percent and 5.7 percent in 2003
to 6.0 percent and 8.0 percent in 2005. Similarly, the credit portfolio o f microfinance
institutions has increased and now accounts for about 50 percent o f banks’ loans and 3
percent o f GDP. The Payments and Banking System Modernization project i s being
satisfactorily implemented and i s expected to lead to improvements in the payments and
clearance systems o f the banking sector.
27,
IDA’S main achievement has been supporting the transformation o f the K A F C
into the largest Non-Bank Financial Institution (NBFI) in the country through the Second
Rural Finance project. I t now accounts for 10 percent o f all financial sector assets and
approximately 25 percent o f the loan portfolio o f banks and NBFIs combined as o f
August 2005. K A F C serves more than 30,000 clients and has 11 branches and 47
representative offices in all parts o f the country. The Bank remains active in i t s support
for the conversion o f K A F C into a private rural bank with the likely support o f IFC to be
provided should a strong technical partner take a strategic position in the bank through
privatization.
28.
The K A F C became a principal supplier o f credits in rural areas with a 65 percent
share in the agricultural sector. I t s financial performance i s strong, with a high recovery
rate of 98.3 percent; and contributes significantly to poverty reduction. However, the
2006 Joint CPPR raised concerns over changes in KAFC’s executive management that
undermined good corporate governance, including transparency which could threaten the
efficiency and sustainability o f the institution.
29.
IFC has continued to support the growth of i t s existing clients such as providing
an additional equity to Demirbank, new financing o f $2.5 million to the Kyrgyz
Investment Bank (KICB) and an additional loan o f $1.4 million to the Altyn-Ajydaar JSC
packaging plant to expand i t s operation to a second factory in Issyk Ata which included a
new waste paper processing operation using recycled paper. In the banking and financial
sector, I F C activities included increasing access t o finance by MSMEs through
strengthening local financial institutions and expanding microfinance, development o f
leasing and housing finance. IFC support included investment in seven local financial
intermediaries - KICB, Demir, Ineximbank, AKB, Bai Tushum, Kazcommertsbank and
Finca. Technical assistance i s often extensive as with B a i Tushum where IFC i s helping
the N G O transform from a non-profit status to a more sustainable, commerciallyoriented, deposit-taking financial institution that can serve as a model for similar
microfinance organizations in the Kyrgyz Republic. IFC financing w i l l enable BaiTushum to expand its lending activities to farmers, private entrepreneurs, and micro and
small enterprises and extend i t s reach to other remote regions o f the Kyrgyz Republic.
T h e Bai Tushum transformation project, as the F I N C A Microfinance project, provides an

86

opportunity for the authorities to refine and apply the rules and regulations that have been
laid out to address the transformation o f suitably qualified micro credit organizations
operating in the country and reach more MSE clients.
30.
IFC technical assistance in the Central Asian Leasing Project (CALP) worked
with the Government and financial intermediaries to create a best practices framework for
leasing as well as providing training for intermediaries.,. IFC provided advisory services
to undertake a diagnostic o f the legal, regulatory and tax framework for mortgage finance
development in mid-2006 and will begin implementation o f the findings to improve the
framework for mortgage finance through the, I F C PEP Central Asia Primary Mortgage
Market Development Project beginning in early 2007.
31.
IFC completed a tourism study which outlined a strategy to institutionally
strengthen tourism marketing for the Kyrgyz Republic, as well as curricula building for
education at both the university and vocational school levels. I F C provided support on a
strategic framework for tourism sector development as well as a framework to
institutionally strengthen tourism marketing. As a follow up o f these studies, in 20042005 the Swiss Government approved hnding for implementation o f the project that i s
being carried out by Swiss Helvetas Agency.
32.
The IDA-financed Land and Real Estate Registration project has been successful
in increasing land tenure security, improving access to investment capital, and more
efficient use o f land and real estate assets. These impacts are particularly remarkable
given the fact that an official transparent land and real estate market did not exist at all
prior to the start o f the project in 2000. Rights on virtually all land and real estate
properties are now or will soon be secure, and backed by appropriate registry records.
33.
Registry transactions are efficient by international standards. Access to credit has
improved - the number and value o f mortgages have increased, with over 40,000
mortgages valued at more than US$418 million equivalent registered during 2005 alone.
Land and real estate assets were distributed and used more efficiently in response to
market forces as demonstrated by the increased sales and leases. Furthermore, with
project support, Gosregister has implemented a number o f measures to reduce the
opportunities for corruption, collusion, and fraud, and increase accountability within i t s
own operations.

2.3 Agriculture and Agro-Processing
34.
Agricultural growth in the CAS period was modest, and severely affected by the
political turmoil of 2005. The sector has considerable potential but remains subject to
l o w productivity and unpredictable fluctuations caused by climatic variations, natural
disasters and also by exogenous factors such as political unrest and cross-border trade
restrictions. The agro-input business (except seeds) in particular remains weak because
private entrepreneurs are unwilling to commit significant resources. The risk that the
Ministry o f Agriculture may enter this market with large government or donor-funded
input distribution programs at any moment i s perceived as high.

35.
IFC identified agri-processing as an important sector for development o f the
Krygyz economy. Support for this sector has been provided through an investment in
Akun, a leading enterprise that uses improved technology for the production o f flour and

87

pasta, much o f which i s exported. Support for agri-processing i s also provided through
investment in packaging companies as well as loans made through microfinance
institutions and financial intermediaries that have received IFC funding.

36.
IDA operations in this sector have been explicitly aimed at improving the
operating environment for private farmers and agri-businesses and at refocusing the
public sector on policy and enabling functions in a market economy. The Agricultural
Support Services Project (ASSP) has been the central vehicle for establishing effective
support services (extension, market information, crop protection, access to seeds and
credit) for farmers. The Second Rural Finance project, now closed, led the way in
extending credit to agriculture and agribusiness. The new Agribusiness and Marketing
Project (ABMP), through i t s Market Development and Access to Credit components, i s
focused on improving the operations o f all participants in the agribusiness value chain.
37.
IDA has also supported government and local communities with developments in
the irrigation sector through the On-Farm Irrigation project (OIP) and the Irrigation
Rehabilitation poject (IRP). Under the latter project which closed in M a y 2006,
rehabilitation and modernization o f 20 irrigation systems with a total command area o f
250,000 ha has been completed, facilitating adequate and timely water supplies. Also,
rehabilitation o f the four major irrigation dams, with a combined storage capacity o f 80
percent o f all irrigation dams in the country, has improved their safety and guaranteed
water supply to 415,000 ha. IDA will continue to support the Government with
rehabilitation and modernization o f higher-order irrigation and drainage infrastructure
through the Water Management Improvement project that became effective in August
2006. This project will also assist with the implementation o f the new Water Code, a
modern piece o f legislation, prepared with the assistance o f OIP, which i s expected to
change the way water resources are managed in the country. The project w i l l also
support the technical and financial reform o f the Department o f Water Resources to turn
i t into a fully client-oriented, accountable organization.
38.
The multi-component ASSP has allowed a number o f other donors3' to attach
their related operations to this project, taking advantage o f i t s institutional, operational
and policy framework. Two ESW studies, an Agricultural Policy Update and the
Livestock Sector Review, were prepared. The former guided the Bank's and other
donors' policy dialogue in the Kyrgyz Republic, while the latter is expected to help frame
the scope and focus o f future external donor support in the livestock sub-sector.
39.
Some 70 percent o f farm land i s now privately owned as a result o f the generally
equitable land reform, supported by the ASSP. There has been a strong commitment to
develop land markets, including a constitutional amendment to allow for private
ownership o f land, introduction o f a legal framework for collateralization, and ongoing
investment to develop a proper registration system. The establishment o f a land rights
registration system and systematic registration o f these rights in urban areas, essential for
mortgaging and the development o f a land market, have been provided through the Land

30

DfID, the EU through Tacis, SIDA and UNDP etc.

88

and Real Estate Registration Project. Systematic land registration in rural areas i s
ongoing.

2.4 Energy Sector
40.
At the beginning o f this CAS period, the quasi-fiscal deficit in the energy sector
had been reduced substantially (from 17 to 10.4 percent) due to the Government’s efforts
in energy sector reform in the previous FY99-01 CAS period, supported by the CSAC. I t
was expected that reforms to the energy sector to further reduce losses and make it
financially viable would continue during the current CAS period. However the
Government failed to increase electricity tariffs in line with the M T T P approved in 2003,
and targets for reducing commercial and technical losses were not met. Political turmoil
and Parliamentary elections at the beginning o f 2005 resulted in the Government
deferring i t s planned tariff increases. Entrenched rent-seeking and vested interests within
the energy sector have also adversely affected the Government’s commitments to reform.
The absence o f privatization o f energy and infrastructure projects as well as a nontransparent legal and regulatory framework are obstacles to increased foreign and IF1
investment in these sectors.
41.
Consequently, the Bank’s GSAC facility was closed before the third and final
tranche was released. The Implementation Completion Report (ICR) determined that this
project had been overambitious and could not have been implemented in the timeframe
envisaged. Several reasons contributed to the unsatisfactory performance o f the GSAC
project: an over-reliance on the possibility o f privatization, the adoption o f a rather
radical sector restructuring program, inadequate consideration o f country circumstances
and sequencing, the use of a Structural Adjustment Loan (SAL) rather than a Sector
Adjustment Loan (SECAL), and investment lending for tackling what were operational
problems in the sector, were all was partly to blame. The Government intends to move
forward on energy policy, including a concession or privatization o f the largest
distribution company, improving the efficiency and reducing corruption in the energy
sector and tariff policy. During 2006, the first steps towards a renewed commitment to
energy reforms were taken with the unification o f household tariffs in M a y 2006.

2.5 M i n i n g
42.
The mining sector accounts for over 10 percent o f GDP. The NPRS recognized
that i t s development and potential was hampered by a poor legal and regulatory
framework as well as a lack of transparency. IDA supported an ongoing mining dialogue
and technical assistance through an IDF grant to support the authorities in developing the
appropriate legal and institutional framework for the development o f the sector.
Although a number of proposals for legal reforms have been developed, entrenched
interests have prevented most o f these from being implemented. The delays in
implementation continued even after the change o f Government in March 2005, amid
concerns that reforms in the sector consistent with international norms might imply a loss
o f sovereignty to the Kyrgyz Republic. Nevertheless one important advance was the
endorsement by the Government o f the EITI in M a y 2004. However compliance with
commitments has been limited due in part to weak capacity; the Government produced
89

some compliance reports in 2004, but there have been none after that. The absence o f
transparency in the award and monitoring o f mining concessions hampers the attraction
o f new investment, and particularly foreign investment into the sector.

2.6 Transport Sector

43.
Roads account for around 92 percent o f freight movements and 99 percent o f
passenger traffic (excluding intra-urban). The 424 km o f the railway network i s small,
with separate branch lines that link the north o f the country to the Kazakhstan rail system,
and the south o f the country to the Uzbekistan rail system. Air transport accounts for less
than 1 percent o f passenger movement, mainly between Bishkek and Osh. Water
transport i s confined to vessels on Lake Issyk-Kul, mainly serving tourism.
44,
The Government received substantial financial assistance from external donors
for road improvement, particularly from the ADB. However, much o f this investment
was targeted at the rehabilitation o f the major trade corridors, with much less resources
allocated for the maintenance o f the rest o f the road network. T h i s has led to serious
maintenance backlog and overall poor condition o f the road network. If the present trend
of maintenance funding continues, the road network will continue to deteriorate, resulting
in significant increases in vehicle operating costs and travel time.
Inadequate
investments in maintenance o f physical infrastructure, including transport and
communications, have constrained the growth o f private business enterprises.

IDA lending operations in the transport sector have been limited to an Urban
45.
Transport project that aimed at providing sustainable, reliable, and affordable access to
mobility for the populations o f the cities o f Bishkek, Osh, and Jalalabad. Project
investments were directed at these three cities. The project has also had significant
impact on the institutional development o f public transport by supporting reform o f the
road sub-sector finances, regulatory reform in urban passenger transport services,
institutional reform of urban road departments, and divesting road rehabilitation and
maintenance functions to the private sector.
46.
In addition, an extensive TA and ESW, including the IDF grant for Institutional
Capacity Enhancement for the PPER, was provided to the Government for introducing a
rational budgeting process, including an integrated way to evaluate road investments and
maintenance expenditures based on objective economic and engineering criteria and
covering the full road management cycle.

The Urban Transport project closed in November 2005, and the rehabilitation o f
the Bishkek-Osh road funded by several IFIs i s almost complete. However, several
policy issues in the sector have yet to be resolved. Without a proper road maintenance
system in place, the large investments in Bishkek-Osh may be wasted. In the meanwhile,
the road network continues to deteriorate, with an estimated 200 km o f pavement lost
annually.

47.

90

3. Providing Essential Services
3.1 H e a l t h
48.
Implementation o f health reforms has continued to be satisfactory despite the
difficult political environment and changes in key personnel. The Health I1 project was
completed successfully and achieved the following: (i)country-wide implementation of
health financing reforms that promote increased allocation o f resources to primary health
care and to those groups most in need of health services, (ii)
rightsizing o f the health
sector through staff and infrastructure reductions, (iii)
strengthening and expansion of the
model of family medicine throughout the country, and (iv) piloting interventions to link
primary health care with health promotion. The inclusion o f strategic policy actions in
the GSAC, complemented by an investment credit through the Second Health Sector
Reform project, has helped to mainstream health reforms.
49.
The Government has approved i t s second generation ten-year strategy (Manas
Taalimi) and implementation plan for the health sector and has received widespread
support for the strategy, including the adoption o f a sector-wide approach (SWAP).
Progress has been made in synchronizing the output orientation o f the health sector with
budget formulation. The 2006 budget was calculated on the basis o f outputs, and general
budget contributions for health were centralized, and streamlined procedures adopted for
the flow o f centralized health funds to the Ministry o f Health and the Health Insurance
Fund. Early implementation o f Manas Taalimi has been successful and points to a high
likelihood that results in the present CAS period will be sustained and deepened.
50.
A key challenge facing the Kyrgyz Republic i s inter-regional disparities in
maternal and child mortality. A MDG study completed by the Bank, in collaboration
with the Ministry of Health (MOH) during the CAS period, highlightedthe importance o f
addressing disparities in health outcomes in order to achieve the MDGs. A key area o f
emphasis of the new health reform strategy i s reducing these disparities, including in
MDG outcomes. This will be supported under the SWAP and be achieved through
strengthening the delivery of emergency medicine, primary health care and public health
interventions among vulnerable groups, e.g. , rural populations, urban migrant
communities, etc.

51.
The Kyrgyz Republic i s also a beneficiary o f IDA’S Central Asia’Regional
HIV/AIDS project and will receive support for both supply- and demand-driven
interventions to reduce the burden o f H I V / A I D S and related issues such as stigma,
discrimination etc. During the CAS reporting period, the Kyrgyz Republic has been cited
as a good example o f coordinating national and regional responses to achieve greater
effectiveness in the fight against HIV/AIDS.
3.2 Education

52.
While literacy in the Kyrgyz Republic i s nearly universal, there are multiple
indications o f eroding the quality o f education, particularly in rural areas. Monitoring
Learning Achievement surveys carried out by the United Nations International Children’s
Education Fund (UNICEF) in 2001 and 2005 show a decline in student achievement
scores. The gap between the urban and rural students i s s t i l l significant. There are

91

difficulties in recruiting teachers to go to remote areas and this issue i s being addressed
under the Rural Education project by improving teachers’ incentives and providing
Teacher Fellowship deposits to attract and retain young teachers in remote villages.
Early childhood development programs continue to be a l o w priority when it comes to
funding, and coverage o f preschool education i s approximately 10 percent.
In October 2006, the Ministry o f Education, Science and Youth Policy approved
53.
an Education Sector Development Strategy (2006-201 0) which was developed in close
consultations and with active involvement o f major stakeholders, including the Ministry
o f Economy and Finance (MOEF), M O H, local development partners, regional
educational departments and external experts. This strategy i s consistent with the overall
country’s CDS (2007-2010) objectives as well as major government programs in the
education sector.

54.
Following the successful appraisal and endorsement o f the country’s Education
Sector Development Strategy (2006-2010) by the local donor group, the Kyrgyz Republic
was approved for a US$15 million grant allocation for 2007-2008 from the Education For
All (EFA) Fast Track Initiative (FTI) Catalytic Fund (CF) to support the implementation
o f the Government’s Education Sector Strategy and accelerated achievement o f the EFA
goals. The CF FTI grant will be administered by the World Bank on behalf o f
contributing donors to the find and i s expected to become effective early 2007.

55.
The Rural Education project became effective in M a y 2005. N e w student and
class achievement tracking instruments have been developed.
In addition, 100
fellowships for rural teachers have been created. Schools in two pilot regions are being
trained in new skills and abilities of joint strategic planning for school development with
engagement o f school staff, parents and boards o f trustees. Work i s underway on
improving the quality o f textbooks and methodological guides in core subjects and
supplying all schools with necessary learning materials.
A number of reforms will have to be undertaken to sustain the impact o f
56.
completed projects in this sector. Presently, the Government’s spending i s focused
mostly on inputs (maintenance, learning materials and salaries) rather than o n outcomes
such as the relevance o f skills and the knowledge o f school graduates in a marketoriented economy. The Government would have to review financing arrangements and
implementing per capita financing to sustaining earlier achieved outcomes.

3.3 Social Protection
57.
Social assistance programs, focused primarily o n means-tested benefits and
categorical assistance for vulnerable groups, have been hrther streamlined. The
targeting of poor and vulnerable groups identified by the poverty assessments has
increased, and budget allocations for this program have been increasing. Overall focus o f
public expenditure o n poverty reduction objectives has been gradually improving,
including significant wage increases o f selected public sector employees, e.g., teachers
and medical workers. In the last few years, social assistance expenditures have been
roughly around 1.4 percent of GDP. Nevertheless, broad untargeted social assistance i s
still being provided through universal price subsidies in electricity and other utility
sectors.

92

58.
Between 2001 and 2005, the total number o f contributors to the pension fund
increased by over 30 percent. Average pensions were raised by 35% in nominal terms,
with higher increases for poor pensioners between 2003 and 2006. A recent change in
the law on Assistance to the Employment of Population has led to an increase in the
number o f registered unemployed, putting a further strain o n the already fragile financial
status o f the Ministry o f Labor and Social Protection (MOLSP).
59.
The Bank’s support to central government in the areas o f health, education and
social protection has been complemented by the community driven development
approaches adopted through the VIP. In addition, the Bank has successfully provided
assistance for rural water supply and sanitation, small town infrastructure, rehabilitation
of power and district heating systems, and urban transport and maintenance. These
projects are all expected to achieve their development objectives.
60.
These community-driven projects have all been successful in a number of ways.
They have expanded local ownership, knowledge and capacity. They have tapped into
local expertise and have governance elements that are feasible to implement. They have
produced tangible and near-immediate results and sustainable impact. The results from
one project have complemented results from another. The success o f these projects has
underscored the case for repeater projects that will deepen and broaden their impact.
61.
In some cases, some work remains to be done. For example, the physical
progress in rehabilitation of rural water supply systems has been impressive, with about
55 percent being complete at the end o f 2005. However, the lack o f progress under an
ADB-funded project in institutional strengthening o f community drinking water users
units, proper maintenance of rehabilitation schemes and delays in the implementation o f
the hygiene and sanitation component raises serious concern over project’s sustainability.
At the beginning o f the World Bank-funded Rural Water Supply project, the poor
condition o f the infrastructure needed urgent intervention to address the most pressing
needs before focusing on sector development strategy.

4. Strengthening the Governance Framework
62.
Various laws have been passed to create an appropriate institutional framework
for the judiciary. A training centre for judges has been established and salaries for judges
have been increased. Also, arbitration courts have been set up and are being increasingly
resorted to. However, corruption and incompetence in the law enforcement agencies and
the judiciary pose serious problems and weaken the rule o f law, leading to a lack o f
public trust in these institutions.
63.
The Bank has been supporting reform in the judicial system through an IDF grant
which has enabled the development o f a court information and management system. T h i s
will allow all court cases and decisions to be publicized, as well as improving the
functioning o f the court system. I t has also provided support to the State Commission on
Public Procurement through strengthening o f the National Procurement Training Centre.
Both projects have been rated satisfactory with respect to their development objectives.
1

93

4.1 Civil Service R e f o r m
64.
Despite the enactment o f a new civil service law and laws requiring asset and
income declarations o f high state officials, and the provision o f greater independence to
the Chamber o f Accounts, the overall pace o f civil service reform has been slow. The
C i v i l Service Law, approved in June 2004, was amended by the Jogorku Kenesh to
increase the powers o f ministers in appointments and reduce the role o f the C i v i l Service
Agency (CSA), thus raising questions about the Government’s commitment to civil
service reform. The reform was further undermined by the appointment in October 2004
o f a close relative o f the President as State Secretary o f the CSA. In the months
following the March revolution, there was considerable pressure to make high level
appointments without due regard for the newly established competitive procedures
overseen by the CSA, and there was very little official recognition o f the role o f the CSA
to manage the appointments process. These issues led to postponement o f the
disbursement of the second tranche o f the GSAC, which was supporting these reforms,
and the project having an unsatisfactory rating. The Government has since begun to
address the deficiencies in implementation o f the reforms, although commitment to them
i s s t i l l uneven across government structures. T h e proportions o f appointments through
due process are now close to 90 percent, compared with about 30 percent in the months
after the revolution. There i s a greater recognition within the Government o f the
importance o f a merit based civil service. Progress made at the end o f 2006 has been
sufficient to upgrade the implementation o f the GSAC to moderately satisfactory and
authorize the disbursement o f the delayed second tranche. The establishment o f the CSA
and competitive appointment procedures can be the basis for further reforms, if the
necessary consensus and understanding can be developed at the highest political levels.
65.
The implementation o f the Law on Declaration o f Income and Assets by high
state officials (approved in June 2004) was also slow and, until early 2006, compliance
was low, particularly among parliamentarians. There was a reluctance to publish the
declarations of income and assets; however, from March 2006, compliance among
officials has reached 95 percent and declarations are now published on the internet and in
major newspapers.

A new public procurement law was introduced in 2004, which takes into account
66.
most of the recommendations o f the 2002 CPAR and introduces major improvements in
the transparency, economy and efficiency of public procurement and selection o f
consultancy services. The country is facing a challenge in implementation and
enforcement o f the law, due to lack o f resources, qualified procurement staff and
adequate equipment and reluctance to implement the provisions o f the law requiring-the
State Committee for Public Procurement and Material Resources (SCPPMR) not to
participate directly in procurement processes.

4.2 Public Finance Reforms
67.
T h e public finance system has been successful in reducing the fiscal deficit and
ensuring macro-economic stability. Budget comprehensiveness and transparency have
increased, in particular, improved budget documentation and public access to key fiscal
information. In addition, there has been some attempt to introduce a multi-year focus to
budget planning. The authorities recognize that significant problems still remain in

94

public financial management, and that improvements are key to making progress in
poverty reduction and economic growth. In particular, frequent and non-transparent
revisions to the budget make budget execution at the sectoral level unpredictable.
Accountability for the use o f funds i s further weakened by the lack o f robust internal
controls and a modern and comprehensive accounting framework.
68.
The authorities have recently developed and made some progress in implementing
a focused action plan (also supported by other donors) aimed at a strengthened approach
to P F M reform. T h e action plan recognizes that the priority i s to deal with a few basic
issues which will allow spending agencies to implement their budgets in a predictable
way and with a solid internal control framework. The development o f the action plan has
been supported by IDA under the PPER, which has focused on providing practical
technical assistance to the authorities and i s envisaged to continue in the next CAS
period.
69.
The G T A C i s supporting the modernization o f the Treasury, and has financed the
development o f a new system design. Procurement o f the new systems will begin during
2007, but a significant impact on the technical efficiency o f the Treasury cannot be
expected for at least two to three years. At least as important as the improvement o f
technical systems will be institutional and political reforms to the budget execution
process.

4.3 Local Service delivery.
70.
Much progress has been made in the provision o f essential services for the rural
population. Examples include: advisory services for farmers through the WB/IFAD/SDC
funded ASSP; infrastructure services such as drinking water, electricity and road access
through the VIP; primary health infrastructure maintenance and school repairs through
the VIP; cadastral services and title registration through the Land and Real Estate
Registration project (LRERP); access to rural credit through the Second Rural Finance
Project and the group lending component o f the ASSP. Both the VIP and the LRERP
have been rated highly satisfactory on achieving development objectives and
implementation performance.

Under the OIP, WUA’s creation, registration, and strengthening continue. At the
71.
end o f 2006, 436 W A S have been legally registered, serving 710,000 ha out o f the
developed area o f 1.1 million ha. Organizing large groups o f water users and achieving
their acceptance and openness towards such aspects as cost recovery for operation and
maintenance, are time-consuming and complex. The WUA concept has now been fully
accepted in the country and the foundation is laid for sustainable WUA development in
the future.
72.
From data collected from ten schemes where rehabilitation works were completed
at least two years ago, i t i s evident that there are already positive impacts. The analysis
showed that the water supply reduced in eight o f these schemes, which means that the
rehabilitated systems are operated more efficiently. In seven schemes, the crop yields

95

and gross production have already increased substantially. Nine o f the W A S have
increased irrigation service fees; operation and maintenance expenditures increased and
collection rates are high, with eight W A Scollecting more than 90 percent of the fees.
In addition, the Rural Water Supply and Sanitation project has already provided
improved water supply systems for about 120 villages, covering about 20 percent o f the
total population or about one third o f the rural population. The result will be to improve
access to potable water in the majority o f the villages in the Issyk-Kul, Naryn and Talas
Oblasts as well as hygiene and sanitation in these areas. The community based approach
to ’management o f rural water supply systems including the selection, implementation,
operation and maintenance o f water supply systems has been internalized, and there i s
evidence o f the communities’ commitment to the process.

73.

74.

The Bank’s VIP has had a major impact on governance at the local level, rapidly
spreading and institutionalizing concepts and practices such as transparency, citizen
involvement, and public accountability. Community contributions are much higher than
anticipated and micro-projects have been implemented quickly, efficiently and at high
quality. Project coverage o f rural communities i s already more than double that expected
at appraisal, and in-country pressure to expand coverage even more rapidly i s high.

IILMEASURINGBANK PERFORMANCE

75.
When the CAS was approved, the weaknesses in political stability and the risk o f
economic shocks were considered. However, the strategy did not and could not have
envisaged the degree o f political and economic dislocation that took place in March 2005
and that subsequently affected over a third o f the CAS period. Despite these adverse
circumstances the performance o f the Bank could be considered satisfactory. The Bank
program focused on visible results and achieved considerable success particularly in
rural- and community based projects. The quality o f the Bank’s products and services
was not compromised, and the portfolio implementation remained generally on track.
Aid coordination improved significantly and resulted in the preparation o f joint projects
and technical assistance, as well as a Joint Country Support Strategy.

76.
Overall the sustainability o f the Bank’s strategy and i t s implementation i s likely.
Where positive outcomes have been achieved; they are likely to be sustained. The
implementation o f the Bank program has been successful in several areas o f institutional
reform which have been maintained through significant stress-testing. One example i s
the deepening of land reform. The Bank supported Cadastre system was tested during the
revolution. Under pressure the system processed thousands o f inquiries and maintained
i t s integrity. Another example i t the overall transparency o f the health expenditures
which continue to be sustained; and health care reforms which have led to a more robust
primary care system in the country.

96

A. Quality o f Products and Services
The overall development effectiveness o f the Bank’s assistance program and i t s
77.
impact on poverty reduction was high. Evaluation o f most o f the projects completed
during the CAS period has shown good quality at entry, and generally satisfactory
achievement o f outcomes; about half have a positive likelihood o f sustainability, but only
one third achieved their institutional development impact. The most recent OPCS report
on the status o f projects under execution show the majority o f projects to be either on
track or to be likely to exceed their development objectives. The two projects which do
not fall into this category are the CSAC and the GSAC, which have both received
unsatisfactory ratings (see Table 3).

I

8

Small Town Infrastructure and Capacity Building

9

Health Sector Reform I1

10

Rural Education

11
12
13
14
15

Power and Distnct Heating
Rural Water Suoolv and San~tation
Consolidation TAC
Gov.SAC
GTAC

1

1

16

Payment and Banking System Modernization

17

Health and Social Protection SWAP

I Problem projects -percent

S
S
S
S
S
MS
U
MS
S
NIA

S
MS
S
S
S
S
U
MS
S
N/A

I

of rated projects

-

5.8

7.1

Problem projects percent of commitments

I

5.8

M
H
H
S
S
M
H
H
S
H

1

7.7

78.
The CAS has provided lending and grants for 13 projects totaling around US$lSS
million and contributed about US$2 million to one regional IDA grant - the Central Asia
HIV/AIDS Project (US$26.9 million, FYOS), and an Emergency Investment Grant o f
US$4 million to strengthen the country’s response capability to an Avian flue epidemic.
The actual commitments o f approximately U S $ l 55million for FY03-FY06 fell short o f
planned commitments in CAS o f US$171 million mainly because o f I D A 13 allocation
cuts in FY05. Projects approved under the FY03-06 CAS were s t i l l being implemented
at the time o f this review and therefore many o f the expected results are yet to
materialize.

97

I

79.
The Bank Group also delivered a number o f important ESW reports over the CAS
period, including the following: Poverty Assessment; Public Expenditure Review;
Country Financial Accountability Assessment; Country Procurement Assessment; Trade
and Growth Report, and Agriculture Policy Update. The Kyrgyz Republic also benefited
from several Central Asia regional studies such as the Regional Electricity Export
Potential Study (REEPS), HIV/AIDS Report, Tuberculosis Study, the Trade and
Transport Facilitation Report, and the Central Asia MDG study (including Kyrgyz case
studies in health and education).
80.
The Quality Assurance Group (QAG) rated the Kyrgyz Republic’s ESW program
as “Satisfactory” overall, as well as in i t s dimensions o f Internal Quality, Participation,
Consultation and Dissemination, and Likely Impact. T h e dimensions o f Strategic
Relevance as well as Coherence and Integration were rated as “Highly Satisfactory”.
Bank Inputs and Processes were also rated Satisfactory. The program is remarkably
homogenous, with only two o f the 12 tasks in the sample rated less than satisfactory.
81.
Several AAA tasks were highly instrumental in helping other donors shape their
respective programs in the Kyrgyz Republic. For example, the PER helped DfID, EU
and USAID support improved budget management, including the introduction o f the
MTBF; the FSAP helped underpin the Fund’s PRGF, and secure donors’ support for
strengthening the capacity o f the National Bank; the C E M informed the C G meeting, and
i s likely to provide donors with a common framework for support to economic growth
and export diversification; the Agricultural Policy Update i s likely to influence IMF work
on taxation in agriculture, and has had an impact on the EU finding practices and ADB
TA programs in the sector; the Poverty Assessment was explicitly used by ADB to
underpin i t s Poverty Partnership Agreement; the CPAR helped harmonize procurement
practices under the Health Sector SWAP; the C F A A findings have impacted on policies
and programs of other donors, especially DFID, ADB, and EU, and served as an input
into the IMF program.

82.
The Assessment Panel suggested that the future AAA program could consider
work on the sources o f growth (including the shadow economy), regional trade and
cooperation, governance (including accountability o f public financial management),
monetization o f non-monetary incomes, rationalization o f social services and benefits,
and rationalization o f higher education.
83.
The relevance o f the AAA program i s now higher than ever, owing to the decision
to produce a multi-donor JCSS, which offers a new opportunity to put in place more
transparent arrangements for the production, dissemination and use of AAA outputs to
help the Government accelerate and deepen reform. In particular, the JCSS may help to
establish a clearer division o f labor and propose measures to enable the joint preparation
o f economic and sector reports.

98

B. Portfolio Assessment

84.
The size o f the Bank’s portfolio was relatively stable throughout the CAS period.
The number of projects grew to 19 in 2006 from 16 in 2003, while total commitments
slightly decreased from almost US$286 million in FY03 to US$268 million in November
2006. T h i s decrease was due to the closure o f five projects worth during FY05-06, with
four new operations being approved in the same period. More than 50 percent o f current
operations and more than 60 percent o f total commitments was inherited from the
previous CAS period.
85.
Recent project approvals are closely aligned with the FY03-06 CAS and, with the
exception o f two projects, are on schedule. An energy project, originally planned for
FY06, and a PRSG that has slipped two years from FY05 to FY07-may not be included
in the JCSS. There have been some slippages31 and deviations3* from the program, but
overall most programmed activities were implemented as planned33. The Business
Enhancement component o f the Financial Sector and Business Development Project had
to be cut from the original project and i t s preparation postponed to FY06. Similarly, the
Agriculture Modernization and Marketing Project had to be split into two projects, with
the Agribusiness and Marketing Project having become effective in M a y 2005. The
Water Management Improvement Project was delivered in FY06. ESW and TA activities
were closely aligned with the CAS.
86.
Disbursements have improved substantially compared to the previous CAS
period. Throughout FY03-05, the disbursement ratio was consistently higher than the
E C A average, increasing from around 20 percent in FY03 to almost 29 percent in
FY0534. The average project age o f 3.935years i s a little higher than the E C A average o f
3.4 years, which can partly be attributed to some projects being extended.
87.
In FY03, several projects had slow disbursement (mainly due to ceilings imposed
on the Public Investment Program (PIP), procurement problems, and project management
flags. Throughout FY04, efforts were made to improve portfolio performance and the
number o f flags has been significantly reduced. The nature o f flags also changed, from
“process” flag categorization in 2003 to mostly slow d i s b u r ~ e m e n and
t ~ ~ legal covenant
problems in 2004/5. The overall status o f the country portfolio was also affected by a
country record flag, due to net disconnect exceeding the 20 percent threshold.

31

E.g. Livestock Review planned for FY05, slipped to FY06; the Integrated Financial Assessment
(IFA) planned for FY04, slipped to FY06; the Investment Climate Assessment<ICA) slipped from FY05 to
FY04.
3’
Currently ongoing Energy DialogueITA, was not envisioned in the FY03-FY06 CAS.
33
CEh4fDPR was dropped in FY05, GFATM Implementation TA - in FY04. Also, Environmental
Expenditure and Policy planned for FY06, seems to have been dropped.
34
Average disbursement ratio in ECA was 19.7 in 2003, 18.3 in 2004, and 23.8 in 2005.
35
As o f November 6,2005
36
The slow disbursement flag may be indicative o f capacity and commitment problems.

99

89,
The CPPRs have evolved into an effective tool for managing portfolio
performance. Most process-related issues identified as generic, i.e., compliance with
procurement, disbursement and financial management requirements, during earlier
CPPRs have been resolved. The most recent CPPRs put a greater emphasis on resultbased approaches in portfolio management and launched the discussion with the
Government on how the portfolio contributes t o achieving CAS goals. In addition,
CPPRs focused attention on more specific issues, such as taxation o f project resources,
project implementation unit (PIU) inspections, and insufficient coordination o f donors
and portfolio by the Government. Moreover, CPPRs contribute significantly to donor
coordination as they are conducted jointly with other development partners, such as
ADB, IsDB and KfW.
90.
During the current CAS period, I F C has financed 6 projects for the total amount
o f U S $10 million. Five projects were in the financial sector and one project in the pulp
and paper sector. Additionally, IFC has invested in regional projects that benefit the
Kyrgyz Republic. These include the Central Asia Micro and Small Enterprises Facility
(MSEF), a revolving financing facility to help augment availability o f sustained credit to
MSEs, and the SEAF Central Asia Small Enterprise Fund ($2.5 million I F C financing), to
invest in SMEs across a range o f sectors.
91.
IFC’s present outstanding portfolio in the Kyrgyz Republic is US$13 million. All
projects are performing successfully.

C. Country Dialogue and Aid Coordination

92.
Dialogue with the Government has been constructive throughout the CAS period
and, even during the run-up to elections and after the appointment o f the new
administration, the Government has continued to consult with the Bank on macroeconomic and social policy issues. Efforts to engage in dialogue with Parliament on core
policy work has required additional time and effort by the Bank team, but this has been
critical in ensuring a better understanding o f the need for reforms in areas such as the
energy sector. The C G meetings in 2002 and 2004 were extremely beneficial for
clarifying the Bank’s and other donors’ support for the Government’s overall
development agenda.
93.
Regular meetings have been held with N G O and c i v i l society group
representatives on a range o f topics. For example, in 2004, the Programmatic Poverty
Analysis team held dissemination meetings at sub-national level with academicians,
NGOs and local administrators to share the findings of their work. However, these
efforts have not dispelled skepticism and distrust o f international financial institutions
and donors in general, which has worsened in recent months. The upcoming JCSS 200710 o f a core group o f five partners, includes plans for a sustained outreach program that
will help better relations with civil society and hopefully reduce distrust and suspicion o f
the donor community.

100

94.
Donor coordination and harmonization in the Kyrgyz Republic is well advanced,
both in practical terms and in spirit. T h e effectiveness o f the Donor Council was
demonstrated in the immediate post-Revolution weeks in March 2005 when members
were able to speak with one voice. Since then, several joint letters have been sent to the
Government raising donor concerns, and a coordinator has been funded by donors. There
has been real progress in project co-financing, joint donor missions, joint policy positions
and joint IF1 portfolio reviews. The recently approved Health SWAP i s a good example
o f a harmonizing program involving five partners.
95.
Since the October 2002 C G meeting in Bishkek, aid coordination and
harmonization have been high o n the agenda. In December 2003, the Government
initiated the establishment o f a harmonization steering committee and working group,
comprising government and donor representatives. The working group developed a draft
harmonization and alignment program and action plan. A joint CAS i s one of the
objectives of the action plan. At the High-Level Forum on Harmonization in Rome in
February 2003, the Kyrgyz Republic was identified as a pilot country o n harmonization
and has been actively participating in the Organization for Economic Cooperation and
Development Assistance Committee (OECD-DAC) meetings.

96.
Information sharing and coordination have improved over the last three years, and
the donor community has made significant steps towards the harmonization o f
procedures. Examples include: the use o f the World Bank’; Poverty Assessment Report
by the ADB for i t s CAS, close coordination o f the IMF’s structural reform agenda with
World Bank and ADB policies, a joint Portfolio Review by the ADB, World Bank, KfW
and the IsDB in 2004, and the decision by KfW to fund a rural community infrastructure
project based on the appraisal and implementation documents o f the Bank’s VIP.

97.
The OECD/DAC Survey on Harmonization and Alignment has indicated a
number o f areas that need further improvements. The survey points to a very weak use o f
country systems by donors. Also, there i s no real alignment with sector programs, with
the exception o f the health sector. Donors did not streamline their conditionality and
only about 10 percent o f the approximately 250 field missions were carried out jointly.
The survey report also notes that while there i s a high-level o f commitment by the
Government to aid effectiveness, the capacity to drive the process remains weak. These
factors should be addressed in the implementation o f the upcoming JCSS.

D. Lessons and Recommendations
98.
Given the fi-actured politics and weak country ownership, building consensus for
reforms will require continued policy and broad consultation, including with Parliament.
Resurgent nationalism and the more interventionist economic approach of the new
Government may require a more flexible economic dialogue. The challenge for the Bank
and other donors i s to find effective ways to support the Government in a time o f political
upheaval and uncertainty. Skepticism towards the Government and development partners
highlights the importance of engaging with and supporting non-government stakeholders.

101

The key will be to initiate sustainable processes that will catalyze broader reforms, and
build champions for them among the public.
99.
Policies that have a visible impact as perceived by beneficiaries are more likely to
generate broad public support for reforms. Given current capacity and institutional
constraints, proposed reforms will have to be modest and sequential, focusing on step-bystep improvement over a long period o f time with a focus on tangible results.

100. Policy reforms requiring institutional changes often take much longer than
expected. There are many reasons for this, including limitations o f the host’s
implementation capacity and the Bank’s own supervision capacity, the absence o f
prerequisites for durable reform, and the time lag between altered incentives and resultant
changes in behavior. There are an infinite number o f exogenous factors that can delay
implementation. Expectations, and related performance indicators, on the pace o f reform
and response to reform should reflect that experience.
101. Conditionality remains important but has proven to be a blunt instrument in
persuading the Government to carry out major institutional (and particularly governance)
reforms. The use o f structural adjustment credits have not worked well in the context o f
the Kyrgyz Republic. The adoption o f a more consultative process to conditionality,
around multi-donor financial support, may be appropriate.

102. Some projects-in energy, the GSAC and GTAC, for i n s t a n c e h a v e been overly
complex in their objectives. With implementation capacity such a major constraint, the
Bank and other donors must make every effort to make projects as simple as possible and
be patient when things do not move as expected.
103. Despite the less than ideal environment for budget support, the positive
experience with the healthy SWAP suggests that programmatic approaches, particularly
in the social sectors, may be feasible.
104. The JCSS should consider a less ambitious reform agenda and focus (in the short
term) on ensuring that reforms achieved in areas such as health and education to date are
protected. Public financial management reforms, for example, have been instrumental in
ensuring macro-economic stability and growth during the CAS period. In some cases,
the results o f projects under the previous CAS are only just starting to show now. Thfs
should be taken into consideration when determining the m i x o f instruments and sector
activities for the JCSS, and in choosing indicators for measuring success o f the Bank’s
program.

105.

Greater selectivity will be needed in the next CAS/JCSS period. The need for
prioritization i s evident given the limited IDA resources and the limitations placed on the
Government’s own Public Investment Plan. In this regard, donors will need to assist the
Government to work out what infrastructure not to “fix” as much as what to invest in.

102

106. IFC projects in the financial sector, mining, agribusiness and manufacturing have
been successful, however, all have faced difficulties as a result o f issues related to the
business environment and .the absence o f regional cooperation which limits market
opportunities for and thus the economic viability o f Kyrgyz enterprises. Projects
generally require significant levels o f technical assistance to ensure the economic
viability and long-term sustainability o f IFC investments.
107. The most effective means o f providing financing to SMEs i s thorough effective
financial intermediaries. Unfortunately financial intermediation i s weak in the Kyrgyz
Republic which limits opportunities for using the system for IF1 support to micro and
small business enterprises. The banking system, with US$670 million o f total assets or
about 25 percent o f GDP at the end o f 2006, i s weak with limited trust among the
populace and business community. The sector offers limited products and needs to
develop leasing, housing finance, private pension funds factoring and insurance in order
to better support the private sector.

103

IA

0

I

*

I

i

FY

2003
2003
2004

PROJECT PLANNED IN CAS
Project
IDA Amount
($MI
GSAC
20
GSAC TA
8
Financial Sector and Business
12

37

CURRENT STATUS
Status
IDA Amount
($MI
Approved FY03
20
Approved FY03
8
Divided into 2

The project was divided into two separate projects: 1.Payment and Banking Modernization and
2,Reducing Technical Barriers to Entrepreneurship and Trade.
38
The project was not envisaged in initial CAS plan; i t appeared after the division of Financial
Sector and Business DevelopmentProject.
39
The project was planned as IDA grant, however due to IDA resource limitations 3.1 million - IDA
rant and 12 - IDA credit.
O'
The Agricultural Modernization and Marketing Project included in the CAS for US$20 million
was split into the Agri-Business and Marketing Project (FYOS) and the Water Management Improvement
Project (FY06).
41
See footnote 12 above.
42
The project was not planned under the CAS; it i s funded by Global Program for Avian Influenza
Control and Human Pandemic Preparedness and Response (GPAI)
43
The project was not envisaged in the initial CAS plan; it appeared after the division o f Financial
Sector and Business Development Project

111

Table 3. Planned Versus Actual Non-LendingDeliverables
a) AAA/ESW

b) Trust Fund/IDF
FY
FY03
MULT
FY03
FY04
MULT
FY04

FY04

FY06

PRODUCT PLANNED IN CAS
Institutional Building Support to PRSP-I

CURRENT STATUS
Completed FY05

IDF Grant on Court Information and
Management System Development
Strengthening Organization Structure and
Statistics Capacity of National Statistics
System Partnership
Building Capacity in Governance and
Revenue Management in Natural Resources
IDF Grant
IDF Grant Institutional Strengthening thru
Support to National Procurement Center in
Bishkek
IDF Grant Institutional Capacity

Completed FY06

112

Completed FY06

Will be completed in FY07

Will be completed in FY08

I Will be completed in FY09

Enhancement for Public Expenditure
Management
Institutional Building Support to PRSP-I1

FY06
MULT
FY06

FY
FYO 1
FY03
FY04
FY04
FY04
FY04
FY04
FY05
FY05
FY05
FY05

FY03-

I
I

Will be completed in FY08

Local Government Capacity Building Grant to
Implement Intergovernmental Fiscal Reforms

Will be completed in FY09

PRODUCT PLANNED INCAS
Agribusiness and Marketing Project
Payments and Banking System Modernization
Project
Village Investment Project
Poverty Reduction Support Grant (PRSG)
Small Towns Infrastructure and Capacity
Building Project
Rural Education Project
Disaster Hazard Mitigation Project
Health and Social Protection Project SWAP
Urban Transport and Maintenance Project
Water Management Improvement Project
(WMW
Disaster Hazard Mitigation Project

CURRENT STATUS
Completed FY05
Completed FY04

Completed FY07

IFC Leasing TA

Completed FY03

IFC Institutional Support to Akun JSC
IDF Grant for Building Capacity in

Completed FY04
Will be completed FY07

Completed FY04
Completed FY07
Completed FY05
Completed FY05
Completed FY05
Completed FY06
Completed in FY06
Completed in FY06

04
- .

FY04
FY04

113

e) Regional Non-Lending Deliverables

I Irrigation in Central Asia - Social, economic, I Completed FY03
I and environmental considerations
I Meeting the Environment MDG in Europe I Completed FY03
I and Central Asia
I MDG Goals for Health in Europe and Central I Completed FY04
I Asia: Relevance and Policy Implications
I Microfinance and the Poor in Central Asia:

114

I Completed FY04

Kyrgyz Republic at a glance
Republic

Europe 8
Central
Asia

LOWincoma

5.2
440
2.3

473
4,113
1,945

2,353
580
1,364

1.o
1.8

0.0
0.6

1.9
2.3

46
36
66
58
7
77
99
98
98
96

64
69
28
5
92
97
104
105
102

31
59
60
39
75
62
104
110
99

1985

1995

2004

2005

..

1.7
18.3
29.5
5.4
6.6

2.2
14.5
42.6
5.8
11.1

2.4
14.4
39.0
4.7
5.5

-14.1
1.2
36.7
13.2

-8.3

..

-3.4
1.3
949
14.0
68.5
131.7

POVERTY and SOCIAL

Kyrgyz

2005
Population,mid-year (millions)
GNI per capita (Atlas method, US$)
GNi (Atlas method, US$ billions)

9/15/06

Life expectancy

T

Average annual growth, 1999-05
Population 1%)
Labor force (%)

GNI
per
capita

Moat recent estimate (latest year available, 1999.05)
Poverty (% of populationbelow nationalpoverty line)
Urban population (% of total population)
Life expectancy at birth (years)
Infant mortality (per 7,OW live births)
Chiid malnutrition (% of children under 5)
Access to an improvedwater source (% of population)
Literacy (% of populafion age 75+)
Gross primary enrollment (% of school-agepopulation)
Male
Female

1

Gross
primar)
enroiimeni

Access to Improvedwater source

I -

Kyrgyz Republic
Low-incomegroup

KEY ECONOMIC RATIOS and LONG-TERM TRENDS

GDP (US$ bllilons)
Gross capital fonnation/GDP
Exports of goods and services/GDP
Gross domestic savings/GDP
Gross national savings/GDP

..

..
..

..
..
..
..
..

Current account balance/GDP
Interest payments/GDP
Total debUGDP
Total debt service/exports
Present value of debUGDP
Present value of debffexports

..

Indebtedness

1995-05

2004

2005

2005.09

-5.3
4.6

4.6
3.4
2.6

7.0
5.9
12.8

-0.6
-1.8
4.6

5.2
4.1

1985

1995

2004

2005

..

Trade

1

1985-95
(average annual growth)
GDP
GDP per capita
Exports of goods and services

Economic ratios'

-

Kyrgyz Republic

~

Low-incomegroup

STRUCTURE of the ECONOMY
(% of GDP)
Agriculture
Industry
Manufacturing
Services

Householdfinal consumption expenditure
General gov't final consumptionexpenditure
Imports of goods and Services

(average annual growth)
Agriculture
Industry
Manufacturing
Services
Householdfinal consumption expenditure
General gov't final consumption expenditure
Gross capital formation
imports of goods and services

:..

..
..

..
..

;:::

17.1
42.6

14.1
45.0

75.0
19.5
42.4

76.0
18.2
51.3

85.9
18.9
58.2

4.1
3.0
2.2
11.9

4.2
-10.9
-15.6
8.1

1985-95

199565

-2.9
-14.3
-24.3
-2.7

5.2
2.7
5.7
4.8

-13.9
-19.3
-17.1

,"E

9.3
36.6

5.1
2.0
-1.4
1.o

IGrowth of exports and Imports (x)

7.5
4.6
23.6
16.3

12.0
-0.8
-1.1
12.7

20
10
0
.10

.m

Note: 2005 data are preliminaryestimates.
This table was produced from the Development Economics LDB database.
* The diamonds show four key indicators in the country (in bold) compared with its incomegroupaverage. If data are missing, the diamond will
be incomplete.

115

1

Kyrgyz Republic
Balance of Payments and Trade

I

2005

2000

pm,mt%wt
511
559
-83

Total merchandise exports [fob]
Total merchandise imports [cif)
Net trade in goods and services
Workers' remittances and
compensation of employees [receipts)

676
1,108
.490

9

m

Current account balance
as a x of GOP

.79
-5.8

.207
-8.5

Reserves, includinggold

263

612

Governance indicators. 2000 and 2004
V m c and accountability

Political stability
Requlatory quality
Rulf of law

Control of corruption
0

25

50

15

100

Central Government Finanoc
(2 0lLiL-w
Revenue
Tax revenue
EHpense

15.1
11.7
15.8

Cash surplustdeficit

.2.9

Technology and Infrastructure
Highest marginal tax rate [A)
Individual
Corporate

Paved roads [X of total)
Fixed line and mobile phone
subscribers (per 1,000 people)
High technology exports
[ X of manufactured exports]

.M

2000

2004

911

900

78

kW

$5

1.4

56
45

W
.
45
15 0

External Debt and Resource Flows
Environment

/Im-ci
Total debt outstanding and disbursed
Total debt service
HlPC and MDRl debt relief [expected, flow]

1.827
173

4?RW

Total debt [X of GDP)
Total debt service [ Z of exports)

133.4
27.4

M9
Mi7

Foreign direct investment [net inflows)
Portfolio equity [net inflows)

AF/

.2
0

,?7

n

Agriculturalland [A of land area]
Forest area [X of land area, 2000 and 20051
Nationally protcoted areas [X of land area)
Freshwater resources per capita [cu meters]
Freshwater withdrawal[X of internal resources]

C 0 2 emissions per capita [mt]

.

G D P per unit of energy use
(2000 PPP $per kg ol oil equivalent)

Composition of total external debt. 2004

094

(7.W

31

.?2

497

.%V

IBRD
Total debt outstanding and disbursed
Disbursements
Principal repayments
Interest payments

0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0

IDA
Total debt outstanding and disbursed
Disbursements
Total debt servioe

377
52
3

565
34
9

31
31
0

7
23

5

n

75
0

15
0

Energy USQ per capita [kg of oil equivalent)

Shmrl-wrm. I

9.121
2I7

pm*ci

Olh.rm"lrl.

US$ millionr

I.t.r.i,554

Private Sector Development
Time required to start a business [days]
Cost to start a business [A of GNI per capita)
Time required to register property [days]
Ranked as a major constraint to business
[X of managers surveyed who agreed)
Tax administration
Economic and regulatorypolicy uncertainty
Stock market capitalization[ X of GDP)
Bank branches (per 100,000people]

2000

2005

--

21
10.4
10

..

33.8
33.2

0.3

I5
.?I

..

..

IFC (Awd.w.y.I
Total disbursedand outstanding portfolio
of which IFC own account
Disbursements for IFC own account
Portfolio sales, prepaymentsand
repayments for IFC own account
MlGA
GIOSS exposure

Note: Figures in italics are for years other than those specified. 2005 data are preliminary estimates.
.. Indicates data are not available. -indicates observation is not applicable.
Development Econom cs Development Data Group [DECOG).

116

8112106

Millennium Develooment Goals

Kyrg yz Repubhc

1995

1990
*?8

Goal 1: halue the rates for $1 a day pouerty and malnutrition
Poverty headcount ratio at $1 a day (PPP, x o f population]
Poverty headcount ratio at national poverty line [ Z o f population]
Share of income or consumption to the poorest qunitile [ X I
Prevalence of malnutrition rX of childrenunder 5)

,*”

,**’
52.0

Goal 2 ensure that children are able to complete primary schooling
Primary school enrollment (net, Z ]
Primary completion rate [ X of relevant age group]
Secondary school enrollment (gross, X ]
Youth literacy rate [A o f people ages 15-24]

.e.

m

Goal 3: eliminate gender disparitg in education and empower women
Ratio of girls to boys In primary and secondary education [ x ]
Women employed in the nonagriculturalsector [ X of nonagriculturalemployment]
Proportion of seats hold by women In national parliament (XI

+8

Goal 4: reduce under4 mortality by two-thirds
Under.5 mortality rate [per l,OOO]
Infant mortality rate [per 1,000 live births]
Measles immunization (proportion of one.year olds ImmUniZQd,x ]

80
68

.w

Goal 5: reduce maternal mortality by three-fourths
Maternal mortality ratio [modeled estimate per 100,000 live births]
Births attended by skilled health staff (X of total]
Goal 6 halt and begin to rcuerse the spread of HlYfAlDS and other major diseases
Prevalence of HIV [ x of populatlon ages 15-49]
Contraceptive prevalence [ x of women ages 15-49]
Incidence of tuberculosis [per 100,000people]
55
Tuberculosis cases detected under DOTS (4)

Goal 8: develop a global partnership for deuelopmcnt
Fixed line and mobile phone subscribers [per 1,000 people]
Internet users [per 1,000 people]
Personal computers [per 1,000 people]
Youth unemployment [z of total labor force ages 15-24)

8.9
7

/I

7

.w

87
95
84

90
93
88
100

46
I

101
+3
1

101
(3

74
63
97

70
60
98

68
58
99

.w

110
99

.w

42

122
62

?
.

RI
?
.

Goal 7: halve the proportion of people without sustainable access to basic needs
Access to an improved water source [ x of population]
78
Access to improved sanitation facilities [ Z of population)
60
Forest area [ x of total land area)
Nationally pIOteCtQdareas (X of total land area]
C02 emissions (metric tons per capita]
28
G D P per unit of energy use [constant 2000 PPP $per kg of oil equivalent]
20

I

2004

2000

37.7

.

77
59
4.5

71
0

1.0
2.3

0.9
31

78

78
10
5

4f
15.0
10
?
. A’

#AF

52
17
&??I

~~~

Measles immunization ( x of 1year old+]

Education indicators (%]

100

75

I

ICT indicators [per 1.000 people]
1251
100
75

50

15

50
25

50
1998

2000

2002

LO04

25

0

0

19wl
-b Primary not enrollment

-c--

1115

2000

1004

ratio

Ratio of girls t o boys in primary h
sccondaru cducakic.n

0 Kyrgyc Republic 0 Europe & Central Asia

Note: Figures In italics are for years other than those specified. ..indicates data are not available.
0e.e opment Economics. Development Data Group (DECDG]

117

2000

LOO2

2004

0 Fixed

mobile rubpcribcra
Intcrnct uicrs

8112106

-

CAS Annex B2 Kyrgyz Republic
Selected Indicators* of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
As Of Date 0510912007

Indicator
Portfolio Assessment
Number of Projects Under Implementation a
Average Implementation Period (years)
Percent of Problem Projects by Number
Percent of Problem Projects by Amount a r c
Percent of Projects at Risk by Number
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount "
Disbursement Ratio (%) e
Portfolio Management
CPPR during the year (yesho)
Supervision Resources (total US$)
Average Supervision (US$/project)

2004

2005

2006

2007

16
3.4
18.8
22.6
25.0
28.0
20.8

16
3.5
6.3
8.2
18.8
24.6
28.5

17
3.5
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
27.5

19
4.0
5.3
13.9
5.3
13.9
24.4

Yes
1729
108

Yes
1547
97

Yes
1352
80

Yes
1588
84

Since FY 80

Memorandum Item
Proj Eva1 by OED by Number
Proj Eva1 by OED by Amt (US$ millions)
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Number
YOof OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt

18
466.7
22.2
8.9

Last Five
FYS
7
109.3
42.9
25.3

a. As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY).
b. Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio.
c. Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) and/or implementation progress
UP).
d. As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
e. Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the
beginning of the year: Investment projects only.
* All indicators are for projects active in the Portfolio, with the exception of Disbursement Ratio,
which includes all active projects as well as projects which exited during the fiscal year.

I18

-

-

CAS Annex 8 3 IBRDllDA Program Summary Kyrgyz Republic
As Of Date 05/09/2007

Proposed IBRDllDA Base-Case Lending Program
Fiscal year

Proj ID

US$(M)

Strategic
Rewards
(H/M/L)

implementation
Risks (H/M/L)

2007

Reducing Tech. Barriers
Village Investment Project 2
On-farm Irrigation 2
Result

5.0
15.0
16.0
36.0

M
H
H

M
L
L

2008

Statistical Capacity Building
Agricultural Investments and Services
BishkeUOsh Urban
Economic Management TA
Regional Biodiversity
Result

1.o
10.0
15.0
4.0
2.0
32.0

M
M
H
M
M

M
L
M
M
M

2009

National Road Network Maintenance and
Rehabilitation
Rural Water 2
Result

20.0

H

M

10.0
30.0

H

L

Education SWAP
Land and Real Estate Registration 2
Judicial Reform
Result

15.0
6.0
10.0
31.0

H
H
H

M
L
M

2010

Overall Result

129.0

119

CAS Annex B3 (IFC & MIGA) for Kyrgyz Republic

-

Kyrgyz Republic IFC and MIGA Program, FY 2004-2007
2004 2005 2006 2007
3.10 3.90 1.20

IFC commitments (US$m)

Sector (%)
Finance Markets
General Manufacturing

100

Total

64 100
36
100 100 100

0

97 100 100
3
100 100 100

0

Investment instrument(%)
Loans
Equity

Total
MIGA guarantees (US$m)

42.14 0.00 0.00

120

-

-

CAS Annex 8 4 Summary of Nonlending Services Kyrgyz Republic
As Of Date 05/09/2007

Comdetion FY

Cost (US$OOO)

Recent completions
Investment Climate Assessment
Poverty Update
lnstitutioal Fiduciary Assessment
Livestock Review
Programatic PER TA
Energy Dialogue TA

FY05
FY05
FY06
FY06
FY06
FY06

129
349
46
185
286
51

KG,PD,PS
KG,PS
PS
PS
PS,PD
PS

Underway
Urban Slums
Poverty Assessment Update
PPER
CPAWCFAA Update
FSAP Update
Poverty Assessment
PPER
Social Protection Strategy
Pub. Exp. Tracking Survey
CEM follow-up
Heating Strategy
Fiduciary Assessment Education
User Survey Access to Health
Judicial Study
CEM
Poverty Assessment Update
Corporate ROSC

FY07
FY07
FY07
FY07
FY07
FY08
FY08
FYO8
FY08
FY08
FYO9
FY09
FY09
FYO9
FYI0
FYI0
FYI0

85
87
100
80
52
150
100
100
100
185
200
50
150
100
250
100
150

KG,PS
KG,PD
KG,PD,PS
KG,PD,PS
PD,PS
KG,PD
KG,PD, PS
PD,PS
KG,PS
KG,PS
KG,PS
KG
KG,PS
KG,PS
KG,PS
KG,PS
KG,PS

Product

a. Government, donor, Bank
b. Knowledge generation, public debate, problem-solving.

121

Audiencea

Obiective”

-

-

CAS Annex B6 Key Economic Indicators Kyrgyz Republic
AS Of Date 05/09/2007

Indicator

2002

Actual
2003 2004

Estimate4
2005 2006 2007

Projected
2008 2009 2010

National accounts (as Yo of GDP)

100
38
23
39

100
37
22
41

100
33
24
43

100
32
22
46

100
33
20
46

100
32
22
46

100
30
23
46

100
29
25
46

100
29
25
46

Total Consumption
Gross domestic fixed investment
Government investment
Private investment

94
18
7
12

104
15
5
10

105
16
5
11

104
16
5
11

121
16
5
11

116
17
5
13

112
17
5
12

109
20
4
16

107
20
5
15

~ x p o r t s(GNFS)~
Imports (GNFS)

43
47

43
50

47
57

43
65

41
78

43
76

44
74

46
75

46
73

Gross domestic savings

15

6

6

-5

Gross national savings'

17

9

12

6

Memorandum items
Gross domestic product

1,606

1,919

2,212

290

340

Real annual growth rates (%, calculated from 95 prices)
Gross domestic product at market prices
0.0
Gross Domestic Income
0.3

Gross domestic product'
Agriculture
lndustry
Services

7

8

9

9

13

14

2,460

2,817

3,116

3,438

400

450

500

550

600

650

710

7.0
7.0

7.0
6.0

-0.2
0.2

2.7
3.8

6.4
5.9

7.2
6.1

7.2
5.8

5.7
4.9

Real annual per capita growth rates (%, calculated from 95 prices)
Gross domestic product at market prices
-0.8
6.1
Total consumption
2.9
18.0
Private consumption
3.9
22.9

5.9
5.9
6.4

-1.6
8.4
10.8

1.7
21.8
23.7

5.2
2.7
2.4

6.0
4.1
3.9

6.1
4.1
3.8

4.6
3.8
3.7

1156
806

1347
942

1526
1064

1746
1223

1913
1319

(US$ million at current prices)
G N I per capita (US%,Atlas method)

'

1 0 1 0
14

15

3,796 4,132

Balance o f Payments (US% millions)
EXPO-

(GNFS)~
Merchandise FOB

640
498

745
590

942
733

942
687

Imports (GNFS)~
Merchandise FOB
Resource balance
Net current transfers
Current account balance

721
572
-80
88
49

875
724
-130
112
-81

1135
904
-193
209
-75

1397
1106
-455
332
-204

Net private foreign direct investment
Long-term loans (net)
OiTicial
Private
Other capital (net, incl. errors & ommissions)

5
36
51
-15
38

46
-16
33
-49
59

131
43
51
-8
17

43
16
16
0
145

105
62
62
0
188

110
78
78
0
135

104
89
89
0
90

116
100
100
0
65

124
55
55
0
45

Change in reservesd

-50

-52

-162

-93

-278

-73

-42

-93

-40

-4

-7

-9

-19

-37

-33

-30

-29

-27

8.1

5.3

12.8

-6.8

-0.4
4.5
8.2
47.1

14.8
19.2
6.9
9.8

13.9
17.3
7.2
7.6

12.9
16.1
5.9
14.0

6.1
6.5
5.2
5.1

2188 2382 2540
1632 1779 1891
-1032 -1035 -1014
512
774
850
-543 -300 -212

2859 3026
2153 2275
-1114 -1113
887
888
-281 -289

Memorandum items

Resource balance (% o f GDP)
Real annual growth rates ( YR95 prices)
Merchandise exports (FOB)
Primary
Manufactures
Merchandise imports (CIF)

..
..
11.4

22.0

15.8

30.8

(Continued)

122

-

Kyrgyz Republic Key Economic Indicators
(Continued)

Indicator

2002

Public finance (as % o f GDP at market price$
Current revenues
Current expenditures
Current account surplus (+) or deficit (-)
Capital expenditure
Foreign financing

A W
2003 2004

rnld

EStimatbr

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

23
23
0.0
5.4
5.1

23
23
-0.5
4.4
4.4

23
23
-0.2
4.4
4.7

24
24
v0.2
4.3
3.6

25
25
-0.2
4.4
1.7

25
25
0.1
4.3
0.3

25
25
0.4
4.3
-0.4

25
25
0.7
4.2
-0.9

25
25
0.9
4.7
-0.9

15
34
12

17
33
95

21
32
-150

21
10
93

29
52
102

31
22
101

33
19
97

33
12
112

33
8
110

Price indices( YR2005 =loo)
Merchandise export price index
Merchandise import price index
Merchandise terms o f trade index

80
99
81

Real exchange rate (US$/LCU)'

85

90
98
92
92

100
111
89
98

100
100
100
100

118
108
109
107

120
107
112
111

119
106
112
114

121
106
115
116

123
106
116
119

2.1
2.0

3.1
4.0

4.1
5.1

4.4
7.1

5.6
9.2

5.0
5.0

4.0
4.0

4.0
4.0

4.0
4.0

Monetary indicators

M2lGDP
Growth o f M 2 (%)
Private sector credit growth /
total credit growth (%)

Real interest rates
Consumer price index (% change)
GDP deflator (% change)

a. GDP at factor cost
b. "GNFS" denotes "goods and nonfactor services."
c. Includes net unrequited transfers excluding official capital grants.
d. Includes use of IMF resources.
e. Consolidated central government.
f. "LCU" denotes "local currency units." A n increase in US$/LCU denotes appreciation.

123

-

CAS Annex B7 Key Exposure Indicators
As of 05/09/2007

-

EBtim

Actual

Projected

ate

Indicator
Total debt outstanding and
disbursed (TDO) (US$m)a
Net disbursements (US$m)a
Total debt service (TDS)
(US$m)a

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

1712

1678

1785

1839

2098

2024

2198

2037

2101

2159

2225

58

20

24

22

41

69

62

78

89

100

55

186

171

116

135

134

118

93

79

78

79

79

299
125
29

298
110
29
75

279
111
18.1
74

247
96
18.1
77

223
95
14.2
80

215
82
12.5
80

190
78
8.0
88

151
65
5.9
88

138
61
5.1
87

124
57
4.5
84

116
54
4.1
81

0.0
53

0.0
61

0.0
98

0.0
93

0.0
99

0.0
100

0.0
100

0.0
99

0.0
97

0.0
96

0.0
0

0.0
0

0.0
0

0.0
0

0.0
0

0.0
0

0.0
0

0.0
0

0.0
0

0.0
0

0.0
0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

379

89

457

529

5 74

558

612

6 0

643

633

620

1.4

0.7
1.o

11.6
3.5

13.3
3.5

14.3.
3.6.

15.9
3.3

42

0

Debt and debt service indicators

(%I
TDO~XGS~
TDOiGDP
TDSiXGS
ConcessionaVTDO

IBRD exposure indicators
(%)
IBRD DSipublic DS
Preferredcreditor
DSipublic
DS (%)
IBRD DSiXGS
IBRD TDO (US$m)
O f which present value
of
guarantees (US$m)
Share of IBRD portfolio
(%)
I D A TDO (US$m)
IFC (US$m)
Loans
Equity

...

0.0
44

'

MIGA
MIGA guarantees (US$m)

0

a. Includes public and publicly guaranteed debt, private nonguaranteed, use o f IMF credits and net shortterm capital.
b. "XGS" denotes exports o f goods and services, including workers' remittances.

124

CAS Annex B8 (IFC) for Kyrgyz Republic

,

Kyrgyz Republic
Statement o f IFC's
Held and Disbursed Portfolio
As o f 04/30/2007
(In US Dollars Millions)

-

Held

_FYproval
2004

2006
19971 19991
2004
2004
2002
20001 2005
200112005

Company
AKB Kyrgyzstan
Bai Tushum
Demirbank
Kyrgyz
Ineximbank
KKB Kyrgyzstan
SEF Akun Ltd.
SEF Altyn-Ajydar
SEF KICB

Total Portfolio:

Equit
y
0

Disbursed

Quas

Parti

i

C

0

0

Loa
n
0.5

0

0

0

0
1.5
2
0.7
0.9
2.5

0.6
0
0
0
0
1.4

0.0
0
0
1
0.4
0

9.2

2.0

1.4

Loan
0.5
1.06
7

2006
1997

Bai Tushum
Demir
KyrgyzIncr

Total Pending Commitment:

Equit
y

Parti

i

C

0

0

1.07

0

0

0

0.0
0
0
0
0
0

0.0
1.5
2
0.7
0.9
2.5

0.6
0
0
0
0
1.4

0.0
0
0
1
0.4
0

0.0
0
0
0
0
0

0.0

9.2

2.0

1.4

0.0

Quas

Parti

i

C

1

0

0

0

0.15

0

0

0

1.15

0

0

125

Quas

0

Approvals Pending Commitment
Loan
0

Equit
Y

m

r

.-d

E

n

P
I:

u

MAP SECTION

72°E

74°E

76°E

78°E

80°E

K A Z A K H S TA N

44°N

KYRGYZ
REPUBLIC
To
Ushtobe

To
Burylbaytal

Chu

BISHKEK

Tokmok

Kara-Balta
Kirov

To
Shymkent

CHUI

TTalas
alas

TA L A S
42°N

al
atk
Ch

Toktogul

Karakol

Lake Issyk-Kul

Peak Pobedy
7439 m

ISSYK-KUL
Enilchek

42°N

Shyirak

S h

n

a

Kara-Say

N a ry n

Tash-Kumyr

NARYN

Nar yn
Naryn

At-Bashy

To
Tashkent

Jalal-Abad

say
Ak

B AT K E N

40°N

Sary-Tash
yz
Daraut- K
Korgan

To
Hotan

yl Suu

25

50

25

75

100 Kilometers

50

75 Miles

78°E

Gul'cha

OSH

Batken

0

0

Kyzyl-Kiya

To
Bukhoro

Lake
Charyi-Kel'

Kurs
hab

Osh

Sulyukta

Tyup

Cholpon-Ata

Chaek

Kara-Kul

40°N

Balykchi

ts.
u M

Barskaun

T i LakeaSonkul
n

JALAL-ABAD

UZB E KI S TAN

K

ey
ung

ata
-Al

Tunuk

Toktogul
Reservoir

To
Panfilov

CHINA

80°E

KYRGYZ REPUBLIC
SELECTED CITIES AND TOWNS
OBLAST CAPITALS
NATIONAL CAPITAL
RIVERS

TA J I K I S TA N

72°E

This map was produced by the Map Design Unit of The World Bank.
The boundaries, colors, denominations and any other information
shown on this map do not imply, on the part of The World Bank
Group, any judgment on the legal status of any territory, or any
endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.

74°E

76°E

RAILROADS
OBLAST BOUNDARIES
INTERNATIONAL BOUNDARIES

IBRD 33430

SEPTEMBER 2004

70°E

MAIN ROADS
To
Murghab

