Public Disclosure Authorized

Document of
The World Bank

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Public Disclosure Authorized

Report No. 66187-PE

INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT
INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION
AND
MULTILATERAL INVESTMENT GUARANTEE AGENCY

Public Disclosure Authorized

Public Disclosure Authorized

COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY
FOR
THE REPUBLIC OF PERU
FOR THE PERIOD FY12-FY16

February 1, 2012

Bolivia, Chile, Ecuador, Peru and Venezuela Country Management Unit
Latin America and the Caribbean Region
The International Finance Corporation
Latin America and the Caribbean Region
Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance of
their official Duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without World Bank authorization.

The date of the last Country Partnership Strategy Progress Report was February 12, 2009

CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS
(as of January 5, 2012)
2.69 Nuevo Sol = US$ 1
FISCAL YEAR
January 1 – December 31

Vice President:
Director:
Task Team Leader:

IBRD
Hasan A. Tuluy
Susan G. Goldmark
Livia Benavides

Vice President:
Director:
Task Manager:

IFC
Thierry Tanoh
Paolo Martelli
Marc Tristant

ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS
AAA
AFP

Analytic and Advisory Activities
Administradora de Fondo de Pensiones
(Pension Fund Administrator)
Asistencia Legal Gratuita (Free Legal Aid
Centers)
Adaptable Program Lending

TB
LAC

Tuberculosis
Latin America and the Caribbean

LPIS

MFI
MIC

Middle-Income Country

BRT

Aseguramiento Universal de Salud
(Universal Health Insurance)
Banco Central de Reserva del Perú (Central
Reserve Bank of Peru)
Bus Rapid Transit

Listado Priorizado de Intervenciones en
Salud (List of Priority Interventions)
Ministerio de Economia y Finanzas
(Ministry of Economy and Finance)
Microfinance Institutions

MIDIS

CAF

Corporación Andina de Fomento

MIGA

CAPRA

MIM

CAT DDO

Central American Probabilistic Risk
Assessment
Catastrophes Deferred Drawdown Options

CCT
CDD
CEA

Conditional Cash Transfers
Community Driven Development
Commodity Exchange Authoroty

MMR
MSMEs
MyPE

CIDA
CNC

NCDs
NGO
NLTA

Non-Lending Technical Assistance

CPC

Canadian International Development Agency
Consejo Nacional de la Competitividad
(National Council for Competitiveness)
Corporación Financiera de Desarrollo
(Development Finance Corporation)
Criminal Procedure Code

Ministerio de Desarrollo e Inclusión
Social (Ministry of Development and
Social Inclusion)
Multilateral Investment Guarantee
Agency
Mejorando la Inversión Municipal
(Improving Municipal Investment)
Ministerio de la Mujer y Desarrollo
Social (Ministry of Women and Social
Development)
Maternal Mortality Rate
Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises
Mediana y Pequeña Empresa (Micro and
Small Companies)
Non Communicable Diseases
Non-Governmental Organization

OECD

CPI

Consumer Price Index

OEFA

CPPR

Country Portfolio Performance Review

OSCE

CPS

Country Partnership Strategy

PAN

CPS PR

Country Partnership Strategy Progress
Report

PARSALUD

CR
CSO

Completion Report
Civil Society Organization

PCG
PEFA

DB
DBR

Doing Business
Doing Business Rankings

PFM
PISA

DDO
DFID

Deferred Drawdown Option
Department for International Development

PPP
PROINVERSION

DPL

Development Policy Loan

PRONASAR

EFTA
EITI
ENDES

European Free Trade Association
Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative
Encuesta Demográfica y de Salud Familiar
(Demographic and Familiar Health Survey)
Empresas Prestadoras de Servicios de
Saneamiento (Sanitation Services Providers)
Energy Sector Management Assistance
Program

PSIA
PSM
RAAP

Organisation for Economic Co-operation
and Development
Organismo de Evaluación y
Fiscalización Ambiental (Office of
Evaluation and Environmental
Enforcement)
Organismo Supervisor de Contrataciones
del Estado(Peruvian National
Procurement Authority)
Programa Articulado Nutricional
(Articulated Nutrition Program)
Programa de Apoyo a la Reforma del
Sector Salud (Improve Health Care for
Poor Rural Populations)
Partial Credit Guarantee
Public Expenditure & Financial
Accountability
Public Financial Management
Programme for International Student
Assessment
Private Public Partnership
Agencia de Promoción de Inversión
Privada
Programa Nacional de Agua y
Saneamiento Rural (National Rural
Water Supply and Sanitation)
Poverty and Social Impact Analysis
Public Sector Management
Rapid Assessment and Action Plans

RBB

Results Based Budgeting

SEIA

Efficient Securities Markets Institutional
Development
Seguro Social del Perú (Social Security)

REACT

Sistema de Evaluación de Impacto
Ambiental (Environmental Impact
Assessment National System)
Results and Accountability in the Social
Sectors
Rendición de Cuentas para la Reforma
Social (Bringing Accountability to Social
Reform)

ALEGRAs
APL
AUS
BCRP

COFIDE

EPS
ESMAP

ESMID
ESSALUD

MEF

MIMDES

RECURSO

ESW

Economic and Sector Work

SEACE

EU

European Union

REDI

FBS

Fee-Based-Service

SBS

FDI

Foreign Direct Investment

SERNANP

FEF

Fondo de Estabilización Fiscal (Fiscal
Stabilization Fund)
Fondo de Investigación y Desarrollo para la
Competitividad (Competitiveness Research
and Development Fund)
Financiamiento para la Innovación, la
Ciencia y la Tecnologia (Fund for
Innovation, Science and Technology)
Forest Investment Program

SFLAC

FITEL

Fondo de Inversión de Telecomunicaciones
(Telecommunications Investment Fund)

SINEACE

FM&C

Fiscal Management and Competitiveness

SIS

FTA
FY
GAC

Fee Trade Agreement
Fiscal Year
Governance and Anticorruption

SME
SNG
SNIP

GDFR

Global Debt Management and Fiscal Risk

SUNAT

GDP
GEF
GOP
GPF
IADB
IB
IBRD

Gross Domestic Product
Global Environment Facility
Government of Peru
Governance Partnership Facility
Inter-American Development Bank
Institutional Births
International Bank for Reconstruction and
Development
Information and Communication Technology
Institutional Development Fund
Independent Evaluation Group
International Finance Corporation
Iniciativa para la Integración de la
Infraestructura Regional Suramericana
(Initiative for the Integration of Regional
Infrastructure in South America)
International Monetary Fund
Infant Mortality Rate
Information Technology
Japan Social Development Fund

SWAP
TA
TAL
TF
UN
US
USAID

FIDECOM

FINCYT

FIP

ICT
IDF
IEG
IFC
IIRSA

IMF
IMR
IT
JSDF

SIAF

SIL

SINADIS

Sistema Electrónico de Contrataciones
del Estado (Electronic System for
Government Procurement)
Recent Economic Developments in
Infrastructure
Superintendencia de Banca y Seguros
(Superintendence of Banks and
Insurances)
Servicio Nacional de Areas Naturales
Protegidas por el Estado (National
Service for Protected Areas)
Spanish Fund for Latin America and the
Caribbean
Sistema Integrado de Administración
Financiera (Integrated Financial
Administration System )
Specific Investment Loan

WB
WBG
WBI
WDR
WHO

Sistema Integrado de Desarrollo Infantil
(National Development and Social
Inclusion System)
Sistema Nacional de Evaluación,
Acreditación y Certificación de la
Calidad Educativa (National System for
Evaluation, Accreditation and
Certification of Education)
Seguro Integral de Salud (Health
Insurance System)
Small and Micro Enterprise
Sub-national Government
Sistema Nacional de Inversión Pública
(National System of Public Investment)
Superintendencia Nacional de
Administración Tributaria (National
Superintendence of Tax Administration)
Sector Wide Approach Project
Technical Assistance
Technical Assistance Loan
Trust Fund
United Nations
United States
United States Agency for International
Development
World Bank
World Bank Group
World Bank Institute
World Development Report
World Health Organization

WSP

Water and Sanitation Program

TABLE OF CONTENTS
COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY FOR
PERU
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY ……………………………………………………………………..……………..

i

I.

INTRODUCTION ……………………………………………………..………………………...…...

1

II.

COUNTRY CONTEXT ………………………………………………….….........……………...…..

1

A.
B.
C.
D.
E.

Political Context ……………………………………………………………………..……………………..
Recent Economic Developments……………….………………………………………..………………….
Poverty Profile and Gender ……………………………………………………………..………………….
Governance ……………..………………………………………………………………..……...................
Economic Outlook ………………………………………………………………………………………….

1
2
4
6
7

III.

DEVELOPMENT CHALLENGES AND GOVERNMENT PROGRAM ………...……………..

9

IV.

WORLD BANK GROUP PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY …………………………..…..................

17

A. Lessons Learned from previous CPS and Stakeholder Feedback …………………………..……………...
B. The Country Partnership Strategy …………………………………….……………………………………
 Strategic Objective 1: Increased access and quality of social services for the poor…………...………
 Strategic Objective 2: Connecting the poor to services and markets …………………………….…....
 Strategic Objective 3: Sustainable growth and productivity …………………………………….……
 Strategic Objective 4: Improved public sector performance for greater inclusion…..…………..……

17
19
20
22
24
26

RISKS …………………………………………………………………………………………...…….

32

Tables
Table 1: Key Economic Indicators ……………………………………………………………………………...
Table 2: Poverty rates in Peru ……………………………………………………………………………….….
Table 3: Peru Economics Prospects …………………………………………………………………………….
Table 4: Indicative World Bank Program (FY12-16) …………………………………………………………..

2
5
8
31

Figures
Figure 1: Peru Country Partnership Strategy (FY12-FY16): Strategic Objectives and Results Areas …………
Figure 2: Strategic Objective 1: Increased Access and Quality of Social Services for the Poor …………….….
Figure 3: Strategic Objective 2: Connecting the Poor to Services and Markets …………………………….…..
Figure 4: Strategic Objective 3: Sustainable Growth and Productivity ………………………………………...
Figure 5: Strategic Objective 4: Improved Public Sector Performance for Greater Inclusion ……..……….….

19
20
22
24
27

Annexes
Annex 1: Peru FY12-FY16 CPS Results Matrix ………………………………………………………………..
Annex 2: Peru CPS Completion Report FY07-FY11 ………………………………………………..................
Annex 3: Peru at a Glance ………………………………………………………………………………………
Annex 4: Peru Selected Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management …………………………
Annex 5: Peru Social Indicators ……………………………………………………………………...................
Annex 6: Peru Key Economic Indicators ……………………………………………………………................
Annex 7: Peru Key Exposure Indicators …………………………………………………………….................
Annex 8: Operations Portfolio (IBRD/IDA and Grants) …………………………………………….................
Annex 9: Statement of IFC‘s Held and Disbursed Portfolio …………………………………………...............
Annex 10: CPS Consultation …………………………………………………………………………...............
Annex 11: Governance and Anti-Corruption …………………………………………………………................
Annex 12: Gender Issues……………………………………………………………………………................

34
42
73
76
77
78
80
81
84
85
89
93

V.

Acknowledgments
This CPS was prepared by a Bank team led by Livia Benavides, and included Emmy Yokoyama,
Ana Karina Rozas, Lucía Silva, Sergi Perez, and Myriam Caro (LCC6), and Marc Tristant, Alvaro
Quijandría, and John Barham (IFC). Substantial contributions were received from Carlos SilvaJauregui, (LCSPR); Ousmane Dione, (LCSSD); Carine Clert, (LCSHD); Oscar Calvo-Gonzalez,
(LCSPE); Alessandra Marini, (LCSHS); Nelson Gutierrez, (LCSHS); Inés Kudo, (LCSHE); Lucia
Fort, (LCSPP); Miriam Muller, (LCSPP); Lisa Banshali, (LCSOS); Maria Sierra, (BDM); María
Beatriz Orlando, (LCSPP); María Margarita Nuñez, (LCSTR); Ellen Hamilton, (LCSUW); Fernando
Lavadenz, (LCSHH); Ian Walker, (LCSHS); Javier Illescas, (LCSPE); María Elizabeth Dasso,
(LCSSO); Maria Gonzalez de Asis (LCSPS); Fernando Mendo (LCSPE); and Carmen Osorio
(Consultant). The team is very appreciative for the collaboration, inputs, and advice of the extended
Peru Country Team (Bank and IFC). The team would like to recognize the close collaboration of the
Government of Peru during the preparation of the CPS. Civil society and private sector participants
in the CPS consultations in Peru contributed substantially through feedback on the Bank‘s
performance, and suggestions on focus areas for the future. The team very much appreciated the
guidance provided at various stages by Bruce Courtney, (LCSDE); Luis Alvaro Sanchez, (LCSPR);
and Neeta Sirur, (ECCU4). Finally, the team is very grateful to Susan Goldmark, LCC6 Country
Director, for her guidance and support throughout the preparation process.

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

1.
Peru is an upper middle income country (MIC) with remarkable economic growth over
the last decade. Peru has been one of the best-performing economies in Latin America, as a result
of prudent macroeconomic policies and a favorable external environment. Peru‘s GDP growth has
been significant from a regional and historical perspective, averaging 6.3 percent between 2002 and
2010. This strong economic performance enabled a continuous recovery of Peru‘s income per capita,
which increased by more than 50 percent during the decade, after almost 30 years of stagnation.
2.
Peru faces the challenge of achieving more inclusive economic growth. The effects of
strong growth on employment and incomes have yielded an important decline in poverty rates –about
4 million people exited poverty between 2004 and 2010. However, disparities across the country still
remain high, particularly between rural and urban areas. In 2010, while the national poverty rate was
only 31 percent, it was around 61 percent in the highlands.
3.
The Government launched an ambitious development agenda to overcome social gaps
and boost productivity, under a solid macroeconomic framework. President Humala started his
new government in July 28, 2011 with a vision of keeping high rates of economic growth with a
strong emphasis on improving equity. The Government's program aims to provide equal access to
basic services, employment and social security, reduce extreme poverty, prevent social conflicts,
improve the surveillance of potential environmental damages, and reconnect with rural Peru ―from
the bottom up and from the inside out‖ through an extended inclusion agenda.
4.
This five-year World Bank Group Country (WBG) Partnership Strategy (CPS) focuses
on supporting the Government in improving equity through social services, infrastructure and
competitiveness, while continuing to preserve macro stability. Peru needs more and better public
infrastructure and social services, particularly for those living in poverty. In the context of a good
fiscal position and access to capital markets, Peru‘s demand for Bank services is selective and
focuses on scaling-up successful experiences of prior Bank strategies in the country, delivering
innovative options to improve results in social services, and expand knowledge products in areas in
which the Bank can contribute to modernize public sector institutions and management processes.
5.
The CPS is closely aligned with the Government’s strategic vision of strong economic
growth with greater inclusion and is selectively concentrated in those fields in which the WBG
can provide more value added to the country. This support will be carried out through focused
interventions distributed into four strategic objectives: (i) increased access and quality of social
services for the poor; (ii) connecting the poor to services and markets; (iii) sustainable growth and
productivity; and (iv) inclusive governance and public sector performance. The CPS also addresses
cross-cutting issues such as those of governance and gender. The CPS is a result of extensive
consultations with government and civil society.
6.
The program relies largely on lessons learned from the previous CPS, with substantial
continuity with the last strategy. Since there is an ongoing portfolio that was approved towards the
end of the previous phase, many of the early results for this CPS will rely on the successful
implementation of these projects. As Peru is becoming a stronger MIC, demand for knowledge
services is increasing. Demand for financing is relatively modest at this stage but flexibility has been
built in to respond to any possible increased demands both in terms of amounts and in terms of new

i

projects, as the new government consolidates its program. Further to this, there is a strong demand
for implementation support for programs and projects from the government.
7.
The World Bank Group intends to continue working in an integrated manner, pursuing
further the potential synergies between International Finance Corporation (IFC), the
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) and the Multilateral
Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA). IFC has had a successful program of investment and
advisory services in Peru, implemented in coordination with the IBRD program. As a result, IFC‘s
investment program over the years has become one of the ten largest in terms of single country
exposure. IFC expects to continue responding to a growing private sector demand with innovative
and competitive financial and advisory products. The main objective will be to foster greater
entrepreneurship and investment climate.
Investment would be focused on infrastructure
development, clean energy, and finance and insurance.
8.
Several risks have been identified, but mitigation measures are available. On the
external side, Peru could be negatively affected by a global economic downturn. Peru‘s economy is
dependent on commodity exports, concentrated in a few markets, and sensitive to changes in
commodity prices. Peru‘s stellar performance of recent years could be affected with GDP slowing
down significantly or even falling into recession if the global crisis is severe. The government
understands these risks and is relatively well positioned to address a moderate external shock, but a
prolonged and deeper global crisis could have important effects on the economy. The Government is
already implementing a fiscal stimulus program, as lessons from the 2008-09 crisis indicate that it
takes between 6-12 months to see the effects of additional spending in the economy. On the internal
side, a challenge for the Government will be addressing social conflicts, particularly those linked to
the extractive industries. The new law on prior consultation is expected to promote greater dialogue
and agreement between the different negotiating parties.

ii

I. INTRODUCTION
1.
This CPS covers FY 2012 to FY 2016 which coincides with the administration of
President Ollanta Humala (July 2011 - July 2016). The CPS has been designed to support
selected areas of the Government's program. The new Government has established a vision of
continuity with respect to macroeconomic policies and the promotion of investments that increase
productivity. Further to this, the Government has set the inclusion agenda as the critical challenge to
be addressed through the implementation of new and restructured social and productive programs for
the poor.
2.
The CPS builds on the positive experience from the implementation of the previous
strategy and on the Regional and WBG strategies for MICs. Thus, the CPS has been designed to
be flexible and to respond to the demands of a sophisticated client that, albeit its recent success, still
faces some major development challenges. Current demands for financing are relatively limited,
given the strong fiscal stance. Still, some flexibility has been built in to respond to possible increased
needs in financing or possible new areas of support that might arise as the new Government
consolidates its program. On the other hand, the Government has expressed a strong demand for
knowledge and implementation support services.
II. COUNTRY CONTEXT

A. Political Context
3.
President Ollanta Humala took office on July 28, 2011. After a tight political campaign,
President Humala won the run-off with 51.5 percent of votes. He was elected on a platform that
focused on reducing poverty, maintaining economic stability and generating more inclusive growth.
In addition, his program highlighted the need to fight corruption, improve competitiveness, increase
tax collections, close the infrastructure gap, and generate employment.
4.
The new Government is highly committed to tackling the country’s major challenge of
achieving more inclusive growth. Peru‘s economic growth, which has been remarkable in the last
decade, has helped reduce poverty rates significantly. Yet, an important proportion of the population
does not have proper access to basic social services. In particular, most social indicators in rural
areas lag behind those in urban areas. Significant investments, particularly in extractive industries,
have fueled some social conflicts centered on the competing use of natural resources. In particular,
water has been the source of conflict since it is scarce and the extractive industries have a high
demand for this natural resource. The Government is promoting open dialogue to address and
resolve these conflicts, in the short term. In the longer term, the Government is committed to
reducing the social gaps in Peru through a vision of ensuring continuous growth but with greater
emphasis on social inclusion. This commitment is reflected in the ambitious social targets
established for the end of its administration in 2016. This includes the elimination of chronic
malnutrition, the implementation of universal access to pre-school education, as well as significant
expansion of electricity, water and sanitation, and voice and data services to rural households. A new
Ministry of Development and Social Inclusion (Ministerio de Desarrollo e Inclusión Social - MIDIS)
has been created to lead the Government‘s inclusion strategy.

1

B. Recent Economic Developments
5.
Peru has been one of the best performing economies in Latin America during the past
decade. This is the result of prudent macroeconomic policies and a favorable external environment.
Peru‘s GDP growth has been significant from a regional and historical perspective, averaging 6.3
percent between 2002 and 2010 (See Table 1). This strong economic performance enabled a
continuous recovery of Peru‘s income per capita, which increased by more than 50 percent during the
decade, after almost 30 years of stagnation. The effects of strong growth on employment and
incomes have yielded an important decline in poverty rates and, for the first time, a small decline in
inequality.
Table 1: Key Economic Indicators
2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011*

4.8
3.9
27.0

6.8
5.8
27.3

7.7
10.3
27.6

8.9
11.8
27.9

9.8
12.1
28.3

0.9
-2.8
28.8

8.8
12.8
29.3

6.8
7.5
29.7

3.9
4.3
18.4
14.1
12.8
12.2

1.4
6.7
21.9
15.2
14.1
11.1

3.0
9.7
25.8
16.1
17.3
11.4

1.4
7.9
26.1
18.2
28.6
13.9

-4.2
2.0
24.4
22.4
32.2
11.4

0.2
4.7
21.2
16.5
33.1
15.4

-1.5
4.3
22.6
18.3
44.2
15.2

-1.5
5.0
21.7
18.9
47.6
13.4

9.3

5.6

26.7

3.4

-14.4

-2.8

17.9

5.4

35.7

28.1

23.8

18.7

15.2

16.2

12.7

11.8

3.5

1.5

1.1

3.9

6.7

0.2

2.1

4.8

-1.1
45.2

-0.4
37.8

2.3
33.0

3.0
29.7

2.3
24.1

-1.6
27.2

-0.5
23.3

1.6
21.2

In percent, unless otherwise stated
National Accounts
GDP growth rate
Growth of real domestic demand
Population (millions)
Balance of Payments
Current Account (% of GDP)
Trade Balance (% of GDP)
Exports of goods (% of GDP)
Imports of goods (% of GDP)
NIR, US$ Billion
NIR, in months of G&S imports
Terms of Trade (deterioration -);
%age change
External Indicators
Public External Debt (% of
GDP)
Inflation
Annual change of CPI (eop)
Fiscal Indicators
NFPS balance(% of GDP)
Public Debt (% of GDP)
* projection

Source: Banco Central del Perú, Ministerio de Economía y Finanzas del Perú, World Bank estimates.

6.
Improvement in economic performance coincides with greater macroeconomic
discipline. Inflation has been throughout these years under strict control with an inflation targeting
rule set at 1 - 3 percent, nevertheless 2011 ended above the ceiling.1 The country embarked on a
series of reforms of which fiscal consolidation, trade openness, exchange rate flexibility, financial
1

The inflation rate registered in 2011 is explained mainly by the increase in commodity prices (namely food and
fuels) throughout 2011 and internal climate factors which affected the supply of perishable foods, particularly during
the last half of the year (Source: BCRP).

2

liberalization, higher reliance on market signals, and prudent monetary policy, including strong
buildup of reserves, have been key components. Fiscal prudence was further buttressed in recent
years by high commodity prices. Moreover, the recent period has been marked by a much lower
volatility of growth, higher total factor productivity, increased private investment and more foreign
direct investment. These developments can be traced back to the improvements in macroeconomic
management.
7.
Fiscal policy has been driven by a commitment to fiscal rules at national and subnational levels. The most salient is the 1 percent of GDP maximum deficit for the consolidated
public sector. Between 2009 and 2010 this rule was waived, and the maximum deficit was raised to
2 percent of GDP. This allowed the Government to pursue a countercyclical fiscal policy through a
fiscal stimulus plan, in the face of the world economic crisis. After running a 1.6 percent deficit in
2009, in 2010 the deficit declined to 0.5 percent, and for 2011, with the original rule restored, fiscal
balance showed a surplus of 1.6 percent of GDP. Moreover, by end-2011, the Fiscal Stabilization
Fund accumulated US$6.7 billion (3.5 percent of GDP), arising from previous fiscal surpluses, and
constitutes an important source to finance countercyclical fiscal policies, if needed.
8.
Peru’s exports have grown largely as a result of both economic reforms and thanks to
an increase in global demand. Exports have grown from an average of US$6.3 billion in 19982000 to an average of US$28.8 billion in 2007-09, i.e. an increase of almost five times in nominal
terms over one decade. Both, traditional and non-traditional exports have increased rapidly, but
while non-traditional exports growth was based on larger trade volumes, traditional exports growth
was supported mainly by higher commodity prices, although volumes also increased. As a result, the
latter grew faster and non-traditional exports, as percentage of total exports, shrank. Despite positive
performance, there is need for further diversification of export baskets and destinations as
commodity exports account for more than half of Peru‘s total exports. About 40 percent of Peru‘s
exports are destined for China and the EU, evenly split between the two. As a result, Peru is
sensitive to commodity price changes and to shocks from China and the EU.
9.
Trade policy has made advances in both reducing barriers to trade unilaterally and
entering into new free trade agreements. Following deep trade liberalization measures taken in the
1990s in goods, services and investment, in recent years there have been additional tariff reductions,
which have set a weighted average tariff rate of just 1.2 percent. It is expected that all these benefits
will be greater while taking advantage of free trade agreements that Peru has negotiated with
different trade blocs and countries (e.g with United States - US, China, Chile, South Korea, Japan,
European Free Trade Association - EFTA countries, EU, Mexico, Panama and Costa Rica).
10.
Peru is sensitive to changes in commodity prices and their impact in natural resource
revenue, but the country remains relatively less exposed to those revenues than other countries
in the region. While commodity price increases have resulted in greater reliance on natural resource
revenues, Peru‘s export basket of commodities is relatively diversified. The reliance on these
revenues for Peru is to be expected given that Peru ranks as the first largest producer of silver, second
largest copper and zinc producer, third largest tin producer, fourth largest lead producer and sixth
gold producer. About 17.5 percent of total fiscal revenues come from commodities and the elasticity
of these revenues to changes in commodity prices is high at around 2. A ten percent decline in
commodity prices generates a fall in revenues equivalent to 3.5 percent (or about 0.7 percent of
GDP). During the 2008-09 crisis export revenues felt by about 2 percentage points of GDP, but
recovered rapidly in 2010. Despite this sensitivity to commodity prices, Peru remains relatively less
exposed to those revenues than most other commodity exporters in Latin America and the Caribbean
3

Region (LAC) because it exports a variety of commodities with prices that are not highly correlated.
The volatility of Peru‘s natural resource revenues is high but at the same time it has a natural hedging
mechanism in the composition of those exports, not depending on a single commodity as in nearby
countries like Chile, Ecuador, or Bolivia.
11.
Public debt has declined significantly over the years and its sovereign debt has reached
investment grade. The country‘s debt service profile and its currency and interest risks exposures
continued to improve in 2010 as a result of active debt management policies which included: (i)
increase in the public debt share in New Soles and the percentage of debt under fixed rates; (ii)
reduction in the concentration of principal repayments over time to re-profile debt; and (iii) to
promote the development of the domestic capital market, through the consolidation of the domestic
public debt market. During 2010, there were three bond issuances, which followed the strategy
guideline of re-profiling debt and replacing old by new debt under better financial conditions. In
2010, the public debt as share of GDP was 23.3 percent of GDP, including local government debt.
However, the share of public external debt still represented 54 percent of total public debt in 2010.
Still, in recognition of the lower risk that Peruvian sovereign debt represents, in recent months,
Standard & Poors and Fitch raised their long-term foreign currency sovereign credit rating for Peru to
'BBB' from 'BBB-'; and confirmed the 'A-3' short-term foreign currency rating and the 'BBB+/A-2'
local currency ratings.
12.
Peru faced the 2008-09 global crisis at the height of its economic performance and while
affected, came out of it rapidly and with no major structural damage. Peru was at the top of its
performance growing at over 10 percent in mid-2008 when the global crisis hit its shores. Macro
fundamentals were strong and its financial sector was not contaminated with risky investment
instruments. As a result the country was in a good position to cope with the effects of the relatively
short-lived crisis. Peru‘s authorities reacted rapidly by building a program of support that included
countercyclical fiscal and monetary policies. They also acquired large lines of credit from the Bank
and others to signal strength and react to any contingency. While private investment and economic
performance slowed significantly during 2009 (with GDP growth falling to 0.9 percent), strong
growth resumed rapidly and accelerated by early 2010. Most economic sectors only slowed down or
entered into minor contraction levels during the crisis but none collapsed. This facilitated recovery
as firms did not fire workers or close operations. Poverty also did not increase during that year.
C. Poverty Profile and Gender
13.
Over the last decade, Peru has experienced unprecedented progress in poverty
reduction, and for the first time in several decades, inequality declined, albeit modestly. In fact,
Peru is one of the best performers in the region in improving welfare. Macroeconomic stability and
record levels of sustained growth provided the space for improving income opportunities to
Peruvians. At the same time, public and social policies have also contributed to this success, even
though the low levels of social spending suggests that their role was more limited.
14.
Between 2004 and 2010 about 4 million people exited poverty. The poverty rate fell by
17.3 percentage points, from 48.6 percent to 31.3 percent. During the same period, extreme poverty
decreased by 43 percent to 9.8 percent (see Table 2). The decrease in the number of poor during the
last 5 years ranks among the highest in the region – Peru only lags behind Argentina, Venezuela and
Uruguay in this respect. During the same period, there was also a small decrease in inequality: the
expenditure based Gini coefficient declined from 0.42 in 2004 to 0.39 in 2010. The income based
Gini also fell during this period.
4

Table 2: Poverty rates in Peru
(In Percentages)

2004
Panel A : Total Poverty
National
48.6
Urban Costa
37.1
Rural Costa
51.2
Urban Sierra
44.8
Rural Sierra
75.8
Urban Selva
50.4
Rural Selva
63.8
Lima metropolitana
30.9
Panel B : Total Extremen Poverty
National
17.1
Urban Costa
5.6
Rural Costa
13.8
Urban Sierra
16.6
Rural Sierra
44.0
Urban Selva
18.7
Rural Selva
30.4
Lima metropolitana
1.3
Source: INEI

2005

2006

Years
2007

2008

2009

2010

10-04
Change

48.7
32.3
50.0
44.4
77.3
53.9
65.6
32.6

44.5
29.9
49.0
40.2
76.5
49.9
62.3
24.2

39.3
25.1
38.1
36.3
73.2
40.3
55.3
18.5

36.2
23.4
34.8
33.5
68.8
31.3
49.1
17.7

34.8
21.4
40.6
31.3
65.6
32.5
57.4
14.1

31.3
21.1
34.8
27.3
61.2
27.4
45.6
12.8

-17.3
-16.0
-16.4
-17.5
-14.6
-23.0
-18.2
-18.1

17.4
4.0
13.4
11.6
46.6
22.5
28.0
2.0

16.1
3.0
14.4
10.3
46.5
18.1
24.6
0.9

13.7
2.1
10.5
8.5
40.8
11.0
23.4
0.5

12.6
2.4
7.9
9.2
37.4
7.2
20.7
0.7

11.5
2.3
9.2
6.8
33.2
8.8
23.8
0.2

9.8
2.7
7.7
4.9
28.5
6.7
17.8
0.6

-7.3
-2.9
-6.1
-11.7
-15.5
-12.0
-12.6
-0.7

15.
Despite these impressive results, poverty rates in rural areas remain high. Six out of ten
poor in Peru reside in rural areas, and extreme poverty is mostly a rural phenomenon. Over 60
percent of those living on the highlands are poor. Even though inequality has declined, it still
remains high. In addition, the observed reduction has been driven by changes in inequality within
geographic areas (e.g. within rural, urban) and not between regions. In fact, the trends seem to
suggest that inequality between urban and rural areas is on the rise. Perhaps more worrisome, rural
areas not only lag behind urban in these advances, but the prospects of further improvements are
small in the absence of policy action. Poverty has been much less sensitive to growth in rural areas.
For example, while 1 percentage point of growth corresponds to 2 percentage points decrease in
poverty rate in Lima, in the rural jungle area (Selva) the corresponding number is below 0.5, a factor
of 4. A key challenge for the Government is translating high growth rates into an improvement in
living standards of the poor, particularly in rural areas.
16.
The indigenous population, which accounts for one-third of Peru's population, shows
higher rates of poverty than the national average. The majority live in the Andean Highlands
(6,067 indigenous communities) and in the Amazon Rainforest (1,448 communities). In the
Southern Highlands, about 73 percent of the indigenous Quechua and Aymara communities – more
than 5 million people – live below the poverty line. Some other statistics point to the vulnerability of
these groups; only 11 percent of the indigenous population between the age of 18 and 20 has access
to higher education; 44 percent of children under one year of age in indigenous communities in the
Amazon region lack birth certificates, a key instrument to ensure access to basic services. In
addition, in regions where more than 25 percent of the population is indigenous, chronic child
malnutrition rates are more than 25 percent.

5

17.
Even though progress has been made to improve the legal and institutional framework
to promote gender equality, gender gaps are still significant in endowments, economic
opportunities and women´s agency. Women´s political participation and representation has
increased over the last decades – women now hold 21.5 percent of the seats in the national
parliament (2011) which is slightly below the average in LAC (23 percent in 2009). However the
share of females among the adult illiterate population was 75 percent between 2005–20082.
Indigenous women are twice as likely to drop out of school than non-indigenous women. In
addition, returns to education seem to be low and the opportunity costs of education are higher for
women than for men.3 Women's labor force participation increased to 62 percent (in 2009), above
the LAC average of 55 percent in the same year, yet women still face higher probability of being
unemployed (8.3 percent vs. 5.4 percent in 2008) especially when they are young (15-24 years of
age: 15.5 percent of young women vs. 12.5 percent of young men in 2008). Women also continue to
earn less on average than men: even when controlling for differences in educational levels and age,
men‘s wages in Peru are 18 percent higher than women‘s. Gender gaps in wages have been highest
among the most educated groups4.
18.
One of the most serious concerns in terms of the gender situation in the country seems
to be the high rates of violence against women. Data from a World Health Organization (WHO)
multi-country study on violence against women (2005) show that 51 percent of women who had had
a partner in Lima and 69 percent in Cusco had experienced physical or sexual violence by a partner5.
The World Development Report (WDR) 2011 on violence and crime, indicates a trend of increasing
violence as the economy grows. The latest statistics issued by Ministry of Women and Social
Development (Ministerio de la Mujer y Desarrollo Social - MIMDES) show that Peru has had one of
the highest increases in violence against women in the region. In 2003 the law on violence against
women (Ley contra la Violencia hacia la Mujer) was approved and is being implemented through the
“Plan Nacional contra la Violencia Hacia la Mujer 2009-2015”. In addition, the Government is
currently developing a gender strategy to be implemented across sectors and has approved a law that
strongly penalizes murder of women in a family setting (“feminicidio‖).
D. Governance
19.
During the last decade, the country has been working to strengthen institutions and
promote greater transparency and accountability, but there are still some challenges ahead. In
2001, Peru faced a number of serious governance challenges6 which were the result of scandals and
corruption and which required alliances between the government, private sector and civil society
under the umbrella of a National Accord. Thanks to a number of efforts during this ten-year period,
some results can be found, especially in improving the quality and professionalism of public
administration and of public financial management in general. At the same time, the Government is
deepening its efforts in several areas of the public sector such as performance-based management
including civil service reform, results-based transfers to municipal governments, treasury systems,
and public investment. Despite progress in these areas, public confidence in the efficiency and the
effectiveness of many state institutions remains low. This includes those charged with ensuring
2 The World‘s Women 2010
3 World Bank (2005). Peru Poverty Assessment
3. Ñopo, Hugo 2009.
5
Please see an overview of key gender issues and resources in Peru in Annex 13.
6

For a detail overview of the governance challenges faced by the country in 2001 please see the World Bank Governance and
Anticorruption Report. http://go.worldbank.org/KJJBY6K510.

6

broad accountability. In addition, the decentralization process has not achieved its objective of
bringing accountability closer to citizens. The justice system has not improved as much as desired,
and Peru is lagging behind other countries in the region in strengthening the rule of law, although
contract enforcement has generally improved. Finally, the checks and balance institutions such as
the audit agency and the press are struggling to maintain their independence and effectively fulfill
their functions.
E. Economic Outlook
20.
Uncertainties linked to the worsening of the world economic environment and the
Peruvian electoral process contributed to the deceleration of the economy during the first half
of 2011. But confidence recovered as the new authorities established credibility among economic
stakeholders. The Government's new economic program was announced, showing substantial
continuity. In particular, the Government aims to continue sustaining the strong macro
fundamentals, on which the country has slowly constructed its export orientation, and to generate
strong growth and employment, as well as poverty reduction.
21.
Peru’s growth is expected to remain strong in future years, assuming good domestic and
international environments prevail. The annual average growth rate of 6 percent in the last
decade, which has placed Peru among the best performers in the region, can be sustained if prudent
fiscal and monetary policies remain in place and there are gains in productivity. The Fiscal
Responsibility and Transparency Law, the main policy instrument, sets clear fiscal rules and calls for
a Fiscal Stabilization Fund (Fondo de Estabilización Fiscal - FEF), which has accumulated US$6.7
billion, to date. In the case of the fiscal balance, the Peruvian economy went from a negative
position in 2009 and 20010 (-1.6 and -0.5 percent, respectively) associated with the countercyclical
fiscal policy implemented to address the effects of the 2008-09 crisis, to an expected surplus of 1.6
percent of GDP in 2011, and is anticipated to reach a 1.1 percent surplus in 2014.
22.
Monetary policy is carefully coordinated with fiscal policy to maintain economic
stability. The Central Bank is well-equipped with monetary policy instruments to implement
countercyclical measures, having used them successfully during the last international economic
crisis. The Central Bank is expected to continue to keep inflation under control, given both its legal
mandate and also its outstanding record in doing so. International reserves are projected to continue
growing in coming years, from around US$47.6 billion in 2011 to US$53.2 billion in 2014. And, the
ratio of public debt to GDP is expected to fall to 17.4 percent of GDP in 2014, from 23.3 percent in
2010.
23.
The relatively robust growth performance and the expectation of a moderate
deterioration of the terms of trade should keep the current account showing manageable
deficits. The assumption of an annual 6 percent growth rate for 2012-2014, will maintain imports
demand relatively high. This, in conjunction with an assumed deterioration of terms of trade at an
annual average of 3.5 percent, will result in negative current account balances, between 3.2 and 3.7
percent in that period (see Table 3).

7

Table 3: Peru Economic Prospects
In percent, unless otherwise stated

Estimate

Projections

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

National Accounts
GDP growth rate
Growth of real domestic demand

8.8
12.8

6.8
7.5

6.0
6.5

6.0
5.7

6.0
5.5

Population (millions)

29.3

29.7

30.2

30.7

31.2

Balance of Payments
Current Account (% of GDP)
Trade Balance (% of GDP)
Exports of goods (% of GDP)
Imports of goods (% of GDP)
NIR, US$ Billion
NIR, in months of G&S imports
Terms of Trade (deterioration -); percentage change

-1.5
4.3
22.6
18.3
44.2
15.2
17.9

-1.5
5.0
21.7
18.9
47.6
13.4
5.4

-3.2
2.7
21.7
19.3
49.2
12.2
-3.1

-3.7
2.3
22.0
19.5
51.1
11.4
-2.7

-3.7
1.3
22.5
19.7
53.2
10.7
-4.7

External Indicators
Public External Debt (% of GDP)

12.7

11.8

11.1

10.3

9.4

2.1

4.8

2.0

2.0

2.0

-0.5
23.3

1.6
21.2

0.9
20.6

1.2
19.0

1.1
17.4

Inflation
Annual change of CPI (eop)
Fiscal Indicators
NFPS balance(% of GDP)
Public Debt (% of GDP)

Source: Banco Central del Perú, Ministerio de Economía y Finanzas del Perú, World Bank estimates.

24.
However, domestic policy might not be able to shield the economy from an extended
external shock, should there be continued deterioration in the global environment. During the
2008-09 crisis, Peru‘s GDP growth declined significantly but remained positive. As a result, poverty
did not increase during the crisis. The fall in Peru‘s GDP growth was the result of both a fall in
foreign aggregate demand, as well as in domestic demand, particularly private investment, as private
sector expectations took a turn for the worse while the Government was preparing its countercyclical
policy package. The delay in its implementation negatively affected private sector expectation,
reducing investment rapidly and, with it, domestic demand and GDP growth. Peru has learned from
the 2008-09 crisis experience and has already launched the first steps of a countercyclical fiscal
policy, to counteract any deterioration in domestic expectations. A moderate global crisis can bring
GDP growth down to 1.3 percent in 2012 and 4.7 percent in 2013, while a more severe crisis (with
perhaps China slowing down significantly) can put GDP growth in negative numbers (-4.3 percent in
2012), with a recovery in 2013 to 2.7 percent growth. These crises scenarios are at this point
uncertain and dependent on developments in the Eurozone, US and China.
25.
To avoid a fast deceleration of growth, the Government has introduced several
temporary stimulus measures. The main ones are: (a) to accelerate procurement processes for

8

public investment projects; (b) the introduction of an efficiency incentive bond for 2012 public
investment projects, with a S/. 400 million budget; (c) exceptional financing authorization for
infrastructure projects in the education, urban and sanitation sectors; (d) the authorization of a
supplementary budget of S/. 889 million to finance the implementation of new projects and
maintenance of infrastructure; and (e) the temporary streamlining of government procurement
processes for these targeted projects. Fiscal costs of these measures are reflected in projections
shown in Table 3.
26.
Lower global GDP growth could be reflected in lower external demand for Peruvian
exports with a potential fall in commodity prices and export volumes of both traditional and
non-traditional exports. Peru‘s exports are concentrated in commodities, and its exports
destinations are primarily China, the EU, the US, and Canada. Fiscal revenues could be affected by
lower commodity exports. Financing the current account deficit could be more costly, depending on
how much Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) contracts and how much access Peru has to international
capital flows, including from multilaterals. As in 2008-09, expectations will play a critical role to
adjust private investment and domestic demand. All in all, a fully fledged global crisis could bring
GDP growth rates down by several percentage points depending on the source, severity and duration
of the shock.
27.
Peru is nonetheless, relatively well prepared to cope with a moderate crisis and protect
the advances made in poverty reduction in the past few years. The Government is well
positioned to withstand a moderate global crisis and implement countercyclical fiscal and monetary
policies to tone down its effects. Relative to 2008, Peru now has the capacity to bolster confidence
of markets as it has a lower public debt burden, higher fiscal savings in the treasury, including
US$1.1 billion in World Bank Deferred Drawdown Options (DDOs), and higher levels of
international reserves. While not immune, these factors are likely to make the country more resilient
to the effects of a global crisis. Nonetheless, the final effects will depend on the severity and
duration of the external shock, and how much expectations are affected by the decline in the global
economic outlook. Uncertainty, however, is still high and market signals are still quite volatile so
that the magnitude and duration of a global crisis.
III. DEVELOPMENT CHALLENGES AND GOVERNMENT PROGRAM

28.
Macroeconomic stability is fundamental but not sufficient for inclusive and sustained
economic growth. High growth rates and improved fiscal surpluses due to the commodity price
boom provide a unique opportunity for Peru to lay the ground for future development. Peru is wellpositioned to address gaps in infrastructure and in human capital, a critical ingredient to foster
inclusive growth. Thus, it is critical to maintain high rates of investment infrastructure, social
services, as well as an efficient public sector management of resources.
29.
To overcome social gaps and boost productivity, the new Government is implementing a
“growth with social inclusion” plan that targets the poor and excluded. The Government aims
to: (i) provide equal access to basic services, employment and social security; (ii) reduce extreme
poverty with emphasis in rural poverty; (iii) prevent social conflicts by restoring public institution
credibility; and, (iv) improve the surveillance of potential environmental damages. The Government
also intends to reconnect with the rural Peru ―from the bottom up and from the inside out‖ by
increasing competitiveness of local markets. The approval of a law regulating the right of indigenous
peoples to prior consultation on matters affecting their collective rights and quality of life, the
creation of MIDIS, and the prudent fiscal and monetary policies that have been announced have had a
9

positive impact in external and internal investors‘ confidence. These measures have helped to build
positive expectations for economic growth for the Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) period. This
section describes the Government's plan organized into the following groups: (i) growth with social
inclusion to achieve greater equity; (ii) connecting the poor to services and opportunities; (iii)
increased productivity and enhanced human capital; and (iv) a strengthened public sector through
sustained high levels of fiscal revenues, improved efficiency of public spending; and a strengthened
private pension system, capital markets and financial system.
Growth with Social Inclusion to Achieve greater Equity
30.
The social protection system needs greater coherence and effectiveness. Despite
moderate increases, the spending levels and coverage of the social protection system are still below
other LAC countries. Weak coordination between the Conditional Cash Transfers (CCT) Program,
Juntos, and the health and education sectors limits their impact on the ground. And finally, to better
coordinate social programs, an integrated network based on the articulation of goals, information and
service provision is needed. Social protection initiatives must be tailored to the needs of
beneficiaries to be effective instruments to reduce exclusion, as well as to provide adequate and
revised processes for accessing social programs.
31.
To address high rates of chronic malnutrition rates in the country, the Government will
deepen its strategy, introducing incentives within Juntos CCT and a targeted nutrition
program. The chronic malnutrition (stunting) rate was stagnant until 2008 when it started falling
from 28.5 percent to 23.2 percent in 2010. However, despite recent progress, much work remains to
be done, particularly in rural areas where stunting rates triple those of urban areas with 40.3 percent
and 14.2 percent respectively (Encuestra Demográfica y de Salud Familiar, ENDES 2009), and
anemia rates persist in the order of 60 to 75 percent in children younger than 18 months. At the same
time, overweight and obesity are becoming a serious public health problem, affecting more than 60
percent of the population older than 15, contributing to a serious increase of chronic diseases. The
Ministry of Health is placing strong emphasis on improving diet quality and access to nutritious food
to prevent further increases in overweight and obesity rates through the new initiative "Peru Sabor y
Nutricion".
32.
The Government has committed to enhance the effectiveness and inclusiveness of the
social protection system. The vision for the upgraded system is to cover the whole life-cycle, from
pre-natal and Early Child Development to old-age and pensions. For the youngest, the Government
will implement the new early child development program CUNA MAS, and expand the Nutrition and
the Maternal and Neonatal Health Programs. Intercultural education and rural schools will be
expanded. The scholarship program, Beca 18, will cover post-secondary education, for 25,000
students. The new non-contributory pension program Pension 65 will cover 150,000 adults older
than 65 years of age. In addition, the CCT Program Juntos will be expanded from, 646 to 856
districts, and be restructured so as to promote enhanced opportunities for its beneficiaries. The CCT
will develop a strategy of progressive graduation from the CCT for the better-off while reaching out
to those currently excluded from any safety nets. Finally, the new MIDIS will help coordinate across
ministries and foster social services delivery at the territorial and family level, reaching out to the
poorest populations and to the most remote areas. MIDIS has also been tasked to monitor key results
in the social sectors. The construction of this new ministry will be a particular challenge, as could be
expected of any new Ministry that has a coordinating role. To address this challenge, a strong
technical team has been brought together and is currently working to build the capacity of the
Ministry.
10

33.
The Government has set three priority areas for the health sector. These focus on
prevalent health issues and include: (a) increased access to maternal and child health services for the
poor; (b) reducing communicable diseases; and (c) optimization of the health system with a focus on
non-communicable diseases (NCDs). Reductions in the infant mortality rate (IMR) and maternal
mortality rate (MMR) were substantial during the last decade, from 40.2 per 1,000 new born babies
(nb) to 20 for IMR, and from 185 to 98 per 100,000 nb for MMR. Nevertheless, substantial
differences by income quintiles persist (IMR is 9 per 1,000 nb in the richest quintile and 58 per 1,000
nb in the poorest one), and coverage for maternal health care (deliveries) is 98 percent in the richest
quintile and 30 percent in the poorest one. In addition, health coverage of the highland and jungle
areas is only at 67 percent and 62 percent respectively, and Peru continues to have the second highest
rate of tuberculosis (TB) in the Americas (111 per 100,000) after Haiti (148). On the other hand,
NCD‘s (cardiovascular, cancer, and diabetes diseases), are becoming the most important causes of
morbidity and mortality as a consequence of the accelerated increase of risk factors in the population
(obesity, sedentary life, tobacco, alcoholism, accidents and violence), and the health delivery system
is not ready to address those challenges. In response, the GoP has decided to continue to: (i) expand
health services for poor mothers and children in rural areas; (ii) strengthen the decentralization of
service delivery; and (iii) improve the efficiency of the health insurance system (Seguro Integral de
Salud, SIS). The Ministry of Health will also launch a health promotion and NCD‘s strategy that
includes the strengthening of the Healthy Municipalities program, the restructuring of the health
delivery model (integrated health networks with appropriate referral systems), and the expansion of
the services financed by the SIS beyond maternal and child health.
34.
The Government plans to establish programs to improve the quality and inclusiveness
of education services. Learning outcomes for Peruvian students lag behind those of their peers in
comparable countries in the region and worldwide. Less than a quarter of second grade students
reach sufficiency in reading and almost half are unable to do basic math. These outcomes are far
worse among children from rural, indigenous communities. In the latest Programme for International
Student Assessment (PISA) results, Peru ranks second or third to last in all subjects worldwide, and
last among LAC countries. On the other hand, Peru has achieved near universal coverage of primary
education, and access to preschool education of children aged 3 to 5 has tripled in the past five years
to reach 70 percent. Yet, half of the children in the poorest districts remain excluded from preschool
services. With a net enrollment rate of 75 percent in secondary education, Peru is above LAC
regional averages, but only 37 percent of the extreme poor graduate (compared to 84 percent of the
non poor). Gender gaps in access to education have vanished in the last decade across the three
levels of basic education (70.5% and 70.0% for girls and boys, respectively, in preschool education;
94.0% and 93.9% for girls and boys, respectively, in primary education; and, 79.4% and 79.1% for
girls and boys, respectively, in secondary education). Notwithstanding, the second-grade assessment
shows some gender disparities in achievement: while learning outcomes in reading are higher for
girls, outcomes in math favors the boys. In this context, the priority objective of the new
administration is to raise student learning by addressing the greatest challenges of the sector:
inclusion and quality. For inclusion, the Government will develop specialized pedagogical models
for ensuring learning for children and youths in rural, bilingual, and high-risk contexts, as well as
assign more resources to the poorest schools, provinces and regions for education service provision.
In the case of quality, the sector will focus on building better teachers through improved, articulated
pre- and in-service training and mentoring programs, as well as a comprehensive performance
evaluation system in the context of the new Teacher Career System. Finally, to support these
strategies, it will strengthen the capacity for decentralized education management and promote
results-based education financing mechanisms.

11

35.
Peru is emphasizing improvements in access to justice, which has long been a significant
challenge. While delays and backlog in the processing of cases and judicial corruption prevent
access, reforms have also tried to address eliminating economic, gender, linguistic and cultural
barriers. Peru‘s poor encounter several barriers in accessing basic justice services from a number of
different sector agencies. For example, legal aid services provided by the Ministry of Justice are
grossly insufficient to respond to the needs of the country. Such services only cover the equivalent
about 45 percent of the population. Peru is a multicultural country, with more than five million
indigenous peoples (Quechua, Aymara, and Amazonian, approximately 22 percent of the total
population); unfortunately, language and cultural barriers as well as the complexities of the court
system deter potential indigenous users. Many indigenous people pass through the sector‘s
institutions without understanding Spanish or legal technicalities, and thus are not able to adequately
explain their problems or fully exercise their rights. The Government has made investments to
improve legal aid services, including mediation, increased numbers of interpreters and public legal
education in indigenous languages. However, access to justice is also hampered by a lack of
coordination between key agencies, most notably in criminal cases. As part of the relatively recent
implementation of the Criminal Procedure Code - CPC (approved in 2006 with implementation in
2009-10), Peru seeks to enhance the sector's speed and transparency. The new roles and duties of
police, prosecutors, judges, public defenders, forensic specialists and even civil society has
represented a major investment from the public budget. Related areas to improve access to justice
and anticorruption include the approval of shared information technology (IT) systems between the
institutions offering services, such as linking social services ministries and judicial institutions.
Connecting the poor to services and opportunities
36.
The Government has an ambitious agenda in the water and sanitation sectors to
address the limited access to these services. Peru is one of the most unequal countries in LAC
when measured against access to water and sanitation services. At the national level, while 78
percent of the non-poor have access to a water connection, only 45 percent of the poor are covered.
In rural areas, only 28 percent of the poor have access to water connection (while 45 percent of the
non-poor have access). Access to sanitation is even worse. The Government program aims to
address the water, sanitation and housing agenda with a particular focus on the 808 poorest districts
dispersed across the country, particularly in the Selva and Sierra regions. In addition the
Government has set the following targets for this sector: to increase access to water and sanitation
services in urban areas to 92 and 88 percent, respectively, and in rural areas to 57 and 45 percent, and
to expand access to sanitation (latrine) for rural households from 22 to 60 percent.
37.
The energy sector agenda emphasizes an increase in coverage and improved efficiency.
The country possesses efficient and competitive private and public companies that mainly serve the
urban areas. Tariffs include sectoral cross-subsidies to permit the poor to access modern energy.
The picture in rural areas, on the other hand, has been strikingly different. While coverage levels still
remain low, the country has made a huge leap in providing electricity service through massive
investments, raising coverage levels to 55 per cent in rural areas and 82 per cent nationally by the end
of 2010. In addition, as a consequence of the power sector reforms that Peru carried out in the 90‘s,
the country dismantled its previous capacity for energy planning. There have been recent electricity
shortages due to droughts that limited hydropower availability and delays in the construction of new
infrastructure. The Government has identified four main priorities to integrate the energy agenda
into its social inclusion and productive development agenda. These include: (i) expanding the
electricity network and improvement of services to cover 85 percent of the rural population by 2016
to boost productive activities associated with the use of energy; (ii) ensuring a national energy
12

security through reliable, clean and affordable energy that supports economic growth; (iii) promoting
an efficient use of the country energy resources primary based on hydropower and natural gas; and
(iv) consolidating these actions within a socially and environmentally friendly framework, ensuring
compliance with environmental safeguards and involving local communities through consultation
and benefit sharing.
38.
Building on progress made in the sector for the last three years, the Government
strategy seeks to expand road infrastructure to promote inclusion. Rural populations in Peru,
especially those in the highlands, do not have adequate access to services or markets. And, many
urban workers spend approximately three hours per day to commute to their jobs. This is due, at
least in part, to urban transport inefficiencies. The Government strategy includes: (i) extending the
rural roads network particularly in landlocked regions; (ii) expanding and modernizing the road
corridors within large cities as well as national connecting segments to foster fluidity in the
movement of people and goods; (iii) consolidating and modernizing the sector institutions; and, (iv)
providing services and promoting innovation and standardization through enhanced capacity-building
within the sector.
39.
The Government will continue making efforts to expand infrastructure services through
Public Private Partnerships (PPPs). To address infrastructure gaps, the administration plans to
foster PPPs, promote investment and strengthen regulatory agencies. A new wave of investment
promotion will be led by PROINVERSION at the national and sub-national level, including the
implementation of a fund to finance pre-feasibility studies, co-financing of investment in the
education, health and sanitation sectors, standardization of concession contracts, and improvement in
PPP financing through the capital markets. Regulatory agencies will be strengthened to improve the
design of PPP. The Government will also continue with significant public investment in transport,
electricity, and water and sanitation infrastructure, especially in the rural areas.
Enhancing human capital and increasing productivity
40.
The Government recognizes that enhancing market-relevant skills matters, not only for
social mobility but also for productivity and sustained growth. Enhancing skills for the job
market forms an important part of the response to this challenge of low productivity. In addition to
efforts to enhance the quality of education, the Government has committed to improve the quality
and relevance of the higher education system. Specifically, the Government will continue the
implementation of a strategy to increase the quality and relevance of education, involving the
creation of the National System for Evaluation, Accreditation and Certification of Education (Sistema
Nacional de Evaluación, Acreditación y Certificación de la Calidad Educativa, SINEACE). The
Government has also set out to enhance the effectiveness of active labor market strategies for specific
disadvantaged groups, such as undereducated youth in urban areas. While strong economic growth
has improved employment conditions, employment creation, earnings and labor productivity have been
distributed unevenly. Some segments of the labor force, particularly young people, continue to
experience difficulties tapping new employment opportunities.
41.
Small and Micro Enterprises (SMEs) are viewed as key instruments to increase
productivity in an inclusive context. Peru faces a poor institutional environment for competitiveness
which has resulted in excessive bureaucracy.7 These challenges have a direct and disproportionate impact
7

The World Economic Forum Global Competitiveness Report 2010-2011, page 34.
http://www3.weforum.org/docs/WEF_GCR_Highlights_2010-11.pdf

13

on SMEs that represent 76 percent of economically active workers in Peru8. SMEs contribute about 43
percent of Peru‘s gross domestic product (GDP).9 Moreover, those firms seeking access to global
markets are further hampered by delays in time and expensive costs to process trade-related export and
import procedures. With only 26 percent of the population having access to the formal financial sector
and microfinance primarily characterized by short term working capital, there is much work still to be
done to improve coverage and product diversification, particularly in rural areas. The Superintendencia
de Banca y Seguros (SBS), the banking and insurance regulatory agency, will work on a review of
banking regulation aimed at increased service coverage and strengthening market competition, as well as
product diversification. COFIDE (the Development Finance Corporation) is already working on the
development of innovative programs on factoring for SMEs called Mype Compradora. This program is
designed to improve micro and small enterprises to access finance through suppliers.
42.
The Government seeks to improve productivity through the simplification of procedures
for investment, increased financing of innovative technologies and use of Information and
Communication Technologies (ICT), and support to better quality information systems and
regulation to boost productive development. The National Council for Competitiveness (Consejo
Nacional de la Competitividad - CNC) will be strengthened to facilitate business development (business
registration, construction permits, etc.), new legislation will be issued to expand broadband and egovernment services, a new National Quality System will be established, contestable funds for innovation
will be strengthened (Financiamiento para la Innovación, la Ciencia y la Tecnología - FINCYT and
Fondo de Investigación y Desarrollo para la Competitividad - FIDECOM), and public administrative
procedures will be simplified, including procurement. Support to improve competitiveness in the
agriculture sector will be also provided, including irrigation infrastructure.
43.
The Government has started discussions to develop an effective public-private SME service
platform that would be at the core of the productive development agenda. Competitiveness strategy
and sectoral policies are already being taken care of by existing institutions. The Government plans to
implement an additional public-private agency that would be in charge of providing services to SMEs on
quality, standards, value chain and cluster development, and other programs to complement what will
continue to be developed to reduce barriers to formality.
44.
The development of the telecommunications sector in Peru has been a partial success in
the last 15 years. Despite the exponential increase in telephone penetration (mobile penetration
reached 96 percent as of June 2010), 73 percent of population centers that compose 12 percent of the
population still do not have access to voice services. Moreover, as the sector evolved in the last
decade, new technologies have not been fully supported and mainstreamed, limiting the opportunities
that network convergence and access to broadband have created in the rest of the world, especially in
rural and low income areas. In fact, Peru has one of the lowest broadband penetrations in the region,
and the gap between the country and the rest of the region has been widening. Considering that the
vast majority of the population and Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises (MSMEs) in Peru do not
have access to financial services, significant efforts are still needed to reduce this gap.
8

Generally, the LAC Region has higher rates of female entrepreneurship and a smaller gap in participation between men and
women entrepreneurs than other regions. However, in Peru (and Brazil) enterprise owners are more likely to be female, not poor,
and to have secondary and even tertiary education (Women´s Economic Opportunities in the Formal Private Sector – A Focus on
Entrepreneurship, WB 2009). In Peru, a large proportion of these female-owned firms are micro-enterprises (44 percent) (Bruhn,
2009). Peruvian women may become entrepreneurs in order to achieve the higher rates of return to education, they cannot find in
salaried employment despite their high educational achievement levels.
9
―The Cost of Resolving Small-Business Conflicts: The Case of Peru, Inter- American Development Bank.‖ Alvaro Herrero and
Keith Henderson. 2003. Page 9

14

Underdeveloped or missing financial services infrastructure keeps transaction costs high and
penetration of financial services to lower income and rural households low. Cost to serve is the
single biggest obstacle when it comes to banking for the poor. Innovative mechanisms to expand
access to finance are crucial to bring the poor closer to the financial sector and technology is
increasingly making it viable for a wider range of players to provide financial services at the base of
the pyramid.
45.
With growing and competing demands, adequate water resources management is
critical to improve agricultural productivity. Water is an important element of the Peruvian
economy since agriculture (6.4 percent of GDP), mining (11.7 percent), and manufacturing (14.6
percent), are the main consumers of water. Moreover, 60 percent of electricity generation comes
from hydroelectricity with a huge potential not being fully developed. A great part of agricultural
production, either for domestic consumption or for exports, depends on irrigation. Irrigated
agriculture represents about 30 percent of cultivated land, where two-thirds of the production goes to
exports. The increased scarcity of water – 1.8 percent of fresh water (2,000m3/year/person) – in the
Pacific Watershed – where most of the population live, the main important economic activities take
place, and most of the irrigated area of Peru is located, is becoming a limitation to the country‘s
economic development and a source of conflict. Flooding and droughts, whose effects have been
increasing due to climate change and the degradation of watersheds by human activity, cause
substantial and increasing socio-economic losses. The GoP regards water resources management as
critical to its growth and productivity agenda. The Government priorities focus on expanding the
water storage, consolidating the institutional and regulatory framework through a basins management
approach and strengthening of the national water agency and in building capacity at national and
decentralized levels.
46.
Peru is addressing environmental challenges to ensure sustainable economic growth and
development. The Ministry of the Environment was created in 2008, together with two
decentralized agencies, the National Service for Protected Areas (Servicio Nacional de Areas
Naturales - SERNANP) and the Agency for Environmental Assessment and Oversight (Organismo de
Evaluación y Fiscalización Ambiental - OEFA). In addition, the National Water Authority, ascribed
to the Ministry of Agriculture was created in 2008. The Government aims to complete the
implementation of the environmental impact assessment national system (Sistema de Evaluación de
Impacto Ambiental, SEIA) and the environmental assessment and oversight national system OEFA.
47.
The Government will continue with the implementation of adaptation and mitigation
measures, biodiversity protection and disaster risk management. Peru is especially prone to
climate change and the poor are at greater risk of being affected. The agenda includes: (i)
consolidating existing policies to better integrate disaster risk management; (ii) strengthening
institutional and technical capacity at different decision-making levels; and (iii) enhancing
preparedness and resilience to climate-induced effects such as floods and droughts through better
planning and prioritization of related investments.
Strengthened Public Sector
48.
A key element for sustaining Peru’s future economic growth and social development
includes improving public services at all levels of Government. The country has taken initial
steps towards improving the efficiency of the public sector by transitioning to performance
management throughout all branches of Government, including subnational levels, to enhance the
results of nearly a decade of decentralization. Peru has adopted results-based budgeting through
15

twelve so-called ―strategic‖ as well as ―institutional programs‖ which (by end-2010) represented
about 11 percent of public spending. In addition, Peru has formulated its first multi-year investment
budget framework (as a first step towards the introduction of a full multi-year budget framework)
which enhances planning and creates predictability. Coordination between the public sector, private
sector, and international cooperation on administrative simplification will be strengthened through
TRAMIFACIL, an initiative that will be led by the Public Sector Management Secretariat of the
Presidency of the Council of Ministers.
49.
The Government places a high priority on citizen participation and accountability,
particularly as a tool to achieving more inclusive development. In recent years, Peru has
introduced a large number of laws covering participatory budgeting, access to information, and laws
creating local, regional and national consultative bodies. In addition, it pioneered a web-based portal
to provide greater budget transparency (Consulta Amigable), which is well known in the region for
providing fiscal data on all levels of government. This has served as a model for some other
countries. Recent evaluations of participatory budgeting in Peru highlighted its role in improving the
voice of the poor in investment decisions, leading to more pro-poor investments relative to control
group communities. Currently 36 percent of local investments are determined via participatory
budgeting processes. In addition, Peru has been part of the Extractive Industries Transparency
Initiative (EITI) and, considering the improvements reflected on the second report and the response
to remediation actions, it is likely that Peru may become a compliant country soon.
50.
Moving from open government to greater accountability, transparency at all levels, and
ultimately better development results is a complex process. 10 Looking forward, the Government
expects to strengthen and extend civic engagement beyond planning to monitoring budget execution,
the quality of service delivery and the transparency and level of inclusion of the participatory
budgeting process itself. In addition, the Government intends to set up several mechanisms to
enhance transparency, improve justice services, and fight corruption. This commitment encompasses
a set of legal and institutional measures, including the strengthening of the General Comptroller of
the Republic and the reorganization of the Organismo Supervisor de Contrataciones del Estado OSCE.
51.
Greater efficiency of public spending is expected to be achieved through the
improvement of the public financial management system, the introduction of a better targeting
system for public expenditures, and the adoption of a territorial approach. The results of the
2009 Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability (PEFA) assessment, from the perspective of
the six budget dimensions measured by the framework, concluded that the PFM system in Peru is
functioning relatively well and is in line with international practices. The Ministry of Finance will:
(i) expand the programmatic public budgeting coverage to 100 percent; (ii) improve information
systems (particularly the new financial management system, Sistema Integrado de Administración
Financiera, SIAF), to make more efficient and effective the public resources allocation; (iii) expand
the accountability systems; (iv) strengthen the multiyear programmatic spending framework; and (iv)
enhance the integrated territorial approach. To facilitate public investment, the National System of
Public Investment will implement a strategic approach of its investment portfolio, including targeting
areas with larger infrastructure gaps and introducing a monitoring and evaluation mechanism of
public investment.

10

Peru has shown its interest and intent in joining the Open Government Partnership, committing to submit an action plan by
March 2012 (http:www.opengovpartnership.org/countries/peru).

16

52.
Public procurement is another critical area being addressed by the Government. Peru
has made progress in the last few years, in particular with the extension and upgrade of the electronic
procurement system, SEACE (“Sistema Electrónico de Contrataciones del Estado”) which is now
largely used throughout the country. It has reformed the national procurement supervisory authority,
OSCE, and its Tribunal (―Tribunal de Contrataciones del Estado‖). Still, there are a number of
critical flaws in the system, as well as an overall weak capacity of government entities, notably at the
regional and municipal level. The Government is committed to remedy these deficiencies by
implementing an action plan that was defined in 200911. The action plan calls for a system based on
results with better efficiency, substantial reform of procurement mechanisms to promote open
competition (Peru has suffered from an extremely low participation of bidders in government
contracts), modernization of processes, and professionalization of procurement staff. To be effective,
this plan will require a significant reform of the legal procurement framework that will need the
support of all stakeholders interested in procurement.
53.
To sustain high levels of fiscal revenues, the Government has adjusted mining taxation,
improved and facilitated tax collection procedures, dealt with smuggling, limited tax
exemptions and controlled tax evasion. The Government has successfully negotiated with the
mining industry an increase of its tax contribution by about US$1 billion per year. To reduce the
high level of tax evasion (about 35 percent of the value added tax revenues and 50 percent of income
tax) and smuggling (around 3 percent of imports), the Government will increase inspections,
strengthen the Superintendencia Nacional de Administración Tributaria (SUNAT), expand the
coverage of customs services, simplify procedures for tax compliance, and revisit the tax code.
54.
The Government seeks to reform the private pension system and increase competition
among private pension funds (Administradora de Fondo de Pensiones, AFP)12, develop local
capital markets, and strengthen Microfinance Institutions (MFI) and Municipal Financing
Agencies (Cajas Municipales y Rurales). A key objective sought by the Government in all areas of
financial development is promoting inclusion of underserved population by reducing service costs
and increasing coverage. For this purpose, an ad hoc commission has been created (including
representatives from the Ministry of Finance, the supervisory agency, representatives from Congress
and academics) to make recommendations to congress. In the area of Municipal Financing Agencies,
COFIDE is developing alternatives for refinancing via support on bundling and monitoring
mechanisms that would allow future securitization of their portfolios.
IV. WORLD BANK GROUP PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY

A. Lessons Learned from previous CPS and Stakeholder Feedback
55.
The WBG’s performance in implementing the FY 07-11 CPS program is rated
satisfactory in the Completion Report which is in line with the Independent Evaluation Group
(IEG) Country Performance Evaluation13. The close alignment of the CPS with the Peruvian
political cycle and with the former President Garcia‘s administration development vision for Peru
were important positive features of the CPS design, enabling continuity of objectives and program
priorities over the entire CPS implementation period. These factors, together with the Government‘s
appreciation of the Bank‘s role in providing access to implementation support, relevant knowledge,
11

―Plan estratégico de contrataciones públicas del Estado Peruano‖, Ministerio de Economía y Finanzas, OSCE, Abril 2009
Four AFPs manage US$ 76 billion (20% of the country's GDP) in retirement savings from 40% of the Peruvian labor force.
13
Peru, Country Program Evaluation for the World Bank Group, 2003-2009, IEG.
12

17

global experience and policy advice on difficult second-generation reform questions, put in place the
foundations for largely successful CPS implementation.
56.
The satisfactory design and implementation of the FY 07-11 CPS provided important
lessons for this CPS. First, the Completion Report (CR) concludes that it is important to support the
country‘s efforts with respect to its focus on results. Second, just-in time and multi-year
programmatic analytical work are an important vehicle for building consensus on key reforms areas.
The strong knowledge agenda and wide consultations and outreach to beneficiaries, NGOs, and other
opinion-makers and stakeholders have helped to create broad reform constituencies, develop a
national agenda, and underpin Bank-financed operations, particularly in the social sectors. Finally,
the accuracy and relevance of the results framework can have a powerful effect in the capacity to
monitor results and produce a fair evaluation of the contribution of the CPS. Strategic coordination
in the implementation of complementary intervention by the Bank and IFC is a key element in
improving CPS results. Evidence of this have been the joint efforts in the areas of competitiveness,
SMEs strengthening, financial and capital markets, sustainable business and infrastructure
development.
57.
The Bank showed considerable flexibility during CPS implementation, especially by
calibrating DPL lending volumes and loan products to mitigate the impact of the global
financial crisis. This flexibility allowed the Government to respond with a strategy of securing
access to contingent lines of credit with the aim of reassuring nervous markets in the form of
development policy loans (DPL) and Deferred Drawdown Options including one that addressed
Catastrophes (CAT DDO). The Government‘s reduced need for external funds was largely
responsible for the shortfall in lending volume vis-a-vis the original CPS program. By and large, the
Government‘s decision to reduce the size of loan amounts for individual operations (rather than
drastically reduce the overall number of investment operations) is a testament to the high value that it
placed on continued Bank knowledge, experience and supervision support both in designing
programs and in ensuring the quality of their implementation.
58.
Both the CPSCR and the IEG Country Program Evaluation provided recommendations
for future WBG engagement in Peru. Challenges remain in making growth more inclusive, with
differential poverty reduction across the country. In the social sectors, IBRD helped realize progress
in difficult second generation reforms, although achievements in some areas fell short of objectives.
The WBG made an effective contribution in strengthening public financial management, although
results in other areas of public sector management were modest. Consistent government
commitment and effective management of the reform agenda underpinned positive WBG
contributions. IEG‘s main recommendations highlighted, first, the need for supporting large-scale
infrastructure development through both public investments and PPPs. Second, IEG recommended
the development of a more strategic approach to helping Peru realize viable, long-term improvements
in public sector performance. Third, close strategic partnership with development agencies that
provide concessional investment finance in social sectors was recommended in order to optimize
synergies with IBRD policy lending and Analytic and Advisory Activities (AAA) in social sectors.
Stakeholder Consultations
59.
The IBRD and IFC country teams undertook consultations for the preparation of the
CPS with numerous State and Municipal clients, the private sector, congressmen and civil
society, comprising approximately 343 direct interlocutors. As the Bank program is increasingly

18

at the sub-national level, consultations had a particular focus on regional and municipal government
representatives and stakeholders.
60.
The results from the consultations suggest that the WBG development support is very
valued by most interlocutors. As detailed in Annex 10, counterparts see the WBG as a leading
development institution and a key partner for the Government. Stakeholders recommended a focus
on improved competitiveness through improvement in the quality of the education system and the
development of adequate labor skills. The need for a second round of the modernization of the State
was also identified in order to achieve a more efficient, accountable and transparent public
administration. Another urgent priority is the need to strengthen subnational governments, with a
focus on increasing their management capacities to improve their quality and targeting of their
spending. Finally, participants stressed the need to undertake civil service reform to obtain stronger
institutions and less incidence of corruption within them. There was also great concern in terms of
protecting the environment, particularly in the importance of seeking a balance between the
expansion of the mining sector and sustainable development. Stakeholders understand that the
country has the opportunity to exploit their natural resources in a different way, taking into account
the concerns of indigenous groups and other social and environmental safeguards to reduce the
incidence of social conflicts related to exploitation of natural resources.
B.

The Country Partnership Strategy

61.
The WBG aims to support the Government’s plan of “growth with social inclusion” to
overcome social gaps and boost productivity in Peru. The Government‘s plan proposes
maintaining sound macroeconomic policies while creating the conditions that generate better
economic opportunities for those most vulnerable. The proposed areas of WBG engagement are
fully aligned with the Government‘s plan and focus selectively on those fields in which the Bank can
provide more value added to the country. The CPS four strategic objectives are: (i) increased access
and quality of social services for the poor; (ii) connecting the poor to services and markets; (iii)
sustainable growth and productivity; and (iv) improved public sector performance for greater
inclusion. Figure 1 summarizes the strategic objectives and expected results areas during CPS
implementation covering FY12-FY16.
Figure 1

19

Strategic Objective 1: Increased access and quality of social services for the poor
62.
The Bank will support the creation of an institutional framework that fosters greater
inclusion, improves the efficiency of social programs, and enhances mechanisms for better
access to basic services. The Government‘s priority is to implement an integrated, sound and
effective social protection system in Peru, particularly in the rural areas where welfare improvements
require strong and targeted policy actions to reduce inequality. MIDIS is the newly created
institution to lead this national agenda. The Bank's dialogue with MIDIS has identified specific areas
of support that build on: (i) substantial technical assistance and analytical work to expand coverage
and quality of basic social services for the most vulnerable (including nutrition, social protection,
justice services), (ii) improved results-based budgeting and accountability in social sectors; and, (iii)
enhanced incentives to promote beneficiaries' participation. The Bank will also continue supporting
the Ministries of Finance, Health, Education and Justice through existing and new lending
operations, trust fund activities and analytical work. Figure 2 summarizes the three results areas and
expected main outcomes in this strategic objective.
Figure 2

Results Area 1.1: A more inclusive and effective social protection system
63.
The Bank will support the Government’s commitment to coordinate design and
implementation of social inclusion programs through MIDIS and the scaling up of efforts to
improve nutrition outcomes. The Bank will support MIDIS in the initial steps of building its
operational capacity. That support will include advice to enhance the impact of social programs,
particularly for the Juntos CCT Program, PRONAA (National Food Assistance Program), and
Pension 65, to strengthen the overall monitoring and evaluation systems for social programs, and to
develop an integrated approach to social programs delivery at the family/household level to break the
vicious circle of cumulated disadvantage. This support will also include enhancing MIDIS'

20

coordinating role across sectors and programs through SINADIS (National Development and Social
Inclusion System). The Bank‘s support will be expanded when MIDIS becomes fully operational,
possibly through a DPL, SWAp or an investment loan.
64.
The Bank will continue supporting the Government’s efforts to reduce chronic
malnutrition rates, particularly in rural areas where the stunting rate (40 percent) is three
times greater than those of the urban areas. The core intervention of the Government will
continue to be the Juntos CCT Program and the Programa Articulado Nutricional (PAN). Bank
support comes through the Juntos Results for Nutrition Sector Wide Approach Project (SWAp),
which aims at improving the coverage and quality of the supply of basic preventive health and
nutrition services in the communities covered under PAN. The intervention foresees increasing the
number of children under 3 receiving comprehensive health check-ups in a timely manner. A Japan
Social Development Fund (JSDF) trust fund will complement the Juntos Results for Nutrition SWAP
with technical assistance and analytical work. In addition, the Bank will provide assistance to
transfer the Juntos CCT program to MIDIS and the implementation of an exit strategy that protects
those beneficiaries that no longer meet the criteria to participate in Juntos but still live in extreme
poverty. Lastly, the Bank will assist in the expansion of the Juntos CCT Program to 200 districts.
Results area 1.2: A more equitable and results-oriented health and education systems
65.
The Bank will continue supporting the GOP in improving access to and the quality of
the health services for the poor. The Health Reform (PARSALUD) II Project will maintain its
agenda aimed at improving health services for poor mothers and children in rural areas, particularly
addressing the challenge of making health facilities culturally appropriate to rural environments. In
addition, the project foresees advancing the decentralization of service delivery and improving the
efficiency of the health insurance system, SIS. The Bank stands ready to provide technical assistance
to the GoP‘s new strategy to broaden the menu of services financed by SIS beyond maternal and
child health and for health promotion, prevention, and treatment. In turn, IFC would work with
private sector agents with a proven track record and local/international know-how to promote
investments in health. It has become doing so already, with Grupo Salud, which has a target affiliate
base of circa 560,000. Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA) is expected to support
growing needs for adequate services provided by the social security agency, Essalud, through a
guarantee to the private sector in charge of developing four concession projects (two hospitals, an
out-patient clinic and a distribution center).
66.
The CPS program in education will support the national strategy to generate better
outcomes in basic education. Coverage of primary education for both boys and girls is now
universal, but learning outcomes are still low and unequal. The Government has requested the Bank
to continue assisting the implementation of the Ministry of Education‘s efforts at improving learning
outcomes, particularly addressing specific challenges for children from rural, indigenous
communities. To this end, the Bank expects to deliver a SWAp operation aimed at putting in place a
results-based strategy that closes the gaps in learning outcomes as well as a required studentcentered, integrated monitoring system to improve decision-making to better allocate resources and
bring greater accountability into the delivery of education services.
Result 1.3 Enhanced access to justice services
67.
Ongoing support for the Government's efforts to increase access to and improve the
quality of justice services for all will continue. The main instrument of support will remain the
21

Justice Services Improvement Project II Technical Assistance Loan (TAL) which aims to expand the
coverage of legal services centers and expedite criminal justice processes. The project will continue
working together with the Judiciary, the Ministry of Justice, the Attorney General's Office, the
Judicial Council and the Judicial Academy. The Bank will remain engaged with other development
partners in the technical debate about how to improve access to justice services in Peru. A recently
approved JSDF trust fund will support the development of an integrated approach for free legal
services for the poor beginning with the identification of the legal needs of the population through a
survey that will provide a baseline.
Strategic Objective 2. Connecting the poor to services and markets
68.
The CPS will help the authorities sharpen the focus on linking the poor to services and
markets. A key priority of the Government is to improve the access of the poor to economic
opportunities and public services through the expansion of integrated infrastructure both in rural and
peri-urban areas. The Bank will build its support for this agenda through ongoing and new
operations aimed at improving water and sanitation services, transport infrastructure and
electrification. The Bank will assist the authorities in developing new approaches to territorial
development that enhance the synergy across interventions. In addition, the WBG is well-positioned
to support the Government‘s commitment to expand coverage of telecommunications services in
rural areas. Figure 3 summarizes the three results areas and expected main outcomes in this strategic
objective.
Figure 3

Results area 2.1: Improved supply of water and sanitation services
69.
The Bank will continue working on expanding the availability of sustainable water and
sanitation services in peri-urban and rural settings. The Bank will build on its extensive
experience in Peru to assist attainment of the Government‘s objective to providing water services to
at least 90 percent of the population in urban areas and 55 percent in rural areas. The ongoing Rural
22

Water and Sanitation Project (PRONASAR) will support this agenda in the rural areas. In the periurban areas of Metropolitan Lima, the current Optimization of Lima Water and Sewerage project will
continue supporting SEDAPAL’s program to promote access to water and sanitation services to
poorer groups at lower cost. In addition, the Bank‘s Water and Sanitation Program (WSP) will
implement US$7 million in technical assistance to create sanitation services for the poor in eight
regions and to help improve the efficiency of small and medium-size urban water utilities (EPS). The
Bank will continue applying gender equity good practices in water and sanitation projects.
Results area 2.2: Better transport and infrastructure to reduce inequality
70.
The CPS will continue to foster the movement of people and goods with attention to
extending rural roads networks and connecting critical segments of the national network. The
Bank will continue supporting both the national and sub-national governments through existing rural,
departmental, and urban transport projects (which could include follow-on projects). The Bank‘s
engagement will retain a focus on the rehabilitation and maintenance of rural and departmental roads,
improving planning, program consolidations (e.g. national roads/Proyecto Peru) and urban transport
systems, as well as promoting micro-enterprise participation and female participation in routine
maintenance of rural and provincial roads.14 A potential project is envisaged to support the national
program for bridges rehabilitation and additional support is under discussion for a new bus line under
the successful bus rapid transport (BRT) system in Metropolitan Lima. The Bank will mainstream
road safety activities in potential lending operations. IFC, in turn, expects to contribute to this
strategy through advice on PPPs for the network of roads to be managed under the concessions
program, as well as by continuing to support private sector participation in ports, airports, rail and
road projects.
Results area 2.3: Reliable energy and telecommunications
71.
The CPS will support interventions that assure a cost-effective and reliable supply of
energy for households, businesses, and public services and expand electricity services to rural
areas. Availability of electricity in rural areas for both households and business is expected to
increase considerably with the support of the two phases of the ongoing Rural Electrification Project
and ESMAP-financed work in the energy sector. In addition, discussions are ongoing about possible
support for new initiatives aimed at: (a) investment in new distribution lines and rehabilitation of
existing lines; (b) elaboration of feasibility studies and environmental and social assessments for
several hydropower plants and implementation of public-private partnerships for building them; and
(c) technical assistance for the development of an integrated national energy strategy. The strategy
would also include the strengthening of public electricity distribution companies to reduce losses, the
expansion of transmission systems, small-scale liquefied natural gas applications for natural gas
distribution, and feasibility studies for refining and commercialization of heavy petroleum reserves,
and bio-diesel market and its potential for electrification. The Bank and the IFC would contribute to
these fronts, through analytical work, potential investment operations, and potential support to the
public and private sector in developing renewable energy.
72.
As part of the Government’s plan to reduce the infrastructure gap in the country, the
Ministry of Transport and Communications will boost public and private investment in rural
telecommunications. To bridge the telecommunication gap and integrate the poor in the digital
twenty-first century, the Government has established targets for rural telecommunications and
14

For reference on the gender dimension in Peru‘s rural transport project see http://www.oecd.org/dataoecd/50/60/47561694.pdf.

23

broadband coverage. The Government‘s plan to expand the broadband system in rural and low
income areas foresees the use of existing funds in the Telecommunications Investment Fund (Fondo
de Inversión de Telecomunicaciones, FITEL) as well as state participation in Public-Private
Partnerships projects with high social returns. The ongoing dialogue with the Ministry of
Communications centers on possible advisory services for: (i) optimizing existing communication
networks, and, (ii) increasing transparency, accountability and citizens‘ participation in service
delivery.
Strategic Objective 3: Sustainable growth and productivity
73.
The CPS supports the Government’s commitment to boost productivity, and address
environmental challenges as the basis for sustainable development. Peru has posted major gains
in total productivity, but it still lags behind other middle-income countries. The Bank will remain
engaged in improving tertiary education to enable youth to profit from employment opportunities.
The Bank and the IFC will promote productive inclusion and transformation of SMEs, particularly to
help them improve their access to financial services and the capacity to respond to the challenges of
competition through innovation. IFC clients already reach over 1,000 mainly rural MSMEs. Support
for rural development will target agriculture and business development for small organizations. To
address environmental challenges, the Bank will continue supporting the further development of the
environmental regulatory framework and biodiversity protection as well as a better integration of
disaster risk management criteria in public investment. Figure 4 summarizes the four results areas
and expected main outcomes in this strategic objective.
Figure 4

Results area 3.1 Promoting productivity through enhanced labor skills and SME’s
competitiveness
74.
On labor productivity, the Bank will support the implementation of the Government's
strategy on tertiary education and job programs. An investment loan will support the
implementation of a quality assurance system for higher education: the number of programs and
institutions undertaking self and external evaluations will increase and a comprehensive higher
education information system will enhance transparency of quality and performance. Similarly, IFC
plans to support education projects by partnering with strategic clients in order to increase access to

24

quality education in the country. The Bank could potentially support the Government‘s efforts to
generate employment opportunities for low-income and low-skilled youth in urban areas, through
Jovenes a la Obra program that focused on reducing search costs and provide complementary
training. Likewise, support can be provided for the skill certification program, Vamos Peru, which
aims to improve the employability of adults in rural areas.
75.
The WBG program will seek to strengthen the productive capacity of small and micro
enterprises, which employ 76 percent of economically active workers in Peru. The Bank will
continue implementing an Efficient Securities Markets Institutional Development (ESMID) program,
which supports the development of capital markets and financial institutions aimed at improving
financial access to SMEs. In the next five years, the program expects an increase of non-government
bond issuance by US$80 million in Peru. The Bank will continue supporting COFIDE in the
development of an innovative factoring scheme focused on SMEs and expects to provide further
assistance along the implementation phase. In addition, IFC expects to assist the GOP in areas
related to public-private SME competitiveness services platform, product diversification, and
incorporation of local SMEs into the supply chain of extractive companies, and implement a LAC
regional initiative that address barriers to the rapid deployment of mobile solutions for banking the
poor.
Results area 3.2: Sustainable rural development and water resources management
76.
The support of the WBG for a more sustainable business rural development will focus
on increasing the productivity in regions where the poor are concentrated through improved
access to water and other inputs. The strategy of the Government to promote rural development in
all regions of the country emphasizes enhancing productivity through innovation in poor regions.
The Bank will help scale-up successful experiences in providing sustainable business opportunities
for small organizations in rural areas, drawing on the lessons from the implementation of the Rural
Development Project. In addition, the Bank would support the Ministry of Agriculture in its strategy
of strengthening the agricultural innovation system and IFC expects to support sustainable
agribusiness investments by the private sector with a focus on high value-added and export oriented
products or segments of their supply chain. Given the high level of water scarcity in the country and
especially in the poor areas, the continued implementation of the Water Resources Management
Project as well as the Sierra Irrigation Project will allow the Bank to help improve water availability
through the introduction of comprehensive river basin management approaches.
Results area 3.3: Strengthening environmental management
77.
The Government and the WBG are exploring cooperation options to address
environmental vulnerabilities and the impact of climate change. The Bank has provided
technical support to the implementation of the institutional framework governing the management of
environmental issues through a programmatic series of Environmental DPLs and extensive trust fund
activities. The CPS will continue further developing this agenda through existing trust funds to
strengthen environment regulation and institutional capacity of the environmental authority,
enhancing the biodiversity conservation system, and providing lessons from adaptation to climate
change pilot projects. The Bank in dialogue with the Government is exploring new technical
assistance and possible lending operations to consolidate and expand the reforms initiated through
the programmatic Environmental DPLs in areas of air quality, particularly the regulation of the
supply of clean diesel (50 ppm or less), and the fishing sector. Support for the knowledge agenda
could include updating estimates about the economic cost of environmental degradation in Peru;
25

strengthening of environmental management capacity in the Amazon regional governments; and
promoting South-South cooperation between Brazil and Peru. In biodiversity, potential activities
would include a more effective inclusion of biodiversity conservation into national and regional
development plans, and support to coastal and marine protected areas through a GEF operation for
the Guano Islands. In the forestry sector, activities might be oriented towards land tenure and
planning in the Amazon region and the national forest investment strategy within the framework of
forest and climate change.15
78.
The IFC foresees a pro-active role in engaging the private sector in the implementation
of the national agenda to face the challenges of climate change. The IFC will rely on the LAC
regional initiative on clean energy to identify opportunities for development of clean energy sources
that increase access to energy in rural areas of Peru. Such an initiative will seek to combine dual
objectives of climate change mitigation and access to productive assets in the rural areas. IFC is also
exploring opportunities to improve irrigation systems and water use efficiency and increase use of
improved hybrids.
Results area 3.4. Improving disaster risk management and urban planning
79.
The CPS will continue working on building institutional capacity to prepare for and
manage the impact of disasters. Peru is a disaster prone country ranking 20th among the world‘s
nations most vulnerable to multiple natural hazards.16 During this CPS, the Bank will assist the
government building institutional capacity for disaster management as well as financial resources for
emergency expenditures through ongoing policy dialogue in the DPL with a CAT DDO and trust
fund-financed technical assistance. The Bank work will endeavor to help build a strong linkage
between a comprehensive disaster risk management strategy at the national level and the capacity of
local governments to address disaster risk and implement activities to reduce vulnerability. In
addition, the Bank will assist in the design of policies and regulations for building safe infrastructure
at all levels of government and the WSP will continue supporting the scaling-up of risk management
practices among urban water utilities (EPS) in Peru.
Strategic Objective 4: Improved public sector performance for greater inclusion
80.
While Government effectiveness in Peru has improved, the current level is still below
what is needed to assure a continuous transformation of the country and achieve greater
inclusion. The Bank will deepen the technical support provided to the Government in previous years
and will emphasize interventions to improve social inclusion and to help reduce the country‘s
vulnerability to a potential global crisis or commodity prices swings. Thus, the support of the Bank
during this CPS will comprise strengthening tax revenue mobilization, better fiscal risk and debt
management, improved public expenditure management with focus in results, and strategic support
to sub-national governments and business regulation enhancement to promote inclusive growth. The
engagement under this strategic objective will assure continuity of the strong support that the Bank

15

Peru is a member of the Forest Carbon Partnership Facility (FCPF), and a pilot country of the Forest Investment Program,
which is part of the Climate Investment Fund. The Bank is trustee of these two initiatives, which aim at assisting countries in
their readiness process to Reduce Emissions form Deforestation and Forest Degradation (REDD+) .
16

World Bank, Natural Disaster Hotspots, 2005, Table 7.2: Countries at Relatively High Economic Risk from Multiple Hazards,
p. 89.

26

has provided in Peru in advancing good governance and mitigating corruption. Figure 5 summarizes
the two results areas and expected main outcomes under this strategic objective.
Figure 5

Results Area 4.1: Improved public sector management
81.
The WBG support to enhance the management capacity in the revenue authority
SUNAT is intended to help the Government in achieving its tax revenue collection target of 18
percent of GDP by 2015. The Bank program of support will build on the joint analysis of the tax
administration and the customs agency performed in 2010 and 2011 that has identified potential areas
for improving revenue capacities of SUNAT. In the case of revenue collection, the areas include the
upgrade of information systems and the use of risk analysis to control evasion, the reduction of
compliance costs, and improving enforcement capacity. In the area of customs, the emphasis will be
on strengthening controls and contraband prevention. The Bank‘s support would be carried out
through knowledge or Fee-Based-Service (FBS), as well as through an IFC Trade Logistics project
focused on strengthening IT capacities and processes at customs.
82.
The Bank will continue its collaboration with the Government to strengthen its risk
management. In coordination with the Ministry of Finance, the Bank will design a three-year
advisory services program funded by the Global Debt Management and Fiscal Risk Trust Fund
(GDRF) to cover debt management, contingent liabilities and the exposure to risks due to the
volatility of commodity prices. The Bank will also provide technical assistance to the Ad Hoc
Commission created by the Government for the implementation of a thorough reform of the private
pension system. The reform would include creating room for more competition focused on asset
management, promoting lower operation costs, adjusting commission structure, and improving risk
management.
83.
The Government of Peru aims to continue enhancing the quality and impact of public
spending through better expenditure management practices. The Bank support will build on the
achievements and lessons of past assistance to improve the performance and accountability of public
spending and procurement. During this CPS, the Bank will move from targeted interventions to a
comprehensive program aimed at strengthening management capacity at all levels of government and
consolidating successful experiences such as the development of the first multi-year investment
budget and the introduction of performance-informed budgeting and decentralized internal control
and audit systems. While there is clear demand for support, the Government program is still

27

evolving. Bank support will be better defined once this dialogue matures but it is expected to focus
on strengthening the management framework both at national and local level to balance the need to
maintain quality control of investment with accelerated expenditure execution. This support is
expected to materialize through a DPL program.
84.
IFC will support the modernization of the public sector to reduce the regulatory costs of
doing business. The activities of IFC engagement would include: (a) improved inspection processes
for business operation and construction licenses as well as reduced transaction costs for all firms
(SMEs and larger companies); b) streamlined procedures to obtain key licenses, permits, and
inspections to create and operate tourism-related businesses, particularly SMEs offering these
services; c) improved trade logistics systems and services by facilitating faster import and export
processes and developing a modern risk management system to reduce and standardize cargo
inspections.
85.
The Bank aims to support the Government’s objective of fighting corruption to achieve
a more efficient and transparent public sector. To advance this objective and foster trust in
government and institutions, activities will aim at broadening engagement with civil society to
identify and strengthen mechanisms of social accountability in critical areas. These can only be
achieved through strengthening transparency and accountability systems at all levels of government
to increase citizens‘ political awareness and promote public demand for better and more equitable
public services. The Bank would support Peru in developing and implementing an anti-corruption
strategy by broadening the implementation of the Governance and Anticorruption (GAC) agenda
through: (i) activities related to the open data initiative already launched by the National Statistics
Institute and the Municipality of Lima, and potential activities related to future engagement of Peru
in the Open Government Initiative; (ii) the strengthening of the procurement system, initially through
an Institutional Development Fund (IDF) for a training program for procurement officials; and (iii)
the provision of technical assistance, through a Governance Partnership Facility (GPF), to the
executive and the Controller General's Office on the monitoring of corruption-related risks.
Results Area 4.2: Strengthening sub-national management capacity
86.
The agenda to help strengthen local government and advance further the
decentralization agenda will focus on removing systemic constraints. In recent years, the rate of
implementation of public investment projects at all levels of government has not improved. Subnational administrations face systemic hurdles in procurement, human resources, financial
management, and public investment systems. The Bank will support the Government‘s efforts with
instrument that would include technical guidance to strengthen sub-national capacity for enhanced
investment performance including an initial diagnosis stage (short term) involving the
implementation of the Rapid Assessment and Action Plans (RAAP) methodology to different sets of
sub-national governments. This intervention would allow a quick and comprehensive identification
of key bottlenecks associated with different capacities and needs in Peru‘s sub-national governments
(according to their characteristics, size and location). A proposal of quick-win actions to speed up
execution rates of public investment will follow.
87.
IFC will continue to work on strengthening the demand for good governance at the
local level that increases the responsiveness, responsibility and accountability of local
governments. The ongoing MIM (Mejorando la Inversión Municipal, Improving Municipal
Investment) Project aims to enable communities and civil society organizations to exercise their
rights to ensure that authorities are responsive and accountable in their use of royalties. Currently
28

reaching 20 municipalities in 5 regions, the project will continue until the end of 2014 expanding its
reach to 30 local governments in 8 regions. In addition, IFC is implementing a 4-year capacity
building program that will reach 30 local governments receiving vast amounts of transfers for
financing local investments (mainly canon). The purpose is to improve sub-national governments‘
investment efficiency and thus, increase access to public services on the part of the local population.
The work is progressing in close coordination with the Ministry of Finance, with an aim to introduce
tested tools and methodologies as standards for strengthening sub-national governments‘ investment
management.
Proposed Program of Lending and Non-Lending Activities
88.
The WBG institutions (IBRD, IFC and MIGA), will work together to deliver an
integrated package of financial products, guarantees and knowledge services based on relative
comparative advantages. Building on the lessons learned, the WBG institutions will work in a
complementary fashion in order to generate synergies. Various areas have been already identified,
including advisory work on pensions reform, support to the development and implementation of
PPPs, the development of the sub-national agenda. As the CPS program matures, the WBG
institutions will seek to identify potential areas for collaboration.
89.
Given the strong degree of continuity from the previous CPS, implementation of the
current IBRD portfolio will be crucial to achieving CPS outcomes for the FY12-16 period. The
current Bank program includes a portfolio of thirteen on-going operations. In addition there are three
DPL-DDOs and one DPL with a CAT DDO open and two GEF grants. All these operations amount
to a total of US$1.95 billion. Seventy six percent of the current portfolio is undisbursed, including
US$1.1 billion in DDOs (See Annex 8). Six out of seventeen active operations were approved in
FY11.17
90.
Program performance improved significantly over the FY07-FY11 CPS period and
currently there are no commitments at risk. Frequent performance portfolio reviews (three times
per year) jointly with the Ministry of Finance and the Implementing Agencies have resulted in
greater responsiveness from all parties to solve operational issues. The disbursement rate of
investment operations more than doubled between FY07 and FY11, from 10.2 to 25.1 percent (with a
peak of 37.8 percent in FY10). The implementation progress of all active investment projects (13) is
rated moderately satisfactory (MS) or satisfactorily (S). On average, fiduciary risk is rated as
moderate and, in general, mitigating measures are adequately implemented.
91.
Despite a satisfactory performance, there are some areas that may require further
strengthening and follow-up in the portfolio review. As it relates to financial management, project
implementation has gradually moved and benefitted from PFM improvements in budget preparation
and execution through the integrated financial management system SIAF-SP. During the current CPS
program, the Bank will continue seeking opportunities to deepen the use of country systems, mainly
in the areas of financial reporting and treasury. The technical MoU with the Auditor‘s General Office
has been revised to include some specific measures that can help to minimize delays in the
17

These comprised: the first CAT DDO (US$100 million), Sierra Irrigation (US$20 million), Second Justice Improvement
(US$20 million), Results in Nutrition (US$25 million), Lima Optimization of Water Systems (US$54.5 million), and Second
Rural Electrification Project (US$50 million). In addition, three DPLs were approved and fully disbursed in FY 11: Third
Environmental DPL (US$75 million), Fourth Fiscal Management and Competitiveness DPL (US$100 million), and Third Results
and Accountability in Social Sectors DPL (US$50 million),

29

appointment of external auditors.
92.
IFC’s current committed portfolio in Peru is US$835.1 million composed of loans,
equity, guarantees, and risk management products. Senior loans are the most common product
and represent 70.9 percent of the total portfolio, while equity, quasi equity products and guarantees
also represent an important share of the current committed portfolio (17.1 percent, 6.0 percent and
5.7 percent, respectively). In terms of industries, Oil, Gas & Mining holds 46.4 percent of the current
committed portfolio, followed by Infrastructure and Financial Markets, each holding an amount
equivalent to the 19.5 percent of the total committed portfolio. The current portfolio has also
investments in the Manufacture, Agribusiness, Health & Education, Sub-national Finance and
Investment Funds industries.
93.
The Bank program will focus on the selected areas of support and will be flexible to
respond to possible changes in demand from the Government. Financial and knowledge
services will be managed as a comprehensive package of support under each CPS strategic
theme to deliver timely and flexible development solutions.. There are no deliverables expected
for FY12 given that there is a new Government, and a review of the proposed work was carried out
during the early months of this administration. The indicative lending program is expected to be
relatively small at about US$250 million per annum, given that the Government is mostly interested
in the policy reform support under DPL operations and in implementation support, through the
investment lending program. At this point, interest in access to more traditional IBRD lending
products is limited given the positive economic context of the country. As a result, much of the
investment lending operations would support relatively large Government funded programs, where
external financing tends to be the lesser fraction of the overall program. This is the case of the ongoing Health Reform Program, the Water Resources Management Project, the Rural Water Supply
and Sanitation Project, among others. Building on the existing portfolio the Bank will gradually
adapt its program offering new or additional financing when deemed appropriate as well as using the
range of instruments to respond to Government‘s demands. The confirmed program will be included
in the CPS Progress Report. The CPS outcomes reflect the overall results of the programs supported
by the Bank through both financial and knowledge services. Table 4 shows an indicative list of
activities that would be initially supported during this period. Actual delivery of the lending program
will depend on IBRD lending capacity, overall country demand as well as demand from other
borrowers, global economic developments, and country access to the markets and available
administrative budget.
94.
Trust funds will continue to be a significant part of the Bank's engagement with Peru.
As trust fund resources are not predictable for the purpose of the CPS, the WBG will ensure that
activities financed by trust funds follow the thrust of this strategy, in agreement with the Government
counterparts. Existing grants are also expected to provide valuable AAA and technical assistance
(TA) during this CPS period (Annex 8B). They support the harmonization and alignment of funding
from various development partners behind core government programs. The WBG‘s Trust Fund (TF)
portfolio (currently over US$39 million) has been expanding significantly, and the range and variety
of TF arrangements have increased the supervision needs. In this regard, the WBG is taking a more
proactive TF monitoring which includes portfolio reviews carried out twice a year jointly with the
Ministry of Finance and the implementing agencies, and simultaneously with the regular Country
Portfolio Performance Review (CPPRs).

30

Table 4: Indicative World Bank Program (FY12-16)
Social Inclusion with continued Growth18
Strategic Objectives
1. Increase access and
quality of social
services for the poor

Current Portfolio, FY12-16
 Health Reform Program II
(APL)
 Results Nutrition for Juntos
SWAp (SIL)
 Justice Services Improv. II
(TAL)
 Real Property Rights II (SIL)






Proposed Lending, FY13-15
Health Program
Basic Education SWAp
Social Inclusion DPL
Social InclusionTAL

Knowledge Services, FY 12-15
 Advisory Education Sector
 HD Support to Lima
Municipality
 Recurso V
 Gender and Agency Study
 Programmatic Poverty NLTA
Series

 Programmatic Knowledge for
Social Protection

2. Connecting the poor
to services and
markets

 Decentralized Rural Transport
Project (SIL)

 Optimization of Lima Water &
Sewerage (SIL)

 Decentralized Rural Transport
Project, Add. Financing
 Regional Transport
Decentralization Add.
Financing
 Optimization of Lima Water
& Sewerage Add. Financing,
 Bridges and Road Safety

 National Rural Water Supply
and Sanitation + Add.
Financing(SIL)
 Rural Electrification, (SIL)
 Second Rural Electrification
(SIL)
 Sierra Rural Development
Project (SIL)

 Sierra Rural Development
Project Add. Financing

 Regional Transport
Decentralization (SIL)

3. Sustainable growth
and productivity

 Water Resources Management
(SIL)
 Sierra Irrigation (SIL)

4. Improved public
sector performance for
greater inclusion

 Water Resources
Management, Add. Financing
 Agricultural Innovation
 Higher Education Quality
Assurance
 Cuzco Regional Development
Project
 Performance Management and
Fiscal DPL

18

 SME Finance
 Financial Sector Work
 Trade Competitiveness and
Growth
 Amazon Management
Framework NLTA
 Irrigation Sector Note

 Programmatic Governance &
Governability NLTA Series
 Pension Reform NLTA

The Trust Fund portfolio is included in Annex 8. The Proposed Lending and the Knowledge Services listed in Table 4 are
indicative. The latter includes only those AAA which are currently programmed. It is expected that additional activities will
occur as the dialogue with the client progresses.

31

95.
Knowledge partnership will be key to the successful implementation of the CPS and, in
some areas, the most important vehicle for WBG engagement, in line with experience in other
MICs. The CPS will build on the WBG‘s existing AAA and TA program, which currently includes:
(i) analysis that supports Government‘s development agenda (e.g. poverty assessments, public
expenditure efficiency at the subnational level); (ii) policy notes, think pieces for knowledge
generation and background papers; and (iv) hands-on TA and programmatic, multi-year knowledge
services. While the Bank expects to continue providing AAA services, some of the knowledge
services will be carried out through Fee-Based-Services, given that these are now allowed under
Peruvian law. In addition, the WBG will continue using South-South learning, as it has been the case
in the transport and education sectors.
96.
IFC’s Advisory Services will work closely with the World Bank on national and
subnational policy. These efforts will include policy advice, assessments and technical assistance.
In all its efforts, IFC will look to incorporate the voice of the private sector into the policy discussion.
The IFC‘s Advisory Service Program is an increasingly important part of IFC‘s engagement in Peru
and for this CPS it expects to manage project funds of approximately US$10 million, of which
US$8million will be donor funded, to provide policy advice, consultation, and technical assistance in
support of sustainable and broad-based economic growth.
Monitoring and Evaluation
97.
The WBG intends to monitor CPS results via: (a) regular project/program implementation
support; (b) CPPRs, carried out three times per year; (b) reviews of the recipient-executed TF
portfolio, twice per year; (d) client demand and feedback, in particular with respect to knowledge
services; (e) Bank internal independent evaluations; and (f) the mid-term CPS Progress Report.
Partnerships
98.
The Bank expects to continue collaborating with development partners in a similar
fashion to the previous CPS. Coordination with Inter-American Development Bank (IADB) is
expected to continue, both through the co-financing of projects as well as through joint knowledge
services efforts. In addition, the Bank will continue to participate in various cooperation groups and
subgroups operating in the country. To avoid duplication of actions, the Bank is being particularly
active in the subgroups of Justice, Decentralization and the monitoring of PEFA initiative with the
Ministry of Economy and Finance. For the next few years, the WBG is expected to continue
coordinating with the different donor agencies especially in those areas in which agendas coincide,
for example, social inclusion, increased competitiveness and governance.
V. RISKS
99.
Weak external environment, volatile commodity prices, fall in fiscal revenues and
deterioration of external financial conditions. The economy will continue to be vulnerable to a
potential global crisis as well as to commodity prices swings affecting primarily gold and copper
export earnings, as well as fiscal revenues. Peru is sensitive to a fall in commodity prices and its
impact on fiscal revenues. Fiscal revenues generated from the taxation of commodities are around
17.5 percent of total fiscal revenues. With an elasticity of fiscal revenues to commodity prices at
around two, a fall in commodity prices of ten percent is associated with a decline of fiscal revenues
of about 3.5 percent. However, Peru exports a number of commodities whose prices are not highly
correlated, thus generating a natural hedge against a price or volume fall. While this reduces the
32

impact of a fall in commodity prices, the government also mitigates the potential effect through fiscal
savings of about US$6.7 billion in its fiscal stabilization fund which can be used to implement a
countercyclical fiscal policy if required. Tighter global financial conditions would also lower
inflows of private capital envisaged in macroeconomic projections; and public external financing
conditions also could be affected. The Government is well aware of these risks and is already
attempting to improve its capacity to respond to these shocks by running countercyclical fiscal
policies to ensure that GDP growth does not decline much, as well as other policies to make sure that
inflation remains low and within the targeting bands, and that currency does not suffer sharp
movements that may cause confidence and the economy to deteriorate. The CPS program is
supporting the strengthening of tax revenue collection, fiscal risk and debt management, and overall
efficiency of public expenditure management. In addition, Peru has about US$1.1 billion of
precautionary line of credit from the World Bank (DDO).
100. Social conflicts may challenge political stability. There has been opposition from rural and
poor communities to new extractive projects that jeopardize their livelihoods and environment. The
Ombudsman Office reported about 220 social conflicts around the country (Nov. 2011). The current
Government is taking steps to mitigate these risks. A new law regulating the right of indigenous
communities to prior consultation on matters affecting their collective rights and quality of life was
approved a month before the new administration took place. This regulation will strengthen the
state‘s mediation capacity in such conflicts to harmonize social and environmental concerns with
business interests. Another source to ease this tension has been the agreement between this
Government and the mining companies to establish a new taxation scheme, allowing the central
Government to capture more resources and redistribute them among the SNGs. The Government
will have to complement these efforts by measures to expand social services and to strengthen the
justice and governance framework. In addition, there is also a possibility that social conflict risk may
arise in connection with Bank operations. The Bank will advice the government to set up grievances
mechanisms in said Bank supported operations.
101. While the risk of corruption affecting WBG projects and portfolio is considered to be
relatively low, a possible lack of political will and government commitment to improve GAC
standards still persists. While the country has undertaken considerable efforts to deal with the
legacy of corruption dating back at least two decades – mostly by way of criminal prosecution and
the recovery of assets – overall governance indicators have not significantly improved since the
1990s as shown by the World Bank Institute (WBI). The WBG will continue to support the GOP
through a lending portfolio with a strong focus on governance and accountability, building and
expanding on improvements achieved in the areas of financial management and the budget process.
102. The lack of continuity of personnel in counterpart agencies can undermine the
Government’s efforts to implement the growth with social inclusion agenda. Facing the lack of
a civil service system, there is always a risk that turnover of public sector employees will result in
implementation delays. The Government has announced the institutionalization of the National
Center of Public Employment in the Ministry of Labor to reorganize several public hiring regimes
and allow for the creation of a civil service system based on meritocracy. The Bank will support the
Government‘s efforts in implementing Peru‘s growth with the social inclusion agenda through
concrete support to MIDIS with lending operations and substantial technical assistance.

33

Annex 1: Peru FY12-FY16 CPS Results Matrix

Development Challenges and
Issues

Outcomes Directly Influenced by the
Program

Milestones

WBG Instruments

Strategic Objective 1: Increase Access and Quality of Social Services for the Poor
Results Area 1.1: A more Inclusive and Effective Social Protection System
National poverty rate is still high (over
30 percent) and trends seem to suggest
that inequality between urban and rural
areas is on the rise. Prospects of further
welfare improvements, particularly in
the rural areas, are small in the absence
of policy action.
High levels of chronic child
malnutrition rates (overall 23.2 percent
in 2010), particularly in rural areas
(40.3 percent in 2009).

 Recommendations on strategic planning, targets,

 MIDIS‘ organizational and

and monitoring and evaluation systems of social
programs fully incorporated in MIDIS.

management rules enacted.
 Agencies, programs or projects are

 Strengthened Juntos CCT Program, as evidenced

by:
 The program is expanded by at least 200
districts;
 A graduation and ―exit‖ strategy for
beneficiaries are designed and have started
implementation
 Improved coverage and quality of the supply of

basic preventive health and nutrition services in
the communities covered under the PAN
including Juntos as evidenced by:
 Children under 36 months with timely and
comprehensive health check-ups (CRED) in
Juntos districts located in the areas of
intervention targeted by the SWAp operation
increased from 10.7 percent (2011) to 40
percent (2014).

transferred from sectors to MIDIS,
including Juntos CCT Program,
Foncodes, and Pronaa.
 The national registry of

beneficiaries of Juntos CCT
Program is functioning.
 SINADIS is launched and

operating as the inter-sectoral
coordinating agency for social
sectors (2012).
 Juntos beneficiaries under 24

months whose CRED information
matches SIS data within 45 days of
attention increased from 30 percent
(2011) to 70 percent (2013).
 Mother beneficiaries with children

under 36 months that have attended
at least one demonstrative session
in the Juntos districts located in the
areas of intervention of the SWAp
increased from 0 percent (2011) to
25 percent (2014).

34

Ongoing Lending:
 Juntos Results for Nutrition Project SWAp
(SIL, FY11-FY16)
 Second Results & Accountability in Social
Sectors (DPL/DDO, FY09-FY13)
Indicative Lending

Social Inclusion DPL (FY13-14)

Social Inclusion TAL (FY13)
Ongoing Trust Funds:
 National Results Based Monitoring,
Evaluation and Information (IDF)
 Participatory intervention model to
improve child nutrition (JSDF)
 Peru: Scaling Up Nutrition (SUN)
 Assessing the Distributional impacts of
Peru's social programs decentralization
(PSIA)
Recent and Planned AAA:
 Recurso V: Understanding accountability:
Can better parental knowledge help
improve basic childhood development
outcomes? (ESW, FY12)
 Support Metropolitan Municipality of
Lima in its Igualdad Strategy (NLTA,
FY12)
 Programmatic Knowledge Service for
Social Protection (ESW, FY13)
 Programmatic Poverty (NLTA, FY12-14)
 Peru Gender and Agency (ESW, FY12)

Results Area 1.2: A more equitable and results-oriented health and education systems
Weak access and low quality of health
care services for the poor: children,
mothers, and population affected by
chronic diseases.

 Increased proportion of institutional births in rural

areas in the 9 poorest regions from 44 percent
(2005) to 80 percent (2015).

 About 450 Maternal Waiting

Homes (MWHs) in operation
throughout the country (2014).
 About 30 percent of health

facilities in rural areas of two
regions are culturally adequate to
provide vertical deliveries (2014).
Peruvian students lag behind their peers
in comparable countries in the region
and worldwide and experience the
deepest inequities in learning outcomes.
Less than a quarter of second grade
students reach sufficiency in reading
and almost half are unable to do basic
math.

 A national strategy for a more efficient and results

oriented education system is fully implemented by
2016.
 Disadvantaged schools (rural, multigrade,

bilingual, and inner city) implemented a studentcentered educational model that promotes active,
autonomous, cooperative learning, engages
families and communities, and is pertinent to their
context by 2016.

 Results-based management systems

for the allocation, execution and
accounting of public resources
(SIGA-MEF) and for monitoring
and evaluation of intervention
strategies (SIGMA-MED)
consolidated for the Strategic
Program for Learning Outcomes
(PELA) activities.
 Inform policy debate on

 An Integrated Education Management Information

System (EMIS) is implemented for acquisition,
processing, dissemination, and reporting data on
students, teachers, schools, system administration,
results and performance by 2016.

educational models that provide
students with better quality, more
engaging learning opportunities,
particularly in the most
disadvantaged context (rural,
multigrade, bilingual, and inner
city).

Ongoing Lending:
 Health Reform Program II (APL, FY09FY15)
Indicative Lending:
 Basic Education Project SWAp, (SIL,
FY13)
 Health Reform Program III (FY14)
Ongoing Trust Funds:
 Strengthening Accountability and ResultsBased Management in Education (SFLAC)
IFC activities:
 Possible financing for private sector
education providers
 Potential IFC direct investment and/or
support for PPP health services programs
MIGA activities:
 Potential operation in health sector

Results Area 1.3: Enhanced Access to Justice Services
The quality of service delivery of the
Judicial system and access to justice is
still inadequate.

 At least 6 legal services centers installed as part of

the legal services network by 2015.

 Legal services demand identified

using data from a survey on legal
demand to be implemented by
2013.

 Number of days required in criminal justice

processes in 3 judicial districts decreased from
835 (2011) to 209 (2015).
 Increased number of consultations in legal aid

centers administered by the Ministry of Justice
from 100,000 (2011) to 250,000 (2015).

 Program to promote and increase

the public awareness on legal rights
implemented (2013).
 Youth anti-violence network

program implemented (2013).

35

Ongoing Lending:
 Justice Services Improvement II (TAL,
FY11-FY16)
Ongoing Trust Fund:
 Enhancing Integrated Legal Strategies for
the Poor (JSDF)

Strategic Objective 2: Connecting the Poor to Services and Markets
Results Area 2.1: Improved Supply of Water and Sanitation Services
Water services coverage is still low,
particularly for the poor population
living in peri-urban and rural areas.

 Number of daily hours water services provided in

the Northern area of Lima increased from 16 to 24
(from 2011 to 2016)
 Annual incidence of water pipe breakages per km

of water supply network and sewerage blockages
per km of sewerage network in the Northern area
of Lima decreased from 0.21 to 0.11 and 8.75 to
4.38, respectively (from 2011 to 2016)

 Number of communities with

households demonstrating adequate
hand-washing practices increased
from 283 to 400 (from 2010 to
2013)

Ongoing Lending:
 National Rural Water Supply and
Sanitation + AF (FY03-FY14)
 Optimization of Lima Water & Sewerage
(SIL, FY11-FY17)
Indicative Lending:
 Optimization of Lima Water and Sewerage
Project Add. Financing (SIL, FY14)

 Increased coverage of potable water and sanitation

services in rural areas, as evidence in:
 Number of rural people having access to
potable water increases from 158,000 (2010) to
256,000 (2013).
 Number of rural people having access to
hygienic sanitation increases from 142,000
(2010) to 242,000 (2013).

Ongoing Trust Funds:
 Water and Sanitation Program (WSP)
IFC Activities:
 Direct investments in private sector water
and sanitation programs, and/or through
subnational administrations where possible
 Advisory services support for PPP
programs water and sanitation programs,
subject to government policies

 Improved systems efficiency in recording users‘

consumption at the local/community level, as
evidence by:
 Number of JASS operating and maintaining
the systems with updated records of users
showing monthly households payments
increased from 157 to 489 (from 2010 to 2013).

Results Area 2.2: Better Transport Infrastructure to Reduce Inequality
Rural populations do not have adequate
integrated transport infrastructure to
access local markets and services
The regional investment and
maintenance interventions on transport
infrastructure do not respond to
strategic planning and budgeting.
Urban transport systems lack efficiency
increasing the day-to-day costs of
transportation.

 Increased portion of secondary road network that

is in good condition.
 Travel time and cost on rural roads is reduced by

improving access to rural households and
entrepreneurs to goods, social services, and
income generating opportunities.
 Follow-up projects are under discussion with the

Government. Concrete outcomes will be included
in the CPS Progress Report.

36

 Rural road lengths of about 3,350

km are rehabilitated; 7,500 km are
maintained periodically; and 2,360
km on non-motorized tracks are
rehabilitated at project standards.
(2013)
 Approximately 150 Provincial Road
Institutes are fully operational.
(2013)
 A number of 24 participatory
regional road plans are approved
and adopted. (2013)
 Regional road lengths of about 1,780

Ongoing Lending:
 Decentralized Rural Transport Project
(SIL, FY07-FY12)
 Regional Transport Decentralization (SIL,
FY06-FY12)
Indicative Lending:
 Decentralized Rural Transport Project
Add. Financing (SIL, FY14)
 Regional Transport Decentralization Add.
Financing (SIL, FY13)
 Bridges and Road Safety (SIL, FY15)

km are rehabilitated; 2,200 km are
maintained periodically; and 2,545
km are under routine maintenance.
(2013)
 At least 670 qualified microenterprises are delivering quality
routine maintenance on rural roads.
(2013)
 About 80 qualified micro-enterprises
are delivering quality routine
maintenance on provincial roads.
(2013)

IFC Activities:
 Advisory services for PPP programs to
expand networks and potential financing
support for port, airport, rail or road
projects

Results Area 2.3: Reliable Energy and Telecommunications
Coverage of electricity services in rural
areas remains low (55 percent) limiting
the expansion of economic activities
Recent years have seen risks of
electricity supply interruptions while
investment in distribution and
development of renewable energy,
including hydropower, has been limited.
The country has one of the lowest
broadband penetration in Latin America
and universal access to
telecommunications services has not
been achieved limiting the opportunities
of using technologies for the poor.

 Increased coverage of electricity services in rural

areas to 85 percent by 2016, as reflected by:
 84,000 new household electricity connections
in rural areas (2015)
 Increased use of electricity for productive uses of

electricity in rural areas as part of social inclusion,
as reflected by:
 MWh/year of electricity for productive uses in
targeted rural areas increased by 8,000 (2015)
 Productive units adopting electricity equipment
increased by 10,000 (2015)

 Improved reliability of rural

distribution and public/private
partnerships in renewable electricity
generation.
 Inform policy discussion on PublicPrivate Participation in rural
telecommunications investment.

Ongoing Lending:
 Rural Electrification (SIL, FY06-FY13)
 Second Rural Electrification (SIL, FY11FY16)
Ongoing Trust Funds
 Peru Rural Electrification Project (GEFIA)
 Support Productive Uses Promotion Peru
(ESMAP)
IFC Activities:
 Potential IFC financing support to
investments in renewable energy

 Increased investment in electricity distribution

and/or renewable energy generation (including
hydropower) projects.
 Outcomes for the Telecommunications sector will

be included in the CPS Progress Report.

Strategic Objective 3: Sustainable Growth and Productivity
Results Area 3.1: Promoting Productivity through Enhanced Labor Skills and SME’s Competitiveness
Unemployment rate among tertiary
graduates is higher than the national
average and about one-third of those
who are employed do not work in their
line of specialization.

 Increased number of higher education programs

and institutions with accreditation (according to
standards) in key disciplines: Education,
Medicine, Other Health Sciences, Law, and
Engineering, at the University level; and Health,
Education, and Technological, at non-university
higher education institutes (IESNU) level.

37

 CONEAU and CONEACES make

first accreditation decisions on
Education programs (2012)
 The Quality Improvement Fund

(FEC) is underway, including a first
round of Improvement Plans under
implementation. (2013)

Indicative Lending:
 Higher Education Quality Assurance (SIL,
FY13)
Ongoing Trust Funds
 Strengthening the national System for
Evaluation and Quality Assurance of
Education (IDF)

Poor institutional environment for
competitiveness affects
disproportionately SMEs (contribute
about 43 percent of GDP). Delays in
time, excessive costs of procedures and
limited access to formal financial
services hampers entrepreneurship and
expansion of small and medium
businesses

 A lending operation in this area is under
preparation. Concrete outcomes will be
included in the CPS Progress Report.

 A comprehensive higher education

information system, including both
―Higher Info‖ and ―Professional
Future Observatory‖ is functioning.
(2015)

 Outcomes related to SME’s competitiveness will

be included in the Progress Report.

 Inform policy debate with

recommendations on enhancing
active labor public programs.
 Support to private sector to increase

Ongoing AAAs:
 SME Finance (NLTA, FY12)
 Financial Sector Work (NLTA, FY12)
 Trade Comp and Growth (ESW, FY12)
IFC activities
 Possible financing for private sector
technical education providers
 Potential financing of SMEs and
development of the securities market
 Local sourcing platform project

access to finance.
 Web-based platform offering expert

advised to SMEs established with
training modules (2013)

Results Area 3.2: Sustainable Rural Development and Water Resources Management
Limited access to financing support and
technical assistance for rural population
reduces productivity growth

The rising lack of water, particularly in
the Pacific Watershed where most of the
population live and activities take place,
is becoming a restriction to the
country's economic development and an
increased source of conflict

 Net value of production of families participating

in the Sierra Rural Development project increased,
as evidenced by:
 Composite index increased by 20 percent for
at least 18,000 families by 2014.

 26,000 families increased the value

of their animals, agriculture
products, & infrastructure.

 River basin management plans

 Better management of water resources and

irrigation systems as evidence by:
 3 River Basin Councils created by project and
operated by 2015, linked to the WRM project
 3 participatory, integrated, basin- scale plans
approved by 2015, linked to the WRM project
 About 750 producers benefited from improved
on-farm irrigation management carried out by
the Sierra Irrigation Project (2016)

Ongoing Lending:
 Sierra Rural Development Project (SIL,
FY07-FY13)
 Sierra Irrigation Project (SIL, FY11-FY16)
 Water Resources Management Project
(SIL, FY10-FY15)

formulated.
 National water quality strategy

designed.

Indicative Lending:
 Sierra Rural Development Project Add.
Financing (SIL, FY14)
 Water Resources Management Project
Add. Financing (SIL, FY14)
 Agricultural Innovation (SIL, FY14)
Ongoing AAAs:
 Irrigation Sector Note (ESW, FY12)
IFC activities
 Potential financing support for private
sector agribusiness investments

38

Results Area 3.3: Strengthening Environmental Management
Institutional capacity governing the
management of environmental issues is
still incomplete. Peru is especially prone
to climate change effects and the poor
population is at greater risk of being
affected.

 Recommendations provided to the Ministry of

Environment to strengthen environment regulation
and institutional capacity of the environmental
authority.
 Ecological representativeness of the country‘s

Protected Areas System expanded and
conservation activities implemented at various
levels within ecological corridors as evidenced by:
 125,000 hectares of natural protected areas
created or expanded between 2012 and 2016.
 3 conservation corridors established between
2012 and 2016.
 5 administration contracts for management of
natural protected areas negotiated between
2012 and 2016.

 Assessment of Peru‘s legal

environmental framework,
planning and organizational
structure of the Ministry of
Environment completed (2012).
 Workshops on environmental

management tools with Consejo
Interregional Amazonico
conducted (2012).
 Use of management tools by

beneficiaries of the Consejo
Interregional Amazonico to reduce
the environmental cost produced by
infrastructure projects in the
Amazon.
 Two pilot projects on adaptation to

climate change, with activities on
the water, agricultural, forestry and
knowledge sectors implemented
(2013).
 Lessons from adaptation to climate

change pilot projects have been
extracted and delivered to Ministry
of Environment to better inform
decision making under the national
adaptation portfolio.
 Key regulation for integrated

management of national, regional,
and local natural protected areas
approved (2014).
 Communication strategy to

promote environmental public
awareness designed and
implemented (2013).
 Participatory management tool to

improve effectiveness in managing
key eco-systems designed (2013).

39

Ongoing Lending:
 First Programmatic Environmental
(DPL/DDO, FY09-FY13)
Indicative AAAs:
 Amazon Management Framework
(NLTA, FY13)
Ongoing Trust Funds:
 Technical Assistance for Strengthening
Institutional Capacity of Ministry of
Environment (IDF)
 Peru Environmental Governance and
Mainstreaming in Key Sectors Project
(SFLAC)
 Strengthening Biodiversity Conservation
through the National Protected Areas
Program (GEF)
 Peru Forest Investment Program (FIP)
 Peru Forest Carbon Partnership Facility
(FCCP)
 Adaptation to the Impact of Rapid Glacier
Retreat in the tropical Andes (GEF,
PHRD)
Indicative Trust Funds:
 Strengthening Sustainable Management of
the Guano Islands, Islets and Capes
National Reserve System Project
IFC activities
 Potential IFC financing support to clean
energy private sector initiatives

Results Area 3.4: Improving Disaster Risk Management and Urban Planning
Peru ranks 20th among the world's
economies most vulnerable to multiple
hazards. The country lacks a
comprehensive disaster risk
management strategy at the national
level and local governments' capacity to
address disaster risk and implement
activities to reduce vulnerability needs
to be strengthened.

 Policy and regulation framework for safe public

health and education infrastructure approved (by
Ministry of Health and Ministry of Education,
respectively) and consolidated. (2013)
 Investment projects pipeline generated for

structural reinforcement of public education and
health infrastructure in Metropolitan Lima. (2014)

 Needs assessment conducted on

Ongoing Lending:
 CAT DDO (FY11-FY14)

reducing seismic vulnerability in
public education and health
infrastructure in Metropolitan
Lima. (2013)

Indicative Lending:
 Cusco Regional Development ProjectPRODER (SIL, FY13)

 Inform policy debate on disaster

risk reduction, risk financing and
reconstruction at national and subnational government levels.

Ongoing Trust Funds:
 Integration of Disaster Risk Information in
Peru's Planning System (IDF)
 Integration of Disaster Risk in Peru Spatial
Information System (CAPRA)

Strategic Objective 4: Improved Public Sector Performance for Greater Inclusion
Results Area 4.1: Improved Public Sector Management
National tax collection remains
relatively low in Peru
Peru has been making an effort to
introduce results-based budgeting with
mixed results. National government
needs to continue strengthening key
public sector areas in order to improve
public expenditure management both at
national and sub-national level.

 Enhanced fiscal risk and debt management at the

Ministry of Finance (2016).
 Improved performance-based management as

evidenced by:
 The implementation of sub-national roll-out
of performance based management
instruments.
 The national procurement system is
automatically linked to SIAF, thereby
allowing a timely reporting and monitoring of
execution rates of sub-national public
investment expenditures.
 Improved administrative procedures to speed up

public investment, as evidenced by:
 Improved procedures for completing technical
security inspections in three sub-national
governments and the National Institute for
Civil Defense (INDECI).
 Improved procedures to create and operate
tourism related businesses in Cusco, as
evidenced by a decrease in the number of days
to comply with business regulatory processes
at the sub-national government of Cusco.

40

 Signing of a strategy or agenda for

Ongoing Lending:
 Second Programmatic Fiscal Management
& Competitiveness (DPL/DDO, FY09FY15)

implementing Performance
Informed Budgeting, including
institutional and strategic programs.
Introduction of performance
measures for the 2013 Budget.
 Planning platforms to separate and

coordinate inputs of different levels
of government to public services
have been established and are being
used. Elaboration of frameworks for
service delivery agreement.
 Develop a new risk classification

system for technical security
inspections.
 Design and implement a technology

tool to streamline the inspection
procedures.



Indicative Lending:
Performance Management and Fiscal DPL
I & II (FY13 and 14 respectively)
Ongoing Trust Funds:
 Improving the Quality and Efficiency of
Public Expenditure Management (IDF)
 Strategy for the Implementation of Highlevel Procurement Training Program (IDF)
 Improving Prevention, Oversight and
Accountability to Increase Transparency
and Curb Corruption in Peru (GPF)
 Operationalizing open data access in Peru
and improving quality, relevance and
accessibility of Peru's national statistics
system (TFSCB)

 Corruption risk maps are identified

for at least three sector or
government institutions by 2013.

Ongoing/ Indicative AAAs:
 Programmatic Governance &
Governability (NLTA, FY12-14)

 Peru Pension Reform (NLTA, FY13)

 Policy dialogue with the Government is ongoing.

Concrete outcomes in this area will be included in
the CPS Progress Report.

IFC activities
 Improving technical security inspections
project under TRAMIFACIL
 Improved investment climate for tourism
in Cusco.
 Trade Logistics project

Results Area 4.2: Strengthening Sub-national Management Capacities
Spending capacity of sub-national
governments needs to be strengthened
to increase the efficiency of public
investment design and implementation

 Improved public investment execution in sub-

national governments as evidenced by:
 30 municipalities improved public investment
execution (2015).
 Sub-national pilots to improve public
investment execution in Apurimac, Ayacucho
and Huancavelica completed (2013).
 Key recommendations from Action Plans are

implemented to improve procurement systems,
human resources, financial management or
revenues management at selected sub-national
governments.
 Policy dialogue with the Government is ongoing.

Concrete outcomes in this area will be included in
the CPS Progress Report.

41

 30 municipalities received technical

assistance on effective investment
management (2013).
 Local institutions in 30

municipalities received technical
assistance to promote greater
accountability (2013).
 Rapid Assessment and Action Plans

(RAAPs) are completed for at least 3
sub-national governments.

Ongoing Trust Funds:
 On-site Expert Support to Improve the
Implementation of Sub-national Public
Investments in the regions of Apurimac,
Ayacucho, and Huancavelica (SFLAC)
IFC activities
 Promoting greater accountability and good
governance at the local level (MIM Peru
project)
 Supporting the improvement of municipal
investment (MRI Peru project)

Annex 2: PERU CPS COMPLETION REPORT
FY07 – FY11
1.
This report is a self-evaluation by the World Bank (WB) of the experience in
implementing the World Bank Group (WBG) Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) in the
Republic of Peru. The main purposes of the report are three-fold: (i) To review the
performance of the CPS program in terms of the progress achieved in furthering country
development goals; (ii) To assess the performance of the World Bank in delivering the CPS
program; and (iii) To derive lessons from the implementation of the CPS program that could
help guide the design and implementation of the new CPS for FY12-FY16.
2.
The joint Bank - International Finance Corporation (IFC) report is based on an
extensive review of Bank project documents, analytical work and evaluations of specific
programs undertaken by International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD),
IFC, Government, and other external partners during the CPS period. It is also informed by
interviews with several government officials (from ministries and other public sector
institutions), relevant civil society representatives, external partners and Bank staff. Finally,
given the significant overlap with the CPS period, key analysis and conclusions of Independent
Evaluation Group‘s (IEG) Peru Country Program Evaluation 2003-2009 were taken into
account in considering developments over the first half of the FY07-FY11 CPS. The overall
WBG performance for the CPS period of FY07-11 was found to be satisfactory across the
various pillars and clusters, as discussed in the following sections.
I.

PROGRESS TOWARDS ACHIEVING COUNTRY GOALS

3.
Peru achieved good progress over the period of the CPS (2007-mid 2011) on the three
overarching objectives of its broad development agenda: (i) faster, more diversified and
sustainable economic growth, (ii) social development, and (iii) strengthening of public
institutions. Building on the efforts of the previous administration to instill sound
macroeconomic management, the Garcia Administration, which took office in mid-2006 for a
five-year term, continued to foster Peru‘s transformation to an open, market-oriented and more
diversified economy through maintenance of prudent macroeconomic policies and appropriate
policy reforms. In the run-up to the global crisis of 2009, Peru experienced a rapid rise in real
GDP growth -from an already-high 6.4 percent in 2005 to 9.8 percent by 2008 – fueled both by
rising commodity prices and buoyant private sector-led domestic demand. Private investment
rose from 15 to 22 percent of GDP between 2005 and 2008 and annual foreign direct
investment (FDI) flows from 3.2 to 5 percent of GDP over the same period. Strong capital
inflows built-up foreign reserves and placed downward pressure on the exchange rate.
4.
Sound macro policies during the boom years afforded fiscal space for appropriate
counter-cyclical measures. In September 2008, following the onset of the global crisis,
uncertainty about the short-term outlook soared, private investment all but halted and the weak
international market negatively affected exports. GDP growth dropped from double digits in
the first three quarters of 2008 to 6.5 percent for the last quarter and averaged just 0.9 percent in
2009. In response, Government (at end-2008) launched a two-year, US$4.8 billion (3.5 percent
of GDP) economic stimulus plan, focused on increased public spending in areas congruent with
medium-term priorities (such as infrastructure). In parallel, the Central Bank eased monetary
policy, bringing its discount rate to 1.25 percent by August 2009, for a cumulative easing of
525 basis points from the beginning of 2009. These measures were followed by a rebound in
42

private investment and domestic demand, in turn, enabling the achievement of a growth rate of
8.8 percent in 2010. With the recovery underway, authorities began to control the pace of
public spending as well as to raise interest rates. A lower public external debt and degree of
dollarization reduced further vulnerabilities. As a result of the adoption of, and adherence to, a
comprehensive debt management strategy, Peru was able to lower the proportion of foreign
currency-denominated public debt, extend the maturity of public debt overall and smooth out its
debt service profile. Bond spreads declined and the country achieved investment grade ratings
for sovereign debt by Fitch, Moody‘s and Standard and Poors (S&P).
5.
Peru also made notable progress in creating a hospitable investment climate for
private business and ensuring sustainable growth through greater attention to environmental
regulation and governance. The Doing Business (DB) rankings of Peru rose consistently over
the CPS period, going from 68th out of 175 countries to 36th out of 183 between 2006 and 2010;
the country was ranked among the top ten reformers worldwide in the 2011 DB Report.
Progress across the board included simplification of requirements associated with business
start-up19, securing of construction permits, property registration and foreign trade. The
negotiation and ratification of Free Trade Agreements (FTAs) with important trading partners
(e.g., FTAs were concluded with the US, MERCOSUR, China, Singapore and others) and
significant investments in infrastructure (e.g., Lima Metropolitano, PLNG pipeline, Iniciativa
para la Integración de la Infraestructura Regional Suramericana - IIRSA) improved the
environment for investment and business growth. In parallel, recognizing that unfettered
growth can aggravate Peru‘s already-growing environmental challenges, Government began to
put in place an appropriate policy, legal and institutional framework for environmental
management and biodiversity conservation. Moreover, environmental sustainability criteria
were successfully mainstreamed in the development agendas of key sectors including mining,
fisheries, urban transport and energy.
6.
Notable social gains included a drop in poverty and extreme poverty rates - from 48.7
and 17.4 percent of the population to 31.3 and 9.8 percent respectively between 2005 and
2010 -- but spatial disparities still persist. The measured drop in Peru‘s poverty rates is
remarkable in view of the high food price inflation and economic slowdown in 2009. Access to
basic infrastructure, including safe water, sanitation and electricity improved, as did social
services. Education, health and nutrition outcomes also registered gains over the CPS period.
A concerted effort to establish national goals for education, including clarification of standards
and establishment of a strong accountability system, paid important dividends with respect to
student achievement in reading and mathematics in the early grades. Expansion of health
insurance increased the use of health care services and there were steady reductions in chronic
malnutrition among children under five years old. However, despite these improvements and a
concerted effort to focus basic infrastructure and social programs in the poorest areas,
substantial spatial differences in poverty and welfare persist. Rural areas generally lag behind
urban ones on nearly all welfare indicators, and there are major disparities between the betteroff Coastal region (inhabited by 63 percent of the population) and the poorer Amazon (9
percent) and Sierra (28 percent) regions.

19

The 2010 Doing Business report showed that starting a business took 9 procedures and 41 days, while in 2005, it took
10 procedures and 98 days. The reforms to achieve these reductions were implemented under the IFC project National
Plan Peru.

43

7.
While Peru’s efforts to modernize public sector institutions and management
processes also met with some success, there is still some way to go. A main focus of the
Government‘s efforts in public sector management (PSM) over the CPS period was a two-track
initiative to increase the effectiveness of ongoing decentralization efforts with the aim of
improving key services. This involved: (i) continuing to strengthen core central control
processes while ensuring their adaptability to a more decentralized environment; and (ii)
building the capacity of sub-national governments (SNGs) to deliver services in an efficient and
accountable manner. Progress over the past few years include – inter alia - introduction of
participatory budgeting, devolution of greater authority for investment projects to SNGs and
organizational reforms at the SNG level. Still, there are continuing problems with effective
budget execution, continued SNG capacity constraints to plan and implement projects and
considerable variability in the delivery of services.
II.

CPS DESIGN AND PROGRAM PERFORMANCE

8.
The CPS was well aligned both with the Peruvian political cycle and with the
priorities of the incoming Garcia administration. The preparation by the Bank of a set of
Policy Notes towards the end of the previous (Toledo) administration set the stage for the CPS
by enabling a broad dialogue with political parties, civil society groups and external partners on
Peru‘s needs and the potential role of the World Bank Group in helping to address development
challenges. The high degree of congruence between the diagnosis and recommendations
contained in the Policy Notes and the priorities identified by the new Peruvian Government in
turn helped establish a productive dialogue from the outset and paved the way for the smooth
preparation of the CPS which was presented to the Bank‘s Board in early 2007, about six
months into President Garcia‘s five-year term.
9.
The CPS program identified a flexible lending program within an indicative base
lending envelope of up to $3.5 billion over the five-year CPS period; the program covered a
wide range of sectors, but activities within each sector were well-defined and focused in areas
where the Bank could add value. CPS activities were organized into the three main pillars
drawn from the Government‘s agenda and structured within these pillars around six clusters. 20
An indicative program of lending operations was identified within each of the clusters but
Analytic and Advisory Activities (AAA) and Non-Lending Technical Assistance (NLTA) were
not specifically defined, leaving room for just-in-time response to Government priorities and
as-needed analytical underpinning for lending operations. CPS implementation was clearly
helped by the Government‘s strong commitment to its goals, as well as by focusing on
outcomes while being flexible on instruments. The partners faced several implementation
challenges, of which the impact of the 2008/2009 global slowdown was the most important.
10.
By and large, CPS performance was satisfactory across each of its pillars and
clusters, with outcomes in some areas surpassing original expectations while delays were
experienced in a few others. The CPS results matrix identified expected outcomes with respect
to each of the clusters, which, as partially modified in the 2009 CPS Progress Report, form the
basis for much of the evaluation contained in the remainder of this report. It should be noted
that while most outcomes were well defined and measurable, a few called for data that is not
20

(i)Maintaining macro-economic stability and reducing vulnerabilities; (ii)Accelerating growth and widening
its base; (iii) Making growth more environmentally sustainable; (iv) Meeting basic needs; (v) Promoting and
developing a new social contract in education, health and nutrition and (vi) Modernizing state institutions

44

regularly collected by any government (or other) agency making them hard to evaluate in some
instances. In addition, in a few cases, the outcome indicator chosen did not appear to have a
clear link to the WBG instruments implemented over the CPS period. Progress on outcomes is
discussed in more detail below and summarized in the matrix (Table 1).
PILLAR I: ECONOMIC GROWTH
Cluster 1.1: Maintaining macroeconomic stability and reducing vulnerabilities (4 outcomes:
all achieved)
11.
The CPS program fully achieved, and sometimes even exceeded, the key outcomes
identified under this cluster. When upgrading Peru to investment grade in 2010 all rating
agencies noted major improvements in fiscal management. The Bank‘s Fiscal Management and
Competitiveness (FM&C) Development Policy Loan (DPL) I-IV series and the related
analytical work (Policy Notes, Public Financial Management Assessment, Recent Economic
Developments in Infrastructure - REDI, PER, Informality, Labor, and Decentralization
Economic and Sector Work - ESW, Tax Compliance Surveys, OECD-DAC Procurement Study
- Public Expenditure & Financial Accountability - PEFA - and others) contributed directly to
sound fiscal management and, in particular, to: (i) the design of the anti-cyclical fiscal stimulus
to manage the impact of the global crisis; (ii) increased transparency of fiscal policy, budget
management and public accounts; and (iii) advances in e-government, especially eprocurement. Noteworthy was the contribution of the FM&C DPL series and the Bank‘s close
ongoing dialogue with Peruvian officials to the appropriate design of the 2009-2010 fiscal
stimulus packages. By tilting the composition of the fiscal stimulus package towards
investment expenditures, Peru avoided the risk that the additional expenditures would become
entrenched. In addition, the package was accompanied by measures to broaden the tax base,
particularly at the municipal level, to facilitate fiscal consolidation. Prudent fiscal management
over the CPS period helped keep inflation within the targeted range. The cumulative inflation –
excluding food and fuel -- for 2007-2011 is about 10.7 percent, nearly 2 percent below the
outcome (12.5 percent) foreseen in the CPS.
12.
Peru reduced the vulnerability of the economic by lowering the relative weight of its
public debt and the dollarization of its financial sector. Strong revenue growth, prudent fiscal
management and implementation of an active debt management strategy (the latter two
supported by Bank lending and AAA, as noted in paragraph 10) combined to reduce Peru‘s
public debt burden from 38 percent of GDP in 2006 to 22.7 percent in 2010, surpassing CPS
goals, which had aimed for a reduction to 26 percent in the absence of external shocks and to 32
percent in the event of a major shock such as the 2009 global crisis. A further decline in the
debt to GDP ratio in 2009 is expected. In addition, the structure of the public debt improved by
(a) increasing the portion held in domestic currency and under fixed interest rate and (b)
smoothing of repayment obligations, helped inter alia by the flexible terms of IBRD loans. The
high dollarization of the economy--another source of vulnerability--was reduced spurred at least
in part by Peru‘s enhanced macro stability and the strengthening of the Nuevo Sol. Banking
deposits denominated in US dollars fell to 47 percent in 2010 from about 65 percent in 2007
and US dollar bank loans to the private sector fell from 70 percent in 2007 to 52 percent by
2010. Though not identified as a CPS outcome, the Catastrophic Risk Deferred Drawdown
Option (DDO) (FY11) has also helped Peru reduce fiscal vulnerabilities in light of the frequent
natural disasters to which the country is subject because of its exposure to earthquakes and the
El Niño phenomenon.
45

Cluster1. 2: Accelerating growth and broadening its base (7 outcomes: 4 achieved, 1 partially
achieved, 1 not achieved, 1 non-observable)
13.
Peru, with support from various CPS instruments, made important strides towards an
improved business environment. The 2011 Doing Business rankings (DBR), ranked Peru 36th
out of 183 countries, considerably higher than its ranking of 68 th of 175 countries at the start of
the CPS period (2007) and the expected ranking of the CPS--55th by 2011. The sustained
attention of the authorities to the DBR annual reports incentivized reforms, which the IFC
supported through Tramifacil TA. The TA promoted public-private dialogue to foster and
coordinate efforts at simplifying municipal business regulations across Peru. So far Tramifacil
has assisted over 170 municipalities and has supported Congress in passing two national laws
simplifying procedures to obtain operating licenses and construction permits. The FM&C DPL
series and related analysis and dialogue also supported improvements in competitiveness both
within and beyond the areas covered by DBR, including the fiscal and debt policy consolidation
already mentioned and the sustainable expansion of credit.
14.
Investment in infrastructure expanded, through both public means and promotion of
private investment. Central government spending on infrastructure investment nearly tripled
from about 1.7 percent of GDP in 2006 to 5.7 in 2010, far exceeding the 3 percent target
envisaged under the CPS. The Bank and IFC played complementary roles in moving this
objective forward. The Bank, through its dialogue on growth and fiscal priorities as well as
targeted analytical work such as the REDI, the National Gas Strategy and the Small
Hydropower NLTA, worked with the Government to open space for public investment in
infrastructure and to define the policy framework for sound use of Private Public Partnership
(PPP) approaches. In addition, a number of CPS project interventions -- including for
decentralized transport at the regional level and in rural areas, Lima urban transport, irrigation,
water and sanitation, rural electrification and others -- supported infrastructure investment and
helped introduce a greater role for private actors where appropriate. IFC, in turn, invested
funds directly with the private sector on a number of transport projects through private
concessions in roads, air transport and railways. Some of the most relevant Projects financed
by IFC include a Guarantee that complemented the IBRD Loan to the Municipality of Lima for
the construction of the Bus Rapid Transit System, the Norvial, the Lima Airport Partners and
the FTSA/Perurail concessions that generate approximately 67.5 million per annum in revenues
to the Government and approximately 1000 jobs. IFC also made major investments in the
energy sector, including a US$300 million participation in Peru LNG, a US$4 billion liquefied
natural gas export project, a US$250 million loan to Cheves, a first IFC hydroelectrical project
finance in the country, and US$ 50 million in Calidda, a gas distribution company, generating
US$ 4.2 in tax revenues while providing initially 283 jobs.
15.
Peru’s growth strategy sought to put in place the skilled human capital required to
spur innovation and technological adaptation. The CPS emphasized increasing the numbers
of tertiary graduates with skills in science and technology. Available survey data show that
there has been a 3-4 percent increase in the total numbers of individuals aged 25-30 years with
tertiary education (from 20.2 percent in 2005 to 24.5 percent in 2009), suggesting
commensurate increases in enrollments in science, technology and related disciplines. The
Bank did not play a large role in this area except through its ongoing dialogue with the
Government on competitiveness, education and innovation. A tertiary education project
originally planned for FY10, is in its final stage of preparation. IFC provided a partial credit
guarantee (PCG) for a first time ever private university bond issue in Peru to the largest private
46

university, Universidad San Martin de Porres, allowing it to access the capital markets to invest
the proceeds in campuses outside of Lima, contributing in excess of 4,000 jobs and supporting
more than 32,000 students.
16.
The emphasis in the CPS on non-traditional exports (mainly the agribusiness sector)
aimed at promoting deeper economic integration of poorer geographic regions, especially the
neglected Sierra region. The CPS program effort to promote deeper integration by
encouraging location of new exporting firms in developing regions was partially achieved. By
early 2011, there were 31 new firms operating in the identified regions versus a CPS target of
39. CPS operations such as the Agriculture Research and Extension II project, the Irrigation
Sub-sector Investment Program and the Sierra Rural Development Project were instrumental in
promoting growth in agricultural productivity and agribusiness through increasing the role of
the private sector (water users‘ associations, establishment of competitive grant mechanisms
and use of Community Driven Development - CDD approaches) and by helping to increase
coordination among disparate Ministry of Agriculture programs. IFC invested in Sociedad
Agricola Viru, the largest exporter of canned produce in Peru, thus reaching more than 260
farmers and sustaining above 6,000 farming jobs and maintained investments in Agrokasa,
among the largest fresh produce exporter in Peru, contributing in excess of 3,000 farming jobs.
However, given the relatively small size of these operations, the Bank Group‘s role was limited
in driving the increase in the value of non-traditional exports from US$6.3 billion in 2007 to
US$7.6 billion in 2010 –an increase of about 5 percent per year.
17.
The level of economic informality decreased during the CPS period. The CPS
foresaw a reduction of the informality rate by 9 percentage points from 60 to 51 percent over
the CPS period. Based on the criterion of workers‘ access to health or social security coverage,
the CPS outcome indicator has been exceeded – by end-2009 about 60 percent of workers were
working formally, i.e., with social protection coverage. The Bank supported formalization
through AAA on Informality (FY07 and FY08) and Skills and Labor Policies for the Poor
(FY10) as well as the FM&C DPL series, the Results and Accountability in the Social Sectors
(REACT) DPL series (which, inter alia, extended health insurance coverage). The IFC support
for microfinance initially contributed to the transformation of a number of Micro Finance
Institutions into regulated deposit-taking entities; and, later to the rapid consolidation of the
sector extending reach and product diversification.
18.
The CPS supported tourism development as a means to help create semi-and lowskilled jobs. IFC invested in the Peru Orient Express Hotels holding hotels in Lima, Cusco, the
Sacred Valley, Machu Picchu, and Colca Valley providing more than 500 direct jobs and
having local goods and services procurement of more than US$ 12 million p.a., and also in
Inkaterra, an eco-tourism lodge in the Amazon region, and in infrastructure (Lima Airport and a
railroad concession linking Cusco and Machu Picchu and Puno). These interventions helped
develop a high-end tourism market, pioneer ecotourism and increase direct employment. The
Bank‘s ongoing investment in the Vilcanota Valley Project (FY04) performed poorly until
2009, when it was restructured to transfer partial responsibility for implementation to the
Government of Cusco to enable better inter-sectoral collaboration at the sub-national level. A
Tourism Infrastructure project, proposed for FY10 was dropped responding to the
Government‘s stand that tourism should largely be left to the private sector. Overall, WBG
interventions were relatively narrow and complementary of broader support for the sector
provided by Inter-American Development Bank (IADB), the United States Agency
International Development (USAID) and other external partners. Therefore, the link between
47

the WBG‘s activities and the achievement of the results framework goal of increasing annual
tourist visitors from 1.3 million annually to 2 million by 2011 is relatively weak.
Cluster 1.3: Making growth sustainable (7 outcomes: 6 achieved, 1 partially achieved)
19.
Solid progress was made in laying the institutional and regulatory framework for
environmental governance. A comprehensive Country Environmental Assessment (FY06) and
focused studies on fisheries and mining provided a sound analytical basis for improving
environmental governance. A programmatic Environmental DPL series comprising three loans
in each of FY08, FY09 and FY11 helped implement the recommendations from this AAA. An
achievement was the establishment, in 2008, of the Office of Evaluation and Environmental
Enforcement (OEFA) with responsibility for regularly monitoring the implementation of
environmental commitments of licensed businesses. OEFA has developed technical and legal
criteria for undertaking post-licensing monitoring and is now fully operational. Similarly, to
address longstanding institutional weaknesses in protected area management and biodiversity
conservation, an autonomous National Service of Protected Areas (Servicio Nacional de Areas
Naturales Protegicas por el Estado - SERNANP) was established with a clear mandate (and the
staff and financial resources) to implement the Natural Protected Areas action plan, including
the right to issue sanctions against violators and to promote private sector financing and
management of NPAs. In addition, the Bank provided substantial support for biodiversity
conservation through two Global Environment Facility (GEF) operations -- the Participatory
Management of Protected Areas GEF project that closed in 2010 and the on-going GEF project
for Strengthening Biodiversity Conservation through the National Protected Areas Program.
20.
The bases have been set for improved management of the urban environment, with a
focus on the five largest and most polluted cities – namely Lima-Callao, La Oroya, Arequipa,
Chimbote and Ilo. The Peruvian Government, with support from the DPL program, developed
and approved environmental quality standards, including maximum permissible emission
levels, for air and water. Additionally, it initiated public disclosure of the air and water quality
monitoring data beginning with Lima and La Oroya. Beyond improving transparency, Lima
and La Oroya made progress in the preparation of contingency action plans (or inclusion of
contingency actions in existing Clean Air Action Plans) in the event that pollution levels exceed
air quality standards. IFC, in turn, contributed to raising awareness about climate change by
organizing a first ever Climate Change Event attended by over 200 participants and focusing on
sustainable energy, water, land use and forestry and climate related insurance products.
21.
Actions have been taken to mainstream the principles of sustainable development in
three key sectors, namely mining, fisheries and urban transport. The Government mandated
application of an up-to date methodology (developed under a Peruvian-Canadian cooperation
program) for the identification and prioritization of all mining environmental legacies. To date,
5,500 mining legacies have been identified, of which 119 have been prioritized as demanding
immediate attention. The Government also approved norms to regulate and promote
participatory environmental monitoring and surveillance in mining. Up to March 2011, about
40 initiatives of environmental participatory monitoring were under execution – about 1/3rd
short of the 60 initiatives that had been targeted in the results framework. The CPS also
contributed to reduce the environmental pressures facing Peru‘s fisheries sector. As part of the
DPL supported program, the Government in December 2008 adopted a decree (now under
implementation) that regulates anchoveta fishing by establishing maximum catch limits by
vessel; also, the decree creates a social compensation fund to reduce impact on workers through
48

financing early retirement, training and incentives to move to new economic activities. Finally,
the CPS sought to improve air quality in urban areas through better regulation of vehicle
inspection and maintenance systems implemented in Lima and other cities, promotion and
implementation of vehicle conversion to natural gas and supply of diesel with 50 ppm of
sulphur content in Lima and Callao since January 2010.
PILLAR II: SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT
Cluster 2.1: Meeting Basic Needs (3 outcomes: all achieved)
22.
Marked progress was recorded in meeting the population’s basic needs over the CPS
period. By 2010, the Index of Unmet Basic Needs, representing the proportion of households
facing a deficiency in at least one of these 5 basic services, stood at 26 percent for the Peruvian
population as a whole and at 47 percent for the rural population – substantially surpassing CPS
targets of 36 and 62 percent, respectively. Steady economic growth and Government
investment in basic (especially rural) infrastructure drove these improvements.
The
contribution of the Bank came through the National Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Project
and Additional Financing, Programa Nacional de Agua y Saneamiento Rural (PRONASAR)
(FY03 and FY11), and Rural Electrification (FY06), and the REACT DPL series (FY07, FY09,
and FY11) that focused on social services. Performance in water and sanitation exceeded
targets: data from a recent Health and Demographic survey indicates that by 2010, 91.5 percent
of households had access to treated water and 85.3 percent had basic sanitation facilities.
Furthermore, the PRONASAR project helped improve rural water supply and sanitation by
removing an existing urban bias from financing policies and technical standards. Regarding
rural electrification, the Ministry of Energy and Mines reports that 55 percent of rural
households had access to electricity in 2010 versus only 30 percent at the start of the CPS
period. The support of the Bank through the Rural Electrification Project also helped establish
a model for rural electrification, co-financed with the electricity distribution companies, an
official tariff for regulated electricity service with solar photovoltaic systems, and successfully
pioneered promotion of productive uses of electricity in Peru.
Cluster 2.2: Developing a new social contract in education, health and nutrition (4 outcomes:
2 achieved, 2 partially achieved.)
23.
A stronger focus on results and higher accountability characterize service delivery in
education, health, and nutrition. The Bank‘s programmatic analytical work, Recurso, and the
REACT DPL series were key factors in helping Government: (i) define standards and set goals
for the outcomes that families should expect from social services, (ii) develop robust
monitoring systems, and (iii) provide individualized data for parents on the learning, health and
nutrition status of their children. These actions to stimulate informed demand, together with
improvements on the supply side, had important outcome impacts.
24.
Education quality improved, albeit at a slower pace than had been targeted in CPS.
The National Census for 2nd grade shows a commendable improvement in education test scores
in 2010 compared with those reported in 2007. The proportion of children lagging below level
1 declined from 30 and 57 percent respectively in reading and math to 24 and 53 percent within
three years. Over the same period, the proportion of students reaching level 2 increased from
16 and 7 percent in reading and math to 29 and 14 respectively. These impressive outcomes
suggest that the original goals included in the CPS may have been overly ambitious.
49

25.
Coverage of health care increased, especially for the poor and rural population. The
proportion of institutional births (IB), a tracer indicator for health services overall, rose steadily
at an average annual rate of 3.4 percent (2.5 percent urban and 4 percent rural). By mid-2010,
IB coverage reached 58 percent for rural areas as a whole and 72 percent in the 10 poorest
regions, which were the focus of Government efforts. Moreover, Health Insurance System
(Seguro Integral de Salud - SIS) enrolments had increased by over 50 percent by 2008 in the ten
poorest regions and by a similar percentage when measured nationwide. Increased SIS
spending, by 42 percent in real terms, financed the growing coverage and a reformulation of the
benefit plan to expand the list of priority interventions (Listado Priorizado de Intervenciones en
Salud, LPIS) through a new Universal Health Insurance (AUS) law, passed in 2009. The Bank
provided continuous support for this process. IFC invested US$20 million in Grupo Salud, a
first time private sector health investment in Peru that is to become a premier oncology and
cardiology center with near in 200 beds and with a broad reach through its related Oncosalud
health insurance company.
26.
After 10 years of stagnation, nutrition in Peru is improving. The drivers of these
improvements include more comprehensive health registration systems, the dissemination of
nutritional indicators through social marketing, support for nutrition counseling by health
workers, stronger integration of nutrition initiatives through the CRECER strategy and the
creation of the Articulated Nutrition Program, a strategic program of the Result Based
Budgeting Initiative which aims at concentrating efforts (budgetary, logistical, and
organizational) in those regions with the highest malnutrition rates. The drop in chronic
malnutrition by 5 percentage points over the CPS period was in line with the Government‘s
target of a ―5-point reduction in 5 years‖. Bank support came through the REACT DPL series
and through the Juntos for Nutrition NLTA. Delays in the preparation the complementary
Juntos Nutrition Results project, due to concerns with the proposed inclusion of softinvestments, motivated a redesign towards a results based Sector Wide Approach Project
(SWAP) that was approved in FY11 (the original proposed date was FY07). This SWAP is the
first operation of its kind in the country and is expected to open doors to a new lending
modality in Peru, removing hurdles for preparation of social sector lending. Already, Ministerio
de Economia y Finanzas (MEF) has led modifications of the Indebtedness law and the Fiscal
Balance law to formally introduce the new figure of "Indebtedness for Results"
(Endeudamiento por Cumplimiento de Metas).
27.
Comprehensive sector work helped develop the gender agenda even if it was not
mentioned explicitly by the CPS. First, women have been active participants in community
organizations, in road maintenance enterprises (rehabilitation of rural roads Provias), in
economic productive associations (rural development of the Sierra “Aliados”), in the
administration of water users JASS (Pronasar) and JUNTAS de Agua (Sierra Irrigation).
Second, project implementation units have developed tools for gender equity tracking such as
MASC in the Sierra project, or a checking list in PRONASAR, or a registration of results (rural
Provias). Third, the projects have developed the registration on good practices, in Incagro they
developed a video and brochures for dissemination; publications of a training module (Provias
rural); a training course on line (Sierra “Aliados”).
PILLAR 3: MODERNIZATION OF INSTITUTIONS
Cluster 3.1: Modernizing state institutions (4 outcomes: 3 achieved, 1 non-observable)

50

28.
The Government modified its decentralization model to both better reflect the
country’s diversity and to accommodate the variety in institutional capacity at sub-national
levels. The Bank‘s Fiscal Decentralization TA project, the FM&C DPL series and the REACT
DPL series supported the fine-tuning of the decentralization approach, beginning with the
decision in 2007 to cease formally accrediting SNGs as the basis for transferring resources and
responsibilities. Instead, the focus shifted to training in standards for municipal borrowing,
budget planning and execution and M&E. Results from these efforts include: (i) extension of
the Integrated Financial Administration System (Sistema Integrado de Administración
Financiera - SIAF) to virtually all municipalities (about 1800) enabling uniform standards and
on-line, and real time monitoring of local government contracts and disbursements; (ii) training
of over 80 percent of SNGs on public financing forecasts, sub-national borrowing and strategic
debt management; and (iii) design and implementation of incentives and mechanisms to
increase the efficiency of public expenditures.
29.
IFC partnered with Canadian International Development Agency (CIDA), USAID
and Department for International Development (DFID) to implement the Canon
Management and the Improving Municipal Investment – Mejorando la Inversion Municipal
(MIM) Peru programs in five regions. Starting December 2007, the Canon Management
Program helped local governments improve their capacity to invest mining, oil and gas royalties
for their development. An on-line platform, “Municipio al Día”, now provides information and
real-time support to improve the skills and management practices of municipal officers and
authorities. As a result, 1,115 municipalities had access to information, and 15,883 inquiries
from local officials were resolved. The MIM Peru is enabling communities and civil society
organizations to exercise their rights in ensuring that authorities be responsive and accountable
in their use of royalties. As a result, 163,174 people were empowered with improved
understanding of royalties and municipal investment; 15 out of 18 municipalities showed
increased accountability (80 percent success rate); and, access to information on royalties
increased from 37.4 percent to 50.0 percent.
30.
Introduction of Results Based Budgeting (RBB) has been one of the most relevant
and innovative public policy reforms undertaken during the CPS period. Bank support came
through the Governance and Governability NLTA, the Fiscal Decentralization TA project and
the FM&C and REACT DPL series among others. In 2008, RBB began as a pilot in five
strategic programs. Since then, it was expanded, step-wise, to nine programs in 2009, 15 in
2010 and 24 for 2011. RBB is now an integral part of the budget cycle in Peru. Monitoring
information identifies gaps and results bottlenecks as the basis for designing actions to
overcome obstacles to better results. The MEF is currently reviewing and revising the RBB
methodology with the aim of streamlining the RBB process before mainstreaming it throughout
the national budget. A complementary initiative has been the implementation of participatory
budgeting monitoring in all municipalities and regions, and increasing use of participatory
budget planning. IFC provided technical assistance support to 18 SNGs located in the areas of
influence of mining projects, including capacity building for participatory budgeting oversight
committees to effectively monitor the advances of the agreements made in the local
participatory budgeting processes and monitoring. However, while participatory budget
monitoring is universal, a recent evaluation, carried out by the Bank at Government‘s request,
found that only about 36 percent of the budgets are allocated through the participatory process.
31.
The ongoing Justice Services Improvement Project (FY04) has been assisting the
reform of the justice system, long perceived by users as one of the country's weakest and least
51

responsive group of institutions. After a slow beginning, the project helped in generating
reform momentum aided by strong commitment in both the executive and judicial branches to
moving beyond the politically motivated reforms between 1992 and 2000. The project design
focused on well-defined, relatively narrow interventions and allowed for operational flexibility,
resisting the temptation for a comprehensive overhaul of the system. The key areas included:
(a) introducing performance-based management and decentralization to specific districts of the
Judiciary; (b) improving human resource management to ensure independence, transparency
and integrity through merit-based evaluations; and (c) enhancing access to justice for Peruvian
society, in particular the poor, through legal aid centers called ALEGRAs (Centros Asistencia
Legal Gratuita) which targeted marginalized groups. Outcomes according to user perceptions
were positive with the vast majority of ALEGRA users surveyed in 2009 expressing satisfaction
with the services they received (78 percent). The project helped lay the basis for long-term
reform and a follow-on project was prepared and approved in FY11.
III. WORLD BANK GROUP PERFORMANCE
32.
The World Bank Group’s performance in implementing the CPS program was
satisfactory overall, and helped further strengthen the World Bank role in supporting Peru’s
development efforts. The close alignment of the CPS with the Peruvian political cycle and with
the Garcia administration‘s development vision for Peru were positive features of the CPS
design that enabled continuity of objectives and program priorities over the entire CPS
implementation period. These factors, together with the Government‘s appreciation of the
Bank‘s role in providing access to relevant knowledge, global experience and policy advice on
difficult second-generation reform questions, put in place the foundations for largely successful
CPS implementation. In this regard, and although difficult to quantify, it is worth noting that
the Bank‘s strong in-country presence, its flexibility and its timely responses to requests were
frequently cited by Government officials as important factors that helped nurture and strengthen
already-productive relationships across a wide range of sectors.
33.
Lending fell below the national envelope as the country’s need of external financing
declined over the CPS period. Although the programmed lending operations were
implemented largely as foreseen in the CPS in terms of numbers of operations, lending volume
was $2.7 billion over this CPS period, substantially lower than the $3.5 billion limit established
at the outset. This reduction was agreed with Government during the preparation of the CPS PR
and was due in part to the higher demand for policy-based rather than investment lending,
which in turn affected the ratio of DPL to investment loans and caused a lowering by the Bank
of the overall lending limit. Moreover, a large proportion of the funds borrowed, about $1.5
billion, were in the form of Deferred Drawdown Options (DDOs), of which $1.15 billion
remain largely undisbursed at this time.
34.
The CPS partners (the Government and the WBG) kept the focus on the results while
they adjusted and recalibrated the lending program to accommodate changing circumstances
-- not least to mitigate the impact of the global financial crisis. The original CPS program
envisaged annual lending of two DPLs (for around US$400 million). After FY2007, when the
program was implemented as planned, Peru‘s need for external financing was sharply reduced
by a rapid growth in fiscal revenue. FY08 DPL operations were deferred, while more resources
went into meeting Government‘s demand for stepped-up ESW and NLTA in priority areas such
as budget management. With the escalation of the global crisis in the last quarter of 2008, the
Bank supported Government efforts to secure access to contingent lines of credit and by
52

accelerating preparation of the FM&C DPL II, the REACT DPL II and the Environment DPL I
as DDOs. Together, the three operations provided contingent financing of US$1.03 billion,
which was later increased to US$1.36 billion through a US$330 million supplemental DDO
associated with the FM&C II operation. As the need for financing declined, loan amounts for
DPLs processed in FYs 10 and 11 (FM&C IV, React III and Environment II and III) were
reduced to US$275 million in total over the 2 years, while the depth and pace of reforms
continued as originally planned with minor refinements. To help address fiscal vulnerabilities
associated with natural disasters, a CAT DDO, for US$100 million, was also approved in FY11.
The volume of investment lending was well below the CPS indicative program, with new
commitments amounting to about US$313.4 million over the entire period, only about 1/5 th the
level provided for in the original CPS, but closer to the adjusted level of US$400 million in the
CPS Progress Report. In terms of numbers of operations, the difference was much smaller,
however: 12 new investment operations (11 projects plus an AF for Rural Water and Sanitation)
were approved during FY07-11, versus a proposed maximum of 15 projects included in the
CPS. A complete list of the projects (both investment and quick-disbursing) is shown in Table
2 of this report.
35.
As of June 2011, the active portfolio consisted of 20 active projects, with total
commitments of US$ 1,953.4 million, of which about US$1,519.5 million remained available
for disbursement. These comprised fourteen investment loans, three DPL/DDOs, one CAT
DDO and two GEF grants. Thus far, Government has drawn down only a relatively small
proportion of the DDOs (including CAT DDO) provided – about US$310 million of the total
US$1.46 billion approved – preferring to use the continued availability of the DDO funds as a
means of further strengthening market confidence and be ready to face coming global
developments. The portfolio was relatively healthy with the proportion of commitments at risk
of not meeting their stated development objectives at 1.3 percent, which compared favorably
with LCR averages (10.1 percent). Of the two projects at risk, the Sierra Rural Development
Project was restructured to address identified weaknesses. After restructuring, the Vilcanota
Valley Rehab & Mgmt Project was still rated moderately unsatisfactory both in terms of
progress in project implementation, and in terms of progress towards its stated development
objectives, due to relative inexperience of the Cusco local government in implementing Bankfinanced projects. Implementation progress of all other projects is rated moderately satisfactory
(MS) to satisfactory (S).
36.
The Bank’s flexible program of analytical studies, complemented with just in time
capacity building in the form of NLTA, played a key role in country relations and positioned
the Bank to respond quickly when the Government stepped up its demand for borrowing
(e.g., in FY09). An extensive AAA program, generally of high quality, often served as a
vehicle for coordination with other donors/external partners, engagement with diverse sectors of
Peruvian society (political parties, academics, think-tanks, NGOs, SNGs, program
beneficiaries) beyond the central government, and was influential in shaping policy decisions
and program directions even in the absence of accompanying lending operations. One example
of the influence of AAA is the NLTA which helped modernize the national procurement
commission, CONSUCODE (today Organismo Supervisor de Contrataciones del Estado,
OSCE), into an institution that responds better to the need for independence, professionalism
and fairness of the procurement process. The AAA activities undertaken over the CPS period
(Table 3) included: (i) large multi-product AAA programs such as Recurso, Governance and
Governability NLTA, often co-financed by external partners through Bank-executed grants, (ii)
major reports such as the Financial Sector Review, the Labor Market Review or the REDI; and
53

(iii) just-in-time studies to support policy-making by Government or underpin lending,
particularly in the areas of poverty analysis, institutional building for decentralization, RBB in
health, the gas development strategy, and skills and employability.
37.
The Bank was also able to support Peru through administering an extensive program
of grant support provided through the Bank by a number of bilateral and multi-lateral
partners (see Table 4). Grant funding committed in support of the CPS amounted to nearly
US$56, of which about US$24 million was disbursed during FYs07-11. Over US$32 million of
GEF support went for biodiversity conservation and rural electrification. Other grants ranged in
size from $2 million to $20,000 and were primarily used for analytical work, feasibility studies
or pilot interventions. Grant-funding served as an important vehicle for cooperation with
external partners and provided necessary resources for wide consultations within Peruvian
society through workshops and consultations at national and sub-national levels (see below).
38.
One of the strongest features of the Bank’s performance over the CPS period was the
systematic attention paid to consultation and outreach with diverse stakeholders in Peru. The
wide dissemination of the 2007 Policy Notes and the feedback from participants fed into the
design of the Government program and the CPS interventions. On a programmatic level as
well, the Government, with Bank support, reached out to stakeholders from across the spectrum
of national and sub-national government, the political opposition, think-tanks, Civil Society
Organizations (CSOs), academia, service providers, program beneficiaries and the private
sector. This was especially apparent in the design of the social sector reform program
(supported through the REACT DPL series), biodiversity conservation efforts as well as many
aspects of the programs to improve basic infrastructure. Similarly, the development of the
performance budgeting initiative involved consultations through a planned series of ―dialogue‖
sessions and workshops with more than 2000 representatives of relevant Peruvian institutions as
well as a number of external partners.
39.
The CPS program implementation was enhanced by effective cooperation between
the Bank and IFC, especially with regard to infrastructure development and support for
competitiveness. The Bank and IFC worked in line with their respective comparative strengths
and mandates to help Government realize key goals in infrastructure. The Bank, in part through
effective use of Public-Private Infrastructure Advisory Facility (PPIAF) grants, helped Peru put
in place a modern policy framework for promoting PPPs in infrastructure as well as supported
direct public investment in rural basic infrastructure, which was critical to poverty reduction but
unlikely to attract private investment. In turn, IFC took equity positions in, or provided longterm financing for, a number of high priority private sector infrastructure projects (e.g., Lima
airport, Peru LNG pipeline, tourist infrastructure, renewable energy generation, natural gas
distribution, water utility, municipal transport financing and regional government transport)
thereby strengthening investor confidence in the country, providing longer term financing and
improving adherence to environmental and social safeguards requirements within the projects
themselves.
40.
Complementary work was also carried out by IFC Peru in order to enhance the
business climate, broaden SME access to finance, and strengthen the capacity of key
stakeholders operating in extractive industry areas. IFC advisory services helped to reduce
regulatory bottlenecks for starting and operating businesses as well as reduced market barriers
as a result of the Tramifacil TA discussed above. On the Small and Micro Enterprise (SME)

54

front, IFC advisory services projects with FIs was primarily focused on reducing the serious
gap that still persists in Peru‘s financial sector coverage. It is important to highlight that in
recent years IFC‘s work in frontier regions has expanded to nearly 50 percent of its project
expenditures in FY11 alone21. Lastly, IFC is making direct investments in a range of sectors
and Bank dialogue and operations are helping to strengthen the broad macroeconomic policy
environment and supporting reforms in trade, taxation and other areas of importance for private
investment.
IV.

LESSONS AND SUGGESTIONS FOR THE NEW CPS

The satisfactory design and implementation of the FY07-FY11 CPS presents several important
lessons that can feed into the design of the new CPS.
41.
Keeping a focus on results that are aligned with government priorities while being
flexible on instruments can help deliver a CPS program. One of the main reasons for the
overall success of the FY07-FY11 CPS was the strong ownership by Government of the CPS
program and the Bank‘s willingness to remain flexible with respect to the size, timing and
content of key operations in order to maintain alignment with emerging circumstances. That
flexibility meant adjusting lending amounts and relying in quality AAA rather than dropping
the objectives of the engagement. As a result, the partners found that DPL operations can be
effective instruments to drive policy reform regardless of their contribution to the budget, a fact
that is highly relevant for the next CPS, as about $1.15 billion in DDO financing is yet to be
drawn down. In addition, a robust AAA program substituted at times for lending keeping the
momentum of reform going, while the lending program was adjusted. Given the recent
amendment to the Peruvian Indebtedness Law to enable Government to buy for knowledge
services, AAA work can be further enhanced in Peru through fee-for-service arrangements with
the Bank.
42.
Relevant, timely and widely disseminated analytical work can contribute to the
development of the national agenda and in underpinning Bank-financed operations. Both
just-in-time studies and multi-year programmatic AAA were an important vehicle for building
consensus on key reform areas with Peruvian domestic actors and also helped coalesce
cooperation with key external partners (IMF, IDB, CAF, the UN system and bilateral
cooperation agencies) in supporting Government achieve its development objectives.
43.
Systematic attention to participation and outreach can enhance the sustainability of
reform initiatives. During this CPS, the wide consultation and outreach to NGOs, other
opinion-makers, program beneficiaries, service providers and relevant stakeholders at both
central and sub-national levels has contributed to creating broad reform constituencies. Perhaps
most notable is the innovative example set in the social sectors where, by design, the
achievement of outcomes was inextricably linked to the empowerment of program
beneficiaries, thus making the empowerment of communities through knowledge
dissemination, consultation and the strengthening of existing participatory mechanisms a
fundamental part of program design. Similar emphasis on outreach in other programs included
results-based budgeting, participatory biodiversity conservation efforts, air quality monitoring,
rural water and sanitation and others.
21

FY10 Frontier Region expenditures in Peru reached 43.7 percent of total project expenditures in the country. For FY11,
Frontier Region expenditures reached 47.78 percent.

55

44.
Focusing Bank-IFC cooperation on specific outcomes around their core
competencies improves effectiveness. Strategic coordination in the implementation of
complementary interventions by the Bank and IFC was a critical element in achieving CPS
goals in areas such as enhancing competitiveness and the business climate, SMEs broadening
access to financial markets and developing capital markets, sustainable oil, gas & mining
activities and infrastructure development both with the private sector and at the municipal level.
45.
Addressing major development challenges such as reducing regional disparities in
living standards requires continued attention and better coordination across interventions.
While the last few years saw substantial improvements in living standards (lower income
poverty, better access to basic and social service) across Peru, the disparities between the
Coastal, Sierra and Amazon zones are still large, with the Sierra region lagging far behind on
important indicators of population welfare. The several programs under the FY07-FY11 CPS
that focused on improving conditions in the poorest districts or regions could have been better
coordinated from the standpoints of complementarity among projects, sequencing, or
geographic focus. Greater impact under the next CPS can be achieved by focusing lending and
analytical inputs more clearly towards the reducing spatial disparities in living standards.
46.
“Smart” program design can help by-pass hurdles and constrains to achieve
development objectives. The relatively strict definition of what constitutes investment under
the Sistena Nacional de Inversión Pública (SNIP) made it difficult to move forward important
development programs that do not have large ―bricks and mortar‖ components (viz. Juntos
Nutrition Results). Results-focused instruments enabled the Bank to support government
programs complementing ongoing efforts to implement results-based budgeting throughout the
Peruvian public sector. Results-based instruments can continue to play an important role in the
next CPS.
47.
The quality, accuracy and relevance of the results framework can have a powerful
effect in the capacity to monitor results and produce a fair evaluation of the contribution of
the CPS. The FY07-FY11 CPS not always established clear linkages between the outcomes
sought and Bank-supported activities (e.g., in the areas of tourism, and informality) and in some
cases did not specify relevant outcome such as in the area of non-traditional exports.
Monitoring and evaluation should be strengthened in the next CPS, including through giving
more prominence to the results discussion in the dialogue with Government during the early
stages of CPS design. The new CPS should explicitly set out the mechanisms for monitoring
the results framework, the responsibilities for reporting on progress towards achievement of
CAS outcomes, and the use of evaluation information for decision-making.

56

Appendix 1: Summary of CPS Program Self-evaluation

Cluster of outcomes and
outcome indicators

Lending and non-lending
activities that contributed to the
outcome
PILLAR I: ECONOMIC GROWTH

Status and evaluation summary

Cluster 1.1: Maintaining macro stability and reducing vulnerabilities
Outcome 1.1.1: Consolidated macroeconomic framework
Indicator: Achievement of
Achieved. Peru achieved Investment Grade by Fitch, Standard &
rating of Investment Grade
Poor‘s and Moody‘s by 2010. The main factors underlying the
(upgrade from current grade upgrades were: (i) the reduction in Peru‘s fiscal and external
BB+ to investment grade
vulnerabilities; (ii) low inflation; and (iii) strong macro
BBB)
fundamentals. The effective use of countercyclical fiscal policies
to absorb adverse external shocks and avoid a ―hard landing‖ was
specifically cited by Moody‘s which upgraded its rating in 2010.
Indicator: Accumulated
inflation (excluding food
and fuels) of 12.5 percent or
below from 2007 to 2011.

Achieved. Cumulative inflation, excluding food and fuels, reached
8.7 percent between December 2006 and January 2011. Inflation
(excluding food and fuels) for 2011 is projected to be +2 percent,
implying cumulative inflation well within the 12.5 percent target
for the 2007-2011 period.

Cluster outcome 1.1.2: Reduced Macro vulnerabilities
Indicator: Reduced public
Achieved. In 2010 outstanding public debt as a percent of GDP
debt (as percent of GDP)
was 22.7. The public debt to GDP ratio is expected to decline
from 38 to 26 percent if no
further (slightly) by end 2011. This reduction in public debt was
adverse external shocks or
achieved despite the impact of the 2009 global financial crisis. As a
32 percent if some external
result of implementation of an active debt management strategy,
shocks.
the structure of public debt also improved over the CPS period
including (i) a significant increase in local currency denominated
debt; (ii) a higher proportion of debt subject to fixed vs variable
interest rates; and (iii) a reduction in the lumpiness of repayment
obligations.
Indicator: Reduced
dollarization of the financial
system from 65 to 52
percent.

Achieved. The share of banking deposits in US dollars decreased
to 47 percent in 2010. In addition, the stock of US dollardenominated loans to the private sector had declined to 52 percent
of the total by 2010.

57

Lending Operations:
-Fiscal Management and
Competitiveness DPLs I-IV (FY0711)
-Capacity Bldg. for Fiscal Decentr.
TA (FY05-FY11)
Non-lending:
-Policy Notes (FY07)
-Public Expenditure Review (FY11)
-Tax Compliance Survey (FY09)
- Tax Compliance Study (FY11-12)
-Review of Progress with FTAs
(FY11)
-Capital Markets for Growth (FY08)

Lending Operations:
-Programmatic Fiscal Management
and Competitiveness DPLs I-IV(FY07-11)
-Capacity Bldg. for Fiscal Decentr.
TA (FY05-FY11)
Non-lending:
-Public Expenditure Review (FY11)
-Tax Compliance Survey (FY09
-Tax Compliance Study (FY11-12)
-Financial Sector Review ( FY11)

Lessons and suggestions for
the new CPS

The FM&C DPL series and its
associated analytical work was
extremely helpful in supporting
Government‘s efforts to
strengthen fiscal management
by defining a multi-pronged
strategy with sufficient
flexibility to respond to the
2009 slow-down while
preserving medium-term goals
and directions. The Bank‘s
DDO lending gave Peru an
important cushion in late 2008early 2009 when reserves and
private investment declined
sharply.
The flexibility of the repayment
terms of the Bank‘s lending
instruments was a key factor in
enabling Government in its
effort to smooth its debt profile.

Appendix 1: Summary of CPS Program Self-evaluation

Cluster of outcomes and
outcome indicators

Status and evaluation summary

Cluster 1.2: Accelerating growth and widening the base of growth.
Outcome 1.2.1: Improved economic infrastructure and business environment.
Indicator: Improvement in
Achieved. Peru was ranked 36th out of 185 countries in the 2011
Doing Business Ranking
Doing Business Rankings. In addition, the country was included
from 68th to 55th out of 175th. among the top 10 reformers – in 4th position -- in the 2011 Doing
Business Report.
Indicator: Increased public
investment in infrastructure
to from less than 1 percent
to 3 percent.

Achieved. Investment expenditures on sectors whose investment
budget (SNIP) corresponds almost exclusively to infrastructure (i.e.
Transport, Education and Culture, Sanitation, Health, and
Agriculture) increased from 1.66 percent of GDP in 2006 to 5.74
percent in 2010.

Lending and non-lending
activities that contributed to the
outcome
Lending Operations:
-Fiscal Management and Comp. DPLs
I - IV (FY07-FY11)
-Urban Property Rights II (FY05)
-Regional Transp. Decentr (FY06)
-Decentr. Rural Transp. (FY07)
-AF Lima Transp. Project (FY10)
-Agric. Rsrch & Ext II (FY05)
-Incagro III (FY11)
-Sierra Rural Dev. I (FY07)
-Irrigation Investment Program (AF
FY06)
-Rural Electrification (FY06)
- Rural Water Supply and Sanitation
II, (FY11)
Non-lending:
-Small Hydropower NLTA (FY08)
-National Gas Strategy (FY09)
-Review of Public Private Partnerships
(FY09)
-Recent Economic Development in
Infrastructure (REDI) (FY09)
- Doing Business Ranking
IFC Investments: Tramifacil TA
(FY07)
- Peru OEH (FY07), Lima Jorge
Chavez International Airport (FY07),
Perurail (FY07), BPZ (FY07, FY08,
FY 09, FY 10), Maple Energy (FY08),
Peru LNG (FY08), Arequipa Region
(FY 11), Municipality of Lima
Guarantee (FY 10), Sedapal (FY 10),
Enfoca (FY 10), Chevez (FY 11),
Calidda (FY 10)

58

Lessons and suggestions for
the new CPS
Strong governmental
commitment to creating a
business-friendly environment
and the high-level attention
accorded to the DBR rankings
provided a powerful impetus for
addressing identified issues.
IFC‘s Tramifacil TA was key.
WBG cooperation in supporting
Peru‘s infrastructure is an
excellent model for the future.
The IFC invested in major,
commercially-viable projects
where it could clearly add value
(through long-term financing,
attention to safeguards etc)
while the Bank appropriately
concentrated on policy issues
and direct financing of the
infrastructure needs in
disadvantaged regions as well
as activities to benefit the urban
poor.

Appendix 1: Summary of CPS Program Self-evaluation

Cluster of outcomes and
outcome indicators

Status and evaluation summary

Outcome 1.2.2: Improved human capital and innovation.
Indicator: Increased
Non-observable. No agency (public or private) collects aggregate
enrolment and graduation
data on university enrolment and graduation rates by discipline.
rates in science, technology, However, survey data shows that the proportion of people with
innovation and related
tertiary education has increased. Individuals aged 22-24 with
disciplines at the tertiary
tertiary education increased from 13.4 percent in 2005 to 15.3
level.
percent in 2009; and among those aged 25-34 years, the percentage
increased from 20.2 percent in 2005 to 24.5 percent in 2009. To the
extent that the proportion of graduates schooled in science,
technology and related disciplines is likely to have increased or at
least remained stable over the period, it is likely that enrolment and
graduation rates in science, technology and related disciplines has
risen, or at least remained stable in the last years.
Outcome 1.2.3: Deeper economic integration.
Indicator: Increase in nonNot Achieved: Non-traditional exports grew steadily –by over 20
traditional exports from 25
percent -- during the CPS period, increasing in value from US$
percent to 40 percent of total 6,313 mill in 2007 to US$ 7,641 in 2010. Strictly speaking,
exports.
however, the CPS outcome with respect to non-traditional exports
was not achieved as it had been defined in the results matrix in
terms of the weight of non-traditional exports within total exports.
Thus, although non-traditional exports grew at a rapid pace, the
Indicator: Increase the
phenomenal rise in the world prices of Peru‘s traditional exports
number of new exporting
over the same period meant that the share of non-traditional exports
firms located in developing
actually fell over the CPS period, from 25 percent in 2007 to just
regions22 from 24 to 39.
over 22 percent by 2011.
Partially achieved. The number of new exporting firms located in
developing regions was 31 as of February 2011.

Lending and non-lending
activities that contributed to the
outcome
Lending Operations:
-Higher Education Qual. Ass. (FY12)
Non-lending:
-Peru: En el umbral de una nueva era
(Policy Notes FY11)
IFC:
Universidad San Martin de Porres
PCG (FY8)

Lending:
-Vilcanota Valley Rehab (FY04)
-Fiscal Management and Comp. DPLs
I - IV (FY07-FY11)
-Agric. Rsrch & Extension II (FY05)
-Incagro III (FY11)
-Irrigation sub-sector Investment
Program (additional financing, FY06)
-Sierra Rural Dev.Project I (FY07)
-Water Sector Modernization
(replaced by Rural Water Supply and
Sanitation II (FY11)

Puno, San Martin, Madre de Dios, Huancavelica, Amazonas, Ayacucho, and Apurimac.

59

More care needs to be taken at
the CPS design stage to ensure
that indicators chosen to
measure outcomes can be
assessed with available data or
with data that can be collected
at reasonable cost.

Solid results over the CPS
period in expanding nontraditional exports were not
captured because the outcome
indicator was couched in terms
of a proportion of total exports.
Given that prices of traditional
exports were not (expected to
be) influenced in any way by
CPS activities, it would have
been preferable to set a target
more exclusively focused on
non-traditional exports.

IFC:
- Agrokasa (FY06), SAV (FY08)

Outcome 1.2.4: Broad-based economic growth and access to labor markets for low income families.
Indicator: Reduce
Achieved: There has been a decrease in informality (as measured
Lending:
informality rate from 60 to
by lack of social protection coverage for workers) to 40 percent in
-Programmatic Fiscal Management
51 percent.
2010.
and Competitiveness DPLs I-IV
-Vilcanota Valley Rehab (FY04)

22

Lessons and suggestions for
the new CPS

The Informality AAA helped
shape amendments to a law on
Special Labor regimes for
micro-enterprises which
alleviated the burden of hiring

Appendix 1: Summary of CPS Program Self-evaluation

Cluster of outcomes and
outcome indicators
Indicator: Increase in the
number of tourists that visit
Peru annually from 1.3
million to 2 million.

Status and evaluation summary
Achieved. Annual tourist visitors to Peru increased from 1.7
million in 2006 to 2.1 million by 2009 (2010 numbers are not yet
available).

Lending and non-lending
activities that contributed to the
outcome
Non-lending:
-Informality I (FY07), II (FY08)
-Skills and Labor Policies for the Poor
(FY10)
-Peru: En el umbral de una nueva era
(Policy Notes FY11)

Lessons and suggestions for
the new CPS
workers on formal contracts.
This was a good example of
how just-in-time and welltargeted AAA can directly
influence policy even in the
absence of related lending.

IFC Investments:
-Peru Orient Express Hotels (FY07),
Perurail (FY07), Lima Airport
(FY08), Agrokasa (FY06), Laredo
(FY07), SAV (FY08), Mi BANCO
(FY06, 07, 08), Nuestra Gente (FY09,
11), Edyficar (FY08), Confianza
(FY07), Protecta (FY09, 10, 11),
PHMC (FY07, 09, 10, 11), Amerika
Financiera (FY08), B. Continental
(FY07, 08, 11), BIF (FY07, 09, 10,
11), Cartones America (FY07, 09),
AAQSA (FY10, 11), Antares (FY10)
Cluster 1.3: Making growth sustainable
Outcome 1.3.1: Improved management of natural resources.
Indicator: Implementation
Achieved. In 2008, Government established the Organismo de
of post-license monitoring
Evaluacion y Fiscalizacion Ambiental (OEFA) with responsibility
system by the Ministry of
for continuously monitoring the implementation of environmental
Environment.
commitments of licensed businesses.

Indicator: Strengthened
institutional and legal
framework for biodiversity
conservation.

Achieved. Over the CPS period the Government established the
autonomous National Service of Protected Areas (Servicio
Nacional de Areas Naturales Protegidas por el Estado, SERNANP)
and approved a Supreme Decree establishing SERNANP‘s key
functions. The Decree provides the overarching institutional and
policy framework for biodiversity conservation including enabling
SERNANP to issue sanctions on violators. Further, a financial
strategy and detailed action plan for the Natural Protected Areas
System have also been established.

60

Lending:
-DPL Environment I (FY09), II
(FY10), III (FY11)
-Strengthening Biodiversity
Conservation through the National
Protected Areas Program (FY11)
-Water Resources Management
(FY10)
Non lending:
-Sustainable Fisheries (FY05)
-Wealth and Sustainability: The
Environmental and Social Dimensions
of the Mining Sector in Peru (FY05)
-Country Environmental Assessment

The Country Environmental
Assessment and the DPL series
helped consolidate past
(somewhat piecemeal )efforts in
the environment area by putting
in place a comprehensive,
coordinated and sequenced
approach to institutional
development, biodiversity
conservation and remediation of
existing environmental issues in
key sectors. The DPL
instrument was an appropriate
choice because it helped focus
the attention of high-level actors

Appendix 1: Summary of CPS Program Self-evaluation

Cluster of outcomes and
outcome indicators
Indicator: Air quality data
for the Lima-Callao
Metropolitan Region is
widely published and
disseminated.
Indicator: Air quality
contingency plans are
developed and implemented
in the 5 most polluted cities.
Indicator: 10 priority
mining environmental
legacies are identified using
technical criteria.

Indicator: Environmental
participatory monitoring
undertaken in at least 60
mining polluting sites.

Status and evaluation summary
Achieved. Daily air quality monitoring data for the cities of Lima
and La Oroya is published and disseminated through SENAMHI‘s
(Peruvian National Service of Meteorology and Hydrology) and
DIGESA‘s (Office of Health Management) websites.
Achieved. Contingency actions have been included in Air Quality
Improvement plans for Lima-Callao, La Oroya, Arequipa,
Chimbote and Ilo (in progress).

Lending and non-lending
activities that contributed to the
outcome
(CEA) (FY06)
Economics of Avoided Deforestation/
REDD in Peru (FY10)
IFC investments:
-Agrokasa (FY06), Laredo (FY07),
SAV (FY08)

Lessons and suggestions for
the new CPS
in both line and central
ministries. Moreover, the
policy, regulatory and
institutional issues needing
attention could not effectively
have been handled through
investment lending.

Achieved The Government approved a Directorial Resolution that
mandates application of PERCAN‘s methodology for the
identification and prioritization of all mining environmental
legacies. It also approved a 3-year plan to identify, rank, and
manage mining environmental legacies. To date, 5,500 mining
legacies have been identified, of which 119 have been prioritized as
demanding immediate attention given health risks for the
population.
Partially achieved. The Government approved norms to regulate
the process of participatory environmental monitoring and
surveillance in mining exploitation activities. Up to 2011, at least
40 initiatives of environmental participatory monitoring have been
executed.

Indicator: Improved
regulation of anchoveta
fishing quotas.

Achieved. Anchoveta fishing quotas by vessel and a social
compensation fund for fisheries were implemented.
PILLAR II: SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT
Cluster 2.1: Meeting basic needs
Outcome 2.1.1: Progress in spreading the benefits of growth by meeting basic needs.
Indicator: Reduction in the
Achieved: The Unmet Basic Needs Index decreased to 26 percent
Lending:
Unmet Basic Needs Index
for the entire population and to 47percent for the rural population
-Rural electrification (FY06)
from 42 to 36 percent for the in 2010.
-Water Sector Modernization
entire population and from
(replaced by Rural Water Supply and
72 to 62 percent for the rural One measure of overall welfare, the Unmet Basic Needs Index,
Sanitation II, FY11)
areas.
measures household welfare on the basis of five indicators
-Results and Accountability - REACT
including income, school attendance by children, physical
I (FY07), II (FY09), III (FY11)
condition of dwelling, household overcrowding, and availability of

61

While this evaluation estimates
that several of the outcomes
were achieved or partially
achieved, reliably tracking
progress is complicated by: (i)
the uncertain quality of the data
in some instances; and (ii) the
fact that some indicators are not

Appendix 1: Summary of CPS Program Self-evaluation

Cluster of outcomes and
outcome indicators
Indicator: Increased
percentage of households
with adequate water from 76
to 85 percent and sanitation
services from 57 to 65
percent.
Indicator: Increased access
to electricity in rural areas
from 30 to 42 percent.

Status and evaluation summary
sanitation services.
Achieved: Data from a recent Health and Demographic survey
indicates that by 2010 91.5 percent of households had access to
treated water and 85.3 percent had basic sanitation facilities.

Achieved. The percentage of rural households with access to
electricity increased to 58.5 percent in 2010.

Lending and non-lending
activities that contributed to the
outcome
Non-lending:
-Poverty, Monitoring and Information
System NLTA (FY09)
-Effectiveness of Antipoverty
Intervention NLTA (FY09)
-RECURSO study (FY06)
-Programmatic RECURSO II (FY08),
III (FY09), RECURSO IV (FY10), V
(FY 11)
-Peru: En el umbral de una nueva era
Policy Notes (FY11)

Lessons and suggestions for
the new CPS
continuously produced or
definitions are changes. Giving
greater prominence in the CPS
dialogue to the importance of
regularly measuring CPS
outcome indicators could help
ensure the stability of data
collection and hence allow for
better measurement of
outcomes in the next CPS.

IFC TA:
-Water Monitoring (FY09)
IFC investments:
-Grupo Salud (FY 11), Enfoca (FY
10), Sedapal (FY 10)
Cluster 2.2: Promoting and developing a new social contract in education, health and nutrition
Outcome 2.2.1: Strengthened accountability, support systems and results orientation in provision of basic social services, and more efficient social protection system.
Indicator: Reduce the
Partially achieved: National Census of 2nd grade shows that by
Devoting a major portion of the
Lending:
proportion of students in
2010 there was a sizable improvement in test scores compared
-Health reform program APL II –
CPS program to advancing a
―level 0‖ of national student with those reported in 2007. In 2010, the proportion of students
PARSALUD II (FY09)
―new‖ results/accountability
census evaluation from 46
lagging ―below level 1‖ decreased to 24 percent in reading and to
-Results and Accountability - REACT culture in social services
percent to 25 percent and
53 percent in math. The proportion of students reaching ―Level 2‖
I (FY07), II (FY09), III (FY11)
delivery was a risky proposition
increase those in ―levels 2 or increased to 29 percent in reading and to 14 percent in math. No
-Accountability for Decentralization in which has paid off. Although
3‖ from 39 percent to 60
numbers are available for 2011.
Social Sectors (FY05)
not all the results were fully
percent between 2004 and
-Results in Nutrition SWAP (FY11)
achieved, the DPL series has
had a major, likely non2011.
Achieved: Seguro Integral de Salud (SIS) affiliation rose to 5.22
reversible, impact on Voice,
Non-lending:
Indicator: Increase in SIS
million (2008) in the ten poorest regions 23; and to 10.5 million
-RECURSO study (FY06)
compact and client power.
affiliation rate for women of nationwide. Both figures increased by 50 percent since 2007. The
-Programmatic RECURSO II (FY08), Factors which contributed to
childbearing age in the ten
SIS budget increased from S/.267 million in 2006 to S/.420 million III (FY09), RECURSO IV (FY10), V
overall success include: (i) true
poorest regions by 10
in 2008. This represented an increase of 42 percent in real terms.
(FY11)
government ownership of the
percentage points and in
-Education Sector NLTA (FY11)
agenda; (ii) flexible program
these 10 regions by
-Decentralization in Social Sectors
design enabling adaptation to
23

The included regions were Amazonas, Apurimac, Ayacucho, Cajamarca, Huancavelica, Huánuco, Loreto, Piura, Puno and Tacna.

62

Appendix 1: Summary of CPS Program Self-evaluation

Cluster of outcomes and
outcome indicators

Status and evaluation summary

20percent in real terms in
2006-2008.
Indicator: Increase
coverage of IBs in the 10
poorest regions to reach 75
percent and nationwide rural
coverage to reach 58
percent.

Achieved. During the last ten years, the coverage of institutional
births (IBs) has continued to rise steadily, with an annual average
growth rate of 3.4 percent (2.5 percent in urban areas and 4 percent
in rural areas. In mid-2010, IB coverage reached 58 percent for
rural areas as a whole and 72 percent in the 10 poorest regions o
(implying that coverage is on track to reach the 75 percent targeted
for the end of the CPS period).

Lending and non-lending
activities that contributed to the
outcome
NLTA (FY10)
-Nutrition NLTA – JSDF Grant
(FY11)
-Health RBB NLTA (FY11)

Partially achieved. As a result of the adoption of new World
Health Organization (WHO) standards, the baseline of 24 percent
in 2006 was adjusted to 28 percent; and, Government adopted a
Indicator: Reduction in
new national target of 23 percent by 2010. This new target has
national chronic
been achieved. However, the 23 percent figure is estimated to be
malnutrition from 24 to 15
equivalent to about 18 percent under the old standard, implying
percent in 5 years.
that progress fell somewhat short of the 15 percent originally
targeted in the CPS.
PILLAR III: MODERNIZATION OF INSTITUTIONS
Cluster 3.1: Modernizing state institutions
Outcome 3.1.1: Consolidation of decentralization processes.
Indicator: Increase in
Non-Observable: Over much of the CPS period, the Government
Lending:
number of local and regional made continuous efforts to recalibrate its decentralization model in -Institutional Capacity for
governments accredited
an effort to design a system that was flexible enough to
Decentralization Technical Assistance
from 310 to 600.
accommodate Peru‘s diversity and the variable institutional
Loan - TAL (FY05)
capacity of SNGs. As a result of these design changes, a decision
-Results and Accountability - REACT
was taken to cease formally accrediting SNGs, although efforts
I –III (FY07-FY11
continued to provide training in standards for municipal borrowing, -Capacity Bldg. for Fiscal Decentr.
budget planning and execution and M&E. Significant progress was TA (FY05-FY11)
achieved in these areas.
Non lending:
-The Decentralization Process and its
Links with Public Expenditure
Effectiveness (FY10)
-PEFA I, to be included in PER
(FY09)
-Governance and Governability
Enhancement NLTA (FY09-11)
-Joint Governance Program in the
Andes (FY09)

63

Lessons and suggestions for
the new CPS
lessons of experience; (iii)
widespread consultation at all
levels including with
beneficiaries; (iv) careful
calibration of analytical work
with policy design needs; (v)
close partnerships with other
donors; and (vi) systematic
attention to matching
budget/financing modalities
with desired service outcomes
(performance-based budgeting)

Decentralization in Peru is still
a work in progress, which
would benefit from sustained
Bank support. Continuing
challenges which the Bank
could consider supporting
through a new CPS include
institutional design questions
given: (i) decisions by
Government to abandon some
coordination institutions in light
of implementation experience;
(ii)) lack of clarity w respect to
functions and (iii) limited
coordination

Appendix 1: Summary of CPS Program Self-evaluation

Cluster of outcomes and
outcome indicators

Status and evaluation summary

Lending and non-lending
activities that contributed to the
outcome

Lessons and suggestions for
the new CPS

-NLTA to CONSUCODE on
Procurement (FY09)
-Municipal Serv. Assess. (FY10)
-Sub-national Pilots NLTA (FY10)
-Social and Distributional Impact
Analysis of the Participatory Budget
in Peru (FY10)
IFC TA:
-Canon Mgmt. Project (FY09)
-BPZ (Regional Government of
Tumbes, FY09)
-Canon Monitoring Project (FY08)
Chinalco (FY09), Peru LNG Royalties
(FY10), Vale (FY10)
Outcome 3.1.2: Improved public sector management.
Indicator: Introduction of
Achieved. Ministerio de Economia y Finanzas (MEF) established
Results-Based Budgeting
the results-based budget (RBB) for five strategic pilot programs in
(RBB) as a tool to improve
2008, expanding to 24 in 2011. RBB is now an integral part of the
the efficiency of public
budget cycle. The MEF is currently revising the RBB
spending.
methodology aiming at streamlining the results-based budgetary
process and mainstreaming its application throughout the national
budget.
Indicator: Increase in the
number of regional and local
governments preparing
budgets following
participatory budgeting
norms from 425 to 725.

Achieved. As a result of the implementation of the Participatory
Budget Law, currently 100 percent of SNGs follow participatory
budget norms in the preparation of the investment budget.

Outcome 3.1.3: Improved perceptions of the rule of law and access to justice.
Indicator: 55 percent of the Achieved. According to a 2009 evaluation, 78 percent of users
clients are satisfied within
evaluated the project service delivery model, ALEGRA, favourably
the jurisdictional institutions with respect to the adjudication and conflict resolution services

64

Lending:
-Programmatic Fiscal Management and
Competitiveness - FMCDPL I (FY07),
II and Supplemental (FY09), III (FY10),
IV (FY11 – FY13)
-Results and Accountability - REACT I
(FY07), II (FY09), III (FY11)
-Capacity Bldg. for Fiscal Decentr. TA
(FY05-FY11)

Non-Lending
-Programmatic RECURSO II –V
(FYs08-11)
-JSDF Grant: Giving Voice to the Poor
in Influencing, Planning, and Eval.
Service Delivery. (FY 2008)
- Eval. of the Participatory Budget and
its Relation to Performance Based
Budget (FY10)
Lending
-Justice Services Improvement Project
II (FY10)

Although the Results Based
Budgeting (RBB) program had
some stops and false starts, it is
beginning to show real results.
Key factors in achieving this
positive result are (i) the
sustained commitment of both
the Government and the Bank
to staying with the program
while adapting it in the light of
experience; and (ii) The Bank‘s
willingness to step back and let
the Government ―own‖ and take
the lead on program design
even in cases of differing
technical positions with respect
to the way forward.

Appendix 1: Summary of CPS Program Self-evaluation

Cluster of outcomes and
outcome indicators
that are implementing
management improvements.

Status and evaluation summary
provided by the Conciliators. 77 percent of respondents also
provided a favourable evaluation of aspects related to the physical
environment and physical access.

65

Lending and non-lending
activities that contributed to the
outcome

Lessons and suggestions for
the new CPS

Appendix 2: Planned Lending Program and Actual Deliveries
(FY07 - FY11)
CPS PLANS 2007

STATUS
IBRD
(US$M)
200
150
50
20
25
15
370
330

FY
Project
FY07 Fiscal Management and Competitiviness DPL I
Results and Accountability (REACT) DPL I
Decentralized Rural Transport Project
Sierra Rural Development Project I
Results in nutrition for Juntos
Health Reform Program APL II
FY08 Fiscal Management and Competitiviness DPL II
Environment DPL I
Rural Water Supply and Sanitation II - PRONASAR II (replaces Water
Sector Modernization)
Low Income Housing
Quality of Basic Education
FY09 Fiscal Management and Competitiviness DPL III
Results and Accountability (REACT) DPL II (DDO)
Natural Disasters Management

30
--150
330
--

Governance Enhancement Program
Sub National Infrastructure Investment Facility

---

Subtotal FY2007-2009

66

1,670

IBRD (US$M)
200
150
50
20

Approved/disbursed
Approved/disbursed
Approved/effective
Approved/effective
Slipped to FY11
Slipped to FY09
Silpped to FY09
Silpped to FY09

---

Converted to Additional Financing and slipped to FY11
Dropped
Slipped to FY13
Slipped to FY10
Approved/effective
Converted to CAT DDO and slipped to FY11
Converted into NLTA Programmatic Governance and
Governability
Converted to Sub-National Pilots NLTA

-----330
-------

Slipped from previous FY:
Fiscal Management and Competitiviness DPL II (DDO)
Environment DPL I (DDO)
Health Reform Program APL II

370
330
15

Additional projects:
Supplemental Financing Fiscal Management and
Competitiviness DPL II (DDO)

330

Subtotal FY2007-2009

1,795

Appendix 2: Planned Lending Program and Actual Deliveries (continued)
(FY07-FY11)
PROGRESS REPORT PLANS 2009
FY10 DPL Fiscal Management and Competitiviness IV
Environment DPL II
Quality Assurance in Tertiary Education
Infrastructure for Sustaintable Tourism
Doing Business Enhancement Program
Water Resources Management
Additional Financing Lima Transport Project

FY11

100
50
----10
---

Results and Accountability (REACT) DPL III

50

DPL Fiscal Management and Competitiveness V
Sierra Development II
Health Reform Program APL III
Sierra Irrigation Project
Justice Services Improvement Project II

---20
20

Subtotal FY2010-2011
TOTAL

250
1,920

67

STATUS
Slipped to FY11
Approved/disbursed
Slipped to FY12
Dropped
Dropped
Approved/effective
Slipped to FY13
Slipped from previous FY:
Fiscal Management and Competitiveness DPL III
Additional projects:
Safe and Sustainable Transport Project (but cancelled in
FY11)
Approved/disbursed
Merged with DPL Fiscal Management and
Competitiveness IV
Slipped to FY13
Dropped
Approved/effective
Approved/effective
Slipped from previous FY:
Juntos Results for Nutrition
National Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Project Additional Financing
DPL Fiscal Management and Competitiveness IV
CAT DDO (former Natural Disasters Management)
Additional projects:
DPL Environment III
Optimization of Lima Water and Sewerage Systems
Second Rural Electrification Project
Subtotal FY2010-2011
TOTAL

-50
---10
-150

150
50
------20
20
25
30
100
100
75
54.5
50
884.5
2,679.5

Appendix 3: Non Lending Services and Actual Deliveries
(FY 2007 – 2011)
CPS PLANS
2007 Not defined

2008 Not defined

PROGRESS REPORT PLAN
2009 Poverty, Monitoring, and Information System NLTA
Public Expenditure Review
National Gas Development Strategy
Tax Compliance Survey
Recurso III
Governance and Governability NLTA
Recent Economic Development in Infrastructure (REDI)
NLTA to CONSUCODE on National Procurement Sytem and Strategy
Joint Governance Program in the Andes (LC6)

2010 Skills and Labor Policies for the Poor
The decentralization processs and its links to public expenditure efficiency
Effectiveness of Antipoverty Intervention NLTA
Growth and Labor Trends in Peru
Economics of Avoided Deforestation/RE DD in Peru
Recurso IV
Decentralization in Social Sectors
Municipal Services Assessment
Sub-Natinal Pilots NLTA
Social and Distributional Impact Analysis of the Participatory Budget in Peru

2011 Review of Progress with FTAs
CEM
Financial Sector Review

STATUS
Additional Products
Rural Electrification
Informality I
Peru SOE Assessment
Lima (Perú) City Poverty Strategy
Additional Products
Capital Markets for Growth
Small Hydropower NLTA
PPP Law
Recurso II
STATUS
Actual
Completed in FY 11
Completed in FY10 (Title changed to Natural Gas Study)
Completed in FY10 (Title changed to Tax Compliance Cost Surveys)
Actual
Actual
Completed in FY11
Converted to IDF approved in FY12 (Title changed to Strategy for the Implementation of Highlevel Procurement Training)
Underway (to be completed in FY13, Title changed to Institutional Strengthening of Andean
Supreme Audit Institutions-IDF)
Additional Products
(CCH) Overcoming Barriers to Hydropower
Improving SME access to Capital Markets
Completed in FY11 (Title changed to Skills and Access to Urban Labor Markets)
Completed in FY11
Completed in FY11
Actual (Title changed to Labor Market Review)
Converted to TA Peru FCPF REDD Readiness preparation. .
Actual
Actual
Merged in Governance and Governability NLTA IV, Completed in FY11
Completed in FY 11
Actual
Additional Products
IT and IT Enabled Services
Strategic Plan for the Telecommunications Investment Fund
Dropped
To be Completed in FY12 (Title changed to CEM - Trade Comp and Growth)
Completed in FY10

68

Poverty NLTA
Recurso V
Education Sector NLTA
Nutrition NLTA
Health RBB NLTA
Governance and Governability NLTA

Completed in FY10 (Title changed to Poverty-Effectiveness Monitoring I)
Completed in FY 12
Actual
Completed in FY10
Completed in FY 11 (Title changed to Universal Insurance Health Reform)
Actual
Additional Products
Insolvency and Creditor Risk ROSC
Natural Resources Land Use and Environment
Financial Crisis Simulation
Assessment of CC in Hidrology
Strength Private Sector Accounting and Auditing
Poverty-Effectiveness Monitoring II

69

Appendix 4: Trust Funds delivered in FY07-FY11
Fund Name
Pillar I: Economic Growth
GEF PPG - Republic Of Peru: Grant for the Preparation of the Strengthening Biodiversity
Conservation through the National Protected Areas Program
Strengthening Biodiversity Conservation through the National Protected Areas Program
First: Peru - 8086 Financial Crisis Simulation Program
GEF3 FSP-Peru: Participatory Management of Protected Areas (PROFONAPE II) Project
Peru Environmental Governance and Mainstreaming in Key Sectors Project
Innovative Institutional and Technological Solutions to Reduce Vulnerability to Resource
Degradation and Climate Shocks in LCR
Peru Forest Investment Program (FIP)
PE Natural Gas Study
PE: Assessment of CC Impacts in Power
Peru Sierra Region Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)
Peru CDM Project Portfolio Consolidation Project
PE Overcoming Barriers to Hydropower Inv
JSDF-Peru: Lima Rapid Empowerment Fund
Pillar II: Social Development
PHRD-Peru: Rural Electrification Project
Peru Accountability in Social Sectors
JSDF-Peru: Capacity Building for Behavioral Change: Reducing Diarrhea in Poor Children
JSDF-Peru: Cap. Bldg. for Behavioral Change: Reducing Diarrhea in Poor Children (BankExe TF To Cover Incr. Bank Costs of TF054228)
PHRD-Peru: Results and Accountability (REACT) Development Policy Loan II
Strengthening Accountability and Results-Based Management in Education
IE - Water Rights in Peru
PHRD-Peru: Decentralized Rural Infrastructure
GEF FSP-Peru: Rural Electrification Project
Round 23 - Peru - Enhancing Integrated Legal Strategies for the Poor
Round 23 - Peru - Enhancing Integrated Legal Strategies for the Poor
Participatory Intervention Model to Improve Child Nutrition
Participatory Intervention Model to Improve Child Nutrition (Bank-Executed)
Cusco +10 - Challenges of Rural Water and Sanitation after a Decade
Peru: Scaling Up Nutrition
IDF: Peru-Strengthening the National System for Evaluation and Quality Assurance of
Education

70

Fund Status

Closing Date

Grant Amount

Total Disbursed
in CPS Period

LCLS
ACTV
LCLS
ACTV
ACTV

06/15/2009
05/31/2015
12/30/2010
12/31/2010
03/31/2013

152,548
8,891,000
200,280
14,800,000
250,000

152,548
579,247
200,280
8,672,657
0

ACTV
ACTV
LCLS
LCLS
LCLS
LCLS
LCLS
LCLS

12/31/2012
12/30/2011
11/20/2009
12/31/2009
10/30/2009
12/30/2009
12/31/2009
03/31/2007

500,000
35,000
99,326
205,109
190,274
138,214
186,411
1,091,219

41,126
20,474
99,326
205,109
190,274
138,214
186,411
749,523

LCLS
LCLS
LCLS

11/15/2006
12/31/2006
09/09/2008

223,748
583,032
848,447

119,448
35,671
384,822

LCLS
LCLS
ACTV
ACTV
LCLS
ACTV
PEND
PEND
ACTV
ACTV
LCLS
ACTV

09/09/2008
10/08/2009
01/31/2013
07/31/2011
06/18/2007
06/30/2013
03/15/2014
03/15/2014
10/22/2014
10/22/2014
08/31/2010
03/31/2012

26,596
852,295
50,000
195,000
208,278
10,000,000
1,120,040
110,773
1,901,660
58,000
46,763
75,900

0
852,295
0
64,756
208,278
2,574,270
0
0
300,000
0
46,763
38,305

ACTV

07/23/2013

396,540

79,897

Fund Name
JSDF-Peru: Lima Rapid Empowerment Fund (Bank-Exe TF For Covering Incremental
Bank Costs Of TF052877)
GEF3 FSP-Peru: Lima Urban Transport Project
Peru RBI Replication in the ALIADOS Project
Women Agricultural Producers And Irrigation In The Peruvian Sierra: Enhancing their
Leadership and Recognition in the Water Users Organizations of Chonta and Maschcon
(Cajamarca Region).
Local Financing Of Utilities Phase 2 - Improving Capacity of Peruvian Water Utilities to
Access Local Financing
Peru - Agricultural Drainage - Maintenance Equipment And Rehabilitation Needs in
Selected Valleys
Support Productive Uses Promotion Peru
Supporting Integrated, Participatory, Basin-Scale Wrm In Peru
Rapid Response: Effective Urban Traffic Management Program for Historic Districts in the
Metropolitan Municipality Of Lima
Peru Vilcanota II Project Preparation
Gender Differentiated Impact in the Incagro Project
Gender Mainstreaming in the Peru Sierra Irrigation Project
Empowering Women And Improving Gender Balance for Irrigation and Water
Management in the Andean Region of Peru
Pillar III: Modernization Of Institutions
Peru: Towards A Results Oriented Participatory Budget (PB) - Piloting Mechanisms to
Increase PB Results Orientation And Support Participatory Monitoring in Health and
Nutrition Services
JSDF-Peru: Civil Society And the Rule of Law
Peru: Assessing the Distributional Impacts of Peru's Social Programs Decentralization
IDF Grant For Technical Assistance For Strengthening Institutional Capacity
On-Site Expert Support to Improve the Implementation of Sub-National Public Investments
in The Regions of Apurimac, Ayacucho, and Huancavelica
Peru National Results Based Monitoring, Evaluation and Information
Peru - Improving Coverage, Quality, and Timeliness of Peru's Vital Statistics
Integration of Disaster Risk Information in Peru's Planning System
IDF: Peru-Improving the Quality And Efficiency of Public Expenditure Management
Peru – TA for Strengthening Private Sector Accounting and Auditing (# 7088)
Peru-IDF Grant for Strengthening Congressional Budget Oversight Capacity Project
PPIAF-SNTA: Peru: Access to Commercial Bank and Capital Markets (Phase II)
Supervision of TF096160 (GFR4317): Preparation for the Peru Vilcanota II Project
Peru: Vilcanota Valley Project

71

Fund Status

Closing Date

Grant Amount

Total Disbursed
in CPS Period

LCLS
LCLS
ACTV

06/30/2007
06/30/2010
09/30/2011

31,071
7,354,080
50,000

16,929
5,451,010
17,500

LCLS

12/31/2009

21,974

21,974

ACTV

06/30/2011

52,800

41,806

ACTV
ACTV
ACTV

06/30/2011
06/30/2011
10/30/2011

41,270
119,706
90,000

39,879
77,079
64,509

ACTV
ACTN
LCLS
LCLS

12/31/2011
12/31/2011
10/31/2010
12/31/2010

125,000
625,000
39,973
29,740

57,750
0
39,973
29,740

ACTV

05/31/2011

35,000

32,393

ACTV
LCLS
ACTV
ACTV

06/30/2011
01/28/2009
06/30/2012
01/12/2012

49,500
560,088
80,000
223,620

13,193
560,088
23,125
30,000

ACTV
ACTV
PEND
PEND
ACTV
LCLS
ACTV
ACTV
ACTV
ACTV

09/24/2013
10/01/2013
10/19/2012
03/30/2013
11/12/2012
06/30/2010
06/03/2011
06/30/2011
12/29/2011
12/31/2011

400,000
311,350
250,000
310,000
150,000
199,463
493,500
499,776
31,250
260,000

80,000
80,000
0
0
50,000
199,463
203,312
449,620
0
234,782

Fund Name

Fund Status

SAP Data as of 06/01/2011
Notes:
LCLS=Legally Closed
PEN=Pending
ACTV=Active
ACTN=Active But Not Disbursing

72

Closing Date

Grant Amount

Total Disbursed
in CPS Period

Total

55,870,614

23,579,721

Annex 3

Peru at a glance

1/5/12

Peru

Latin
America
& Carib.

Upper
middle
income

Population, mid-year (millions)
Surface area (thousand sq. km)
Population growth (%)
Urban population (% of total population)

29.1
1,285
1.1
72

572
20,394
1.1
79

1,002
48,659
0.9
75

GNI (Atlas method, US$ billions)
GNI per capita (Atlas method, US$)
GNI per capita (PPP, international $)

136.7
4,700
8,120

4,011
7,007
10,286

7,515
7,502
12,440

8.8
7.6

-1.9
-3.0

-2.6
-3.4

6
15
74
15
5

8
17
74
19
4

..
..
72
19
..

95
85
109
109

92
90
118
114

94
91
111
110

82
68

93
79

95
84

Key Development Indicators

Age distribution, 2009

(2010)

Male

Female

75-79
60-64
45-49
30-34
15-19
0-4
10

GDP growth (%)
GDP per capita growth (%)

5

0

5

10

percent of total population

(most recent estimate, 2004–2010)
Poverty headcount ratio at $1.25 a day (PPP, %)
Poverty headcount ratio at $2.00 a day (PPP, %)
Life expectancy at birth (years)
Infant mortality (per 1,000 live births)
Child malnutrition (% of children under 5)

Under-5 mortality rate (per 1,000)
90
80

70
60

Adult literacy, male (% of ages 15 and older)
Adult literacy, female (% of ages 15 and older)
Gross primary enrollment, male (% of age group)
Gross primary enrollment, female (% of age group)

50
40
30
20
10

Access to an improved water source (% of population)
Access to improved sanitation facilities (% of population)

0
1990

1995

Peru

Net Aid Flows
(US$ millions)
Net ODA and official aid
Top 3 donors (in 2008):
United States
Spain
Germany

1980

1990

2000

2010

202

397

397

442

53
0
59

79
6
60

92
19
34

104
100
80

1.0
12

1.6
18

0.8
15

0.4
15

2000

2009

Latin America & the Caribbean

a

Growth of GDP and GDP per capita (%)
15
10

5

Aid (% of GNI)
Aid per capita (US$)

0
-5

Long-T erm Economic T rends
Consumer prices (annual % change)
GDP implicit deflator (annual % change)
Exchange rate (annual average, local per US$)
Terms of trade index (2000 = 100)

-10
95

..
65.9

..
6,836.9

..
3.7

5.4
6.9

0.0
..

0.2
126

3.5
100

2.8
145

05

GDP

GDP per capita

1980–90 1990–2000
2000–10
(average annual growth %)
Population, mid-year (millions)
GDP (US$ millions)
Agriculture
Industry
Manufacturing
Services

17.3
20,661
11.7
42.8
23.5
45.5

21.7
26,294

25.9
53,290

29.1
157,053

2.3
-0.1

1.8
4.7

1.2
6.1

(% of GDP)
8.5
8.5
27.4
29.9
17.8
15.8
64.1
61.6

8.3
34.3
16.6
57.5

3.0
0.1
-0.2
-0.5

5.5
5.4
3.8
4.0

4.1
6.6
6.2
6.2

Household final consumption expenditure
General gov't final consumption expenditure
Gross capital formation

57.5
10.5
29.0

73.7
7.9
16.5

71.4
10.6
20.2

62.7
10.0
24.4

0.7
-0.9
-3.8

4.0
5.2
7.4

5.3
5.7
10.7

Exports of goods and services
Imports of goods and services
Gross savings

22.4
19.4
..

15.8
13.8
19.3

16.0
18.2
20.2

25.1
22.2
22.8

-0.9
-3.2

8.5
9.0

7.2
9.2

Note: Figures in italics are for years other than those specified. 2010 data are preliminary. Group data are for 2009. .. indicates data are not available.
a. Aid data are for 2009.
Development Economics, Development Data Group (DECDG).

73

Peru
Balance of Payments and T rade

2000

2010

Governance indicators, 2000 and 2009
(US$ millions)
Total merchandise exports (fob)
Total merchandise imports (cif)
Net trade in goods and services

6,955
7,358
-1,138

32,673
24,191
4,713

Voice and accountability

Current account balance
as a % of GDP

-1,546
-2.9

-2,315
-1.5

Regulatory quality

Political stability

Rule of law

Workers' remittances and
compensation of employees (receipts)

718

Reserves, including gold

8,563

2,378

Control of corruption
0

44,150
2009

Central Government Finance

25

50

75

100

Country's percentile rank (0-100)
higher values imply better ratings

2000

(% of GDP)
Current revenue (including grants)
Tax revenue
Current expenditure

14.9
12.2
15.1

16.8
14.5
12.7

Overall surplus/deficit

-2.8

0.0

Source: Kaufmann-Kraay-Mastruzzi, World Bank

T echnology and Infrastructure

Highest marginal tax rate (%)
Individual
Corporate

30
30

Paved roads (% of total)
Fixed line and mobile phone
subscribers (per 100 people)
High technology exports
(% of manufactured exports)

30
30

2000
13.4

2009
13.9

12

95

3.6

2.6

17
54.1
..

17
53.1
..

60,377
19.3

56,685
..

External Debt and Resource Flows
Environment
(US$ millions)
Total debt outstanding and disbursed
Total debt service
Debt relief (HIPC, MDRI)

28,632
2,571
–

36,271
6,784
–

53.7
25.8

23.1
15.7

Total debt (% of GDP)
Total debt service (% of exports)
Foreign direct investment (net inflows)
Portfolio equity (net inflows)

810
123

Agricultural land (% of land area)
Forest area (% of land area)
Terrestrial protected areas (% of land area)
Freshwater resources per capita (cu. meters)
Freshwater withdrawal (billion cubic meters)

4,760
47

CO2 emissions per capita (mt)

Composition of total external debt, 2009

1.2

1.5

GDP per unit of energy use
(2005 PPP $ per kg of oil equivalent)

11.8

15.4

Energy use per capita (kg of oil equivalent)

468

510

00
IMF,IBRD,
Short-term, 0IDA,
2,846

W orld Bank Group portfolio
Other multilateral, 10,262

Bilateral, 3,362

US$ millions

Time required to start a business (days)
Cost to start a business (% of GNI per capita)
Time required to register property (days)
Ranked as a major constraint to business
(% of managers surveyed who agreed)
Anticompetitive or informal practices
Tax administration
Stock market capitalization (% of GDP)
Bank capital to asset ratio (%)

2000

2010

–
–
–

27
13.6
7

2000

2010

..
..

22.1
17.9

19.8
9.1

2009

IBRD
Total debt outstanding and disbursed
Disbursements
Principal repayments
Interest payments

2,590
266
93
189

2,846
379
245
107

IDA
Total debt outstanding and disbursed
Disbursements
Total debt service

0
0
0

0
0
0

292
157
70

760
538
216

10

64

329
40

7
0

(US$ millions)

Private, 19,923

Private Sector Development

2000

IFC (fiscal year)
Total disbursed and outstanding portfolio
of which IFC own account
Disbursements for IFC own account
Portfolio sales, prepayments and
repayments for IFC own account
MIGA
Gross exposure
New guarantees

63.6
10.0

Note: Figures in italics are for years other than those specified. 2010 data are preliminary.
.. indicates data are not available. – indicates observation is not applicable.
Development Economics, Development Data Group (DECDG).

74

1/5/12

Millennium Development Goals

Peru

With selected targets to achieve between 1990 and 2015
(estimate closest to date shown, +/- 2 years)

Peru

Goal 1: halve the rates for extreme poverty and malnutrition
Poverty headcount ratio at $1.25 a day (PPP, % of population)
Poverty headcount ratio at national poverty line (% of population)
Share of income or consumption to the poorest qunitile (%)
Prevalence of malnutrition (% of children under 5)

1990
<2
..
5.6
8.8

1995
8.6
42.7
4.4
5.7

2000
15.1
48.4
3.3
5.2

Goal 2: ensure that children are able to complete primary schooling
Primary school enrollment (net, %)
Primary completion rate (% of relevant age group)
Secondary school enrollment (gross, %)
Youth literacy rate (% of people ages 15-24)

92
..
67
..

89
89
70
95

98
102
85
..

94
101
89
97

Goal 3: eliminate gender disparity in education and empower women
Ratio of girls to boys in primary and secondary education (%)
Women employed in the nonagricultural sector (% of nonagricultural employment)
Proportion of seats held by women in national parliament (%)

96
..
6

96
31
11

97
33
11

99
38
28

78
55
64

59
43
98

41
31
97

19
15
91

Goal 5: reduce maternal mortality by three-fourths
Maternal mortality ratio (modeled estimate, per 100,000 live births)
Births attended by skilled health staff (% of total)
Contraceptive prevalence (% of women ages 15-49)

250
80
59

220
56
64

160
59
69

98
83
73

Goal 6: halt and begin to reverse the spread of HIV/AIDS and other major diseases
Prevalence of HIV (% of population ages 15-49)
Incidence of tuberculosis (per 100,000 people)
Tuberculosis case detection rate (%, all forms)

0.4
317
55

0.5
242
78

0.5
184
81

0.4
113
97

75
54
54.8
..
1.0
10.0

77
59
..
..
1.0
11.6

79
62
54.1
..
1.2
11.8

82
68
53.1
..
1.5
15.4

2.6
0.0
0.0
..

4.6
0.3
0.0
1.5

6.6
4.9
3.1
4.0

10.2
84.7
27.7
10.1

Goal 4: reduce under-5 mortality by two-thirds
Under-5 mortality rate (per 1,000)
Infant mortality rate (per 1,000 live births)
Measles immunization (proportion of one-year olds immunized, %)

Goal 7: halve the proportion of people without sustainable access to basic needs
Access to an improved water source (% of population)
Access to improved sanitation facilities (% of population)
Forest area (% of land area)
Terrestrial protected areas (% of land area)
CO2 emissions (metric tons per capita)
GDP per unit of energy use (constant 2005 PPP $ per kg of oil equivalent)
Goal 8: develop a global partnership for development
Telephone mainlines (per 100 people)
Mobile phone subscribers (per 100 people)
Internet users (per 100 people)
Personal computers (per 100 people)

Education indicators (%)

Measles immunization (% of 1-year olds)

125

75
75
50

25
25
0
2000

2005

ICT indicators (per 100 people)
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0

100

100

50

2009
5.9
31.3
3.9
5.4

2009
0
1990

1995

2000

2009

2000

2005

2009

Primary net enrollment ratio
Ratio of girls to boys in primary & secondary
education

Peru

Latin America & the Caribbean

Note: Figures in italics are for years other than those specified. .. indicates data are not available.
Development Economics, Development Data Group (DECDG).

75

Fixed + mobile subscribers

Internet users

1/5/12

Annex 4
PERU
Selected Indicators* of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
As Of Date 1/5/2012

Indicator
Portfolio Assessment
Number of Projects Under Implementation a
Average Implementation Period (years) b
Percent of Problem Projects by Number a, c
Percent of Problem Projects by Amount a, c
Percent of Projects at Risk by Number a, d
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount a, d
Disbursement Ratio (%) e
Portfolio Management
CPPR during the year (yes/no)
Supervision Resources (total US$)
Average Supervision (US$/project)

Memorandum Item
Proj Eval by OED by Number
Proj Eval by OED by Amt (US$ millions)
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Number
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt

2009

2010

2011

2012

17
3.9
11.8
1.8
23.5
3.2
27.8

18
3.9
5.6
0.5
5.6
0.5
38.0

18
3.1
5.6
1.0
5.6
1.0
13.9

18
3.6
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
10.3

yes
1842
108

yes
1572
87

yes
1133
63

yes
737
41

Since FY 80 Last Five FYs
76
8
4,921.4
314.8
39.2
25.0
17.0
10.5

a.
b.
c.
d.
e.

As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY).
Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio.
Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) and/or implementation progress (IP).
As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the
beginning of the year: Investment projects only.
* All indicators are for projects active in the Portfolio, with the exception of Disbursement Ratio,
which includes all active projects as well as projects which exited during the fiscal year.

76

Annex 5

Peru Social Indicators
Latest single year

POPULATION
Total population, mid-year (millions)
Growth rate (% annual average for period)
Urban population (% of population)
Total fertility rate (births per woman)
POVERTY
(% of population)
National headcount index
Urban headcount index
Rural headcount index
INCOME
GNI per capita (US$)
Consumer price index (2000=100)
Food price index (2000=100)
INCOME/CONSUMPTION DISTRIBUTION
Gini index
Lowest quintile (% of income or consumption)
Highest quintile (% of income or consumption)

Same region/income group

1980-85

1990-95

2003-09

Latin
America
& Carib.

Uppermiddleincome

19.5
2.4
66.9
4.4

23.9
1.9
70.3
3.3

29.2
1.2
71.5
2.5

572.5
1.2
79.0
2.2

1,001.7
0.9
74.9
2.0

..
..
..

..
..
..

34.8
21.1
60.3

..
..
..

..
..
..

960
0
0

1,990
65
77

4,200
113
..

7,007
123
..

7,502
127
..

..
..
..

44.9
4.9
50.4

48.0
3.9
52.6

..
..
..

..
..
..

..
2.7

2.4
..

2.7
2.7

3.9
4.0

3.8
4.3

96
93
89

89
90
89

94
94
95

94
94
93

93
93
92

..
..
..

77
89
50

82
90
61

93
97
80

95
98
86

53
48
12

98
90
9

91
93
5

93
92
4

93
93
..

63
61
65

68
66
71

73
71
76

74
71
77

72
69
75

76
101

51
62

19
21

19
23

19
22

287
229
..
..

228
173
220
80

162
100
98
83

190
103
86
89

201
122
82
96

SOCIAL INDICATORS
Public expenditure
Health (% of GDP)
Education (% of GDP)
Net primary school enrollment rate
(% of age group)
Total
Male
Female
Access to an improved water source
(% of population)
Total
Urban
Rural
Immunization rate
(% of children ages 12-23 months)
Measles
DPT
Child malnutrition (% under 5 years)
Life expectancy at birth
(years)
Total
Male
Female
Mortality
Infant (per 1,000 live births)
Under 5 (per 1,000)
Adult (15-59)
Male (per 1,000 population)
Female (per 1,000 population)
Maternal (modeled, per 100,000 live births)
Births attended by skilled health staff (%)

Note: 0 or 0.0 means zero or less than half the unit shown. Net enrollment rate: break in series between 1997 and 1998 due to
change from ISCED76 to ISCED97. Immunization: refers to children ages 12-23 months who received vaccinations before one
year of age or at any time before the survey.
World Development Indicators database, World Bank - 15 April 2011.

77

Annex 6
PERU – Key Economic Indicators

Indicator
National accounts (as % of GDP)
Gross domestic product a
Agriculture

Actual
2006
2007

2005

Estimate
2009
2010

2008

Projected
2011
2012

2013

100
7

100
7

100
7

100
7

100
8

100
8

100
8

100
8

100
7

Industry

34

37

37

37

35

34

34

33

33

Services

58

56

56

56

57

57

59

59

60

Total Consumption
Gross domestic fixed investment
Government investment
Private investment

76
18
3
15

71
19
3
16

70
22
3
18

73
26
4
22

76
23
5
18

73
25
6
19

73
24
6
18

74
24
6
18

73
26
6
20

Exports (GNFS) b
Imports (GNFS)

25
19

29
20

29
22

27
27

24
20

25
22

27
24

27
25

27
26

Gross domestic savings

24

29

30

27

24

27

27

26

27

Gross national savings c

19

23

24

23

21

23

22

22

22

Memorandum items
Gross domestic product
(US$ million at current prices)
GNI per capita (US$, Atlas method)

79385
2680

92304 107233 126823 126923 157053 175682 192020 208370
2950

3370

4010

4170

4730

..

..

..

Real annual growth rates (%, calculated from 94 prices)
Gross domestic product at market prices 6.8
7.7
Gross Domestic Income
8.0
13.1

8.9
9.5

9.8
5.8

0.8
0.3

8.8
12.1

6.5
7.3

6.0
5.3

6.0
5.5

Real annual per capita growth rates (%, calculated from 94 prices)
Gross domestic product at market prices 5.6
6.6
7.7
Total consumption
3.9
5.4
6.7
Private consumption
3.4
5.3
7.2

8.7
6.8
7.6

-0.2
2.7
1.2

7.6
5.4
4.8

..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

Balance of Payments (US$ millions)
Exports (GNFS) b
Merchandise FOB

19657
17368

26490
23830

31246
28094

34667
31018

30607
26962

39521
35565

47338
43129

50893
46242

55582
50385

Imports (GNFS) b
Merchandise FOB
Resource balance
Net current transfers
Current account balance

15205
12082
4452
..
1148

18241
14844
8249
..
2854

23935
19591
7312
..
1460

34154
28449
514
..
-5318

25800
21011
4807
..
211

34809
28815
4713
..
-2315

42767
36067
4572
..
-4396

48389
40994
2505
..
-6233

53715
45685
1867
..
-7705

Net private foreign direct investment
Long-term loans (net)
Official
Private
Other capital (net, incl. errors & ommissions)

2579
-2030
-1931
-99
-68

3467
-410
-392
-18
-3158

5425
612
-2316
2928
2916

6188
1171
-89
1260
1466

5178
2501
-574
3075
-5950

7113
2745
-1369
4114
3648

8546
4932
8
4925
-5958

8950
5454
-770
6225
-6672

9512
1992
-514
2506
-1847

Change in reserves d

-1628

-2753 -10414

-3507

-1939 -11192

-3124

-1499

-1953

Memorandum items
Resource balance (% of GDP)
Real annual growth rates ( YR94 prices)
Merchandise exports (FOB)
Primary
Manufactures
Merchandise imports (CIF)

5.6

8.9

6.8

0.4

3.8

3.0

2.6

1.3

0.9

..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..

(Continued)

78

PERU – Key Economic Indicators
(Continued)

Indicator

Actual
2006
2007

2005

Public finance (as % of GDP at market prices) e
Current revenues
15.7
Current expenditures
14.7
Current account surplus (+) or deficit (-)
1.0
Capital expenditure
1.9
Foreign financing
..

Estimate
2009

2008

Projected
2011
2012

2010

2013

17.4
14.1
3.3
2.0
..

18.1
14.2
3.9
2.2
..

18.3
13.8
4.5
2.4
..

15.9
13.9
2.0
3.8
..

16.8
12.7
4.1
4.3
-0.6

19.9
13.6
6.3
5.6
0.1

20.9
14.1
6.8
6.0
0.5

21.0
13.7
7.3
6.2
0.0

10.8
27.2
186.1

11.2
20.0
-101.9

13.1
29.4
770.3

15.1
28.1
305.2

16.3
10.8
28.3

29.3
109.2
-332.9

28.9
8.3
-95.5

28.8
7.6
-77.5

28.6
7.6
-16.7

..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

Real exchange rate (US$/LCU) f

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

Real interest rates
Consumer price index (% change)
GDP deflator (% change)

1.6
3.0

5.7
7.2

0.4
1.9

5.3
0.7

5.5
2.2

5.4
6.9

5.5
3.0

3.7
2.0

3.3
2.0

Monetary indicators
M2/GDP
Growth of M2 (%)
Private sector credit growth /
total credit growth (%)
Price indices( YR94 =100)
Merchandise export price index
Merchandise import price index
Merchandise terms of trade index

a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.

GDP at factor cost
"GNFS" denotes "goods and nonfactor services."
Includes net unrequited transfers excluding official capital grants.
Includes use of IMF resources.
Consolidated central government.
"LCU" denotes "local currency units." An increase in US$/LCU denotes appreciation.

79

Annex 7
PERU – Key Exposure Indicators

2005

Actual
2006
2007

2008

29352

29133

32073

34559

36393

36271

35716

33870

32630

Net disbursements (US$m) a

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

Total debt service (TDS)

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

TDO/XGSb

135.1

99.2

91.7

88.7

105.6

83.9

69.5

61.3

54.3

TDO/GDP

37.0

31.6

29.9

27.2

28.7

23.1

20.3

17.6

15.7

TDS/XGS

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

11.2

10.8

9.6

10.8

10.7

9.9

9.9

10.1

9.8

IBRD DS/public DS

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

Preferred creditor DS/public

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

Indicator
Total debt outstanding and

Estimated
2009
2010

Projected
2012
2013

2011

disbursed (TDO) (US$m) a

(US$m)

a

Debt and debt service indicators
(%)

Concessional/TDO
IBRD exposure indicators (%)

DS (%)c
IBRD DS/XGS
IBRD TDO (US$m) d

1.4
2816

1.2
2633

1.1
2649

0.9
2712

1.0
2846

0.7
2965

0.7
3206

0.7
2933

0.6
2962

Of which present value of
guarantees (US$m)
Share of IBRD portfolio (%)

2

2

2

2

3

3

3

3

3

IDA TDO (US$m) d

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

IFC (US$m)
Loans
Equity and quasi-equity /c
MIGA
MIGA guarantees (US$m)

a. Includes public and publicly guaranteed debt, private nonguaranteed, use of IMF credits and net shortterm capital.
b. "XGS" denotes exports of goods and services, including workers' remittances.
c. Preferred creditors are defined as IBRD, IDA, the regional multilateral development banks, the IMF, and the
Bank for International Settlements.
d. Includes present value of guarantees.
e. Includes equity and quasi-equity types of both loan and equity instruments.

80

Annex 8
Operations Portfolio (IBRD/IDA and Grants)
As Of Date 1/5/2012

Closed Projects

113

IBRD/IDA *
Total Disbursed (Active)
of which has been repaid
Total Disbursed (Closed)
of which has been repaid
Total Disbursed (Active + Closed)
of which has been repaid

454.90
5.87
1,822.34
2,087.14
2,277.23
2,093.01

Total Undisbursed (Active)

1,469.28

Total Undisbursed (Closed)

0.00

Total Undisbursed (Active + Closed)

1,469.28

Active Projects

Difference Between
Last PSR

Expected and Actual

Supervision Rating
Development
Objectives

Project ID

Project Name

P101590
P095570
P101471
P095424
P110752
P065256
P117293
P078894
P078813
P117310
P090116
P090110
P117864
P079165
P107666
P095563
P101177
P104760
P120860
Overall Result

PE 2nd Prg Fiscal Mgmt & Comp.
S
DPL/DDO
PE Decentralized Rural Transport
S
Project
PE First Prog. Environ DPL/DDO
S
PE GEF Nat'l Protected Areas
S System
PE Justice Services Improv.SII
PE NATIONAL RURAL WATER
MS SUPPLY AND
PE Optimization of Lima WatS& Sewerage
PE Real Property Rights II S
PE Regional Transport Decentralization
S
PE Results Nutrition for Juntos
S SWAp
PE Rural Electrification
S
PE Rural Electrification
MS
PE Second Rural Electrification
S
PE Sierra Rural Development
S Project
PE Water Resources Mgmt.S
PE- (APL2) Health Reform Program
S
PE-2nd Results & Accnt.(REACT)DPL/DDO
S
PE-Sierra Irrigation
MS
PERU CAT DDO
S

Disbursements a/

Original Amount in US$ Millions

Implementation
Progress

Fiscal Year

IBRD

S
S
S
S
HS
MS
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
MS
S
S
MS
S

2009
2007
2009
2010
2011
2003
2011
2006
2006
2011
2006
2006
2011
2007
2010
2009
2009
2011
2011

700
50
330

81

IDA

GRANT

8.891
20
80
54.5
25
50
25
50
10
50
20
10
15
330
20
100
1929.5

18.891

Cancel.

Undisb.

Orig. Frm Rev'd

480
7.197861 7.197861
310
4.746438
18.65468
36.40768
6.40768 6.40768
54.5
1.3E-07
5.228164 5.228164 3.00352
25.96836 25.96836
25
1.484641 0.092975 -3.11213
7.10161 6.893277
50
6.083772 6.083772 2.137105
8.63138 -1.368617
11.52486 5.258197
310
18.59667
100
1481.126 -205.1315 8.436177

Annex 8B: Trust Funds Overview

Program
CSCFIA
ESMAP
ESMAP
GEFIA
GEFIA
GEFIA
GFDRR
IDF
IDF
IDF
IDF
IDF
IDF
JSDF
JSDF
JSDF
JSDF
PHRD
PHRD
PHRD
PSIA
SFLAC

Fund
TF098688
TF097910
TF011473
TF091712
TF056023
TF097155
TF058206
TF092745
TF094136
TF095180
TF096586
TF096843
TF099051
TF096419
TF096475
TF099277
TF099279
TF090328
TF011294
TF011295
TF097239
TF099500

SFLAC
SFLAC
SFLAC
SFLAC
SFLAC

TF095895
TF096160
TF095953
TF098992
TF099273

SFLAC
SIEF
SOUTH
SUN

TF096018
TF096538
TF011088
TF096400

TFESSD
TFSCB
TFSCB

TF097837
TF099184
TF011183

Fund Name
Peru Forest Investment Program (FIP)
Support Productive Uses Promotion Peru
Technical Assistance for Energy Planning in Peru
Adaptation to the Impact of Rapid Glacier Retreat in the Tropical Andes Project
Peru: Rural Electrification Project
Strengthening Biodiversity Conservation through the National Protected Areas Program
Vilcanota Valley Project
Technical Assistance for Strengthening Institutional Capacity
Institution Strengthening Of Andean Supreme Audit Institutions
Improving the Quality and Efficiency of Public Expenditure Management
Strengthening the national System for Evaluation and Quality Assurance of Education
Peru National Results Based Monitoring, Evaluation and Information
Integration of Disaster Risk Information in Peru's Planning System
Participatory Intervention Model to Improve Child Nutrition
Participatory Intervention Model To Improve Child Nutrition (Bank-executed)
Enhancing Integrated Legal Strategies For The Poor
Enhancing Integrated Legal Strategies For The Poor
Adaptation to Rapid Glacier Retreat in the Tropical Andes (Bolivia, Ecuador, Peru)
Mainstreaming Inclusive Design & Universal Mobility In Lima (Bank Supervision)
Mainstreaming Inclusive Design And Universal Mobility In Lima
Assessing the Distributional impacts of Peru's social programs decentralization
Supervision of TF096160 (GFR4317): Preparation for the Peru Vilcanota II Project
Rapid Response: Effective Urban Traffic Management Program for Historic Districts in the
Metropolitan Municipality of Lima
Peru Vilcanota II Project Preparation
Integration of Disaster Risk in Peru Spatial Information System - CAPRA
Strengthening Accountability and Results-Based Management in Education
Peru Environmental Governance and Mainstreaming in Key Sectors Project
On-site Expert Support to Improve the Implementation of Sub-national Public Investments in the
regions of Apurimac, Ayacucho, and Huancavelica
IE - Water Rights in Peru
Study-tour for high-ranking Peruvian officials to learn from the Escuela Nueva model in Colombia
Peru: Scaling Up Nutrition
Innovative Institutional and Technological Solutions to Reduce Vulnerability to Resource
Degradation and Climate Shocks in LCR
Improving Coverage, Quality, and Timeliness of Peru's Vital Statistics
Operationalizing Open Data Access In Peru And Improving Quality, Relevance And Accessibility Of

82

Grant
Type
BE
BE
BE
RE
RE
RE
BE
RE
RE
RE
RE
RE
RE
RE
BE
RE
BE
RE
BE
RE
BE
BE

Closing Date
12/31/2012
06/30/2012
12/06/2012
09/30/2012
06/30/2013
05/31/2015
12/31/2011
01/12/2012
09/02/2012
11/12/2012
07/23/2013
10/01/2013
08/16/2014
10/22/2014
10/22/2014
09/30/2015
09/30/2015
09/30/2012
12/31/2013
12/31/2013
06/30/2012
12/29/2011

Grant
Amount
35,000
160,896
85,000
7,940,000
10,000,000
8,891,000
260,000
223,620
489,900
150,000
396,540
311,350
310,000
1,901,660
58,000
1,120,040
110,773
865,000
125,000
2,500,000
80,000
31,250

BE
RE
BE
BE
BE

12/31/2011
12/31/2011
12/15/2012
01/31/2013
03/31/2013

125,000
625,000
300,000
50,000
250,000

RE
BE
BE
BE

09/24/2013
07/31/2011
06/30/2012
03/31/2012

400,000
195,000
49,000
75,900

BE
RE
RE

12/31/2012
10/19/2012
12/02/2014

500,000
250,000
240,000

Program

Fund

Grant
Type

Fund Name

Peru's National Statistics System
Supporting Integrated, Participatory, Basin-Scale WRM in Peru
Peru - Agricultural drainage - maintenance equipment and rehabilitation needs in selected valleys
TOTAL
SAP Data as of 12/05/2011
BE= Bank Executed / RE= Recipient Executed
WPP
WPP

TF095581
TF097066

BE
BE

Closing Date
11/30/2011
11/30/2011

Grant
Amount
90,000
41,270
39,286,199

Annex 8C: Water and Sanitation Program
Donor

Fund

CIDA
TF093027
DFID
TF098440
DFID

Fund Name

Project Name

Closing Date

WSP-CIDA Peru Post-Earthquake
Planning
Pe/61 Utilities Customer-oriented
Management
Per/49 Creating Sanitation Markets

Disaster Risk Management in WSS

07/31/2012

Grant
Amount
USD
3,000,000

Peru/61 Utilities Customer-oriented Management

10/31/2013

480,000

Per/49 Creating Sanitation Markets

10/31/2013

784,000

SDC Peru - Phase 3

Support Decentralization

04/30/2013

525,202

EWDLAC/Gates Handwashing Peru

Scaling Up Handwashing Behavior Change*

02/28/2013

3,652,852

TF098345
SDC
Peru
GATES

TF093813
TF070692
TOTAL

8,442,054

(*) This project is in the Monitoring and Evaluation phase (last phase)

83

Annex 9
International Finance Corporation
Peru
Committed and Disbursed Outstanding Investment Portfolio
As of 12/31/2011
(In USD millions)

Committed

FY Approval
1993/ 1997/ 2000/
2012
2000/ 2006
2008/ 2012
2011
2007/ 2008/ 2011
2007/ 2009/ 2010/
2007/ 2008/ 2009/
2010
2004/ 2007/ 2009
2011
2004/ 2005/ 2008
2010
2011
2002/ 2003
2000/ 2007
2007
2010
2002/ 2006/ 2007/
2008
2000
2005
2003
2009/ 2011
2007/ 2009/ 2010/
2001/ 2007
2008
2009/ 2010/ 2011/
2008/ 2012
2005
1994/ 1995/ 2000

Company
2001/ 2010/ 2011/

2011
2010

2008/ 2012

2011

2012

AAQSA
Agrokasa
Amerika Fin.
Arequipa Region
B.Continental
BIF
BPZ
Calidda
Cartones America
Cheves
EDYFICAR
Enfoca
Grupo Salud
ISA Peru, SA
Laredo
Lima JCIAirport
Lima Muni
MIBANCOPERU
Maple Energy
Milkito
Miraflores
Norvial S.A.
Nuestra Gente
PHMC
Peru OEH
Peru LNG
Protecta
SAV
USMP
Yanacocha

Total Portfolio

Loan

Equity

**Quasi
Equity

Disbursed Outstanding

*GT/RM

Participant

Loan

Equity

**Quasi
Equity

*GT/RM Participant

0

52.76

0

0

0

0

52.73

0

0

0

4.09
10
0
66.22
15
0
40
0
70
0
0
25
8.68
13.2
0
0
17.8
0
0
3.12
12.06
9.23
0
0.87
286.54
0
4.67
0
0

0
0
0
0
0
31.17
0
0
0
0
14.99
0
0
0
20
0
9.64
1.58
0
0
0
12.41
0
0
0
2.41
0
0
0.33

0
0
0
0
18
9.94
10
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
7
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
5
0
0

0
5.72
1.51
0
5
0
0
0.62
0
2.22
0
0
0.08
1.23
0
21.36
0
0
0
0
0
0
0.21
0
0
0
0
0.57
0

0
0
0
46
0
0
0
0
180
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
24.97
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
20
0
0

4.09
10
0
66.22
15
0
36.13
0
0
0
0
0
8.68
13.2
0
0
14.97
0
0
3.12
12.06
9.23
0
0
286.54
0
4.67
0
0

0
0
0
0
0
31.17
0
0
0
0
4
0
0
0
13.41
0
9.64
1.58
0
0
0
12.4
0
0
0
2.41
0
0
0.33

0
0
0
0
18
9.94
9.03
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
7
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
5
0
0

0
0
1.55
0
5
0
0
0.42
0
2.22
0
0
0
0.97
0
21.36
0
0
0
0
0
0
0.21
0
0
0
0
0.57
0

0
0
0
46
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
24.97
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

586.49

145.30

49.94

38.51

270.97

483.93

127.66

48.97

32.30

70.97

* Denotes Guarantee and Risk Management Products.
** Quasi Equity includes both loan and equity types.

84

Annex 10: CPS Consultation
The current CPS was developed through a participative consultation process including
Government representatives and non-governmental actors. This Annex provides a brief summary of
the main results from the consultations carried out from June to December 2011.
Overview of the Consultation Process
The consultation process for the new CPS in Peru was designed in a participatory and
decentralized approach. The concept of the consultation was strategically planned including three
levels of intervention: (i) Micro level (Ayacucho-Huamanga), community and district level, (ii) Mezzo
level (Cusco), regional level; and (iii) Macro level (Lima), national level including. Between April and
December 2011, a total of 9 formal consultation sessions were held with approximately 320
representatives of civil society, NGOs, academic institutions, faith groups, grassroots organizations,
indigenous peoples, business sector, women‘s organizations, and think-thanks, among others. Of these,
one consultation was particularly focused on issues related to the World Bank‘s GAC strategy, and
another one had a particular view on social conflicts related to extractive industries. Participants
expressed appreciation of being able to engage with members of the Bank directly and underlined the
importance of maintaining similar periodic dialogue sessions throughout the implementation of the CPS.
The objectives of the consultation process were: (i) listen to participants‘ feedback on Peru‘s main
challenges; (ii) learn from the good practices engaged by the civil society and other stakeholders; and,
(iii) receive feedback about the role that the World Bank could play in the national agenda. The
consultation process involved initially a session in which the Bank presented its structure, vision,
performance of active portfolio and overall description and highlights of the new CPS. Subsequently
dynamic sessions were carried out where information was collected, and participatory techniques were
used to summarize and generate recommendations.
The consultation process was designed around four thematic areas: (i) economic growth with social
inclusion; (ii) competitiveness and decentralization; (iii) open government, access to information, and
anti-corruption; and, (iv) rural development and environment. In addition to the formal consultation
process, the WB team carried out a series of meetings and interviews with Ministers and technical staff
in the new administration, including the Ministry of Economy and Finance (Ministerio de Economia y
Finanzas, MEF).
Summary of Participants’ Opinions and Recommendations
The dialogue was fluid and allowed for a good environment of knowledge sharing and
recommendations for action. The conversation started with a rapid diagnosis on: regional and local
perspectives on issues related to growth with inclusion, rural development, competiveness, open
government and dialogue, followed by priorities for the next five years. The team also carried out a
special event in Huamanga (Ayacucho) to discuss issues related to gender.
Table 1. Top priorities identified by participants
Macro consultation
 Include growth with equity and social justice into the national
(86 participants from
agenda
academia, NGOs, private
 Develop more transparent and less corrupt public institutions
sector, and faith groups)
 Develop a land management strategy with sustainable criteria
 Listen to the voice of indigenous communities and understand the
impact of the extraction of natural resources in their lives

85

 Incorporate sociopolitical and economic contexts of the regions
when designing public policies
 Develop strategies to improve local and regional management
capacities
 Strengthen civil society capacities to improve dialogue among
institutions and citizens
 Promote a land use plan to reduce social conflicts
 Integrate language, traditional practices and customs in the provision
of social services
 Promote capacity building of civil society organizations in
participation at SNGs, local and regional institutions
Micro–consultation
 Improve local governments capacity
(21 leaders, women and
 Improve access to basic services (especially health and education)
men, of NGOs, local
for the most vulnerable population, particularly indigenous people
businessmen and municipal
and women
authorities, and a second day  Invest in high quality education and promote citizens‘ leadership
with 58 community leaders,
skills to improve Peru's competitiveness
women and men, from San
 Promote the participation of women in public and private sector
Francisco - VRAE [Valley
 Undertake measures to eliminate domestic violence against women
of the Rio Apurimac and
Ene], Huamanga, Cangallo,
Vilcashuaman, Samugari,
and Victor Fajardo)
Mezzo consultation
(59 representatives from
Arequipa, Apurimac, Cusco,
Madre de Dios and Puno)

In virtually all consultation sessions, participants recognized that Peru has shown strong economic
development and now needs to develop economic policies to improve living standards of its
citizens. Stakeholders pointed out that opportunity gaps among Peruvian citizens remain high. They
agreed that enhancing the quality of education at all levels and developing a strategy to improve
competitiveness are key factors to achieve the vision of inclusive growth.
Participants expressed strong concern over the low quality of education in Peru. They suggested
adapting the curricula according to the cultural context of the student, linking the education program to
the social and economic needs of the region. Participants also recommended the strengthening of the
intercultural basic education program (implementing bilingual education in those areas where the
population speaks a language other than Spanish) and increasing investment in secondary and higher
education to improve employment opportunities for young people. Moreover, they agreed that it is
necessary to train young people in leadership and entrepreneurship.
There is also a clear demand to incorporate an intercultural and inclusive attention model in the
health sector. Even though there have been improvements in the delivery of health services, health
professionals still lack adequate methods to engage indigenous women. Participants also stated that
child nutrition programs need further strengthening.
Participants also indicated that a balance needs to be sought between the expansion of the mining
sector and sustainable development. Civil society representatives argued that it is necessary to
involve indigenous groups and environmental safeguards in order to reduce the social conflicts related to
exploitation of natural resources. Private sector representatives also agreed that the consultation process
needs to be integrated into their business plan. To promote social inclusion and reduce social conflicts,
they also identified the following challenges: (i) enhance institutional capacity of SNGs to increase
Peru‘s competitiveness; (ii) increase spending capacity of local governments; (ii) introduce mechanisms
86

for investment control; (iii) improve labor market skills; (iv) improve quality of education; and, (v) close
infrastructure gaps.
There was great concern about the redistribution and management of public resources and the
use of revenue from the tax linked to excess-earnings in the mining sector. The attendees proposed
looking for an imaginative tax proposal that allows making an association between the benefits of
mining activity and an improvement of living conditions. Also, they identified the need to continue
providing technical support to local governments to optimize the use of resources from mining royalties
through the Bank instruments.
Participants indicated that decentralization is necessary to consolidate regional governments and
strengthen their capacities, especially in their ability to identify priorities and spend better. Even
though the GoP has implemented some improvements in terms of institutional reforms, especially in
fiscal management, a new stage of phase in the modernization and decentralization of government is
needed to achieve a more efficient use of resources and build more efficient, accountable and
transparent institutions. Participants stressed the need to undertake a civil service reform as a previous
step to obtain stronger institutions and reduce corruption. The participants encouraged the Bank to
promote the dialogue for the creation of macro-regions.
Participants also highlighted WB’s support to SIAF, and Results Based Budgeting (RBB). They
also considered that both systems have helped to improve accountability and civil society vigilance.
Participants also addressed that Bank's role in disseminating best practices for access to information, but
they also noted that now it is necessary to provide the tools to use such information for the decision
making process.
According to participants, Peru is ready to migrate to a more developed information system that
allows public in general to monitor the performance of the public administration. Peru has
successfully started to develop more accountable information systems (e.g. SIAF) but there is need to
move further. For instance, the political cycle is not aligned with the provision of social services
indicators produced by INEI (i.e nutrition targets in rural areas) leading to a lack of citizen monitoring
of electoral promises. In sum, public information systems still do not yield adequate indicators related to
public sector management and performance.
Participant recommended that the Bank work further in promoting Open Government and
transparency policies. Citizens are now better informed and qualified than they were in 2000 when
Peru initiated its Access to Information Policy. It is necessary to make the information accessible and
user-friendly for citizens in order to allow them to generate their own information products.
There is a need to integrate a GAC strategy into a national public policy agenda. In order to build
up this strategy, public sector representatives noted that it would be necessary to request additional WB
technical assistance to strengthen managerial and technical capacity, especially at the sub-national level.
Given that GAC is a multisectoral issue and involves all levels of government, stakeholders suggested
that the Bank could develop a role as accredited "mediator", given the institution's international
experience.
Participants also prioritized the reduction in the gender gap to achieve social inclusion with
growth. Women and men expressed their interest and commitment to gender topics. During the Micro
Consultation, participants discussed about their community problems (rapid diagnosis), voted for the
four main issues that require action in the next five years, analyzed male and female status, and
proposed an action plan in gender equity to improve their communities. Seven issues were discussed:
87

(i) access to education, health and justice services; (ii) environment; (iii) dialogue with local
governments; (iv) productive projects; and, (v) skills training for competiveness.
Looking ahead, participants discussed on ways to achieve greater inclusion and equity. The men
concluded that they need to change themselves, eliminate chauvinism and domestic violence, share
domestic work, respect women‘s participation in decision making, more dialogue with their partner, and
promote women‘s participation in politics. The women addressed the need for self affirmation, more
training workshops for capacity building, the need to introduce gender equity in basic education; and
more opportunities for public participation.
CIVIL SOCIETY CONSULTATION
Macro Consultation
Objective

Mezzo Consultation

Micro Consultation

Receive feedback on the immediate and medium term challenges that faces
the Country, and which role could develop the World Bank

Target

Stakeholders from
Academia, Faith
Groups, NGOs and
businessman, at
national level

Dates

June 21, 22 & 24,

Stakeholders from
Academia, Faith
Groups, NGOs and
businessmen, at the
regional level (six
regional sites from the
Southern Macroregion).
Also Regional and local
authorities from Cusco
October 26 & 27

Indigenous peoples
leaders from Ayacucho
and Cusco communities
(especially from the
River Apurimac and
Ene Valley), local
authorities and NGOs
representatives from
Ayacucho-Region
December 12 & 13

Participants

86

65

79

Issues
pointed out

Improved competitiveness, quality of the education system, development of
adequate labor skills, more efficient, accountable and transparent public
administration, management capacities at SNGs, sustainable exploitation of
natural resources, rural development, gender

OTHER NON GOVERNMENT CONSULTATIONS
GAC II Consultation

Mining Sector Meeting

Congressmen Meeting

Informal GAC Meeting

Develop an oversight
framework for an effective
collaboration between the
Budget and General
Account Commission at the
Congress, the Supreme
Audit Institution
(Contraloria General de la
Republica - CGR), and the
Ministry of Finance

Indentify challenges and
opportunities on
Governance and
Anticorruption

Receive stakeholder inputs
for the World Bank GAC
Strategy II. The
contributions received are
valuable to the CPS

Receive inputs from a key
economic sector in the
Peruvian economy:
extractive industries

Public sector and relevant
actors from civil society,
including NGOs,
universities and business

Selected representatives of
major mining companies in
Peru

Congressmen and advisers

Public sector and relevant
actors from civil society,
including NGOs,
universities and business

April 7 & 8

July 4

July 18 & 19

October 3 & 4

28

8

45

18

Civil service, transparency and accountability, fight against corruption, management capacities at SNGs, social conflicts,
social inclusion, institutionality
Complete reports on the consultation Macro, Mezzo and Micro are published in web site www.bancomundial.org.pe

88

Annex 11
Governance and Anti-Corruption
Country Context
Peru has implemented a set of important measures to improve its governance, especially in all
concerned on fight against corruption. The country is still living the heritage of the FujimoriMontesinos regime (1990-2000), when an unprecedented degree of corruption occurred. Subsequently,
in 2008, the eruption of another scandal (called Petrogate due to the audios in which high public
officials were discussing petroleum extraction contracts) led to the launching of a new national anticorruption plan, under the office of the then Prime Minister Yehude Simón. This plan was prepared by
a technical committee in record time. The plan presented a long list of anti-corruption measures to be
implemented by a broad range of actors and institutions and was grouped under seven objectives
ranging from institutional strengthening to corporate social responsibility and participation of media and
civil society. The prime minister also announced the creation of a new high-level anti-corruption
commission to articulate the plan which included representatives from the Supreme Court, the national
and regional governments and some representative organizations from civil society.
Even though Peru has undertaken considerable efforts to deal with the legacy of corruption dating
back at least two decades, overall governance indicators have not significantly improved since the
last 1990s. Figure 1 shows the World Bank Institute (WBI) governance indicators24 for Peru. Indices
are relatively low for political stability and rule of law, both ranking far below the Latin American
average. The only one of the six indicators that shows significant improvement is the one on voice and
accountability at slightly above the 50th percentile. The country‘s regulatory quality performs as the best
of the six indicators.
Peruvians are among the most pessimistic when it comes to perceiving progress in the fight
against corruption, compared with other Latin Americans25. According to Proética26, the Peruvian
chapter of Transparency International, one-third of the population feels that the country is very corrupt.
The Ombudsman and the Catholic Church are the institutions that people trust the most when it comes
to fighting corruption, whereas the Congress and political parties are the least trusted. Fifty-one percent
of respondents believe that corruption is the main problem of the country, ahead of crime (41 percent),
and only 1 in 5 people believes the situation will improve in the next five years.

24

WGI represent perceptions of businesspeople, citizens and experts in industrial and developing countries. While they do not identify whether
countries have similar governance systems, they do give an indication of how countries compare to each other with respect the quality of their
governance (http://info.worldbank.org/governance/wgi/index.asp).
25 Latinobarómetro: Informe 2010.
26 Proética: Sexta Encuesta Nacional Sobre Corrupción (2010).

89

Figure 1

Moreover, there is evidence that the problem of corruption is exacerbating inequalities among
Peruvians. Some studies27 evidence that poorer users are disproportionally penalized by paying bribes
that represent a greater share of their income and, in addition, paying a bribe does not necessarily
translate in better quality of the service received. Each form of corruption is associated to a different
institutional weakness and calls for a targeted policy solution. The studies also recommend that
recruiting and merit-oriented promotion system be improved, and that the civil service remain
independent from political changes.
The key elements identified to fight corruption are transparency, accountability and civil society
monitoring. Better monitoring and accountability can be achieved by facilitating an effective open
access to information and by stimulating the commitment in this area from government, private sector
and civil society. Linked to that, the GoP has recently signed a pledge to join the Open Government
Partnership. In order to materialize its involvement in this partnership, the country needs to prepare an
action plan, jointly with civil society, in anticipation of the Summit, scheduled for March 2012 in Rio de
Janeiro, Brazil. Also the Ombudsman is pursuing the implementation of the Law of Transparency and
Access to Information, a pioneer in Latin America but with some shortcomings in terms of guaranteeing
rights of access.

27

Kaufmann, Recanatini (eds.): Voices of the Misgoverned and Misruled: an Empirical Diagnostic on Governance, Rule of Law and Corruption of
Peru (2001).

90

The Government has indicated that the fight against corruption will be a priority. The Government
intends to set up several mechanisms to enhance transparency, improve justice services, and fight
corruption. The GoP's frontal attack on corruption proposes to implement a set of legal and institutional
measures, among which is the strengthening of the General Comptroller of the Republic and the
reorganization of the Supreme Organism for Public Procurement (OSCE). The lack of trust of Peruvians
in their public institutions is one of the main concerns for the new Government, particularly because
governance problems tend to ignite social conflicts, which in turn could pose risks to economic growth
in the long run.
The World Bank GAC Strategy in Peru
Sustained growth rates require strong institutions. GAC support has been a key element in the
performance of the World Bank. As an innovator in the demand side of incorporating governance into
development operations, the Bank needed (and needs) a strategy for dealing with cases of corruption
that, at the same time, was consistent with its mission of fight against poverty. In this context, GAC
Strategy I provided several tools to strength the Bank's response capacity to demand from the client for
increased support in Governance and Anticorruption.
The World Bank selected a group of countries as pilot countries (CGAC), which included Peru as
a MIC representative. The Bank has been working on GAC issues through strengthening capacities of
implementing units through the improvement of control systems and provision of transparency
mechanisms for greater accountability. As part of the CGAC program, since 2008, the Bank has
intensified its GAC activities and has begun its support to the country by using tools that go beyond the
traditional Bank instruments.
In this context, the World Bank has strongly supported anti-corruption initiatives from the GoP
through a GPF grant. With an amount of US$ 450.000 and embedded in Peru's Anti-Corruption
Action Plan the Improving Prevention, Oversight and Accountability to Increase Transparency and
Curb Corruption in Peru grant, now under implementation, aims to support the Government of Peru in
the prevention of corruption through the identification and monitoring of key vulnerable sectors to
corruption, and to increase transparency and accountability in public sector accounts. A Corruption Risk
Map is being developed to promote the creation and consolidation of a National Observatory for
Governance. The grant also seeks to establish a technical unit in the Congressional Budget Commission
to better control public finances and strengthen the role of the General Comptroller of the Republic.
The Bank, in partnership with key institutions of civil society, has promoted citizen oversight as a
tool to control the proper use of public resources in rural Peru. Through the PARSALUD project,
more than 200 people have been trained in the last year as overseers to monitor the adequate delivery of
medical equipment to health facilities. Guidelines have also been produced for citizen oversight and for
trainers which are being distributed in some regions. Likewise, the Bank has provided support to the
dissemination of good practices in public sector management to all provincial, regional and national
institutions. The Bank has also collaborated with Proética in financing of the National Survey on
Corruption, which is a key instrument to determine the perception and attitude of Peruvians toward
corruption. As a CGAC Country, the Peru team produced a note on the challenges and opportunities in
this area.28.
Governance was an explicit focus of the previous CPS and led to the preparation of various
operations and AAA. The issues of transparency, accountability and institutional strengthening have
been reinforced as a crosscutting priority in all areas of engagement. Thus, the Bank has supported the
28

Peru‘s CGAC Experience: Challenges, Achievements and Opportunities.

91

application of traditional fiduciary tools (PEFA, OECD–DAC procurement indicators) in order to
facilitate the evaluation of the country under international benchmarks. Also, the Justice Services
Improvement Project II is focusing its major components on the improvement of service delivery from
the participating institutions in the national Justice system, strengthening human resources management,
and enhancing access to justice with a specific anti-corruption dimension. Finally, the Bank has been
investing heavily on building capacities of national and SNGs through AAA services and NLTA
(budgeting process, results based budgeting, procurement, accountability framework from the social
sectors, strengthening capacities of regional governments, among others).
This CPS proposes to implement governance as a crosscutting theme, in support of the
Government of Peru. Discussions with government and civil society counterparts have indicated that
there will be continued demand for support in this area. The challenge for the Bank lies in taking
advantage of the windows of opportunities in terms of government commitment, while being realistic in
terms of the scope of reforms that Peruvian institutions are able and willing to go through. The Bank
will continue to ensure that GAC measures are taken into account in the portfolio. In addition a number
of studies, including those supported by the above-mentioned GPF, will contribute to the policy debate.

92

Annex 12: Gender Issues
I.

Overview

This Annex presents an overview of key gender issues in Peru, which can provide initial guidance
on gender integration in particular areas of the World Bank’s country assistance.
The integration of gender considerations into World Bank engagement involves an understanding
of the relationship between men and women in society, in terms of the roles they play, the
relationship of power between them, their differential access to resources and their specific and
often differential development outcomes. Thus, understanding gender roles and relations can draw out
key factors that can improve Bank operations by (i) anticipating the impact of gender dynamics on the
effectiveness of operations and (ii) anticipating the impact of operations on the relative status and wellbeing of men and women.
In Peru, gender intersects with other social variables. Outcomes for Peruvian women and men in
terms of labor markets, education and health are heavily influenced by their ethnic as well as geographic
background. Thus, when analyzing the status of gender issues in Peru, considering ethnicity and
location (in addition to age, life-cycle and family status) is very important. As observed in other Latin
American countries with large indigenous populations, there are remarkable differences between rural
and urban areas and between indigenous29 and non-indigenous populations in Peru, with rural
indigenous women being generally more disadvantaged in all dimensions30. Being indigenous increases
the probability of being poor, even controlling for other observable characteristics31. Generally,
indigenous households are underrepresented in the richest strata and have less access to public and
private goods and services32.
Besides ethnicity, rural or urban background has a decisive influence on women’s and men’s
opportunities in Peru. It is important to analyze differences within the country that are overlapping
gender-dimensions, since national aggregates ignore such differences between sub-groups. However,
the lack of recent data or no data at all disaggregated by rural/urban or ethnic origin limits the discussion
in this annex.
II.

Formal Legislative and Institutional Framework

Peru ratified the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women
(CEDAW, 1982) and the Optional Protocol under CEDAW (2001). The Peruvian Government has
made efforts to implement the Convention through the adoption of laws, policies, plans and programs.
Over the last few years, particular pieces of legislation were amended or passed in order to promote
women‘s empowerment and gender equality. The Constitution of Peru upholds the principle of equality
between men and women.
In July 2002, the structure of the former Ministry of Promotion of Woman and Human
Development (PROMUDEH, created on October 29, 1996) was modified and the Ministry of
Woman Affairs and Social Development (MIMDES) was created. The law establishing MIMDES
states that this institution designs, proposes and executes policies of social and human development,
oriented to the promotion of gender equality and equal opportunities for women, children, the third age
29

In Peru in 2001, while 32 percent of the population had an indigenous mother tongue, 41 percent self-identified as indigenous (Hall
and Patrinos 2005).
30 If not mentioned specifically otherwise – data used in this paragraph stem from The World Bank: World Development Indicators.
31 World Bank Poverty Assessment 2005.
32 Hall and Patrinos 2005.

93

and populations in poverty and extreme poverty conditions, the discriminated and the excluded 33. As
part of its mandate, MIMDES has been executing the following national programs: Wawa wasi,
FONCODES, PRONAA, INABIF, CONADIS, and ―Contra la violencia Familiar y Sexual‖ (Against
domestic and sexual violence).
Gender equality is a goal of national development plans and policies, such as the Plan
Bicentenario, El Peru hacia 2021, and previous governments introduced two key laws to promote
gender equality:




The ―Ley de Igualdad de Oportunidades entre Mujeres y Hombres‖ (Ley Nr. 28983, 2007)
establishes
responsibilities
for
all
levels
of
government,
http://www.cepal.org/oig/doc/Per_LeyIgualdadMujeresHombres_2007.pdf.
The executive
power and local and regional government are called upon to promote the economic, social and
political participation of rural, indigenous and Afro-Peruvian women and those from the
Amazon region34.
The Ley contra la Violencia hacia la Mujer (Ley Nr. 26260) from 1993 is being implemented
through the ‗Plan Nacional Contra la Violencia Hacia la Mujer 2009-2015‘.

The current Government has emphasized the commitment of reducing inequity to promote
growth with social inclusion. A key measure to ensure the inclusion of the gender view into the
political agenda includes enhancing MIMDES. A National System of Monitoring of Gender Equity will
be created in all regions. In addition, the current administration will establish a Decentralized
Multisectoral National System to combat all forms of violence against women. Moreover, the
Government has included creation of Women Emergency Center in 195 provinces at the end of 2016. In
2012, 25 Centers will be implemented and the establishment of the remainder will be finalized in 2014.
The Government will develop a concerted national plan with the Prosecutor‘s Office and the Judiciary
to confront feminicide.
In October 2011, the Ministry of Development and Social Inclusion (MIDIS) was created to target
vulnerable populations and promote social inclusion and equality. As part of its mandate, MIDIS
will administrate all social programs currently under MIMDES (Wawa wasi, FONCODES, PRONAA,
INABIF, CONADIS, and ―Contra la violencia Familiar y Sexual‖) and others such as Pension 65 and
Juntos. With these changes, MIMDES is expected to strengthen its role to oversee the integration of
gender view into sector Ministries strategies, such as education, economy and finance, transport and
communication, health, labor and employment as well as in the sub-national strategies35.
Since September 2011 MIMDES is drafting the Plan Nacional de Género 2012-2017 (National
Gender Plan) which aims to organize national policies to reduce gender inequality and promote
economic, political and social development of women. The plan has been designed around eight main
policies and has been consulted with the Central Government, Regional and Local Governments, civil
society, women organizations, international cooperation, among others. The Plan will be presented to
the National Council of Ministers for approval during the first quarter of 2012.
Even though the Peruvian Government has taken those legislative and institutional steps to protect and
promote women‘s rights and gender equality, women in Peru still face a reality different from what
these laws promise as will be shown in the following sections.

33

JICA 2007. Please see also: http://www.mimdes.gob.pe/index.php?option=com_content&view=article&id=118&Itemid=189
ECLAC 2010 ..
35
APCI, Agencia Peruana de Cooperacion Internacional,Report on Módulo Facultativo: Igualdad de Género,2011.35 Zapata
Zapata 2011.
34

94

The WDR 2012 on Gender Equality and Development report‘s framework shows that gender outcomes
are the product of four interconnected spheres: markets, formal institutions, informal institutions and the
household. Altogether, those spheres influence the three main dimensions of gender equality:




III.

the accumulation of endowments (education, health, and physical assets)
the use of those endowments to take up economic opportunities and generate incomes, and
the application of those endowments to take actions, or agency, affecting individual and
household well-being.
Endowments

In Peru, most progress on gender equality and women‘s status has been achieved in several dimensions
subsumed here under (human capital) endowments. However, there are still challenges that need to be
approached by policy makers.
Education
Today, women in Peru have similar education levels to men. Female primary and secondary school
enrollment rates have caught up with boys´ (education enrollment ratio female to male was 0.99 in 2008
for both primary and secondary enrollment). In tertiary education, there is a slight gap in favor of girls
(1.06 female to male tertiary enrollment ratio, 2006).
Advances in educational coverage have been accompanied by significant changes in mean years of
schooling of different groups benefiting both men and women, but with a more substantial impact on
women. The expected years of schooling for girls (13.98 years) were slightly higher than for boys
(13.33 years) on average in 2009 compared to 8.8 for girls and 10 for boys in 1970. In terms of
repetition rates, girls are better off than boys with 6.9 percent of girls compared to 7.4 percent of boys
having to repeat at primary level, and 4.6 percent of girls and boys repeating during secondary schooling
in 2008. On the other hand, girls in female-headed households are less likely than boys to enroll in
school, particularly secondary school, compared to their counterparts in male-headed households
(irrespective of income)36.
According to Cunningham et al (2008), ensuring that girls finish school, especially in rural areas37
continues to be a challenge. Gender-specific differences can still be observed among children in lowincome households and among those residing in rural areas: Rural girls seem to still face disadvantages
in access to and quality of education, leading to lower achievements and higher school desertion rates if
compared to boys38. Rural Peru seems not to reflect the Latin American trend of higher secondary
school attendance rates for girls. Cunningham et al (2008) partially attribute the common pattern
amongst Latin American countries to social expectations that assume that boys should start working
early and that schools are greater protective environments for girls than for boys. However, girls in
rural Peru say parents‘ prejudice against girls‘ learning and the expectation they should marry and leave
the household is the main reason for leaving school early39. On the other hand, while indigenous
households continue to have less educational achievement than non-indigenous households,40 the
36

World Bank 2005a.
Cunningham et al (2008). This may apply to secondary education, since data from Genderstats states that the average persistence to
grade 5 is almost equal for females and males: 87.76 for girls versus 86.72 for boys (% of cohort) in 2007.
38 JICA 2007.
39
Dasso 2006; IDDI 2006.
40 Mean years of schooling for indigenous adults is 6.4 years compared to 8.7 years for non-indigenous people. Indigenous female
household heads have 4.6 years less schooling than their non-indigenous counterparts (Source: Hall and Patrinos 2005, based on the
National Household Survey - ENAHO 2001-IV).
37

95

differences in access to primary education between indigenous and non-indigenous people have
decreased. On the other hand, inequality between indigenous and non-indigenous households in access
to secondary and tertiary education seems to have increased41.
Although women still lag behind men in terms of the adult literacy rate, the gap has narrowed
over the last three decades. Female adult literacy increased from 74 percent in 1981 to 85 percent in
2007, while male literacy increased from 90 percent to 95 percent. Among the young, female literacy
increased from 90 percent in 1981 to 96.7 percent in 2007 and is nowadays almost as high as for males
(98 percent, 2007). But women still account for the majority of illiterates in the country: they constitute
75 percent of the adult illiterate population42.
Health
General health indicators have been improving in Peru over the last decades so that life expectancy at
birth has increased for both, females and males, reaching 76.25 years for women and 70.97 years for
men (2009) compared to 62.08 for women and 58.04 for men in 1980.
Women’s access to and use of contraceptives has increased from 41 percent (1981) to 73.2 percent
(2009),43 as evidenced by a drop in the fertility rate from 5 births per women in 1980 to 2.54 in 2009.
Information on contraception and family planning was high (99 percent in 2007) and has increased
decisively since 1986 (23 percent). This is particularly true for rural women: while only 8 percent of
them were aware of modern contraception methods in 1986, 97 percent knew about them in 200744.
Despite such progress, Peru still lags behind regional averages in several indicators of reproductive
and sexual health. Notably, Peru has relatively high rates of maternal deaths (98 of 100.000 live
births in comparison to LAC average of 86 in 2008) – only Haiti, Bolivia, El Salvador and Ecuador
show higher rates. Rural women living in poverty conditions and with a low educational level have a
disproportionate risk of maternal death45.
One of the most critical interventions for safe motherhood is to ensure care provided by skilled
professionals during pregnancy and childbirth. The skilled birth attendance-rate in Peru is also
slightly behind the regional average: 82.5 percent of births were attended by skilled personnel in 2009
compared to the regional average of 89 percent. There are large disparities in access to skilled birth
attendance between urban and rural areas: In 2004/2005, skilled attendance at delivery in urban
environments was 89.1 percent compared to 42.9 percent in rural areas46. Women‘s income level is also
a determinant of skilled birth attendance: lower income women were four times less likely to have
access to skilled care than their richest counterparts47.
The HIV/AIDS prevalence was estimated to be less than 1 percent (2010) 48. According to the Ministry
of Health, the male/female ratio for AIDS diagnoses in 2009 was 3.02 to 1. Men who have sex with men
(MSM) account for a large proportion of HIV incidence (55 percent) in Peru. Among female sex

41 World Bank 2005a.
42
The World´s Women 2010: Data refer to the latest year available in the given interval 2005-2008.
43
LAC average was 74.7 percent in 2009.
44 WHO Peru Country Profile: Making Pregnancy Safer. Data come from different years: the DHS conducted between 1986-2004
(DHS Peru, 1986 - 2004); United Nations, Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Population Division (2007); World
Population Prospects: The 2006 Revision. Access online at: http://www.who.int/making_pregnancy_safer/countries/per.pdf
45 JICA 2007.
46 WHO Peru Country Profile: Making Pregnancy Safer
47 WHO Peru Country Profile: Making Pregnancy Safer
48 USAID 2010.

96

workers prevalence remains low (less than 1 percent) but transsexuals who are sex workers are the most
affected population, with an estimated prevalence between 32 and 45 percent49.
IV.

Economic Opportunities

At 62.2 percent, Peru‘s female labor force participation (FLFP) rate is higher than the average in Latin
America (55.42 percent in 2009)50. However, average FLFP rates in Peru hide differences across
different groups of women. Exploring participation rates by educational levels and motherhood status,
Piras (2005)51 shows that female participation rates increase with education and decline with family
responsibilities. Thus, 63 percent of women with tertiary education and without children participate in
the labor force, while only 38 of women with less than high school education and without children do
so. For both women with high school and women with college education, labor force participation rates
decrease if they are mothers of children less than 7 years old.52.
Also, it seems noteworthy that 30.5 percent of all adult females had no income of their own, with
higher rates amongst the rural female population (38.1 percent versus 27.1 percent amongst the urban
population)53.
The quality of female labor force participation continues to be an issue of concern. Women are
more likely to be unemployed than men, 8.3 percent versus 5.4 percent (2008), and even more when
considering only the population between ages 15-24, where the unemployment rate is 15.59 percent
(females) versus 12.51 percent (males) (2008).
Peru also has one of the highest rates of informality in the world, with 56.3 percent of men and 71.7
percent of women estimated to be in the informal sector (2007)54. In fact, the majority of the country‘s
urban poor either own or are employees in small, informal businesses55. Even in formal firms,
individuals are frequently hired through temporary and informal contracts56.
Generally, the LAC Region has higher rates of female entrepreneurship and a smaller gap in
participation between men and women entrepreneurs than other regions. Only in Peru and Brazil
however, women are more likely to be entrepreneurs than men57. Enterprise owners in Peru are more
likely to be female, not poor, and to have secondary and even tertiary education58. But the majority of
these female-owned firms are micro-enterprises (44 percent59). It has been argued that one of the
reasons for women being that active in entrepreneurship is the low returns to education in salaried work.
This might be true in Peru as well: Peruvian women may become entrepreneurs in order to achieve
higher rates of return to education, returns they cannot find in salaried employment despite their high
educational achievement levels. Gender-specific segregation of the labor market, which has been
observed for other economies in the region, is also obvious in Peru, where almost two-thirds of working

49

USAID 2010.
The male labor force participation rate was 76% at the same time.
Using data from the 2000 Encuesta Nacional de Hogares (ENH).
52
Piras (2005) also shows an impact of motherhood on wages: Peruvian mothers of children younger than 7 face a penalty here.
53
CEPAL Gender Observatory
54
CEDLAS and the World Bank: SEDLAC– Informality definition: Informal=salaried workers in small firms, non-professional selfemployed and zero-income workers
55
World Bank 2005a.
56
However, this seems to have begun to change with new regulations taking effect in 2009 (World Bank 2009).
57 Global Entrepreneurship Monitor (Allen, 2007), cited from World Bank 2009.
58 World Bank 2005a.
59 Bruhn 2009.
50
51

97

women are concentrated in two sectors: primary activities (29.2 percent) and commerce (33.1
percent).60
Both in the region and in Peru, gender wage differentials remain an important barrier for female
economic advancement. Atal, Ñopo, and Winder (2009) estimate that, in Latin America as a whole,
men on average earn 10 percent more than women, though there is significant variation among countries
and sectors. In Peru the unexplained component of the gap is almost equal to the original gap:
Women earn 18.3 percent less than men and 19.4 if controlling for age and education 61. In a separate
publication, Ñopo shows that gender gaps in wages were highest among the most educated groups62.
There are many potential explanations for this pattern in LAC, including cultural or social factors such
as differential preferences between men and women, the implications for labor supply and training,
discrimination in the market and societal expectations that limit women‘s access to labor markets. The
sectors chosen by girls often represent an extension of domestic tasks and of the traditionally
reproductive role of women (thus being both, a reflection and a reinforcement of culturally defined
roles) and at the same time account for lower incomes and less perspective for professional career.
Thus, women tend to be confined in low-paying segments of labor market.
Young women’s labor market prospects in Peru are generally bleaker than young men‘s. For
instance, the school-to-work transition period for Peruvian young men begins at 13.5 years and ends at
19. For young women, school-to-work transition starts at the same age, but transition to work only ends
by the age of 23, thus taking 4 years longer than for boys (9.5 versus 5.5 years) 63. This pattern differs
between poor and non-poor, indigenous and non-indigenous, urban and rural youths, with poor,
indigenous and rural populations starting the transition at an earlier age on average. Still, the difference
by gender is larger than between poor and non-poor populations as shown by Cunningham et al (2008).
One of the reasons behind this is that women‘s role as wife and mother tends to start at the same time as
labor force entry. This is supported by the fact that 20 percent of nonworking Peruvian women ages 19
to 24 state that they are not working because of their household responsibilities, compared with 6.6
percent of men of the same age64.
V.

Agency

Agency is about one‘s ability to make choices—and to transform them into desired actions. Following
the World Development Report 2012 (Gender Equality and Development), women‘s agency influences
their ability to build their human capital and take up economic opportunities. Women‘s agency also
matters for the welfare of their children. Nevertheless, there are still heavy constraints to women‘s
agency in both the private and public spheres.
Violence
A clear manifestation of the lack and even the negation of agency is gender-based violence. Women in
particular are subjected to different forms of violence – physical, sexual, psychological and economic –
both outside and within their homes.
The physical integrity of Peruvian women is an issue of great concern: Violence against women
represents a widespread social problem and the Government has taken steps to reduce it. Peru was
among the first countries in Latin America to adopt special legislation on domestic violence and in 1993
60

Enaho, 2007
Ñopo, and Winder 2009: Authors‘ calculations using Household Surveys circa 2005.
62 Ñopo, Hugo 2009.
63 Source: Cunningham et al (2008), authors‘ calculations based on household and labor market surveys, various years.
64 Cunningham et al (2008) – author‘s calculations based on Perú – Encuesta Nacional de Hogares [ENAHO] 2001.
61Atal,

98

introduced the Ley 26260 de Protección frente a la Violencia Familiar65. This law was strengthened in
1997. The amendment aimed among other things, to expand the definition of family violence, improve
victims' access to forensic medical examinations, and further clarify police responsibilities and other
procedures. The law stipulates punishments for both rape and spousal rape66.
The problem of violence against women remains widespread and prevalence of different forms of
violence against women is very high67: 49 percent of ever-partnered women in Lima and 61 percent in
Cusco reported physical violence by a partner at some time in their life. Twenty-three percent in Lima
and 47 percent in Cusco reported sexual violence by a partner at some time in their life, while. 51
percent of ever-partnered women in Lima and 69 percent in Cusco had experienced physical or sexual
violence by a partner68.
When it comes to violence suffered during pregnancy, 15 percent of ever-pregnant women in Lima and
28 percent in Cusco reported having experienced physical violence during this period. Of these, one
third in Lima and over half in Cusco were punched or kicked in the abdomen.
Physical violence from someone other than a partner was also high: 28 percent of all respondents in
Lima and 32 percent in Cusco reported having experienced such form of violence since 15 years of age.
The main perpetrators were fathers and relatives (both female and male).
In the majority of countries where the relationship between household wealth and ever-experience of
violence is significant, it takes the shape of an inverted U, with a peak in reporting of violence in the
third income quintile; this is also the case for Peru. Here, the odds of ever experiencing violence fall
consistently with age at marriage, so that women who were first married at ages younger than 15 have
the highest odds of ever having experienced violence and those married beyond age 24 have the lowest.
In many cases, violence against women ends in death: In 2009 the Observatorio de Criminalidad
reported 1,343 victims of intentional homicides, of which 273 were female and 1,070 were male. Four
out of 10 female victims had been killed by their partners, ex-partners or other family members69.
Access to services for victims of gender-based violence seems to be difficult: As shown by the WHO
Multi-Country Study (2005), only about one third of women who had experienced physical violence by
a partner sought help from a service provider, mainly the police (25 percent) or health service (8 percent
in Lima, 17 percent in Cusco).
Teenage pregnancy
Getting pregnant before the age of 20 has implications for a woman’s and her child’s
opportunities in a society. Teenage pregnancy is often correlated with higher poverty rates and lower
economic opportunities of the mother, as well as lower educational outcomes of the child. However,
there is little empirical evidence on whether these correlations represent causal links and what is the

65

For more information on the law, please see:
http://webapps01.un.org/vawdatabase/searchDetail.action?measureId=32770&baseHREF=country&baseHREFId=1032
66 US Department of State 2008.
67 All prevalence data used here stem from a WHO Multi-country study on Violence against women (2005).
68 In the Study, the following definitions of partner violence were used. Physical violence meant the woman had been: slapped, or
had something thrown at her; pushed, shoved, or had her hair pulled; hit with a fist or something else that could hurt; kicked, dragged
or beaten up; choked or burnt; threatened with or had a weapon used against her. Sexual violence meant the woman had: been
physically forced to have sexual intercourse; had sexual intercourse because she was afraid of what her partner might do; been forced
to do something sexual she found degrading or humiliating.
69 Zenaida Franco Mendoza 2011.

99

direction of causality. A regional study on teenage pregnancy and its implications for women and the
next generation is currently being developed by LCSPP.
The adolescent fertility rate in Peru was 52.3 (births p/1000 women 15-19) and is thus moderate
when compared to the 72.3 average in Latin America and the Caribbean (2009). Similarly, when
observing the percentage of girls aged 15-19 who are mothers it shows that Peru accounts for a
relatively low share of teenage pregnancies if compared to other countries in the region:

Political representation
The Government of Peru has made efforts to increase the number of women participating in
political decision-making, through the establishment of quotas in 2002 mandating that at least 30
percent of candidates affiliated with any party for congressional, regional and municipal elections must
be female70. Below are the participation rates for women in different levels (and spheres) of political
decision-making processes:






The share of women in ministerial cabinet positions was 32.7 percent71 during the last period
observed (2006-2011).
The share of women holding seats in national parliaments is 21.5 percent and thus higher than
the LAC average (23 percent, latest data 2009) (2011).
The percentage of women judges in the highest court or Supreme Court was only 6 percent in
2009 and thus far below the average for the region which at the same time was 19 percent72.
At the local level, the share of elected women town councilors of the municipal governments
was 29.6 percent in 2009.
However the share of female mayors is less encouraging, with only 2.7 percent of Peruvian
mayors being women (2009)73.

Cited from World Bank 2009: Schmidt, Gregory D. (2003), ―The Implementation of Gender Quotas in Peru: Legal Reform,
Discourses and Impacts.‖International Institute for Democratic and Electoral Assistance.‖
71 ECLAC Gender Observatory.
72 ECLAC Gender Observatory.
73 ECLAC Gender Observatory.
70

100

VI.

Gender and the proposed CPS Program

The Bank’s current portfolio for Peru has gender-sensitive activities, which will be adopted and
continued as part of the new CPS. The current and upcoming portfolio also will build on the
knowledge and experience on gender integration developed in Peru through the implementation of
several gender pilots under the GAP trust fund.
For instance, good gender diagnoses for the Sierra Irrigation Project led to the development and
implementation of activities to ensure greater gender balance in water users‘ organizations (WUOs).
Similarly, the impact evaluation of the Agricultural Research and Extension Project (INCAGRO)
focused on rural women‘s organizations and indigenous groups. A number of recommendations
emerged from this initiative regarding the success of sub-projects in fostering communal ownership and
identifying a collective goal.
The Sierra Rural Development Project (ALIADOS) not only includes a gender-diagnosis, but its
training and capacity building also builds on a revised and customized version of the approach of the
Peru RBI pilot on Strengthening the Economic Empowerment of Women Micro-Entrepreneurs in
Lima. Under the RBI pilot project, women‘s entrepreneurial capacity and economic status was
strengthened through a capacity building program that included training and individualized technical
assistance in business management skills (including marketing), productive capacity, and personal skills
in metropolitan Lima. The project‘s impact evaluation found increasing sales and revenues of women's
enterprises as a result.
Another gender-informed operation is Project on Lima Water and Sewerage Systems (SEDAPAL),
where social interventions will complement physical investments. The intervention will include gendertailored initiatives such as the provision of guidance to manage consumption in particular through the
use of in-house water saving equipment. The Project‘s beneficiaries actively participate in all Project
stages through a social component that has been designed using some specific gender consultations.
Gender issues are also well considered in the diagnostics of the Project on Rural Water and
Sanitation (PRONASAR), with regards to decision-making processes as well as gender-specific use
and needs in water supply. The project incorporates stakeholders and direct beneficiaries in the
decision-making processes throughout the extended project cycle. The project incorporates incentives to
incentive women to participate on water administration.
A more gender-balanced decision-making process is also the focus of the gender component under the
Rural Roads Project (PCR, PROVIAS Descentralizado), where provincial road institutes have been
created under the authority of provincial road boards. These institutes contract out road maintenance of
the roads to micro-enterprises created by men and women from the poorest rural communities, and 30%
of the workers have to be women. This approach has improved the efficiency of maintenance activities,
and contributed to developing entrepreneurial capacity and reducing poverty in rural areas.
Based on a gender assessment done for the justice sector, the Justice Services Improvement II Project
implements a gender action and inclusion plan, with specific metrics according to the specific
components of the project.
Finally, an ESW on Gender and Agency will explore how agency, i.e., the capacity to make personal
decisions and benefit from available opportunities (as defined in the WDR 2012), manifests itself in
Peru and how different policies and programs can strengthen agency and the linkages to asset creation
and opportunities. The study will focus on 4-5 initiatives being conducted as part of Bank-funded
projects where evidence is available and lessons for policy design can be extracted.
101

Table 2. Gender Activities in the Active Portfolio
Project

Gender activities

 There is a subcomponent on women‘s economic empowerment: social
interventions will complement the physical investments. These will include
gender-tailored initiatives such as the provision of guidance to manage
consumption in particular through the use of in-house water saving equipment.
 The Project‘s beneficiaries will actively participate in all Project stages through a
social component, that has been designed using some specific gender
consultations, and which includes activities to be carried out by contractors as
part of the construction phase, civil society and interventions by SEDAPAL.
 SEDAPAL will prepare a check list to track gender and social issues.
Project on Rural  Gender issues considered in diagnostics: As is typical in communities deprived
Water and
of water supply services, women and children bear the burden of fetching water.
Sanitation
In the Andean region, women and children spend an average of two and a half
(PRONASAR)
hours per day fetching water. It is also very common that water availability
decreases during parts of the year, which increases the difficulties of supplying
water to the family. While community needs are commonly articulated by men,
women (even when they are illiterate) typically play an important role in
activities such as the safe keeping of money collected by the community for
paying the operating cost of water supply systems.
 The project incorporates stakeholders and direct beneficiaries in the decisionmaking processes throughout the extended project cycle. The participatory
approach is a key element to ensure both project implementation and the
sustainability of the services provided by the project's investments. Mechanisms
have been built into the project to ensure proper gender focus.
Rural Roads
 Gender component: Improve the access of rural poor to basic services, market
Project (PCR,
integrating infrastructure and income-generating activities with gender equity, to
PROVIAS
help alleviate rural poverty and raise the living standards of rural communities.
Descentralizado)  Unlock barriers for a real increase of the presence and participation of women in
the process of the rural ways maintenance (decision making).
 More than 500 micro-enterprises have been created, representing 5,700
employment opportunities for poor men and women (30% of the workers are
women)
Sierra Rural
 Gender extensively included in diagnosis
Development
 National Plan for Undocumented People (2005-2009). In October 2004, the GoP
Project
launched a Special Commission to prepare a National Plan for Undocumented
(ALIADOS)
People (2005-09). The national policy targets the prevention of undocumented
people and actions for providing national identification document (DNI) with due
consideration to gender and ethnic equity, and civic rights.
 One of the project goals: Promote social inclusion to improve equity in benefits
for excluded indigenous people, undocumented farmers, women, and youth.
 The PIU has developed a MASC <marco ambiental social cultural y de genero>
the MASC is a tool for implementation. The PIU will report on the
implementation of 1500 community and business projects.
 There is a midterm review study that has included gender. The study includes
extensive gender information.
Project on Lima
Water and
Sewerage
Systems
(SEDAPAL)

PSI- Sierra
Irrigation Project

 Gender subcomponent: The role of women in irrigation in the Sierra is important
due to the temporal migration of men to the cities in order to generate a sufficient

102

Project

Health Reform
(APL2)

Justice Services
Improvement II

Gender activities
income for meeting the needs of the family. The Project will pay special attention
to cater to the needs of female farmers in the Sierra, making sure that they benefit
from the capacity building activities and encouraging the fair representation of
women within Water User Organizations (WUOs). The final objective is the real
inclusion of women in the institution in charge of the administration of lands.
 Two gender pilots were undertaken in Cajamarca and Arequipa as part of Project
preparation. These pilots aimed to better position women to participate in water
management and to improve their involvement in the different stages of the
agricultural supply chain. The lessons learned from the gender pilots served to
improve the approach that PSI will use for building the technical, management
and financial capacities of prioritized WUOs in the Sierra. The capacity building
activities under Component C will include awareness building and training with
some targeting to youth and women. Social and gender issues will also be
identified in rapid participatory diagnostics of WUOs.
 Water associations and organizations of water users are traditionally male
fashioned. A gender pilot developed in Cajamarca and Arequipa had great
results, so that now water users organizations include women. The pilot received
grants from the GAP.
 Goal: Address high fertility and maternal mortality rates: reduce maternal and
infant mortality rates in the nine poorest regions of the country (Amazonas,
Huanuco, Huancavelica, Ayacucho, Apurimac, Cusco, Cajamarca, Ucayaliand
Puno).
 PDO: (i) improve family care practices for women (during pregnancy, delivery
and breast-feeding), and children under the age of three; (ii) strengthen health
services networks with capacity to solve obstetric, neonatal and infant
emergencies and to provide comprehensive health services to women (during
pregnancy, delivery and breast-feeding) and children under the age of three; and
(iii) support MINSA's governance functions of regulation, quality, efficiency and
equity for improving the new health delivery model of maternal and child health
care in a decentralized environment.
 Gender Assessment for the justice Sector has been completed, project
implementation informed by this gender assessment
 Existing action gender plan and inclusion plan, with specific metrics according to
the specific components of the project.
 The Project entails gender as part of the domestic violence component. Gender is
also broadly covered in the JSDF.

103

Appendix A: Facts and Figures – Gender indicators for Peru (July 2011)
Demography
Fertility Rate, (births per woman)*

2.53 (2009)
2.9 (2000)

Sexual and reproductive health and family planning
Adolescent Fertility Rate (births
p/1000 women 15-19)*

52.3 (2009)
65 (2000)

LAC-Region
2.26 (2009)
2.65 (2000)
72.3 (2009)
83.1 (2000)

Life expectancy at birth in years Female
(2009)*
Male

76.25
70.97

77.1
70.9

Maternal Mortality Rate (per 100.000
live births), 2008*

98 (2008)
160 (2000)

85.13 (2008)
110 (2000)

Pregnant women receiving prenatal
care (2009)*
Skilled birth attendance (2009)*
Education
Survival rate to final grade of Female
primary,2000–200774
Male

94.3%

95%

82.5%

89.5%

90%
90%

Education enrollment ratio female to Primary
male*
Secondar
y
Tertiary
Labor
Labor force participation rate (share of
population 15-64)* 2009
Unemployment rate* 2008

0.99 (2008)
0.99 (2008)
1.06 (2006)

Unemployment by population between
ages 15-24*, 2008

Gender-specific
segregation, 2006*

labor

market Employees
agriculture
Employees
industry
Employees
services

Political Participation
Proportion of seats held by women in
national parliaments*
*Genderstats, World Bank.

74

Chile: Female-98% Male-98%
Mexico: Female-94% Male91%
0.97 (2008)
1.08 (2008)
1.26 (2008)

Female
Male
Female
Male
Female
Male

Female
Male
Female
Male
Female
Male

62.2%
76.0%
8.3 %
5.4%
15.59
%
12.51
%
7.6%
14.5%
42.9%
40.8%
49.4%
44.7%

55.42 %
83.0%
8.8%
5.4%
17.9%
11.8%

10.4%
21.6 %
15.7 %
28.3 %
73.7 %
49.8 %

21.5% (2010) 23% (2009)

UNESCO Institute for Statistics, correspondence in June 2009, cited from The World‘s Women 2010.

104

Appendix B: Gender-specific labor legislation in Peru75
Peru has made significant progress in terms of labor law/regulations in favor of gender equality. Also,
the country has introduced several mechanisms in order to conceal women´s reproductive role with
employment. The regulations can be grouped as follows:
Regulations regarding the period of pregnancy, birth-giving and lactation:
 Pregnant women may not be dismissed before and after confinement (Legislative Decree No.
728)76.
 Government mandates paid maternity leave for women employees. The minimum length of paid
maternity leave is 90 calendar-days. 100% wages is paid by the Government during maternity
leave. (Law No. 26790 of May 17, 1990)
 The mandatory minimum length of paternity leave is 4 calendar days (Ley 29.409)
 Lactation is allowed for 1 hour daily until the child completes 1 year (Act. No. 27240)
Equality before the law:
 Women and men have equal capacity by law. (Constitution (Art. 2)
 Married men and married women have equal capacity by law. (Constitution Art. 2)
 Women and men have equal ownership rights over moveable and immoveable property.
(Constitution (Art. 2)
 Women and men have equal inheritance rights over moveable and immovable property. (Civil
Code (Book IV))
 Women retire at the same age as men in the private/public sector (65 years) Law No. 26504 of
July 18, 1995 (Art. 9)
Anti-discrimination:
 Women can work the same night hours as men, they can work in all industries. (Law No.
26790).
 Dismissal is null and void if motivated by the pregnancy or occurs at any time during gestation
or within 90 days after delivery (Legislative Decree No. 728)77

75

If not mentioned otherwise, information as presented in this paragraph stems from Gender and Law Library, World
Bank.
76 ILO database of work and employment laws.
77 ILO database of work and employment laws.

105

Sources:
APCI, Agencia Peruana de Cooperacion Internacional, Report on Módulo Facultativo: Igualdad de Género, el marco de la última
encuesta de Seguimiento de la Declaración de Paris , March 2011. www.apci.gob.pe
, Atal, Juan Pablo, Hugo Ñopo and Natalia Winder. 2009. New Century, Old Disparities: Gender and Ethnic Wage Gaps in Latin
America. IDB Working Paper Series No. 109. Washington, DC: Inter-American Development Bank.
Bruhn, Miriam. 2009. ―Female-Owned Firms in Latin America: Characteristics, Performance, and Obstacles to Growth.‖ World
Bank Policy Research Working Paper No. 5122.
CEDAW: Concluding comments of the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women: Peru 2007
CEDLAS and World Bank, Socio-Economic Database for Latin America and the Caribbean (SEDLAC) (2009).
Cunningham, Wendy; McGinnis, Linda; García Verdú, Rodrigo; Tesliuc, Cornelia; Verner, Dorte: Youth at Risk in Latin America
and the Caribbean Understanding the Causes, Realizing the Potential. World Bank 2008.
Dasso, Elizabeth. 2006. ―Voices of Youth Consultations in Peru.‖
http://siteresources.worldbank.org/INTWDR2007/Resources/1489782-1137012196309/21128071146686942621/PERU_Final_Report_WDR_2007.pdf.
ECLAC 2010: What kind of State? What kind of Equality? Regional Conference on Women in Latin America and the Caribbean.
Access online at: http://www.eclac.cl/publicaciones/xml/3/40123/What_kind_State_What_kind_equality.pdf
ECLAC 2011. Observatory: Gender Equality in Latin America and the Caribbean. Statistics. Santiago de Chile, Chile. Access
online at: http://www.eclac.org/oig/default.asp?idioma=IN.
EIU: Women‘s Economic Opportunities Index 2010, funded by the World Bank.
Hall, Gillette and Patrinos, Harry Anthony: Indigenous People, Poverty and Human Development in Latin America: 1994-2004,
World Bank 2005.
IDB: Piras, Claudia, Laura Ripani. 2005. The Effects of Motherhood on Wages and Labor Force Participation: Evidence from
Bolivia, Brazil, Ecuador and Peru. Inter-American Development Bank.
Ilahi, Nadeem. 2001. Gender and the Allocation of Adult Time: Evidence from the Peru LSMS Panel Data (World Bank, December
2001).
JICA. 2007. Peru: Country Gender Profile.
MEASURE DHS+ (USAID funded). 2004. Multi country study (Data for Peru Demographic and Health Survey 2000.
Ñopo, Hugo. 2009. The Gender Wage Gap in Peru 1986-2000: Evidence from a Matching Comparisons Approach.
OECD: Social Institutions and Gender Index http://genderindex.org/sites/default/files/pdfs/Peru.pdf.
Perova, Elizaveta. 2010. Buying out of abuse - how changes in women‘s income affect domestic violence.
UN. 2006: In-depth Study on all Forms of Violence Against Women, Report of the Secretary-General, UN General Assembly 61st
Session A/61/122/Add.1, UN, New York, NY.
UN. 2009: Human Development Report 2009.
UN. The World's Women 2010 - Trends and Statistics, New York, 2010. Access online at: http://www.gaportal.org/publicationworld39s-women-2010-trends-and-statistics-8-dec-2010.
UNAIDS. 2010: Report on the Global Aids Epidemic
UNIFEM. 2009. Who Answers to Women? Progress of the World‘s Women 2008/2009 – Gender and Accountability.
UN-Secretary General´s Database on Violence against Women.
Access online at: http://webapps01.un.org/vawdatabase/goodpractices.action.
USAID: HIV/AIDS Profile Peru, 2010.
US Department of State: Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights, and Labor 2010 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices´Report
Peru April 8, 2011 http://www.state.gov/documents/organization/160473.pdf.
WHO. 2005: Multi-country study on Women's Health and Domestic Violence against Women, 2005
Access online at: http://www.who.int/gender/violence/who_multicountry_study/en/
WHO. 2008: Health Profile Peru 2008.
WHO Factsheet Peru – Making Pregnancy Safer. Access online at: http://www.who.int/making_pregnancy_safer/countries/per.pdf
World Bank. 2005a: Peru Opportunities for All - Peru Poverty Assessment.
World Bank. 2005b: PREM Notes - Engendering justice: a gender assessment‘s impact on project design.
World Bank. 2007: Luz Caballero and Nerida Alcahuasi - En breve: Gender in Peru: Can women be integrated into transport
projects?
World Bank. 2009: Women‘s Economic Opportunities in the Formal Private Sector in Latin America and the Caribbean - A Focus on
Entrepreneurship.
World Bank: 2011. Work and Family: Latin American and Caribbean Women in Search of a New Balance. Laura Chioda and
Rodrigo Garcia Verdu.
World Bank Website: Genderstats.
World Bank Website: Women, business and the law - Peru
Access online at: http://wbl.worldbank.org/ExploreEconomies/Peru
World Economic Forum. 2010: The Global Gender Gap Report.
Zenaida Franco Mendoza. 2011. El Registro de Femicidio del Ministerio Publico: Observatorio de Criminalidad del Ministerio
Público. Registro de Femicidio del Ministerio Público del Perú.

106

IBRD 33465R
80°W

75
75°W

70
70°W

0°

0°

EC U AD
ADO
OR
R

LOMBIA
CO LO
MBIA

Arcadia

N

ap

o

Putumayo

e

tes

To
Machala

Ayar Manco

San
Ignacio

AS

Yurimaguas

Tamánco

Tarapoto

C

e

A

A

s

Cajamarca

SAN
MARTIN

PERU
To
Cruzeiro
do Sul

Santa
Lucia

Trujillo

ga
alla

ANCASH

ali

Huánuco

M

Atalaya

Satipo

Ayacucho

A

Pisco

AY

Ica

ed
eD

Sintuya

Nevada
Salcantay
(6271 m)

Lanlacuni
Bajo

Cusco

RI

Abancay

M

Puerto
Maldonado

ios

mb

Nudo
Ausandate
(6384 m)

AC

Astillero

a ri

PUNO

To San
Buenaventura

UC

Puquio
Nazca

O

H

Caballas

de
Puno

Lago
Titicaca
To
La Paz

M
tn

Arequipa

s

AREQUIPA
Atico

s.

NATIONAL CAPITAL

To
Carabuco

Juliaca

An

Antiquipa

15
15°S

Cailloma

Alca
Nevada
Coropuna
(6271 m)

San Juan

SELECTED CITIES AND TOWNS
REGION CAPITALS

PU

AC

ICA

PER U

Quillabamba

HUANCAVELICA

MADRE
DE DIOS

In a

200 Miles

mba

.

100

M
ad
r

CUSCO

Ayna

Huancavelica

300 Kilometers

ba
Uru

Huancayo

s

0

200

ac

JUNIN

m
uri

La
Oroya

Ap

t

LIMA

Purús

PASCO

Cerro de
Pasco

n

Sayán
Huacho
PA C IF I C
LIMA
OCEAN C A L L A O

100

10°S
10

UCAYALÍ

Goyllarisquizga

Callao

ay
Uc

Tingo María

HUANUCO

Nevada
Yerupaja
(6634 m)

10°S

Pucallpa

Hu

Nevada Sihuas
Hueascarán
(6768 m)

Huaraz

0

5°S

a
Uc

Moyobamba

LA LIBERTAD
LIBERTAD
LIBERTA
Chimbote

A ZI L
BR AZI

i
var
Ya

Maraño
n

Chachapoyas

AR

d

AM

n

CAJ

A

Chiclayo

Caballococha

LORETO
li

PIURA

zona
s

ya

Talara
Sullana

Iquitos

Pas
taza

To
Loja

LAMBAYEQUE

A

AMAZON

TUMBES

Piura

ma

Santiago

Tumbes

5°S

r
Tig

en
rr i
Co

Puerto Curaray

Desaguadero

RIVERS
Mollendo

MAIN ROADS
RAILROADS

Moquega

MOQUEGUA

REGION BOUNDARIES

TACNA
Tacna

INTERNATIONAL BOUNDARIES

To
Visviri

B OL IIV
V IA
IA

To Belén

75°W

To Iquique

CHILE
NOVEMBER 2006

