Public Disclosure Authorized

Document of
The World Bank

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Public Disclosure Authorized

Report No. 67194-WS

INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION
INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION

COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY

Public Disclosure Authorized

Public Disclosure Authorized

FOR THE
INDEPENDENT STATE OF SAMOA
2012 - 2016

March 5, 2012

Timor-Leste, Papua New Guinea, and Pacific Islands Country Management Unit
East Asia and Pacific Region
The International Finance Corporation
East Asia and Pacific

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance of their official
duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without World Bank authorization.

INDEPENDENT STATE OF SOMOA
CURRENCY EQUIVALENT
1 Tala (WST) = 0.44 US Dollar (USD)
(Exchange rate effective as of February 2012)
ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS
AAA

Analytic and Advisory Activities

NISP

Samoa National Infrastructure Strategic Plan

ADB

Asian Development Bank

NZ

New Zealand

AusAID

Australian Agency for International Development

OPEC

Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries

CBS

Central Bank of Samoa

PALM

Japan – Pacific Alliance Leaders’ Meeting

CEDAW

Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination Against Women

PCRAFI

Pacific Catastrophe Risk Assessment and
Financing Initiative

CHOGM
CPS

Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting
Country Partnership Strategy

PEFA
PEC

Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability
Pacific Environment Community Fund

DPO
ECD

Development Policy Operation
Early Childhood Development Initiative

PFM
PFTAC

Public Financial Management
IMF Pacific Technical Assistance Facility

EDF

European Development Fund

PIAC

Pacific Infrastructure Advisory Center

EGRA

Early Grade Reading Assessment

PIFS

Pacific Island Forum Secretariat

EIB

European Investment Bank

PPCR

Pilot Program for Climate Resilience

EU

European Union

PRIF

Pacific Regional Infrastructure Facility

FAO

Food and Agriculture Organization

PRTI

IFC Pacific Regional Tourism Initiative

FSM

Federated States of Micronesia

RMI

Republic of the Marshall islands

GDP

Gross Domestic Product

RSE

NZ Recognised Seasonal Employment Scheme

GEF
GFDRR
GFRP

Global Environment Facility
Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery
Global Food Crisis Response Program

SACEP
SDS

Samoa Agricultural Competitiveness
Enhancement Project
Strategy for the Development of Samoa 2012-16

GIIF
GNI
HIES

IFC Global Index Insurance Facility
Gross National Income
Household Income and Expenditure Survey

SMEs
SOE
SPC

Small and Medium Enterprises
State Owned Enterprise
Secretariat to the Pacific Community

HDI
IBRD

Human Development Index
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development

SPREP
SROS

South Pacific Regional Environment Programme
Scientific Research Organisation of Samoa

ICAO

International Civil Aviation Organization
International Development Association

SWP
UNDP

Australian Seasonal Worker Programme

IDA
IEG

Independent Evaluation Group

UNEP

United Nations Environment Programme

IRM

IDA Immediate Response Mechanism

UNESCO

LDC

Least Developed Country

UNFPA

United Nations Educational, Scientific and
CulturalNations
Organization
United
Population Fund

LMIC

Lower Middle Income Country

UNICEF

United Nations Children's Fund

IFC

International Finance Corporation

VAGST

Value Added Goods and Services Tax

IMF

International Monetary Fund

WFP

World Food Programme

JICA

Japan International Cooperation Agency

WHO

World Health Organization

MDGs
NGO

Millennium Development Goals
Non-Governmental Organizations

WMO

World Meteorological Organization

United Nations Development Programme

IDA

IFC

Pamela Cox

Karin Finkelston

Country Director:

Ferid Belhaj

Sergio Pimenta

Task Team Leader:

Robert Jauncey

Gavin Murray

Vice President:

INDEPENDENT STATE OF SAMOA
WORLD BANK GROUP
COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY
Contents
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY ............................................................................................................ i
I.

RATIONALE FOR A COUNTRY STRATEGY FOR SAMOA ............................................... 1

II.

COUNTRY CONTEXT: SMALL ISLAND DEVELOPMENT CHALLENGES ................... 1
Economic Geography: The Constraints of Distance, Density, and Dispersion ............................... 1
Government Development Strategy ................................................................................................. 5
Donor Engagement .......................................................................................................................... 6

III.

WORLD BANK GROUP ENGAGEMENT ................................................................................ 6
World Bank Group Engagement Across the Pacific Island Countries ............................................ 6
Translating Common Regional Themes into a Samoan Context: Strengthening Resilience ........... 7
Rebuilding Economic Resilience and Encouraging Investment for Inclusive Growth .................... 8
Generating Opportunities from Greater Global and Regional Integration ..................................... 10
Building Resilience to Natural Disasters and Climate Change ...................................................... 12
Mainstreaming Gender................................................................................................................... 13
New Approaches ............................................................................................................................ 13
Financing Terms and Sources ........................................................................................................ 14

IV.

RISKS AND MITIGATION MEASURES ................................................................................ 15

Annexes
Annex 1: Donor Programs …………………………………………………………………………..17
Annex 2: Samoa Results Matrix …………………………………………………………………….19
Annex 3: Samoa: Country at a Glance ………………………………………………………………22
Annex 4: Samoa: Key Social, Economic and Exposure Indicators ………………………………….25
Annex 5: Selected Indicators of IDA Portfolio Performance and Management ……………………..28
Annex 6: IFC Operations Portfolio ………………………………………………………………….30
Annex 7: Map of the Independent State of Samoa ……………………………………………..……31

INDEPENDENT STATE OF SAMOA
COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY FY12 - 16
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
i.
This Country Partnership Strategy represents the first individual country strategy prepared for
Samoa. The World Bank has been scaling up its assistance in the Pacific and is moving from a regional
approach to individual country strategies, to better acknowledge country-specific challenges and priorities.
ii.
Samoa highlights the particular challenges facing small and remote islands states, with its
development trajectory heavily influenced by its economic geography. Strong policy performance since the
mid-1990s has supported generally successful efforts to meet most MDGs while macro-economic stability
has enabled relatively strong growth compared to other remote small island economies. Nevertheless,
Samoa’s small size, limited natural resources, narrowly based economy, and distance to major markets have
imposed speed limits to growth when compared to economies of with similar income levels and policy
performance that do not face the same constraints. Recent exogenous shocks, including a devastating
tsunami in 2009 and global economic volatility, highlighted the continuing vulnerability of even well
performing small islands such as Samoa.
iii.
The overarching theme running through the Government’s new Samoa Development Strategy and
the proposed Bank Group program is the importance of building resilience against shocks. Within this
World Bank Group engagement with Samoa will focus on supporting Government efforts to: (i) rebuild
macro-economic resilience and encouraging inclusive growth; (ii) generate opportunities from global and
regional integration; and (iii) strengthen resilience against natural disasters and climate change.
iv.
Efforts to rebuild macro-economic resilience and encourage inclusive growth will be anchored in
a stronger and collaborative policy dialogue between the Bank, Government, and partners to accelerate
reform. A central element of this discussion will be to build on current efforts to enhance service deliver and
public expenditure management. At the same time, this strategy and the Government’s own priorities reflect
an increasing focus on structural reform to improve competitiveness and encourage broad based growth. In
addition, given Samoa’s comparative advantages in tourism, IFC will focus on encouraging significant new
investments to support 4,000 new arrivals per year across the Pacific. In order to support broad based
growth, targeted Bank and IFC investments are also designed to improve agricultural productivity and
provide greater opportunities for micro and small enterprises.
v.
Greater economic integration with neighbors offers the best way for Samoa to overcome
disadvantages of smallness and distance. The Bank is committed to helping Samoa capitalize on growing
opportunities for temporary labor migration to New Zealand, and more recently Australia. As highlighted by
the telecoms revolution in the region, better transport and communications links can mitigate the cost of
distance and encourage integration; and a key focus will be to build on the success of telecoms reforms and
encourage new private investment to improve broadband connectivity.
vi.
As with many small economies remote from major markets, continuing external financing flows
are likely to be critical for Samoa to build longer-term resilience and maintain service delivery. Given
Samoa’s strong performance, the Bank is committed to working closely with the Government and partners to
ensure that assistance can be provided flexibly in support of Samoa’s own efforts to rebuild macro-economic
stability and improve service delivery. This will be supplemented by targeted and innovative efforts to help
Samoa improve food security and mitigate and respond to climate change and natural disasters.
vii.
New ways of doing business will be required if the Bank Group is to be as effective as possible in
supporting Samoa. Assistance will need to be provided flexibly, reflecting Samoa’s strong policy
performance. Even closer collaboration with partners will be critical. And given Samoa’s need to rebuild
macro-economic resilience, all options will need to be explored to encourage new private investment for
infrastructure and to mobilize grant financing from other partners. In this, the Bank will need to be both
imaginative and disciplined.
i

INDEPENDENT STATE OF SAMOA
WORLD BANK GROUP
COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY
2012 - 2016
I. RATIONALE FOR A COUNTRY STRATEGY FOR SAMOA
1.
This is the first individual Country Partnership Strategy prepared for Samoa. Reflecting
rapidly increasing World Bank Group engagement across the Pacific islands, individual country strategies
are now being prepared for each client country. Given similar issues facing many of the small Pacific
islands, such strategies will be shaped by a common regional approach. Individual strategies will,
however, allow a more nuanced discussion of how broader themes in the Bank Group’s engagement
across the Pacific can be tailored to reflect the different histories and challenges of each country.
2.
This strategy has been prepared in close coordination with the Government of Samoa and key
development partners. As well as consultations with key bilateral and multilateral partners, the
Government of Australia and the Asian Development Bank participated with the Bank Group in joint
programming discussions with the Government of Samoa in preparing this strategy.

II. COUNTRY CONTEXT: SMALL ISLAND DEVELOPMENT CHALLENGES
Economic Geography: The Constraints of Distance, Density, and Dispersion
3.
Samoa is a small and remote Pacific island country, with less than 200,000 people residing on
two main islands, approximately 3,000 km from New Zealand, and 4 000 km from Australia. The
country was settled by Polynesian voyagers who arrived approximately 3,000 years ago. Samoa is a very
cohesive and structured society, with a strong traditional culture. Each of Samoa’s several thousand
extended families nominates at least one traditional high chief (“matai”) who represents them in village
councils. Since independence from New Zealand in 1962, Samoa has been a stable democracy. Under
the Constitution, executive power rests with the Prime Minister, who is elected by the legislature. The
right to stand for election is limited to matai, although election is by universal suffrage. The Human
Rights Protection Party has been in power for most of the past 30 years, most recently winning office in
March 2011 with a five year mandate until 2016.
4.
Samoa illustrates many of the constraints facing even well performing small island states.
Samoa’s country policy and institutional assessment is the highest among the Bank’s Pacific Island
member states and among the top five of all IDA borrowing countries. Strong policy settings for almost
two decades have resulted in MDG outcomes and economic performance well above the average for
comparable island countries. Yet Samoa’s small size, limited natural resources, narrowly based economy,
distance to major markets, and vulnerability to exogenous shocks, impose speed limits on growth and
have led to a high degree of volatility in recent economic performance.
5.
Reflecting strong policy performance and service delivery capacity, Samoa is on track to meet
key MDGs. Full details on Samoa’s MDG performance can be found in Annex 3 (Country at a Glance)
and Annex 4 (Selected Social and Economic Indicators):


Hunger is almost non-existent, with the 2008 Household Income and Expenditure Survey suggesting
that the level of food poverty in Samoa is about 3% of households. Nevertheless, using the national
poverty line, the level of basic needs poverty remains persistent at about one in five households.
1



Education access in Samoa is good. The adult literacy rate is 99%. Net primary school enrolment is
93%, although quality of education remains a concern, with the Pacific Islands Forum Secretariat
2010 MDG Tracking Report suggesting that about half of year six children assessed as at risk of poor
outcomes in English literacy and numeracy.



Health indicators have improved, although with emerging issues. Samoans are now living, on
average, a decade longer than thirty years ago, with life expectancy at birth rising from 62 in 1980 to
72 in 2008. Samoa has met MDGs targets for improved infant, child and maternal mortality rates, and
almost all births are attended by skilled health professionals. Health facilities are well distributed
throughout the country, although there are staff shortages, reflected in a recent decline in
immunization rates. Non-communicable and lifestyle diseases are an increasing problem, with
particularly high levels of obesity.



Gender outcomes are mixed. Samoa has ratified the UN Convention on the Elimination of All Forms
of Discrimination Against Women (CEDAW). Equal numbers of girls and boys attend primary
school, and girls are slightly over-represented in secondary education. Nevertheless, women make up
only slightly less than 40% of the paid workforce. Women’s representation in Parliament is low,
although about 40% of departmental CEOs are women. The Samoa Family Health and Safety Study
found almost half of all women had experienced some form of domestic violence.

6.
Since the start of reforms in the mid-1990s, Samoa’s economy has until recently shown
reasonable growth, underpinned by a stable macro-economic environment and a business friendly
investment climate. Samoa’s current GDP per capita is about $2,900. Since the early 1990s, growth has
averaged 3% per annum, well above both Pacific and Caribbean comparators (see figure 1). Growth has
been accompanied by prudent fiscal policy, which has seen government debt reduced dramatically since
peaking at over 100% of GDP in the mid-1990s. This has been driven by tax reforms, including the
introduction of a VAGST (value added goods & services tax) in 1994 to improve revenue and move away
from tariffs, as well as restructuring to contain expenditures while modernizing the public service and
improving service delivery. An exchange rate peg to a basket of currencies has proven credible,
anchoring inflation expectations. Macro-economic stability has been matched by structural reform to
encourage investment.
Figure 1: Average Real GDP Growth Per Capita: 1993 - 2009
Average Real GDP Growth Per Capita: 1993 - 2010
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
Samoa

Other Pacific
(ex Samoa)

Caribbean

Indian Ocean

LMICs

Developing East
Asia

Source: World Bank, World Development Indicators

7.
Recent shocks have highlighted the particular disadvantages facing even well performing small
and remote island states such as Samoa. The Samoan economy contracted by over 5% in 2009 as a
result of the cumulative effects of the 2008 food and fuel price spikes, the global slowdown, and a
devastating tsunami in September 2009. While the coincidence of economic and natural shocks was
2

particularly unfortunate for Samoa, this illustrates many of the structural vulnerabilities confronting small
island states – especially the particularly remote island countries of the Pacific.
Figure 2: Real GDP Growth and Inflation: FY00 – FY11
20
15
10
GDP

5

CPI
0
-5
-10
FY00

FY02

FY04

FY06

FY08

FY10 FY11

Sources: World Bank Data, IMF Staff Report July 2011

The Global Economic Crisis has severely impacted small island economies such as
Samoa, highlighting their continuing vulnerability. Ultimately, small and remote island economies
8.

are likely to find it very difficult to follow the traditional path of growth moving from agricultural
production to the export of manufactured goods and services. The economic costs of smallness and
distance undermine export competitiveness in the production of commonly traded manufactured goods
and services. Samoa’s strong growth compared to small island counterparts, for instance, remains low
compared to lower middle income countries as a whole – despite Samoa’s better than average policy
performance – and well below the fast growing East Asian developing countries. The economy remains
narrowly based and vulnerable to shocks. Tourism receipts make up about 20% of the economy and
almost half of all external earnings, but have been affected by the slowing global economy. Agriculture
provides employment and a safety net for much of the population, but has been subject to recent poor
harvests. Remittances from the large diaspora, have averaged around 24% of GDP over the last 10 years.
A strong policy environment has allowed Samoa to make the most of regional concessionary trade
arrangements, particularly in car parts, but slowing global demand and increasing transport costs from
increasing fuel prices led to downsizing at the plant and the loss of over 1,000 jobs. Samoa’s heavy
reliance of fuel imports, which have averaged slightly less than 10% of GDP, led to inflation increasing to
14% in 2009 as a result of fuel price spikes, despite the adoption of a bulk-purchasing program for fuel
administered by the Government that mitigated transference of the price rise. In addition to the direct
impact on the economy, the increase in transport costs associated with fuel price spikes affected the cost
of imports, which make up about 50% of GDP, and reduced Samoa’s already limited export
competitiveness.
9.
A devastating tsunami in September 2009 caused tremendous human suffering and was a stark
reminder of the vulnerability of small island states to natural disasters. While Samoa is subject to
regular cyclones, this was the worst disaster since Independence with 143 people killed. Physical damage
alone is estimated at $60 million, or over 10 % of GDP. In addition, the tsunami significantly affected the
key agriculture and tourism industries. World Bank led work on Pacific Catastrophe Risk Assessment
and Financing Initiative (PCRAFI) suggests that the average annual cost to small islands from natural
disasters is equivalent to approximately 3% of GDP. And risks from natural disasters are potentially
3

increasing further, with climate change posing a major long-term threat. Although Samoa does not face
the same existential threat as atolls states such as Kiribati or Tuvalu, vulnerabilities are compounded by
the fact that 70 % of Samoa’s population and infrastructure are located in low lying coastal areas.
10.
Samoa’s swift and effective response to the shocks has provided a foundation for the economy
to rebound. The authorities responded to the global recession and tsunami with expansionary monetary
policy and a significant fiscal stimulus (equivalent to $100 million or about 15% of GDP over 4 years).
Spending has been effectively allocated to address the immediate needs of resettlement and infrastructure
rehabilitation as well improving safety nets, and is designed to boost economic activity and generate
employment opportunities, while laying a foundation for expanding the productive capacity of the
economy in the medium term. The economy is responding to these measures, and growth of just below
3% is estimated in FY11, although this could slow slightly in over the next few years.
11.
It will be vital for the Government to tighten fiscal policy as planned in order to maintain hard
won macro-economic stability and ensure debt remains at sustainable levels. While expansionary fiscal
policies were an appropriate response to exogenous shocks, Samoa’s previously modest fiscal deficit
widened to 10% of GDP in FY10 – a level that is not sustainable in the medium term. External public
debt is also anticipated to climb back to over 55% of GDP, and a decline in reserves has reduced longterm resilience (see figure 3, and detailed economic indicators and projections in Annex 4). In order to
maintain macro-economic stability and ensure debt sustainability, the Government is committed to
reducing the fiscal deficit to below 3.5% of GDP by FY14, by reprioritizing expenditures to give priority
to infrastructure to resuscitate growth and eliminate non-essential spending. Tough policy choices will be
required if macro-economic stability is to be maintained, but this will be critical for Samoa’s long-term
future. Current assumptions also assume that remittances will remain at about 20% of GDP and the
Government will continue to be able to secure grants and highly concessional financing of over $100m
per annum. The Government intends that new borrowing will be on concessional terms only, and any
non-concessional borrowing, or even concessional borrowing on terms more expensive than offered by
the multilateral development banks, would add further pressure to the overall debt situation. Baseline
scenarios also assume that the Samoan economy will grow at 1.5 – 2.0% per annum. Should fiscal
consolidation not occur as anticipated, or should there be further exogenous shocks (possible at a difficult
time for the global economy), there would be significant risks to Samoa’s long-term resilience at a time
when economic buffers are limited. IMF Article IV discussions provide a forum for partners to discuss
these issues with the Government, with the mission scheduled for April 2012.
Figure 3: Samoa’s Fiscal Balance and External Public Debt: 2000 – 2013 (proj)
70
60

% of GDP

50
40
30
20
10
0
-10
-20
FY01

FY03

FY05

FY07
FY09
FY11
External Public Debt

Fiscal Deficit

Source: Government Budget, IMF Staff Report, July 2011

4

FY13 (proj)

12.
As well as fiscal consolidation, continuing structural economic reform will also be important to
improve competitiveness and encourage longer-term growth, despite the inevitable speed limits and
volatility facing small island economies. Samoa’s rank of 60th in the World Bank’s Doing Business
survey 2012 places it among the highest among Pacific countries. Samoa has been among the forefront of
Pacific island countries in introducing reforms to the telecoms and airlines sectors in the mid-2000s. Still,
after the transformation of the Samoan economy in the 1990s and early 200s, the Doing Business ratings
of several other island countries have over the past decade climbed relative to Samoa. If Samoa is to
maintain its hard won competitive advantage in terms of the quality of its regulatory and business
environment compared to competitors, there is scope to further accelerate momentum on the remaining
structural agenda and encourage greater economic efficiency. This will be important given broader risks
to global growth, which could impact remittances and tourism, on which Samoa relies heavily.
13.
More broadly, size and remoteness are likely to restrict Samoa’s global competitiveness;
prospects for longer-term economic development in Samoa are likely to depend significantly on greater
economic integration with neighbors, maximizing the gains from natural resources (especially
tourism), and continued external remittance and aid flows. Reflecting the particular constraints of small
island economies, the Bank, with other donors and the active engagement of Pacific Islands academics
and opinion leaders, is working at conceptualizing an adaptable framework of donors engagement in
small and vulnerable economies, altering the traditional development paradigm linking good performance
and sound policy to sustainable, self sustaining economic growth and human development leading to
eventual self reliance and the phasing out of international development assistance. A key element of this
analysis is that perhaps the best way of overcoming disadvantages of smallness and distance is through
integration with larger economies, providing market access, skills, ideas, cheaper import prices, and
investment. Samoa already has a significant expatriate population in NZ, the US, and Australia, although
increased labor market integration, including short term employment opportunities, offers potential
benefits for both labor sending and receiving countries. Better transport and communications links can
also mitigate the cost of distance and encourage integration, as can aligning and harmonizing regulatory
rules and standards. Similarly, pooled service delivery by the Pacific islands can help to address
problems of cost and capacity simultaneously. Maximizing gains from natural resources – in Samoa
tourism and, although to a lesser extent than many other islands, fisheries – will be particularly important
given constraints to the establishment of large scale manufacturing industry. And, as with many rural and
remote areas even within developed countries such as Australia or the US, continuing financial and
technical assistance are likely to continue to be required.
Government Development Strategy
14.
The key focus of the Government of Samoa’s 2012-2016 Strategy for the Development of
Samoa (SDS) is on strengthening economic resilience and encouraging inclusive growth through
increasing investment in the productive sectors of the economy. The SDS will consolidate the progress
achieved over the previous SDS period from 2008 – 12, which had a relatively strong emphasis on
strengthening service delivery. The new SDS draws on a review of the previous SDS led by the Ministry
of Finance and reflects views expressed during extensive stakeholder consultations. The Government is
committed to encouraging private sector investment to encourage inclusive growth. Given Samoa’s
comparative advantages in tourism, investment in tourism infrastructure will be scaled up to promote
Samoa as an attractive tourist destination that is supported by good infrastructure and service delivery.
Dedicated interventions will be directed toward the agricultural sector to encourage broad-based
participation in growth, raise domestic production to meet food security needs, and boost export capacity.
Opportunities to transform viable agricultural products to higher value added processing for the export
market will be given attention. Investment will also continue in support of the social sectors in order to
achieve a healthy Samoa and improved access to quality education and training. Infrastructure in terms of
5

water, energy, transport, and telecommunications will continue to be supported to provide the enabling
environment for businesses and improved service to the public.
Donor Engagement
15.
Samoa, like many small island states, is heavily reliant on international development
cooperation flows. International assistance is growing substantially; following the 2009 tsunami, gross
commitments in FY11 reached WST 270 million ($120m) and it is anticipated that international flows are
likely to be maintained at approximately this level over the next few years. Development cooperation
flows are equivalent to about $600 per capita or 20% of GDP. In addition, the role of church and
community groups remains very strong, and churches tend to be a significant provider particularly of
primary education services in Samoa, as in many other Pacific island states.
16.
Growing aid flows reflect not only a scaling up by traditional partners, but the emergence of
new donors in the Pacific, including Samoa. Key traditional bilateral partners include Australia, New
Zealand and Japan, while multilateral partners including the IMF, ADB, the EU, the UN System, and the
World Bank, have also had a long engagement with Samoa. In addition, China is now playing a
significantly greater role in the Pacific, and has emerged as one of Samoa’s largest partners. Across the
region, the OPEC Fund for International Development and the Gulf states are increasing investments in
renewable energy. Details of individual donor programs are provided in Annex 1.

III.

WORLD BANK GROUP ENGAGEMENT

World Bank Group Engagement across the Pacific Island Countries
17.
The Bank Group’s engagement with the Pacific Island countries reflects the fact that their
development trajectories will be shaped – more than perhaps any other nations in the world – by their
economic geography. The Bank’s Pacific island member countries1 have a population of about 2 million
people spread across hundreds of islands, and scattered across an area equivalent to 15 % of the globe’s
surface. The island states themselves have a key role in establishing a policy environment that encourages
investment and long-term development outcomes, and Samoa is an example of the benefits of domestic
policy reform. At the same time, given constraints to growth, greater economic integration and more open
labor markets in metropolitan neighbors, as well as more equitable natural resource agreements, will also
be vital for the longer-term future of the Pacific Islands. And given their fragility and geographic isolation,
sustained development progress will require long-term cooperation by international partners. Even where
policy environments are strong, external assistance is likely to remain needed to support service delivery.
18.
The World Bank Group is in the process of scaling up its engagement with the Pacific Island
countries as part of a renewed longer-term commitment. Both IDA and IFC are significantly increasing
engagement. As well as scaling up in traditional clients like Samoa, the Bank is placing particular
emphasis on reaching out to “non-traditional” clients. World Bank IDA and trust fund commitments to the
Pacific of almost $250m in the past four years have been more than in prior history, as have IFC
commitments of almost $90m (figure 4).
19.
A key priority for the Bank Group across the Pacific will be to translate the credibility and trust
generated by a growing program into a more substantive and coordinated policy dialogue with countries
to strengthen their own reform efforts. The value of our engagement is not principally defined in terms

1

Fiji, Kiribati, Palau, Marshall Islands, Micronesia, Samoa, Solomon Islands, Tonga, Tuvalu and Vanuatu.

6

of the volume of lending, but rather by the extent to which the Bank can “bundle” its expertise and
financing, collaborate with other development partners to transfer global knowledge, build capacity, and
encourage changes that will improve the lives of Pacific Island citizens.
Figure 4: World Bank Group Commitments to the Pacific Islands FY01 – FY12 (est)
140.0
120.0
100.0
80.0

IFC

$m
60.0

IDA + TF

40.0
20.0
0.0
FY02

FY04

FY06

FY08

FY10

FY12 (Proj)

Translating Common Regional Themes into a Samoan Context: Strengthening Resilience
20
The key theme running through the Bank Group’s engagement with Samoa will be to
strengthen resilience. This reflects both the priorities set out in the new Samoa Development Strategy, as
well as the Bank’s broader approach across the small and remote Pacific island countries. Within this
framework, key priorities for the Bank Group’s engagement with Samoa will include supporting
Government efforts to:
(i)

Rebuild macro-economic resilience and encouraging inclusive growth;

(ii)

Generate opportunities from global and regional integration; and

(iii) Strengthen resilience against natural disasters and climate change.
21.
Samoa’s access to considerable grant financing provides a useful discipline on the Bank, and
will require the program to be highly selective. Although the Bank has been able to make IDA grant
financing available to the smaller Pacific islands reflecting their limited capacity for longer term debt
sustainability, Samoa’s relatively strong performance and size means that IDA financing will be on
concessional terms. Particularly at a time when the Government is committed to reducing public debt,
this will require the Bank to be highly selective in its engagement; to ensure that all activities are able to
strengthen Samoa’s longer-term development prospects; are of very high priority for the Government; are
areas in which the Bank can bring particular comparative advantages compared to other partners, and that
all options are explored to mobilize private sector investment or grant financing for investments. The
Government has, for instance, indicated that it gives priority to mobilizing grant financing for social
sector investments. As a result, Bank financing for health is unlikely to continue to be required, although
service delivery and issues such as health financing are likely to be an element in a broader policy
dialogue among the Government and partners. Similarly, the strategy reflects the lead role of partners
such as the ADB and EU in the energy and water sectors respectively.

7

Rebuilding Economic Resilience and Encouraging Investment for Inclusive Growth
22.
Reflecting demand from both the Government and partners, this strategy will be anchored by
the Bank Group playing an increasing role to support reform efforts in Samoa, with analytical work
backed up by a multi-year series of development policy operations. Samoa’s strong policy performance
and needs following exogenous economic shocks and natural disasters led donors to increasingly provide
budget support for Government operations, supplementing sectoral investments. In 2009, donors
including Australia, the EU, New Zealand, ADB, IMF and World Bank agreed on a coordinated policy
matrix with the Government of Samoa as a foundation for budget support. Planned budget support from
the Bank will be grounded in Samoa’s policy and reform program. The Government expects that possible
budget support from the international community will help consolidate Samoa’s fiscal position and
longer-term resilience. While a detailed policy matrix will be developed during 2012 in coordination with
the Government and partners, it is envisaged that policy actions will focus around themes such as: (i)
fiscal consolidation and strengthened public expenditure and public financial management; (ii) improving
service delivery; and increasingly, (iii) structural reform to strengthen competitiveness and encourage
medium-term investment and growth.
23.
Continuing support to strengthening the Government’s public expenditure management will be
vital for Samoa to enhance long-term resilience. Especially at a time of fiscal consolidation,
strengthened planning systems and public expenditure management will be critical to ensure efficiencies
and maintain service delivery standards, and will remain a feature of a coordinated policy dialogue. In
general, the overall governance environment in Samoa is relatively strong, as evident in Samoa’s CPIA
rating and a Transparency International corruption perceptions rating of 69 out of 183 countries – among
the top 6 of all IDA borrowers. Strengthening PFM systems was a particular focus of the policy matrix
agreed in 2009, and the Government has established a central procurement unit and developed a strategic
plan to further strengthen internal audit. Nevertheless, there is scope for further improvement, and the
Government is committed to implementing recommendations of a 2010 Public Expenditure and Fiduciary
Assessment (PEFA) as well as undertaking a review of procurement processes, with the support of the
Bank.
24.
The focus of Samoa’s previous development strategy, together with the exogenous shocks
suffered by Samoa in 2009, has meant broader policy discussions between the Government and
partners appropriately focused in the past few years on immediate economic recovery needs, and
protecting the most vulnerable. A continuing focus on strengthening service delivery will be important,
especially given emerging issues with education quality, as well as declining immunization rates and
growing prevalence of lifestyle diseases. The Bank will continue to support Samoa’s successful efforts to
improve social outcomes, although at the request of Government, engagement will be through analytical
support and policy dialogue in conjunction with partners, with the Government mobilizing grant
financing after the current health sector support program. The Bank is working closely with NZ, as lead
donor, and Australia to support health financing reform and to encourage behavioral change given high
levels of lifestyle diseases in Samoa. With support from Australia, the Bank is also scaling up analytical
work across the Pacific on early grade reading assessments (EGRA), and Samoa will be a priority country
for a first phase EGRA scheduled for FY13 given Samoa’s strong tradition of student assessments and inservice teacher training. There is scope to supplement EGRA work in Samoa with an Early Childhood
Development (ECD) analysis. This work will inform discussion on a future joint policy matrix. Australia
and New Zealand are also exploring options to increasingly encourage better health and education
outcomes through the provision of sector budget support linked to agreements on policy actions.
25.
As the recovery proceeds, however, the Government is now giving greater priority to renewing
momentum on the structural reform agenda to promote inclusive growth, and this will be a key feature
of future policy discussions. Samoa shows that, despite the constraints faced by small island economies
8

as a result of their economic geography, strong domestic policy settings can help to raise the speed limits
on growth – but an outstanding reform effort remains if Samoa is to further improve economic
competitiveness. The government divested 21 SOEs in the early 1990s, and has improved independent
oversight of remaining businesses. The restructuring in 2005 of government-owned Polynesian Airlines
into a majority privately owned joint venture with a foreign airline has helped reduce airfares to Samoa by
around half, resulting in a significant increase in tourist arrivals, as well as removing a financial burden to
the budget. Nevertheless, there is a significant remaining agenda; while remaining SOEs only account for
10% of formal employment, more could be done to further improve efficiency. Similarly, further
structural reform could encourage new investment. Recent changes to the Companies Act have reduced
the time, cost, and complexity of registering a business, and Samoa has also significantly reduced the time
and cost of land registration (being the top reformer in this area in the World Bank’s Doing Business
report for 2011). Still, getting credit remains difficult, with limited publicly available credit information,
and insolvency resolution can be time consuming and costly. And while land issues are sensitive and
integral to Samoa’s traditional culture, lack of legal title to customary land, which accounts for about 80%
of all land in Samoa, and an inability to transfer ownership, inhibits some forms of economic use,
particularly through impeding access to finance. The passage of legislation to allow banks to use capital
improvements on leased customary land as collateral is a step in the right direction, although uncertainties
with contract enforcement mean that banks remain reluctant to lend to households and business on this
basis. The Government anticipates articulating a policy framework during 2012 that could provide the
basis for a coordinated policy matrix to provide a foundation for support from development partners. The
Bank Group, in turn, anticipates scaling up analytical support for Government efforts, in close
coordination with key multilateral and bilateral partners. Linked to this, IFC is assisting the Unit Trust of
Samoa, established by the Government to encourage local investment in newly privatized entities, to
expand its local investor base.
26.
As well as supporting policy reform, a key focus of this strategy is to combine the public and
private sector instruments that the Bank can deploy to assist the country improve competitiveness and
attract new investment. IFC intends to significantly scale up efforts to encourage new investment in
Samoa, with a focus on tourism. Tourism is a particular comparative advantage for many of the Pacific
island states, and – even despite the tsunami – remains Samoa’s fastest growing industry and major
source of foreign exchange beside remittances. Samoa is one of 3 focus countries – with Tonga and
Vanuatu – for the Pacific Regional Tourism Initiative (PRTI) to be launched in 2012. The initiative aims
to mobilize US$15 million in new private sector funding for tourism infrastructure as well as US$30
million in new tourism investments to support up to 4,000 new tourist arrivals across three pilot countries
over the next three years.
27.
Encouraging broad participation in the formal economy will be important to ensure growth is
inclusive and the benefits shared widely to reduce income poverty. IFC is undertaking analytical work
in Samoa, Tonga, and Vanuatu to explore options for a holistic approach to assist micro-enterprises and
SMEs overcome key constraints growth. Micro and SMEs themselves identify access to finance and
access to markets as key constraints, while financial institutions have identified lack of collateral and
information asymmetry as key limitations they face in expanding lending to SMEs. One potential option
could be for IFC, the Bank, and partners to work together to replicate a risk share facility that could
encourage commercial banks to increase lending for micro and SMEs, including but not only in tourism,
as was established in 2011 in PNG. In order to ensure benefits of tourism investments are widely shared
among local populations, IFC’s tourism initiative also anticipates supporting SMEs to improve supply
chain links with larger operators, with the aim of helping 150 SMEs across the 3 target countries to
increase revenues by a combined US$0.5 million per year.
28.
Reflecting the particular difficulties food price spikes caused small islands such as Samoa and
the importance of agricultural reform to encourage broad based growth, the Government places high
9

priority on assistance from the Bank to strengthen food security and agricultural productivity. While
there are some examples of niche agricultural export industries in Samoa (particularly the export of nonu
juice to China and virgin coconut oil), the agriculture sector in Samoa is dominated by small scale
subsistence and semi-commercial farms, which provide a key safety net for many Samoans. The Samoa
Agricultural Competitiveness Enhancement Project (SACEP), financed by a combination of IDA credits
and grant resources from the Global Food Crisis Response Program (GFRP) will help to improve food
security by supporting greater livestock and fruit and vegetable production by subsistence and semicommercial farmers. The investment will also assist small farmers to take greater advantage of market
opportunities, particularly by accessing supply chains for tourism operators in Samoa, and provide
opportunities for import substitution. In building resilience and encouraging inclusive growth, the
Government places priority on investment in downstream processing of agricultural products utilising the
research results undertaken by the Scientific Research Organisation of Samoa (SROS).
29.
To build resilience against fuel price shocks, IFC in conjunction with ADB could explore
opportunities to encourage new private sector investment in the generation market. Samoa was hard hit
by fuel price shocks, although was insulated more than some other islands by the fact that about 40% of
energy needs are met from hydropower as well as by a well functioning by bulk fuel purchasing and
storage systems. Over 98% of households are connected to the grid. ADB has historically led on energy
sector issues, and is helping the Government to develop an integrated energy roadmap to prioritize least
cost investments, as the World Bank is in Tonga and Vanuatu. The Australian Government also has
significant grant financing available to support public investment in energy. Recent legislative changes to
open the generation market to new independent power producers potentially offer a significant
opportunity to encourage new private investment in infrastructure, replicating the successful experience in
the telecoms sector. IFC would be able to work with the Government and ADB to explore options to
encourage new private generation investment, such as for proposed hydropower investments in Sava’ai,
which would help to meet the ambitious investment targets set out in the Government’s National
Infrastructure Strategic Plan, prepared with assistance from the Pacific Infrastructure Advisory Centre
(PIAC). Samoa has also been a leader in the Pacific, with support from the Bank over more than a
decade, in encouraging local private sector engagement to undertake road maintenance, rather than
relying on Government implementation.
Generating Opportunities from Greater Global and Regional Integration
30.
Making the most of international employment opportunities will be especially important for
Samoa, and a continuing priority for Bank Group support. Labor is one of the few viable exports for
many small and remote island countries, and Samoa has traditionally benefitted from significant
remittances. Although labor mobility remains subject to significant policy barriers, New Zealand and,
increasingly, Australia are expanding scope for temporary labor migration. New Zealand’s Recognised
Seasonal Employment (RSE) scheme, introduced in 2007, now provides opportunities for up to 8,000
participants per year to work in the horticultural industry. Approximately three quarters of participants
tend to come from the Pacific, including an average of almost 1,000 Samoans per year. This scheme has
provided significant benefits for participating Pacific island countries, with studies suggesting workers
will bring home an average of $4,400 each year (after deductions and living expenses), as well as
experience with modern agriculture and computer literacy and English language skills. In a “win-win”, it
also provides considerable benefits for New Zealand, where the industry estimates RSE has helped
increase production by as much as $150 million since its inception. While a similar Australian Seasonal
Worker Program (SWP) has had a slow start, it is now expanding and offers significant potential. The
Bank was involved in providing advice to both Australia and NZ on international best practice on
temporary labor migration. And the Bank remains closely engaged, with financial support from
Australia, in providing technical and analytical advice for Pacific island countries including Samoa to
manage their participation in such schemes.
10

31.
The Bank Group will support efforts by Samoan workers to send back funds more cheaply and
to establish businesses on their return. The Bank and IFC have been working with Governments and
private sector financial institutions to help bring down very high costs of remittances on Pacific routes.
Although the situation is improving, with average to rates to transfer an amount of USD 200 now down
from almost 20% to below 15% - with some significantly cheaper systems increasingly well used –
further improvements are required to meet the 2014 CHOGM targets of 5%. IFC is actively working with
organizations in the Pacific to develop products and services that will help meet these targets. At the same
time the Bank and IFC are engaged with central banks across the Pacific, including Samoa, to strengthen
payment systems legislation. This work will enable safer and more secure payment systems to protect
consumers, particularly where services are provided by non banks, and will encourage initiatives such as
new technologies and mobile money transfers. Regional investments will be key to strengthen the
national payments system and retail payments infrastructure, including in Samoa. Sources of financing
for such investments are being explored. Once workers have returned, IFC’s Pacific micro-finance
initiative also offers a mechanism to support a wide range of emerging entrepreneurs to open businesses.
IFC is also working with the major Banks in Samoa to establish a new credit bureau that will facilitate
reasonable lending to the lower two thirds of the population. In time, the credit bureau should reduce the
cost of credit overall by lowering risks.
32.
The telecommunications revolution throughout the Pacific has provided enormous
opportunities for people. Samoa, in 2006, was one of the first Pacific countries to open its telecoms
market in order to encourage competition and allow new private sector operators. The result has been to
dramatically lower telecoms costs and improve coverage – with mobile phone usage increasing from
about 20% of the Samoan population to over 90% in only a few years. Improved telecommunications has
literally opened up the world to those previously disconnected. Connectivity allows fishermen to access
timely price information; enables mobile financial services; better connects people to schools and health
services, and provides entrepreneurs with better information in a timely manner. The Bank Group has
played a key role in securing reforms by providing extensive support through IDA to develop policy and
strengthen regulatory agencies to oversee a liberalized market, as well as transaction advisory services for
the sale of SamoaTel to a private investor in 2011. Highlighting synergies across the Bank Group, IFC
investments have played a key role in encouraging new private operators, with an IFC investment of
$10.5m in Samoa encouraging total new investments of over $40m.
33.
The next key challenge in the ICT sector will be to improve broadband connectivity, to provide
opportunities for Samoans to participate in and benefit from the global economy. Samoa, unlike many
of the smaller islands, has a cable connection via American Samoa to Hawaii and is not forced to rely on
relatively expensive satellite links. Nevertheless, the lifespan of the current reconditioned cable is
limited, and a new cable option needs to be identified to meet the projected growth in demand for Internet
bandwidth. In addition, further regulatory reform is likely to be required to reduce the currently high retail
costs of internet access. The Bank Group is working closely with Samoa to identify least cost options for
a new international fibre-optic cable: possible routes include: (a) a connection to a possible new NZ-US
cable currently being proposed to investors; (b) a new cable to the Southern Cross Cable Network in Fiji.
The Bank would be prepared to work with the Government as well as partners such as IFC, ADB, and
EIB to encourage new private investment, while ensuring that there is open and fairly-priced access to
bandwidth for all domestic service providers. Nevertheless, an element of concessional financing through
the Government is likely to be required to reduce the cost of capital, and strengthen the overall business
case. Bilateral partners such as Australia have indicated interest in providing grant financing to support
public participation in a PPP. The Bank could also make IDA credits available for such an investment
should a financing gap remain. Given that activities with regional spillovers can be included, such
investment can potentially draw on additional resources from the IDA Regional Program over and above
the normal IDA financing envelope for Samoa.
11

34.
Supporting investment and reform of economic infrastructure to support regional integration
will be critical and is an area in which the Bank could offer assistance if needed. Elsewhere in the
Pacific, the Bank is supporting countries in their efforts to harmonize aviation safety standards and
regulations with those of NZ, and to upgrade infrastructure. The Government is currently considering
needs for safety upgrades at Faleolo international airport, and the Bank could, if needed, offer
concessional financing to support public investments. As with IDA financing for regional broadband
connectivity, the participation in the regional aviation program also has the potential to obtain some
financing from the IDA Regional Program, in addition to Samoa’s normal allocation. Commercialization
of airport operations also offers potential to attract private sector finance, particularly for terminal
upgrades. Similarly, across the region, there are significant investment and reform needs required to
modernize ports – a crucial element in encouraging export competitiveness – and this is also an area
where the Bank could offer expertise and potentially regional financing on top of regular country IDA
allocations, again in conjunction with possible grant financing from partners such as Australia.
Building Resilience to Natural Disasters and Climate Change
35.
Given vulnerabilities, targeted investments to improve Samoa’s long-term resilience to natural
disasters and climate change will be a key focus for new Bank engagement. The Bank has been able to
mobilize $25 million in grant financing for Samoa through the Pilot Program for Climate Resilience
(PPCR). Initially, grant resources will be focused on “climate proofing” the main West Coast road from
the airport to the capital of Apia. A second phase, anticipated in FY13, will help Samoa develop a
national climate adaptation plan, and support 16 districts to implement high priority coastal protection
works, in conjunction with UNDP support for Samoa’s other 25 districts. These investments build on the
Bank’s highly successful engagement with Samoa over more than a decade supporting transport and
disaster mitigation and rehabilitation. The Bank was able to move quickly, for instance, to use the
flexibility provided by emergency response procedures, to support investments in new access roads to
communities that had decided to relocate inland after the tsunami. Similarly, the Bank effectively
supported reconstruction efforts in Samoa following Cyclone Heta in 2004. In addition, Bank assistance
for transport sector reform in Samoa since the late 1990s has ensured an integrated asset management
strategy and continued recurrent cost to finance necessary maintenance. Samoa’s success in building
local private sector capacity to undertake road maintenance was evident in the rapid and effective
response by local contractors to clear roads and ensure access following the 2009 tsunami. Should the
Government wish, further IDA resources could also be made available on top of PPCR financing to assist
with priority new transport sector investments identified as priorities in the National Infrastructure
Strategic Plan. The Australian Government has indicated interest in working the bank in transport.
36.
Innovative mechanisms to strengthen long-term resilience and to provide a quick response
capacity following future disasters will be explored. The Bank’s Pacific Catastrophe Risk Assessment
and Financing Initiative (PCRAFI) program has undertaken a major risk analysis across the region, and is
able to provide Governments with highly detailed geospatial information in order to mitigate and manage
disaster risks. The Bank is now working closely with the Government of Japan to introduce risk pooling
and insurance mechanisms that would reinforce broader mitigation efforts while at the same time
providing a fast response facility in the event of future disasters. Samoa is one of five Pacific island
countries that will be part of a pilot insurance program, expected to be established in late 2012, prior to
the next cyclone season. IFC is also planning to explore the feasibility of developing a weather index
insurance program for the Pacific under its Global Index Insurance Facility (GIIF). In addition, the Bank
will explore scope to use the flexibility now available under the new IDA Immediate Response
Mechanism (IRM) to build contingent disaster response components into current and new investments.

12

Mainstreaming Gender
37.
Gender issues will be mainstreamed throughout the program. As noted, gender outcomes in
Samoa are mixed. The current health sector support program gives priority to ensuring that high levels of
maternal health services, particularly skilled medical practitioners at birth, are maintained. Education
analytical work will similarly give attention to ensuring that high levels of girls’ representation at primary
and secondary school are maintained, and with a focus on improving education quality for both boys and
girls. Especially given the relatively limited participation by women in formal economic activity,
particular attention will be paid to this issue. In supporting subsistence households, the Samoa
Agricultural Competitiveness Enhance Project (SACEP) will give particular attention to assisting women
and youth; data will be collected on a gender disaggregated basis; and the investment has been designed
with input from Women in Business Development Incorporated, which has had particular success in
developing niche agricultural exports in Samoa. IFC analytical work to explore options for a more
holistic approach to assist micro-enterprises and SMEs overcome key constraints to growth will similarly
explore the differential constraints to growth (including access to finance) faced by male and female led
enterprises. And technical assistance provided by the Bank to help Samoa manage participation in
temporary labor migration schemes will explore options for greater participation by women, with most
current participants being men undertaking work in the agricultural and horticultural industries. The UN
system has traditionally led on gender specific interventions in Samoa, and is significantly expanding
gender focused interventions to strengthen the position of women. In this context, the Bank’s legal
department will explore the scope to possibly mobilize trust funds to help address domestic violence.
New Approaches
38.
In Samoa, and across the Pacific, the World Bank Group is committed to working in very close
collaboration with partners. This reflects the priority Pacific island leaders placed in the 2009 Cairns
Compact to make better use of all resources available for development. This strategy has been developed
not just in very close coordination with partners but through joint programming discussions with the
Government in which key bilateral and multilateral partners were integrally involved. This commitment
to collaboration is also highlighted in the intention of key partners to work together with the Government
of Samoa to develop an agreed policy matrix as a foundation for potential budget support from all
partners. At the operational level, the Bank and ADB are now jointly co-financing investments in both
Tonga and Kiribati, and options to do so in Samoa, particularly to support broadband connectivity, will be
given priority. The establishment of joint ADB – World Bank liaison offices across the Pacific, including
Samoa, has also helped significantly to improve understanding between the two organizations as well as
to provide a capacity for more regular engagement with the Government and implementation support for
the program. And flexible Australian and NZ support for the Bank’s operations in the Pacific have been
instrumental in allowing the scale up that has occurred and potentially provide a model for collaboration.
39.
Although Bank Group engagement with Samoa will be highly selective, Samoa’s strong
performance and relatively familiarity with the Bank compared to other island countries provides an
opportunity to trial new approaches that can potentially be replicated elsewhere in the region. Samoa’s
strong policy performance offers opportunities to use budget support instruments to underpin reform
efforts. The Bank is working with the Government and partners to support a procurement assessment,
and it is anticipated that this could help to strengthen systems that will, in turn, allow an increase in
thresholds for national competitive bidding and prior review of contracts. At the sectoral level, the
availability of bilateral grants and Samoa’s macro-economic situation will impose a useful degree of
discipline on the Bank to be both selective and innovative.
40.
The telecoms revolution in the Pacific has highlighted opportunities to encourage new private
investment for critical economic infrastructure, and potentially provides a model for other sectors.
13

More detailed consideration of options to encourage private, rather than just public, investment is likely to
be required if the ambitious National Infrastructure Strategic Plan is to be implemented. The Bank Group
is committed to working with the Government and partners to explore options for PPPs. In addition, the
Bank could work with the authorities to explore the use of IDA guarantee to reduce the risk to the private
sector and leverage more resources to Samoa for financing infrastructure.2
Financing Envelope and Sources
41.
The Bank has had a longer and more substantive engagement with Samoa than any of our
other Pacific clients, and this is expected to continue over the next five years. In total, the Bank could
potentially make US$80 – 100 million available to Samoa through IDA and trust fund resources over the
CPS period, compared to US$140 million in commitments since Samoa joined the Bank in 1975. This
includes an indicative 3-year IDA16 allocation of approximately US$25-30 million and a potentially
similar amount in IDA17, subject mainly to performance and financing of the overall replenishment. 3
There is also scope for Samoa to access additional resources from the IDA Regional Program over and
above the country allocation, to finance qualified regional investments with cross-country spillovers, such
as regional broadband connectivity or regional aviation safety. While the Bank has been able to make
IDA grant financing available to many of the smaller Pacific island countries given their current debt
distress or high risks to debt distress, Samoa is currently eligible to receive IDA on highly concessional
credit terms4. IDA availability will continue even with Samoa’s anticipated graduation from least
developing country status. In addition, the Bank has already secured US$30 million in new trust fund
grant resources, including $25 million from PPCR and $5 million from GFRP, with the potential for
further trust fund resources to be mobilized during the course of the CPS.
42.
The program will need to be implemented flexibly; actual resource use will depend very much
on decisions by the Government of Samoa during the CPS period and are likely to be influenced by the
availability of grant funds from partners and private financing for investments. The Government has
indicated strong interest in using approximately half of its base IDA allocation – or about $5 million per
year – as budget support. The Bank and the Government has also agreed on combined IDA and GFRP
financing for the Samoa Agricultural Competitiveness Enhancement investment, and broad agreements
have been reached on the use of PPCR financing. Decisions the use and volume of IDA resources for
new transport, broadband connectivity, and aviation safety investments will be determined during
implementation of the strategy. Samoa and the Bank may modify the strategy and program in the outer
years depending on evolving country and external developments and domestic priorities.

2

3

4

IDA guarantee only counts 25% against a country’s IDA allocation; and guarantee can also help catalyze
additional investment from the private sector.
IDA resource allocations are based on 3-year replenishment cycles. For IDA16 (FY12-14) allocations, only the
FY12 allocation is firm while estimates for FY13-14 are indicative only and can change depending on: (i) total
IDA resources available in the respective fiscal year in IDA16; (ii) the country’s performance rating; (iii) the
terms of IDA's assistance to the country (grants or credits) in the respective fiscal year based on its debt
sustainability position; (iv) MDRI debt relief and the redistribution of the MDRI compensatory resources as
applicable; (v)the performance and assistance terms of other IDA borrowers; and (vi) the number of IDA-eligible
countries. The indicative allocations and IDA’s terms of assistances are updated annually. For IDA17 (FY15-17),
in addition to these factors, available IDA resource would also depend on the size of the replenishment.
IDA’s terms of assistance (grant or credit) is based on a recipient country’s debt sustainability position, and thus
these terms are updated annually based on the latest Debt Sustainability Analysis (DSA). Among IDA-only
countries, those in debt distress or with a high risk of debt distress are eligible for IDA grants while those with low
risk of debt distress are eligible only for credits; and those with a moderate risk of debt distress are eligible for a
50/50 credit/grant mix. The latest DSA in 2010 indicates that Samoa has a low risk of debt distress, and thus in
FY12, it is eligible only for IDA credits, which has zero interest rate, a 5-year grace period, a 40-year maturity,
and thus a grant element of about 61%.

14

Samoa: Indicative IDA and Trust Fund Operations (FY12 – FY16)
Year

IDA

IDA-16 Period
Development Policy Series
Agricultural Competitiveness
West Coast Road Climate Resilience
Community Coastal Resilience
Infrastructure Asset Maintenance

FY13-14
FY12
FY13
FY13
FY14

TBD

IDA-17 Period
Development Policy Series
Pacific Aviation Safety
Broadband Connectivity

FY15-16
FY15
FY15


TBD
TBD




Cofinanced/
Trust Fund

GFRP
PPCR
PPCR

43.
In addition to IDA, IFC will actively explore opportunities to encourage new private
investment in tourism and tourism infrastructure, as well as potential private engagement in PPPs to
support broadband connectivity, new energy generation, aviation, and solid waste collection.

RISKS AND MITIGATION MEASURES
44.
The key risk is that further exogenous shocks will put Samoa’s hard won macro-economic
stability at risk. Recent history in Samoa has demonstrated that even well performing small island states
are likely to experience significant economic volatility, with natural disasters also posing a continuing
risk. Samoa’s macro-economic buffers have been depleted by exogenous economic shocks and a
devastating tsunami. Further shocks, particularly the risk of a slowdown in Australia and New Zealand
on which Samoa’s economy relies, could hit the economy hard at a time when resilience has already been
weakened. The timing and sequencing of flexible budget support arrangements will need to be calibrated
to reflect economic circumstances.
45.
A reacceleration of reform momentum will be required, with fiscal consolidation critical to
maintain debt sustainability and structural reform needed to increase the speed limits on growth. Even
without shocks, Samoa will need to rebuild reserves, undertake significant fiscal consolidation, and
carefully manage debt, being particularly cautious to mobilize external financing on grant or highly
concessional terms. While Samoa has been a strong performer, an acceleration of reform momentum will
be needed. Managing the potential social implications of implementing the reforms and maintaining
social support for the reform agenda will be key. Mitigating and supportive factors include: (i) the strong
degree of political continuity in Samoa, with many of the current leaders also having played a key role in
significant reform efforts in the late 1990s and early 2000s that saw a transformation of Samoa’s
economy; and (ii) the Government’s clear mandate following elections in 2011 which gave it a new 5
year term.
46.
Strong coordination among partners will be required to ensure coordinated policy engagement
with the Government. As outlined above, there is a strong commitment among Samoa’s traditional
partners to more collaborative approaches. With changing global economic balances, greater integration
with fast growing East Asian economies offers significant opportunities for Samoa, and greater
collaboration on the ground with such non-traditional partners will be a key priority.
47.
The program will need to reflect the inevitable capacity constraints facing small island states,
even well performing ones such as Samoa. Historically, investments in Samoa have performed well,
15

with the current portfolio performing reasonably and IEG confirming ratings of satisfactory or moderately
satisfactory on all activities exiting the portfolio in the past decade. There is consequently greater scope
in Samoa to selectively engage in sectors where the Bank has less of a track record, although this will
need to be balanced with continued support in more tried and tested sectors in order that risks in the
overall portfolio are manageable. In contrast in even smaller countries elsewhere in the region
investments are likely to focus very much on replicating successes that have been achieved in other
Pacific island countries. Nevertheless, capacity constraints are evident in sectors such as agriculture and
health, and very close portfolio oversight will be required to maintain this record. The establishment of a
joint World Bank Group – ADB liaison office provides a greater level of day to day engagement with
counterparts and implementation support, although considerable engagement of international staff will be
required given that “on the ground” support in Samoa still remains relatively limited. Investments will
need to be very focused and targeted. New approaches will also be required to address capacity issues.
This includes efforts to “crowd in” greater private sector involvement in service delivery, as has occurred
in the telecoms sector and road maintenance rather than solely working through government agencies and
exploring of opportunities for regional approaches to generate efficiencies and allow for regulatory
harmonization.

16

ANNEX 1
Annex 1: Donor Coordination
Australia is Samoa's largest partner, and assistance has significantly and steadily increased to
approximately A$48 million (US$51 million) in FY11. The framework for Australian cooperation with
Samoa is set out in the Samoa-Australia Partnership for Development signed by respective leaders in
August 2008 – revised in 2011. Australia provides assistance in four priority areas: (i) governance and
economic stability; (ii) better quality and more equitable education; (iii) improved health services; and
(iv) improved law and justice.
China provides approximately 40 million Yuan (US$6m) in grants to Samoa per year. Priorities are set
by the Government of Samoa, with a focus particularly on infrastructure, including government buildings,
sport and hospital facilities. China also provided significant in-kind assistance to rehabilitate education
facilities following the tsunami. A 210 million Yuan (US$31m) loan on concessional terms was provided
for the Samoa National Medical Centre and the Headquarters of the Samoa Ministry of Health, and
concessional lending has also been made available to support Government communications.
Japanese bilateral assistance has averaged almost $10m per annum, and concessional financing has been
provided for energy sector priorities in conjunction with ADB. Samoa is also eligible for support from
the 6.8 billion yen (US$77.5m) Pacific Environment Community Fund (PEC Fund) that will focus on
solar power generation and sea water desalination projects in the Pacific region.
New Zealand’s joint commitment for development with Samoa, signed in July 2011, guides
development cooperation programs which reached NZ$16 million (US$11.5m) in FY11. Priorities
under this shared vision to enhance long-term development outcomes include: (i) strengthening tourism;
(ii) private sector development, (iii) renewable energy, (iv) agriculture; (v) basic education; (vi)
scholarships; and improving health outcomes.
The Asian Development Bank has had a long-term engagement in Samoa, based around an integrated
program of analytical work and investments. Under a broad Pacific Approach 2010-14, ADB’s
engagement with Samoa is outlined in a Business Plan for the period 2012-14. Concessional finance of
$18m per year is available from the Asian Development Fund (ADF), with additional grant based
technical assistance facilities totaling almost $2 million during this period. ADB has been integrally
engaged in macro-economic and structural policy dialogue, including SOE reform and the economic use
of customary land, supported by an Economic Recovery Support Program. Investments have been
focused on expanding the power sector (with Japan) and sanitation and drainage in order to remove
these constraints on growth. ADB, with Australia and NZ has also been engaged on strengthening
education outcomes.
The European Union’s country strategy (2008 – 2013) sets out a framework for engagement with Samoa
under the 10th European Development Fund (EDF). The EC anticipates making approximately €31m
(US$41m) available during this period, focused primarily on extending access and improving system
quality in the water sector.
The IMF has provided support to Samoa to spur recovery and reconstruction following the 2009
tsunami. In 2009 Samoa borrowed $9m from the IMF. Prior to this loan, Samoa made purchases from
the IMF’s General Resources Account in 1984 and 1985.
The United Nations system is active, with UNDP, UNICEF, WHO, UNFPA, UNEP, UNESCO, FAO
and WMO implementing programs and projects. UNDP was especially active in coordinating an
immediate needs assessment following the tsunami. The combined average development expenditure of
these organizations between 2000 and 2008 was $2m per annum, although this is increasing with
significant climate change adaptation funding.
17

ANNEX 1
Current assistance by individual donors is set out below, using the Government of Samoa’s budget
framework for reporting on donor engagement by sector.

Donor Engagement Matrix by Sector

Australia

China

Japan

Education

X

X

X

Agriculture/ Food Security

X

Energy

X

Environment/ Climate
Change Adaptation

X

NZ

IMF

X

X

UN
X
X

X

X

X

X

X
X

Health

X

Law and Justice

X

Public Administration

X

Transport and
Infrastructure

X

Communications and ICT

X

IFC

X

X

AAA

X

X

X

X

X

Water and Sanitation

X

X

X

X

X

Private Sector

X

Financial Sector

X

Macroeconomic
Framework

EU

X

Tourism

Community Development

ADB

World
Bank
Group

X

X

18

X

IFC
IFC

X

X

X

X

X

Annex 2: Samoa Results Matrix
Medium-term
Country Goals

Key Issues

CAS Outcomes
Expected (FY12 – FY16)

Milestones

WBG Instruments and
International Partners

 Fiscal consolidation and
rebuilding of reserves
 Improved competitiveness,
including improvements on
Doing Business indicators
 Strengthened public financial
management
 Improved efficiency and
effectiveness of service
delivery to strengthen health
financing and address
education quality

 Detailed outcome indicators
around the broad themes
listed as well as specific
milestones will be developed
as part of a coordinated
policy matrix underpinning a
DPO series starting in FY13,
and will be included in the
CPS Progress Report

AAA: Analytical work in support
of coordinated DPO policy
matrix. Procurement review.
Early Grade Reading Assessment,
Early Childhood Development
analysis, Non-communicable
diseases assessment.

 IFC tourism investments to
support 4,000 new arrivals
across 3 pilot countries by
2016 [Samoa specific
indicators will be developed as
this initiative progresses and
will be included in the CPS
Progress Report]
 Concessions tendered for new
private investment in energy
generation following
liberalization and framework
for independent power
producers.

 Samoa to gain share of IFC’s
Pacific Tourism Initiative
which aims to encourage
$30m in new private sector
tourism investments and
$15m in new tourism
infrastructure investments
across 3 pilot countries.

Priority 1: Rebuilding Economic Resilience and Encouraging Inclusive Growth
Rebuild MacroEconomic Resilience

Encourage Greater
Private Investment in
Tourism and in
infrastructure service
delivery

 2009 tsunami and exogenous
economic shocks led to fiscal
deficit increasing to 10% of
GDP in FY10 and external
public debt increasing from
30% of GDP to 58% in 2011
 The Government anticipates a
reduction in the fiscal deficit to
below 3.5% of GDP by FY14
(subject to no further
exogenous shocks) will reduce
pressures for external debt even
on concessional terms.
 Samoa’s Doing Business rating
of 60 places it among the better
performers in the Pacific, but
with room to improve.
 Tourism is a key comparative
advantage, and the Government
is committed to encouraging an
increase in visitor arrivals from
baseline of 120,000 per year
and increase in tourism receipts
from baseline of WST 300m
per year.
 Tourism arrivals were hurt by
the 2009 tsunami but are
returning despite the global
slowdown
 Despite a significant program
of reform, inefficient SOEs still
lead to high cost of
infrastructure service provision

19

Operations: DPO series (starting
FY13), Health Sector Support
Program.
Donor Partners: ADB, IMF,
Australia, New Zealand, European
Commission.

AAA: Analytical work in support
of coordinated DPO policy
matrix; IFC TTA for Unit Trust of
Samoa.
Operations: DPO series (starting
FY13), IFC Pacific Tourism
Initiative.
Donor Partners: ADB, IMF,
Australia, New Zealand, European
Commission.

Medium-term
Country Goals

Key Issues

CAS Outcomes
Expected (FY12 – FY16)

Milestones

WBG Instruments and
International Partners

 Matching grant scheme to
support up to 1,000 farmers by
2016 to upgrade livestock and
fruit and vegetable production
 New breeding stock imported
by end 2014 to strengthen
nucleus breeding program
 Field slaughter service
established by 2015
 Identification and introduction
of new fruit and vegetable
varieties by end 2014
Strengthened agricultural
extension services

Operations: Samoa Agricultural
Competitiveness Enhancement
Project (FY12)

 Fibre optic cable linking
Samoa with trans-Pacific
cables
 Regulatory environment
allows competition with equal
access by all retail market
players to buy international
bandwidth on a fair and
transparent basis.

AAA/ TA: Samoa international
connectivity least cost options
study (2012)

Priority 1: Rebuilding Economic Resilience and Encouraging Inclusive Growth
Improve Agriculture
Productivity and
Strengthen
Opportunities for
Small and Medium
Scale Farmers

 About 60% of the population
employed in the agriculture
sector, which provides a key
safety net
 Agricultural productivity
growth has been limited
 Opportunities for farmers to
enter local tourism supply
chains and niche exports
 Government aims to improve
agricultural productivity by
subsistence and semicommercial farmers
increasingly able to enter local
supply chain.
 Provide opportunities for
women farmers

 Doubling of average yields by
2017 for carrots (baseline 1,250
kg/acre), tomatoes (baseline
2,000 kg/acre), bok choy
(baseline 3,850 kg/acre),
eggplant (baseline 5,850
kg/acre), bell peppers (baseline
1,250 kg/acre)
 Share of locally produced fruit
and vegetables sold by
domestic channels increased
from 5% to 25%
 Increase in share of locally
produced beef sold by domestic
channels from 40% to 55%
 Measure the participation of
women in the SACEP, in both
the matching grants program
and activities targeting
subsistence farmers

Priority 2: Generating Opportunities from Greater Global and Regional Integration
Improved connectivity
to provide
opportunities for
growth

 Telecoms reform expanded
mobile phone use from 20% to
90% of population since 2006
 SamoaTel successfully
privatized
 Current cable has limited
bandwidth and a 5 year lifespan
 Regulatory issues increasing
costs for consumers
 Government aims to increase
internet use from 5% of the
population to over 20% by 2016
through cheaper prices and
increased availability.

 Infrastructure to enable
anticipated increase in demand
from 30 megabits per second
per month in to projected 400
Mbps/month in 2015, with
wholesale bandwidth costs to be
reduced from over $1,000
Mbps/month to $500
Mbps/month or lower, flowing
through to reduced retail
internet and telecoms costs

20

Operations: Pacific regional
connectivity program Horizontal
APL. Potential IFC financing.
Donor Partners: ADB, Australia,
EIB, IFC, PRIF

Medium-term
Country Goals

 International studies suggest
that for 10% increase in
broadband penetration, growth
increases by 1.3%
 Key Issues

CAS Outcomes

 Milestones

 Expected (FY12 – FY16)

WBG Instruments and
International Partners

Priority 2: Generating Opportunities from Greater Global and Regional Integration (Continued)
Greater opportunities
for Samoa temporary
labor migration, with
improving returns

 An average of almost 1,000
Samoa workers currently
participate per year in NZ RSE
scheme
 Each worker on average returns
with $4,400
 Remittance costs for Pacific
channels reducing, but still high
 Opportunities for returned
workers to open businesses on
return limited, in part by access
to finance

 Increase in Samoan workers
participating in temporary labor
migration schemes in Australia
and NZ, with higher returns per
worker as efficiency increases
 Reduction in remittance costs
from current unweighted
average of 16% for all schemes,
with a policy and payments
system in place to support
greater use of mobile money

 WB to support Government
oversight and management of
Samoan workers in RSE
scheme and new Australian
SWP
 Legislative revisions to
strengthen National Payments
System and investments to
increase efficiency of retail
payment systems
infrastructure
 Establishment of a credit
bureau

AAA/ TA: Pacific temporary
labor migration TA. World Bank
and IFC payments systems reform
TA.
Operations: IFC Pacific
Microfinance initiative.
Donor Partners: Australia, New
Zealand

Priority 3: Overcoming Isolation and Generating Opportunities from Greater Global and Regional Integration
Strengthen Resilience
against natural
disasters and climate
change

 2009 tsunami highlights
vulnerability of coastal
communities to natural disasters
 Bank analysis suggests that
average annual costs of natural
disasters to Pacific Islands is
3% of GDP, with climate
change an increasing threat
 Transport reforms have built
local private sector capacity for
maintenance and provided
sustainable recurrent financing
but key roads remain vulnerable
to disasters

 16 districts completed high
priority coastal protection
initiatives (such as mangrove
planting) by 2016
 Completion of 5 km inland
coastal road to provide access
to villagers in tsunami areas
that decided to relocate
 Climate proofing and improved
drainage for 30 km West Coast
road by end 2016

 Integrated National Climate
Change Adaptation Strategy
developed by end 2014
 Samoa able to access regional
risk pooling and catastrophe
insurance schemes, to be
introduce by end 2014

AAA: Pacific Catastrophe Risk
Assessment and Financing
Initiative (PCRAFI); “Acting
Today for Tomorrow” (FY13)
Operations: SIAM2 (continuing);
Samoa Post-Tsunami
Reconstruction Project
(continuing); PPCR West Coast
Road Climate Resilience (FY12);
PPCR Coastal Communities
Resilience (FY13)
Donor Partners: UNDP, Japan,
PRIF.

21

ANNEX 3

Samoa at a glance

2/8/12

Samoa

East
Asia &
Pacific

Lower
middle
income

0.18
2.8
0.1
23

1,944
16,302
0.7
45

3,811
31,898
1.2
41

0.5
2,940
4,270

6,149
3,163
6,026

8,846
2,321
4,784

-0.2
-0.3

7.4
6.6

7.1
5.9

..
..
72
22
..

17
39
72
21
9

..
..
68
43
24

Adult literacy, male (% of ages 15 and older)
Adult literacy, female (% of ages 15 and older)
Gross primary enrollment, male (% of age group)
Gross primary enrollment, female (% of age group)

99
99
100
99

96
91
111
112

87
74
109
105

Access to an improved water source (% of population)
Access to improved sanitation facilities (% of population)

88
100

88
59

86
50

Key Development Indicators
(2010)
Population, mid-year (millions)
Surface area (thousand sq. km)
Population growth (%)
Urban population (% of total population)

75-79
60-64
45-49
30-34

GNI (Atlas method, US$ billions)
GNI per capita (Atlas method, US$)
GNI per capita (PPP, international $)

15-19
0-4
10

GDP growth (%)
GDP per capita growth (%)

5

0

5

10

percent of total population

(most recent estimate, 2004–2010)
Poverty headcount ratio at $1.25 a day (PPP, %)
Poverty headcount ratio at $2.00 a day (PPP, %)
Life expectancy at birth (years)
Infant mortality (per 1,000 live births)
Child malnutrition (% of children under 5)

60
50
40
30
20
10
0
1990

Samoa

Net Aid Flows
(US$ millions)
Net ODA and official aid
Top 3 donors (in 2008):
Australia
Japan
New Zealand

1980

1990

2000

2010

25

48

27

77

4
2
4

9
9
6

7
5
4

18
16
10

18.5
159

28.9
295

11.0
154

15.3
433

1995

2000

2009

East Asia & Pacific

a

8
6
4
2

Aid (% of GNI)
Aid per capita (US$)

0
-2
-4

Long-Term Economic Trends
Consumer prices (annual % change)
GDP implicit deflator (annual % change)
Exchange rate (annual average, local per US$)
Terms of trade index (2000 = 100)

-6

32.8
17.9

15.3
9.0

1.0
2.8

-0.2
2.9

0.9
..

2.3
..

3.1
..

2.8
..

95

05

GDP

GDP per capita

1980–90 1990–2000
2000–10
(average annual growth %)
Population, mid-year (millions)
GDP (US$ millions)

0.2
108

0.2
112

0.2
246

0.2
526

0.4
1.6

0.9
2.7

0.1
2.9

(% of GDP)
Agriculture
Industry
Manufacturing
Services

..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..

16.8
26.0
14.8
57.2

9.8
28.2
10.0
62.0

..
..
..
..

-0.4
0.5
-1.9
10.6

-2.0
3.1
-2.0
4.0

Household final consumption expenditure
General gov't final consumption expenditure
Gross capital formation

..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

Exports of goods and services
Imports of goods and services
Gross savings

..
..
..

..
..
..

33.8
57.2
..

35.5
60.0
..

..
..

10.7
4.3

..
..

Note: Figures in italics are for years other than those specified. 2010 data are preliminary. Group data are for 2009. .. indicates data are not available.
a. Aid data are for 2009.

22

Development Economics, Development Data Group (DECDG).

ANNEX 3

Samoa
Balance of Payments and Trade

2000

2010

(US$ millions)
Total merchandise exports (fob)
Total merchandise imports (cif)
Net trade in goods and services

17
106
-48

16
236
-129

Voice and accountability

Current account balance
as a % of GDP

-4
-1.8

-46
-8.7

Regulatory quality

Workers' remittances and
compensation of employees (receipts)

45

124

Reserves, including gold

64

166

Political stability

Rule of law
Control of corruption
0

Central Government Finance
(% of GDP)
Current revenue (including grants)
Tax revenue
Current expenditure

33.0
..
22.3

36.0
..
23.8

Overall surplus/deficit

-0.7

-11.3

Highest marginal tax rate (%)
Individual
Corporate

..
..

..
..

25

50

75

100

2009

Country's percentile rank (0-100)

2000

higher values imply better ratings

Technology and Infrastructure

2000

2009

Paved roads (% of total)
Fixed line and mobile phone
subscribers (per 100 people)
High technology exports
(% of manufactured exports)

14.2

..

6

102

0.5

0.3

22
1,710.0
..

23
1,710.0
..

..
..

..
..

0.79

0.90

GDP per unit of energy use
(2005 PPP $ per kg of oil equivalent)

..

..

Energy use per capita (kg of oil equivalent)

..

..

2000

2009

IBRD
Total debt outstanding and disbursed
Disbursements
Principal repayments
Interest payments

–
–
–
–

–
–
–
–

IDA
Total debt outstanding and disbursed
Disbursements
Total debt service

47
6
1

80
2
2

1
1
0

10
10
10

0

8

–
–

–
–

External Debt and Resource Flows
Environment
(US$ millions)
Total debt outstanding and disbursed
Total debt service
Debt relief (HIPC, MDRI)

138
5
–

280
10
–

Agricultural land (% of land area)
Forest area (% of land area)
Terrestrial protected areas (% of land area)

Total debt (% of GDP)
Total debt service (% of exports)

56.1
6.9

53.3
4.9

Freshwater resources per capita (cu. meters)
Freshwater withdrawal (billion cubic meters)

-2
..

8
..

Foreign direct investment (net inflows)
Portfolio equity (net inflows)

CO2 emissions per capita (mt)

Private, 0IBRD,
0
Short-term,
0
Bilateral, 46

World Bank Group portfolio

IDA, 80

(US$ millions)

IMF, 9
Other multilateral, 100

Private Sector Development
Time required to start a business (days)
Cost to start a business (% of GNI per capita)
Time required to register property (days)
Ranked as a major constraint to business
(% of managers surveyed who agreed)
n.a.
n.a.
Stock market capitalization (% of GDP)
Bank capital to asset ratio (%)

2000

2010

–
–
–

9
9.8
27

2000

2010

..
..

..
..

..
..

..
..

IFC (fiscal year)
Total disbursed and outstanding portfolio
of which IFC own account
Disbursements for IFC own account
Portfolio sales, prepayments and
repayments for IFC own account
MIGA
Gross exposure
New guarantees

Note: Figures in italics are for years other than those specified. 2010 data are preliminary.
.. indicates data are not available. – indicates observation is not applicable.
Development Economics, Development Data Group (DECDG).

23

2/8/12

ANNEX 3

Millennium Development Goals

Samoa

With selected targets to achieve between 1990 and 2015
Samoa

(estimate closest to date shown, +/- 2 years)
Goal 1: halve the rates for extreme poverty and malnutrition
Poverty headcount ratio at $1.25 a day (PPP, % of population)
Poverty headcount ratio at national poverty line (% of population)
Share of income or consumption to the poorest qunitile (%)
Prevalence of malnutrition (% of children under 5)

1990
..
..
..
..

1995
..
..
..
..

2000
..
..
..
..

2009
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..

..
101
83
..

90
94
78
99

..
93
76
..

Goal 3: eliminate gender disparity in education and empower women
Ratio of girls to boys in primary and secondary education (%)
Women employed in the nonagricultural sector (% of nonagricultural employment)
Proportion of seats held by women in national parliament (%)

..
30
..

..
32
..

..
34
..

..
..
..

Goal 4: reduce under-5 mortality by two-thirds
Under-5 mortality rate (per 1,000)
Infant mortality rate (per 1,000 live births)
Measles immunization (proportion of one-year olds immunized, %)

50
40
89

41
33
96

34
28
93

26
22
45

Goal 5: reduce maternal mortality by three-fourths
Maternal mortality ratio (modeled estimate, per 100,000 live births)
Births attended by skilled health staff (% of total)
Contraceptive prevalence (% of women ages 15-49)

..
76
..

..
..
..

..
100
..

..
..
4

Goal 6: halt and begin to reverse the spread of HIV/AIDS and other major diseases
Prevalence of HIV (% of population ages 15-49)
Incidence of tuberculosis (per 100,000 people)
Tuberculosis case detection rate (%, all forms)

..
99
86

..
96
98

..
92
100

..
90
51

91
98
1,300.0
..
0.8
..

90
99
..
..
0.8
..

89
100
1,710.0
..
0.8
..

88
100
1,710.0
..
0.9
..

2.5
0.0
0.0
..

4.6
0.0
0.2
0.1

4.8
1.4
0.6
0.6

17.8
84.4
5.0
2.3

Goal 2: ensure that children are able to complete primary schooling
Primary school enrollment (net, %)
Primary completion rate (% of relevant age group)
Secondary school enrollment (gross, %)
Youth literacy rate (% of people ages 15-24)

Goal 7: halve the proportion of people without sustainable access to basic needs
Access to an improved water source (% of population)
Access to improved sanitation facilities (% of population)
Forest area (% of land area)
Terrestrial protected areas (% of land area)
CO2 emissions (metric tons per capita)
GDP per unit of energy use (constant 2005 PPP $ per kg of oil equivalent)
Goal 8: develop a global partnership for development
Telephone mainlines (per 100 people)
Mobile phone subscribers (per 100 people)
Internet users (per 100 people)
Personal computers (per 100 people)

100

120

100

100

75

75
80

50
60

50
25

40
25

0

20
2000

2005

2009
0

0
1990

1995

2000

2009

2000

2005

2009

Primary net enrollment ratio
Ratio of girls to boys in primary & secondary
education (..)

Samoa

East Asia & Pacific

Note: Figures in italics are for years other than those specified. .. indicates data are not available.

24

Fixed + mobile subscribers

Internet users

2/8/12

ANNEX 4

Samoa Social Indicators
Latest single year

POPULATION
Total population, mid-year (millions)
Growth rate (% annual average for period)
Urban population (% of population)
Total fertility rate (births per woman)
POVERTY
(% of population)
National headcount index
Urban headcount index
Rural headcount index
INCOME
GNI per capita (US$)
Consumer price index (2005=100)
INCOME/CONSUMPTION DISTRIBUTION
Gini index
Lowest quintile (% of income or consumption)
Highest quintile (% of income or consumption)
SOCIAL INDICATORS
Public expenditure
Health (% of GDP)
Education (% of GNI)
Net primary school enrollment rate
(% of age group)
Total
Male
Female
Access to an improved water source
(% of population)
Total
Urban
Rural
Immunization rate
(% of children ages 12-23 months)
Measles
DPT
Child malnutrition (% under 5 years)
Life expectancy at birth
(years)
Total
Male
Female
Mortality
Infant (per 1,000 live births)
Under 5 (per 1,000)
Adult (15-59)
Male (per 1,000 population)
Female (per 1,000 population)
Maternal (per 100,000 live births)
Births attended by skilled health staff (%)

Same region/income group

1980-85

1990-95

2004-10

East
Asia &
Pacific

0.2
0.2
21.2
4.8

0.2
0.8
21.5
4.6

0.2
0.0
23.0
4.0

1,943.8
0.8
45.0
1.9

3,810.8
1.2
40.9
2.5

..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

670
49

1,010
86

3,070
174

3,163
126

2,321
130

..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..

..
3.9

4.2
..

2.2
3.3

2.1
4.1

..
..
..

..
..
..

91
91
91

..
..
..

87
88
86

..
..
..

90
96
88

88
90
87

88
96
81

87
95
81

81
89
..

96
94
..

45
46
..

91
93
9

79
79
24

62
59
66

68
64
71

72
69
75

72
71
74

68
66
70

48
60

33
41

22
26

21
26

43
58

..
..
..
..

262
202
..
76

193
108
..
100

158
99
89
89

201
136
230
67

25

Lowermiddleincome

ANNEX 4

Samoa: Selected Economic and Financial Indicators, FY2007 - FY2013 1
Est.
Proj.
FY 2007 FY 2008 FY 2009 FY 2010 FY 2011 FY 2012 FY 2013
Output and inflation
Real GDP growth
Nominal GDP
Change in CPI (end period)
Change in CPI (period average)

1.8
9.1
8.0
4.7

4.3
9.6
8.9
6.3

Central government budget
Revenue and grants
Of which: grants
Expenditure and net lending
Of which: Development
Overall balance
External financing
Domestic financing

36.6
7.4
35.9
9.3
0.6
-1.1
0.4

31.2
5.3
33.0
6.6
-1.8
0.9
1.0

Money and credit
Broad money (M2)
Net foreign assets
Net domestic assets
Private sector credit

8.7
9.0
10.5
12.7

(12-month percent change)
-5.4
0.2
2.1
-2.5
1.8
3.9
10.0
-0.3
2.9
14.6
-0.2
2.9

1.4
9.0
5.5
7.5

1.9
5.9
4.0
4.0

37.7
9.5
44.2
18.1
-6.5
5.5
1.0

35.6
8.2
41.0
13.0
-5.4
6.6
-1.2

34.4
7.0
39.3
12.3
-4.8
5.0
-0.2

14.5
14.4
13.5
6.7

(12-month percent change)
7.7
10.9
-0.8
9.2
32.7
-11.6
6.3
1.5
5.3
6.5
4.0
6.4

…
…
…
…

…
…
…
…

-83.2
-16.0
12.2
-241.1
79.3
-37.5
103.9

-32.6
-6.5
11.2
-204.3
85.8
-38.0
112.8

(In millions of U.S. Dollars)
-18.0
-50.4
-95.5
-3.1
-8.1
-15.1
11.3
13.0
12.8
-251.1
-278.2
-305.2
101.6
100.4
71.0
-19.0
-25.4
-20.2
139.3
139.8
146.1

-97.7
-14.2
13.5
-318.1
75.4
-21.2
152.7

-101.0
-13.9
14.4
-335.5
81.6
-22.6
161.1

80.9
3.6
37.1
5.2

87.6
3.2
30.3
3.9

104.4
3.4
38.1
5.0

175.8
5.1
49.5
5.6

157.6
4.4
54.4
5.1

167.2
4.4
57.6
4.8

157.1
3.9
58.8
5.1

Exchange rates
Market rate (tala/U.S. dollar, period average)
Market rate (tala/U.S. dollar, end period)
Nominal effective exchange rate (2000 = 100) 2/
Real effective exchange rate (2000 = 100) 2/

2.6
2.6
97.3
101.0

2.6
2.9
94.9
105.6

2.7
2.5
97.6
116.1

2.3
2.4
97.9
111.6

2.3
2.4
98.0
112.5

…
…
…
…

…
…
…
…

Memorandum items:
Nominal GDP (in millions of tala)
Nominal GDP (in millions of U.S. dollars)

1,331
520

1,459
502

1,422
570

1,448
616

1,505
629

1,640
687

1,738
728

Balance of payments
Current account balance
(In percent of GDP)
Merchandise exports, f.o.b.
Merchandise imports, c.i.f.
Services (net)
Income (net)
Current transfers
External reserves and debt
Gross official reserves
(In months of next year's imports of GNFS)
External debt (in percent of GDP)
Public external debt-service ratio (in percent)

26

(In percent of GDP)
34.6
36.8
7.8
10.6
38.8
46.8
12.8
18.9
-4.1
-10.0
3.1
10.0
1.0
0.0

ANNEX 4

Samoa - Key Exposure Indicators

Indicator
Total debt outstanding and
disbursed (TDO) (US$m)a

2005

Actual
2006
2007

Estimated
2009
2010

2008

Projected
2012

2011

2013

167

164

186

206

235

308

352

374

384

Net disbursements (US$m)a

6

..

..

0

0

0

0

0

0

Total debt service (TDS)
(US$m)a

6

..

..

2

2

3

4

4

4

..
40.6
..
99.3

..
36.1
..
99.4

..
35.1
..
99.6

..
36.2
..
99.8

..
44.8
..
96.0

..
53.7
..
97.0

..
..
..
97.4

..
..
..
97.6

..
..
..
97.7

..
..

..
..

..
..

..
..

..
..

..
..

..
..

..
..

..
..

..
..

..
..

..
..

..
..

..
..

..
..

..
..

..
..

..
..

..
64

..
69

..
78

..
79

..
80

..
99

..
100

..
103

..
105

Debt and debt service indicators
(%)
TDO/XGSb
TDO/GDP
TDS/XGS
Concessional/TDO
IBRD exposure indicators (%)
IBRD DS/public DS
Preferred creditor DS/public
DS (%)c
IBRD DS/XGS
IBRD TDO (US$m)d
Of which present value of
guarantees (US$m)
Share of IBRD portfolio (%)
IDA TDO (US$m)d
IFC (US$m)
Loans
Equity and quasi-equity /c
MIGA
MIGA guarantees (US$m)

a. Includes public and publicly guaranteed debt, private nonguaranteed, use of IMF credits and net shortterm capital.
b. "XGS" denotes exports of goods and services, including workers' remittances.
c. Preferred creditors are defined as IBRD, IDA, the regional multilateral development banks, the IMF, and the
Bank for International Settlements.
d. Includes present value of guarantees.
e. Includes equity and quasi-equity types of both loan and equity instruments.

27

ANNEX 5

CPS Annex 5 - Samoa
Selected Indicators* of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
As Of Date 2/5/2012

Indicator

2009

Portfolio Assessment
Number of Projects Under Implementation
Average Implementation Period (years)

a

b

2010

2011

2012

3

3

3

3

4.4

5.4

3.7

4.3

Percent of Problem Projects by Number

a, c

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

Percent of Problem Projects by Amount

a, c

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

Percent of Projects at Risk by Number

a, d

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount

a, d

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

18.2

32.4

26.3

11.4

Disbursement Ratio (%)

e

Portfolio Management
CPPR during the year (yes/no)
Supervision Resources (total US$)
Average Supervision (US$/project)

Memorandum Item

Since FY 80Last Five FYs

Proj Eval by OED by Number

11

2

Proj Eval by OED by Amt (US$ millions)

66.0

4.6

% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Number

18.2

0.0

% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt

11.3

0.0

a. As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY).
b. Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio.
c. Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) and/or implementation progress (IP).
d. As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
e. Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the
beginning of the year: Investment projects only.
*

All indicators are for projects active in the Portfolio, with the exception of Disbursement Ratio,
which includes all active projects as well as projects which exited during the fiscal year.

28

Samoa CPS Annex 5
Operations Portfolio (IBRD/IDA and Grants)
As Of Date 2/5/2012

Closed Projects

13

IBRD/IDA *
Total Disbursed (Active)

22.72

of w hich has been repaid

0.00

Total Disbursed (Closed)

38.01

of w hich has been repaid

12.74

Total Disbursed (Active + Closed)

60.73

of w hich has been repaid

12.74

Total Undisbursed (Active)

15.47

Total Undisbursed (Closed)

0.00

Total Undisbursed (Active + Closed)

15.47

Active Projects
Last PSR
Supervision Rating

Original Amount in US$ Millions

P120594

Samoa Post Tsunami Reconstruction

S

MS

2011

10

P086313

Samoa Health Sector Management

S

MS

2008

6

P075523

Samoa Infrastructure Asset Management 2 S

S

2004

21.07

Overall Result

37.07

29

Annex 6 Samoa
IFC's Committed and Disbursed Outstanding Investment Portfolio
(In USD Millions)

Committed
FY
Approval

Company

2007

Digicel

Loan

Equity

Disbursed Outstanding

**Quasi
Partici
Equity *GT/RM pant

10,462,000.00

30

Loan

Equity

**Quasi
Partici
Equity *GT/RM pant

172°30'W

172°00'W

SAM OA

S OUT H
PA CIFIC
O CEA N

SELECTED CITIES AND TOWNS
NATIONAL CAPITAL
RIVERS

SAMOA

MAIN ROADS
DISTRICT BOUNDARIES
INTERNATIONAL BOUNDARIES

Savai'i

Fagamalo

Safotu

Mauga
Falealupo
13°30'S
Tufutafoe

172°30'W
13°30'S

Asau

VAISIGANO

A'opo

GAGAIFOMAUGA

GAGA'EMAUGA
Pu'apu'a

Mt. Silisili
(1,857 m)

Taga

SATUPA'ITEA

Tu a s i v

i

FA'ASALELE'AGA
Ridge

Faga

A
PA L

Samata

PALAULI

Safotulafai

ULI

Sala'ilua

Papa

Fa'a'ala

Taga

Salelologa

GAGA'EMAUGA

Maota

Tafua

SATUPA'ITEA
Ap

o

lim

a

St

ra

it

Sale'imoa

Apolima
Mulifanua
Manono

AIGA-I-LE-TAI
Samatau

Fale'ula

Leulumoega

Upolu

APIA

Lauli'i

A'ANA
Falelatai

Aleisa

Falefa

TAUMASAGA

Falease'ela
Matautu

Solosolo

VA'A-OFONOTI
Mt. Fito
(1,115 m)

ATUA

Sataoauta

Uafato

Ti'avea
Samusu

Si'umu

14°00'S

Poutasi

GAGA'EMAUGA

14°00'S

Fanuatapu
Namu'a

Lotofaga

Nu'utele

Lalomanu

Nu'ulua

S OUT H
PA CIFIC
O CEA N
0
172°30'W

172°00'W

5

10

5

15 Kilometers

10

15 Miles
172°30'W

IBRD 33472

JANUARY 2005

0
This map was produced by the Map Design Unit of The World Bank.
The boundaries, colors, denominations and any other information
shown on this map do not imply, on the part of The World Bank
Group, any judgment on the legal status of any territory, or any
endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.

