Public Disclosure Authorized

DOCUMENT OF
The World Bank
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Public Disclosure Authorized

Report No. 54615-BD

INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION
INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION

COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY

Public Disclosure Authorized

Public Disclosure Authorized

FOR
THE PEOPLE’S REPUBLIC OF BANGLADESH

FOR THE PERIOD FY11-14

July 30, 2010

Bangladesh Country Management Unit
South Asia Region

International Finance Corporation
South Asia Department

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance of
their official duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without World Bank authorization.

The date of the last Country Assistance Strategy for Bangladesh is April 12, 2006
CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS
(Exchange rate effective May 4, 2010)
Currency unit =
Tk 69.27 =
US$1.50 =

Bangladeshi taka (Tk)
US$1
SDR 1

FISCAL YEAR
July 1-June 30
ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS
AAA
ACC
ADB
BBBF
BDF
BICF
BoP
BRAC
CAS
CASE
CDD
CMU
CPIA
CPPR
CTG
DFGG
DFID
DPL
DP
EGPP
ERD
ESW
EU
GAC
GDP
GFDRR
GNI
GoB
CPRR
GSM
HIES
HNPSP
ICT
IDA
IEG
IFC
IGR
IGS
ILRT

Analytical and Advisory Activities
Anti-Corruption Commission
Asian Development Bank
Bangladesh Better Business Forum
Bangladesh Development Forum
Bangladesh Investment Climate Fund
Base of Pyramid
Bangladesh Rural Advancement Committee
Country Assistance Strategy
Clean Air and Sustainable Environment
Community Driven Development
Country Management Unit
Country Policy and Institutional Assessment
Country Portfolio Performance Review
Caretaker Government
Demand for Good Governance
Department for International Development
Development Policy Lending
Development Partner
Employment Generation Program for the Poorest
Economic Relations Division
Economic Sector Work
European Union
Governance and Anti Corruption
Gross Domestic Product
Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery
Gross National Income
Government of Bangladesh
Country Portfolio Performance Review
Global System for Mobile Communication
Household Income Expenditure Survey
Health, Nutrition and Population Sector Program
Information and Communication Technology
International Development Association
Independent Evaluation Group
International Finance Corporation
Institutional and Governance Review
Institute of Governance Studies
Investment Lending Risk Team

IMF
INT
IPFF
ISR
JCS
JICA
JOTAP
LCG
LGSP
MDG
MDTF
MIGA
MSME
NGO
NBR
NLTA
NSAPR
ORAF
ORMAP
PEFA
PFM
PPP
PRSC
PSD
RTI
SEDF
SIPP
SME
SMU
SOE
SPEMP
SWAP
TF
WBG
WBI
WSP

International Monetary Fund
Department of Institutional Integrity
Investment Promotion and Financing Facility
Implementation Status and Results
Joint Cooperation Strategy
Japanese International Cooperation Agency
Joint Assistance Technical Program
Local Consultative Group
Local Government Support Project
Millennium Development Goal
Multi Donor Trust Fund
Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency
Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise
Non-Governmental Organization
National Board of Revenue
Non-Lending Technical Assistance
National Strategy for Accelerated Poverty Reduction
Operational Risk Assessment Framework
Operational Risk Management and Assessment Program
Public Expenditure Financial Accountability
Public Financial Management
Public Private Partnership
Poverty Reduction Strategy Credit
Private Sector Development
Right to Information
South Asia Enterprise Development Facility
Social Investment Program Project
Small and Medium Enterprise
Sector Management Unit
Statement of Expenditure
Strengthening Public Expenditure Management Program
Sector-wide Approach
Trust Fund
World Bank Group
World Bank Institute
Water and Sanitation Program

The World Bank
Vice President
Country Director
Task Team Leader

Isabel M. Guerrero
Ellen Goldstein
Tahseen Sayed & Thomas Buckley

The International Finance Corporation
Vice President, (Operations)
Director, South Asia Department
Task Manager

Rashad Kaldany
Paolo M. Martelli
Syed A. Mahmood & Junko Oikawa

The World Bank Group appreciates the close collaboration of the Government of the
People’s Republic of Bangladesh in the preparation of this Country Assistance Strategy.

COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY FOR
THE PEOPLE’S REPUBLIC OF BANGLADESH

CONTENTS

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY…………………………………………………..……….…………..i
I.

COUNTRY CONTEXT AND STRATEGY ..................................................................................1

A.

Introduction ........................................................................................................................... 1

B.

Political Evolution ................................................................................................................ 1

C.

Recent Economic Development ............................................................................................ 2

D.

Progress in Human Development ......................................................................................... 4

E.

The Governance Context ...................................................................................................... 6

F.

National Vision and Strategy ................................................................................................ 8

G.

Macroeconomic Prospects and Risks.................................................................................. 10

II.

BANK GROUP ASSISTANCE STRATEGY FOR BANGLADESH .......................................12

A.

Lessons Learned from Implementing the Previous CAS .................................................... 12

B.

Proposed Assistance Strategy ............................................................................................. 17

C.

Cross-Cutting Dimensions .................................................................................................. 32

III.

IMPLEMENTING THE STRATEGY ........................................................................................34

A.

Building on the Portfolio .................................................................................................... 34

B.

Improving Programming..................................................................................................... 36

C.

Reducing Corruption in Operations .................................................................................... 38

D.

Managing for Results .......................................................................................................... 40

IV.

MANAGING RISKS .....................................................................................................................41

COUNTRY STRATEGY ANNEXES
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.

Progress towards MDGs/Poverty Reduction/Social Welfare
Strengthening Governance
CAS Completion Report
Client Survey and CAS Consultations
Vulnerability to Climate Change and Natural Disasters
Results Framework Matrix
Existing and Indicative Program (including Trust Funds) by Strategic Objectives
Aid Effectiveness and Partnerships
Reducing Corruption Risks in Bank Operations
Country Financing Parameters

45
54
60
117
122
126
138
149
155
160

TEXT BOXES
Box 1: Growth in a Challenging Governance Environment
Box 2: BICF Tax Administration Reform Project
Box 3: Multi-Stakeholder Consultations
Box 4: CAS Results Framework
Box 5: CAS Results Framework – Core CAS Indicators
Box 6: Stimulating Demand for Good Governance

7
12
17
19
20
29

TEXT TABLES
Table 1: Bangladesh Key Macroeconomic Indicators
Table 2: Bangladesh’s Human Development Performance in a Regional Context
Table 3: Bangladesh Key Macroeconomic Indicators – Projections for the CAS Period
Table 4: Portfolio and Proposed Commitment by Pillar

3
6
11
35

CAS STANDARD ANNEX TABLES
Annex A2: Bangladesh at a Glance
Annex B2: Selected Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
Annex B3: Proposed IDA Lending FY11-14
Annex B3: IFC Investment Operations Program
Annex B4: Indicative Program of Analytical and Advisory Activities
Annex B5: Bangladesh - Social Indicators
Annex B6: Bangladesh - Key Economic Indicators
Annex B7: Bangladesh - Key Exposure Indicators
Annex B8: Operations Portfolio
Annex B8: IFC: Committed and Disbursed Outstanding Investment Portfolio

MAP OF BANGLADESH

161
164
165
166
167
168
169
170
172
173

COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY FOR
THE PEOPLE’S REPUBLIC OF BANGLADESH

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
i.
A peaceful transition to democratic government. In 2006, the political system in Bangladesh was
shaken by civil unrest that threatened longer-term peace and stability. Ultimately, a caretaker government
(CTG) stepped in for two years in early 2007 with the aim of restoring peace and democracy. Elections
held in December 2008 resulted in a peaceful transfer of power and the restoration of democracy—a
triumph for political governance in a region often fraught with conflict.
ii.
A strong track record on growth and development. Despite political turbulence and frequent
natural disasters in recent years, Bangladesh has sustained a surprisingly good track record for growth and
development. In the past decade, the economy has grown by nearly 6 percent per annum, accelerating in
recent years. This has been accompanied by significant poverty reduction and profound social
transformation over the past two decades, with an influx of girls into the education system and women into
the labor force to support the burgeoning garment industry. Bangladesh has made laudable progress on
many aspects of human development, and is on track to meet Millennium Development Goals for infant
and child mortality and gender equality in education. However, with around 55 million people still living
in poverty and two-fifths of children chronically malnourished, development needs remain large and
pressing.
iii.
A challenging governance environment. Relatively strong progress on development has occurred
within a challenging governance environment, characterized by paralyzing political rivalry, weak checks
and balances among branches of government, weak accountability, inadequate systems for public resource
management and a widespread culture of corruption. This seeming paradox has been much analyzed, with
the conclusion that successive governments have nonetheless managed to maintain macroeconomic
stability, create adequate space for private sector-led growth and encourage labor migration and workers’
remittances. Indeed, ready-made garment exports and workers’ remittances have been the twin drivers of
growth in the past decade.
iv.
Ambitious aspirations for development. Looking ahead, Bangladesh has an opportunity to
accelerate growth by taking advantage of its low labor costs relative to other Asian producers. However,
the country will need to come to grips with the effects of weak governance, including unchecked urban
congestion, insufficient planning and under-investment in basic infrastructure. Annual growth of around 8
percent will be needed for the country to achieve its ambitious aspirations of reaching middle-income
status and reducing poverty from 40 percent to 15 percent of the population by 2021. Past performance
has been positive, but a significantly higher growth rate in future will require the country to address
persistent governance challenges that undermine the effectiveness of the public sector and create
disincentives for private sector initiatives.
v.
Strategic objectives of the CAS. The Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) for FY11-14 will support
Bangladesh’s ambitions by contributing to accelerated, sustainable and inclusive growth, underpinned by
stronger governance at central and local levels.


Accelerated growth. Massive infrastructure investment and a more conducive business
environment are needed--even to sustain recent levels of private sector growth. The Bank Group
will increasingly invest in transport (including logistics and ports) and power infrastructure that
can overcome severe infrastructure deficits, transform lagging areas of the country, create
agglomeration economies in urban areas and foster broader regional networks. Investment will be
accompanied by support for reforms to strengthen sector governance, financial sustainability and
i

private sector participation in infrastructure provision and maintenance. More generally, the Bank
Group will continue to provide strong support for investment climate reform, building on recent
progress in this area. The strategic objective to accelerate growth under this CAS is defined as:
increasing transformative investments and enhancing the business environment. Among the
major Bank interventions will be an exceptional level of support for the Padma Multipurpose
Bridge Project in order to unlock the economic potential of the isolated Southwest Region, as well
as scaled-up support for power sector development, including financing for an additional 750 MW
of power generation. IFC’s assistance will focus on access to finance, Economic Zone
Development, Public-Private Partnerships (PPPs) and private sector investments.


Sustainable growth. Bangladesh is among the most densely-populated countries in the world,
already vulnerable to natural disasters and now becoming highly-affected by climate change.
Water resource management, agricultural adaptation, environmental protection and disaster
preparedness will be critical areas for intervention. Given its vulnerability, the country is at the
global forefront on climate change policy and interventions, and needs cutting edge technical and
financial support from the Bank Group and Development Partners (DPs) to adapt and respond to
climate change and natural disasters. The country is also susceptible to external shocks, such as it
experienced with the food and fuel crisis in 2008. The strategic objective for more sustainable
growth under this CAS is defined as: reducing environmental degradation and vulnerability to
climate change and natural disasters. Major interventions in FY11-12 will focus on water
resource management through the Bangladesh River Information and Conservation Project and the
National Coastal Embankment Improvement Project as well as a Disaster Preparedness Project to
build on earlier emergency work in this area. IFC’s Sustainable Energy Program will also provide
support through its South Asia Enterprise Development Facility (SEDF).



Inclusive growth. Long-run progress on human development has been encouraging, with some
notable exceptions. The country is still struggling to rein in population growth, reduce maternal
mortality, effectively combat malnutrition, streamline social assistance and enhance educational
quality and learning outcomes. More effective delivery of social services at the local level is
needed to address these shortcomings, bring marginalized groups and rural communities more
firmly into the development process, and allow Bangladesh to compete in regional and global
markets with a healthy and skilled labor force. The strategic objective for more inclusive growth
under this CAS is defined as: improving social service delivery. In FY11-12, this will include the
Bank’s second-generation support for sector-wide approaches with other partners in primary
education and health, population and nutrition services, as well as expansion of targeted social
assistance through an Employment Generation Program for the Poorest (EGPP). IFC will provide
support through promotion of private sector participation in the social sectors.



Stronger governance. Bangladesh has made slow but steady upward progress in many areas of
governance in the past five to ten years, but—as in much of South Asia—governance remains
weak by global standards. For example, in the past five years the country has risen from the
bottom to the 25th percentile in global rankings of corruption perception. To grow faster and more
inclusively, government will need to be more responsive and effective, building on a renewed
commitment to private sector-led growth and decentralized service delivery. The Bank Group will
build on Government’s interest in strengthening the investment climate as an entry point for
dialogue on governance reforms, with IFC spearheading advisory work in this area through its
Bangladesh Investment Climate Fund (BICF). This will be complemented by an IDA-funded
Private Sector Development Project in FY11. On the public sector side, the Bank will support
more decentralized service delivery, coupled with strengthening of domestic accountability at
central and local levels. Overall, the strategic objective to strengthen governance is defined as:
enhancing accountability and promoting inclusion. Analysis under an Institutional and
ii

Governance Review (IGR) will be an input into reform and investments under a second Local
Government Support Project in FY12, as well as possible development policy lending.
vi.
These four strategic objectives were defined through multi-stakeholder consultations in various
locations in Bangladesh, which further identified sixteen outcomes to which the CAS could contribute
within these areas. The program will build on an on-going portfolio which is well-aligned with the four
strategic objectives, but with a ramping up of investments to accelerate growth (objective 1) and reduce
vulnerability to climate change (objective 2). These strategic objectives will be supported by the entire
World Bank Group, with initiatives by the IFC, for example, in each area and targeted support from the
World Bank Institute (WBI) on governance issues in general and in key sectors.
vii.
Cross-cutting dimensions. Additional dimensions that cut across all four strategic objectives of
the CAS include fostering regional cooperation, strengthening gender mainstreaming and partnering for
aid effectiveness.


Fostering regional cooperation. The political transition in Bangladesh has created an historic
opportunity for closer collaboration with neighboring India, which may gradually open the door to
wider and deeper regional cooperation. The Bank Group will build on opportunities for enhanced
cooperation as they arise in promising areas, including cross-border infrastructure networks and
management of common natural resources (e.g. waterways, wildlife).



Strengthening gender mainstreaming. The Bangladesh program has a good track record on
gender mainstreaming, as noted by the Independent Evaluation Group (IEG) in its review of the
previous CAS. This has included a long-term commitment to girls’ education and to reproductive
health, along with gender-focused community-driven development which has contributed to social
transformation. Under this CAS, additional emphasis will be given to women’s economic
empowerment, in areas such as employment generation for low-income women and a pilot
program to support rural women transitioning into labor-intensive manufacturing industries.



Partnering for aid effectiveness. Enhancing aid effectiveness in line with Paris Declaration
principles and the Accra Agenda for Action will be another cross-cutting feature of the country
program. This will build on current donor partnerships in many sectors, including sector-wide
approaches in health and education, coordinated co-financing of large infrastructure operations and
multi-donor trust funds (MDTFs) in areas such as public resource management and investment
climate reform. Sector-based partnerships will be guided by the recent endorsement of a Joint
Cooperation Strategy (JCS) by bilateral and multilateral partners (including the Bank) at the
Bangladesh Development Forum (BDF) in early 2010 and its subsequent signing by the
Government of Bangladesh and eighteen DPs.

viii.
Lessons learned from the previous CAS. The new CAS reflects lessons drawn from the CAS
Completion Report, client surveys, multi-stakeholder consultations and an IEG Country Assistance
Evaluation which judged outcomes in the most recent CAS period to have been moderately satisfactory.
Among the most important lessons relates to the handling of governance concerns. The previous CAS had
governance as a unifying theme, and an ambitious set of objectives in areas where political will was
notoriously weak. While the Bank contributed to progress in public financial management and in the
independence and accountability of local government, impact was negligible with respect to high-profile
investigations and prosecutions, as well as judicial and civil service reforms. A longer-term, systemic
engagement was needed to promote gradual and incremental change, build demand for good governance as
well as greater selectivity in order to take advantage of pockets of political will.

iii

ix.
Strategic repositioning on governance and anti-corruption. The costs of weak governance in
Bangladesh cannot be overestimated, in terms of adequate domestic resource mobilization,
underperformance of the annual development program and disincentives for private investment. The
FY11-14 CAS will make a deliberate shift to a longer-term and more systemic approach to strengthening
governance and anti-corruption by building domestic accountability mechanisms. It will be more
selective, focusing on areas with adequate government commitment and/or champions with whom to work,
and where concrete results are considered feasible. In addition to a continued focus on core governance
(particularly public financial management), this CAS seeks to build on the current political commitment to
strengthen local government and local service delivery. A four-pronged approach to strengthening
governance and anti-corruption (GAC) will be adopted, including: i) increasing operational selectivity
based on sector-specific GAC analysis; ii) promoting systemic prevention of corruption through long-term
governance improvements in areas where the Bank can align with political will to effect substantive
change; iii) cultivating new entry points for strengthening GAC by engaging in dialogue with a wide
range of stakeholders; and iv) fostering greater demand for good governance from civil society. This
approach will be mainstreamed across all four strategic objectives, and will engage the entire Bank Group,
including continued capacity development support from WBI and investment climate and corporate
governance work by IFC.
x.
IDA lending volumes. IDA commitments to Bangladesh have grown rapidly in the past five
years, topping US$ 1 billion for the first time in FY09. During the upcoming CAS period, new
commitments will build on a US$ 2.9 billion portfolio of two dozen operations. FY11 is expected to be a
peak year, with new commitments of over US$ 2 billion (backloaded from the FY09-11 IDA15
allocation), including US$ 1.2 billion for the Padma Multipurpose Bridge mega-project. Indicative
allocations for FY12-14 (from the IDA16 cycle) are assumed to remain on par with the IDA15 allocation
of around US$ 1.3 billion per annum. In total, the indicative allocation for the FY11-14 CAS is expected
to exceed US$ 6 billion if supported by continued strong country performance. Actual allocations during
the CAS period will be determined annually based on: (i) total IDA resources available; (ii) the number of
IDA eligible countries; and (iii) performance of all IDA borrowers as well as the terms of IDA assistance.
xi.
Better programming. The sustained increase in the Bank’s lending volume allows and
necessitates a move to larger, more strategic interventions in order to maximize development impact,
leverage structural reforms and maintain a manageable portfolio in the face of limited implementation
capacity. Thus, future programming will encourage consolidation, so that the average size of operations
will continue to rise from approximately US$ 70 million in the earlier part of the decade to US$ 120
million most recently and a targeted US$ 150 million or more under the new CAS. Programming will be
guided by the following principles:
 Sequencing of analytical work to guide policy dialogue on reforms and influence operational
design;
 Use of the full range of instruments, including a possible resumption of development policy
lending in selected areas with sufficient country ownership and capacity to carry forward reforms.
 Realism to maintain a manageable portfolio aligned with the client’s capacity to implement and
the Bank’s capacity to supervise;
 Increased engagement where opportunities exist for larger and more strategic interventions;
 Scaling up of interventions with demonstrable results and high country ownership;
 Within an overall context of consolidation, retaining flexibility to innovate and pilot through
selected, smaller interventions.
xii.
Finally, with emphasis on enhancing the investment climate, IFC will continue to implement its
large advisory services program (with UK and EU financing), while the ramping up of infrastructure
investments will create opportunities for increased IFC investment and MIGA guarantees.
iv

xiii.
Reducing corruption risk in operations. The concept of consolidation is also intended to reduce
corruption risks to the portfolio through larger operations with fewer and larger contracts subject to
appropriate fiduciary oversight. It also will enable meeting government priorities by leveraging Bank
resources in support of policy changes for transformative investments. While the CAS embraces a broader
governance and anti-corruption agenda focused on strengthening country systems and domestic
accountability mechanisms, the Country Team will take special measures to reduce corruption risks within
operations as well. Addressing corruption risk is already at center stage in the Bangladesh country
program, through the on-going Operational Risk Management Assessment Plan (ORMAP) team put in
place under the previous CAS. Measures to strengthen the on-going engagement will include:






Modifying the ORMAP methodology to integrate the corporate Operational Risk Assessment
Framework (ORAF) and to include risk assessment for both pipeline and on-going operations;
Engaging in quarterly technical portfolio reviews and annual high-level portfolio reviews
focused on corruption risk assessment and monitoring;
Increasing diagnostics of political economy and operational risk assessments in key sectors in
order to calibrate Bank engagement to the level of government commitment to the GAC agenda;
Using the Bank’s new Access to Information policy and the country’s new Right to Information
(RTI) Act to support social accountability mechanisms and third party monitoring in all
operations;
Continuing to cooperate with the Department of Institutional Integrity’s (INT) investigations in
order to support the client in implementing follow-up action plans, such as the on-going
technical assistance to strengthen governance and business processes in the road sector.

xiv.
Managing for results. Measures to strengthen governance and reduce corruption within Bank
operations are one aspect of a broader effort to manage for better results. Monitoring of CAS
implementation will be enhanced to ensure a continuous focus on progress towards results. In particular,
the multi-sectoral “results teams” created around each strategic objective during CAS preparation will
continue to play a role in periodic monitoring of progress towards the sixteen outcomes. The Country
Management Unit (CMU) will play a more active coordinating role across these teams to ensure regular
CAS monitoring and reporting on progress towards results, so that the CAS serves as a “live” management
tool.
xv.
Risk mitigation. CAS monitoring will focus on progress towards results, as well as mitigation of
risks to results—risks which are deemed substantial in the Bangladesh context. Mitigation will address the
main risks identified, which include a possible faltering commitment to reforms, setbacks on governance,
corruption and misuse of Bank funds, limited implementation capacity and continued opposition to
reforms and important strategic initiatives, particularly related to decentralization/local government and
cooperation in the South Asia Region. The democratically-elected government is at a turning point in its
tenure. In power for one year, the Government has had sufficient time to determine priorities and outline
broad strategies. The challenge now is to translate these into sector-specific action plans and implement
quickly and effectively to deliver results on the ground. The Bank Group is poised to provide peak levels
of support for implementation of Government priorities, but will calibrate its support going forward in line
with demonstrated commitment to structural reforms and good governance.

v

COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY FOR
THE PEOPLE’S REPUBLIC OF BANGLADESH
I.

A.

COUNTRY CONTEXT AND STRATEGY

Introduction

1.
Bangladesh, with nearly 160 million inhabitants on a landmass of 147,570 square kilometers, is
among the most densely-populated countries in the world. It remains a low-income country, with a per
capita income of US$ 652 (Atlas method) in FY09 and 40 percent of its population living in poverty.
2.
Geography is a strong determinant of Bangladesh’s development. The country is bounded by
India on the west, north, and north-east, Myanmar on the south-east, and the Bay of Bengal on the south.
Eighty percent of its area consists of floodplains created by more than 300 rivers and channels, including
three major rivers: the Ganges, the Brahmaputra, and the Meghna. Bangladesh forms only a small part of
a large regional hydrologic system—less than 10 percent of the river basin falls within the national
territory. Its southern part is nestled in the Bay of Bengal with a 710 km long coastal belt that is home to
nearly 35 million people. Bangladesh’s geographical position and very high population density make it
extremely vulnerable to natural disasters including floods, droughts, and cyclones. Global climate change
has increased these vulnerabilities manifold.
B.

Political Evolution

3.
Since independence in 1971, Bangladesh has experienced a variety of forms of government,
including military rule. A parliamentary system was re-introduced in 1991, and power has alternated
between the two major parties, the Bangladesh Awami League and the Bangladesh Nationalist Party, in
each of the last four elections. The political system concentrates power in the hands of the party leaders.
Political dialogue has been characterized by bitter party rivalry that undermines sustained development
during political transition periods. In 2006, the political cycle was broken by civil unrest that threatened
longer-term peace and stability in the country. A military-backed caretaker government stepped in for two
years in late 2006 with the aim of restoring peace and democracy.
4.
Democracy restored. The caretaker government held elections in December 2008 that were
deemed free and fair by international observers and resulted in a peaceful transfer of power to an Awami
League government led by Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina Wajed, daughter of slain freedom-fighter and
first president of independent Bangladesh, Sheikh Mujibur Rahman. The Awami League won 230 out of a
possible 300 seats in the parliament, granting it an absolute majority. This peaceful restoration of
democracy was a triumph for political governance in a region often fraught with conflict.
5.
Regional cooperation. The political transition in 2009 paved the way for renewed cooperation
between Bangladesh and India which is an important prerequisite to greater regional economic integration.
Despite significant labor migration, South Asia remains the least integrated region in the world in terms of
trade in goods and services and management of common resources. Institutions for fostering regional
collaboration need strengthening. A major study on economic cooperation points out that Bangladesh
could gain very significantly in terms of trade and poverty reduction if opportunities for regional
integration were more fully exploited, particularly through increased cross-border trade and use of
Bangladesh as a transit hub for the sub-region1. An historic summit between the Bangladeshi and Indian
1

See Sadiq Ahmed et al (edited), Promoting Regional Cooperation in South Asia: Beyond SAFTA, Sage Publications, New Delhi,
2010.

1

Prime Ministers was held in February 2010 and resulted in the signing of accords on border security, trade,
transport, and power interconnections. Implementation of these accords and deepening of dialogue on
water resource management could herald the start of an era of improved cooperation with economic
benefits for all countries of the region.
C.

Recent Economic Development

6.
Despite periods of political turmoil and frequent natural disasters, the past decade in Bangladesh
has been marked by sustained growth, stable macroeconomic management, significant poverty reduction
and rapid social transformation and human development. This positive progress has given rise to problems
of severe infrastructure deficiencies, environmental degradation and urban congestion. With governance
and institutions weak--and only slowly improving--the ability of the country to manage its growth and
confront emerging challenges will be stretched.
7.
Sustained economic growth. During FY01-09, GDP grew by a healthy 5.8 percent per annum
(including 6.3 percent per annum in FY06-09), accelerating by one percentage point compared to the
previous decade. Despite natural disasters and political volatility, GDP growth has been remarkably stable,
with a low standard deviation of 0.7 during this decade (half the volatility of growth in the 1980s). Growth
has been led by industry and services sectors, while agriculture - as in other South Asian countries – has
performed less well with an average annual growth rate of only 3 percent.
8.
Sources of growth. Remittances and exports have been twin drivers of the Bangladeshi economy
as well as the balance of payments. On the demand side, domestic consumption, fed by strong growth in
remittances, has contributed to 70-80 percent of the growth in the past decade. Remittances, combined
with growth of ready-made garment exports, which now account for over two-thirds of export earnings,
have been the major contributors to current account inflows, leading to a positive current account balance
in recent years. In FY10, while the global slowdown dampened the growth of exports, remittances
continued to be robust, keeping the current account in surplus. Direct investment inflows have remained
small but stable. The overall balance of payments remained in surplus equal to 2.3 percent of GDP in
FY09, enabling the country to continue accumulating international reserves. By November 2009, gross
reserves had crossed US$ 10 billion. While high reserves are good as an insurance mechanism up to a
point, continued high accumulation of reserves indicates that there is pressure on the exchange rate to
appreciate; the resultant need for sterilization by the central bank also reduces the flexibility of monetary
policy.
9.
Factor accumulation but limited growth of total factor productivity. GDP growth accelerated in
recent years largely due to factor accumulation, both capital and labor. Capital accumulation was led by
the private sector and financed mainly by gross domestic savings. Meanwhile, accumulation of qualityadjusted labor was largely driven by a surge in the number of entrants into the labor force (because of the
demographic transition and greater participation of women) and to a lesser extent by better access to
education. Total factor productivity – or the efficiency with which labor and capital are combined to
produce output – made a small contribution.2 In future, faster economic growth will require a greater
contribution from rising total factor productivity. Factor accumulation and the smaller improvements in
total factor productivity that helped accelerate growth in the past decade received a boost from macrostabilization measures and market-oriented reforms.

2

See World Bank (2007). “Bangladesh: A Strategy for Sustained Growth.”

2

Table 1: Bangladesh Key Macroeconomic Indicators
FY02 FY03 FY04 FY05 FY06
annual percent change
4.4
5.3
6.3
6.0
6.6
23.1
23.4
24.0
24.5
24.7
2.8
4.4
5.8
6.5
7.2

Output and Prices
Real GDP Growth
Investment (% of GDP)
CPI Inflation (average)
External Performance
Exports (f.o.b.) (US$ billion)
Annual % change
Imports (c.i.f.) (US$ billion)
Annual % change
Remittances (US$ billion)
Annual % change
Current account balance (% of GDP)
Foreign Direct Investment (US$ million)
Gross official reserves (US$ billion)
In months of GNFS imports
Public Finance
Total Revenue
Total Expenditures
Overall budget deficit (excl. grants)
Domestic financing
Public debt
Money and Credit
Private sector credit
Broad money (M2)

5.9
-7.6
7.7
-8.7
2.5
32.9
0.3
391
1.6
2.1

6.5
9.5
8.7
13.1
3.1
22.4
0.3
376
2.5
2.9

7.5
15.9
9.8
13.0
3.4
10.0
0.3
276
2.7
2.8

8.6
14.0
11.9
20.6
3.8
14.2
-0.9
800
2.9
2.5

10.1
14.8
4.7
2.5
52.7

10.3
13.7
3.4
1.2
51.1

10.2
13.3
3.1
1.8
51.0

10.5
13.8
3.3
1.7
50.1

14.4
13.1

24.4
15.6

14.1
13.8

16.8
16.7

10.4
21.6
14.7
12.2
4.8
24.8
1.3
743
3.5
2.7

FY07

FY08

FY09

6.4
24.5
7.2

6.2
24.2
9.9

5.9
24.2
6.7

12.1
15.8
15.5
16.3
6.0
24.5
1.4
793
5.1
3.3

14.2
15.6
17.4
10.1
19.5
20.3
25.6
4.2
7.9
9.7
32.4
22.4
0.9
2.8
748
941
6.2
7.5
3.4
3.6
percent of GDP
10.7
10.4
11.4
11.2
14.1
13.5
15.0
14.8
3.4
3.1
3.6
3.6
2.2
1.9
1.4
1.8
48.3
46.8
46.8
45.3
end of year; percent change
18.1
15.0
24.9
14.6
19.3
17.1
17.6
19.2

Source: Government of Bangladesh and IMF-World Bank Joint Debt Sustainability Analysis

10.
Stable macroeconomic management. Sustained macroeconomic stabilization measures have
underpinned GDP growth, and resulted in lower inflation and smaller internal/external balances in the
1990s and the past decade (see Table 1). Responsible fiscal and monetary policies have kept inflation in
single digits. Fiscal prudence has also kept public borrowing in check, preventing the crowding out of
private investment. Meanwhile, fiscal and monetary discipline along with periodic adjustments in the
exchange rate, have helped keep the external sector in balance. On the structural side, wide-ranging
reforms have increased the market orientation of the economy. These include easing of trade and
exchange restrictions, relaxation of restrictions on private investment, reform of state-owned banks, and
deepening of agriculture reforms.
11.
Resilience to global crisis. The Bangladesh economy has shown remarkable resilience to the
effects of the global economic crisis. The impact of the crisis on the domestic economy has been relatively
limited thus far, although the country remains vulnerable due to insufficient export diversification and high
dependency on migrant workers’ remittances. The country has a relatively low risk of debt distress.
Continued prudent foreign borrowing amid robust economic growth and recent real appreciation of the
taka has put the external debt to GDP ratio on a declining path. However, if domestic public debt is also
taken into account, the risk of debt distress is somewhat more elevated, with the ratio of total public debt to
GDP projected to remain at around 44 percent of GDP over the medium term. In terms of crisis effects,
Bangladesh’s direct exposure to toxic assets was almost zero. However, it is still vulnerable to the
economic downturn that has followed the financial crisis, since it is highly dependent on garment exports
to developed country markets (especially the US and EU). The dollar value of exports has fallen by 7
percent in the first seven months of FY10 (versus the same period of FY09), after growing 10 percent in
FY09. Similarly, high dependence on the Middle-East for overseas employment of Bangladesh’s surplus
labor is another major source of vulnerability, although remittances continued to display robust growth in
FY10.
3

12.
Vulnerabilities at the micro-level. With a large share of per capita expenditures clustering around
the poverty line, vulnerabilities are more exposed at the micro-level. Shocks such as the 2007 natural
disasters or the early 2008 food/fuel price increases can lead to significant increases in poverty. It is
estimated that a 5 percent decrease in consumption, spread equally through the population, would increase
the poverty head count ratio by 11 percentage points (simulations based on 2005 HIES data). Similarly,
the spike in rice prices from 21 taka per kg. in April 2007 to 35 taka per kg. in April 2008, would have led
to a significant decline in consumption and increase in poverty. The magnitude is evident, for example, in
spot surveys of nutritional status in 2008 that found acute malnutrition levels (wasting) in children of as
much as 25 percent—nearly double the trend rate--in the hardest-hit areas of Bangladesh. In addition,
weak coordination and targeting in the social protection system reduces the effectiveness of targeted
programs to dampen the poverty impact of such shocks.
13.
Growth outstrips infrastructure supply. Sustained growth in recent years has rapidly increased
the demand for energy, transport and telecommunications services. Insufficient planning and investment
for future growth have now resulted in severe infrastructure deficits. Electricity supply falls more than
2000 megawatts (MW) short during peak times, fulfilling less than 75 percent of peak demand. Even so,
per capita electricity consumption, at 160Kwh, is about one-fourth of India’s and one of the lowest in the
world. Less than half of all households have access to electricity. In transport, the country is overlydependent on a network of poorly-managed and maintained roads, which satisfy 88 percent of total
transport needs. Only 40 percent of main roads are in good condition, and easy access of the rural
population to an all-season road is only 37 percent for Bangladesh versus 69 percent for India.
Bangladesh’s abundant waterways are underdeveloped as cost-effective transport, particularly for the poor.
14.
Urban congestion constrains future growth. At around 15 million inhabitants, Dhaka is now the
eighth-largest city in the world, projected to become the third-largest by 2020. It is also among the ten
most-polluted cities in the world. Extreme urban congestion is discouraging investment and economic
activity, while pollution levels are undermining the health and well-being of the population. Urbanization,
which includes about 25 percent of total population, has been an important catalyst for recent growth. It
continues unabated as rural populations compete for scarce land and seek better employment opportunities
in cities or abroad. Rising congestion in major urban areas and poor urban services and management raise
concerns about the quality and sustainability of growth in Bangladesh.
D.

Progress in Human Development

15.
In the past two decades, Bangladesh has experienced significant poverty reduction and a profound
social transformation with the widespread entry of girls into the education system and women into the
labor force to support rapid expansion of the garment industry. On the whole, Bangladesh has made
laudable progress on many aspects of human development which has been a foundation for improvements
in growth, empowerment and social mobility. Some notable exceptions—particularly malnutrition and
maternal mortality—underscore that much still remains to be done to improve health and education
outcomes, strengthen social services and address continued gender inequality in many areas, whether it is
access to productive assets, voice in community decision-making or widespread spousal violence. Fertility
rates were halved in the 1990s, but then stagnated for nearly a decade. Fertility is once again declining,
but requires continued attention. At its current growth rate, Bangladesh’s population is expected to reach
220 million inhabitants by 2040, posing a daunting development challenge, particularly given the
country’s vulnerability to the effects of climate change and natural disasters.
16.
Significant poverty reduction. Per capita GDP grew by 4.3 percent per annum in the past decade,
contributing to a decline in headcount poverty from 57 percent at the beginning of the 1990s to 49 percent
by 2000 and 40 percent by 2005. Despite this progress, Bangladesh still had an estimated 56 million
people in poverty in 2005—equivalent to the population of the UK or France. Direct evidence on poverty
4

trends since 2005 is not yet available. However, based on the association between economic growth and
poverty reduction, it is expected that the poverty head count has declined further to around 30 percent by
2009 even after taking into account the setbacks caused by the cumulative impact of natural disasters in
2007 (twin floods and a cyclone), the food-price shock during 2007-08, and the impact of the global
recession on exports. On the basis of this expected trend, Bangladesh is on track to meet the MDG poverty
targets by 2015. For more on Bangladesh’s poverty profile, see Annex 1.
17.
Poverty, growth and inequality. Poverty reduction in Bangladesh has been driven by growth, and
linked particularly to transformations in the labor market and rapid increases in workers’ remittances.
Economic growth has led to expanded wage employment, wage growth and enhanced labor productivity.
Workers moved away from low productivity jobs in agriculture to more productive jobs in the nonfarm
private sector, particularly in urban areas and overseas. Increasing flows of workers’ remittances, which
grew by 20 percent per annum in 2000-2005, were a key factor in poverty reduction. Based on 2005 data,
poverty incidence among households receiving remittances from abroad was only 17 percent compared to
42 percent among the population at large. Inequality, as measured by the Gini coefficient of consumption,
remained unchanged from 2000 to 2005 at around 0.31.
18.
Better child survival. Bangladesh has made considerable progress on some health-related MDGs.
Over the past two decades, infant and child mortality have declined by around half—46 and 57 percent
respectively— outstripping progress in other South Asian countries and setting Bangladesh on track to
meet the relevant MDGs (see Table 2). This progress was accompanied by substantial narrowing of the
gender gap in neonatal, infant and child mortality. Despite progress, children and adults still face a high
burden of communicable diseases. Bangladesh ranks among the top-five countries for incidence of
tuberculosis, and diarrheal diseases and acute respiratory infections remain widespread in the absence of
clean water and sanitation and in the face of deteriorating air quality.
19.
Persistent maternal mortality and malnutrition. Maternal mortality rates are high, and even
under the most optimistic scenario, the MDG target will not be reached. Prenatal care remains inadequate,
with most births in rural areas unattended by qualified health personnel. Chronic and acute malnutrition
remain high even as per capita income rises among the poor. Child underweight rates (chronic
malnutrition) have fallen just 5 percent to 46 percent between 2000 and 2007. Chronic malnutrition is
pervasive across all socioeconomic strata, at 56 percent of all children among the poorest and 32 percent
among the wealthiest quintiles. Child wasting (acute malnutrition) fluctuates, but reached 16 percent in
2007, above the 15 percent threshold used to identify emergency feeding situations by the World Health
Organization.
20.
Increased access to education. The gross enrollment rate for primary school increased from 76
percent in 1991 to 98 percent in 2008 (with net enrollment at 91 percent). At the secondary level, gross
enrollment was 57 percent in 2008, representing a three-fold increase since 1980. Much of the gain at the
secondary level was due to a seven-fold increase in girls’ enrolments since 1980. Demand-side
interventions since the early 1990s, including a gender-targeted secondary stipend program, have been met
with expanded supply, particularly through private channels. The share of girls in total enrollments is now
52 percent in primary and 55 percent in secondary education, compared to fewer than 40 percent in the
early 1990s.

5

Table 2: Bangladesh’s Human Development Performance in a Regional Context
Bangladesh

GDP (current US$ billion)
GNI per capita, Atlas method (current US$)
Fertility rate, total (births per woman)
Life expectancy at birth, total (years)
Mortality rate, under-5 (per 1,000)
Mortality rate, infant (per 1,000 live births)
Maternal mortality ratio (per 100,000 live births)
Malnutrition prevalence, height for age (% of children under 5)
Malnutrition prevalence, weight for age (% of children under 5)
Low-birth weight babies (% of births)
School enrollment, primary (% net)
School enrollment, secondary (% net)
Ratio of girls to boys in primary education
Ratio of girls to boys in secondary education
Population, total (million)

1990
30.1
250
4.3
54.4
146.0
92.0
574
…
66.0
…
60.5
…
0.83
0.52
116

2000
47.1
350
3
61.6
90.9
66.4
320
57.2
48.2
…
…
43.1
…
…
141

2008*
79.0
520
2.4
66.3
65.0
52.0
…
47.8
46.3
21.6
91.1
40.7
1.08
1.08
160

South
Asia
2008*
1531
986
2.8
64.7
78.2
58.9
…
47.1
40.9
26.5
…
44.7
…
…
1543

East
Asia &
Pacific
2008*
5658
2631
1.9
72
27.4
22.3
…
25.6
12.6
6.1
93.1
…
…
…
1931

Note: * Data is for latest available year (2006/2007/2008)
Source: World Development Indicators, and UNDP MDG Monitoring at http//www.undp.org.bd/mdgs.php

21.
Weak educational quality and outcomes. The primary school completion rate is only 52 percent,
and only 20 percent at the secondary level. Transition rates are also low, at 44 percent for primary to
lower secondary, 27 percent from lower to upper secondary and only 6 percent to tertiary. Learning
outcomes are generally poor, especially among low income and disadvantaged groups. Many poor
children are still out of school or lack a quality schooling environment. Government recognizes that
increased enrolment at the primary and secondary levels is putting additional pressure on the tertiary
system, and has acknowledged the importance of developing a quality tertiary and vocational education
system to accelerate economic growth, enhance competiveness in the global economy and provide
abundant labor to external markets.
22.
Increasing vulnerability to disasters. By virtue of its geography, Bangladesh has long been
vulnerable to natural disasters, such as cyclones and floods. Anywhere from 30 to 50 percent of the
country is affected by floods every year. Of about 250,000 deaths worldwide arising from cyclones during
1980-2000, 60 percent occurred in Bangladesh. In the past decade, the country has become better prepared
to deal with weather uncertainty and emergency responses, making recent events less deadly than earlier
disasters. However, climate change effects are exacerbating Bangladesh’s vulnerability by increasing the
frequency and severity of weather events. The long-run impact of climate change is uncertain, but it is
estimated that a four degree rise in global temperature would raise the sea level by 100cm by 2100,
inundating 15 percent of the country’s land area and displacing 20 million people. Adapting to climate
change and enhancing preparedness to deal with climate-change-related disasters are policy priorities for
Bangladesh.
E.

The Governance Context

23.
Bangladesh is no exception within South Asia in finding itself at the low end of most global
rankings on governance and anti-corruption. In contrast to some countries in the region, however,
Bangladesh has managed to maintain peace and political stability, make slow but steady progress in
6

improving corruption perceptions, and strengthen public financial management in recent years. Economic
performance has been relatively strong within this challenging governance environment. Nonetheless,
governance shortcomings have led to an inefficient public sector which has insufficiently provided key
public goods needed to sustain economic growth. Bangladesh has a low revenue-to-GDP ratio that is less
than regional comparators, including Nepal’s (at around 12 percent). Revenue use is also inefficient. Only
two-thirds to three-quarters of the Annual Development Plan (ADP) is implemented each year. A recent
assessment of large value procurements approved by the Cabinet Committee for Government Purchase
found that only 18% of contracts for the Roads and Highways Division and 33% of contracts for the Local
Government Engineering Division (the major public works entity) were awarded within the initial bid
validity period of 90-120 days. An efficient procurement system would expect to award 90% of contracts
within the bid validity period. This kind of inefficiency has contributed to a lack of investment, most
notably in the power sector. The situation has grown so severe that consumers face load-shedding for as
much as sixteen hours a day, and power to key export industries and agriculture is being rationed.
Bangladesh will require actions on multiple fronts to improve the governance environment in order to meet
its goal of reaching middle income countries status (see Box 1).
Box 1: Growth in a Challenging Governance Context
A weak governance and transparency environment has been an impediment to business investments. Notwithstanding, Bangladesh has managed to achieve relatively good economic outcomes. Some have called
this the “Bangladesh Paradox”, but it is more understandable when the overall governance environment is
unbundled. Such an unbundling reveals at least six areas where Bangladesh has demonstrated capacity for
good governance.







The state created space (at the macro-economic level) for the emergence of a vibrant domestic private
sector by maintaining macroeconomic discipline, as evident from low inflation rates, fiscal deficits and
external indebtedness, thus preventing the crowding out of private sector investment.
The state has significantly improved its capacity to manage natural disasters, thus reducing considerably
their macroeconomic impact.
Successive governments have been relatively good at making wise public expenditure choices within a
limited fiscal envelope. They have financed rural infrastructure and ensured a sustained injection of
public funds for health and education.
Recognizing its limitations in meeting the strong demand for services, successive governments have
created space and forged partnerships with NGOs and the private sector to deliver services.
Unleashing the development potential of half its population, successive governments have supported
family planning, girls’ participation in schooling and female entry into the labor force.
Successive governments have also encouraged the migration of Bangladeshi workers and created a
domestic environment and mechanisms to encourage these workers to remit large sums of money.

However, like some of the South East Asian countries in the early 1990s, Bangladesh may discover that it is
outgrowing its current governance environment. While the country’s relatively weak governance
environment may have been adequate to cope with an economy breaking out of stagnation and widespread
poverty, it could increasingly prove a barrier to more rapid, inclusive and sustainable growth. For example,
accelerated growth will require much more public investment and therefore revenue generation, which will
mean overcoming Bangladesh’s long-standing obstacles to better tax administration and fiscal policies. It
will also require improving the quality of public investments and overall expenditures.
Similarly, mitigating the potential impact of climate change on agricultural output and GDP growth will
place a premium on better governance of the adjustment process. In addition, accelerated GDP growth also
requires better governance of cities in order that diseconomies of urbanization not dominate over the
benefits of agglomeration. Surmounting the energy deficit, perhaps one of the most critical and immediate
challenges to accelerating and even sustaining current rates of growth, will require comprehensive reforms
in the governance of the energy sector including the energy pricing structure of energy utilities, and an
improved regulatory framework for private participation in infrastructure.

7

24.
Institutional checks and balances. Although Bangladesh has witnessed several largely peaceful
transfers of power between its two major parties, political competition has not yielded strong mechanisms
for accountability of Government. Political competition has rather created a ‘winner-takes-all’ system
which has consistently prompted the ruling party to subordinate state institutions to its own interests rather
than building effective institutions with appropriate checks and balances. Public institutions offer little de
facto opportunity for opposition to hold Government accountable. Neither Parliament nor the Judiciary
provides significant institutional restraint on executive power. Notwithstanding these enduring
shortcomings, there has been progress in recent years. The country has adopted a legal and institutional
framework for countering corruption although there have been recent developments to dilute institutional
independence. It has progressed from the bottom to the 25th percentile in global rankings of corruption
perception, despite concerns about the current Government’s commitment. Bangladesh has adopted a RTI
Act and is promoting e-governance as a tool for reducing opportunities for corruption. The country has a
vibrant-albeit partisan—press and many strong, world-class non-governmental organizations (NGOs),
though the NGO community has tended to focus more on service provision than demanding better
performance by Government. Uncertainty remains regarding the outlook for better governance, as the
Government’s commitment to strengthening governance and anti-corruption has yet to be translated into
demonstrable actions. In some cases, as with recent amendments to the framework for the Anti-Corruption
Commission (ACC), actions are not encouraging. Many external partners have adopted a ‘wait-and-see’
attitude, while encouraging pro-activity among local stakeholders. A more detailed assessment of the
governance context in Bangladesh is provided in Annex 2.
25.
Public sector management and service delivery. Government is among the most centralized in
the world, with the central administration responsible for most public service delivery. Local levels of
government lack both resources and clear responsibilities. Public administration is undermined by weak
policy coordination, a poor incentive structure, inadequate revenues, weak accountability and limited
implementation capacity that inevitably lead to underperformance in the delivery of public services. The
current government has emphasized the need to improve public sector performance in order to bring
services to the doorsteps of the people. Government has continued positive measures to strengthen public
financial management, including adopting a Public Money and Budget Management Act, establishing a
medium-term budget framework and implementing a sound public procurement law—although recent
amendments undermined the transparency of processes for low-value purchases. Government has
committed to a comprehensive program to build more effective public financial management, and has
outlined priorities to strengthen governance in the Second National Strategy for Accelerated Poverty
Reduction (NSAPR-II).
F.

National Vision and Strategy

26.
The Government has placed elimination of poverty and inequity at the forefront of its
development strategy. Government’s long-run vision was first outlined in the Awami League Manifesto,
and is now being reflected in a long-term perspective plan for 2010-2021 that is being finalized. This plan
sets ambitious goals to reduce poverty from 40 percent to 15 percent and achieve middle-income country
status by 2021. Government adopted the NSAPR-II for FY09-11 as the first phase in implementation of
the Vision 2021. The NSAPR-II will serve as a transitional poverty reduction strategy until the launch of
the Sixth Five-Year Plan for FY11-15. The Five-Year Plan is expected to be a closely-aligned
continuation of the NSAPR-II in order to maintain momentum toward longer-term goals.
27.
NSAPR-II priorities. The national strategy calls for “putting Bangladesh into a trajectory of
high-performing growth, stabilizing commodity prices, minimizing income inequality and human poverty,
creation of employment opportunities, securing health and education for all, enhancing creativity and
human capacity, establishing social justice, reducing social disparity, achieving capacity to tackle the
8

adverse effects of climate change, and firmly rooting democracy in the political arena.”3. The strategy also
anticipates the use of information technology to help achieve the above goals, as part of a broad Digital
Bangladesh initiative. The NSAPR-II consists of five strategic blocks aimed at maintaining
macroeconomic stability for pro-poor growth; bringing vibrancy to lagging rural areas; building essential
infrastructure; ensuring social protection for the vulnerable; and consolidating gains in human
development. These blocks will be supported by strategies to (i) ensure participation, social inclusion, and
empowerment; (ii) promote good governance; (iii) ensure efficient delivery of public services; (iv) care for
the environment and tackle climate change; and (v) enhance productivity and efficiency through science
and technology.
28.
The Bank/Fund Joint Staff Assessment of the NSAPR-II concludes that the national strategy
provides a sensible basis for Bangladesh to move forward in tackling its key challenges to growth and
poverty reduction. The strategy is comprehensive and addresses the major constraints to accelerated,
sustainable and inclusive development. It would benefit from greater prioritization of policy measures and
sequencing of investments in light of the array of policy measures identified and the large (US$ 12.5
billion) resource gap for planned investments. Nonetheless, it accurately assesses the key development
challenges facing Bangladesh in coming years, and these are the basis for articulating the Bank Group’s
country assistance strategy for FY11-14. Governance remains a central challenge. Among the key
challenges highlighted:
29.
Accelerating growth. To move toward eight percent real growth per annum, Bangladesh will need
to take advantage of its low-cost labor for faster expansion of labor-intensive manufacturing activities,
including continued growth and value-addition in the garment industry. In terms of factors of production,
a sustained higher rate of growth will likely require faster increases in investment and (skilled) labor, as
well as greater improvements in total factor productivity. To increase foreign and domestic investment,
attention must be paid to investment climate reforms to spur private investors and to domestic revenue
generation to expand public investment. From the demand side, encouraging growth of workers’
remittances will be critical in sustaining the growth of domestic consumption.
30.
Closing infrastructure gaps. Short-term emergency measures must be combined with long-term
planning and investment for least-cost energy solutions for Bangladesh. This will require massive
investments in sources of energy and in electricity generation and transmission, along with structural and
policy changes. In transport, the country needs a more integrated, multi-modal strategy aimed at
supporting export-led growth and enhancing rural access. In energy, roads and multi-modal transport,
enhanced cooperation will be essential to build regional infrastructure networks.
31.
Alleviating urban congestion. Urbanization can stimulate growth, but can become a mixed
blessing if it is not well-planned, as has occurred in Bangladesh. There is no quick fix for the problems that
have emerged. Bangladesh will need to support the building of financial and managerial capacities in all
municipalities to enable a better approach. In addition, in congested cities like Dhaka and also Chittagong,
special support by the central government will be needed for large investments in sectors such as transport
and water. A holistic National urbanization policy would also help to provide a guiding framework for
policies, investments and interventions by different agencies.
32.
Reducing vulnerability to disaster. With natural disasters exacerbated by climate change effects,
Bangladesh’s food security is increasingly at risk. The agriculture sector is facing rising threats from
overpopulation, erratic weather and saline water intrusion in coastal areas. Improving the productivity of
3

Steps Towards Change, the National Strategy for Accelerated Poverty Reduction FY2009-11, Planning Commission, December,
2009, p. xiii.

9

rice and other crops will be essential, and will require development and dissemination of higher yielding
technologies, as well as better price signals for farmers. Food security would also be enhanced by
diversification to other crops and to non-farm activities, and by enhanced food storage capacity.
Continuing Bangladesh’s recent progress in disaster preparedness will be critical, along with greater
cooperation among all riparian countries for regional water resource management.
33.
Absorbing the labor force. Nearly two million workers are joining the labor force in Bangladesh
every year. Generating employment opportunities will depend on creating an environment conducive to
private sector investment, particularly for labor-intensive manufacturing and services. Workers will need
to be better trained and educated, to allow improved productivity and higher-skilled jobs, permit increased
earnings and remittances per migrant, and enable productivity growth to play a greater part in overall GDP
growth. A focus on the quality of tertiary and vocational education will be needed, as well as policies and
programs to facilitate labor migration and remittances. Finally, social protection programs that create
temporary, labor-intensive employment opportunities can be an effective poverty-reducing intervention.
34.
Improving health, population and nutrition outcomes. Priority must be given to scaling up and
enhancing the effectiveness of health services which deliver proven results, such as training skilled birth
attendants in order to strengthen prenatal care and reduce maternal mortality. Population growth must also
be addressed through reinvigoration of family planning and reproductive health services, including
information, education and communications activities. Persistent malnutrition should be addressed
through well-known health interventions, but also through analysis and implementation of a multi-sectoral
approach addressing pollution control, safe water and sanitation, agricultural practices, intra-household
dynamics, etc.
35.
Strengthening governance. Better governance will underpin progress in all sectors and areas.
Strengthening governance of the business environment will unleash the potential of the private sector to
lead investment and growth. It will also enhance the effectiveness of public resource use and improve
public service delivery. Government gives priority to improving governance as an underlying strategy to
achieve better development outcomes. The Awami League Manifesto emphasized the need to change
State performance in order to bring services to the doorsteps of the people. The national strategy lists ten
major areas for governance reform, including parliamentary processes, local government, civil service,
judicial system, e-governance, combating corruption, human rights, accessing information, project
implementation and sectoral governance. Implementing this wide-ranging set of priorities will be
extremely challenging. In many of these areas, governments of the past two decades have not been able to
expend the resources and political capital needed to make substantive change. More promising may be a
selective and sequenced approach to supporting reform in areas with demonstrated political will and broad
consensus on the direction and pace of reform, such as in the area of local governance and domestic
accountability.
G.

Macroeconomic Prospects and Risks

36.
Sources of growth. Bangladesh has enjoyed robust growth in the past decade, mainly due to
expansion of the manufacturing sector and domestic services such as wholesale and retail trade, transport
and communications. Given its inherent strengths--especially a vibrant private sector and a large pool of
inexpensive labor--the prospects for continuation of such growth are relatively good. Unit labor costs in
the dominant garment industry are 50 percent below the nearest competitor and only about one-third of
those in China. Not surprisingly, foreign investors are showing interest in large-scale relocation of laborintensive industries, particularly garments and related textile manufacturing. In addition, sectors such as
pharmaceuticals, ceramics, and processed and frozen foods have shown dynamism in recent years.
Demand for jute goods grew significantly in FY10. An interesting recent development is private
10

investment in construction and export of small ships, a segment where Bangladesh appears to enjoy a
competitive edge. Based on these potential sources of growth, the CAS is cautiously optimistic that
Bangladesh can maintain the growth rates of the recent past—above six percent per annum—going
forward. Growth could be accelerated through significantly increased investment and deepening of
structural reforms.
37.
Constraints to growth. Bangladesh faces several challenges in maintaining and accelerating
growth, and realizing the full potential of some of the promising sectors highlighted above. The greatest
constraint today lies in overcoming the energy deficit, which is affecting current production and could
undermine prospects for private sector investment and growth. Improving the business environment is
also required in order to encourage greater private investment, a necessary element in accelerating growth.
The state owned banking sector remains weak despite ongoing corporatization efforts. Further reduction
in the anti-export bias through tariff reforms and improved trade logistics (targeting, for example, the
Dhaka-Chittagong corridor, and customs facilitation) will be needed in order to maintain the growth rate of
exports. Finally, low tax collections are a major constraint since they affect the government’s capacity to
increase public investment in energy and other infrastructure sectors.
38.
Debt Sustainability. The recent IMF-WB joint Debt Sustainability Analysis shows a low risk of
debt distress based on external debt indicators. In fact, all external debt indicators stay below the policy
dependent debt burden thresholds in the baseline scenario. The net present value (NPV) of the debt-toGDP ratio decreases from about 20 percent in 2009 to less than 10 percent during the projection period,
while the NPV of the debt-to-exports ratio decreases from 99 percent in 2009 to 25 percent, and the debt
service ratio from 6 percent in 2010 to 2.5 percent. External debt indicators do not breach the debt
thresholds under various stress tests. However, debt indicators worsen once domestic debt is added. In the
baseline scenario, the NPV of the public debt-to-GDP ratio remains steady at about 40 percent of GDP.
The decline in the NPV of external public debt to GDP ratio is offset by a rising domestic debt-to-GDP
ratio. Concerted and sustained efforts by the Government, supported by the Bank Group (Box 2), could
result in tax collection increasing from 11.5 to 13 percent of GDP during the CAS period. Higher-thanexpected revenue mobilization would be positive for debt dynamics, not only because of its direct fiscal
impact, but also because of its potential effects on investment and growth.
Table 3: Bangladesh Key Macroeconomic Indicators- Projections for the CAS Period
Real GDP Growth (%)
Export (f.o.b) Growth (US$ value) (%)
Current Account Balance (% of GDP)
Net Foreign Direct Investment (% of GDP)
Reserves (in months of GNFS import)
Revenue (% of GDP)
Public Debt (% of GDP)
External Debt (% of GDP)

FY10
5.5
1.8
2.4
0.5
5.1
11.5
43.8
22.3

FY11
5.8
12.4
2.1
0.9
5.3
11.6
44.0
21.7

FY12
6.3
15.7
1.7
1.0
5.5
12.1
43.7
20.8

FY13
6.4
17.0
1.3
1.0
5.8
12.5
43.3
19.8

FY14
6.4
18.3
0.9
1.0
5.9
13.0
43.1
19.0

Source: IMF-World Bank Joint Debt Sustainability Analysis and World Bank Staff Estimate

39.
Macroeconomic risks. Total public debt indicators are sensitive to alternate assumptions and point
to sizeable risks, especially given the low levels of revenue mobilization. Any event that raises public debt
(such as a rise in world market prices resulting in contingent liabilities for state-owned enterprises that sell
underpriced electricity, diesel and imported fertilizer) can increase the debt-service-to-revenue ratio
significantly, which can crowd out the private sector and reduce growth. Also, if current constraints to
growth remain binding, this can affect the debt dynamics and revenue mobilization. On the external front,
a high dependence on garments and remittances renders the current account vulnerable to events that affect
11

these sectors, such as shocks in Kuwait or Saudi Arabia--which absorb over half of the migrant
Bangladeshi population--and/or derailed recovery in the US and Europe--which account for around 65
percent of Bangladesh’s exports. Price shocks such as those of 2007/2008 have significant distributional
consequences in a country where the poverty ratio is high and where an even larger share of the labor force
is engaged in informal activities. Mitigating such shocks, through improved safety nets, will help
government manage social risks.
Box 2: BICF Tax Administration Reform Project
The need for tax administration reform is well recognized. According to the Doing Business Report
2010, for instance, it takes a company 302 hours per year to pay required tax in Bangladesh, which
ranked 127th out of 174 countries. It has been challenging to build dialogue and support reforms of
tax administration.
As part of its Phase II Business Regulatory Reform program, BICF successfully reached an
agreement with the new National Bureau of Revenue (NBR) leadership on a tax administration
modernization project in September 2009. As the central objective, the project aims to increase tax
revenue as a percentage of GDP by 1.5 percent from the current level by improving tax collection,
taxpayer service, and institutional capacity. It will help modernize the technology, reform the laws,
and improve processes, including lower compliance cost and easy access for taxpayers.
An IDA-funded tax administration strengthening operation is also planned during the CAS period to
complement and deepen support for domestic revenue mobilization in Bangladesh.
II.

A.

BANK GROUP ASSISTANCE STRATEGY FOR BANGLADESH

Lessons Learned from Implementing the Previous CAS

40.
The Bank Group’s new assistance strategy for Bangladesh is informed by the lessons drawn from
implementation of the previous strategy. These lessons derive from the Completion Report prepared at the
end of the earlier CAS period as well as a Country Assistance Evaluation done by the Bank’s Independent
Evaluation Group (IEG). Direct feedback from stakeholders also shapes the new strategy, and was
captured through an FY10 client survey and stakeholder consultations conducted as part of the CAS
preparation process.
1. Lessons from the CAS Completion Report
41.
CAS results framework. The Completion Report concluded that the FY06-09 CAS was
strategically relevant and produced moderately satisfactory outcomes. It was well aligned with
Bangladesh’s first National Strategy for Accelerated Poverty Reduction. Pro-poor growth, human
development and governance were at the heart of the strategic agenda. However, it was found difficult to
assess the Bank group’s contribution to the achievement of positive outcomes across the pillars, because
indicators and targets were too numerous and too loosely-linked to expected outcomes. This provides an
important lesson about defining a manageable set of outcomes to which the CAS will contribute, with
fewer and more clearly-linked indicators which can be adequately monitored to assess progress towards
results. For this reason, the Country Team has now articulated a set of 16 outcomes, linked closely to only
20 core indicators that will serve as the basis for CAS monitoring.
42.
Monitoring CAS progress. The monitoring and evaluation system for the overall country program
was insufficient to make adjustments during implementation in order to better achieve results. Learning
from this, the Country Team has created multi-sectoral results teams during CAS preparation which will
12

continue during implementation to carry out regular monitoring of progress towards results. The CMU is
being strengthened in Dhaka to include staff with specialized skill in managing for results, in order to
coordinate and catalyze CAS monitoring across the Country Team, and in collaboration with IFC which is
implementing results based management activities through BICF4.
43.
Appropriate skill mix. The previous CAS focused dominantly on enhancing governance, but the
staff skills needed to manage this complex agenda were not immediately available. On the ground
presence of staff with diversified skills and global knowledge was limited in key sectors like energy and
local governance, limiting the Bank’s ability to engage in dialogue and support necessary reforms.
Ensuring adequate and appropriate staffing and skills mix on the ground—particularly for expected areas
of greater emphasis such as infrastructure and climate change--will be critical for the successful
implementation of the upcoming CAS. This raises questions about staffing incentives in relatively
unfavorable environments.
44.
Sustained engagement. Governance and institutional reforms take significant time to achieve
desired outcomes. Change is incremental, and it is important to stay engaged in key sectors, even if
performance is weak and progress slow. In these instances, the Bank should use its analytical work to
support implementation of reforms in promising sectors and to maintain engagement and foster dialogue
on reform in more difficult sectors. During this CAS, for example, an IGR will provide analysis of policy
options for local government and local service delivery. At the same time, innovative tools will be used to
remain engaged in high-risk sectors such as roads and highways, where corruption has undermined the
effectiveness of traditional Bank lending instruments. Technical support is now being provided in the
roads sector to strengthen expenditure tracking and pilot performance-based road maintenance work. If
successful, these could be scaled up to provide a framework to resume larger-scale investment lending in
roads.
45.
Tackling governance challenges. The previous CAS was considered an early “governance CAS”
which sought to tackle governance challenges in a comprehensive and high-profile fashion. The relevance
of tackling weak governance as a barrier to development was appropriate, but experience has provided
lessons on how we might be more effective in addressing this seemingly intractable and pervasive problem
in Bangladesh and other countries of South Asia. See Annex 3 for the detailed Completion Report.
2. Lessons on Governance and Anti-corruption
46.
Recognizing the systemic nature of governance problems in Bangladesh, the previous CAS
established governance as its unifying theme, with modest results. While the governance focus was
appropriate, there was need for more selectivity during implementation. Some positive outcomes were
achieved with support from the Bank. In particular, public financial management was measurably
strengthened, including substantial improvement to the procurement regime, which remains well above the
norm for South Asia despite some recent backsliding on rules for low value procurement. The Bank also
contributed successfully to greater independence and accountability for local government—an historic
breakthrough in Bangladesh’s highly centralized administration.
47.
Changing the culture of corruption. The Bank provided support to the caretaker government’s
attempts to break the culture of corruption through powerful signaling from the top, in the form of high4

BICF is pursuing the monitoring on three tracks: (a) contracting out results monitoring and evaluation to an independent firm,
which periodically reports to the donors and IFC management on implementation progress in relation to a well-defined action
plan; (b) developing investment climate related M&E capacity in government and some private sector chambers; and (c)
pioneering new survey tools, such as quarterly business confidence surveys, and government agency score cards capturing client
feedback on Government to Business (G2B) services.

13

profile investigations, prosecutions, and sanctions. In addition, the Bank supported reforms of the civil
service and the judiciary. Outcomes in these areas were negligible due to unrealistic expectations for
change within a short timeframe coupled with strong political interests that ran counter to reforms. The
challenge in implementing these reforms was underestimated, especially in a politically unstable
environment with frequent changes of government. High-profile prosecutions meant to signal zero
tolerance for corruption served instead to create a perception that those in power will pursue those who are
not for politically-motivated reasons, within a persistently corrupt environment. Moreover, the caretaker
government’s will to carry through with prosecutions subsided during the latter part of its tenure. While
different signaling from the top would have been desirable, it was perhaps not realistic within a relatively
short timeframe. Even in areas of success, governance improvements have been slow and incremental. To
be effective, the Bank must take a long-term perspective to cultivating a culture of accountability by
building demand for good governance from the grassroots up. Governance must remain a cross-cutting
theme of the new CAS, with efforts mainstreamed across sectors. Governance focus at the center, local
and sector levels will be maintained. However, a more selective approach will be needed to take
advantage of entry points in which sufficient political will exists and champion for reforms can be
supported.
48.
Adopting a long-term, systemic approach. The country team will make a deliberate shift to a
longer-term and more systemic approach to strengthening governance and anti-corruption by building
domestic accountability mechanisms. This is based on a realistic assessment of the environment for
anticorruption reforms, recognizing that external players have limited ability to counter systemic
facilitators of corruption in areas with limited government commitment to reforms. The new CAS will
focus on areas with adequate government commitment and/or champions with whom to work, and where
concrete results are considered feasible. In addition to a continued focus on core governance (particularly
public financial management), this CAS seeks to build on the current political commitment to strengthen
local government and local service delivery. A four-pronged approach will be adopted:
a) Increasing operational selectivity. In making strategic choices about the Bank’s own operations,
the country team will strive for increased selectivity based on greater understanding and sensitivity
to specific corruption risks in sectors. This will be based on more systematic diagnostics of
political economy and operational risk assessments in order to inform project preparation and
design and define the extent and nature of risks across different sectors. Cross-sector support to
task teams will be enhanced to identify governance and corruption risks through the new ORAF,
which builds on the ORMAP currently in use in the Bangladesh program. The Bank will invest
more in using lessons learned from sector governance risk analyses. In sectors where government
commitment to addressing corruption is deemed insufficient--and hence risks are too high--the
Bank will disengage. Projects which proceed to approval will require rigorous assessments of
fraud and corruption risks and corresponding mitigation measures. These assessments and
mitigation measures will be monitored closely and updated regularly during project
implementation as per the ORAF. The Bank will be decisive in addressing cases of corruption as
they may arise in any of its operations, and if problems cannot be properly addressed, the Bank
will disengage.
b) Building on sufficient political will. The World Bank Group will promote systemic prevention of
corruption through long-term governance improvements in areas where the Bank Group can align
with Government priorities and political will. This includes continuing our work to increase
regulatory transparency and strengthen public financial management, including the oversight
functions of Parliament and the Comptroller and Auditor General, implementation of the RTI Act,
increased use of e-governance tools as part of the Digital Bangladesh agenda to improve
government-citizen or government-business interface and reduce opportunities for corruption.
Bank support to build domestic accountability mechanisms will include ramping up support for
14

local government and decentralized service delivery. A strong push will also continue, particularly
through support from IFC’s BICF support and engaging with private sector stakeholders, for
reforms to streamline regulation of business and trade as well as strengthening tax collection, both
of which will decrease opportunities for corrupt behavior.
c) Cultivating entry points on governance and anti-corruption. Increased emphasis will be placed
on policy dialogue and engagement with a wide range of stakeholders in order to cultivate
additional entry points for strengthening governance and countering corruption. In a democratic
environment, policy priorities may change, and the Bank will be ready to respond accordingly if
new entry points for substantial reforms emerge. To this end, the Bank will maintain a high-level
policy dialogue on governance, particularly through implementation of an IGR. The IGR will be a
flexible and participatory process to provide timely assessment of policy options and policy advice
that is responsive to Government’s emerging priorities on governance. The IGR and other
analytical work will develop feasible actions that Government can undertake to improve
transparency and accountability of the public sector. IFC will complement these efforts through
public-private dialogue with the private sector and other stakeholders on governance and
transparency issues.
d) Fostering demand for good governance. The Bank Group will build on efforts under the previous
CAS to promote greater demand for good governance and lower tolerance of corruption over the
long term. This will occur through collaboration with civil society organizations on joint research
and analysis on governance issues, as well as independent monitoring efforts. Corruption and
governance analysis, independent third party monitoring, and demand for good governance in
projects and sectors will be conducted to the extent feasible in partnership with Bangladeshi civil
society organizations. The country program will also increasingly emphasize governance through
strengthening of the lowest levels of government and through community empowerment so that
citizens directly demand better services from the public sector. The IFC’s advisory assistance
through BICF will continue to engage government and other stakeholders in formulation of new
business regulations. The Bank and IFC (through BICF) will also increase its outreach and
actively engage the media for better understanding and coverage of governance issues. IFC will
also strengthen corporate governance of investee companies of the private equity funds in which it
has invested and raise awareness on corporate governance issues through various fora.
3. Lessons from the Country Assistance Evaluation
49.
The Bank’s IEG prepared a country assistance evaluation for Bangladesh in June 2009, which
rated the overall outcome of IDA assistance to Bangladesh as moderately satisfactory, and drew the
following lessons from past experience:
a) While macroeconomic governance improved to some extent, progress on public sector reform was
disappointing. In particular, initiatives to reform the civil service suffered from insufficient
political will. The evaluation concludes that the full range of Bank instruments-development
policy operations, investment lending, technical assistance and analytical and advisory services--is
required to support complex institutional reforms of this nature.
b) Monitoring and evaluation of the CAS should be strengthened. The earlier CAS lacked adequate
tools to monitor progress. Despite having a long list of milestones and intermediate indicators, the
CAS lacked a clear system and capacities to ensure that they would be measured.

15

c) Improved coordination and harmonization with DPs was effective in human development sectors.
The Bank’s coordination was strong in many sectors, but weaker in energy and water supply,
contributing to unsatisfactory outcomes in these areas.
d) Staying engaged over the long-run is deemed critical to getting results, even in sectors where
dialogue has proven difficult, like energy and agriculture. Moving out of a sector has proven to be
costly due to loss of knowledge and interruption in the Bank-client relationship. While the Bank
must be selective about large-scale operations, other tools can be used (e.g. analytic and advisory
services, small-scale piloting) to stay engaged.
e) The design and implementation of analytical and advisory work should involve all the relevant
stakeholders including the government, civil society and DPs. Extensive dialogue is needed up
front to gain strong political support for future reforms. Better dissemination of analytical works is
needed to raise awareness and improve ownership.
4. Client Survey and Stakeholder Consultations
50.
The World Bank client survey in Bangladesh, and World Bank Group consultations with various
stakeholders throughout the country, have provided important feedback into preparation of the new CAS5.
Annex 4 provides more details on the findings of both the survey and the consultations.
51.
Client survey results. The FY10 Client Survey was conducted in Bangladesh in August 2009 with
a total of 334 respondents. It suggests a perception of the Bank and its work that is far more positive now
than when last surveyed in FY04. Governance, power generation, basic infrastructure and employment
creation were identified by respondents as the key development priorities in Bangladesh. Respondents
valued the Bank most strongly for its investment lending relative to other instruments like development
policy lending and technical assistance. Support was particularly high for the Bank’s role in the proposed
Padma Multipurpose Bridge project, which will be a centerpiece of the Bank’s infrastructure engagement
under the new CAS.
52.
Consultation feedback. Initial launch consultations were held with government, civil society and
DPs in June 2009 to begin the CAS preparation process. More extensive consultations were held in March
2010 to discuss the emerging storyline and results framework for the FY11-14 CAS. The Dhaka-based
Bank team divided into cross-cutting, multisectoral teams to lead consultations in four locations (Dhaka,
Chittagong, Jessore and Rangpur). Consultation involved a range of stakeholders including top
government officials, leaders from civil society organizations, think tanks and academicians, the media,
the private sector and other DPs, both bilateral and multilateral agencies. The key messages of the
consultations are summarized in Box 3.

5

BICF has frequent dialogue with private sector and other stakeholders on the business climate. This includes: quarterly regional
dialogue in four different cities of Bangladesh, BICF’s Technical Advisory Committee consisting of several private sector
members, and quarterly dissemination of BICF’s Business Confidence Survey.

16

Box 3: Multi-Stakeholder Consultations
Participants highlighted a range of development priority areas for the World Bank Group’s engagement in
Bangladesh. They also identified issues the Bank Group should avoid. There was widespread recognition of poor
governance as a key constraint hindering public service delivery and rule of law. The key messages are presented
below:
Suggestions for Bank Group involvement: Stakeholders recommended the following priority areas: (i)
development of the energy sector, particularly gas and power; (ii) climate change adaptation programs with active
involvement of wider community; (iii) strengthening local governance through local governments; (iv) good
governance on the basis of equity, inclusion, participation with transparency and accountability; (v) programs to
increase productivity in agriculture to ensure food security; (vi) promoting and implementing regulatory
framework in key sectors like energy; (vii) regional integration within Bangladesh to reduce regional disparities;
(viii) management of water resources, including capital dredging; (ix) scaling up investment in transport and
communication sectors, particularly in railways and inland water resources; and (x) programs for population
planning.
Issues that the Bank Group should avoid: Stakeholders wanted the World Bank to avoid: (i) engaging in
activities not aligned with country priorities; (ii) political partisanship; (iii) making the CAS complicated with
unrealistic performance monitoring indicators; (iv) imposing its development priorities; and (v) imposing stringent
conditions.
Divergent views on Bank Group involvement: Participants had difference of opinion on: (ii) investment in
infrastructure projects; (ii) use of coal as a source of energy; (iii) issues with labor migration; and (iv) support for
the agriculture sector.

B.

Proposed Assistance Strategy
1. Strategic Overview

53.
Building on Bangladesh’s strong track record on growth and development in recent years, the
Bank Group will continue to support government’s objective of achieving annual growth rates of six
percent or higher. Annual growth of around eight percent per annum will be needed for the country to
achieve its ambitious aspirations of reaching middle-income status and reducing poverty from 40 percent
to 15 percent of the population by 2021. This will require accelerated, sustainable and inclusive growth,
underpinned by stronger governance at central and local levels. Past performance has been positive, but a
significantly higher growth rate in future will require the country to address persistent governance
challenges that undermine the effectiveness of the public sector and create disincentives for private sector
initiatives.
54.
Accelerated growth. Massive infrastructure investment is needed--along with a more conducive
business environment--even to sustain recent levels of private sector growth. Power deficits remain the
binding constraint to growth, with current power generation shortages of approximately 2000 MWs at peak
periods. As one of the country’s largest DPs, the Bank will increasingly invest in transport and power
infrastructure that can transform lagging areas of the country, create agglomeration economies in urban
areas and foster broader regional networks. In the power sector, this will include support for new
generation, rehabilitation, expansion of transmission capacity and enhancing the natural gas supply for
power and other applications. Complementing the Bank, IFC will explore investment opportunities in
transport (logistics and ports), power (including renewable energy) and Information and Communication
Technology (ICT) infrastructure that are identified with strong partners and transparent process. The Bank
Group will also continue to provide strong support for investment climate reform, building on recent
progress in this area.
17

55.
Sustainable growth. Bangladesh’s geography offers a unique opportunity to accelerate growth
through regional collaboration, but requires dynamic adaptation to climate change effects at the same time.
Bangladesh is one of the most densely-populated countries in the world, already vulnerable to natural
disasters and now becoming highly-affected by climate change. Not surprisingly, the country is at the
global forefront on climate change policy and interventions, and needs cutting edge technical and financial
support from the Bank Group to adapt and respond to climate change and natural disasters. Annex 5
provides more details on Bangladesh’s vulnerability to climate change and natural disasters.
56.
Inclusive growth. Dramatic social transformation has occurred with female entry into the
education system and labor force in the past twenty years. Long-run progress on human development has
been encouraging, with some notable exceptions. Improved delivery of social services at the local level is
needed to address these shortcomings, bring marginalized groups and rural communities more firmly into
the development process, and allow Bangladesh to compete in regional and global markets with a healthy
and skilled labor force. Complementing IDA’s support, IFC will seek to support inclusive growth
especially focusing on the base of the economic pyramid, supporting projects with potentially high socioeconomic impact such as microfinance, mobile banking, health care and education sector.
57.
Stronger governance. The Bangladeshi economy has performed reasonably well within a
challenging governance environment. With the peaceful restoration of democracy in 2008 following a
two-year interim Government, the country has avoided major conflict. This was a triumph for political
governance, but—as in much of South Asia—governance remains weak by global standards. Bangladesh
has made slow but steady upward progress in most areas of economic governance in the past five to ten
years. To grow faster and more inclusively, government will need to be more responsive and effective,
building on a renewed commitment to private sector-led growth and decentralized service delivery. The
Bank Group will support this commitment to improving both the business environment and service
delivery, coupled with strengthening of domestic accountability at central and local levels.
58.
Within this overall World Bank Group Strategy, as well as IFC’s regional strategy in South Asia,
IFC’s Bangladesh strategy centers on three cross-cutting areas: (i) promoting inclusive growth which
focuses on the base of the economic pyramid, rural areas, infrastructure development and improved access
to finance for micro, small and medium enterprises (MSMEs); (ii) addressing climate change, especially
adaptation and mitigation (including renewable energy, cleaner production and energy efficiency
financing); and (iii) supporting global and regional integration via South-South investments, investment
climate reforms, trade financing, logistics and financial infrastructure development. On the investments
side, IFC will seek opportunities that are likely to have stronger development impact, especially in
banking, non-bank financial institutions (including micro-finance, housing finance, Small and Medium
Enterprise (SME) finance, agro-finance, and sustainable energy finance), private equity funds, transport
(logistics and ports), ICT, power (including renewable energy), agribusiness, manufacturing, health and
education. On the advisory side, IFC will contribute to these three strategic areas by assisting government
with regulatory reforms to improve the business environment, building financing institutions’ capacity to
expand access to finance, accelerating PPP projects, raising the corporate governance standards, and
supporting SMEs.
59.
Results Framework and Core CAS Indicators. The Bank Group strategy outlined above gives
rise to a results framework based on four strategic objectives (See Box 4). To achieve these four
objectives, the Bank Group will seek to contribute to sixteen development outcomes discussed briefly
below. The core indicators for assessing progress towards CAS outcomes are presented in Box 5 on Page
20. Annex 6 summarizes the results framework matrix, including mid-term milestones, outcome indicators
and targets.
Annex 7 presents the existing and indicative program, trust funds (TFs) and
analytical/advisory work that supports the strategic objectives and development outcomes.
18

Box 4: CAS Results Framework

2. Summary Results Framework
Strategic Objective 1: Increase Transformative Investments and Enhance the Business Environment
60.
Accelerated growth. Growth of the Bangladesh economy has been laudable over the past decade at
5.8 percent per annum in real terms, despite political turmoil and frequent natural disasters. Maintaining such
growth will be challenging, and yet the country will need to grow significantly faster—by an average of eight
percent per annum--if it is to achieve its goals to reduce poverty to 15 percent and reach middle-income status
by 2021, as outlined in Government’s Vision 2021 and the NSAPR II. Economies that have grown at this pace
or better have typically been accompanied by significantly higher public and private investment fueled by
domestic savings and robust tax generation. At 10-11 percent, Bangladesh has one of the lowest tax collection
rates in the world, and this is not conducive to a sustainable increase in public investment.
61.
Increasing revenue generation needs to be accompanied by improvements in the quality and execution
of public investment. Massive investment by both the public and private sectors is needed in economic
infrastructure, even to sustain Bangladesh’s current growth rate. The power deficit, currently estimated at
2000 megawatts during peak season, is cited as the biggest constraint to doing business in Bangladesh. It is
too large to be amenable to quick fixes, and will need a sustained, broad-based investment program that
includes conventional new capacity, rehabilitation of older capacity and additional natural gas supply. This
will require approximately US$1.2 billion proposed Bank financing with US$600 million phased in during the
early years of CAS. Transport is overly-dependent on a weakly-managed and highly-congested road network,
with under-developed water and rail links. The CAS proposes over US$2 billion in infrastructure investments
with the proposed Padma Bridge at US$1.2 billion planned in the early CAS period. Unplanned growth of
major urban areas has choked the capacity of urban infrastructure, negating much of the growth benefits of
agglomeration. Providing more infrastructure through increased public investment will likely crowd in private
investment and promote public-private partnerships. Private investment, however, is also constrained by
regulatory obstacles and land shortages, as well as inadequate access to long-term finance, especially for SMEs
and long term agriculture projects.

19

Box 5: CAS Results Framework - Core CAS Indicators

20

62.
Country strategy. Through the NSAPR II, Government outlines an ambitious plan to tackle these
issues. It aims for an increase in total investment from 24 percent of GDP in recent years to nearly 30
percent over the next few years, facilitated by a decline in the cost of borrowing and an improvement in
productivity. It recognizes the challenge of increasing revenue generation, articulates the need for an
improved business and investment climate, seeks planned urban development, outlines policies to ensure
optimal use of land, lays out a vision to supply quality and reliable power to all by 2021 and seeks to
develop all modes of transport, including roads, rail, ports and waterways. The Bank Group will seek to
contribute to selected results under this scenario, building on its on-going analytical work, advisory
services and portfolio in the following areas:
Strategic Objective 1:
Accelerated Growth: Increase Transformative Investment and Enhance the Business Environment
CAS Outcomes:
Outcome 1.1: Increased public investment and improved revenue generation
Outcome 1.2: Improved environment for private sector investment
Outcome 1.3: Increased infrastructure provision, access and efficiency
Outcome 1.4: Improved planning and management of urbanization

63.
Outcome 1.1: Increased public investment and improved revenue generation. Bangladesh will
need increased fiscal space for priority development spending, while maintaining the sound macroeconomic management that has benefitted growth in the past decade. The Bank will continue to work with
the IMF providing analytical support on macroeconomic and fiscal issues. In particular, the Bank will
support participatory analytical work aimed at deepening the understanding of future sources of growth,
especially through trade diversification and regional integration. To achieve desired growth rates in
Bangladesh, it is projected that public investment would need to rise from less than 5 percent of GDP
today to 7-8 percent in future, sustained by improved revenue generation. The Bank Group will encourage
initial tax policy reforms and seek to accelerate improvements in tax administration. IFC advisory services
to improve business environment will be complemented by IDA investment in tax administration systems
and potential policy lending, if dialogue on fiscal reform and decentralization deepens. On the public
expenditure side, the Bank will focus on improving the quality of public investment and accelerating
implementation of the Government’s ADP. One instrument for this will be the Strengthening Public
Expenditure Management Program (SPEMP) supported by a Bank-administered multi-donor trust fund
(MDTF). Government’s continued commitment to sound macroeconomic management and improved
public sector governance will also be a determining factor in future development policy lending for
Bangladesh. Thus far, macro-management appears solid, but signals have been more mixed on public
sector governance in the past year. Through a participatory IGR, the Bank is working with Government to
identify and build consensus around priority areas for public sector reform that could form the basis for
renewed development policy lending in the FY12-14 period.
64.
Outcome 1.2: Improved environment for private sector investment. Private investment in
Bangladesh, at less than 20 percent of GDP, is significantly lower than high-growth countries such as India
or those in East Asia. Much can be done to make the business environment more conducive to private
investment, as reflected in the country’s ranking (119th out of 183 countries) on the international Doing
Business index. The Bank Group will support regulatory reform, promotion of public-private partnerships
and vibrant economic zones, expanded access to finance and land as well as skills development for a more
competitive labor force. Regular investment climate assessments coupled with support from the IFC’s
BICF will identify and build support for regulatory reform aimed at streamlining and making more
transparent the government-business interface, and building capacity in the field of competition policy. A
scaled-up, IDA-funded Investment Promotion and Financing Facility (IPFF) will build on demonstrated
results in introducing a public-private partnership model for power generation. Together with IFC’s
technical services, IPFF will support the establishment of adequate capacity and a sound policy, legal and
21

institutional framework to expand and implement public-private partnerships for infrastructure. The IFC
and the Bank are also working together to support further development of a modern Economic Zone
regime in order to accelerate and diversify export-led growth.
65.
The Bank Group will continue its engagement in the financial sector, supporting further
enhancement of regulatory standards and the independence of the Central Bank, enhancing corporate
governance of banks and listed companies, enacting a movable collateral law, and strengthening risk
assessment in banks. To promote private sector investment, the Bank Group will continue to help improve
the financial sector for all sizes of companies. IFC support will also be offered to other banks to raise their
corporate governance standard or risk assessment capability. To promote access to finance, especially for
MSMEs, the Bank Group will assist the Central Bank to modernize the Credit Information Bureau,
including setting up a privately-owned Credit Information System. The IFC’s SEDF will help develop
banks’ capacity for MSME finance and trade finance, complementing its value chain analysis and other
programs for SMES. IFC’s technical assistance to the financial institutions and the Central Bank in the
area of SME banking will complement the World Bank’s activities. IFC will explore new opportunities to
support non-bank financial institutions in a variety of areas including: housing finance, microfinance,
sustainable energy finance, agro-finance and insurance sector. IFC’s ongoing dialogue with the Central
Bank on development of its local currency instruments is expected to enhance IFC’s investment
opportunities.
66.
Inadequate access to land is also cited as a major constraint to private investment in this denselypopulated country. Building on IFC’s work in this area, the Bank Group will support development, testing
and implementation of a modernized deeds registration system and land records modernization program.
Lack of a policy for resettlement of displaced people is another land-related issue affecting investment
decisions, particularly for infrastructure. The Bank will assist the Government of Bangladesh in the
formulation and implementation of a National Resettlement Policy and in simplifying process to acquire
land for infrastructure developments. Finally, the Bank Group will focus on skills training for a more
competitive labor force. Continued support for higher education will be coupled with a new focus on
vocational and technical education to build skills appropriate for both domestic and external labor markets.
67.
Outcome 1.3: Increased infrastructure provision, access and efficiency. Bangladesh’s people
and economy suffer from severe shortages of reliable electricity and natural gas. Peak system deficit
(during warmer months) is more than 2,000 MW, arising partly from a gas deficit of at least 200 million
cubic feet per day (mmcf/d). In the absence of investment, these deficits are expected to more than double
in the next ten years. Only 45 percent of households are electrified and perhaps 5 percent have access to
gas. An estimated US$1.5 billion per annum in investment is needed to close these gaps and keep pace
with rising demand. As a strategic priority for Government, transformative investments in the energy
sector will be a prime focus for the Bank during the CAS period. Working with other partners in the
sector, like the Asian Development Bank (ADB), the World Bank’s support will be three-pronged. First,
the Bank will adopt a programmatic approach to domestic generation and transmission that will combine
support for sector reforms with large-scale investments in generation capacity and transmission systems.
Sector reforms will enhance financial sustainability, strengthen regulation, build institutional capacity and
encourage private investment. From a corporate governance perspective, a key focus will be on improving
cash management at the distribution end of the business for example with the South Zone Power
Distribution Project, and bolstering procurement transparency and efficiency in large investments such as
the Bibiyana power station. Second, the Bank will encourage integration with regional electricity
networks and with the global gas market through strategic infrastructure investments. Third, the Bank will
scale up the positive results of the IDA-funded Rural Electrification and Renewable Energy Development
Program which has successfully connected 600,000 households to the national grid and another 320,000
households to solar systems, bringing affordable and reliable energy to rural populations. IFC will
22

complement Bank’s efforts and will seek to support power and gas sectors, including public-private
partnerships (PPP) and investments where there are strong partners and transparent processes.
68.
Maintaining and extending transport networks is vital, but difficult in such a densely-populated
country with weak governance structures and vulnerability to natural disasters. Bank strategy will focus
on investments with expected transformative effects and/or demonstrated past results. Most notably, just
as completion of the Jamuna Bridge in 1998 transformed economic and social development in the
Northwest Region (with faster growth and greater poverty reduction among communities linked to the
bridge), the Bank will now invest in the Padma Multipurpose Bridge Project to unlock the economic
potential of the Southwest Region. This assistance will be provided in partnership with ADB, JICA and
the Islamic Development Bank. Large-scale investment in the bridge, planned in the early years of the
CAS period, will be coupled with analytical work on sequencing future investment for optimal
development of the Southwest, including road, rail, port and energy linkages to neighboring countries.
Rehabilitation and maintenance of rural roads is another area where the Bank has contributed to
demonstrable results, and will scale up through a follow-on Rural Transport Improvement Project during
the CAS period. Additional investments in major roads, railways, ports and waterways will depend on
momentum to implement sector reforms and strengthen accountability. Road and railway reforms have
been slow to materialize, and the Bank has stopped supporting major road construction due to governance
risks to the portfolio. Technical support is now being provided to improve governance in roads and
highways institutions as a pre-requisite to re-engagement in the sector. Such re-engagement could pave
the way for multi-modal transport investments under the North-East Regional Program (including India,
Nepal and Bhutan) as regional cooperation moves forward. IFC would consider investment opportunities
in the transport sector (logistics and ports), a potential area for IDA-IFC collaboration.
69.
Outcome 1.4: Improved planning and management of urbanization. Bangladesh's recent
urbanization has been fueled by, and is a key contributor to, the strong growth of industries and services.
Agglomeration economies of its cities have helped firms achieve efficient scale and become internationally
competitive, providing jobs for migrants from the countryside. Economic and demographic growth is
highly concentrated in the Dhaka and Chittagong metropolitan areas, overwhelming the capacity of
existing urban infrastructure and institutions. This has resulted in a rapid deterioration in services and the
environment, which has increased the cost of living and doing business, thereby offsetting the benefits of
urbanization. Indeed, urban congestion and pollution now threaten future economic growth, and call for a
holistic, long-range approach to urban planning and management. The Bank has been supporting urban
infrastructure and building financial and managerial capacity in over 100 municipalities, and intends to
scale up this support through a follow-on Municipal Services Project. The Bank will also begin extending
its focus on urban water supply services from Dhaka to secondary cities. To deepen the urban
engagement, the Bank is providing analytical and advisory support to enhance understanding of
urbanization processes and options, and formulate effective national policies and programs to guide future
urban growth. Building on this analytical work and IFC’s work on economic zones and industry clusters,
the Bank would support a Major Cities Improvement Project within the CAS period.
Strategic Objective 2: Reduce Environmental Degradation and Vulnerability to Climate Change and
Natural Disasters
70.
Sustainable growth. Bangladesh is ranked as the most climate-vulnerable country in the world,
and is among the most densely-populated as well. Climate change is a central development challenge for
the country. The Bank Group will significantly increase investments in this area, with a proposed Bank
lending program of US$1.2 billion. Frequent natural disasters - cyclones, storm surges and floods adversely impact on the country’s growth and development targets. In most years, between 30 to 50
percent of the country is affected by floods. Tropical storms originating from the Bay of Bengal recur with
daunting and damaging frequency. Investments in water management infrastructure made over the past 30
23

years-- worth more than US$10 billion--are vulnerable due to frequent and extreme weather events. The
regional dimension of water resource management is also critical for the future transformation of
Bangladesh. As the lowest riparian country, occupying only 7% of the Ganges-Brahmaputra-Meghna river
basin, but receiving water from 57 international rivers, Bangladesh faces numerous challenges associated
with the greater watershed beyond its borders. Achieving sustainable water resources management in
Bangladesh requires moving beyond historic obstacles toward enhanced regional cooperation with all
riparian countries.
71.
It is projected that climate change effects will raise temperatures, leading to rapid snow melt in the
Himalayas with a high risk of sea level rise covering a significant portion of the country’s land mass. The
agriculture sector is increasingly threatened by overpopulation, natural disasters and climate change effects
leading to erratic weather patterns, frequent drought, exhaustion of natural resources and saline intrusion
along the coast. Adaptation in agriculture will be a key element in strengthening food security in future.
The country’s climate vulnerability is made more severe by the multiple inter-related environmental
challenges, accounting for economic losses equivalent to 4 percent of GDP according to the Bank’s
Country Environmental Assessment. High population density, rapid urbanization and strong economic
growth have exacerbated air, land and water pollution to dangerous levels. Forest cover is the second
lowest and protected areas coverage is the smallest share of any country in South Asia, creating pressure
on biodiversity. The Sundarbans (or ‘beautiful forest’) are one of the world’s great mangrove forests,
shared between India and Bangladesh and home to the endangered Bengal tiger.
72.
Country strategy: Bangladesh is at the forefront of global climate change advocacy and action.
“Caring for the Environment and Tackling Climate Change” is a focus area of the NSAPR II, which aims
to achieve poverty-free environmental sustainability in Bangladesh. The NSAPR II presents “food for all”
as a national goal, promoting food security through agriculture growth and sustainable management of
water resources. Government is already active in addressing the climate challenge by investing heavily in
adaptation measures and adopting policies to address climate change impacts. The national Climate
Change Strategy and Action Plan adopted prior to the Copenhagen Summit is recognized as global ‘best
practice’. It outlines the country’s strategy to scale up its resiliency to climate change. Government has
already committed about US$100 million in budgetary resources to establishment of a climate change fund
to address the priority adaptation needs of the most vulnerable sectors. Government has also recently
reached agreement with DPs to establish a Bangladesh Climate Change Resilience Fund. The Bank will
support Government’s strategies on environmental protection and climate change resiliency through a
stronger focus on the following expected outcomes:
Strategic Objective 2:
Reduce Environmental Degradation and Vulnerability to Climate Change and Natural Disasters
CAS Outcomes:
Outcome 2.1: Strengthened water resource management and coastal protection
Outcome 2.2: Improved agriculture production and food security
Outcome 2.3: Reduced environmental degradation
Outcome 2.4: Enhanced disaster preparedness

73.
Outcome 2.1: Strengthened water resource management and coastal protection. Bangladesh’s
310 rivers are the lifeblood of this densely-populated landmass (1,200 inhabitants per square kilometer).
In the face of high vulnerability to water-related events, Bangladesh must increase information,
infrastructure and institutions related to water management. The water challenge is most complex and
acute along the coastline due to the multiplicity of hazards (sea level rise, cyclones, rain storms, water
logging, and surges) requiring both rapid and strategic responses. The diffused and overlapping
institutional mandates for coastal development add to the challenge. While the existing coastal
embankment network is large with more than 6,000 km of embankments and over 130 polders,
24

effectiveness has been impaired by poor maintenance, weak management, and repeated storms. The Bank
will support a two-pronged strategy: (i) reinforcing coastal embankments and river conservation; and (ii)
strengthening capacity of water-related institutions. Already the Bank is active in these areas under
various emergency operations for restoration of embankments and livelihoods recovery. During the first
two years of the CAS, this support will be enhanced through the Bangladesh Rivers Information and
Conservation Project in collaboration with DPs like the Netherlands, which will include a regional
component to upgrade and harmonize hydrological networks in cooperation with India. The Bank will
make major investment in strengthening and developing coastal embankments during the same period.
The Bank’s support will complement DPs’ ongoing assistance in water resource management. IFC will
explore opportunities to engage with the private sector in the climate change area, complementing the
Bank’s assistance through the public sector.
74.
In this regard, the Bank will also continue to support the South Asia Water Initiative (on-going
regional Abu Dhabi Dialogue) on water cooperation. Learning lessons from the previous CAS period
about disaster preparedness, the Bank Group will seek to enhance Bangladesh’s capacity to protect coastal
embankments, upgrade and modernize the water information system, expand water infrastructure for more
reliable and productive water uses, strengthen and scale up early warning system for floods and tidal
surges, and support institutional reforms and capacity building in key water resources areas. As part of its
climate change mitigation strategy, IFC would support private sector-managed projects in these areas.
75.
Outcome 2.2: Improved agriculture production and food security. The agricultural sector is a
major driver of economic growth and poverty reduction, employing about 62 percent of the labor force and
providing the main sources of livelihood for more than 70 percent of the rural population. The Bank
Group strategy will support increased production and protection of the agriculture sector: increasing
production and productivity of rice and others crops, and concurrently protecting against disasters and
extreme weather events. On-going operations support rural water management and agricultural research
and extension aimed at enhancing crop resiliency. During the CAS period, these operations will be
complemented by support to increase food storage capacity and enhance rural livelihoods, particularly in
the fisheries and dairy sectors. Analytical work, in collaboration with DPs, will further examine climate
change impacts on agriculture and possible mitigation measures, including in the highly-affected
Southwest Region as part of broader analytical work to unlock the potential of this lagging area of the
country. Complementing the Bank’s efforts, IFC’s support will include ongoing advisory assistance for a
small enterprise that has innovated weather stress tolerant seeds and flood, drought and saline resistant
seeds, and other possible investments and advisory services in agribusiness companies.
76.
Outcome 2.3: Reduced environmental degradation and strengthened natural resource
management. The concentration of key air pollutants in Dhaka and other major cities in Bangladesh has
been steadily increasing, with annual averages far higher than World Health Organization safety
guidelines. Environmental factors account for as much as 22 percent of the national burden of disease,
principally in the form of respiratory infections and diarrheal disease6. Environmental degradation in the
Dhaka urban watershed is driven by the rapid growth of export-oriented industry, inappropriate
technology, inadequate treatment processes, and unplanned, un-serviced urbanization. The river system in
the watershed is being severely degraded by effluents flowing from domestic sources and industries. The
Bank group is supporting the government’s efforts to reduce environmental pollution and strengthen
natural resource management through the recently-launched Clean Air and Sustainable Environment
(CASE) Project, as well as analytical work in the field of indoor air pollution (on improved cook stoves)
and outdoor air pollution (on introducing clean technologies for brick manufacturing). Additional
financing for the CASE project will be considered during this CAS period in order to implement a Bus
Rapid Transit system and scale up clean technology in the brick sector to reduce transport based CO2 and
6

Bangladesh Country Environmental Analysis (2006).

25

air pollution emissions. The Bank Group will also continue to develop its operations in carbon finance in
Bangladesh. IFC’s SEDF will continue its Sustainable Energy Finance Program which aims to enhance
the Energy Efficiency/Renewable Energy finance portfolio of financial institutions and encourages the
financial sector to proactively consider environmental risk in its lending. As part of the Bank’s intensified
focus on urban management in the next CAS period, support will be provided to tackle industrial pollution
and strengthen institutional capacity for improving the quality of the Dhaka watershed. On the rural side,
technical analysis and advice is being provided on conservation challenges of the Sundarbans reserve
forest while increasing the quality of life of the nearby populations. Work on the Sundarbans offers an
opportunity for regional cooperation with India, with Bank analytical and financial support, including
through the Global Tiger Initiative aimed at protecting Bengal tigers and doubling their population over
the next 12 years.
77.
Outcome 2.4: Enhanced disaster preparedness. The country’s ability to manage disaster risks,
in particular floods and cyclones, has improved as a result of a gradual shift from a reactive, responsebased approach to a pro-active strategy that incorporates elements of greater emergency preparedness and
risk mitigation. Significant gaps remain in the implementation of the national disaster risk management
policies and local risk reduction action plans, as was evidenced in the 2009 SIDR cyclone response.
Learning the lessons from the past CAS, the Bank will try to avoid ad hoc responses in favor of investing
in disaster preparedness aimed at (a) further strengthening and institutionalizing preparedness, especially at
the sub-national level; (b) mobilizing resources for improved local preparedness and response
management; (c) mainstreaming disaster risk reduction and mitigation across sectors and down to lower
levels of government, and (d) extending key risk mitigation infrastructure such as shelters and coastal and
river embankments. Ongoing projects and initiative such as the Emergency Cyclone Rehabilitation and
Restoration Project and the South Asia Water Initiative are strengthening the country’s capacity in disaster
management. Technical advice will be provided through the Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and
Recovery (GFDRR) and the recently initiated Social Dimensions of Climate Change in the Ganges Basin
initiatives, which will assess local adaptation responses in highly flood-prone areas of the Ganges Basin in
Bangladesh. Technical and analytical work will be coupled with investments in coastal and river bank
protection, cyclone shelters and food storage facilities in order to enhance disaster preparedness.
Strategic objective 3: Improving social services delivery
78.
Inclusive growth. Bangladesh has made impressive progress on many human development
indicators at an accelerating pace in recent years. Progress in Bangladesh has out-stripped progress in
many other South Asian countries, setting Bangladesh on track to meet MDGs related to infant and child
mortality and gender equality in education. The country has also experienced profound social
transformation with the education of girls and rapid entry of women into the labor force, particularly into
the dominant garment export industry. Despite these gains, areas of persistent weakness remain,
particularly with respect to maternal mortality and childhood malnutrition. An important part of the
solution lies in improved access to clean water and sanitation. Educational enrolment is quite high, but
educational quality and learning outcomes must be improved if the country is to remain competitive in
future. With 40 percent of the population still in poverty, fragile food security and a tendency toward
natural disasters, the country needs effective social safety net policies and programs. Addressing these
concerns will require a systemic approach to increasing the efficiency of social services delivery. In
particular, it will be necessary to strengthen planning capacity, decentralize decision-making, improve the
regulatory framework and enhance voice and accountability to accelerate progress on human development.
Strengthening of supply-side service delivery combined with demand-side approaches will be required to
increase use of essential services. Systemic governance issues will need to be addressed in order to raise
the quality and cost-effectiveness of service delivery, and improve equity of access to services.

26

79.
Country strategy: The NSAPR II summarizes Government’s commitment to improving human
development and improving access and quality of health, education, and water services. It sets out highly
ambitious targets, including attaining full literacy by 2014, ensuring the supply of pure drinking water to
the entire population by 2011, reducing maternal mortality to 1.5 % and child mortality to 15 per 1000 live
births by 2021. Social protection is also a core element of the poverty reduction strategy, by expanding
social safety nets to protect the poor and vulnerable, especially women, from natural disasters, economic
shocks and poverty. The Bank Group will build on its long-standing engagement in the social sectors in
Bangladesh, where important contributions have been made to progress in health and education. The Bank
will continue to work in the social sectors through harmonized approaches with other DPs, while also
linking to Bank analytical work and possible development policy lending to promote decentralization,
empower local government and enhance local service delivery. Specifically, Bank support will contribute
to four main outcomes:
Strategic Objective 3:
Improve Social Services Delivery
CAS Outcomes:
Outcome 3.1: Improved access to quality health, population and nutrition services
Outcome 3.2: Expanded access to safe water and sanitation services
Outcome 3.3: Enhanced and more systematic social protection
Outcome 3.4: Improved student learning based on quality education services

80.
Outcome 3.1: Improved access to quality health, population and nutrition services. Despite
positive progress on many aspects of health status, maternal mortality and childhood nutrition remain
alarmingly poor. Fragmentation, inefficiency and weak sector governance remain constraints to provision
of effective health, population and nutrition services. The Bank has had a long and productive engagement
in the health sector in Bangladesh. Today, the Bank, in collaboration with DPs, is supporting
Government’s Health, Nutrition and Population Sector Program (HNPSP) through a sector-wide approach.
The Bank is supporting analytical work for a Health Sector Review which will inform the next phase of the
HNPSP. The Bank is engaged with other DPs in preparing the next phase, capitalizing on the
achievements of HNPSP, with a stronger focus on results and greater attention to service delivery at the
district and local levels. In particular, the Bank will support Government efforts to expand access, ensure
availability and improve the quality of maternal and child health services. Joining the Bank’s efforts, IFC
will explore opportunities to support private sector effort to expand access to quality healthcare services.
With respect to population growth, the total fertility rate has been halved since 1990, but progress has
slowed in recent years. Population growth remains a serious development challenge, and the fertility rate
will need to decline further to avoid a doubling of the population within the next 40 to 50 years. This
requires reinvigorated attention to reproductive health and family planning services, and their integration
into health service provision at all levels of the system. In light of persistent and widespread malnutrition,
the effectiveness of nutrition interventions will also be assessed, and program design will be adjusted for
greater impact on the nutritional status of mothers and children. However, addressing the problem of
malnutrition effectively requires more than strengthening targeted health services interventions. A broader
multi-sectoral approach is also needed. Analytical work will be carried out to better understand the key
constraints to achieving better nutritional outcomes through multi-sectoral approaches, and to identify
high-impact interventions across all sectors that would benefit from Bank support.
81.
Outcome 3.2: Expanded access to safe water and sanitation services. The Bank program seeks
to support the government target of supplying safe drinking water to the entire population by 2011 and
bringing each household under hygienic sanitation by 2013.7 In rural areas, an ongoing Bank supported
7

According to the 2008 Joint Monitoring Program (JPM) of WHO and UNICEF, 80% of the population is using improved water
sources and 53% of the population is using improved sanitary facilities.

27

operation is seeking to increase sustainable access to safe services through an increased number of piped
rural water supply systems, including an arsenic mitigation option, with local Public-Private Partnerships
in financing and operations. In urban areas, the Bank Group, in collaboration with DPs, is supporting
Government to improve the delivery of safe water, sanitation and drainage services through extension of
network water, sanitation and wastewater facilities in municipalities. This includes the extension of water
networks (including to urban slums), drainage improvements to reduce flooding in Dhaka, and
improvements in the commercial performance and service accountability of urban utilities in Dhaka. This
will be extended first to Chittagong, and then to Khulna during the CAS period. Trust funds will support
water utility performance benchmarking networks and peer-to-peer learning of local government
institutions that seek to identify, validate and replicate best practices in improving access to safe water and
sanitation services. IFC will also explore options of supporting private sector engagement in provision of
infrastructure for drinking water.
82.
Outcome 3.3: Strengthened social protection system to reduce vulnerability. A sizeable
number of Bangladesh’s population remains in extreme poverty and clustered around the poverty line. This
implies that even a small shock can cause large movements in poverty rates. Historically, Bangladesh has
implemented an array of social safety net programs to reach the ultra poor. At present, the country has 31
social protection programs in operation. This includes 13 cash transfer programs, 7 food transfer programs
and 11 social protection funds. Nonetheless, coverage is low, targeting is weak and government’s
planning and delivery capacity needs significant strengthening. The programs have a food support bias,
adding to administrative costs and increasing leakage possibilities. Overall, social protection and social
empowerment programs accounted for 15 percent of the national budget and about 2.5 percent of GDP in
FY10. The World Bank will support the Government to improve the social protection system through a
combination of analytical work and IDA credits. The proposed analytical and advisory activities (AAAs)
will build on existing work to improve targeting, strengthen program governance, strengthen institutions,
promote micro-insurance for the extreme poor, and develop capacity to scale up safety nets effectively
during shocks including natural disasters. The on-going lending program supports services for the most
vulnerable population groups: disabled and street children. In the first year of the CAS period, the Bank
will also support Government’s Employment Generation for the Poorest Program to address seasonal
poverty in rural areas, with a special focus on vulnerable women. If policy dialogue advances sufficiently,
the Bank will also support streamlining of diverse safety net programs through a more efficient and
effective model to deepen and broaden coverage of the most vulnerable. Additional grant financing will
be used to pilot innovative approaches to address vulnerability in partnership with local governments.
83.
Outcome 3.4: Improved student learning based on quality education services. While
Bangladesh has attained the gender parity MDGs in primary and secondary education, considerable
challenges remain in the sector. These include high drop-out rates, low completion rates, poor learning
outcomes, lack of accountability and poor governance in schools. Government strategy in the sector has
moved from an initial focus on primary education to a more holistic approach including non-formal,
secondary, higher and technical education. The NSAPR II reinforces this, and sets out specific goals and
targets to meet the lagging MDGs and improve quality across the education system, thereby producing a
more skilled and market-relevant labor force. The Bank’s on-going operations reflect this holistic
approach, with support for primary (under a multi donor supported program), secondary, and higher
education, as well as a targeted operation for reaching out-of-school children. During the CAS period, the
Bank will support an education sector review as well as an impact evaluation of the long-running
secondary stipend program. Continued support will be given to a second phase of the sector-wide
approach for primary education development. The Bank will also scale up results achieved in the
reaching-out-of-school-children program. A programmatic series will continue to support reforms and the
successful stipend program at the secondary level, while a new technical and vocational education
operation will be implemented, drawing on the recommendations of earlier analytical work. IFC will also

28

explore investment opportunities to support centers of excellence or chain networks that can branch into
rural and under-served regional areas.
Strategic Objective 4: Enhance Accountability and Promote Inclusion
84.
Strengthened governance. Avoiding prolonged conflict and restoring democracy in Bangladesh
in the 2006-2008 period was an important step forward for political governance in an otherwise
challenging environment. Strengthening political and economic governance remains an uphill struggle for
the country as also demonstrated by recent moves to weaken the independence of accountability and
regulatory institutions, such as the ACC and the Telecom Regulatory Commission. Long-term efforts are
needed to eliminate a culture of corruption in favor of performance and accountability in both the public
and private sectors. Global indicators of corruption perception have improved significantly in recent years,
although this has moved Bangladesh up to only the 25th percentile in worldwide rankings in 2009.
Entrepreneurs consider corruption and political instability second only to power shortages as obstacles to
doing business in Bangladesh. IFC investment opportunities have also been constrained by this weak
governance environment. Addressing these governance shortcomings will be important to ensure a public
sector better able to promote economic and human development at the pace needed to reach the country’s
poverty reduction and middle-income status goals. Under the NSAPR II, Government intends to address
governance through, inter alia, strengthening local government, reforming the civil service, and increasing
transparency and accountability through enhanced access to information and e-governance.
85.
The World Bank Group’s strategy to strengthen governance will be informed by the modestly
encouraging reform record to date, targeting support to areas where Government has shown commitment
and where the potential for positive outcomes is high. Our strategy will focus on supply side reforms as
well as building demand for good governance through greater inclusion. We will seek to broaden the base
for governance by promoting mechanisms to include all segments of society, with a particular focus on
empowering women. Sustained improvements in governance depend on creating an environment where
the public sector faces scrutiny from a broad spectrum of society to perform more effectively. In addition
to assistance to public entities to improve governance practices and interface with citizens, the Bank will
continue to foster demand for better governance through collaboration with civil society organizations,
media and academia on research, analysis, policy discussion and constructive engagement with the
Government. (See Box 6).
Box 6: Stimulating Demand for Good Governance (DFGG)
The World Bank Group will promote demand for good governance through its analytical work and operations. It
will support initiatives to increase the provision of information about the public sector, and assist in developing tools
for instituting feedback, participatory, and monitoring mechanisms which empower citizens.
The Bank will support improvement of information flows from the Government through capacity building of civil
society and public officials in the use of the Right to Information Act and monitoring of its implementation.
Feedback mechanisms will also be strengthened through the promotion of community driven development and the
establishment of stakeholders’ groups that allow civil society groups to engage with Government on public sector
performance, such as through the recently formed Public-Private Procurement Stakeholders’ Group.
Through Trust Funds and technical assistance, the Bank Group will foster mechanisms that allow for citizen
monitoring of government performance, including public procurement. The Bank will build on the pilot review of
DFGG under its operations and will conduct a comprehensive DFGG review of its entire portfolio in FY 11 to
promote good practices for citizen engagement in all of its projects. Based on this review, operations will be
selected under each pillar of the CAS to pilot more extensive third-party monitoring arrangements.

86.
Since the political transition in early 2009, the Bank has been gauging the extent of the new
Government’s commitment to deepening governance reforms. Worrisome amendments to the public
29

procurement law led the Bank to scale back its policy-based lending until greater clarity was reached on
the nature of future reforms. To move the dialogue forward, Government has agreed to prepare jointly
with the Bank, an Institutional and Governance Review aimed at identifying and building broader
consensus around priority governance reforms. With sufficient country ownership, such reforms could
pave the way for a resumption of development policy lending by the Bank during this CAS period. Such
lending would likely continue Bank support for core governance in areas like public financial
management, as well as extending support for decentralized institution-building and accountability at local
levels. A focus on strengthening governance will be integrated across all strategic objectives of this CAS
to underpin the achievement of development results. Support will also be targeted under this pillar
specifically to strengthen public sector accountability and promote inclusion in the development process,
as summarized by the outcomes below:
Strategic Objective 4:
Enhance Accountability and Promote Inclusion
CAS Outcomes:
Outcome 4.1: Increased effectiveness and efficiency of public resource use
Outcome 4.2: Enhanced transparency and accessibility of public services through information technology
Outcome 4.3: Increased effectiveness of public service delivery at the local level
Outcome 4.4: Expanded participation in local development and women’s economic empowerment

87.
Outcome 4.1: Increased effectiveness and efficiency of public resource use. Support for
strengthening of public financial management (PFM) will build on progress which occurred during the last
CAS period, notably the adoption of a medium term budgetary framework approach, the passage of the
Public Money and Budget Act 2009, the initial computerization of accounts, and strengthening of the audit
process. It will address areas where substantial challenges for satisfactory performance of the public
financial management system persist: the weak framework for accountability and internal control
environment including the powers and culture of formal public accountability entities, inadequate capacity
for strategic budget and debt management, and limited access to financial information. The primary
vehicle for support will be the Strengthening Public Expenditure Management Program financed by an
MDTF administered by the Bank. In addition to continued support for the Ministry of Finance, the
SPEMP would strengthen system and human capacity for line ministries, the Comptroller and Auditor
General and Parliamentary committees (the Public Accounts, Public Undertaking, and Estimate
Committees).
88.
Through the on-going second Public Procurement Reform Project, the Bank will continue to
support strengthening of the public procurement system. Bangladesh’s 2006 Public Procurement Act and
2008 Public Procurement Rules were an important step forward, establishing a procurement regime with
most features of international good practice, including introducing a procurement management capacity
development program and piloting a procurement performance monitoring system. The 2009 amendments
to the law were unhelpful, undermining the transparency of some provisions, but still leaving Bangladesh
far ahead of most South Asian countries. Going forward, the Bank will focus support on implementation
and monitoring of the procurement law in key sector ministries, electronic bidding (e-procurement), and
social accountability mechanisms, including operation of a recently-established Public-Private
Stakeholders Committee. Both public financial management and public procurement processes could be
further supported by development policy lending if reform commitment is strong.
89.
Outcome 4.2: Enhanced transparency and accessibility of public services through
information technology. Lack of transparency and inefficient procedures tend to insulate public officials
from their obligations in delivering services, hinder responsiveness, and provide opportunities for abuse
and corruption. The interface between Government and citizens in Bangladesh could benefit from reforms
to promote greater transparency and efficiency. Government has recently undertaken two important
30

initiatives to address this, passing the RTI Act in 2009 and promoting the use of ICT under the so-called
Digital Bangladesh agenda. The Bank Group will support implementation of both initiatives during the
CAS period. The joint IGR will assess how best to facilitate implementation of the RTI Act. On this
basis, the Bank will support capacity building for public institutions to proactively and reactively provide
information, formulate policy, and handle appeals. Already, the Bank is supporting pilots on the use of
ICT in 500 village councils under the Local Government Support Project, and this would be scaled up
during the CAS period. The Bank will also incorporate transparency requirements mandated by the RTI
Act and the Bank’s new Access to Information Policy in its operations in Bangladesh. The Bank and IFC
will further the Digital Bangladesh agenda by promoting e-governance applications. This will include
developing a coherent framework for the use of ICT in the public sector, including provision for
interoperability of information systems among different agencies and standards to secure and ensure
reliability of data. IFC will continue to assist in the automation of various government-business interfaces.
Building on its work for establishing an electronic registry of business rules and regulations, IFC will
provide further support to government for enhancing the supply of regulatory information and engaging
stakeholders when formulating new regulations. It will also mainstream the recently piloted client
satisfaction score-card for private sector related government agencies. The Bank will also support the
upgrading of the country’s national identification system to provide an electronic platform for better
service delivery by multiple public entities.
90.
Outcome 4.3: Increased effectiveness of public service delivery at the local level. Bangladesh
is among the most centralized countries in the world, with line agencies undertaking most public service
delivery functions and accounting for the bulk of public expenditures. Despite poor service delivery
outcomes, resistance to decentralization and local service delivery remains significant. The election
platform of the current Government called for a new paradigm to ‘bring services to the doorsteps of the
people’, and steps have already been taken to decentralize some powers and strengthen local government.
The World Bank will build on this renewed Government commitment to local service delivery and on the
experience gained through the ongoing Local Government Support Project (LGSP), which has shown that
efficiency and responsiveness of local services can significantly improve through provision of adequate
resources and strengthened accountability at the local level. The Bank will continue to provide support
through a combination of lending operations and analytical support to enhance local government capacity
and accountability. Through the IGR and other advisory support, the Bank will foster a policy dialogue
with Government on strengthening the institutional framework for government and public service delivery
at the local level. A multi-sectoral approach will be adopted in order to link efforts on local government to
core interventions for social services delivery. Implementation of the on-going LGSP, and a follow-on
operation, would be the main vehicles to support this agenda, which build capacity at the village council
level by enhancing the fiscal transfer system, institutionalizing accountability mechanisms, improving
financial management and establishing effective monitoring systems. The LGSP model will also be
supported for city corporations and urban municipalities under the next phase of the Municipal Support
Project. Analytical work will be conducted in parallel with these proposed operations to assess local
governments’ financing, financial management and service delivery capacity for scaling up. Development
policy lending may also provide a vehicle for supporting multi-sectoral reforms aimed at strengthening
local government and decentralizing service delivery. IFC will expand and deepen its program of regional
dialogue between local governments (including city corporations and district administration) and the
private sector. Currently being piloted in four district towns, these dialogues have proven useful in
identifying business issues at the local level and catalyzing actions to resolve them.
91.
Outcome 4.4: expanded participation in local development and women’s economic
empowerment. Bangladesh’s poorer, rural populations have not shared sufficiently in the benefits of the
country’s recent growth. Lack of voice and participation in decision making, especially allocation of public
funds by local governments, underlies this exclusion, leading to unequal opportunities and limited ability
to negotiate better terms and services and to access assets that would reduce poverty. Addressing this is
31

critical for more inclusive growth and poverty reduction. Recognizing the need to enhance voice and
participation in development, the Government introduced a community driven development (CDD)
approach in 2003 and continues to advocate this approach under the NSAPR II. The Bank’s engagement in
CDD in Bangladesh began with the Social Investment Program Project (SIPP), which was piloted in the
two poorest districts of Jamalpur and Gaibandha. The project has demonstrated that a CDD approach is an
effective mechanism to enhance poor people’s voice and improve local governance. The Bank will
continue to support SIPP during the CAS period, and expand its scope through a SIPP-II Empowerment
and Livelihoods Program in a larger number of districts. As one element of the planned IGR, an
assessment will be made of other avenues for increasing voice and participation, as well as creating social
accountability mechanisms at the local level.
92.
Bangladesh has made strong progress on certain aspects of gender equality, especially in
childhood health and education. At the same time, women’s empowerment remains weak in terms of
access to paid employment and assets, as well as voice in the household and in the public sphere, in spite
of a growing women’s movement. The NSAPR II emphasizes the inclusion of women in all dimensions as
an important strategy for accelerating growth and ensuring long-term sustainability of the development
process. For its part, a significant portion of the Bank-funded portfolio and analytical work in Bangladesh
has supported mainstreaming gender, particularly in human development, microfinance and communitydriven development. The Bank-sponsored analysis “Whispers to Voices” is regarded as a milestone for
empirical work on gender, while the Bangladesh portfolio was recognized by the Bank’s IEG as ‘best
practice’ in gender mainstreaming. The CAS will build on this track record of gender mainstreaming
while going a step further by including women’s economic empowerment as an expected CAS outcome.
To contribute to this outcome, the Bank will pilot training and transitional support for women living in
lagging areas to work in burgeoning export industries, including the dominant garment industry. The
planned EGPP will also encourage women’s empowerment by targeting 30 percent of the jobs created.
IFC’s Economic Zones program will continue to support government in improving the working conditions
of women employed in the zones, with a view to replicating the results outside the zones.
C.

Cross-Cutting Dimensions

93.
Several areas with specific CAS outcomes outlined above also have cross-cutting dimensions.
Governance and gender, most notably, cut across all pillars and will be mainstreamed throughout the
Bank’s program. On governance, this will involve greater attention to strengthening sector institutions,
implementing key sector reforms and enhancing sector-specific accountability mechanisms. On gender,
this will involve gender-disaggregated analysis and gender-sensitive design and monitoring to ensure that
both sexes are equally participating in, and benefitting from, the development process. In addition to
governance and gender, the CAS will have two other cross-cutting dimensions, regional integration and aid
effectiveness, discussed below.
94.
Strengthening gender mainstreaming. Bangladesh has made impressive gains in gender equality
against great odds. Perhaps its most spectacular achievement has been in education where girls’ secondary
enrollment rates are higher than those of boys. Education seems to have brought a virtual revolution in the
Bangladeshi countryside. In health too, the achievements have been impressive. Bangladesh halved its
fertility rates between 1971 and 2004, the gender gap in infant mortality has been closed and overall child
mortality rates have rapidly come down. Despite these significant achievements, women continue to have
very poor access to reproductive health services, and maternal mortality remains unacceptably high. Only
a little over 10 percent of pregnant women give birth in medical institutions and a large proportion are
malnourished during pregnancy and lactation. In the economic sphere, the micro-credit revolution
continues to boost women’s earning potential and economic empowerment. The thriving garment industry
employs mostly young women and vast numbers of young women leave their villages to work in factories
where, in earlier generations, young women were rarely seen outside their homes. However, overall
32

female labor force participation rates are low and women’s access to wage work is limited. Women also
face high levels of violence in the home and outside, and threats to their security could jeopardize their
gains. In the arena of political participation, Bangladesh, like other South Asian countries, has elected
female heads of government. The current cabinet has women members heading ministries traditionally
regarded as men’s domain. It also has quotas for women in national parliament and local government.
95.
The Bank has been a longstanding partner in supporting Bangladesh’s gender achievements. In
operations, the Bank has integrated gender both within the traditional human development sectors and
others sectors such as rural development and livelihoods. The Bank has supported the highly successful
female secondary stipend program, primary education programs, health SWAps and community livelihood
projects that have all contributed to gender gains. The Bank’s analytical work mainstreams gender
effectively. The Bank report "Whispers to Voices” is regarded as a milestone on empirical work on new
and emerging gender issues. A portfolio review of gender mainstreaming in projects in Bangladesh found
good integration of gender in the Bank’s operations. During the CAS period, the Bank will strengthen
gender mainstreaming with an increased focus on women’s economic empowerment. Among the
instruments, will be employment generation targeted at low-income women and an innovative pilot
program to support low-income women in transitioning into labor-intensive manufacturing.
96.
Promoting regional integration. The political transition in Bangladesh brought with it a new
impetus to strengthen cooperation with India in particular, allowing more optimism about broader regional
efforts to improve economic integration. The economic benefits of enhanced integration are clear and
considerable for Bangladesh, with some estimates of annual growth rates increasing by as much as two
percentage points. For this reason, the CAS will support opportunities for regional integration across all
four strategic objectives. This includes, inter alia, support for regional transport networks and power pools
(objective 1); management of common natural resources, especially rivers, coastlines and forests (objective
2), facilitation of labor mobility and enhanced regional response to malnutrition (objective 3); and regional
knowledge-sharing on decentralization and empowering local government (objective 4). It is recognized
that the extent of Bank support in many areas will depend on the evolution of the political dialogue and the
opportunities that emerge for enhanced regional cooperation. The country program will build in sufficient
flexibility to respond to emerging regional opportunities, and will seek to leverage additional resources
from the regional IDA envelope as appropriate. As emphasized in its third strategic component, IFC will
continue its support via South-South opportunities, trade finance, transport infrastructure projects (as
materialized), and through BICF’s advisory services to improve business regulations and processes.
97.
Enhancing aid effectiveness. The effective use of aid resources is rooted in the broader issue of
public resource management, which will continue to be a core focus of the Bank’s support on governance
(objective 4). Aid effectiveness also has specific determinants related to Government leadership on aid
management and the behavior of development agencies. In Bangladesh, the Economic Relations Division
of the Ministry of Finance has responsibility for coordinating aid management on behalf of Government.
The formal mechanism for macro-level coordination is the Local Consultative Group (LCG), with multiple
sector and thematic working groups. As a prominent development partner, the Bank is a standing member
of the LCG Executive Committee, and takes the rotating lead on several sector/thematic working groups
(e.g. public financial management). The Bank has worked with other DPs to support Government
preparation of the NSAPR II in 2009 and hosting of a BDF in early 2010 after a hiatus of five years.
98.
The Bank was also a core member in the drafting of a Joint Cooperation Strategy to serve as an
action plan aimed at strengthening adherence to aid effectiveness principles summarized in the Paris
Declaration and the Accra Agenda for Action. The JCS was endorsed at the BDF, and was signed by
Government and eighteen DPss in June 2010. Among the actions agreed in the JCS will be adoption of a
harmonized development results framework based on the NSAPR II, which can serve as a basis for
33

common performance assessment by development agencies. The DPs will support the NSAPR II and the
results framework under their respective assistance strategies, and through operational partnerships as
deemed necessary. The Bank will play a leading role in working with Government to define this results
framework, which would pave the way for more harmonized, programmatic approaches among DPs. The
Bank itself will make greater efforts to adhere to aid effectiveness principles, by simplifying instruments
and processes under the on-going sector-wide approaches in health and education, identifying other
opportunities for sector-wide and/or pooled approaches, supporting joint analytical work and joint
operations with other partners, administering MDTFs in support of Government-led programs, and using
the Bank’s portfolio to strengthen country systems and capacity to monitor progress and manage for
results.
99.
Partnerships. The Bank Group works closely with other DPs across a range of sectors, and has
been instrumental in developing sector wide approaches in health and education. In the health and
nutrition program, the Bank is the coordinating agency to manage the program among the eight DPs that
pool their funds. They include the EU, Canada, Germany, Sweden, Netherlands, UK and UNFPA. In the
primary education development program, ADB manages the program on behalf of eleven partners which
includes the Bank, Australia, Canada, EU, Japan, Netherlands, Norway, Sweden, UK, and UNICEF. The
Bank is also engaged in parallel and co-financing operations in energy, infrastructure, water resources
management, environment protection and local government, among others. During the CAS period, the
Bank, as the coordinating donor, will finance the Padma Bridge in partnership with ADB, Japan and the
Islamic Development Bank. In addition to project and program-based financing, the collaboration with
DPs extends to analytical work and technical assistance. The Bank collaborates with the IMF on
macroeconomic assessments. MDTFs such as SPEMP, financed by UK(DFID), European Union (EU),
Denmark and Netherlands, have emerged as good practice of donor collaboration and have strengthened
the partnership between the Bank and DPs. Several non-lending technical assistance (NLTA) programs
are under implementation including the Swiss financed NLTA that aims to strengthen local governance. In
private sector development, IFC has taken a leading role through its two facilities, SEDF and BICF, which
are largely donor-financed by the EU, Norway and UK(DFID). In the area of governance, UK(DFID) is
financing a TF which has provided analytical support for a range of sectors. The Bangladesh Climate
Change Resilience Fund is an upcoming partnership currently supported by UK(DFID), Denmark, Sweden
and EU. Besides partnerships on operations and analytical work, the Bank Group is also engaged in
regular dialogue with all DPs through the LCG mechanism and through bilateral contacts. The Bank
Group is committed to building on these arrangements under the proposed lending and analytical program
during the CAS period. See Annex 8 for more details on aid effectiveness and existing partnerships.
III.

IMPLEMENTING THE STRATEGY

100.
The Bangladesh CAS for FY11-14 builds on a strong on-going portfolio which is well-aligned
with the strategic objectives of the new CAS. Relative to the previous CAS period, the new CAS will
place greater emphasis on investments to accelerate growth and reduce vulnerability to climate change. In
terms of CAS implementation, efforts will be made to improve programming for greater impact, through
larger, more strategic operations, more operationally-relevant analytical work, better integrated TF
resources and a stronger focus on managing for results.
A.

Building on the Portfolio

101.
The volume of annual commitments increased during the last CAS period. In 2006 and 2007
annual new commitments averaged US$420 million, rising to US$753 million in 2008 and US$1.1 billion
in 2009, the highest ever for Bangladesh. At the end of the CAS period in July 2009, the portfolio
consisted of 26 active operations with a total loan commitment of US$2.9 billion. Out of this, US$1.7
34

billion was undisbursed. Twenty nine operations (including ten DPLs) totaling US$2.7 billion (with DPLs’
share at 46%) were approved during the last CAS period.
102.
The ongoing portfolio is well positioned to support CAS outcomes. It covers operations across
the four pillars, with a larger share supporting operations falling under strategic objectives 1 and 3. This
CAS builds on the portfolio while significantly ramping up assistance for infrastructure and climate change
(see Table 4), and scaling up in sectors showing results. There have been visible results in bringing poor
children to schools, increasing livelihoods for the vulnerable, creating access through rural road networks
and expanding provision of renewable and solar energy to rural households. These successes will be
consolidated through larger interventions.
Table 4: Portfolio and Proposed Commitments by Pillar

103.
Portfolio performance improved during the previous CAS. Disbursements were better than the
regional average, and a significant reduction occurred in portfolio at risk and problem projects. The
proactivity index showed visible improvement towards the end of the CAS period. Twenty one projects
exited from the portfolio during FY06-FY09. Out of these, two projects received unsatisfactory and four
received marginally unsatisfactory ratings from IEG. In terms of portfolio risk flags, an average 20% of
the portfolio faced two risk flags – fiduciary and project management - demonstrating the inherent
institutional, governance and capacity weaknesses in public sector ministries and weak financial
management and internal controls. Due to these and related constraints, implementation delays occur, also
affecting faster disbursements of investment projects. In future, use of fast disbursing instruments (such as
programmatic performance based investment lending) and more active monitoring have the potential to
improve disbursements.
104.
Analytical work has been a central part of the country program. It has informed future
operations, and carried forward the dialogue with government and civil society. Major Economic and
Sector Work (ESW) has included a Country Environment Assessment, the Bangladesh Strategy for
Sustained Growth, a Country Gender Assessment, and a Poverty Assessment. Key AAA was made widely
available through a new Bangladesh Development Series. Reports on emerging issues like climate change
and disaster management were also prepared. Policy notes were intended to provide just in time advice to
policy makers and were demand responsive. The FY11-FY14 CAS will build on this experience and
further strengthen AAA work using a range of analytical and advisory instruments for core ESW, demandbased policy notes and reports.

35

105.
Bangladesh is a recipient of large Trust Funds (TFs). Trust Funds are well integrated in the
country program through AAA, co-financed operations and capacity building activities. The current TF
portfolio consists of a total commitment amount of over US$450 million and is well aligned with the CAS
pillars. Major TFs are the multi-donor financed SPEMP, the UK (DFID) funded Joint Technical Assistance
Program (JOTAP) on Governance, and the multi-donor financed Health SWAp. SPEMP is a
comprehensive program which supports the Government in implementing financial management and
budget execution reforms. JOTAP delivers an enhanced level of analytical work and policy dialogue on
governance across key reform areas and sectors. The Health SWAp is the largest TF which provides cofinancing to the Government’s health, nutrition and population program. In addition, other TFs, such as for
decentralized governance and rural water supply, have significantly contributed to enhancing policy
dialogue in operations like LGSP and improving local level peer to peer learning through the Water and
Sanitation Program.
106.
During the last CAS period IFC delivered a strong program. Since early 2006, IFC delivered
investment commitments amounting to US$334 million (for IFC's own account), with over three quarters
supporting the financial sector. All the financial market projects, except two, provided guarantees for trade
transactions of SMEs. As of April 2010, IFC's portfolio had 14 projects amounting to US$124.1 million,
including US$8.9 million for syndications. On the advisory side, IFC made significant strides since SEDF
was established in 2002 and BICF was established in 2007 in partnership with UK (DFID) and the
European Union. IFC's advisory services focus on: (i) investment climate, and identifying and addressing
key private sector investment constraints in the country; (ii) access to finance; and (iii) SMEs' and financial
institutions' capacity building. In this context, BICF promotes better business regulation; enhanced
economic zones and capacity building; more business friendly policies, laws, and regulations; and
strengthening of implementing institutions. BICF focuses on priorities identified through extensive
consultations with various stakeholders including the private sector, government and other DPs. As IFC’s
largest investment climate facility devoted to a single country, BICF complements other advisory teams in
Bangladesh including SEDF, Access to Finance (A2F), and Infrastructure Advisory which provides advice
on PPPs.
107.
MIGA's strategy is informed by the strategic directions of the World Bank Group. The Agency’s
current portfolio consists of one project, financed by Egyptian investors, in support of the country’s
telecommunications sector. The project involves the acquisition, operation and maintenance of a national
mobile telephone network based on GSM technology, and aims to address the acute shortage of reliable
telephone services in the country. The Agency is also providing cover for a joint venture banking facility
in Afghanistan, operated by a UK investment company, ShoreCap, and a large Bangladeshi microfinance
business, the Bangladesh Rural Advancement Committee (BRAC). MIGA’s strategy will continue to be
guided by the overall direction of the World Bank Group to support new openings anticipated during the
CAS period.
B.

Improving Programming

108.
The IDA resource envelope for the FY11-FY14 CAS, estimated at over US$6 billion, covers the
last year of IDA 15 and the full IDA 16 cycle. The indicative allocation for the IDA 16 period is assumed
to be SDR 2560 million, the same as for IDA 15. Actual allocations during the CAS period will be
determined on a yearly basis and will depend on: (i) total IDA resources available at the time; (ii) the
country’s performance rating; (iii) the performance and assistances terms of other IDA borrowers; (iv) the
terms of IDA’s assistance to Bangladesh (whether credit or grants); and (v) the number of IDA-eligible
countries.

36

109.
The lending program will be prepared and monitored around the sixteen outcomes. The
strategic link between proposed operations and CAS outcomes will be strengthened to ensure that Bank
financing is well aligned, and the new operations and on-going portfolio lead to accomplishment of desired
results. With this in view, all proposed operations and AAA link directly to the anticipated outcomes. This
will be further backed by sector specific frameworks developed by government ministries in collaboration
with DPs. A series of SWAPs and programmatic investment lending will support these frameworks, for
example in health, education and water supply, jointly with other DPs.
110.
The Bank will diversify instrument choices. The indicative program includes Standard
Investment Loans, additional financing for well-performing projects, programmatic performance-based
Specific Investment Loans, and the flexibility to use Development Policy Lending if credible reform
measures by government warrant policy lending. A clear shift already initiated is towards performancebased investment lending, currently proposed in social protection, education and rural roads. These
instruments can reduce risks as disbursements will be linked to actual performance. The Bank will also
deliver increased volume by leveraging sector reforms through large-scale infrastructure operations (e.g.
the Padma Bridge) and significantly scaled up operations to reduce vulnerability to climate change.
111.
Learning lessons from experience, this CAS will seek to consolidate and innovate for results.
All new operations and AAA entering the work program will be guided by the following principles:
a) Sequencing of analytical work to guide policy dialogue on reforms and influence operational
design;
b) Use of the full range of instruments, including a possible resumption of development policy
lending in selected areas with sufficient country ownership and capacity to carry forward reforms;
c) Realism to maintain a manageable portfolio aligned with the client’s capacity to implement and the
Bank’s capacity to supervise;
d) Increased engagement where opportunities exist for larger, more strategic intervention;
e) Scaling up of interventions with demonstrable results and high country ownership;
f) Within an overall context of consolidation, retaining flexibility to innovate and pilot through
selected, smaller interventions.
112.
Sustaining a record level of IDA resources. The program for FY 11 is fairly well advanced and is
expected to commit the highest-ever level of annual IDA to the country, assuming continued strong
performance. The FY11 commitments, reflecting significant back-loading of IDA 15, are expected to
exceed the US$2 billion mark, including US$1.2 billion for the proposed Padma Multipurpose Bridge
Project. From FY12-FY14, indicative annual allocations under IDA 16 are maintained at approximately
US$1.3 billion, on par with the IDA 15 annual allocation. The total allocation during the four-year CAS
period is estimated at over US$6 billion, contingent on country performance and progress in sector
policies. The annex on Proposed IDA Lending lists the range of possible operations. A mid-cycle CAS
Progress Report will provide an assessment of implementation and proposed shifts based on actual
delivery.
113.
More strategic interventions and increased average size. This will leverage Bank resources to
meet government priorities and support reforms for transformative investments leading to better
development impact. It will also enable better portfolio monitoring by the Bank while reducing the
capacity strain on the client for managing scattered small projects. The average size of operations is
expected to continue to rise from the US$70 million in the earlier part of the previous decade to US$120
million in the last year of the FY06-09 CAS to US$150 or more million during the upcoming CAS. While
37

pursuing these larger interventions, the Bank will selectively include a few small operations to test
innovative approaches for potential scale up. Increased use of large scale projects (such as the Padma
Multipurpose Bridge Project) coupled with greater use of performance based lending is also expected to
reduce risks.
114.
Delivering on this increased level of financing will require strong performance on the part of the
Government and the Bank. Actual financing amounts will depend on the extent to which sectoral policies
and governance arrangements are conducive to effective IDA investments. In a number of areas,
particularly related to infrastructure investment (such as energy and transport), key policy and institutional
actions are required before expanded investment can take place. Government reform momentum and
priorities may evolve, opening up new opportunities or requiring the Bank to scale back where
commitment and ownership is weakened. Recognizing this, the CAS reflects engagement across the four
pillars while retaining the flexibility to allocate resources based on sector and country developments.
115.
AAA work will be sequenced to support key sector and cross-sector priorities. The Bank’s key
value added pertains to the quality of its analytical work to inform policy development and operations.
AAA work will be linked to policy needs of the lending program and will also assist in enhancing the
research and knowledge base in the country. Analytical work will be used flexibly to resolve issues that
arise during the planning and implementation of sector reforms and large-scale investment programs, such
as in infrastructure. In addition to ESW and high visibility studies, non-lending technical assistance and
TFs will support policy notes on a demand basis, as well as diagnostic and operational reviews to improve
operational effectiveness. Internal scrutiny of AAA tasks will mirror that for operations, with the CMU
and SMUs implementing a well-coordinated mechanism for supporting demand driven analytical work.
The Bangladesh Development Series will continue with a more comprehensive dissemination and outreach
strategy making greater use of print and electronic media, and extending dissemination activities to
different geographic locations. The Bank’s new Access to Information Policy will enable easier
dissemination of analytical work. WBI will provide support as a global facilitator of capacity development.
It will facilitate global offerings and flagship courses linked to the CAS pillars including on governance,
climate change, urban development, health, and growth.
116.
Trust Funds will support AAA work, advance policy dialogue and pilot innovations for potential
replication. The current robust TF portfolio will be augmented according to sector and cross sector
priorities. The TFs will continue to be subjected to similar internal quality and management approval
processes to those employed for standard Bank operations. The large TFs, such as SPEMP, have similar
supervision processes as used for IDA credits. This focus on quality at entry and during implementation
will be maintained for all upcoming TFs. TF monitoring will continue to be included in country portfolio
monitoring to ensure that Task Teams are kept abreast of required actions. The CMU, through its enhanced
operational capacity, will maintain quarterly monitoring updates for all TFs.
C.

Reducing Corruption in Operations

117.
Learning lessons from the last CAS and recognizing the governance, corruption and low capacity
risks, Bank operations will be strengthened through the following measures which will be systematically
employed across the portfolio and at all stages of the project cycle. Annex 9 provides further details.
118.
Corruption and governance risks will continue to be assessed for all lending operations. During
project preparation, teams agree on safeguards with governments including institutional reform, fiduciary
controls, and procurement risk mitigation plans. This practice will further be strengthened and more
rigorously monitored.

38

119.
New lending development will have increased sensitivity to specific corruption risks in sectors.
In sectors where government commitment to addressing corruption is deemed insufficient and hence risks
are too high, the Bank will reduce engagement. The Bank will invest more in conducting diagnostics of
corruption through political economy and operational risk assessments in key sectors to inform project
preparation and design and to define the extent and nature of risks across different sectors. So far three
such analyses have been conducted which have contributed to sector teams’ enhanced understanding of the
drivers of corruption in their sectors.
120.
The ORMAP team will operate under a modified methodology. The ORMAP will shift from its
earlier focus on lending to overseeing risk assessments and risk monitoring for both pipeline and portfolio.
This will ensure that sufficient attention is given during implementation when the need is greatest. The
ORMAP work will dovetail and be integrated with the roll out of the ORAF beginning FY 11. Crosssectoral technical support and managerial oversight will be provided to task teams in identifying
governance and corruption risks under the new ORAF.
The in-country team will work in close
collaboration with corporate level Investment Lending Risk Team (ILRT). There will be capacity
challenges in handling risk assessment and risk monitoring based on the upcoming ORAF and the specific
requirements of the Bangladesh portfolio. To address this, CMU and sector teams’ capacity is being
strengthened, including through appropriate training, to effectively implement these changes.
121.
Monitoring and review processes. More specialized monitoring of high risk projects will be led by
CMU in coordination with sector units. Quarterly portfolio reviews will focus on high risk operations, and
annual high level Country Portfolio Performance Reviews (CPPR) will specifically include review of
progress on governance and anti corruption plans.
122.
Engagement with government on governance and corruption risks will be maintained during
both project preparation and implementation. The risk assessment and mitigation measures will be
monitored closely and updated annually during project implementation as per the ORAF, and progress
against the agreed actions plans will be reflected in the Implementation Status Reports (ISRs). The Bank
management will be quick and decisive in addressing cases of corruption as they may arise in any of its
projects and develop systems to reduce opportunities for the subsequent re-emergence of the problem, and,
if deemed necessary disengage from projects.
123.
Projects in the Bangladesh portfolio have been the subject of INT investigations. So far four INT
investigations have been completed with follow up action plans agreed with the client. In sectors, where
the Bank is no more providing operational support, extensive technical engagement is ongoing to improve
business processes, as currently underway in the roads sector. The Country Team will also proactively
engage with INT during project preparation to benefit from INT’s technical guidance on high risk
operations. Earlier experience of such upfront engagement with INT led to much more robust institutional
risk assessment and mitigating measures for projects with high corruption risks.
124.
Decentralized service delivery and CDD operations will be scaled up to generate greater local
level accountability. The experience with CDD operations in Bangladesh demonstrates the high
development impact of participatory planning and monitoring that has also helped to reduce corruption at
the local level. The good experience of the Local Governance Support Project in improving service
delivery will be expanded under a second phase. The IGR will assist in defining decentralization policy
options, especially for enhanced local level accountability.
125.
The Bank will make use of the new Access to Information policy. Information on Bank
operations will be made more accessible and will be in public domain. Information on contracts, with
grievance mechanisms - established through the Procurement Act – will be more actively posted on
39

websites. Information on performance of projects and results of third party monitoring will also be made
available.
126.
Trust funds will support core governance and sector governance activities. This will include
improving the planning, budgeting and executing capacity of ministries. Other TF supported activities
will include operational risk assessment for sectors; operational review of demand for good governance;
third party monitoring; impact evaluations; and surveys of public perception of the overall governance
environment.
127.
WBI will maintain its support for the implementation of the RTI Act, and its assistance in
establishing a South Asian Network for Social Accountability anchored by the Institute of Governance
Studies (IGS) at BRAC University. WBI’s Parliamentary program will continue with ongoing capacity
building support to key oversight committees.
D.

Managing for Results

128.
A lesson from the previous CAS which was highlighted in the independent Country Assistance
Evaluation was the need to maintain momentum on results during CAS implementation, so that the CAS
becomes a tool to manage for results, rather than a static document. This requires something of a shift in
mindset among Bank task teams, Government counterparts and other stakeholders to focus not only on
inputs and processes, but increasingly on progress towards expected outputs and outcomes.
129.
Results monitoring during CAS implementation. The starting point for a continuous focus on
results is in developing a shared vision around a well-articulated results framework with measurable midterm milestones and outcome indicators. During CAS preparation, multi-sectoral “results teams” were
established around the four strategic objectives to articulate CAS outcomes and lead multi-stakeholder
consultations. These results teams will be maintained through the life of the CAS, with responsibility for
monitoring progress towards expected outputs and outcomes and modifying strategy as needed to manage
for better results.
130.
Catalyzing and coordinating a focus on results. The CMU in Dhaka will be strengthened through
recruitment of a Results Specialist Operations Officer responsible for catalyzing and coordinating regular
CAS monitoring and reporting on results. The CMU will also build capacity and encourage resultsoriented supervision among task teams as the building block for broader portfolio reviews and CAS
monitoring. This will include promoting the use of core sector indicators in portfolio monitoring. Equally
important will be planned efforts by the CMU to raise awareness and strengthen capacity among
implementing agencies to manage for results.
131.
Reinvigorating Country Portfolio Performance Reviews. The independent evaluation also
recommended reinstating regular CPPRs with the client. The CMU has already initiated quarterly
technical portfolio reviews with Government, and agreed on an annual high-level portfolio review
involving other DPs and stakeholders. This annual review will be broadened into an annual forum for
CAS monitoring, with a particular focus on progress towards results. Results-oriented supervision by task
teams will underpin portfolio reviews and CAS monitoring, but will also encourage greater proactivity for
poorly-performing operations, including options such as restructuring at any point (not only at mid-term
review).
132.
Enhancing domestic accountability mechanisms. Ultimately, strengthening domestic
accountability mechanisms will create sustained incentives to achieve better results. It is therefore
important that such strengthening be mainstreamed across all CAS objectives and activities. To this end,
40

the Demand for Good Governance (DFGG) within the Bank’s portfolio will be systematically assessed,
building on an assessment of a sample of operations already undertaken. Recommendations of the
portfolio assessment will lead to mainstreaming of DFGG mechanisms in new operations, as well as
retrofitting as appropriate in on-going operations. Third-party monitoring has also been successful in
enhancing accountability for resources and results in some on-going operations in Bangladesh. A new TF
proposal will support the introduction of third-party monitoring in signature projects across all strategic
objectives of the CAS, to provide an independent perspective on progress towards results.
133.
Strengthening country capacity to manage for results. The Bank’s own efforts to manage for
results across the country program are built on Bangladeshi systems and capabilities for measuring and
monitoring progress. Strengthening the country’s capacity to manage for results is paramount as a
foundation for sustained development. Such efforts must be incorporated across the country program and
portfolio, through diverse support for planning and budgeting, institutional strengthening, statistical
capacity building, sector monitoring and evaluation systems and reform of incentives to achieve results.
Beyond the portfolio, the Bangladesh program will rely on sizable on-going TFs for good governance and
public financial management to strengthen country capacity to manage for results.
134.
Improving communications and outreach. The Bank has an interest in both achieving results and
better documenting them. On both counts, an increase in the quantity and quality of communications and
outreach in Bangladesh is warranted. This will be accomplished by increasing specialized communications
staff, as well as empowering the CAS results teams--and every task team--to engage more extensively with
civil society, the media and research institutes and think tanks. Implementation of previous
communications and outreach strategies has consistently fallen short of expectations due to inadequate
staffing and resources devoted to this vital area.
IV.

MANAGING RISKS

135.
Risks to the achievement of results (and to the reputation of the Bank) under this CAS are
substantial, as they have been in previous CAS periods. Strenuous efforts are underway to appropriately
mitigate these risks. Mitigation efforts have been described throughout the CAS document, but it is
worthwhile to reiterate the major risks, as follows:


Faltering commitment to reforms. After a year in power, Government has reached a turning point
at which a stated commitment to structural reforms and good governance will need to be translated
more directly into actions on the ground. Performance to date is mixed. In the governance arena,
efforts to promote e-governance, right to information, a public-private stakeholder committee for
public procurement, and some local government strengthening have proceeded well, while the
independence of the judiciary and the ACC were weakened, and the quality of the public
procurement law was diluted. This mixed performance is unsurprising, but requires a more
selective approach by the Bank to successfully support reforms. The Bank, and IFC (especially
BICF) in providing advisory services, will engage in investments, reforms and advisory services in
sectors and areas where political commitment is sufficient, while engaging in dialogue across
multiple stakeholders to identify additional entry points for meaningful reform.



Weak institutional capacity. The poor quality of public administration continues to be a
significant obstacle to effective public sector performance as manifested in weak service delivery.
Civil service weaknesses have contributed to insufficient policy co-ordination and implementation
capacity, ineffective public financial management, and widespread corruption. This has led to
underperformance in implementing ADPs, which undermines the achievement of development
outcomes. The Bank Group recognizes that institutional capacity development is a long term
41

agenda, and will address these concerns through: (i) support to systemic improvements in crosscutting areas such as financial management, internal government processes and monitoring
systems; (ii) support for decentralization and local service delivery, including for local municipal
governments; iii) promotion of PPPs, especially in infrastructure and social services; and (iv) more
systematic knowledge transfer and use of AAA and TFs for institutional support and capacity
development. At the portfolio level, the Bank will adhere to strong institutional ‘readiness filters’
for new operations and consolidate the pipeline to reduce the burden of multiple transaction costs
for a client with capacity limitations.


Corruption and misuse of funds. Although reforms in recent years have led to improvements in
corruption perception in Bangladesh, the country continues to suffer from pervasive corruption
according to both domestic surveys and international indicators. Corruption is having a major
impact on the efficiency and transparency of service delivery, particularly for the poor. It has been
a key factor in the public sector’s insufficient provision of infrastructure to sustain economic
growth. Corruption also has had a direct effect on Bank-financed projects, as highlighted in
several investigations into allegations of corruption. At the systemic level, Government has
committed to a comprehensive program to build a more effective public financial management
system over the next five years with World Bank support, and other efforts are underway to
strengthen core governance. At the same time, the Bank will strengthen existing measures to
reduce corruption risks in Bank-supported operations. The Bank will integrate right to information
and other transparency measures such as third party monitoring of procurement and execution of
projects and instituting demand for good governance in projects. The Bank will also invest more
in conducting diagnostics of corruption through political economy and operational risk
assessments in key sectors in order to inform project preparation and design and to define the
extent and nature of risks across different sectors. These assessments and mitigation measures will
be monitored closely and updated regularly during project implementation and included in high
level portfolio reviews with the client. The Bank will be decisive in addressing corruption as it
arises, by developing systems to reduce opportunities for re-emergence of the problem, or--if
problems cannot be properly addressed--disengaging from operations.



Opposition to strengthening local government. Local governance and service delivery reforms
could be threatened by political and bureaucratic opposition to changing power relationships.
Bangladesh remains one of the most centralized countries in the world, with central bureaucracy
responsible for most public service delivery at all levels of government. Although the
intergovernmental legal framework was recently improved and the lowest tier has instituted
mechanisms for accountability, local governments are constrained by lack of resources, unclear
responsibilities, and insufficient staffing. Parliamentarians exercise significant power through
influence over the centralized bureaucracy and budget, and they also exercise formal ‘advisory’
authority over some levels of local government. The Bank will support government efforts to
empower and strengthen local governments, promote fiscal decentralization, and local
accountability and community empowerment. Widely disseminated and discussed analytical work
will identify options and best practices world-wide, helping to forge consensus and strengthen
public opinion against entrenched interests. Investment lending will provide continued financial
and technical support to local government to directly empower communities, while development
policy lending may be a tool to leverage reform if sufficient consensus and commitment exists.



Obstacles to regional cooperation. Significant progress has been made on regional cooperation
with the recent signing of cooperation agreements with India. However, the opposition party raised
concerns, and has the potential to tap into public fears of a dominant India. The historic
rapprochement has the potential to create regional opportunities for water resource managements,
42

transport, trade and energy. The Government’s dialogue with Bhutan and Nepal is an opening to
improve cooperation on energy and multi-modal transport. Despite promising progress during this
government’s tenure, further progress on regional cooperation and implementation of existing
agreements hinges on maintaining strong political will and support in Bangladesh as well as across
the regional country governments. The Bank Group will work across the South Asia Region,
leveraging its financial and technical resources to advocate for regional cooperation and support
regional initiatives. The Bank Group will foster regional dialogue in key sectors, working through
its sector and country departments, as well as the Regional Department. Programming under the
CAS will remain sufficiently flexible to respond to regional opportunities as they emerge,
including on-going consideration of India-Bangladesh cooperation in the power sector and a
proposed cross-border water resource management operation.

43

COUNTRY STRATEGY ANNEXES
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.

Progress towards MDGs/Poverty Reduction/Social Welfare
Strengthening Governance
CAS Completion Report
Client Survey and CAS Consultations
Vulnerability to Climate Change and Natural Disasters
Results Framework Matrix
Existing & Indicative Program (including Trust Funds) by Strategic Objective
Aid Effectiveness and Partnerships
Reducing Corruption Risks in Bank Operations
Country Financing Parameters

45
54
60
117
122
126
138
149
155
160

CAS STANDARD ANNEX TABLES
Annex A2: Bangladesh at a Glance
Annex B2: Selected Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
Annex B3: Proposed IDA Lending FY11-14
Annex B3: IFC Investment Operations Program
Annex B4: Indicative Program of Analytical and Advisory Activities
Annex B5: Bangladesh - Social Indicators
Annex B6: Bangladesh - Key Economic Indicators
Annex B7: Bangladesh: Key Exposure Indicators
Annex B8: Operations Portfolio
Annex B8: IFC: Committed and Disbursed Outstanding Investment Portfolio

161
164
165
166
167
168
169
171
172
173

44

ANNEX ONE: PROGRESS TOWARDS MDGs/POVERTY REDUCTION/
SOCIAL WELFARE
Bangladesh’s Progress in Meeting the Millennium Development Goals1
1.
Bangladesh has witnessed significant poverty reduction and social transformation since the
1990s, with girls’ education and women employment being standout achievements. Overall, while goals
related to poverty, universal primary education, gender equality, reducing child mortality, and combating
HIV/AIDS and other diseases will partially or fully be met, lowering maternal mortality and chronic
malnutrition continues to be a challenge.
Goal 1: Eradicate extreme poverty and hunger
2.
Bangladesh made significant progress in reducing poverty. The poverty head-count rate, using
the upper-poverty line, declined at an annual rate of 1.8 percent between 2000 and 2005, to reach 40
percent in 2005. This compares with a rate of 56.6 percent in 1990/91. If this pace is maintained,
Bangladesh can achieve the MDG target of 29 percent head-count rate ahead of 2015. Regional
inequality presents a cause for concern. Between 2000 and 2005, the poverty rate declined rapidly in
Dhaka and Chittagong divisions, while it remained stagnant in Rajshahi and Barisal divisions and
increased in Khulna.
3.
The growth of the employment rate was slow at the national level. In 2006, the adult employment
rate was 58.5 percent. The average annual growth rate of adult employment for the last six years was
only 1.1 percent. As a result, the national adult employment rate in 2015 is estimated to be 65 percent
against the target of full employment. A low female employment rate – despite recent gains – is the main
bottleneck.
4.
The prevalence of underweight children was 46.3 percent at the national level in 2007. During
the 1990s child underweight rates fell at an average rate of 3.7 percent per year. Since then progress has
almost ground to a halt: a meager drop of 1.7 percentage points in 7 years since the turn of the century
(the issue of chronic malnutrition is common to most South Asian countries). Nearly one out of two
children under-five are underweight, and more than one in three is stunted (BDHS 2007). Meanwhile, the
share of the population suffering from calorie deficiency (those who consume less than 1805 kcal per
day) is declining. As of 2005, 19.5 percent of population suffered from calorie deficiency in comparison
to 28 percent in 1991/92. If the present trend continues, Bangladesh may reach a calorie deficiency of 15
percent, very close to the 2015 target of 14 percent.
Goal 2: Achieve universal primary education
5.
Bangladesh took several initiatives following the World Conference on Primary Education in
1990 and the Millennium Summit in 2000. These initiatives have led to progress in all the three areas in
different degrees under Goal 2. Achievement in the area of gender parity has been particularly
noteworthy, although geographical variations exist. Based on the Ministry of Primary and Mass
Education’s administrative data, the net enrolment rate in primary education is on track. The net
enrolment ratio in 2007 was more than 91 percent,2 with dominance of girls’ enrolment. Growth
1

This Annex draws on the references listed at the end, especially the 2008 Progress Report on the MDGs. In an exercise of this
kind, the data are drawn from various sources and are therefore often not comparable over time. In addition, when multiple data
sources are available for a given indicator at a point time in time, either (i) both sources have been cited, or (ii) the more robust
indicator has been reported.
2
The Household and Income Expenditure Survey (2005) data shows NER at 67%.

45

performance in the other two areas - completion rate and adult literacy rate - has been lagging, making it
difficult to achieve the MDG targets. Progress in the completion rate of primary education has been
slow. With the baseline rate in 1990 at only 40 percent, the completion rate of primary education for boys
went up to 51 percent in 2008. In 2015, two-third of the school-going children will complete their
primary education. The completion rate varies disproportionately across the country. It was very low in
Rajshahi Division, with a higher dropout rate in the monga (seasonal poverty)-prone areas and in the
Padma-Jamuna-Brahmaputra basin. The completion rate was comparatively better in Khulna and Barisal
Divisions. A higher completion rate (more than 60 percent) was found in 15 districts in the southern
areas of Bangladesh. The 15-plus year literacy rate – a proxy indicator of the youth literacy rate (15-24
years) – shows that 56 percent of the people were literate in 2007, with adult male literacy rate at 63
percent and adult female literacy rate at 54 percent.
Goal 3: Promote gender equality and empower women
6.
Bangladesh has already achieved gender parity in primary and secondary education at the
national level, although geographical variations exist. The share of females in total enrolments is now
close to 52 percent in primary education, and 55 percent in secondary education, compared to under 40
percent in early 1990s. Gender parity at the tertiary level has also improved. In 2006, the male-female
ratio was 62:38 in the tertiary level enrolment in the public universities, colleges under the National
University and the technical universities/colleges. The estimated trend shows that male-female ratio will
be 55:45 in 2015. Low female enrolment in science education has resulted in a high gender disparity at
the tertiary level.
7.
The recent general elections in 2008 saw an increase in the number of elected women
parliamentarians. Female parliamentarians account for 18.6 percent of total seats (Total number: 64 of
which 19 are elected and 45 are selected by Parliamentarians). Of the current 44 member cabinet, 13.6
percent are women holding important portfolios such as the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Ministry of
Labor and Employment, Ministry of Expatriates Welfare and Overseas Employment, Ministry of
Agriculture, Ministry of Home Affairs, and Ministry of Women and Children’s Affairs under the
leadership of a female Prime Minister. However, wage employment for women in Bangladesh is still very
low despite a recent uptick in women’s employment in the readymade garment sector. Only one woman
out of every seven is engaged in wage employment in the non-agricultural sector. To cope with the
gender challenges, NSAPR II envisages women’s advancement to create a society where men and women
will have equal opportunities in all spheres of life.
Goal 4: Reduce child mortality
8.
Bangladesh has made remarkable progress in reducing under-five mortality since 1991. Between
1991-2007, the under-five mortality rate dropped by more than 50 percent to 65 deaths per 1,000,
outpacing progress in other countries in the region. A similar decline was seen in infant mortality. If this
trend continues, Bangladesh will reach the Goal 4 targets by 2015. High immunization coverage is one of
the factors responsible for the marked reduction in child mortality. There are, however, some lagging
regions such as Sylhet, which have considerably higher mortality rates and require special attention if the
country is to reach the target uniformly by 2015. Under the multi donor supported HNPSP, there are
comprehensive interventions for reducing child mortality in the country.

46

Goal 5: Improve maternal health3
9.
Most of the indicators for achieving the targets under Goal 5 are off track. While data for
maternal mortality rates varies widely, even under the most optimistic scenario, Bangladesh will not
reach the MDG goal of 143 deaths per 100,000 live births. This is due mostly to the slow uptake of
skilled delivery services – which, despite doubling since 1993, remains low at 18 percent and far below
the 50 percent target – as well as low utilization of institutional deliveries (less than 15 percent of
deliveries took place in a health facility in 2007). High fertility rates in some regions, such as Sylhet and
Chittagong, also contribute to the high maternal mortality rate. Other contributing factors include the
early age of marriage and high adolescent fertility rate; by the age of 19, 65 percent of Bangladeshi
women have given birth to their first child.
10.
There are, however, some encouraging signs. The proportion of pregnant mothers who received
at least one Ante Natal Care intervention from a medically trained provider (doctor/nurse, trained
midwife) more than doubled from 28 to 60 percent during 1993-2007. Mothers who received two or
more tetanus toxoid vaccines during pregnancy increased from 49 to 60 percent in the same period.
Goal 6: Combat HIV/AIDS, malaria and other diseases
11.
Bangladesh has performed well in halting communicable diseases (HIV/AIDS, malaria and
tuberculosis), which are under Goal 6. HIV/AIDS data show that the prevalence of HIV infections among
adults is now 0.32 per 100,000 people and it is estimated that it will be 1.3 per 100,000 people by 2015,
which is low compared to other countries in the region. While the disease is concentrated among
Injecting Drug Users in Dhaka, cases are increasingly being detected in other large cities. The prevalence
of malaria and tuberculosis show that the country will be able to halt the two diseases by 2015. In 2008,
the prevalence of malaria was 59 per 100,000 people in Bangladesh and the prevalence of tuberculosis
was 225 per 100,000 people in 2007. There was a significant improvement in the reduction of malarial
deaths in the country over the years. The cure rate for tuberculosis is ninety-two percent, which exceeds
the target.
Goal 7: Ensure environmental sustainability
12.
Bangladesh is largely on track in relation to the Goal 7. It has taken significant steps to
incorporate sustainable environment into policy as well as programs. It has achieved successes in
increasing access to drinking water and reforestation in urban areas through the social forestry
movement. Around half of the area of Bangladesh has basic tree coverage, while approximately 19.2
percent of the land has tree cover of 10 percent and above (defined as the forest coverage of the country).
According to current estimates, the target of high-density tree coverage (20 percent) could be achieved by
2015. However, Bangladesh has less than 0.02 hectares of forest land per person, one of the lowest
forest-people ratios in the world, and, in addition, forests are declining at a rate of nearly 70,000 hectares
per year.
13.
Carbon dioxide and CFC (should perhaps be spelt out?) emissions by Bangladesh are low.
About 82 percent of urban and 72 percent of the rural population use safe drinking water. About 39
percent of the population has access to improved sanitation. Slum settlements have grown rapidly in
recent years. The sanitary condition of urban slums is very poor. Most of the slum dwellers have no
latrines, and only a few have pit or surface latrines. Access to safe water for all is a challenge, given the
impact of arsenic and salinity on safe water availability.

3

The Bangladesh Demographic and Health Survey is the source of information for data not in the table.

47

Goal 8: Develop a global partnership for development
14.
Net Official Development Assistance (ODA) inflow into Bangladesh has declined from $1.4
billion in FY92 to slightly over $1 billion in FY09. On the other hand, the cost of servicing this debt has
declined from 9.8 percent (FY92) to 2.9 percent (FY09) of total exports of goods and services.4 The
Local Consultative Group is a mechanism through which donors coordinate and align their aid in
Bangladesh to improve its effectiveness. The number of ICT users is very low, as only three internet
connections were available per 100 populations in 2008. The government aims to promote ICT in a
comprehensive way, including in hard-to-reach areas, in order to fulfill the government vision of a
“Digital Bangladesh” by 2021.
References:
i)

Millennium Development Goals, Bangladesh Progress Report, 2008, General Economics Division,
Planning Commission, Government of the People’s Republic of Bangladesh.

ii) A Situation Analysis Report on Poverty and Hunger (MDG 1) - Bangladesh, General Economics
Division, Planning Commission, Government of the People’s Republic of Bangladesh & UNDP
Bangladesh.
iii) A Situation Analysis Report on Education (MDG 2) - Bangladesh, General Economics Division,
Planning Commission, Government of the People’s Republic of Bangladesh & UNDP Bangladesh.
iv) A Situation Analysis Report on Gender (MDG 3) - Bangladesh, General Economics Division,
Planning Commission, Government of the People’s Republic of Bangladesh & UNDP Bangladesh.
v) A Situation Analysis Report on Health (MDG 4, 5, 6) - Bangladesh, General Economics Division,
Planning Commission, Government of the People’s Republic of Bangladesh & UNDP Bangladesh.
vi) A Situation Analysis Report on Environment (MDG 7) - Bangladesh, General Economics Division,
Planning Commission, Government of the People’s Republic of Bangladesh & UNDP Bangladesh.
vii) Household Income and Expenditure Survey, 2005
viii) World Development Indicators, Various years, The World Bank.

4

Cost of external debt service expressed as a percentage of the sum of merchandize exports, service exports and workers’
remittances.

48

Bangladesh Millennium Development Goals: Progress at a Glance

Goals, Targets and Indicators (revised)
Goal 1: Eradicate extreme poverty and hunger

Base
Year
1990/91

MidTerm
Report
2007

Current
Status

Target
by
2015

Status

Goal will partially be met

Target 1.A: Halve by 2015 the proportion of people living below the poverty line
1.1 Proportion of population below national
upper poverty line(2122 kcal), percent

56.6

40.0
(2005)

40.0 (2005)

29.0

On track

1.2 Poverty gap ratio

17.0

9.0 (2005)

9.0( 2005)

8.0

On track

1.3 Share of poorest quintile in national
consumption, percent

6.5

5.3 (2005)

5.3 (2005)

na

…

Target 1.B: Achieve full and productive employment and decent work for all, including women and young
people
1.5 Employment to eligible population ratio
48.5
..
58.5(2006)
for all
Not achievable
by 2015
Target 1.C: Halve by 2015 the proportion of people who suffer from hunger
1.8 Prevalence of underweight children underfive years of age (6-59) percent

66.0

47.5
(2004)

46.3(2007)

33.0

Not achievable
by 2015

1.9 Proportion of Population below minimum
level of dietary energy consumption (percent)

28.0

19.5(2005)

19.5(2005)

14.0

May end up
close to the
mark

Goal 2: Achieve universal primary education

Goal will partially be met

Target 2.A: Ensure that, by 2015, children everywhere, boys and girls alike, will be able to complete a full
course of primary schooling
2.1 Net enrollment ratio in primary education,
percent

60.5

87.2
(2005)

2.2 Proportion of pupils starting grade 1 who
reach grade 5, percent

40.7

49.5
(2007)

2.3 Adult literacy rate of 15+ years old
population ( proxy), percent

37.2

54.0
(2006)

56.3(2007)

..

..

..

..

69.9 (2006)

..

..

Adult literacy rate of 15-24 years of population
(Female), percent

91.1 (2007,
MOPME)
(67%, 2005
HIES)
52.0 (2007)

100.0

On track based
on MOPME
admin. data

100.0

Not achievable
by 2015

Goal 3: Promote gender equality and
Goal will probably be met
empower women
Target 3.A: Eliminate gender disparity in primary and secondary education preferably by 2005 and at all levels
by 2015
3.1a Ratio of girls to boys in primary education
(Gender Parity Index= Girls/Boys)

0.83

1.1(2005)

1.08 (2007)

1.0

On track, but
with geographical
variations

49

Bangladesh Millennium Development Goals: Progress at a Glance
Base
Year
0.52

MidTerm
1.0 (2005)

Current
Status
1.08(2006)

Target
by
1.0

3.1c Ratio of girls to boys in tertiary education
(Gender Parity Index= Girls/Boys)

0.37

0.56(2005)

0.61 (2006)

1.0

3.2 Share of women employed in the
nonagricultural sector (percent)

19.1

..

14.6 (2005)

50.0

Not achievable
by 2015

3.3 Proportion of seats held by women in
national parliament (percent)

12.7

..

18.6 (2009)

33.0

Difficult to
judge

Goal 4: Reduce child mortality

Goal will be met

Goals, Targets and Indicators (revised)
3.1b Ratio of girls to boys in secondary education
(Gender Parity Index= Girls/Boys)

Status
On track, but
with
geographical
variations
Not achievable
by 2015

Target 4.A: Reduce by two thirds by 2015 the under 5 mortality rate
4.1 Under 5 mortality rate (per 1,000)

146

88 (2004)

65 (2007)

48

On track

4.2 Infant mortality rate (per 1,000 live births)

92

65 (2004)

52 (2007)

31

On track

4.3 Immunization, measles (percent of children
under 12 months)

54.0

70.3
(2004)

77.2 (2007)

100.0

On track

Goal 5: Improve maternal health

Goal will not be met

143

Not achievable
by 2015

18.0 (2007)

50.05

Not achievable
by 2015

59.0 (2007)

..

..

126 (2007)

..

..

Target 6: Reduce by three quarters, by 2015, the maternal mortality ratio
5.1 Maternal mortality ratio (per 100,000 live
births)

574

320 (2001)

5.2 Births attended by skilled health staff
(percent of total)

9.5

13.4
(2004)

Target 5.B: Achieve, by 2015, universal access to reproductive health.
5.3 Contraceptive prevalence rate , percent

39.9

5.4 Adolescent fertility rate, per 1000 women

140

5.5a Antenatal care coverage (at least one visit),
percent
5.5b Antenatal care coverage (at least four visits),
percent

27.5
(1993)
5.5
(1993)

55.9
(2004)
15.9
(2004)

60.3 (2007)

100.00

will be close

20.6 (2007)

100

Not achievable
by 2015

5.6 Unmet need for family planning, %

19.4
(1993)

11.3
(2004)

17.1 (2007)

5

58.1
(2004)
135 (2004)

..

..

Bangladesh Maternal Health Strategy 2001 by Govt. of Bangladesh.

50

Bangladesh Millennium Development Goals: Progress at a Glance
Goals, Targets and Indicators (revised)
Goal 6: Combat HIV/AIDS, malaria, and
other diseases

Base
MidCurrent
Year
Term
Status
Goal will largely be met

Target
by

Status

Target 6.A: Have halted by 2015 and begin to reverse the spread of HIV/AIDS
6.1 HIV prevalence among population (per
100,000 population)

0.005

6.2 Condom use rate, percent

3.0

..

0.319 (2007)

Halting

On track

4.2 (2004)

4.5 (2007)

Low Use

..

22 (2006)

No
target
..

6.3 Proportion of population aged 15-24 years
with comprehensive correct knowledge of
HIV/AIDS, percent

Low
Knowledge

Target 6.C: Have halted by 2015 and begin to reverse the incidence of malaria and other major diseases
6.6a Prevalence of Malaria per 100,000
population

43
(2000)

34 (2005)

59 (2008)

Halting

On track

6.6b Death rate associated with Malaria per
100,000 population

0.37
(2000)

0.35(2005)

0.11(2008)

Halting

On track

..

89 (2008)

..

6.7 Proportion of Children under-5 sleeping
under insecticide treated bed nets [13 Malaria
prone districts] percent

..

Insufficient
evidence

6.9a Prevalence of TB per 100,000 population

264
(1990)

406 (2005)

225(2007)

Halting

On track

6.9b Death rate associated with TB per 100,000
population

76
(1990)

47 (2005)

45 (2007)

Halving

On track

6.10a Detection rate of TB under DOTS, percent

21
(1994)

46 (2004)

72 (2008)

Sustain

On track

6.10b Cure rate of TB under DOTS, percent

73
(1994)

85 (2004)

92 (2008)

Sustain

On track

Goal 7: Ensure environmental sustainability

Insufficient data

Target 7.A: Integrate the principles of sustainable development into country policies and programs and reverse
the loss of environmental resources
Target 7.B: Reduce biodiversity loss, achieving, by 2010, a significant reduction in the rate of loss
7.1 Proportion of land area covered by forest
(percent) (tree coverage)

9.0

…

19.2 (2007)
Tree
density>10%

7.2 CO2 emissions, metric tons per capita

0.14

0.3 (2006)

0.30 (2007)

20
Tree
Density
>70%
..

7.3 Consumption of ozone-depleting CFCs in
metric tons

195.0

196.2
(2006)

155 (2007)

0.0

On track

Insufficient
data
On track

51

Bangladesh Millennium Development Goals: Progress at a Glance
Goals, Targets and Indicators (revised)

Base
Year

MidTerm

Current
Status

Target
by

7.4 Proportion of fish stocks within safe
biological limits

Insufficient
data

7.5 Proportion of total water resources used,
percent
7.6 Proportion of terrestrial and marine areas
protected, percent

Status

1.64

..

6.6 (2000)

..

1.68 (2007)

Insufficient
data
5.0

Not achievable
by 2015

7.7 Proportion of species threatened with
extinction

Insufficient
data

Target 7.C: Halve, by 2015, the proportion of people without sustainable access to safe drinking water and
sanitation
7.8 Proportion of population using an improved
drinking water sources, percent

7.9 Proportion of population using an improved
sanitation facility, percent

..

85.2 (2008,
MICS)
80.0 (2008,
JMP)
80 (2008,
MICS)
53 (2008,
JMP)

89.0

On track

70.0

On track

Target 7.D: By 2020 have achieved a significant improvement in the lives of at least 100 million slum dwellers
7.10 Proportion of urban population living in
slums, percent
Goal 8: Develop a global partnership for
development

...

..

7.8 (2001)

Insufficient
data

Target 8.A: Developed further an open, rule-based, predictable, non discriminatory trading and financial
system
Target 8.B: Address the special needs of the least developed countries
Target 8.C: Address the special needs of landlocked developing countries and small developing states
Target 8.D: Deal comprehensively with the debt problems of developing countries through national and
international measures in order to make debt sustainable in the long term
8.1a Net ODA received by Bangladesh (million
US$ )

1240

1000 ( 200809)

..

..

8.1b Net ODA received by Bangladesh, as
percentage of OECD/DAC donors' GNI

5.7

0.2 (2006)

0.2 (2006)

..

..

8.2 Proportion of total bilateral sector-allocable
ODA to basic social services, percent

42 (2005)

42 (2005)

..

..

8.3 Proportion of bilateral ODA of OECD/DAC
donors that is untied (received by Bangladesh) ,
percent
8.7 Average tariffs imposed by developed
countries on agricultural products, textiles and
clothing from developing country (Bangladesh),

82(2005)

82(2005)

..

..

12-16
(2006)

12-16 (2006)

..

..

52

Bangladesh Millennium Development Goals: Progress at a Glance
Goals, Targets and Indicators (revised)

Base
Year

MidTerm

Current
Status

Target
by

Status

percent
8.12 Debt service as a percentage of exports of
11.0
4.1 (2005- 2.9 (2008..
goods and services
06)
09)
Target 8.F: In cooperation with the private sector, make available the benefits of new technologies, specially
information and communication
8.14 Telephone lines per 100 population

0.2

13.6
(2006)

8.15 Cellular subscribers per 100 population
8.16 Internet users (per 100 people)

0.0

0.2 (2006)

0.92 (2008)

...

30.8 (2008)

..

3.4 (2008)

...

Low Users

Low Users

Based on UNDP MDG monitoring at http://www.undp.org.bd/mdgs.php.
Source: Indicators 1.1, 1.2, 1.3 & 1.9 (HIES, 2005); Indicator 1.5 (LFS, 2006); Indicators 1.8 (BDHS, NIPORT); Indicator 2.1, Indicator 2.2
(DPE, 2007); Indicator 2.3 (SVRS, 2007); Indicator 2.3a (MICS, 2006); Indicators 3.1 (BANBEIS), Indicator 3.2, 3.3 (Year Book, BBS);
Indicator 4.1, Indicator 4.2, Indicator 4.3( BDHS, NIPORT); Indicator 5.1 (BMMS, NIPORT); Indicator 5.2, Indicator 5.3, Indicator 5.4,
Indicator 5.5a, Indicator 5.5b, Indicator 5.6 (BDHS, NIPORT); Indicator 6.1, Indicator 6.6a, Indicator 6.6b (DG Health); Indicator 6.9a, Indicator
6.9b, Indicator 6.10a, Indicator 10b (NTP, DG Health); Indicator 6.2 (BDHS, NIPORT); Indicator 6.3 (NASP); Indicator 7.1, Indicator 7.6 (DoF);
Indicator 7.2, Indicator 7.3 (DoE); Indicator 7.8, Indicator 7.9 (Multiple Indicators Cluster Survey; Joint Monitoring Program); Indicator 7.10
(Pop Census, BBS); Indicator 8.1, Indicator 8.2, Indicator 8.12 (ERD); Indicator 8.14 (BBS); Indicator 8.14, Indicator 8.15, Indicator 8.16
(BTRC).

53

ANNEX TWO: STRENGTHENING GOVERNANCE

A.

The Governance Context: Issues and Approaches

1.

Bangladesh has strong elements of democracy, but many diagnostics of the performance of
public institutions point to significant weaknesses. Power has alternated relatively peacefully between
the two major parties through the electoral process for most of the period since 1991. The recent
December 2008 elections were largely considered free and fair, with extraordinary effort undertaken to
ensure franchise to citizens through the establishment of a reliable voter registry. Bangladesh also has
one of the most extensive and vibrant non-governmental sectors in the world, with more focus on directly
providing services to people and lesser on an advocacy role. However, these democratic elements have
not led to measurable improvement in public sector performance. Bangladesh ranks in the bottom third in
global governance indices such as the Doing Business rankings, the WBI indicators for government
effectiveness and rule of law, as well as Transparency International’s Corruption Perceptions Index (see
Figure 1). Reviews of the country’s governance, most notably by Bangladeshi experts such as BRAC
University’s State of Governance Reports, have noted entrenched problems in many key public
institutions.
Figure 1. State of Governance in Bangladesh and Regional
and Per Capita Income Comparators
Corruption
Perception
Index, ranking
Doing
converted to
Business,
Government
percentile,
ranking
Effectiveness,
Rule of Law,
Transparency
converted to
GNI Per Capita, USD
percentile,
percentile,
International
percentile, IFC
PPP method, World
WBI 2008
WBI 2008
2009
2010
Bank 2008
Bangladesh

22.7

27.3

22.8

35.0

1440

India

53.6

16.7

53.3

27.3

2960

Pakistan

25.6

19.1

22.8

53.6

2700

Nepal

24.2

24.9

20.6

32.8

1120

Indonesia

47.4

28.7

43.9

33.3

3830

Vietnam

45.5

41.6

33.3

49.2

2700

Nigeria

13.3

11.5

27.8

31.7

1940

Kenya

32.2

17.7

18.9

48.1

1570

2.
Bangladesh’s performance in the Bank’s Country Policy and Institutional Assessment
(CPIA) ratings has remained above the average for IDA recipients. The consistent performance on
CPIA ratings underscores the stability and resilience of the country’s policy and institutional framework
throughout periods of political transition and natural and economic crises (Figure 2a). Figure 2b shows
that Bangladesh has performed consistently better than the IDA average and, as a result of reforms under
the Caretaker Government in 2007-8, surpassed the SAR average in 2008. Moreover, Bangladesh has
consistently been rated higher on the CPIA criteria in the economic management cluster than the SAR and
IDA average. At the same time, Bangladesh’s scores for the specific cluster measuring public sector
management and institutions are at par with the IDA average and slightly below the SAR average.

54

Figures 2a and 2b: CPIA Ratings

3.

Despite recent progress, Bangladesh’s system of political governance creates strong
incentives that run counter to the interests of improving governance. Internal and external
commentators, including IGS, stress that Bangladesh’s political system continues to be marked by an
extreme form of ‘winner-takes-all’ competition between the major parties and a culture of confrontation
that excludes political opposition from its legitimate place in a democratic polity. This political system
has encouraged the ruling party to subordinate state institutions to its own interests rather than seeking to
build effective institutions with internal checks and balances. This partisanship has affected personnel
policies in many State institutions, most notably in the senior civil service, the judiciary, and in law
enforcement agencies, but also at other levels, including non-governmental professional associations.
The problem has been compounded by the lack of internal democracy within the political parties where
the chairpersons enjoy significant authority over all operations. Despite recent legislation which seeks to
reform the internal workings of political parties, power has remained centralized in the hands of party
leadership.

4.
Parliament provides few institutional restraints on executive power, though the current
convocation is marginally better performing. Although Bangladesh’s legislative framework contains
checks and balances, in practice the leadership of whichever party takes office is pre-eminent over all
institutions. Parliament does not enforce accountability from the executive in large part because the
opposition has tended to be marginalized from oversight and the legislative process. There is a
constitutional bar on Members of Parliament voting against his or her party (or even abstaining from a
vote) which removes any restraint on a sitting Prime Minister arising from parliamentarians “crossing the
floor”. The current, 9th Parliament has proven to be moderately more effective as a policy-making
institution, with rapidly formed and more active standing committees and some level of opposition
participation in committees and plenary sessions.
5.

The justice system is subject to executive interference. Rather than being strengthened and
consolidated, significant safeguards of judicial independence in the 1972 Constitution have been diluted
over the years through constitutional amendments as political actors have sought to consolidate political
and economic power. As in many low income countries, the executive retains substantial de facto control
over the judiciary through the system of appointments to the High Court and administration of the court
system. Judicial integrity and quality have been further degraded due to the drastic fall in the real and
relative value of judicial salaries and benefits and the failure to preserve non-material incentives (such as
status and prestige) for judicial service. Excessive delays seriously compromise the ability of the court
system to enforce contracts and property rights: a civil case may on average take five years to resolve
55

between filing and the decision of a district court. The delays reflect the lack of modern case management; weak court administration; and deliberate delays on the part of litigants (and their lawyers) to avoid
resolution when their cases are weak. Contract enforcement is rarely pursued in the courts, and often
occurs through reliance on criminal elements. The ability of the Bangladeshi judicial system to enforce
its own judgments is poor.

6.
Bangladesh has an institutional framework for countering corruption and has seen some
improvement in global corruption perception indicators from a very low base. Bangladesh has anticorruption legislation in place, ratified the UN Convention Against Corruption, and established an ACC
endowed with significant independence in investigating and prosecuting corruption. Under the previous
military-backed CTG,,the ACC played an active role in prosecuting cases against a large number of
politicians and bureaucrats, including the leaders of the country’s main political parties, though its
effectiveness was eventually undercut as deals were made with the major political parties to ensure their
participation in the December 2008
Figure 3: Changes in Transparency International’s
election. These earlier steps contriCorruption Perceptions Index, 2005-2009
buted to improving scores on inter3.5
national corruption perceptions indices
Bangladesh
3.3
in contrast to static or declining
3.1
rankings among comparators by
India
2.9
region and per capita GNI (see Figure
Pakistan
2.7
3).
2.5

Nepal

7.

2.3
However,
the
current
Indonesia
Government’s actions have under2.1
Vietnam
cut progress on prosecution of
1.9
corruption. Although the current
1.7
Nigeria
Government has stated commitment to
1.5
Kenya
having an independent ACC, it has
2005
2008
2009
moved to weaken the institution. In
April 2010 the Government endorsed
amendments to the ACC Act that will substantially limit the Commission’s autonomy and ability to
investigate corruption. If, as expected, Parliament adopts these amendments, the role of the Commission
will be similar to that of the previous ineffective Anti-Corruption Bureau. Furthermore, over the course
of the past year of elected Government, the ACC itself has launched far fewer corruption cases than it had
during the CTG period. A Government commission has recommended the withdrawal of thousands of
corruption-related cases, almost entirely involving Awami League members. Finally, the courts
themselves have either delayed or dismissed numerous corruption cases in the past year. The current
Government has emphasized that it seeks to fight corruption primarily through preventive measures,
particularly through use of ICT to reduce opportunities for rent-seeking by officials.

8.

Bangladesh remains one of the most centralized countries in the world. The central
bureaucracy continues to be responsible for most public service delivery at all levels of government.
Local government expenditures have never been more than 4% of overall public expenditures, less than
the budget for core operations of the central Ministry for Local Government, Rural Development and
Cooperatives. There are four tiers of sub-national administration, with locally elected councils or boards
in the two lowest tiers and in municipalities and the country’s six major cities. Although the intergovernmental legal framework was recently improved and the lowest tier – the Union Parishads – have
instituted mechanisms for accountability, local governments are constrained in responding to citizens
needs because they lack resources, major service responsibilities, and human resources. Members of
Parliament exercise significant local power through their ability to influence centralized bureaucracy,
direct special funds to specific projects, and in the case of the second lowest tier, the upazilas, formal
56

‘advisory’ authority over local government. Centralization of power and consequent weak local
accountability has contributed to poor service delivery at the local level.

9.
The poor quality of public administration continues to be a significant obstacle to effective
public sector performance. Public administration is characterized by weak policy co-ordination and
implementation capacity, a poor incentive structure, serious capacity deficits, ineffective public financial
management, and widespread corruption. The bureaucratic culture emphasizes process over results or
outcomes, with opacity often buttressing patron-client relationships. Weakness in the ability to implement
policy has led to persistent inability to carry out ADPs. Most important, as IGS and other commentators
note that there has been increasing politicization of the bureaucracy. This trend continued under the
current Government, which transferred hundreds of senior civil servants soon after taking office.
Politicization has led to a civil service where partisan affiliation rather than merit has become an
important criterion for recruitment and career progression within the career service.
10.
Public Financial Management (PFM) has improved in recent years, but further work is
needed. Improvements have included the adoption of more strategic budgeting through a Medium Term
Budget Framework, the passage of a Public Money and Budget Management Act in 2008 which
consolidated a government budget policy framework, computerization of accounts, and some
improvement in the conduct of audits. The government has a sound Public Procurement Act and Rules,
though these were in part undercut with recent changes for low value purchases that waived qualification
requirements and allowed for a lottery. At the same time there are ongoing shortcomings in terms of
financial oversight with the Parliament and the Comptroller and Auditor General de facto not exerting
significant control over the budget system. Perhaps the greatest problem is the continuing weakness in
revenue administration which deprives the State of resources it needs for investment and provision of
higher levels of public services. Recognizing these continuing weaknesses, the current Government has
committed to a comprehensive program to build a more effective PFM system over the next five years.
B.

The Government’s Approach to Addressing Governance Issues
Diagnostics on the State of Governance in Bangladesh
BRAC University’s IGS produces an annual report on the State of Governance that is a major diagnostic tool
for review of State institutions. First produced in 2006, the State of Governance draws on expert analysis of
the legal framework, performance of public institutions, and a perception survey concerning quality of
service delivery, corruption, and institutional performance. Together with other development partners the
World Bank has provided capacity building to IGS for this report and other initiatives as part of its
continuing long-term strategy of promoting demand for good governance in civil society. In addition to the
State of Governance Report, there are annual surveys conducted by Transparency International Bangladesh
and development partners such as the Asia Foundation which capture public perceptions on a range of
governance issues.
The World Bank also assesses governance through its own instruments including the annual Country Policy
and Institutional Assessment (CPIA), Doing Business reports, and the World Bank Institute’s Governance
Indicators which provide year-on-year comparisons. The IFC conducts a quarterly business confidence
survey. The Bank has also conducted a Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability (PEFA) review in
2005 as well as a Public Expenditure and Institutional Review (PEIR) completed in 2009. The Bank
previously published two comprehensive Institutional and Governance Reviews in 1996 and 2002, the
conclusions of which remain broadly valid today.

57

11.
The Government gives priority to improving governance as an underlying strategy to
achieve better development outcomes. The Awami League’s Election Manifesto emphasized the need
to change the performance of the State in order to bring services to the people’s doorsteps, including
continuation of several governance reforms initiated by the preceding CTG. The Awami League
Government has followed through on its commitments with some exceptions, most notably in the area of
justice sector reforms. Bangladesh’s NSAPR II for 2010-2012 further stresses that enhancing governance
is a cross-cutting supporting strategy. The NSAPR II contains a comprehensive list of 10 areas where
governance improvements are needed:
1.
2.
3.
4.

5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.

Improving the Parliamentary process to hold Government accountable, including on PFM;
Strengthening local government;
Reforming and strengthening public services through civil service reform;
Reforming the legal and judicial system, primarily through improved court administration,
changes in the appointment system, transparency, increased access to women and the poor; and
appointment of an Ombudsman;
Promoting e-governance;
Combating corruption through preventive and measures and sanctions;
Ensuring human rights;
Accessing information;
Improving project implementation capacity; and
Improving sectoral governance.

12.
The Government’s governance agenda and corresponding policy matrix are broad and
ambitious. The NSAPR II’s listing of areas for governance improvements reflects a comprehensive
assessment of shortcomings and a broad commitment to better governance as a cross-cutting strategy for
growth and poverty reduction. Given Bangladesh’s record with governance reforms over the past two
decades and the difficulties encountered worldwide for developing countries to carry out comprehensive
governance reforms, implementing this wide-ranging agenda will be challenging. Despite extensive
diagnosis of these governance shortcomings, including in the previous NSAPR, prior Governments have
been unable to expend the resources and political capital needed to carry out substantive changes in many
of the identified problem areas. It has proven difficult to design and implement comprehensive reform
programs. The NSAPR II also leaves open questions of the specific steps that the Government will
undertake in carrying out reforms. The Strategy’s policy matrix in most cases identifies general
performance goals, such as ensuring effective service delivery, without articulating specific institutional
or procedural changes.
13.
There are a number of promising areas where Government has taken action to improve
governance, most notably in use of ICT. The current Government’s signature initiative has been to
promote Digital Bangladesh as a means of improving efficiency of public service delivery, reduce
opportunities for corruption and other abuses, and increase transparency and ultimately public trust. It is
rolling out local ICT centers at the grassroots level, implementing e-filing of tax returns, and expanded
use of mobile phones as a means of delivering important public information to citizens. The issuance of
national voter cards to 85 million citizens in the past Parliamentary elections was a popular step
undertaken to enfranchise citizens. The Government plans to enhance the system to have a national ID
database that will serve as a platform for designing, implementing, and tracking public service delivery.
The Government has also passed policies on ICT and is working to develop common standards to
underpin dozens of ongoing e-governance initiatives.
14.
The Government has implemented better public financial management practices and is
taking steps to empower local government, though there remains much to be done. The Government
has adhered to sound budgeting as per the principles of the 2008 Public Money and Budget Management
58

Act, including much improved public reporting by the Ministry of Finance, strengthening of audit
procedures, and more engaged Parliamentary oversight of budget execution. The Government has agreed
to conduct a Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability review to measure progress and implement
better practice. The Government has also modestly strengthened local government through more
predictable and reliable intergovernmental transfers and some clarification of functional responsibilities.
It has recognized that such strengthening is needed in order to ‘deliver services to the people’s doorsteps’.
At the same time, there are powerful interests aligned against decentralization, making reforms in this
area a case of incremental steps and not without reversals.
C.

Relevance of the Bank’s Strategy to Addressing Governance

15.

The country context prompts the Bank to be selective in choosing areas for engagement on
strengthening governance based on Government commitment. Alignment with priorities of decisionmakers in Government is critical for achieving governance reforms. Although the Government’s wideranging governance agenda is laudable, the Bank assesses that the likelihood of achieving changes in the
different areas will vary depending on Government’s interest in reforms and its willingness to take on
resistance to changes from vested interests. A key factor that will determine the Government’s interest is
the extent of demand for good governance that citizens are able to exert. In some areas the balance of
Government interest and resistance favors reforms. For instance, there is demonstrably strong
Government interest in using ICT for efficiency and anti-corruption purposes and little articulated
resistance. On the other extreme, there appears to be little appetite for structural judicial reforms (the
NSAPR II focuses on other aspects of the judiciary) and long-standing political imperatives to retain
influence by the executive, limiting space for reform. On the basis of this selective approach, the Bank
will focus on four areas of core governance: continued support for more effective and accountable public
financial management; support for e-governance; support for implementation of the Right to Information
Act; and support for improved local service delivery and enhanced local government. The Bank will
maintain dialogue on other governance policy issues in order to investigate and promote possible
additional areas of engagement during the CAS. The primary vehicle for this dialogue and the
development of additional actions will be an Institutional and Governance Review.

16.
The emphasis on working in areas of Government commitment is also one of the lessons
learned from prior work in Bangladesh. The last CAS placed issues of governance ‘center stage’,
targeting a large number of areas for assistance based on the importance of the issues. This approach
proved overly ambitious as Government in several cases proved unready to carry out substantive changes
proposed by the Bank and other stakeholders in the reform process. The current CAS seeks to reflect a
more realistic approach in working towards more achievable results improving governance and
performance of public institutions.

59

ANNEX THREE: BANGLADESH CAS COMPLETION REPORT
OVERVIEW
1.
The FY06 CAS period was marked by dramatic internal and external events and shocks for
Bangladesh: three changes in government, severe flooding and cyclones in 2007, a global food crisis
followed by a global recession. Inter-political party rivalry took serious turn in 2006, potentially plunging
the country into chaos. The caretaker government (CTG) assumed power, promising to hold a fair
election. It initiated many reforms and delivered on its promise to hold a free and fair election in
December 2008. The election produced a landslide win for the Awami League. It is a tribute to the
country’s resilience, and to the tradition of sound macro-economic management, that annual economic
growth averaged over 6% through this turbulence. Aggregate fiscal and monetary discipline was
maintained. Inflation declined and the balance of payments improved reflecting strong growth in
garments and record inward remittances. The Completion Report assessed overall progress during the
CAS period as moderately satisfactory.
CAS Outcomes
2.
Under the Investment Climate pillar, IDA Development Support Credits contributed to macroeconomic stability. SOE losses declined, benefitting in part from falling petroleum and fertilizer prices
and administered price adjustments reduction in workforce in some major loss makers, including Biman
the national airlines. Trade protection was lowered; regulatory reforms reduced the cost of doing
business, with particularly strong gains in the automation of customs at Chittagong port and the related
sharp reduction in container dwell time and turnaround time for ships, and bonded warehouse licensing. A
DFID-EU funded BICF, managed by IFC, has since its establishment in 2007, supported regulatory
reform and the modernization of the economic zones regime, underpinned by a program of institutional
capacity building, particularly within government. A planned privatization of Rupali Bank came to
naught, but progress in corporatizing the remaining three state-owned commercial banks (SCBs) helped
improve their performance. The Government is now planning to off-load part of the shares of SCBs
through the local stock market. Reforms in the energy sector included establishing an Energy Regulatory
Commission, corporatizing public utilities, and enhancing transparency in procurement and the selection
of IPPs. Efforts to initiate governance reforms in roads and highways did not produce the anticipated
results.
3.
Under the Empowering the Poor pillar, vertical programs under a Bank-managed health SWAp
made progress both in terms of efficiency and equity, but utilization of public health facilities remains
poor reflecting a number of governance-related factors. In primary education, access indicators improved
and a large backlog of teacher vacancies was filled with improved recruitment policy and procedures, but
quality of education and learning levels remain low. Secondary education quality and access for the poor
improved through linking government subventions to private school performance, registration and
certification of teachers through national testing, textbook and curriculum reform. Bank efforts to help
strengthen local governance are beginning to yield results after an initial slow start. A Social Investment
Program is enhancing the voice of the very poor. The mandate of IFC’s SEDF, the $40 million, 6 year
program (2002-08) was to promote growth and poverty reduction through SME development and
employment generation.
4.
Under Core Governance, while public financial management reforms made slow progress, an
agenda for public financial management reforms has been adopted. Despite government efforts to boost
public revenues, Bank support for reforms in tax policy and administration proved largely ineffective. A
landmark Procurement Act has contributed to greater transparency in public procurement. However, the
60

Bank’s partnership with IGS on institutions of accountability is helping to build a constituency for reform
that needs nurturing. DFID and Bank (WBI) support for a civil society led initiative for a RTI law
produced results supported by the new government, a major achievement. Overall progress during the
CAS period is regarded as moderately satisfactory.
5.
The Bank Group’s contribution to these outcomes is not easy to measure. Credit for some of the
gains must go to reforms initiated by the Government, vigorous civil society support for reforms, and the
Bank’s key DPs. But the Bank Group got many things right. The CAS rebranded Bangladesh as a
country with surprisingly good development outcomes despite low governance and opened the way for
reengaging in neglected sectors like agriculture, water and energy. The strong CAS focus on governance
positioned the Bank to respond to the ensuing crisis in governance. The Bank reacted quickly and flexibly
to rapid changes in the country context. Timely development policy loans contributed to sustaining
growth and macro-economic stability. The BICF which has provided long-term as well as just-in-time
support to the GoB to improve the investment climate and build institutional capacity, is emerging as a
good practice case of donor collaboration, and engagement with government and other stake-holders.
6.
How did the Bank Group’s CAS play out in terms of mainstreaming the governance agenda
across sectors and changing the way the Bank does its business? In the four priority areas for
mainstreaming governance, complex institutional reforms in infrastructure were initiated for a more
transparent and efficient development of the energy sector. These are still in a nascent stage and need
continuing strong political commitment. In Roads and Highways the government has lacked appetite for
longer term reforms recommended in the Bank’s Operational Risk Assessment. Continued INT
investigations discouraged the Bank from new project preparations with Roads and Highways. Continued
risks in the sector discouraged the Bank from new project preparations with Roads and Highways. In
local governance, the Bank’s program may have overestimated implementation capabilities and needed
adjustment before progress was made. In public financial management, success in procurement reform
was clearly a high point in the Bank program, but progress could have been faster in other PFM areas
given the CTG’s support. In revenue mobilization, despite a strong push by the CTG, the problems at the
National Bureau of Revenue (NBR) proved insurmountable, and in the end, the Bank drew a blank. In the
areas where there has been progress, the Government will need to stay the course for reform continuity.
7.
Beyond this strategic governance agenda, many task teams took the objective of mainstreaming
governance seriously. The strong governance focus in the secondary education sector reforms and
regulatory reforms led by IFC stand out. Sector teams also began to selectively use political economy
analysis, although late in the CAS cycle, so results are not clear. There was progress on strengthening
demand for better governance, in the local governance project, in the Social Investment Program, and in
the Bank’s partnership with IGS on institutions of accountability. The enactment of a RTI Act represents
a huge potential opportunity to advance the agenda on strengthening demand for good governance.
Overall, beneficiary involvement in project design remained limited to a few interventions.
8.
Changing the way the Bank does its business called for strategic staffing, strengthening
institutional processes and cultural change within the Country Team. This is a work in progress. Two
governance advisors were added to the team and enabled the broader approach to governance. But human
resource planning needed a long term strategic vision, and there were large gaps between staff
reassignment and location of replacements, and a failure to position international staff in the field in
sectors such as energy and local governance resulting in high costs to the policy dialogue. Lack of
appropriate staff and adequate resources were particularly costly in the context of a transformative CAS
that was raising the bar across the board, mainstreaming governance across sectors, and reforming Bank
processes. The important innovation of an Operational Risk Mitigation group to facilitate mainstreaming
the governance agenda had a limited mandate of assessing risks of pipeline operations, and performed
61

below its potential. Going forward, it will need to be more structured in its approach, and ensure that
governance risks are addressed at all stages of the project cycle.
Lessons Learned
9.
Key lessons for the upcoming CAS include the following: Governance and institutional reforms
are highly complex and long term in nature. Reforms take time, are subject to frequent setbacks and
require a long term commitment on the Bank’s part. Helping build coalitions in support of reforms is
essential to ensuring their sustainability. This is both staff and resource intensive, and will require a
regular outreach to a wide range of stakeholders. Budgetary support through development policy credits
can be used effectively in ensuring government commitment to macro-economic stability and policy
reforms. It will also require strong engagement with the Government, and will need long term TA to
ensure steadier progress in national systems including public financial management reforms.
10.
Managing corruption and fiduciary risk requires careful planning and management. It is important
to retain a strong focus on results rather than on inputs, to go for simpler project design, more robust risk
assessments and greater upfront investment in implementation arrangements. Risk mitigation needs to
precede rather than be part of project preparation so as to keep open the option of staying away if there is
lack of commitment to reforms, and to better design operations to reduce risk. Long delays in completing
investigations on corruption and putting the burden of reducing corruption on the supervision process
risks jeopardizing Bank country relations. Strengthening beneficiary involvement in project preparation
and implementation and ensuring project design enhances accountability to local institutions rather than
the Bank will be critical to avoid these risks.
11.
Country assistance strategies that are transformative in the sense of a significant change in
directions and scaling up of effort need to be adequately resourced and staffed. In the Bangladesh
context, this in particular calls for strategic and sufficiently long term planning of replacements and new
appointments for field-based international staff and providing the resources to help build local reform
coalitions that can then sustain a reform process. Monitoring and evaluation systems, including regular
progress reports, are essential to a results oriented CAS and to better manage fiduciary risk.

62

BANGLADESH CAS COMPLETION REPORT
Date of CAS:
Period covered:
Prepared by:
Date of Report:

April 12, 2006
FY06-FY09
Thomas Buckley and K. Sarwar Lateef
February 1, 2010

A. COUNTRY CONTEXT
1.
The period covered by the CAS under review for Bangladesh (World Bank, 2006) was marked
by dramatic internal and external events and shocks. There were three changes of government, major
floods in the July-September 2007 period that affected 13 million people in 44 of the country’s 64
districts, and a Category IV tropical cyclone (named Sidr) that struck Bangladesh in November 2007,
affecting some 9 million people in 30 districts. World Bank estimates put the cost of the floods at around
$1 billion while that of the cyclone at just under $0.5 billion. External shocks, including the sharp rise in
global food and commodity prices in 2008, contributed to a severe food crisis. And towards the end of the
period, the global economic crisis began to affect Bangladesh’s principal sources of foreign exchange:
garments and remittances.
2.
The major political crises and changes had their origins in the unhealthy state of political
competition in Bangladesh. As noted in the CAS, the concentration of political power in two major
political parties dominated by rival families discourages the emergence of intra-party democracy. A firstpast-the-post system of elections contributes to large stable majorities, reducing the importance of
Parliament in the absence of a sizable opposition. Bangladesh’s highly centralized state leaves little stake
in the system for losing political parties. Opposition thus takes the form of street power, political agitation
and hartals (strikes).
3.
Lack of trust between the two political parties led to an unusual Constitutional innovation in
1996: a neutral election umpire. When parliament’s term came to an end, a “Non-Party caretaker
government” took over to conduct the election within 90 days. The Caretaker system worked well for the
1996 and 2001 elections. But in 2006 it broke down over controversies relating to the appointment of the
Chief Advisor, opposition objections to the Election Commissioner, and a flawed voter list. This led to
wide-scale protests and a political impasse. As the crisis deepened, the President declared a state of
emergency, and appointed a new CTG with a former Governor of Bangladesh Bank as Chief Advisor.
The new CTG postponed elections pending reform of the electoral system.
4.
The caretaker government delivered on its principal mandate by conducting on December 29,
2008 what was widely judged as Bangladesh’s most free and fair election. A digitized electoral roll and
voter photo identity cards contributed to a record turnout. The Awami League won by a landslide. The
caretaker government also instituted a number of reforms, passing some 122 ordinances, focussing
particularly on governance and anti-corruption, which were subject to ratification by a newly elected
parliament. It ran an aggressive anti-corruption program through a strengthened ACC, arresting large
numbers of people, including leaders of both major political parties. And on completion of its term, it
handed over to the newly-elected government a relatively stable macro-economic situation with relatively
strong growth, declining inflation, as global commodity prices eased, and a strong balance of payments.
5.
The caretaker government’s term in office was not without controversy. Early in its term in
office, it gave the impression that it was interested in changing the political rules of the game as well as
bringing reforms. The arrest of the two main political leaders, accompanied in the second half of 2007 by
63

rising food prices due to floods, the cyclone, and rising international commodity prices, began to erode
the CTG’s initial high popularity. By early 2008 the CTG began to shift gear and focus on its principal
role of ensuring a free and fair election.
6.
The Awami League has come to power with a vast majority of seats in the parliament. Its
manifesto has promised a range of reforms and development initiatives. While the sustainability of the
many reforms instituted during the CTG’s term in office was being tested, the parliament has so far
passed as law 65 ordinances of the 122 ordinances promulgated by the CTG, including the RTI Act.
7.
It is due to the remarkable resilience of Bangladesh’s economy and its people that despite
severe internal and external shocks its economy continued to show strong and broad-based growth.
However, the pace of poverty reduction may have slowed due to the rise in food prices and the impact of
global recession. Moreover, Bangladesh continues to make progress towards meeting key MDGs.
B.

LONGER TERM STRATEGIC GOALS

8.
The World Bank Group CAS drew on Bangladesh’s 2005 NSAPR. The NSAPR was prepared in
2005 following extensive consultations with civil society, academia, members of Parliament, and DPs.
The Government took the process seriously, managing preparation with due attention (World Bank,
2005). The principal long term goal of the NSAPR was to substantially reduce poverty and improve the
quality of life for the average citizen. The strategy laid out an agenda around the policy triangle of propoor growth, human development and governance.
9.
The Bank Group’s assistance strategy put governance at center stage. Governance was to be the
core focus for the two pillars of the strategy: improving the investment climate and empowering the poor,
while the CAS program also aimed at helping strengthen core governance.
Progress in Improving the Investment Climate
10.
Despite severe domestic and external shocks, the CAS period under review saw Bangladesh’s
economy grow at an average rate of 6.3 per cent (See Annex A). Growth was broad based, cutting
across all major sectors and benefiting from robust domestic and external demand. Inflation rose from 6.5
percent in FY05 to almost 10 percent in FY08 reflecting mainly a rise in food inflation, before slowing to
an estimated 6.7 percent in FY09. Surging garment exports and the rapid growth of remittances from $3.8
billion in FY05 to $9.7 billion in FY09, enabled foreign exchange reserves to more than double to $7.5
billion at end-June, 2009. External debt as a percentage of GDP fell by over six percentage points to
23.4%. Dependence on aid continued to lessen with aid flows in FY09, a modest 1.8% of GDP.
However, the development budget is still predominantly aid dependent. Moreover, the global downturn
poses a threat to garments exports and remittances, the two crown jewels of the Bangladesh economy.
11.
Ratios of investment to GDP declined modestly over the CAS period to 24.2 percent while
domestic savings levels were stagnant at around 20 percent. The failure to raise investment levels to
fuel faster growth reflects a continuing weak investment climate. Gross national savings (27 percent of
GDP), boosted by remittances, exceeded investment by 2.8 percentage points in FY09. The excess of
savings over investment represents the potential to raise investment levels without pressure on the balance
of payments. Foreign direct investment still averages less than one percent of GDP. This reflects the low
scores Bangladesh receives on the perception-based global competitiveness index, ranking 111 of 134
countries in the 2008-09 index. The five most important problems listed by respondents to this survey are
corruption, inefficient bureaucracy, policy instability, inadequate supply of infrastructure and access to
financing. Similar concerns surface in surveys of domestic investors1. Electricity shortages were the
1

World Economic Forum, The Global Competitiveness Report 2008-2009.

64

most serious problem cited by businesses in the 2007 Investment Climate Assessment. Firms reported a
sharp jump in the value lost to electrical outages from 2.9% of sales in 2002 to 12.3% of sales in 20072.
Political instability ranked second, while governance was a significant factor for more than half the firms.
Access to land and finance remained serious concerns. Supply of skilled labor is emerging as an
important constraint. Bangladesh ranked 110 (out of 181 countries) in the 2009 Doing Business rankings,
down from 106 the previous year.
Progress in Empowering the Poor
12.
Growth in consumption fuelled by rapid economic growth and remittance inflows enabled
Bangladesh to accelerate the pace of poverty reduction in the first half of the current decade. The
poverty headcount fell faster than in the 1990s, from 49% in 2000 to 40% in 2005. While there is no data
on poverty trends over the CAS period, the World Bank’s recent poverty assessment (World Bank,
2008b) suggests that the strong GDP growth would have been expected to reduce poverty by around 5
percentage points between 2005 and 2008, but the impact of the food price shock and the two natural
disasters may have negated some, though not all, of this likely reduction in poverty. Bangladesh remains
on track to meet the poverty MDG, and continues to see gains in education and health outcomes including
infant and child mortality. The target for gender parity in primary and secondary schooling was met
before the CAS period.
13.
Nevertheless Bangladesh remains a poor country with some 56 million people in poverty in
2005 (40% of the population). There are large disparities across income and occupational groups, gender
and regions. A large concentration of population within a relatively narrow band of consumption above
the poverty line remains highly vulnerable to shocks such as the rise in food prices experienced in 2008.
Safety nets are inadequate, with only 23 percent of poor households benefiting from at least one program.
The poverty assessment reveals a growing divergence between the eastern region which has benefited
from integration with the country’s two growth poles (Dhaka and Chittagong), and the western region
where the two large rivers crisscrossing the country act as natural barriers to connectivity. This is
compounded by region specific factors such as inadequate infrastructure, lack of growth poles and
remittance income.
14.
There is evidence of increasing inequalities in access to health and education. Gains in
childhood immunization coverage have accrued principally to better off households. An important
exception has been Vitamin A coverage where coverage had increased and inequality has declined. Lack
of adequate care during child delivery remains a serious problem, particularly for the poor. Malnutrition
indicators are high and remain unchanged. Education outcomes appear to be peaking. Having reached a
gross primary enrolment rate of 90 percent, enrolment is stagnating. Gross secondary enrolment is
growing faster, but completion rates are declining. Boys from poor households appear to be left behind
compared to girls of poor households. The quality of health and education services continues to be low,
and this disproportionately hurts the poor.
Trends in Governance
15.
The 2009 Worldwide Governance Indicators suggest no clear discernible trends in perceptions
of governance between 2005 and 2008. The Indicators suggest an absolute deterioration in political
stability and control of corruption over the past decade. Bangladesh’s scores are worse than the average
for low income countries and for the South Asia region for political stability and control of corruption.
Bangladesh’s absolute score in Transparency International’s Corruption Perception Index rose from 1.7
in 2005 to 2.1 in 2008, with its ranking improving from 158th to 147th. However, given the overlapping
2

Given the different samples between the two years, comparisons between 2002 and 2007 are for only industries and cities used
in the 2002 ICA survey, i.e., Dhaka and Chittagong.

65

ranges within which these scores stand, trends in perceptions of corruption are unclear. Bangladesh’s
score on the Global Integrity index went up from 64 in 2007 to 68 in 2008, both “weak” ratings. The
improvements reflected the tougher anti-corruption law and the more active anti-corruption agency in
2008.
CPIA Ratings
16.
These overall development trends are mirrored in the World Bank’s CPIA scores.
Bangladesh’s overall CPIA ratings improved modestly between 2006 and 2008 from 3.4 to 3.5, with no
change in the low ratings for structural policies or the above average ratings for social inclusion/equity.
Bangladesh saw further improvement in its ratings for macro-economic management, and recognition of
the modest improvement in governance.
Table 1: Bangladesh CPIA Ratings 2006-2008
Rating Clusters
Economic Management
Structural Policies
Policies for Social Inclusion/Equity
Public Sector Management and Institutions
Overall Rating

2006
4.0
3.3
3.6
2.8
3.4

2007
4.0
3.3
3.6
3.0
3.5

2008
4.2
3.3
3.6
3.0
3.5

C. CAS OUTCOMES
17.
Four factors shaped outcomes during the FY06-09 CAS. First, the political uncertainty and
lack of continuity in interlocutors that marked this period due to several changes of government created
difficulties in engaging policy makers in a dialogue on the complex CAS agenda. In the 39 months since
CAS approval, only for 18 months was there a level of engagement that enabled the Bank to pursue its
support to Bangladesh’s development agenda. Even within that narrow 18 month slot, a food crisis,
severe floods and a cyclone preoccupied the attention of both the Government and the Bank. The Bank
needed to respond urgently – and it did - to these various crises to support the government’s objectives of
maintaining macro-economic stability and reducing the adverse social impact. But preoccupation with
short term shocks distracted attention from longer term development goals, although it was essential to
ensuring a climate for achieving those goals.
18.
Second, the CAS itself marked a departure for the Bank Group both in Bangladesh and more
broadly, as its strategy anticipated the CGAC approach. The CAS committed the Bank to making
governance “a central focus of its work program, influencing decisions about sectoral priorities, the
composition of Bank lending and AAA and the type of instruments deployed”.
19.
Third, the CAS began a process of reengagement in key sectors that the Bank had ceased to be
active, such as agriculture and power. This implied filling large knowledge gaps that had emerged after
disengagement, but also more systematically addressing the governance issues that had contributed to the
disengagement. These decisions increased the complexity of the agenda and required both raising the bar
and adequate managerial attention, staff, and financial resources.
20.
Finally the FY06 Bangladesh CAS was one of the early results-based strategies. The CAS
committed the Bank Group to ensuring that a results’ focus was reflected in everything the Bank Group
did “from lending and AAA to the way it manages fiduciary risks”. This was easier said than done. In the
early years of the CAS, outcomes were principally affected by activities funded under previous CAS
programs rather than from the new directions the Bank was initiating. Thus, the Bangladesh CAS may
have overstated outcomes from the new interventions, which took time to make an impact in a difficult
66

governance context. Moreover, the performance indicators in the CAS matrix were mostly not
quantitative and lacked precision. A monitoring and evaluation mechanism to measure outcomes was not
established. 3A mid-term progress report was not considered, given management preoccupation with
responding to the complex political and economic situation. The judgments on outcomes in this section
rely on discussions with the country team and selective consultations with government officials and civil
society.
IMPROVING THE INVESTMENT CLIMATE
21.
Improving the investment climate was seen as critical to raising the country’s growth potential.
The CAS addressed four key issues that were identified in investment climate assessments of Bangladesh
to be central to investor confidence: maintaining macro-economic stability, removing trade restrictions
and reducing administrative barriers facing investors, improving governance and efficiency in
infrastructure services, particularly power and ports, and ensuring private sector friendly finance, land and
labor markets. Outcomes under each of these are discussed below.
Outcome: Maintain Macroeconomic Stability
22.
Macro-economic management was prudent throughout the CAS period. Inflation was mostly
kept under control despite domestic and external shocks, through fiscal and monetary discipline. Fiscal
deficits did not exceed 4% of GDP throughout this period, while domestic financing of the deficit was
kept at a conservative 2% of GDP. Development policy credits supported the reduction in subsidies on
petroleum products and the sell off or closure of Statement of Expenditures (SOEs). SOE losses were
reduced significantly during FY06 and FY07 to 0.86% of GDP and 0.48% of GDP respectively. These
gains came in part from the closure of large state-owned enterprises such as Adamjee Jute Mill, one of the
world’s largest jute mills employing 25,000 workers, as part of a reduction in the number of state
enterprises in manufacturing, which declined from 121 in FY01 to 82 by FY09. SOEs were encouraged to
shed surplus staff using a Voluntary Retirement Scheme. In FY08, some 16,237 workers took advantage
of the offer. There has been no further privatization, but the CTG corporatized the State airline (Biman)
and Bangladesh Telecom. SOE contingent liabilities are now largely accounted in the national budget
and there is greater transparency relating to SOE finances. However, when crude oil prices rose from an
average of $65 a barrel in 2006 to $98 a barrel in 2008, the government made only a modest price
adjustment (in July 2008) for fear of social unrest. SOE losses rose sharply in FY08 to 1.83% of GDP.
With the sharp fall in crude oil prices in FY09, SOE losses are estimated at a mere 0.03% of GDP.
Outcome: Remove Trade Restrictions and Reduce Administrative Barriers
23.
The trade liberalization agenda supported by the Bank’s Development Support Credits
continued to make progress during the CAS period. Quantitative restrictions were eliminated in FY06
and a long standing ban on a wide range of textile imports was removed. Average nominal protection was
reduced from 29.4 per cent in FY02 to 20.1 per cent by FY09. A free float of the Taka helped in further
liberalizing the regime. The resultant strong growth in the ratio of trade to GDP was a response to this
opening up process. However while CAS outcomes were broadly met, average nominal protection is still
the highest in the region and among the highest in the world. The FY10 budget of the new government
has further raised the average nominal protection to 23.9% by lowering import duties on raw materials,
capital goods and intermediates while levying a regulatory duty of 5% on top of a customs duty rate of
25%. High nominal protection rates combined with cumbersome trade facilitation procedures, an
3

An exception was the new IFC facility, the BCIF, which established a rigorous M&E framework based on a logical
framework agreed with the donor partners, DFID and EU, and contracted an independent firm to collect and analyze
data. SEDF, IFC’s other advisory facility, also has a strong M&E system and in-house M&E team in place.

67

inefficient duty drawback scheme and severe infrastructure bottlenecks at the port result in a high antiexport bias. This explains Bangladesh’s failure to diversify its exports beyond garments which account
for 75% of exports, a sector in which the anti export bias from the high nominal protection is cushioned
by access to duty free raw materials.
24.
There has been progress in lowering administrative barriers. The CTG established a Regulatory
Reform Commission on November 1, 2007 with a mandate for one year, and subsequently extended to
October 2010. Twenty of the Commission’s 58 recommendations have been implemented. These include
Box 1: Impact of regulatory reforms
Regulatory reform work supported by IFC includes:
 The bonded warehouse licensing reform, implemented in May 2008, has yielded impressive results. A
survey of 58 companies which obtained licenses during July-December 2008 indicate an 81% reduction
in time taken (from 226 to 43 days) and a 44% reduction in mostly unofficial costs.
 Chittagong Customs which deals with the bulk of the country’s trade has introduced automation Clearance
processes have been reduced from 42 to 6 steps most imports are now cleared within 3 days (versus 32 in
2008) and 90% of exports are cleared within 1 day (as against 32 in 2008).
 The automated business registration system introduced in March 2009 coupled with process improvements
has led to a significant reduction in the time taken to register a business from about 30 days in 2008 to
less than 7 days, with a fast track system allowing one day registration.
 The Government has taken a decision to substantially reduce the property registration fees (by about 50%).
This reform is expected to result in more realistic reporting of property values and thus higher revenues.
A program to digitize land records and transactions is being developed.

streamlining approval of location clearance and environmental clearance certificates, simplification of
duty drawback and exemption systems and capital machinery import clearances, streamlining of bonded
warehouse licensing system, prepublication of laws, rules and regulation on the government website for
public consultation, legalizing courier services and streamlining the registration of joint stock companies
and firms. The Commission has also begun work on an E-Registry of all 174 laws and 9000 plus gazette
notifications. A draft Competition Act is awaiting Cabinet discussion. Implementation of these reforms
has been slow. IFC’s BICF is playing a useful role in providing technical advice and financial support to
regulatory reform. A key test of sustainability will be whether regulatory reform process is pursued with
or without the new Commission.
Outcome: Improve Governance and Efficiency in Infrastructure Services
25.
The Bank Group engaged broadly across the power sector to help address serious electricity
shortages. An FY08 Power Sector Development Credit and an ongoing TA credit supported reforms in
sector financial restructuring, private investment in generation, regulatory reforms and institutional
strengthening, distribution company corporatization and commercial reform, and a new rural
electrification strategy. The Bank also supported a 300 MW public sector plant at Siddhirganj. IFC
provided technical assistance for transparent contracting of an IPP at Bibiyana. Progress has been slow,
little additional power capacity was added (other than temporary rental capacity and 8 small power plants)
against an annual incremental requirement of 400MW of installed capacity a year, but some of the
groundwork for addressing key sector issues is being addressed, including:


The operationalization of the Bangladesh Energy Regulatory Commission (BERC) established in
2003. A full complement of commissioners is in place, and an organizational chart, table of
equipment and service rules were approved. BERC is beginning to play a key role in setting tariffs,
68








issuing licenses and providing regulatory oversight, although it lacks a strong mandate to function as
an independent entity and it is unclear how freely it can operate under a popularly elected
government.
Corporatization of the Bangladesh Power Development Board (BPDB) is continuing, albeit at a slow
pace. However, the successor corporatized entities still lack independence because of reluctance by
the Ministry and BPDB to devolve power.
Recognizing heavy financial losses from the failure to adjust tariffs, the CTG initiated a monthly
transfer of Taka 500 million to BPDB to partially cover these losses. The government also initiated
financial restructuring of BPDB which focused on balance sheet reconciliation, asset revaluation and
debt restructuring and a collection drive to reduce revenue losses. Price adjustments were also
undertaken twice during the CTG period to help BPDB pay gas suppliers and IPPs, but these were not
sufficient to reduce financial losses or align domestic and international energy prices and reflect
higher cost in prices of electricity to consumers. Consumer meters in the South Zone service territory
are to be replaced with automated secure meter reading systems once a metering tender process is
complete.
Efforts to attract IPPs through transparent bidding processes proved abortive, with an unsuccessful
bidding process for a gas based Bibiyana power project.
Through an ongoing IPPF project the Bank financed eight small power plants, adding 178MW to total
capacity.
A new strategy for rural electrification has been prepared that addresses the governance issues that
emerged in this area in recent years.

26.
The CAS emphasized the need to support improvements at Chittagong Port. As part of the
reforms pushed by the CTG, Chittagong Port Authority introduced in May 2007 a Berth Operator System
which combined merchant, dock and stevedoring staff under one group. In March 2007 a private operator
was appointed as a single point operator for integrated operation of the container terminal. Along with
other rationalization, container handling capacity at the port doubled since December 2006 to 32,000 20foot equivalent units (TEU). Container dwell time was reduced from 26 days in December 2006 to 18
days, and ship turnaround time is now less than 3 days. Container traffic handled rose from 0.83 million
TEU to 1.03 million TEU in 2007-08. Cargo handled at the port has risen from 29 million metric tons in
2005-06 to 32 million metric tons. Sustainability of these trends will depend on whether these reforms
are allowed to continue, but this was clearly an area of improvement.
27.
Bank group support to the road sector through a New Road Sector Reform project was delayed
pending an Operational Risk Assessment reflecting concerns about poor governance and high levels of
corruption in the sector. This followed an INT investigation of a 2004 Flood Rehabilitation Project
which found collusive activities in the Roads and Highways Department (RHD). Mis-procurement was
declared and $40 million was cancelled from the project. The assessment which was completed in March
2007 found that while administrative control risks were high in Bangladesh, they were comparable to
other countries in the region. The highest overall risks came from political control risks because of the
“tolerance of continuing and escalating failures of administrative control”. The assessment developed an
action plan to be implemented by RHD and the Ministry of Communications. Due to lack of confidence
in the ability and willingness of RHD to implement the plan, particularly in light of ongoing INT
investigations, the Bank has postponed project preparation with RHD. The ongoing Rural Transport
Improvement Project has contributed to improving rural roads. Rural roads are managed by the Local
Government Engineering Department (LGED), for which the Bank is carrying out a similar operational
risk assessment, since it is responsible for 40% of the Annual Development Programme for transport.
LGED has traditionally had a better governance reputation but it has also experienced deterioration in its
performance.

69

28.
The World Bank is supporting a reform and investment program in Bangladesh Railway. This
is part of a multi-year multi-donor partnership with ADB and JBIC involvement. The Bank provided $40
million in a first development policy credit for railways in FY07 in support of a comprehensive reform
program which includes restructuring the railways by line of business, transforming it into a corporate
entity, instituting a transparent cost accounting and financial reporting system by line of business and
strengthening management. Although the railways have improved services carrying larger volumes of
freight and number of passengers between 2005 and 2008 (6% and 34%) respectively, their share in
overall transport keeps declining. While there has been modest progress in implementing reforms, there
is reluctance to let go of close government control, and the Government is yet to fully implement the
reform program.
29.
During the CAS period, IFC invested in Grameen Phone, Bangladesh’s largest mobile service
provider. It also explored several opportunities in transport/ports/toll roads and aviation, tracking the
Chittagong NM Container terminal, inland container depot/port, following up on PPP opportunities in
existing as well as upcoming Export Zones; tracking progress of the Dhaka Chittagong Expressway, the
privatization of Biman and investment opportunities in new private airlines. However, not many projects
were implemented because of slow progress on policy and regulatory reform, and lack of transparency in
infrastructure concessioning. IFC completed an advisory mandate for the Bibiyana IPP tender to set up a
450MW gas-based power plant. This project was a good example of IFC/World Bank cooperation on
many levels. However, the Bibiyana IPP project could not be implemented during the CTG’s tenure. The
GoB is now moving forward on this important IPP project.
Outcome: Deepen and make more efficient financial intermediation
30.
The FY06 CAS focused on strengthening governance in the banking sector. Key outcomes
included amendments to the Bangladesh Bank Order 1972 and Bank Companies Act 1991 which gave the
central bank autonomy over exchange rate and monetary policy and bank supervision and put the stateowned commercial banks (previously known as the Nationalized Commercial Banks) under the direct
oversight of Bangladesh Bank. The World Bank’s technical assistance project for Bangladesh Bank has
had a delayed start due to problems with an initial procurement. The Bank has also supported reform of
state owned banks through the Enterprise Growth and Bank Modernization Project and its DPCs. Rupali
Bank, the smallest of the four state owned banks did not get privatized as originally planned as the
successful bidder failed to meet his commitment. The other three banks Sonali, Agrani and Janata Banks
have been corporatized rather than privatized. Three CEOs and four General Managers were selected
through a competitive process and appear to be already making an impact. The SCBs are publishing their
accounts, ensuring timely audits, improving their HR management and establishing internal control
systems. Information technology investments will also help improve performance. They have also
reached agreements with their unions. Gross non-performing loans fell from 14% in June 2007 to 10.36%
September 2009. Net NPLs (after provisioning) fell from 145.41% in June, 2007 to 5.12.34% in
September, 2009. The improvements reflect better corporate governance and strong support from the
CTG. However, reshuffling of the Bank Boards along with pressures for directed lending and moratorium
on loans could quickly reverse the progress on corporatization and NPLs.
31.
Through its Access to Finance program, IFC’s SEDF has helped introduce new financial
products in the Bangladesh market including SME-tailored products, factoring, and operating lease. The
18 partner financial institutions (PFIs) of SEDF provided finance to over 150,000 SMEs triggering sectorwide interest in financial services for small and medium enterprises and even specific sectors such as
Light Engineering. SEDF also helped improve core risk management capability in the Bangladesh
financial sector (trained 6,660 bankers across 34 private and commercial banks in Bangladesh). IFC also
supported the consolidation of the banking sector through investments in 4 banks, one microfinance
institution; and provided trade finance support to 4 participating banks under its Global Trade Finance
70

Program. This support became particularly significant, when the global financial crisis set in, and trade
financing became difficult. The first Partial Credit Guarantee Project was approved for the BRAC NGO
by Bangladesh Bank in 2007 for which Citibank was the lead financier. There is limited scope for IFC in
the microfinance sector, as MFIs are not allowed to borrow in foreign currency.
Outcome: Strengthen Policies for Rural Growth
32.
The FY06 CAS reengaged in the rural sector after several years. Reengagement has required
reinvesting in sector knowledge and attempting to restore the Bank’s credibility with agencies in the
sector. The Bank has focused in three areas: water management, agricultural research and extension, and
high value crops. Three investment operations have been approved: an avian flu preparedness project for
the livestock sector (FY07), a water management improvement project (FY08) co-financed with the
Netherlands with a chequered preparation history (9 years between PCD and approval) reflecting high
fiduciary risks in the sector, and a national agricultural technology project (FY08), an APL co-financed
with IFAD. The first phase of the agricultural technology project addresses governance issues through an
innovative competitive grants program with an autonomous government foundation that selects grantees
and identifies research themes to be funded based on a demand led process involving farmers. Similarly
the project establishes a decentralized demand led extension system based on organizing small and
marginal farmers into Common Interest Groups with the help of NGOs, and encouraging them to use
scorecards to evaluate the extension system. Implementation has begun: 30 competitive grants have been
awarded and some 15,000 Common Interest Groups have been identified.
33.
IFC engaged in the rural sector through the activities of SEDF. SEDF promoted contract farmbased hybrid vegetable seed production, enhancing employment opportunities for women (75% of
workers employed in seed production). In the Bogra area seed production generated 165,000 person days
of employment for women. SEDF also facilitated a $62m fund allocation for storage facilities, research &
development establishing a certification agency for the seed sub-sector through Public Private
Partnership. SEDF support for higher production and use of organic fertilizers increased crop yields by 319%, and resulted in a 10-13% increase in income for the farmers adopting organic fertilizers. Upgraded
private laboratory testing services helped 10,000 small commercial farms reduce the risk of bird disease
and mortality. The establishment of a new extension service with SEDF-support helped 300 poultry
SMEs achieve a 15-20% cost reduction.
EMPOWERING THE POOR
34.
To help empower the poor the FY06 CAS supports improved service delivery to the poor,
strengthening local governance and enhancing the voice of the very poor.
Outcome: Improve the Quality of Health Services for the Poor
35.
Bangladesh continues to deliver vertical programs effectively and equitably. Eighty two
percent of children under 2 are fully immunized, with the gap between the rich and the poor being less
than 10 percent. Forty eight percent of women use modern contraceptive methods, with a rich-poor gap of
less than 3 percentage points. However, utilization of essential health services remains the principal health
challenge. Women receiving antenatal care from medically trained providers increased by 25% among
the poorest between 2004 and 2007, deliveries at facilities increased by 67%, and medically trained
assistance at delivery rose by 38%. But there remain large gaps in the rate of utilization of such services
between the rich and the poor, and only a tiny proportion of poor women (under 5%) delivered their
babies in health facilities or received skilled assistance at delivery. Similarly, only 31% of poor women
received antenatal care from medically trained providers (compared to 84% for the rich). Also, only 17%
of poor children with acute respiratory infections received care from skilled providers as against 60% of
71

children in the upper quintile. A major area where there has been limited or no progress has been
nutrition where effective delivery of services remains a challenge.
36.
A number of factors drive the poor utilization of public health services. While total expenditures
on health are far too low (3.2 percent of GDP or US$ 13 per capita), inefficiencies in public spending
remain the sector’s most immediate challenge. Widespread system inefficiencies, weak planning capacity
and overly centralized approval processes lead to under spending of available funds. The practice of
allocating funds on an infrastructure basis does not translate into financing for the population most in
need. Salaries and staff allowances absorb a large share of the budget. The publicly-financed system is
plagued with high vacancies, absenteeism, lack of qualified staff and an imbalanced skill mix. Service
quality is poor. Drug shortages are frequent and patients make substantial out of pocket payments to
pharmacies. Over three fifths of total health spending represents out of pocket spending by households.
Health insurance is practically nonexistent. A highly centralized system managed out of Dhaka
undermines accountability to service users.
37.
The World Bank currently leads a multi-year $4.2 billion SWAp. It also administers a $460
million multi-donor trust fund4 supported by DFID, EC, Sida, the Netherlands, UNFPA, CIDA and KfW
and chanelled through government systems. This arrangement has enabled the Bank to field a strong staff
in the field office for policy dialogue, monitoring sector outcomes and providing periodic operational and
analytical reviews. Analytical work has included a public expenditure review, three rounds of
performance reviews of NGOs as service providers, and information on hospital services. The HNPSP has
tried to address governance challenges by (i) strengthening country systems, especially planning, financial
management, procurement and MIS, (ii) helping establish an arms’ length mechanism for contracting out
service provision to private and NGO providers, and (iii) strengthening demand side mechanisms.
38.
Progress has been mixed in the absence of reform champions, frequent changes in government
with the related disruptions in continuity, and frequent changes in personnel. Weak ownership, an
over centralized and ineffective health administration, resistance from professional agencies to reform
contribute to slow progress. Contracting out arrangements were severely delayed (by three years) due to
delays in recruiting agencies for this process. Donor concerns about corruption have also contributed to
lack of trust and ownership on the part of counterparts and the diverting the time of health sector
specialists to addressing corruption issues in which they lack comparative advantage. Donors must
perforce walk a thin line between being pushed into ring-fencing activities they fund which undercuts
institution building, and staying the course on what are inherently long term systemic changes, while
avoiding the appearance of seeming to be tolerating corruption. The SWAp offers many advantages but it
is a huge challenge to coordinate with 16 donors and arrive at a manageable set of priorities.
Outcome: Enhanced access to and quality and relevance of education
39.
Bangladesh has made significant progress in improving access to education. However, the
sector is plagued by low internal efficiency associated with high dropout and low completion rates, poor
quality of teaching, inadequate accountability in government aided secondary schools, low institutional
capacity despite past capacity building efforts and weak monitoring and evaluation. High dropout rates
reflect the low quality of schooling and the high opportunity cost to parents of children attending schools
and huge national loss in creating effective human resources. Only 52% of primary school children
complete the primary education cycle, and of these only 44% go on to lower secondary school. Of these,
less than 50% complete their secondary education (with higher dropout rates for girls). Only 6% of the

4

In addition to a $300 million ongoing IDA credit.

72

eligible age cohorts are enrolled in higher education reflecting the poor value of the higher education
qualification.
40.
The World Bank has been involved in the primary education sector through the Primary
Education Development Program II, a SWAp led by ADB and supported by 10 other DPs. Progress has
been mixed. The SWAp has led to a significant reduction in transactions costs and facilitated a more
collaborative approach between the Government and DPs. Progress on access indicators has been
positive and a large backlog of teacher vacancies has been filled with improved teacher recruitment policy
and procedures. While quality of education and learning levels remains low, Government is cognizant of
the importance of monitoring learning outcomes. A second round of the national assessment of student
learning has been completed. Increasing accountability in school management through school
management committees, and strengthening teacher education and classroom support systems should help
to improve the quality of education and learning levels if properly implemented. However, institutional
reforms and staffing levels have been discussed extensively with government but there has been limited
progress, and collusive practices relating to procurement of paper for textbooks have been a serious issue.
41.
The Bank has also supported secondary education through three Education Sector
Development Support Credits. These programs supported key governance reforms: First, Government
subventions to private schools were tied to school performance. Strict enforcement of the criteria for
eligibility to subventions led to some 60% of schools following the criteria in 2007 versus 30 per cent
prior to reforms. A majority of audit objections were resolved. Second, registration and certification of
non-government teachers through a system of testing were introduced with private schools only able to
recruit certified teachers. Only 19% of teacher candidates passed the certification examination in 2007.
Student pass rates in school leaving exams almost doubled since 2003 to three fifths of all students. Third
party evaluations of the system have been undertaken. Third, textbook and curriculum reform has
included a transparent process for approval of manuscripts through a review by independent experts.
42.
The share of poor children in secondary schools has risen from 24% in 2003 to 33% in 2007.
The success in gender parity is showing up in completion rates. Grade 10 completion rates for girls (18%)
exceed that of boys (15%) from the same age group. An IDA project to improve secondary education
quality and access is supporting boys and girls from poor households in 121 upazilas. While improved
enrolment rates for girls have not significantly delayed age at marriage, there is a modest improvement in
labor market participation of women. A Reaching Out-of-School Project has substantially achieved its
development objective with student enrolment exceeding the original target of 500,000, with gender
parity in these new enrolments.
43.
The Bank initiated its first engagement on the higher education sector during this CAS period.
It is supporting the sector under a project that became effective in May 2009. The project would
encourage innovations in teaching, learning and research, and provide Bangladeshi universities with state
of the art connectivity with the global knowledge community.
Strengthen Local Governance
44.
The FY06 CAS focused on helping strengthen accountability of the lowest tiers of government
to citizens. The principal instrument was the LGSP in partnership with other donors (the UNCDF/UNDP,
EC and DANIDA). The project provides Union Parishads (UPs) an Expanded Block Grant (EBG), and
greater discretion in deciding spending priorities through a participatory process, while enhancing
accountability. Accession to and continuation in the program is conditional on clearing a thorough audit.
Nearly 7ooo such audits have been undertaken over three years under a public-private partnership. Threefourth of the 4498 UPs are now receiving EBGs, and this coverage will extend to all eligible UPs in the
73

country the coming one year. Overall, block grant financing has increased by over 50%. The UPs also
benefit from a core institutional development program that strengthens their capabilities in planning,
budgeting, and public financial management. Some 33,000 public officials have been trained under the
project. At the central level, the project is putting in place a transparent and predictable intergovernmental fiscal transfer system and strengthening the abilities of the central government to support
and monitor local governments. LGSP has received strong local level support. UP officials see new
opportunities in enhanced autonomy and increased resources, while citizens welcome greater openness in
UPs and the new participatory planning and budgeting systems. Civil society groups are facilitating social
audits to enhance UP accountability.
45.
The project initially faced significant implementation problems due to (i) bureaucratic and
political unease at the central and intermediate levels at relinquishing controls and bestowing local bodies
with greater discretion; (ii) weak capacities at all levels of government to manage and monitor a project of
such scope, reaching all 4498 UPs in the country; and (iii) political transitions and uncertainties at the
national level. The project has been restructured to simplify and streamline implementation, while not
compromising core principles. Although its performance has improved over the last year one year, some
implementation challenges are expected to continue given the nature and scope of the project.
46.
Since 2007, the Bank has also implemented a Swiss Agency funded NTLA Program for Local
Governance Reform which has supported policy advocacy initiatives, sector and policy studies, policy
pilots, workshops, exchange visits and study tours, and capacity building initiatives. In particular, the
NLTA contributed to elevating the policy discourse on local governance at the national level and in
facilitating local government reforms. It has also helped mobilize other DPs around the theme of
decentralization and local governance.
47.
There is a growing consensus in Bangladesh on the need to strengthen local governance
institutions and practice to improve service delivery, accountability and political competition. The 2005
PRSP highlighted local governance as one of the eight medium-term strategic priorities for the country.
Between 2007 and 2009, a number of ordinances related to local governance were passed under the CTG.
The CTG also established a Local Government Commission and set in motion the process for Upazila
elections. The Awami League government held elections to Upazilas in January 2009. While the new
government has stated its commitment to a strong local government system, some of earlier reforms have
been rolled back or revised. In particular, the formal role accorded to the Members of Parliament in
Upazila affairs has vexed local government advocates. The momentum provided by LGSP and the
increasing political focus on local Governance are nevertheless expected to provide greater impetus to the
decentralization agenda in the country.
Enhance Voice and Participation through Community Driven Development
48.
To enhance voice among the poorest of the poor an ongoing FY03 SIPP was expanded during
the CAS period through three supplementary financing credits aimed at enhancing support through the
Social Development Foundation to community driven development, local infrastructure and livelihoods,
and broadening coverage to districts affected by “Monga” (famine). Additional SIPP financing of $50
million was provided in June 2008 to meet the needs of rural communities devastated by the floods and
cyclone of 2007.
49.
Initial results are promising. SIPP is demonstrating that hard core poor villagers, particularly
women, have the capacity to prioritize needs, manage resources, and implement subprojects. Some 2
million people in nearly 1,000 village communities have benefited from SIPP. About 1,300 community
managed subprojects have been implemented, (rural roads, schools, tube wells) with better quality and at
74

low costs. Nearly 20,000 of the poorest individuals strengthen community level planning for
infrastructure provision and livelihood and undertake pilots to promote private funding of community
driven programs aimed at livelihood. Nearly 15,000 Livelihoods Savings (Jibikayan) Groups (JGs) have
been formed, with over 80% female membership, to mobilize savings, gain financial literacy, and
demonstrate creditworthiness. The relative success of this program is owed to a number of factors: the
strong performance of the Bank’s key partner, the Social Development Foundation, the strength of
existing social capital in NGOs and local communities, and the willingness of communities to work
together. The Bank has drawn on its considerable experience in community development programs in
South Asia and elsewhere and developed a model that appears to be working. The project supports
improved governance, giving the very poor choices and an opportunity to participate.
Outcome: Improve the Effectiveness of Safety Nets
50.
Successive governments have become increasingly committed to developing a national strategy
for social protection. A Bank AAA assessed social safety nets5 and suggested approaches that might be
usefully deployed in such a strategy. The existing 30 programs spread over 13 agencies need to be
rationalized and strengthened to protect the extreme poor, including in times of natural disasters, and to
provide cost effective social welfare and support to marginalized groups (the disabled and vulnerable), the
need to integrate urban areas and introduce means testing to avoid capture of the programs by the not so
poor. The Bank and other donors have actively supported the development of such a strategy. Although a
formal social protection policy has not been developed or approved, as was targeted in the CAS, the
government has strengthened support for such a policy. It has raised the total allocation for safety nets
from 1% of GDP to 2.2% of GDP. The CTG also announced a new 100 day employment guarantee
scheme and some 2 million people were targeted in FY2009. If the employment guarantee is effectively
implemented it could help reduce vulnerability. The CAS also targeted the implementation of a proxy
means test. The employment guarantee scheme is a form of means testing since the wage is set at a level
designed to attract only the poor. The government has also introduced a proxy means test aimed at
eliminating the richest three quintiles from its secondary school scholarship program. This is not the same
as targeting the poorest but it suggests a gradual acceptance of such testing.
GOVERNANCE AT THE CENTER
51.
The governance program focused on public financial management reforms including revenue
mobilization and procurement. It intended to support public administration reform but given lack of
political will for such reforms by successive governments, the only contribution in this area were policy
notes. But the Bank cautiously entered new territory: institutions of public accountability, legal and
judicial reforms, and strengthening demand for reform.
Outcome: Improve Public Financial Management
52.
Revenues rose modestly over the CAS period, peaking in FY08 at 11.4 per cent of GDP but
falling back to 11.2 per cent in FY09. The malaise in tax administration is deep rooted and is seen in
poor taxpayers’ services, corruption associated with tax collection, inadequate audit and enforcement and
protracted disputes with taxpayers. The Bank has been engaged for over a decade in the reform of NBR
together with DFID and the IMF. A Strategic Development Plan laid out a roadmap for reforms
(institutional reform, change management and investment in information systems) and a Large Taxpayer
Unit was set up. Development policy credits, accompanied by a TA grant, supported the reforms. An
IDA funded customs and tax reform investment operation was dropped from the lending program. The
improvement in revenues during the CTG period, when NBR officials came under pressure to perform
5

World Bank, 2006, “Social Safety Nets in Bangladesh: An Assessment”, South Asia Region, World Bank, January 2006.

75

and reduce corruption, illustrates the potential. The CTG launched a tax-payer education campaign, and a
Citizens’ charter. On-line registration of VAT and computerization of income tax were initiated, while
Customs automation at Chittagong was completed. Progress slowed over the past year. The NBR is still
seen as a weak institution and prospects for sustained reform without political commitment appear
uncertain. The Bank’s contribution was modest in this area.
53.
Bangladesh’s Public Financial Management scored low in a PEFA assessment prepared at the
time of the CAS6. Typical ratings were C and D. Key issues of concern were the lack of a strategic
planning process, reflected in over-programming of the Annual Development Plan, which facilitated
discretionary behavior and created opportunities for rent seeking. Budget planning focused on inputs
rather than outputs and outcomes. Weaknesses in budget execution related to accounting, reconciliation
between expenditures and bank balances, and delays in reporting which created opportunities for
corruption. Internal and external controls were weak, reflecting lack of accounting information in line
ministries, delays in the publication of audited reports, unsatisfactory quality of audits, and weak
parliamentary oversight.
54.
There has been modest progress over the CAS period. A medium-term budgetary framework has
been introduced in 20 line ministries (compared to 4 at the beginning of the CAS period), covering 70 per
cent of the total budget. Computerization and strengthening of the budgeting and accounting systems has
been initiated in 60 district offices and 49 chief accounts offices. The quality and timeliness of fiscal
reports has improved although these still do not fully cover lower levels of government and SOEs because
of delays in reporting from these entities. Overall expenditure management became more transparent with
budget information now displayed on the Finance Department website. Differences between the treasury
and bank accounts have narrowed. SOEs’ fiscal accounts and contingent liabilities have been included in
the budget since FY09. Internal Control Manuals and Expenditure Management manuals have been
prepared to assist the internal audit function, but these are yet to be implemented. Government plans to
invite external audits have not been carried out except in the Ministry of Health where an audit has been
conducted with donor support. Separation of audit and accounting functions is incomplete. There has been
little progress in the external audit function although audit delays were reduced under the CTG to 10-12
months. The absence of an elected Parliament for over half the CAS period has not helped, although
Parliaments have in the past not been particularly active in exercising oversight functions, reflecting the
large parliamentary majorities enjoyed by ruling coalition.
55.
Although public financial management reforms remain a work in progress, the government
has taken some ownership of the program during the CAS period. In 2008 the government passed a
Public Resources and Budget Management Ordinance which aims to tighten fiscal discipline and enhance
transparency, accountability and quality of public expenditures. A new Public Financial Management
reform program, SPEMP has been adopted to build a performance oriented budget management process
that strengthens financial accountability across ministries. This is now being funded by a World Bank
administered $100 million MDTF supported by DFID, the European Commission, Denmark, Netherlands
and Canada. The MDTF will support reform across the various components of public financial
management -that includes strengthening the office of the C&AG, and strengthening legislative oversight
of public expenditure management.
56.
Perhaps the one area where there has been greatest progress is in public procurement. Under
the policy framework set out in the Development Support Credit series, a landmark procurement law was
passed in July 2006 and became effective from January 31, 2008 when government issued detailed rules
to guide implementation. All implementing agencies and public procurement entities started observing the
6

See Attachment 4 to the CAS which is based on the Review of Institutional Arrangements for Public Expenditure, Financial
Management and Procurement.

76

law including the use of independent review panels for complaint redressal. Transparency of the
procurement system has improved with the publication of bid notices and contract award information on
the website of the Central Procurement Technical Unit (CPTU). The reforms have resulted in improved
competitiveness in a few key agencies. Four leading government agencies, the Rural Electrification
Board, the Local Government Engineering Department, the Bangladesh Water Development Board and
the Roads and Highways Department started publishing their procurement performance data on a pilot
basis through CPTU’s website. A second IDA financed Public Procurement Reform project financed is
helping with implementation and monitoring of the law. The project supports institutionalization of
procurement capacity development, helps strengthen implementation and monitoring of procurement at
the sector level, pilots e-procurement in the four pilot agencies to increase transparency and competition,
and engages business bodies and civil society in the monitoring of the contracting process and
procurement outcomes. The government recently made few changes in the procurement law certain
provisions of which may impact upon good procurement practices. The Bank will need to continue its
dialogue in helping build an understanding in the government on the rationale for this important reform
that contributed to strengthening the overall public procurement system.
Outcome: Strengthen Institutions of Accountability
57.
The CAS recognized the importance of strengthening key institutions that are intended to
contribute to a constitutional role of checks and balances as a means of putting restraints on the
executive. The Bank’s program has supported the Bangladesh Bank through the ongoing Central Bank
Strengthening project, the Supreme Court through the recently closed Legal and Judicial Capacity
Building project, and to the Comptroller and Auditor General’s office through the ongoing policy
dialogue on public financial management. These interventions have had a very limited impact due to
project design problems and the lack of a sustained dialogue on these issues, although the Bangladesh
Bank project is now finally gaining some momentum.
58.
The only area where there was brief policy interest and momentum was the work of the AntiCorruption Commission during the CTG period. The Commission had been appointed by the political
government on 21 November 2004. Lacking ownership, the government appointed Commissioners
proved ineffective and the Commission remained largely dysfunctional until the CTG came to power.
The CTG forced the resignation of Commissioners, appointed a new head of the Commission and staff.
The CTG amended the ACC act to strengthen the powers of the Commission, developed a new
organogram for 1,281 staff, and established rules for prosecution. The Commission pursued cases against
politicians of both parties, including party leaders, as well as a number of businessmen. The zeal of the
new Commission initially inspired initially strong civil society support. However, it later had a negative
impact on the business climate and frightened bureaucrats into inactivity. But the Commission
dramatically reduced impunity, successfully prosecuting a number of officials and former politicians.
While the Commission’s excess zeal during the CTG period may have damaged the long term cause of
anti-corruption in Bangladesh, the brief success of the Commission makes it difficult for elected
governments to abandon the anti-corruption agenda.
59.
Bangladesh also began to access international support in the fight against corruption. It
acceded in February 2007 to the United Nations Convention Against Corruption (UNCAC) and began a
process of reviewing its legal and regulatory framework to ensure compliance with the Convention.
Parliament has yet to ratify the Convention. The Bank helped the government access the Stolen Asset
Recovery Initiative (STaR) through workshops and training in accessing mutual legal assistance (MLA).
A new MLA unit was established in the AGO, with assistance from USAID. Seven MLA requests were
being pursued with the UK in December 2008. Momentum has slackened during the past year. The task
forces created by Bangladesh Bank appear to have dispersed and people are no longer assigned to these

77

tasks. Consistent with the intentions of the CAS, the Bank played a relatively modest role in this area,
providing informal advice and responding to requests for support.
60.
Recognizing the lack of political commitment to strengthen accountability institutions the Bank
chose to focus on demand side initiatives. It supported an initiative by the BRAC University’s new IGS
to conduct workshops aimed at bringing reformers together both within and outside government as part of
a coalition-building exercise to engage in an evidence-based discussion of the issues that faced key
institutions of accountability. Five workshops were held covering the ACC, the Election Commission, the
Public Services Commission, the Comptroller and Auditor General and the Judiciary. Although the
quality of the policy notes from the workshops varies, the process followed ensured strong local
ownership of the agenda and sensitization of reform issues in the concerned institutions.
61.
Another important development was the establishment in November 2007 of the Bangladesh
Better Business Forum (BBBF), a public-private dialogue platform chaired by the Chief Adviser. IFC
has helped GoB in the design and subsequent operation of the Forum. The BBBF does most of its
technical work through five working groups, which are co-chaired by and composed of senior
Government and private sector representatives, and is supported by a Secretariat based in the Board of
Investment (BoI). The BBBF Working Groups met several times during the CAS period, submitted a total
of 290 recommendations, of which 247 have been approved for implementation. The private sector has
recognized this as an effective means of results-oriented dialogue on private sector issues through a
transparent and open process.
Support Legal and Judicial Reform
62.
Bangladesh adopted a legal reform strategy in 2000. This was prepared with World Bank
assistance, and implementation of the strategy was supported by an FY01 Legal and Judicial Capacity
Building Project which closed in FY09. The project focussed on a range of issues including amendments
to the Civil Procedure Code which addressed delays in case processing and introduced a computer
management system in pilot courts. The project aimed at improving the investment climate by improving
predictability in the enforcement of contracts. The project was largely unsuccessful in meeting its
objectives and did not address broader issues such as the role of the judiciary as an institution of
accountability. The FY06 CAS recognized the need to broaden this agenda but given the lack of public
demand for legal and judicial reform it stressed the need to strengthen demand for reform and proposed
encouraging a broader debate in the country. This proposal was folded into the Bank’s partnership with
IGS on institutions of accountability. At the same time the Bank fielded an extensive survey of citizen’s
experience of civil wrongs and crimes and their use of the dispute resolution mechanism. The survey
results are just beginning to flow and will be analyzed to improve understanding of how citizens relate to
the justice sector.
63.
The caretaker government saw legal and judicial reform as a high priority and began by
implementing a Supreme Court decision to separate the judiciary from the executive. This reform was
supported by the Transition Support Credit and the Ordinance passed to bring about this change has been
accepted by the elected Awami League led government and legislated into Law. In a similar vein, the
CTG also initiated the establishment of a Supreme Judicial Commission which was intended to
depoliticize the appointment of judges and to reverse the apparent deterioration in the quality of the
higher level judiciary by removing such appointments from the current almost exclusive discretionary
power of the government. The ordinance pertaining to this reform, also supported in the Transition
Support Credit has not yet been taken up by the Government, and has therefore lapsed until the
government chooses to bring forward a second legislation. Another casualty is the CTG ordinance

78

creating an independent prosecution service which also has not been ratified. In sum, there has been only
modest progress in this area.
Strengthen Demand for Reform and Enhance Right to Information
64.
The FY06 CAS recognized that governance reforms cannot be imposed from outside and that
the Bank needed to work with civil society to help build consensus around governance reforms. The
CAS supported the PRSP’s emphasis on enhancing access to information and the need for a Freedom of
Information Law, though the PRSP was cautious in describing the law as a longer term objective. Strong
civil society support and advocacy influenced the CTG into issuing an ordinance on the RTI in October
2008. The Bank supported this work through the Transition Support Credit where a prior action was “the
preparation of a draft ordinance on the Right to Information through a transparent and consultative proves
that includes discussion with civil society and other stakeholders”. Given the popular support for the law,
the newly elected Awami League government passed the RTI
Act in March 2009. Following the
enactment of the law the country team partnered with WBI to sponsor an international conference
organized by a national NGO on lessons from international experience in implementing RTI legislation.
While largely unexpected, the RTI law represents a major achievement of this CAS period.
65.
Access to information on business regulations is improving, in particular through an e-registry
of rules and regulations, expected to be launched in October 2009 supported by IFC’s BICF which has
a substantial program of engagement with various stakeholders including private sector chambers and
associations, think-tanks, media and universities.
LONG TERM STRATEGIC ISSUES
66.
Bangladesh faces major long term development risks from climate change and the frequency
of disasters that accompany it. While this was not a major focus of the FY06 CAS, a number of the flood
and cyclone of 2007 raised the profile of these issues and resulted in the Bank approving a $109 million
Emergency 2007 Cyclone Recovery and Restoration project. While the project is too new to result in any
outcome, it is designed to implement a medium to long term framework developed in an April 2008 GoBdonor joint Damage Loss and Need Assessment prepared in the aftermath of Cyclone Sidr for disaster risk
mitigation and management.
67.
Recognizing its vulnerability to climate change, Bangladesh played a highly active role at the
Bali Conference in December 2007. Bangladesh has prepared a Climate Change Strategy and Action
Plan emphasizing food security, disaster management, building resilient infrastructure, increasing the
country’s understanding of the climate change risks it faces, policies for mitigation and low carbon
development and capacity building and institutional strengthening. In September 2008, during a High
Level Meeting organized by DFID in London, DPs agreed to establish an MDTF for Climate Change in
Bangladesh to be administered by the World Bank. Some $100 million has been committed to the Trust
Fund. Three major studies are being prepared by the Bank to initiate work on the implications of climate
change on fresh groundwater resources in central aquifers, the implications of climate risks on food
security in Bangladesh and on the economics of climate change for Bangladesh. These studies are
nearing completion and will assist in developing Bank programs in the next CAS period.
D.

WORLD BANK GROUP PERFORMANCE

COUNTRY DIALOGUE AND AID COORDINATION
68.
The country dialogue with Bangladesh has been frequently interrupted by changes in
government. But the Bank remains well respected in Bangladesh. It has maintained good relations and
79

contacts with the two major political parties, and the Bank Group remained a trusted partner during this
period. A strong lending program was maintained, backed by AAA products.
69.
The Bank’s country office has played an important role in the policy dialogue. The national
staff has played an important role in facilitating dialogue, and helping HQ-based staff better understand
the political and cultural context in which the Bank’s operates. IFC now has a substantial on-the ground
capacity to carry out dialogue with the government through the BICF. The Bank was not able to bring in a
stronger on the ground presence of interested staff. This reduces the Group’s ability to effectively
leverage its national staff.
70.
Donor coordination has been a central issue for the country assistance strategy. Relations
between many DPs and the BNP-led government were difficult and unproductive at the time the CAS was
under preparation. The four largest donors in Bangladesh, the ADB, Japan, UK (DFID) and the World
Bank formed a partnership to prepare a joint framework that would guide their programs. This
framework included a statement of Partnership principles together with an understanding on the areas of
engagement in different sectors and terms of reference for coordinating and support roles. In the water
sector, a partnership framework was signed among DPs for work on Dhaka and Chittagong Water and
Sanitation programs.
71.
The joint framework was prepared following a large initial exercise that covered the key staff
of the four institutions. The initiative was led by the four Country Directors who saw the need for closer
coordination during a difficult period for Bangladesh and high governance risks. A common strategic
framework informed the country strategies of all four partners. Coordination and dispute resolution took
place at periodic meetings among the four Country Directors. The commitment to close collaboration did
not extend to a common country strategy or a joint implementation strategy except in co-financed
activities such as the health and primary education SWAps which embraced several donors, or the support
to reforms in the railways. The emphasis on governance in the common strategic framework was not fully
reflected in all of the partners’ work programs.
72.
The Government and 15 DPs, including the World Bank have signed a Statement of Intent in
2008 to develop, a Joint Cooperation Strategy (JCS). The JCS is an aid effectiveness plan for
Bangladesh based on the principles agreed in the Paris Declaration on Aid Effectiveness (2005) and the
Accra Agenda for Action (2008). The Bangladesh JCS intends to outline a joint vision for improving aid
effectiveness at country level by establishing an institutionalized mutual accountability mechanism. The
latter will be based on the LCG dialogue structure and a JCS Action Plan. Consultations and drafting of
the JCS started in the second half of 2008, and the strategy is planned to be finalized and signed by
Government and participating DPs in 2010. Although not envisaged during the design of this CAS, the
BICF and SPEMP have emerged as good practice cases of donor collaboration. BICF is funded by DFID
and the EU, and managed by the IFC. The MDTF for SPEMP is mainly funded by DFID, the EU and
DANIDA, while CIDA and the Embassy of Netherlands are potential donors.
LENDING AND AAA
73.
Lending volume during the CAS was robust but differed significantly in content from the
original CAS program. The program was highly responsive to the client’s changing policy priorities and
a range of emergency needs, including floods, a cyclone and the food crisis. The CTG’s strong policy
reform orientation enabled the Bank to provide a series of development support credits, covering macroeconomic and structural policy reforms, governance, education railway and power sector reforms. With
Bangladesh’s improved policy performance during the CTG period, the improved CPIA ratings enabled
the performance based IDA allocation to rise. In FY09, the last year of the CAS and the first year of IDA
15, the allocation for Bangladesh went up substantially to reflect the larger IDA, and for the first time
ever, the Bank provided over $1 billion in new commitments.
80

74.
Some 27 projects were approved during the CAS period (8 DPCs and 19 investment
operations), with total commitments of $2.6 billion, compared with a CAS lending program of $2.9
billion. Fourteen of the 25 projects identified in the CAS were delivered during the CAS period, nearly
all during the first two years of the CAS (see table 2). A total of $534 million was committed in response
to natural disasters and the food crisis. Development support credits accounted for 46% of actual
commitments compared to 30% of the CAS proposed lending program, again reflecting both policy and
crisis response, with $305 million of budget support related to disaster response. Lending slowed during
FY07 as a result of political and policy uncertainty in the pre-election period, accounting for much of the
shortfall in relation to planned total lending.
75.
The average project completion cost during the CAS was US$ 321,000, in line with the regional
average of US$319,000. Average project preparation time at 15 months (concept review to Board
approval) masks wide variations. Major infrastructure projects (e.g., Dhaka Water and Siddhirganj
power) were prepared in 3-4 years and one project took nine years. However, most operations were
prepared in less than one year reflecting the high share of DPCs, emergency operations, and additional
financing in the program. However, investment operation took place at least two years to prepare.
76.
Much of the core Economic and Sector Work has been relevant and of high quality. The nonlending program included 17 ESW reports and 15 policy notes. The analytical work informed future
operations, as well as the dialogue with government and civil society. Core ESW included a Country
Environment Assessment, the Bangladesh Strategy for Sustained Growth, a Country Gender Assessment,
a Poverty Assessment and a Public Expenditure Review. Key AAA was made widely available through a
new Bangladesh Development Series. Toward the end of the CAS period, reflecting an increasing focus
in this area, three major reports on climate change and disaster management were delivered. Policy notes
were intended to provide just in time advice to policy makers and be highly demand responsive.
77.
Technical assistance assumed a much higher profile in the country AAA program with a total
of 22 completed activities, compared with four during the previous CAS. This is consistent with Bankwide trends and reflects an increasing emphasis on providing more rapid response policy advice and
capacity building. Substantial technical support has also been provided in governance related areas
including public financial management, procurement, and public sector reform, much of this supported by
the Bangladesh specific DFID Governance Trust Fund. Overall, $5.6 million was spent on non-lending
TA, of which trust funds accounted for just over $3 million. These were seen as being highly relevant by
the country teams. However, more periodic peer reviews would help provide better ex-post quality
control.
PORTFOLIO PERFORMANCE
78.
Some 23 projects exited the portfolio during the CAS period. As of June 2009, there were 27
projects in the portfolio, with net commitments of $2.9 billion, and an undisbursed balance of $1.685
billion, the 15th highest in the Bank and the 5th highest for IDA recipients.
79.
The Completion Report for the FY01 CAS identified a number of issues in project design and
supervision including unrealistic expectations regarding objectives, completion schedules, and expected
results and insufficient attention to institutions and political economy. Bank supervision was
characterized by poor quality and realism of reporting and insufficient focus on development
effectiveness. These issues manifested themselves in disappointing project outcomes during the most
recent CAS as the stock of projects approved in the late 1990s and early 2000s exited the portfolio. Of
the 23 projects that closed during the FY06 CAS period, 13 were reviewed by IEG. Four projects (31%)
had a rating of MU or U, significantly worse than in the previous CAS Completion report. The lagged
81

nature of project outcome ratings suggests that these results will improve as more recently approved
projects – when attention to quality and implementation significantly increased – are completed and
evaluated. The IEG review ratings also reflect a worrisome disconnect ─5 out of 13 projects (38%) had
lower IEG ratings than in the ICR─ indicating the need for continued attention to monitoring project
ratings and the quality of ICRs.
80.
The CAS recognized the challenge of improving portfolio performance. The CAS identified a
range of issues – predominantly tied to inadequate government ownership and commitment – that
contributed to long implementation periods and large undisbursed balances. Efforts to address these
issues (for example, through intensified portfolio monitoring and together with DPs, to help GoB
streamline implementation) resulted in some improvement in the disbursement ratio, which averaged 19%
from FY01 to FY05 and increased to an average of 21% during the CAS period, reaching 24.7% in FY09,
above the regional average of 11.8% and IDA average of 22.9%. However, the median age of projects at
4.1 years remains higher than at the beginning of the CAS period (compared to the regional and IDA
average of 3.6 years); 8 projects are older than five years. One third of the projects in the portfolio have
had their closing dates extended. Average annual supervision costs over the CAS period were $103,000
somewhat below the regional average of $118,000.
81.
Portfolio risk declined, with the share of projects and commitments at risk falling throughout
the CAS period. At the end of the CAS period, three projects, (11% of the portfolio, 4% of
commitments) were classified as problem projects, compared with South Asia and IDA averages of 15%
and 14%, respectively. Portfolio management indicators deteriorated during the FY2006 and FY2007 but
then recovered with realism and proactivity rising from 57% and 33% in FY06 respectively, to 100% by
end FY09.
FIDUCIARY AND IMPLEMENTATION RISK MANAGEMENT
82.
The CAS committed the Bank to a strong focus on managing fiduciary and operational risk.
Tracking studies, post procurement reviews, and an independent procurement review of selected
operations and INT investigations all pointed to irregularities such as collusion in bidding, delays in
tender evaluation, lack of transparency and poor record keeping including inadequate documentation to
support variation in contracts. As a part of systematic pursuit of remedies, withholding of disbursement
for unresolved pending serious audit objections resulted in enhanced follow up on audit objections within
the government agencies. A number of corruption cases mentioned in audit reports followed special
scrutiny by independent private auditor and INT investigation. An ORMAP envisaged a systematic
analysis of corruption risk through AAA and in project preparation, advise on smart project design,
stronger supervision, more systematic follow up on remedies, and enhanced information disclosure. A
cross- sectoral Operations Risk Mitigation Team under the Chairmanship of the Operations Adviser in
Dhaka was established early during CAS implementation to advise teams on risk identification and
mitigation at project preparation stage.
83.
As originally conceived ORMAP was principally about information sharing and peer review of
the lending program. It was intended as an upstream engagement to influence the design of projects, and
not to duplicate the role of fiduciary teams. The team reviewed a number of key operations, focusing on
“hot” sectors such as roads, water, power and health. Since FY08, following the India DIR, the country
team added a downstream phase of trouble shooting advice to task teams facing corruption issues during
implementation. This resulted in a more systematic follow up of remedies, in part because of some of the
policy improvements relating to procurement. The overall process however, had mixed results. While
some sector teams found the exercise useful, benefiting project design, there was confusion in the
Country Team about ORMAP’s role. ORMAP elicited little interest from HQ-based staff and became an
exclusively Dhaka office activity. It lacked a specific budget or a formal secretariat, resulting in capacity
82

and resource constraints to monitor implementation of risk mitigation plans, carry out follow up and
oversight functions and more efficiently manage meetings and issue minutes.
E- ASSESSING A GOVERNANCE-FOCUSSED CAS
84.
This highly tumultuous CAS period tested both the Bank’s client and the Bank. While it may
be early to make a definitive judgment, Bangladesh’s economy withstood the severe political and
exogenous shocks and emerged relatively unscathed. Growth exceeded 6 per cent throughout the CAS
period, national savings rates were bolstered by remittances, domestic financing of the budget was
contained, inflation is under control, and the current account deficit is moderate and external reserves
comfortable. Downside risks have eased in recent months and near-term economic prospects remain
broadly favorable. Social indicators, particularly those linked to per capita income growth, continue to
improve, and Bangladesh remains on track to meet its MDG targets. These are significantly good results
given the overall difficult policy and governance environment.
85.
CAS outcomes were mixed but generally modest. Macro-economic stability saw relatively good
progress and automation of customs at Chittagong Port offered significant relief to exporters and
importers. There were gains in regulatory reforms, in corporatization of state owned banks, energy
regulatory capacity and corporatization of power utilities, and in enhancing accountability and quality of
private school providers in the secondary education system. The newly enacted Right to Information Act
could, if well implemented make a major contribution to strengthening demand for reform. But in general,
progress was mixed, and reforms moved at a relatively slow pace despite two years of an energetic CTG.
Outcomes were modest in relation to an ambitious and possibly over-reaching CAS. They were adversely
impacted by the difficulty of sustaining a dialogue with frequent changes of government and large
political uncertainties. While things went better than might have been expected given the difficult context
there remain questions about whether the Bank’s overall effort was commensurate with the task at hand.
86.
While the Bank’s contribution to the positive outcomes is not easy to measure, the Bank did a
number of things right. Apart from the obvious attribution problems in a country whose dependence on
aid has fallen sharply, a number of players contributed to these outcomes, including a relatively dynamic
CTG, a vigorous civil society, and the Bank’s principal DPs. Nevertheless, there were a number of things
the Bank did well:







The CAS helped rebrand Bangladesh as a country that despite poor governance managed to get a
lot of things right. This enabled the Bank to support Bangladesh on things it did well while
helping it to address the things it did not.
The strong emphasis on governance on the eve of one of the country’s many severe governance
crises positioned the Bank to better respond, and the effort to address the over centralization of
the state through local governance reforms was also right given the high costs to political stability
from the concentration of power in Dhaka.
Reengagement in important sectors like rural and power, while costly in terms of the Bank having
to learn afresh the issues in the sector and win back lost confidence, enabled it to attempt once
again to address neglected development issues in the Bangladesh economy.
Close collaboration between major donors through a joint strategic framework for partnership
ensured a unified approach and good collaboration on most substantive issues.
The Bank also reacted flexibly and quickly to the rapid changes in the country context. For
instance, the Bank Group did not waste much time dwelling on whether or not to work with a
non-elected, self-appointed CTG. The advice from civil society and elsewhere was that the
engagement was necessary to continue to support the country’s development agenda. Just-intime policy notes, policy-based lending and quick support following the flood and cyclone of
2007 reflect this proactive approach.
83



IFC’s BICF was coincidentally established at the beginning of 2007 and became an important
vehicle to support the CTG in its efforts to improve the investment climate. In particular, it helped
the CTG counter the drop in business confidence resulting from some of its early actions. IFC
exploited the window of opportunity by emphasizing a number of strategic initiatives, such as the
RRC and BBBF, which stood a chance of being sustained beyond the CTG’s tenure.
Development Policy Credits provided timely budget support for policies and programs that the
government was committed to undertake rather than pushing policies that the Bank wanted to see
done. While there are legitimate questions about the sustainability of some of the CTG led
reforms, those risks also exist whichever government was in power. DPCs also provided
important balance of payments support and helped avoid excessive domestic borrowing by the
government that would have crowded out the private sector. They also helped Bangladesh cope
with severe and repeated exogenous shocks. The Bank’s support probably contributed positively
to the continuing macro-economic stability during this period.



87.
A more interesting question is how one of the Bank Group’s early governance focused CAS
played out. The FY06 CAS recognized that the governance agenda was ambitious, and outlined two
strategies to address this. The first was to recognize that mainstreaming governance was a broad agenda
and that the Bank would focus on four key strategic areas:7 improving governance and efficiency in
infrastructure, particularly power; supporting local governance and community driven development
initiatives; improving public financial management, and strengthening the government’s revenue efforts.
Second, a governance-oriented CAS required “new ways of doing business”. The CAS called for shifts in
staffing, institutional processes and culture.8 This in turn required new skill sets in the Dhaka office, new
processes relating to mainstreaming of governance in all sector interventions, and in fiduciary risk
management, a more aggressive outreach to civil society and academia, more effective cross-sectoral
work and a shared country team understanding of expectations and risk tolerance in governance work.
PURSUING STRATEGIC GOVERNANCE PRIORITIES
88.
As seen from the foregoing discussion on CAS outcomes, results in terms of the strategic
governance agenda were mixed. In three of the four areas, progress has been slower than anticipated but
there has been progress, much of it on account of the actions taken during the CTG period. In the fourth
area, reform of the country’s revenue efforts, despite the CTG’s efforts, progress has been limited:






7
8

Improving governance and efficiency in infrastructure. In the energy sector, complex institutional
reforms were initiated and supported by a power development policy credit. These new
institutions are still finding their feet and it will require considerable political will to allow these
institutions to evolve and take shape and ensure that the process is allowed to continue without
undue political or bureaucratic interference. But key elements of the foundations for reform have
been laid, albeit somewhat tenuously, for a more rapid development of the sector should the new
government choose to build on these.
In roads and highways, the Bank carried out an elaborate Operational Risk Assessment that set
out a reform path for the Roads and Highways Department to reduce fiduciary risks. But
continuing INT investigations have discouraged the Bank from pursuing further financing in this
area.
Strengthening local governance: The Bank’s LGSP is path breaking in many respects and its
initial implementation was strongly supported by the outgoing BNP government and the CTG.
Nevertheless implementation was slow because of an overestimation of implementation
capabilities at both the central and local levels in designing the intervention. This has now been

World Bank, 2006, main text para 33.
World Bank, 2006, main text paras. 136-140.

84







remedied and the project has begun to move. However, key challenges remain, including
developing clarity between roles and functions of Ministers and elected local Government.
Community driven development: The Bank’s Social Investment Project is showing the way on
strengthening community empowerment. It is still limited in scope and it is only now that a
larger intervention is being planned. Organizing beneficiaries is being attempted in other projects
(e.g., the National Agriculture Technology project) but is not yet seen as a key element in all
Bank interventions.
Public Financial Management: With one exception, progress in this area has been slow. The
Bank’s report on the reform agenda came late in the CAS cycle, awaiting political economy work.
Nevertheless the enactment into law of the IDA supported Public Resources and Budget
Management Ordinance and the adoption of a Public Financial Management Improvement
program have created the basis for more rapid PFM reforms. A forward looking approach
towards the much awaited separation of accounts and audit cadre and Bank assisted policy note
on Restructuring Public Financial Management and Institutional Arrangements and a government
led action plan is another major stride towards improving PFM. The enactment and
implementation of the 2006 Procurement Act has also been a major achievement, although recent
revisions in some of its provisions have been as being contrary to international best practices.
An enhanced revenue effort: Despite a strong revenue effort under the CTG, there has been little
or no progress in this area. Frequent changes in personnel and a weak revenue agency have
delayed reforms. The CTG did not succeed in addressing this issue and the Bank’s considerable
work over the years appears so far to have come to naught.

89.
Although the CAS focus was on these key areas, many task teams took the mainstreaming of
governance agenda seriously. In secondary education, the programs supported ensuring a transparent
process for teacher recruitment, greater transparency in the production and distribution of textbooks,
linking financing of private schools to performance, all major governance reforms. In the health sector,
while governance was an afterthought in a program designed before the CAS, the team attempted
contracting out activities at an arm’s length, strengthening voice of service users, and strengthening
procurement issues. There was insufficient traction from counterparts and this was a time consuming and
difficult process. Similarly, regulatory reforms supported by IFC have a strong governance element.
Sector teams also benefited from an increasing use of political economy work facilitated by the
governance advisors. This work came late in the CAS work cycle, as in public financial management and
in the energy sector. In general key task teams are more sensitive to political economy issues but it is not
yet clear how this will influence the design of Bank strategies.
90.
The demand side programs supported by the governance team have started a process that needs
to be sustained. The partnership with IGS on accountability institutions has shown the potential for
creating local ownership and analytical capacity around key reform areas. The Bank also provided
strategic support to civil society on the right to information issue. The networks that have been created
from this work need to be sustained. This is a time consuming and onerous task for which the Bank is
currently not well organized. IFC’s BICF, has put in place a robust and multi-track program of stakeholder engagement and communications. This is a social capital whose usefulness may extend to the
whole WBG.
91.
There is nevertheless no denying that the outcomes fell short of expectations and of the
country’s critical needs, particular in the energy sector and in public revenues. Much of this can be
blamed on the underlying political context, and it could even be argued that the achievements were
satisfactory given this difficult context. The CAS may also have been too ambitious and the Bank’s effort
may have fallen somewhat short. Where there has been some success it has been more on account of the
efforts of strongly committed and professional individuals and teams supported strategically by
management, rather than because of well established processes and clear incentives.
85

CHANGING THE WAY THE BANK DOES ITS BUSINESS
Staffing
92.
The Bank made some progress in changing the way it does its business within the context of a
strong governance focus to its country strategy. The Bank appointed two governance advisors to initiate
work on the large governance agenda and to help mainstream the governance agenda. It fielded a strong
team of senior staff in Dhaka during the early period of the CTG including a lead economist with a strong
public sector background. However, the presence of HQ staff in the field in crucial areas where sustained
dialogue is critical such as energy and local governance remained limited if non-existent. Personnel
planning lacked strategic vision, and long term planning, and did not take adequately into account the
difficulties in posting high quality staff to Dhaka. This resulted in lengthy and costly interregnums
between the departure of high level staff and the arrival of their replacements, including country directors,
lead economists, sector specialists and governance advisors.
93.
Weak personnel management and inadequate resources were particularly costly in the context
of a transformative CAS that was raising the bar across the board, mainstreaming governance across
sectors, reengaging in sectors the Bank had retreated from, developing new programs in the core
governance area, introducing new processes to mitigate potential risks, developing key donor partnerships
through the Joint Strategy Partnership with ADB, DFID and Japan, by leading or participating in two
SWAps and reaching out systematically to civil society and academia with a view to help build coalitions
for reform. While the Bank benefitted from the DFID Governance Fund and other TFs, it was probably
too significant a scaling up of effort to manage effectively without additional high quality staff in the
field, without additional budgetary resources, and without a sustained effort to keep a country team divided as it often is, by the Bank’s network silos - on the same page through regular annual retreats,
progress reviews and team building efforts, and without addressing the incentives the staff face to respond
adequately to the challenges the Bank was addressing. The absence of a monitoring and evaluation
system for the country program as a whole was a significant gap in the CAS itself. Progress reports would
have enabled early decisions on areas promised in the CAS like public administration reform and legal
and judicial reform which looked increasingly unrealistic during implementation.
Institutional Processes
94.
The CAS committed the Bank to ensuring a knowledge sharing and peer review process as a
means to mainstreaming governance in the CAS. The Operational Risk Mitigation group was
established and has met regularly. But the process lacked sufficient involvement from headquarter staff,
was under resourced and under managed. To complicate matters, its terms of reference were broadened
following the India DIR to include advice to staff facing issues of corruption in their operations. ORMAP
is currently being redesigned to address some of these issues. Three issues will need to be addressed
going forward. First, the exercise needs to be focused on providing guidance to teams on both project
design and implementation, and requires the necessary technical skills to do so. Second, the ad hoc
interaction between the Senior Governance Advisor and the task teams needs to be replaced with a more
structured interaction that allows for comments on initiating briefs and project appraisal documents and a
more systematic mapping of the efforts to mainstream the governance agenda so that some of the
common policy issues that emerge can be raised with government and addressed. Third, governance
issues need to be addressed early in the project preparation cycle to more systematically reduce the risk of
corruption and to shift the onus for monitoring corruption risks to beneficiaries and to government
institutions rather than the Bank. An excessive focus on preventing corruption, in the absence of
concomitant focus on processes that enhance accountability to beneficiaries and to local institutions,
destroys the trust essential to a good partnership relationship.

86

95.
Country team members interviewed express concerns about the way corruption was being
addressed in the program. INT’s prolonged investigations put Bank-borrower relations in the project and
institutions being investigated on hold and created a climate of distrust. Some members feel that a focus
on corruption often takes attention away from a focus on results. Highly qualified and specialized Bank
staff end by spending valuable time on fiduciary risk mitigation issues that they do not feel competent to
address, rather than addressing the institutional factors causing those risks to increase in the first place.
Some Task Team Leaders worry that staff entrusted with rating procurement and FM risks may have
perverse incentives to mark all risks as high if only to protect themselves against future problems.
Procurement staff note that the symptoms of potential procurement problems that INT’s prevention
department has made available to staff are difficult to follow up since procurement staff are not trained
investigators and reluctant to encroach on functions that belong to government.
96.
While some of these concerns may reflect a reluctance to address governance issues in
projects, for the most part staff understands the importance of reducing fiduciary risk to better project
outcomes. But they are not convinced about current approaches to solving the problem. There are no easy
solutions, but the current environment is one in which staff may be becoming risk averse and from a
borrower perspective, the cost of dealing with the Bank may be rising. Corruption is a symptom of a
larger governance problem. The Bank needs to focus on helping address that larger governance problem,
and to recognize that while it is being addressed through long term institution building, there will remain
considerable risk of projects being subject to corruption, and to manage those risks through greater
beneficiary involvement and improved oversight by government agencies and independent entities.
Reaching out to civil society and academia.
97.
The Bank has made progress in selected areas in reaching out to civil society and academia.
Extensive consultations with civil society and academia preceded and followed preparation of flagship
reports such as the ones on NGOs, the poverty assessment, the gender report and the growth study. The
Bank also pioneered a new approach to AAA by partnering with a local institution, the IGS, which staged
workshops that pulled together the key stakeholders in different institutions of accountability. The Bank
and the IFC jointly worked with another local institution, the Bangladesh Enterprise Institute in the
preparation and dissemination of the Investment Climate Assessment. Additionally, the Social
Development team established a unique Post-Graduate Certificate Course on Management of Land
Acquisition and Resettlement (MLARR) at BRAC University’s BRAC Development Institute (BDI)
which can train professionals to assist the country and all DPs in better overcoming the infrastructure
gap. While these are commendable efforts, the underlying objective of strengthening demand for good
governance by building coalitions around reform areas is highly time consuming and staff intensive. In
Bangladesh, where decision making is highly centralized, the incentives are geared towards persuading
key decision makers rather than the more time consuming task of helping build coalitions for reform. The
latter is highly resource intensive with uncertain results. The civil society network developed by the
governance team would not have been possible without DFID TFs. Bank budgets currently do not allow
for funding activities which managers view as not necessarily leading anywhere. By contrast, IFC, in
particular its BICF program, has substantial resources dedicated to stake-holder engagement and
communications which has enabled it to carry out a variety of innovative activities involving a wide range
of stake-holders. A distinguishing feature of this is the exploitation of synergies between the various
activities – this has been possible because stake-holder engagement and communication has been viewed
within IFC as a holistic exercise carried out by a tightly integrated team while in the Bank this has been a
series of isolated exercises carried out by different program teams working in silos. Farming out AAA to
policy think tanks and academia would also enable the Bank to help build local analytical capacity and
understanding of reform issues and create local reform networks.

87

ANNEX A: BANGLADESH: SUMMARY MACROECONOMIC INDICATORS
FY05

FY06

FY07

FY08

FY09
(Est)

Real GDP growth (annual % change)

6.0

6.6

6.4

6.2

5.9

Investment (% of GDP)

24.5

24.7

24.5

24.2

24.2

Gross domestic savings (% of GDP)

20

20.2

20.4

20.3

20

Gross national savings (% of GDP)

23.9

25.8

25.8

25.5

27

CPI Inflation (annual % change)

6.5

7.2

7.2

9.9

6.7

8.6

10.4

12.1

13.9

15.6

11.9

13.3

15.5

19.5

21.1

3.8

4.8

6

7.9

9.6

-0.9

0.9

1.4

0.9

2.8

2.9

3.5

5.1

6.2

7.4

2.5

2.7

3.3

3.4

3.6

1.5

1.6

1.6

2.1

2.2

2.5

2.5

2.4

2.6

2.5

29.6

28.9

28.7

25.9

23.4

4.6

4.1

3.7

3.2

3

6.3
5.8
In Percent of GDP

5.3

4.9

4.6

10.5

10.7

10.3

11.4

11.2

13.8

13.9

13.6

15.1

15.3

3.3

3.2

3.2

2

2.9

..

..

..

1.7

0.7

..

..

..

3.7

3.6

1.7

2.1

2

1.5

1.8

47.5
46.9
46.5
End of year; Percent Change

44.4

44.8

17.1

19.5

12.6

18.1

17.8

16.8

18.1

15

24.9

14.6

16.7

19.3

17.1

17.6

19.2

Output and Prices

External Sector
Exports (f.o.b) ($ billion )
Imports (c.i.f) ($ billion )
Remittances ($ billion)
Current account balance (% of GDP)
Gross official reserves ($ billion)
In months of GNFS imports
Gross Aid Flows ($ billion)
Gross Aid Flow (% of GDP)
External Debt (% of GDP)
External Debt Service Ratio (% of foreign exchange
earnings)
External Debt Service Ratio (% of export earnings)
Public Finance
Total Revenue
Total Expenditures including support to SOEs
Overall budget deficit (excl. grants)
Budget support to SOEs
Budget deficit including support to SOEs
Domestic financing
Public debt
Money and Credit
Net Domestic assets
Private sector
Broad money (M2)

88

ANNEX B: IFC PROGRAM AND ACTIVITIES IN BANGLADESH (2006-09)
98.
IFC’s program in Bangladesh during the CAS period under review, combined its investment
activities in a range of sectors, as well as its advisory work through two donor funded facilities SEDF and
BICF (established in 2007).
IFC STRATEGY






IFC strategy in Bangladesh in the CAS period under review focused on: (i) private infrastructure; (ii)
energy, including investments in gas production and related infrastructure; (iii) manufacturing and
service sector companies; and (iv) innovative, private sector sponsored projects in health and
education. IFC also supported the development of local capital markets and a competitive banking
sector through direct investments and institution building. IFC’s investment as well as advisory
program in Bangladesh reflects the above strategic priorities. IFC has a committed portfolio of $107
million in 12 projects at the end of June 2009, in a range of sectors including telecommunications,
cement, agri-processing, education and financial markets. Financial Markets account for 48%,
general manufacturing and services for 31%, Agribusiness 13% and Telecomm for 8% of the
portfolio.
However, IFC’s ability to execute this strategy was constrained by slow progress on policy and
regulatory reform, delays in receiving regulatory approvals for investments, and lack of transparency
in infrastructure concessioning. IFC developed a strong pipeline of potential investments in
agribusiness, financial markets, infrastructure, and the pharmaceutical sector, funding for which is
required in both local currency and foreign currency. The Bangladesh authorities have indicated that
they would prefer to limit the use of IFC’s existing local currency product (the partial credit guarantee
instrument PCG) to infrastructure projects.
There has been a concerted effort to integrate IFC’s investment and advisory operations in
Bangladesh, where the support provided by SEDF in sectors such as poultry, agribusiness laid the
ground for potential IFC investments. IFC also built strong relationships with partner banks under the
SEDF’s Access to Finance program and IFC could also have a strong investment role with these
banks.

IFC PROGRAM IN BANGLADESH






Infrastructure: IFC’s existing portfolio in the infrastructure sector includes investments in power,
telecom and ICT (mobile operators, internet broadband business). During the CAS period, IFC
explored opportunities in transport/ports/toll roads and aviation (tracking the Chittagong NM
Container terminal, inland container depot/port, following up on PPP opportunities in existing as well
as upcoming Export Zones; tracking progress of the Dhaka Chittagong Expressway, the privatization
of Biman and investment opportunities in new private airlines. IFC completed an advisory mandate
for the Bibiyana IPP tender to set up a 450MW gas-based power plant. This project was an excellent
example of IFC /World Bank cooperation on many levels.
In the General Manufacturing and Services sector. IFC provided investment and advisory support
in the manufacturing and services sector through support of SMEs with a positive impact on
improving inclusion through employment generation. The target for investment in this group was
export-oriented companies as foreign exchange earnings provide a natural hedge for borrowings in
foreign exchange (IFC does not have a local currency product to offer). Agribusiness (food
processing /seed /poultry and dairy) was another focus area for IFC because of its ability to enhance
food security and inclusion. In the education sector, IFC explored opportunities to support
mainstream education and vocational training.
Financial Markets: In the financial sector, IFC supported the consolidation of the banking sector
through investments in 4 banks, one microfinance institution; and provided trade finance support to 4
89

participating banks under its Global Trade Finance Program. This support became particularly
significant, after the global financial crisis started in 2007, and trade financing became difficult. The
first partial credit guarantee (PCG) project was approved for the BRAC NGO by Bangladesh Bank in
2007 for which Citibank was the lead financier. There is limited scope for IFC in the microfinance
sector is not allowed to borrow in foreign currency.
IFC’S ADVISORY PROGRAM
SEDF
99.
IFC’s SEDF was initially conceived as a 5-year $28m program in 2002, which evolved into a
$40m SME development program (term extended by 1 year) by IFC in partnership with the European
Union (EU), UK (DFID), CIDA, ADB Bank, the Government of Norway and the Government of
Netherlands. The belief was that effective access to finance, business advisory services and an enabling
regulatory environment are key to increasing the number, performance and competitiveness of SMEs which lead to growth and poverty reduction. IFC’s SEDF operates in Bangladesh, Nepal, Bhutan and
North East India. The first phase of the program ended in December 2008 and IFC management approved
an extension of six years for IFC’s SEDF, titled SEDF2 (2008-14), and other donors, namely DFID, EC
and the Government of Norway, have pledged financial support to IFC’s SEDF2.
100.
By combining IFC expertise with the capacity and partnerships in the region, IFC’s SEDF1
facilitated counterparts and service providers to achieve considerable successes during 2002-08. Some
key highlights include:











Through its Access to Finance program, IFC’s SEDF has helped introduce new financial products
in Bangladesh market (e.g. SME-tailored products, factoring, and operating lease).
18 partner financial institutions (PFIs) of SEDF provided finance to over 150,000 SMEs
triggering sector-wide interest in financial services for small and medium enterprises and even
specific sectors such as Light Engineering.
SEDF also helped improve core risk management capability in the Bangladesh financial sector
(trained 6,660 bankers across 34 private and commercial banks in Bangladesh); sector now better
positioned to comply with Basel II commitments.
Demonstrated 45% energy efficiency (natural gas savings) in steel production, bringing local
industry closer to international benchmarks; as well as efficient use of gas and raw material (scrap
metal), generating savings of $2.5m per year in 21 re-rolling mills.
Facilitated a $62m fund allocation for storage facilities, research & development and establishing
a certification agency for the seed sub-sector through Public Private Partnership.
SEDF promoted contract farm-based hybrid vegetable seed production enhancing employment
opportunities for women (75% workers employed in seed production are women. In the Bogra
area seed production generated 164,749 person days of employment for women.
SEDF support for higher production and use of organic fertilizers increased crop yields by 319%, and resulted in a 10-13% increase in income for the farmers adopting organic fertilizers.
Upgraded private laboratory testing services helped 10,000 small commercial farms reduce the
risk of bird disease and mortality.
The establishment of a new extension service with SEDF support helped 300 poultry SMEs to
achieve 15-20% cost reduction in farm management.
Demonstrated significant productivity improvements in garment enterprises (16% increase in
pieces per worker per hour; 21% reduction in rejection rates); industry now accessing
productivity services without IFC’s SEDF assistance.

90







Assisted the garment industry association in implementing a system of industry-wide monitoring
to enable social compliance.
Supported the first ever trade fair on waste water management in Bangladesh, which attracted 36
effluent treatment solutions providers and generated contracts worth $2.3m.
Supported government efforts to simplify business registration in Bangladesh and Bhutan;
facilitated automation of the Registrar of Joint Stock of Companies, Bangladesh.
Supported the Canada Trade Fair that generated $6.5m in additional business for garment
enterprises.
SEDF undertook a portfolio of over thirty projects jointly with FIAS and the WB between 20032007 that enabled the creation of the IFC Bangladesh Investment Climate Fund

BICF
101.
A major development in the WBG’s support to Bangladesh during the CAS period was the
establishment in January 2007, of the BICF, a technical assistance and advisory facility dedicated to
investment climate reforms. This eight-year, $55 million facility is funded by DFID and EC and managed
by IFC. The BICF focused on two core program areas: regulatory reforms and modernization of the
economic zones regime, underpinned by a program on institutional capacity building, particularly in
government. With support from BICF, the government drafted an Economic Zones Act (approved by the
cabinet in May 2008) and likely to be passed by parliament soon. The Act intends to facilitate the move
towards a private sector dominated economic zones regime in the country through PPPs. BICF also
assisted the Bangladesh Export Processing Zones Authority (BEPZA) in developing an environmental
and social management system, and in streamlining and automating its administrative processes.
102.
In its two years of operation BICF has made marked progress in various program areas including
providing technical and advisory support for the establishment of the Regulatory Reforms Commission
(RRC) to streamline regulations and the BBBF, which provides systematic, regular and results-oriented
dialogue between the private sector and government functionaries at the highest level. BICF and WB
cooperated on the private sector development support project (PSDSP), reform recommendation on land
administration, special economic zones etc.
103.
IFC’s BICF is helping build capacity through a two-track approach: a) institutional strengthening
of key individual agencies working on PSD issues, e.g., the BoI; and b) across-the-board training of civil
servants. BICF reached agreement with the Ministry of Establishment to work jointly on the design and
delivery of a comprehensive training program focused on private sector development issues for all levels
of civil servants. Over the life of the program, more than 2000 civil servants are expected to be trained. It
also initiated a “Core Group” program which engages groups of civil servants over a 6 -8 month period to
expose them to good practice thinking on PSD issues, and build a community of reform-minded civil
servants.
Bangladesh Better Business Forum
104.
IFC’s BICF assisted the government in the design and establishment of the BBBF, a publicprivate dialogue platform chaired by the Chief Adviser (Head of the Government). The BBBF does most
of its technical work through five working groups, which are co-chaired by and composed of senior
Government and private sector representatives. The Working Groups focus on 5 broad thematic areas Business Finance, Infrastructure, Macroeconomic Policy, Business Entry and Operations and Skills
Development. These Working Groups prepare and submit detailed recommendations for policy,
regulatory, institutional or infrastructural reforms to the plenary session, which prioritizes them for
implementation. The BBBF is supported by a Secretariat based in the BoI.

91

105.
The BBBF Working Groups have met several times during the CAS period, submitted a total of
290 recommendations, of which 247 have been approved for implementation. Out of these, 94
recommendations have already been implemented. Among the BBBF’s major achievements include the
reconstitution of the National Skills Development Council, an apex body to oversee skills development
work across all sectors in Bangladesh. The BBBF has also resulted on the establishment of SME Service
Centers in banks to ease the access of SMEs to loans, the continuation of tax benefits to the growing IT
sector, and a reduction in the cost of internet bandwidth in Bangladesh, among other reforms. IFC’s
BICF provided the BBBF with assistance in communications support and capacity building.
Impact of Regulatory reforms
Examples of significant results of Regulatory reform supported by IFC include:






The bonded warehouse licensing reform, implemented in May 2008, has yielded impressive results. A survey
of 58 companies which obtained licenses during July-December 2008 indicate an 81% reduction in time taken
(from 226 to 43 days) and a 44% reduction in mostly unofficial costs.
Chittagong Customs which deals with the bulk of the country’s trade has introduced automation Clearance
processes have been reduced from 42 to 6 steps; most imports are now cleared within 3 days (versus 32 in 2008)
and 90% of exports are cleared within 1 day (as against 32 in 2008).
The automated business registration system introduced in March 2009 coupled with process improvements has
led to a significant reduction in the time taken to register a business from about 30 days in 2008 to less than 7
days, with a fast track system allowing one day registration (for 20% of the cases). Early estimates suggest that
this reform has doubled company registrations.
The Government has taken a decision to substantially reduce the property registration fees (by about 50%). This
reform is expected to result in more realistic reporting of property values and thus higher revenues. A program
to digitize land records and transactions is being developed.

Regulatory Reform Commission
106.
IFC’s BICF assisted the government in conceiving, designing, and establishing a 17-member
Regulatory Reform Commission to oversee a systematic regulatory reform program (rather than the
earlier tradition of ad hoc reforms) in Bangladesh. Established in late October 2007 with a mandate for
one year, the RRC’s term has been extended till the end of October 2010. BICF supported the
government’s reform initiatives by providing assistance to RRC and other agencies in two broad areas:
reduction in the costs and risks of regulatory compliance; and strengthening the institutional framework
for regulatory governance. BICF has also been at the forefront in supporting the government’s work on
competition policy (through the Ministry of Commerce) - a Competition Act has been drafted and is
awaiting Cabinet approval. The RRC met 11 times and made over 50 reform recommendations, many of
which have been accepted by the government and are being implemented.

92

TABLE A: BANGLADESH FY06 CAS COMPLETION REPORT SUMMARY RESULTS MATRIX
A. COUNTRY
DEVELOPMENT
GOALS AND
RESULTS
Economic
Growth

Poverty
Reduction

Human
Development

FY06 CAS

GDP growth averaged 5.4% between FY-0105, with investment rising from 16% of GDP
to 18.5%, while public investment fell from
7% to 6% of GDP. Medium-term macroeconomic framework underpinning CAS
projected growth accelerating to 6% in FY06
and 6.5% in FY08, predicated on higher
investment levels, increased efficiency of
investment, and structural reforms.
Percentage of poor fell gradually to 50% in
2000 from 59% in 1990. Additional 5%
point reduction projected for 2004.

Bangladesh had taken large strides towards
meeting the Millennium Development Goals
 Primary Completion Rate was 73.3 as
reported in the CAS
 Ratio of girls to boys in primary and
secondary schools rose from 72.5% in
1990 to 102.8% in 2001
 Under 5 mortality fell below 77 in 2003
from 144 in 1990.
 Percentage of children underweight
projected to fall below 50% in 2004
from 67% in 1990.
 Maternal mortality rates estimated at
380 per 100,000 live births.
 Contraceptive prevalence for women
between 15 and 49 was 54%

STATUS AT FY06 CAS COMPLETION
REPORT
Growth averaged 6.3% during the CAS period, broad
based, cutting across all sectors. Growth rose to 6.6% in
FY06 but fell slightly each year to 5.9% in FY09.
Investment levels ranged between 24.2% and 24.7%.

Growth in consumption fuelled by rapid growth and large
remittance inflows contributed to a faster rate of poverty
reduction to 40% by 2005. Poverty could have fallen by
a further 5 percentage points through 2008, given rapid
growth, but natural disasters and a food price shock may
have slowed the pace of poverty reduction.
Bangladesh continued to make progress towards the
Millennium Development Goals;
 Primary Completion Rate is currently reported at 72,
suggesting no improvement over the period
 Ratio of girls to boys remained at 103 for most recent
data reported; thus continuing to meet the MDG
target which had already been exceeded prior to the
CAS
 Under 5 mortality fell further to 61, on course to
meet MDG
 Percentage of children underweight fell modestly to
46%
 Maternal mortality rate declined to 320 per 100,000
live births but will not reach MDG target. (143)
 Contraceptive prevalence improved modestly to 56%
in the most recent reported data.
 HIV prevalence remains low and TB case detection
at 72% is above WHO global targets. Deaths from
malaria fell sharply from 588 in 2002 to 158 in 2008
in 13 malaria endemic districts.

CHALLENGES AND LESSONS
LEARNED
While growth has been impressive,
Bangladesh continues to under
perform in relation to its potential.
Investment levels are 8% points below
national savings rates, reflecting the
lost opportunity to raise investment
without straining the balance of
payments. FDI levels are still less than
1% of GDP
Bangladesh still remains a very poor
country with 56 million people in
poverty, and large numbers just above
the poverty line who are vulnerable to
shocks and ill served by safety nets.
Poverty data also reveals large
regional variations with the western
region lagging behind.
Educational outcomes appear to be
peaking and boys from poor
households appear to be being left
behind girls of poor households. Child
mortality continues to decline rapidly.
Malnutrition and high levels of
maternal mortality remain serious
problems The quality of health and
educational services remains low and
disproportionately hurts the poor.
National averages conceal large
differences in access, although there
have been gains in equitable coverage
of vertical programs.

94

B. CAS
STRATEGIC

FY06 CAS

STATUS AT FY06 CAS COMPLETION
REPORT

CHALLENGES AND LESSONS
LEARNED

OBJECTIVES AND
OUTCOMES

Pillar 1: Improve Investment Climate
1-A. Maintain
Macroeconomic
Stability






1-B. Remove
Trade
Restrictions and
Reduce
Administrative
Barriers

Consistency of fiscal deficits and their
financing patterns with requirements of
macro stability and sustainability
maintained.
Contingent liabilities accounted for and
all new public borrowing restricted to
above the line
SOE losses and public utilities’ arrears
reduced

Trade structure rationalized and an integrated
trade strategy formulated across GOB


Average nominal trade protection rate
reduced and para-tariffs on non-luxury
items phased out*

SOE losses

FY06 FY07 FY08

FY09

(in billion Tk.) 35.7

22.8

99.9

1.5

(% of GDP)

0.48

1.83

0.03

0.86

SOE losses were reduced significantly in FY06 and FY07
but increased sharply in FY08 due to the lack of
adjustment in administered prices in response to the
international commodity price increases. Particularly oil
and fertilizer.
However in FY09, the operating costs and losses of a
number of state-owned enterprises declined significantly
due to the slump in international commodity prices which
in turn reduced the burden of subsidies.

Average
FY06 FY07 FY08 FY09 FY10
nominal
protection
rate (%)
26.5
24.3 21.9
20.1 22.9
trade
Trade reforms during FY06-09 were opportunistic and
gradual focusing mostly on import duty reduction and
simplification.
Trade Policy cell established in the government.

A key lesson is the need to maintain
flexibility in the design and
implementation of reforms to take
account of unforeseen external and
domestic developments. The automatic
pass-through to domestic consumers
of the substantial increase in global
energy prices, while economically
desirable, proved difficult in practice,
given difficult political Similarly,
closure of large state-owned
enterprises, such as Adamjee Jute
Mill, concerns had emerged about
inadequate growth in employment and
the paucity of good and willing
investors, causing a more cautious
implementation of privatization and
closures of sick industries.
Bangladesh continues to have one of
the most restrictive trade regimes in
the world. The remaining trade
liberalization agenda is quite
substantial. High nominal protection
rate, together with cumbersome trade
facilitation procedures, an inefficient
duty drawback system, and severe
infrastructure bottlenecks at the port,
has resulted in the anti-export bias
leveling off at relatively high levels.
Bangladesh's immediate challenge is
to reduce this bias further while
ensuring that favorable trade
agreements are reached so that
dependence on garments exports is
reduced.

95

B. CAS
STRATEGIC

FY06 CAS

STATUS AT FY06 CAS COMPLETION
REPORT

CHALLENGES AND LESSONS
LEARNED

OBJECTIVES AND
OUTCOMES

Pillar 1: Improve Investment Climate (Cont’d)





1-C. Improve
access to and
quality of
infrastructure
services, by
strengthening
sector
governance and
encouraging
greater private
sector
participation










The approval process in BOI, BEPZA,
and Register of JSCs, streamlined and
made transparent
Reliable and up-to-date business
information made available
Efficiency of customs & ports admin.
increased by streamlining procedures
Enforcement of contracts & property
rights improved and commercial justice
mechanism streamlined

A regulatory and pricing framework
more conducive to greater private sector
participation established
Progress towards the corporatization
and commercialization of public utility
agencies, and publicized service
delivery standards and performance
targets
Private sector participation in
infrastructure provision increased
Progressive alignment of domestic
energy prices with international prices
and power prices adjusted to reflect
changes in underlying costs*
Bangladesh Power Development Board
restructured and successors corporatized
Conclude at least two deals for new
privately financed base-load power
plants following competitive and
transparent procurement and applying
the generation financing strategy*











Automation of business registration processes at the
Office of the Registrar of Joint Stock Companies has
led to a significant reduction in the time taken to
register a company; the majority of the companies
are now obtaining registration in less than 3 days
compared to more than 30 days before.
Institutional basis for regulatory reforms laid through
the establishment of the Regulatory Reforms
Commissions Draft Competition Act prepared. Time
taken to clear customs reduced through automation
of processes at the Chittagong Customs House (no
involvement of BICF here but BICF is assisting a
similar project at the Dhaka Customs House .
During the CAS period there were adjustments in
various categories of petroleum product (and CNG)
prices, but there was no implementation of any
indexation to international prices. Certain customer
segments have experienced power price adjustments
but for all customers, price increases have not kept
pace with increases in the costs to serve them. BERC
did develop somewhat as a regulatory agency, but it
is not yet functioning with a strong mandate or full
independence.
Under the Dhaka Water Supply and Sanitation
Project, The corporate governance and commercialization structure of Dhaka Water and Sewerage
Authority (DWASA) strengthened through the establishment of a Performance Agreement between
DWASA and the GOB and the publication of the
rules and regulations governing the operations of
DWASA. A DWASA customer charter has been
published.
Corporatization of BPDB has continued but at a slow
pace, and the independence of corporatized successor
entities has been significantly constrained. This is
due to strong instincts for centralization in BPDB
and in the Ministry of Power, Energy and Mineral
Resources...

Key Lessons: Sector institutional and
governance strengthening require
sustained efforts over the long term.
The Bank is taking a long term phased
approach in sector support – using a
series of simplified but focused
interventions. Progress on common
sector and policy issues can be
enhanced through coordinated
development partner actions. In water
and sanitation a Joint Partnership
Framework between the GOB and key
DPs helped leverage achievements.

96

B. CAS
STRATEGIC

FY06 CAS

STATUS AT FY06 CAS COMPLETION
REPORT

CHALLENGES AND LESSONS
LEARNED

OBJECTIVES AND
OUTCOMES

Pillar 1: Improve Investment Climate (Cont’d)
No baseload power plants were financed in the private
sector, due primarily to the lack of GOB commitment to
transparency in procurement processes. Other factors,
especially the weak mandate of the CTG on these issues,
also affected the IPP program, as did difficult external
market conditions.

 Dhaka-Chittagong Transport Corridor
improved
 New Mooring Container Terminal in
Chittagong Port completed and
concessioned to the private sector

1-D. Deepen and
make more
efficient
financial
intermediation

 Supervision of banking sector
strengthened. BB prudential norms
brought in line with international best
practice*
 Progress towards divestment of
remaining NCBs and improved debt
recovery: privatization of Rupali Bank
completed
 Enforcement of bankruptcy and default
legislation made stricter
 Regulation for improved governance of
MFIs enacted: adopt corporate
governance standards for MFIs.

 IFC’s invested in the mobile telecomm provider
Grameen phone but projects in other infrastructure
areas did not materialize on account of slow progress
on policy and regulatory reform, and lack of
transparency in infra-structure concessioning.
 Dhaka-Daudkani portion of Dhaka-Chittagong
corridor is four lane highway. Widening of the
remaining portion of corridor to four lane has been
initiated. A project to build an expressway with ADB
financing is under consideration.
 In March 2007, a private operator was appointed for
integrated operation of the Container Terminal.
 An Economic Zones Act, which will facilitate private
participation in the development of economic zones
has been prepared. Several potential PPP projects in
the economic zones are being analyzed.
 Bangladesh Bank Order 1972 and Bank Companies
Act 1971 amended to give Bangladesh Bank autonomy over exchange rate and monetary policy and
bank supervision and placed the state-owned commercial banks and specialized development Bank under
direct oversight of Bangladesh Bank
 Development Policy Credits supported the proposed
privatization of Rupali Bank, but this was not realized
when the bidder failed to meet his commitment.
 The climate for further privatization worsened, and
the Bank pursued an agenda of corporatizing the three
remaining state-owned commercial banks. This
program of management and financial reforms has
resulted in a decline in gross non-performing loans

The Bank pragmatically shifted its
emphasis from support for
privatization of state owned
commercial banks to improving their
performance. However, this strategy
may be threatened by the return to
populist policies on bank lending
falling the return of an elected
government, including politically
motivated appointments to the boards
of state owned banks and a return to
directed landing for agriculture and a
moratorium on loans to certain groups.

97

B. CAS
STRATEGIC

FY06 CAS

STATUS AT FY06 CAS COMPLETION
REPORT

CHALLENGES AND LESSONS
LEARNED

OBJECTIVES AND
OUTCOMES

Pillar 1: Improve Investment Climate (Cont’d)

1-E. Increase
productivity
and income
growth;
improve living
conditions for
the rural poor

Regulatory & supervisory frameworks for
capital & insurance markets (SEC, Insurance
Commission strengthened: (i) Increase
market placement of securitized issues. (ii)
Develop secondary markets for govt.
securities and establish reliable yield
benchmarks
 Agricultural extension and research
progressively more responsive to market
needs
 Functioning of agricultural input and
output markets improved
 Reduce, rationalize, and selectively
eliminate agricultural input subsidies*
 Rural business climate improved:
 Regulatory environment for agrobusiness improved
 Initial steps taken to improve the system
of land administration and land use
planning:

from 14% in June, 2007 to 10.36% in September 2009.





CAS outcomes relating to agricultural extension and
research were not achieved during the CAS period,
but are likely to be achieved only in the next CAS
period and beyond under the ongoing FY08 National
Agriculture Technology Project (NATP), which is
designed as first 5 year phase of a 15 year long
program (APL).
Strategy to modernize land administrations
procedures and records developed. RRC, with
support from the BICF, made a comprehensive set of
recommendations to modernize land administration
procedures and records. BICF has been providing
support to the line ministries responsible for
implementation. BICF was also instrumental in
catalyzing reduction in property registration fees ,
announced in the FY10 budget. SEDF’s technical
assistance in agribusiness sectors (poultry, seeds)
including value chain analysis helped increase
productivity and incomes in rural areas. SEDF work
in farm based hybrid seed production enhanced
employment opportunities for women. While the
improvements in regulatory environment were not
achieved an Agribusiness Opportunities and
Constraints Study, completed in FY 08 recommends
several reforms but these have not been implemented
by the Government. Also the NATP, in the long run,
would lay foundation for improving regulatory
environment for improved agro-business.

CAS should not have committed to
outcomes unless there were robust
instruments designed to achieve some
of these outcomes. Political economy
issues ruled out cuts in agricultural
subsidies.
While AAA work completed
(Agribusiness Opportunities and
Constraints Study completed in FY
08) recommended policy and strategic
interventions toward this outcome, the
dialogue with the government did not
continue as follow up due to political
changes and uncertainty.

98

B. CAS
STRATEGIC

FY06 CAS

STATUS AT FY06 CAS COMPLETION
REPORT

CHALLENGES AND LESSONS
LEARNED

OBJECTIVES AND
OUTCOMES

Pillar 1: Improve Investment Climate (Cont’d)
1-G. Strengthen
adherence to
international
social &
environmental
standards

Adherence to social & environmental
regulations increased
 Improve private sector compliance with
workplace safety, security and
environmental regulations

1) A system to compensate very poor and destitute
informal settlers residing on canals of Dhaka city has
been implemented in the context of the Dhaka WASA
project. This was the first time for Dhaka WASA and it
set the standards for similar future interventions.
2) An NLTA on Pro-poor resettlement has been
established with support from AusAID and DFID trust
funds. A series of activities including policy dialogues,
training for GOB officials, exposure visits to best practice
projects and capacity building programs for newly
established resettlement cells in Dhaka WASA, PGCB
and GTCL is being implemented.
3) A policy dialogue on issues of land acquisition and
resettlement has been initiated with the participation of
multiple implementing agencies of the GOB.). A report
catalyzing demand for reform from the standpoint of
implementing agencies within GOB has been produced
and endorsed by all participating agencies.
4) A Post-Graduate Certificate Course in Management of
Land Acquisition and Resettlement (MLAR) has been
established in BRAC University, Dhaka..
5) BICF, through its Economic Zones program helped set
up an environment and social management system in the
Bangladesh Export Processing Zones Authority. IFC’s
SEDF work with SMEs in the RMG, Light Engineering
improved environmental compliance and standards.

99

B. CAS
STRATEGIC

FY06 CAS

STATUS AT FY06 CAS COMPLETION
REPORT

CHALLENGES AND LESSONS
LEARNED

 Between 2004 and 2007, impressive gains in equitable coverage of vertical programs: 82% of children
under 2 receive all basic vaccinations: gap between
top and bottom quintiles dropped to 8.5 % points; 88%
of children 9-59 months given vitamin A supple-ments
( rich-poor gap only 1.2 % points), and, 48% of
women use modern contraceptive methods (rich-poor
gap 2.5 % points).
 Utilization of health services still poor. Only 4.4 % of
poor women deliver in health facilities (compared to
43% among the rich), 4.4% have skilled assistance at
delivery (compared to 51%), and 31 % receive
antenatal care from medically trained providers
(compared to 84%). Just 17% of poor children with
acute respiratory infections received care from skilled
providers (60% in upper quintile). While utilization of
essential services by the poor remains low, trends are
positive. Between 2004 and 2007,for the poorest
women, total fertility rate dropped by 20% ante-natal
care from medically trained provider increased by
25%; deliveries at the facility increased by 67% and
medically trained assistance at delivery also increased
by 38%. HNPSP sought to strengthen the
government’s stewardship role, country systems and
community voice, and to empower consumers. A key
component, diversifying service provision through
contracting out services was subject to significant
delays in recruiting agencies to carry out contracting
process. A significant part of anticipated delegated
responsibilities to ensure arms length contracting for
accountability was not realized. Modest progress was
made on country systems and building capacity A
major step forward a demand side financing pilot to
empower poor pregnant women-the program now
covers 33 upazillas and reaches out to over 100,000
pregnant women annually.

 The remaining challenge is to
increase utilization of essential
health services.
 Progress on strengthening governance has been mixed due to the
absence of reform champions, the
changing political economy and
key institutional constraints including poor capacity and lack of
ownership. Underlying issues such
as frequent staff transfers, lack of
technical assistance and the slow
pace of change limited advancement in strengthening country
systems.
 Donor support is through a sectorwide approach (SWAp). In
addition to the US$ 300 million
IDA credit, the World Bank administers a US $460 million MDTF
that pools resources from seven
DPs (DFID, EC, Sida, Netherlands,
UNFPA, CIDA and KfW). This
arrangement has meant increased
staff resources and engagement in
the sector, a coordinated policy
dialogue with government, close
monitoring of sector outcomes, and
periodic operational and analytical
reviews to identify constraints and
agree on joint actions. However,
efforts constrained by weak client
capacity in and changing political
economy. Further, harmonization
and joint working make it more
challenging to arrive at a
manageable set of priorities.

OBJECTIVES AND
OUTCOMES

Pillar 2: Empowering the Poor
2-A. Improve
Access to
Quality Services
Through Better
Accountability

Health
 Access and quality of the poor to health
services improved
 Shorter and more direct accountability
links established between the health
service providers and beneficiaries
 Utilization rate for essential service
delivery package of the two lowest
quintiles arises from 55% to 65%
 Further diversification of service delivery
through contracting arrangements with
NGOs in partnership with UPs.
 TB detection and treatment improved
according to HNPSP action plan

100

B. CAS
STRATEGIC

FY06 CAS

STATUS AT FY06 CAS COMPLETION
REPORT

CHALLENGES AND LESSONS
LEARNED

OBJECTIVES AND
OUTCOMES

Pillar 2: Empowering the Poor (Cont’d)
Education
 Access enhanced and quality &
relevance of pre-primary, primary and
secondary education especially for girls
improved
 Quality assurance mechanisms for
monitoring student learning and carrying
out impact assessments established
 Teachers selected through merit based
transparent process*
 Public subsidies to schools linked to
learning outcomes*
 Increase competition in Textbook
procurement at the secondary level
 Continue incentives for girls to attend
and stay in schools









National Assessment of student learning outcome
was carried by Directorate of Primary Education
(2006 & 2008).
24,000 primary teachers appointed based on merit
and through transparent process.
MOE now grants monthly pay order to private
education institutions based on performance
Major part of textbook development in secondary is
now privatized.
Newly approved Secondary Education Quality and
Access Enhancement Project (SEQAEP, approved
by the Board in July 2008) provides special
incentives for both poor girls and boys.
Under the Reaching out-of School Children Project
(ROSC), 500,000 students are enrolled in Learning
Center.







Interventions to expand access to
education should be accompanied
by improvements in education
quality.
In order to meet the EFA/MDG
goals, the government should now
place greater emphasis on all
school age population, including
disadvantaged groups, children in
remote areas, etc.
It is critical to foster public
private partnership in order to
achieve the desired educational
development goals.

Water and Sanitation






Water resource management improved
Coverage of solid waste collection and
adequate disposal in selected towns
increased
Surface water quality in and around
Dhaka improved
300 rural communities switching from
shallow tube-well water to community
run piped water schemes.
Coverage of solid waste collection and
adequate disposal in selected towns
increased.







14% of the 20% of communities affected by arsenic
have received some arsenic mitigation intervention.
As per DGHS, only 25000 of the 20 million
population exposed to arsenic contamination (i.e.
0.01%) are displaying symptoms of arsenecosis.
9 UPs have ensured 100% drinking water sources
tested and colored for arsenic, 2 UPs have ensured
100% drinking water sources are protected and 1 UP
has ensured 100% drinking water sources are
registered (i.e. poor have been ensured access).
‘Open defecation' reduced from 77% (Oct. 03) to
12% (Jun. 08) i.e. 90 million people have gained
access and are using latrines (but as per JMP only
half of those latrines are sanitary.

101

B. CAS
STRATEGIC

FY06 CAS

STATUS AT FY06 CAS COMPLETION
REPORT

CHALLENGES AND LESSONS
LEARNED

OBJECTIVES AND
OUTCOMES

Pillar 2: Empowering the Poor (Cont’d)






20% of the urban local governments (55
pourashavas) & 30% of the rural local governments
(1325 Union Parishads) have ensured ‘open
defecation free’ status (i.e. poor have been ensured
access).
Own source revenues in rural local governments (128
UPs) has increased. For 11 water utilities, the
average population served increased by 30% and
average revenue collection period reduced by 35%
over the period 2004/08.
As per GoB Horizontal Learning data, linking 'open
budget' planning processes to the raising of holding
tax in 44 UPs has resulted in >4 fold increases in
own source revenues. A water utility network has
been been established amongst 11 urban water
utilities for sharing benchmarking performance.
About 21 community-private sector partnership run
piped water schemes are in construction, scaled
down from the initial 300 villages targeted, after a
partial cancellation and restructuring of the
Bangladesh Water Supply Program Project
(BWSPP). The rehabilitation of existing sewerage
system in Dhaka and the preparation of a sewerage
master plan in Dhaka, both meant to help improve
the surface water quality in and around Dhaka is
commencing in FY09.



Rural piped water schemes are
relatively untested new service
delivery arrangements in
Bangladesh. The target for 300
schemes was too ambitious. The
Bank has scaled down the project
to focus on pilot/demonstration of
the working arrangements for
these schemes (before considering
scaling up in the future).

102

B. CAS
STRATEGIC

FY06 CAS

STATUS AT FY06 CAS COMPLETION
REPORT

CHALLENGES AND LESSONS
LEARNED

OBJECTIVES AND
OUTCOMES

Pillar 2: Empowering the Poor (Cont’d)
2- B.
Strengthen
Local
Governance

Improved capacity of local government
bodies to successfully implement efficient
service delivery schemes on behalf of their
constituents
 Sustained increase in discretionary
resources (own revenue and transfers)
available to elected local governments.
 Increased capacity for effective,
accountable and transparent generation
and use of public resources*


Powers and responsibilities of elected
women members of local governments
increased through allocation of specific
subjects to them.











2. C.
Rationalize
Social
Protection
Systems

Safety net policy rationalized and better
targeted
 A national social protection strategy
developed
 Proxy means test based targeting and
event linked benefits that ensure more
effective protection to the poor and
vulnerable introduced

More than three-fourth of the 4498 UPs in the
country are currently receiving discretionary block
grants under LGSP. Over the next one year, most of
the UPs in the country will be covered under the
project. Yet, the central government has not been
able to ensure timely and predictable release of block
grants, and this affects local budgeting and PEM.
Nearly 7000 independent local government audits
have been undertaken through an innovative public
private partnership. Over 1000 of these were
comprehensive assurance audits monitoring inputs
and results on the ground.
More than 33,000 public officials at the UP and
Upazila level have been trained under LGSP.
Further, a decentralized and comprehensive UP
institutional development strategy is being operationalized.
No additional powers granted to women members
through legislation. However, LGSP mandates that
various UP level committees for public expenditure
prioritization and oversight have adequate
representation of women.
At the central level, monitoring capacity has
remained weak and this poses short term fiduciary
risks and limits the ability to undertake evidencebased decisions.

The Bank and other donors actively supported development of a national social protection strategy. Based on
analytical work and intensive policy dialogue, GoB
decided to start implementing some reform areas
identified: the need to establish safety nets in urban areas,
to develop a transparent national targeting mechanism.
The Bank supported both through the preparation of a
National Social Protection Project which is awaiting
GOB approval.



The process of decentralization
and local government reform in
Bangladesh has been an incremental process, and success will
come from sustained efforts by
integrating analytical work, capacity building, institutional
development, and evidence based
advocacy.
 Policy reform and project implementation, while connected, do
not always move in sync. Tying
these two together in a common
implementation framework will
increase risks of delay and failure
for both. Nevertheless, policy
advocacy and technical assistance
would be successful only when it
is part of a larger engagement
package that includes investment
projects and country level dialog.
 The still-evolving nature of the
decentralization debate, and weak
institutional capacity highlight the
need for simpler project designs,
more robust risk assessments and
greater investment in implementation arrangements.
Aggravated by the food, financial and
economic crisis, many poor remain
unprotected, programs continue to
exist in parallel and with low coverage. However, the recent initiation of
a new employment guarantee program
could help improve the situation for
some vulnerable groups (rural), but
still needs to improve implementation,
monitoring and evaluation.

103

B. CAS
STRATEGIC

FY06 CAS

STATUS AT FY06 CAS COMPLETION
REPORT

CHALLENGES AND LESSONS
LEARNED

Enhanced revenue effort (targets agreed and
achieved) and strengthened and more
transparent tax administration:
 Increased tax revenue by 1.5 per cent of
GDP, and rationalized exemptions*;
expanded tax base

Tax GDP
FY06 FY07 FY08 FY09
ratio%
8.5 8.3
9.1 9.0
 The CTG made some efforts to address the structural
problems of tax administration resulting in some
positive developments. Measures to reduce tax
leakage and increase tax collection had some impact.
The Government initiated an extensive tax education
campaign. To enhance awareness among tax-payers
and make payment procedures simpler, it introduced
the Citizen’s Charter, published guide-books on the
provisions and procedures for paying taxes, and ran
TV advertisements. This met with an unprecedented
response in the form of allocation of the Tax
Identification Numbers, submission of tax returns and
payment of value added tax. Computerization of
Income Tax is under way. Comprehensive automation
of Customs processing at the Chittagong Customs
House is completed. Online registration of the VAT
is being introduced. These measures are expected to
simplify the procedures of payment, hence increase
the efficiency, dynamism and transparency of revenue
administration. Previously introduced PSI, which was
supposed to come to an end by August 31, 2008, will
continue. This reform momentum ended when the
CTG left office.

The malaise in tax administration is
deep-rooted as reflected in poor
taxpayer services; lack of transparency
in collection; inadequate audit and
enforcement, and protracted taxpayer
disputes, all of which have hampered
revenue collection.
 Fundamental reforms, like those
envisaged at the NBR require local
ownership and leadership at the
top of the administration. Efforts
to improve certain elements of the
system were made possible
because of the parallel efforts of
the CTG to fight corruption
overall.
 While some elements of the
system can be improved
pragmatically as opportunities
arise, they need to take place
within a well thought out
plan/strategy

OBJECTIVES AND
OUTCOMES

3. Governance at Center Stage
3. A. Improving
Implementation
Capacity
Improve Public
Financial
Management
and
Procurement
Systems and
Institutions

There is a broad agreement that a major institutional
change is needed to enable NBR to mobilize revenues
effectively and efficiently and improve the business
climate. The Strategic Development Plan for NBR, a
multi-year program already endorsed by the government
is not being implemented.



There is a need to build support at
the lower levels of the tax
administration (its local offices
and branches) who are the ones
that will eventually carry out
reforms. At present there seems
to be resistance at that level while
there is extensive state capture at
senior levels.

104

B. CAS
STRATEGIC

FY06 CAS

STATUS AT FY06 CAS COMPLETION
REPORT

CHALLENGES AND LESSONS
LEARNED

Overall progress has been uneven. The status of
achievements so far include:
 Strengthened strategic budget planning by adopting
and expanding the MTBF approach to 20 ministries
(70% of spending) ;
 Overall expenditure management became more
transparent with budget information now displayed
into a well established website of the Finance
Division. Contingent liabilities were included for the
first time in the budget estimates and documentation.
 Computerization of accounts and strengthening of the
CGA system with production of monthly accounts
with a lag of five weeks compared to the six months,
previously;
 Improved reporting of fiscal data consistent with
government Finance Statistics ( GFS); however
conformance to international standards not yet
achieved;
 Annual audits completed with a time lag of 12 months
after end of fiscal year compared to a lag of 2 years,
previously The focus of audits is largely transactional
and ensuring compliance with regulations rather than
risk-based. The audit impact has improved, but audit
reports take several years to be tabled in Parliament
and reviewed by the Public Accounts Committee. In
addition, the audit reports are not considered public
documents .and there is little follow-up on audit
findings through departmental committees;
 Continued weaknesses in the legislative oversight
function in the absence of parliament for some 2 years
, coupled with the weak institutional capacity of key
parliamentary bodies including the PAC.
 Landmark procurement law passed in July 2006.
 Regulations issued January 31, 2008 making law
effective.

The Ministry of Finance’s
commitment to this agenda resulted in
the limited progress attained. Given
the amount of budgetary support
lending the Bank could have promoted
this agenda more aggressively.

OBJECTIVES AND
OUTCOMES

3. Governance at Center Stage (Cont’d)
Progress towards attaining higher standards
in Public Financial Management based on
agreed PEFA-based benchmarks, including:
 Improved expenditure management,
 Budgets much more transparent and
accessible to the public
 Improved credibility and timelines of
the Government financial statements
 Strengthened auditing and enhanced
audit impact
 Improved quality of CAG’s audit reports
Performance indicators:
Improved ratings on Public Financial
Management (PFM) performance indicators
based on implementation of agreed action
plan in key areas, focusing particularly on
enhanced accountability, transparency, and
reduced fiduciary risk, including: *
 Strategic budget management for a closer
alignment of the budget with PRSP
priorities through the institutionalization of
the MTBF.
 Improved quality of financial statements
for the central government
 Improved quality of audits according to the
international standards and systematic
follow up by the Government on audit
findings and recommendations of the
Public Accounts Committee
Transparent Procurement System (including
concessions)

Persistent low key dialogue by Bank
paid rich dividends. However, new
govern-ment recently made certain
changes in the Act which could dilute
its effectiveness.

105

B. CAS
STRATEGIC

FY06 CAS

STATUS AT FY06 CAS COMPLETION
REPORT

CHALLENGES AND LESSONS
LEARNED

 All implementing agencies started implementing the
law including the use of independent review panels
 Bid notices and contract award information now
published on the website of the Central Procurement
Technical Unit.
 Improved competitiveness evident from results in four
pilot agencies.
 A second IDA Public Procurement Reform Project is
supporting implementation of the program.
 The Bank prepared a set of policy notes on these
issues, but there was no government interest in
pursuing reforms. A high level dialogue was pursued
with the CTG on civil service reform and public
administration reform but there was no interest in
pursuing longer term reforms under which the civil
servants would bide their time until a more pliable
elected government came along.
 More than three-fourths of the UPs in the country is
covered under LGSP presently. These UPs are
receiving enhanced resources and greater discretion in
deciding their service delivery priorities.

Understanding the rationale behind
those changes, there is a need to
continue dialogue with the
government to consolidate the reform
efforts already undertaken and build
on a strong country system.

OBJECTIVES AND
OUTCOMES

3. Governance at Center Stage (Cont’d)
 New procurement law enacted and
implemented and E-procurement
introduced. Compliance with regulations
monitored through independent annual
procurement review and civil society

Transformation
of Public
Administration





Measurably improved service delivery
and public perception of service delivery
(based on service delivery surveys and
using 2001 survey as benchmark and
integrating sector program targets)
Progress in implementing plan to be
agreed with GOB to develop a
professional merit-based civil service
which upholds principles of honesty and
integrity and sees itself as accountable to
the public
 New personnel management
system, including extended merit
based promotions, transfers within
clusters, revised compensation and
enhanced training. Agree on steps
to reestablish Senior Service Pool.
 Pay and employment policy
consistent with macro economic
stability introduced. Incentives
linked to performance, including
through decompressed pay scales.
Skill mix issue addressed.
 Greater decentralization of service
delivery decisions, especially to
UPS.

 This was a case of the Bank’s
rhetoric in the CAS getting ahead
of the reality on the ground and the
Bank’s own ability to deliver,
given lack of instruments and
sufficient dialogue and preparation.
A mid-term CAS progress review
would have enabled the Bank to
lower expectations in this area.
The issue could assume importance
with the new government.
 Decentralization remains a
continuous topic and has to be
addressed strategically.

106

B. CAS
STRATEGIC

FY06 CAS

STATUS AT FY06 CAS COMPLETION
REPORT

CHALLENGES AND LESSONS
LEARNED

Considerable progress made during the CTG period, but
many of the gains have proved to be unsustainable. ACC
became operational, but former commissioners forced to
resign by the CTG and former army chief with a
reputation for integrity installed (Hassan Mashhud
Chowdury as Chair). Problems of competence and
integrity of a wholly unreformed workforce of former
Bureau Against Corruption staff were “overcome” by
seconding military officers to the ACC, who had the
confidence of the new Chair. ACC pursued cases
vigorously, but its reputation was affected by overzealous pursuit of key members of political parties.

Until the CTG, the anti-corruption
agenda was largely imposed on the
country from donor pressure.
Corruption is now a domestic issue.
New government has a strong anticorruption commitment on paper, but
as in other countries it may see the
anti-corruption agenda as a political
weapon against its opponents. The
ACC’s overzealous push on
corruption may have jeopardized the
long term effectiveness of the
Commission.

OBJECTIVES AND
OUTCOMES

3. Governance at Center Stage (Cont’d)
3. B. Tackling
Corruption
Operationalize
Anti-Corruption
Commission
(ACC)

 Greater public confidence in
government’s ability to curb corruption
as measured in corruption surveys
 Reduced opportunities for corruption
through simplifying procedures/
clearances and where appropriate
removing controls and restrictions with
improved scores in Doing Business
Surveys
 Increased public awareness of the costs
of corruption and of how to fight
corruption as measured in surveys








ACC fully operational
Initiate dialogue between ACC and
civil society on a strategy to fight
corruption
ACC catalyzes development of a
coherent and practical strategy to
fight corruption including through
strengthened prevention,
enforcement and education
National Integrity Strategy
developed and agreed with
government
Civil society activated to raise voice
against corruption and monitor
public finances
Local government audits being
institutionalized all over the
country.

ACC developed a strategy to fight corruption, including
prevention, enforcement and public education and
worked in co-operation with Transparency International
on a number of initiatives. However, progress was very
much dependent on personalized leadership/clout and the
strong support at the political level (CTG and the military
behind it). With the change in government, ACC Chief
was forced to resign. He has been replaced, but the jury
is still out on whether the new ACC will be effective.
National Integrity Strategy produced under an ADB
budgetary support trigger, but may lack country
ownership. This Government nominally accepted the
document.
Civil society active against corruption but not always
willing to take on governments.

The ADB was the principal player on
anti-corruption. The Bank provided
low key informal support to the ACC
and providing training and support to
Bangladesh’s efforts to access
international instruments such as the
Stolen Assets Recovery Initiative and
UNCAC.
The Bank’s credibility on anticorruption may have been enhanced
had it spoken up against apparent
abuse of due process by an overzealous ACC.

Bank support for anti-corrruption including training and
information on accessing the Stolen Asset Recovery
Program and supporting Bangladesh’s membership of
UNCAC.
Nearly 7000 independent local government audits
undertaken over the last three years.

107

B. CAS
STRATEGIC

FY06 CAS

STATUS AT FY06 CAS COMPLETION
REPORT

CHALLENGES AND LESSONS
LEARNED

 There was no Parliament from October 2006 until
January 2009 and hence no movement on the issue
of strengthening parliamentary committees. The
CTG attempted reform of the process of
appointments to senior statutory and constitutional
positions. A draft ordinance was discussed in
Council of Ministers during 2007 but there was
internal resistance and the initiative died. Only area
of movement was in the establishment of a Supreme
Judicial Commission, providing a process for
appointments to the upper judiciary. The latter has
been abandoned by the Awami League Government.
Some gains were made during this period on the
financial and administrative independence of the
Election Commission and the ACC.
 The Bank helped initiate a dialogue on these issues
through its partnership with IGS and a series of
workshops were held which have created a small
network of people committed to reforms both within
these agencies and outside.

Dialogue initiated under IGS
workshop series needs to be sustained,
as do the networks that were in the
process of being created. Continued
Bank support for these activities will
be important.

 No data exists on progress in reducing case backlog
or increasing use of ADR. An ongoing Bank funded
Legal and Judicial Reform project supported case
management and court administration reforms
through computerization at the Supreme Court and in
lower courts in Dhaka and a few regions. The project
has been completed and is currently being evaluated,
but progress was uneven.
 In the absence of an interested counterpart and
emerging other priorities the Bank did not pursue the
idea of developing consensus on reform priorities
through a dialogue led by eminent jurists and
lawyers, but this got folded into the workshops at
IGS.

Legal and judicial reforms are critical
to both improving the investment
climate and ensuring checks and
balances on the executive. The
Bank’s agenda was aimed at helping
create a consensus around reforms and
progress towards that was modest. A
mid-term evaluation in the context of
a progress report may have enabled a
clearer decision on whether or not to
pursue this objective given the
prevailing complex political situation.

OBJECTIVES AND
OUTCOMES

3. Governance at Center Stage (Cont’d)
Strengthen the
Guardians of
Accountability

3. C. Legal And
Judicial Reform
Develop
Consensus on
reform
priorities and
initiate key
reforms

 Public perception of increased
independence and effectiveness of key
oversight agencies as measured in anticorruption surveys
 Increased effectiveness of Parliamentary
Committees
 Technical Support Unit of PAC
established and fully operational and PAC
proceedings opened to the media.
 Government takes measures to ensure the
independence and operational
effectiveness of key agencies by:
 Creating a transparent, fair and
independent process for the selection
of the leadership and senior
management of key agencies
 Ensuring financial and administrative
independence of these agencies
 Ensuring adequate salaries and other
compensation for the leadership and
senior management commensurate
with their responsibilities and special
status.
 WB will focus on BB, C&AG, PAC, SEC.
 Court case backlog reduced and increasing
resort to ADR.
 Broad consensus on strategies for reform
of key justice sector agencies, including
the courts and the police and measurable
improvements against agreed priorities.
 Better understanding of the obstacles to
reform in the sector, including political
economy constraints.
 Availability of commercial justice for
corporate sector at least in Dhaka and in
elected regions.

108

B. CAS
STRATEGIC

FY06 CAS

STATUS AT FY06 CAS COMPLETION
REPORT

CHALLENGES AND LESSONS
LEARNED

OBJECTIVES AND
OUTCOMES

3. Governance at Center Stage (Cont’d)

3. D.
Strengthen
Voice/
Empowerment/
Participation
Freedom of
information law
and Egovernance.

 Supreme Court and selected district courts
implement Case Management and Court
Administration Reforms.
 ADR systems introduced.
 Independent panel of eminent jurists and
lawyers established in consultation with
government which carries out broad
consultations and initiates debate on
priorities for justice sector reforms and
recommends key actions and next steps.
 Detailed reform agenda and action plans
for the key justice sector agencies
developed including police.*
 Greater flow of information from
government via PRS monitoring and
achievement of sector program
commitments to information and
accountability
 Measurably increased use of public
information to hold government
accountable
 Better informed media monitoring of
government performance
 Government develops and
implements an Information Policy
Strategy including potential
enactment of a Freedom of
Information Act and implementation
of information dissemination
strategies , while also addressing
underlying financial and human
resource requirements
 Key business processes redesigned
and e-governance introduced to
enhance information flows and
reduce opportunities for corruption
 Key public institutional processes
made open to the public including

The Bank also initiated a survey on how the justice
sector is perceived in the country and its results will be
known shortly.
The CTG however moved to implement a Supreme
Court decision to separate the lower judi-ciary from the
executive branch. The Awami League government has
accepted this reform, but implement-tation is awaited.
The government also initiated the establishment of a
Supreme Judicial Commission which would reduce
political inter-ference in appoint-ment of judges. This
however has not been accepted by the successor civilian
government.
 CTG adopted RTI Ordinance late in its term (a
trigger in the Bank’s Transitional Support Credit).
New Government passed RTI Act in March 2009.
Dialogue now starting with Government about the
details of implementation.
 DFID and WBI/Bank supported civil society efforts
to persuade CTG on RTI ordinance.
 Bangladesh Better Business Forum, a high-powered
public-private dialogue mechanism established.
 A number of business processes streamlined (such as
bonded ware house licensing and capital machi-nery
imports) and some automated (e.g., company
registration, customs automation). An e-registry
containing all business related regulations is being
prepared and will be launched by end of 2009.
Government is subjecting an increasing number of
proposed laws and regulations to stake-holder
consultation prior to enactment.
 CTG made very modest improvements on the e-gov
front. Discussion now underway with new AL
Government about ‘digital Bangladesh’.

 This has been an area of progress
and a high priority for future Bank
engagement. Leadership for this
came from the CTG. Strong civil
society demand made it difficult
for the new government to not
support the RTI.
 Experience elsewhere suggests that
enactment of a law is only half the
battle. Implementation will be
resisted by a bureaucracy used to
lack of transparency. Strong
implementation policies will need
to be developed going forward.

109

B. CAS
STRATEGIC

FY06 CAS

STATUS AT FY06 CAS COMPLETION
REPORT

CHALLENGES AND LESSONS
LEARNED

OBJECTIVES AND
OUTCOMES

3. Governance at Center Stage (Cont’d)
Public Accounts Committee hearings,
procurement process, disclosure on the
web of periodic financial statements and
audit reports.

 Measurably more effective advocacy on
governance reforms by civil society,
media
 More responsive service provision and
improved customer satisfaction in
priority sectors as measured in surveys.
 Review mechanisms in place and
satisfaction surveys conducted,
publicized, and incorporated into
future planning
 Measurably increased participation by,
and accountability to, beneficiaries in the
design and implementation of
government development programs
 Institutionalized participation in
expenditure tracking and budget
performance analysis
 Government and donor funded
projects systematically require
participation by and accountability
to targeted beneficiaries facilitated,
by civil society
 Civil society becomes measurably more
accountable.
 NGOs commission annual audits of
their activities and budgets and
publish them

 Progress during CTG on asset disclosure of candidates for election, and for senior civil servants.
 PAC not sitting until 2009 and its proceedings are not
yet public
 Procurement data are now to be found on the web
 Audit reports still not on web
 The period has seen improved civil society advocacy
in terms of evidence-based dialogue. There has been
a significant increase in locally generated empirical
work of varying quality on issues of governance, eg.
PPRC 2007, IGS 2007, IGS 2008 (forthcoming),
BRAC 2008
 CTG made some modest efforts to improve service
provision (eg. Passport office, RAJUK, requiring
charters of public service providers etc)
 Other than the forthcoming Bank survey on the legal
and judicial system, and the period surveys by
Transparency International’s Bangladesh chapter,
there has been no systematic attempt to measure the
effectiveness of service provision.
 Expenditure tracking surveys were undertaken in the
health and education sectors early in the CAS cycle.
 The Bank is committed to more beneficiary
participation but this has been limited to only a few
projects. A high quality Bank example has been the
Social Investment Program now extended over
several districts which greatly enhances the voice of
the poor.
 An excellent Bank study on NGOs early in the CAS
cycle pointed to the need for greater self
accountability by civil society institutions. There has
been little progress in this area. Transparency
International published a draft law on NGOs, but this
has not moved.

Success in helping civil society
become more effective in advocacy on
governance and policy reforms and in
forming effective reform coalitions
will require considerable investment
of staff time including regular national
staff who ensure the dialogue with
civil society is carried out at the
relevant level (country management,
sector staff and governance staff).

110

B. CAS
STRATEGIC

FY06 CAS

STATUS AT FY06 CAS COMPLETION
REPORT

CHALLENGES AND LESSONS
LEARNED

OBJECTIVES AND
OUTCOMES

3. E. Political
Governance

Code of conduct for elections monitored,
adhered to, and sanctions imposed on code
breakers

Expectations surpassed wildly by the CTG – the digitized
voter list, id cards, a code of conduct and a near
flawlessly conducted national election are its lasting
achievements.

The CAS saw this issue as one to be
monitored by its bilateral DPs.

 This outcome was partially achieved in several ways
and with several instruments. The Bank led the joint
GOB-donor Damage, Loss and Need Assessment
(JDLNA) in the aftermath of Cyclone Sidr. The
JDLNA report published in April 2008 provides a
medium- and long term framework or mainstreaming,
planning and coordinating the implementation of both
analytical, research and investment operations for
disaster risk mitigation and management.
 The Bank approved a US$ 109 million for Emergency
2007 Cyclone Recovery and Restoration Project,
which includes provisions for national capacity
building for disaster risk mitigation and management.
However, the project is still too young to contribute to
the outcome.
 The climate change agenda was furthered during the
CTG following a London conference. A $100 million
Bank administered Multi-Donor Adaptation Fund was
established under which the Bank is completing three
analytical works ESW toward this outcome:

 Progress in this area was
principally the result of the
simultaneous floods and cyclone
and the CTG’s response to the
global climate change agenda. The
Bank responded promptly and well
to take advantage of this
commitment.
 The Multi-Donor Adaptation Fund
has the potential to enable the
Bank to mainstream adaptation
and mitigation strategies in the
upcoming CAS and to help the
government integrate these issues
into its development strategies.

4. Long Term Strategic Issues
Improve disaster
management
capacities

 Improved natural disaster response
systems and preparedness at community
level, backed by official support
 Disaster management
mainstreamed throughout relevant
GoB structures & donor
programmes
 Improved surveillance and disaster
management in public health
 Establish a public health
surveillance system to track
diseases that affect the vulnerable,
such as HIV/AIDS
 Increased information sharing and joint
planning at regional level encouraged
Increase emphasis on mitigating climate
change effects mainstreamed in donor
programmes to protect interests of the poor.

(1)"Implications of Climate Change on Fresh
Groundwater Resources in Coastal Aquifers in
Bangladesh". (2) “Implications of Climate Risks on
Food Security in Bangladesh". (3) “Economics of
Climate Change in Bangladesh”
Strengthen
Environment and
Water Resource
Management

 Water resource management capacities
including flood control improved
 Strengthen Bangladesh Water
Development Board

This milestone was not achieved during the CAS period
but is likely to be achieved through the interventions of
the ongoing Water Management Improvement project
(WMIP) due to the time it took to launch this project.

111

C. BANK GROUP
PERFORMANCE
Country
Dialogue and Aid
Coordination

FY06 CAS
 The Bank Group dialogue with the
Government on the eve of the CAS was
close despite a difficult governance
environment. The CAS recognized the
severe political risks facing the country,
the lack of political appetite for much
needed governance reforms and weak
implementation capacity.
 The CAS was based on an intensive
dialogue with all sections of Bangladesh
society. The focus on governance and
on local governance reform reflected a
strong emphasis on these issues during
the dialogue.
 The CAS was prepared jointly with the
ADB, Japan and UK (DFID). Together
with the Bank these partners accounted
for 80% of all development assistance to
Bangladesh. The objectives of the joint
strategy were better coordination and
greater complementarity across project
pipelines, the need to give government
consistent messages and reinforce the
four partners’s efforts in supporting
reforms. The CAS anticipated the
extension of sector wide approaches
beyond health and education. Under the
joint approach each institution
maintained its own business plans and
projects/AAAs but were informed by a
joint results matrix. The joint strategy
was not intended to rule out partnerships
with other donors. All four partners
supported harmonization around
government systems. The Bank
committed itself to supporting a
transition to a government led aid
coordination process consistent with the
Paris principles.











STATUS AT FY06 CAS COMPLETION
REPORT
The dialogue with Government was adversely
affected by the frequent changes in government and
the limited time over the CAS period (some 18
months) when there was a government in power (the
CTG) that was willing to move forward on reforms.
The dialogue with the CTG was close, but the CTG
was unwilling to push longer term reforms, such as
administrative reforms, which it felt would not be
sustainable.
The Bank’s inability to persuade senior HQ staff in
key sector areas to be posted in Bangladesh, and the
long interregnum between staff reassignments from
the field and the arrival of their replacements had an
adverse effect on the dialogue with the country.
The Bank’s relations with civil society improved over
the period but civil society retained a healthy
skepticism about the Bank’s role and remained a
critical interlocutor.
The joint strategy partnership of Bangladesh’s four
largest DPs generally did succeed in minimizing
conflicting signals, ensuring common policy messages
to government, and managing political risks. But the
partnership lost momentum when the original set of
Country Directors were reassigned, and it is not clear
that the degree of collaboration other than in the areas
noted above was much greater than it would have
been had there been no strategic partnership.
The intention to extend the SWAp concept to sectors
other than health and education did not materialize,
although governance was seen as a potential
candidate.

CHALLENGES AND LESSONS
LEARNED
 That the Bank remains a trusted
partner Bangladesh despite the
rapid political changes speaks well
of its ability to not appear too close
to any one side. Nevertheless, the
strong support to the CTG reforms
may have had a more lasting
impact if a dialogue had been
maintained with the major political
parties during the CTG period.
Given the tensions and
uncertainties prevailing at the time,
this is easier said than done.
 The Bank needs to plan its staff
assignments more strategically and
on a more long term basis to avoid
unnecessary gaps in the dialogue
when staff are reassigned and to
more effectively persuade or find
senior staff willing to serve in
Bangladesh in sectors crucial to
the Bank’s policy dialogue.
 Bangladesh donors are rightly
moving from the present
coordination arrangements to more
systematically implementing the
Paris principles and the Accra
Action Agenda. This will call for
effective support to the
government in strengthening its
ability to provide the leadership
and coordination functions that are
currently missing in the aid
coordination mechanisms.

112

C. BANK GROUP
PERFORMANCE
Focus on
Development
Effectiveness

FY06 CAS
 The results focus of the CAS will be
reflected in everything the Bank Group
does in Bangladesh
 Governance will be a central focus
 The Bank will systematically involve
beneficiaries and affected communities
in the design and implementation of its
programs.
 The Bank will seek to build partnerships
with academia and civil society and the
international donor community.
 The Bank will become increasingly
open and transparent in the way it does
its business.
 The Bank will step up efforts to
strengthen fiduciary safeguards and
improve implementation.
 These goals were to be achieved
through:
 Strategic staffing
 Institutional processes including an
Operational Risk Mitigation team
 Strong partnerships
 A cultural change that required more
cross sectoral work and stronger country
team alignment on acceptable risks and
expectations relating to governance
within projects.







STATUS AT FY06 CAS COMPLETION
REPORT
No Monitoring and Evaluation system focusing on
CAS outcomes outside of project specific M&E
systems.
Governance focus not fully mainstreamed
The commitment to systematically involve
beneficiaries in the design and implementation of
projects was not consistently pursued.
Despite Bank efforts to be more open, civil society
still tends to see the organization as highly secretive
and lacking transparency.
The Bank took significant steps to strengthen fiduciary
safeguards, and has more proactively managed
fiduciary risk. But some important initiatives did not
fulfill their promise.

In terms of specific actions:
 Two governance advisors were appointed, to help
address the CAS governance agenda.
 A strong team of senior HQ staff were fielded in
Dhaka but there were significant gaps in the energy
sector and in local governance, and costly
interregnums when key positions remained vacant.
 An Operational Risk Mitigation plan to mainstream
governance was under-resourced and under-managed.
 The concern with reducing corruption risk in Bank
projects was not fully thought through and it may have
resulted in shifting incentives towards monitoring
inputs rather than focusing on outcomes.











CHALLENGES AND LESSONS
LEARNED
Risk mitigation needs to precede
rather than be part of project
preparation so as to keep open the
option of staying away if there is
lack of commitment to reforms
and to better design operations to
reduce risk.
Long delays in completing
investigations on corruption and
requiring staff to breathe down the
necks of their counterparts have a
deleterious impact on Bank
country relations.
Strengthening beneficiary
involvement in project preparation
and implementation and ensuring
project design enhances
accountability to local institutions
rather than the Bank will be
critical to avoid these risks.
Country assistance strategies that
are transformative in the sense of
a significant change in directions
and scaling up of effort need to be
adequately resourced and staffed.
Monitoring and evaluation
systems, including regular
progress reports, are essential to a
results oriented CAS and to better
manage fiduciary risk.

113

C. BANK GROUP
PERFORMANCE
Quality of
Products and
Services

FY06 CAS
 Portfolio performance broadly in line
with South Asia average. Disbursement
ratio in FY05 at 23%, similar to IDA
average. Share of projects at risk
11.5%, commitments at risk 14%.
Realism and proactivity indices were
100%.
 QAG assessment on eve of CAS
showed quality of individual tasks to be
consistently good, but AAA lacked
client input on its scope and that
preparation of reports lacked client
participation, and AAA was faulted for
poor dissemination.

STATUS AT FY06 CAS COMPLETION
REPORT
 Disbursement ratio fell in FY06 and 07, but increased
to 26% by FY09, well above regional and IDA
averages. Riskiness also increased in first two years
of the CAS, but recovered with the share of projects at
risk of 11% and commitments at risk of 4% and
commitments at risk of 1%. Realism and proactivity
similarly dipped and then recovered to 100% by the
end of the CAS period.
 Most core AAA relevant and well received by client.
Major AAA tasks (Poverty assessment, Gender
assessment, Growth report) were all based on
extensive consultation and involvement of
Bangladeshi academia and civil society, and were
extensively disseminated. The Bank’s partnership
with IGS on workshops on institutions of
accountability demonstrated the value of farming out
the Bank’s analytical work.
 Policy notes formed a significant share of AAA.

CHALLENGES AND LESSONS
LEARNED
 Bangladesh think tanks and
academic institutions are now fully
capable of undertaking much of
the AAA that the Bank produces,
and there would be huge
advantages for the Bank to prepare
future AAA in partnership with
local institutions helping build
local analytical capacity and local
reform champions
 The quality and effectiveness of
policy notes needs to be reviewed
periodically through client surveys
and peer reviews since these risk
becoming supply driven and are
not always subject to the same
rigorous internal Bank review
processes.

114

Table B: Bangladesh - Planned Lending Program and Actual Deliveries (FY06-09)
Status - FY09 CAS Completion Report

FY06 CAS Plans
IDA
$M

Projects

Type b/

Development Support Credit (DSC) III
Education Sector Dev. Support Credit II
Local Governance Support
Investment Promotion Financing Facility
Subtotal

Inv
Inv
Adj
Inv

200.0
100.0
106.0
50.0
456.0

Actual
Actual
Actual
Actual
Subtotal

200.0
100.0
111.5
50.0
461.5

2007

Development Support Credit IV
Siddhirganj Power Project
Dhaka Chittagong Sewerage & Drainage
Public Procurement Reform Project (II)
Private Sector Development
National Agricultural Technology
Education Sector Development Support
Credit (DSC) III
Avian Flu Preparedness

Adj
Inv
Inv
Inv
Inv
Inv

200.0
150.0
100.0
7.0
85.0
75.0

Actual
Forwarded to FY09
Forwarded to FY09
Forwarded to FY08
Dropped
Forwarded to FY08

200.0

Adj
Inv

100.0
30.0

Actual
Actual

100.0
16.0

747.0

Additional Actual Projects:
BD Railway Reform
Programmatic DevPolicy
SIPP Additional Financing
Microfinance II Additional
Financing
Subtotal

Subtotal
2008

Status c/

Poverty Reduction Support Credit I
Social Investment Program II (incl. Rural
Livelihoods)
Export Infrastructure Development

Inv

300.0

Dropped

Inv
Inv

100.0
120.0

Technical, Vocation, Higher Education
South Zone Power Distribution Company
Tax and Customs Administration
Dhaka Environment & Water Resources

Inv
Inv
Inv
Inv

100.0
150.0
60.0
22.5

Dropped
Dropped
Renamed and forwarded to
FY09
Forwarded to FY10
Dropped
Forwarded to FY09
Additional Actual Projects:
Public Procurement Reform
Project II (from FY06)
National Agricultural
Technology Project (from
FY07)
Water Management Improve ment Project (non IDA)

Type

IDA
$M

FY
2006

Adj
Adj

40.0
8.0

Inv

15.0
379.0

Inv

23.6

Inv

62.6

Inv

102.3
120.0

Power Sector DPC

Adj

115

FY

Projects

Type b/

Subtotal
2009

Poverty Reduction Support Credit II
Governance and Accountability
Inland Water Transport
Urban Development and Services
Padma Bridge
Air Quality - renamed Clean Air and
Sustainable Environment

Subtotal
Planned Total FY06-09

IDA
$M

Status c/
Bangladesh DSC IVSupplemental Financing
Bangladesh DSC IVSupplemental Financing II
BD Transitional Support Credit
SIP Additional Financing for
Floods 2007
Rural Transport Improvement
Additional Financing
Municipal Services Additional
Financing

852.5

Subtotal

Inv
Inv
Inv
Inv
Inv

300.0
100.0
70.0
70.0
300.0

Dropped
Dropped
Dropped
Dropped
Forwarded to FY11

Inv

70.0

910.0
2938.0

Actual
Additional Actual Projects:
Siddhirganj Peaking Power
Project (from FY07)
Higher Education Quality
Improvement (from FY08)
Dhaka Water Supply and
Sanitation Project
Secondary Education Quality
& Access Enhancement

Type

IDA
$M

Inv

75.0

Inv
Adj

100.0
200.0

Inv

25.0

Inv

20.0

Inv

25.0
753.5

62.2

Inv

350.0

Inv

81.0

Inv

149.0

Inv

130.7

Disability and Children at Risk
SIPP-Cyclone-07 Additional
Financing III
Emergency 2007 Cyclone
Recovery & Rest Pr

Inv

35.0

Inv

50.0

Inv

109.0

Bangladesh Food Crisis DSC

Adj

130.0

Subtotal

1096.9

Actual Total FY06-09

2690.9

116

ANNEX FOUR: THE WORLD BANK FY10 CLIENT SURVEY AND CAS MULTISTAKEHOLDER CONSULTATIONS
A.

World Bank FY 2010 Client Survey for Bangladesh

1.
Background: A client survey was conducted in August 2009 to confirm the initial client
perceptions obtained through a series of upstream CAS multi-stakeholder consultations held in June 2009.
The survey was designed to assist the World Bank in gaining a better understanding of stakeholders’
perception of the World Bank’s role and development assistance in Bangladesh, obtain systematic
feedback, and inform the CAS formulation process that the country team had started to embark on. The
survey covered a range of questions on: issues facing Bangladesh; overall attitude towards the Bank; the
importance of specific areas of the Bank’s work and the Bank’s effectiveness in those areas; the
respondent’s level of agreement with the way the World Bank does business, and the Bank’s
communication and outreach efforts in Bangladesh.
2.
Process: Approximately 580 stakeholders of the World Bank in Bangladesh were invited,
through mailed questionnaires, to provide their opinions on the Bank’s assistance to the country.
Participants in the survey were drawn from among the offices of the President, Prime Minister, Ministers,
and Parliamentarians; employees of ministries, ministerial departments, or implementation agencies; local
government official or staff; bilateral or multilateral agencies; private sector organizations; NGO or civil
society; the media (including national media in Bangla and English and international media); independent
government institutions; trade unions; religious groups; academia or research institutes; and the judiciary.
A total of 334 stakeholders participated in the client survey, mostly from Government. The response rate
was nearly exactly the same as in FY 04 and quite high at 58%. Other than local government, all
stakeholder groups were fairly represented.
3.
Results: The FY 10 country survey results in Bangladesh suggest an environment that is far
more positive about the World Bank and its work now (and for the future) than when the last client survey
was conducted in FY 04. The survey findings show that the Bank has improved significantly in a number
of important areas and stakeholders can now define a very clear role for the Bank in Bangladesh. The
Bank was very well regarded in most areas and its assistance was considered relevant and aligned to
country priorities. Respondents also felt that Bank lending promotes effective development and
demonstrates flexibility in adjusting to changing circumstances.
4.
Areas of Focus: The client survey indicated that governance is considered the top development
priority in order to alleviate poverty and foster economic growth. Stakeholders believe that Bangladesh
would be best served by the Bank if it focused on power generation, basic infrastructure and employment
creation. Power generation was particularly considered a key to growth -and worthy of high level of
assistance from the World Bank. Other priority areas where a majority of stakeholders would like to see
more Bank involvement include: health, anti-corruption, agriculture and climate change. Stakeholders
also gave a very high level of support for the Bank’s role in the construction of the Padma Bridge.
5.
Value to the Clients: In terms of value of the World Bank to the clients, most stakeholders
consider investment lending as effective instrument for reducing poverty in Bangladesh when compared
to policy based lending or technical assistance. As such, investment lending and loans were seen in a
more positive light than budget support, policy or economic advice and knowledge sharing.

117

6.

Response to Key questions in the FY09 Client Survey:

“What are the first and second most important
development priorities for Bangladesh?”

“Which TWO areas of development would contribute
most to reducing poverty in Bangladesh?”

“Where would it be most productive for the Bank to

“Which World Bank instrument is the most effective in

focus most of its resources?”

reducing poverty in Bangladesh?”

118

B.

CAS Multi-stakeholder Consultations

7.
Background. The Bank team held multi-stakeholder upstream consultations in June 2009 to
identify the key challenges and results areas of the new CAS. The key messages from those early
consultations fed into the CAS discussions with the Country Team, and provided a basis for the first draft
of the CAS. After completion of the upstream review and development of the CAS Pillars, multistakeholder downstream consultations were held during March, 2010.
8.
Process. Five upstream consultations were held in Dhaka in which the Bank team interacted with
development practitioners from NGOs, members of academia and think tanks, media editors, the business
community, and development partners. In addition, the Bank team held a number of bilateral meetings
with retired Government counterparts. The consultation with members of academia and think tanks was
organized by the Policy Research Institute (PRI) of Bangladesh and held at their premises. The meeting
with the business community was organized by the Metropolitan Chamber of Commerce and Industry
(MCCI) in Dhaka. The consultation with media editors was held at the Sonargaon Hotel. Practitioners
from NGOs and development partners were invited to the World Bank Office.
9.
During the upstream consultations, the Bank team presented the results of the previous CAS
period to start a discussion on where the Bank should set its priorities for the new CAS period.
Discussions were held in a plenary format. At PRI and the MCCI the consultations were facilitated by the
respective hosts. The World Bank team facilitated the dialogue for the other consultations.
10.
Six downstream consultations were held with a wide spectrum of stakeholders, including the
government, development partners (DPs), civil society, private sector, academia and journalists. Out of
the six consultations, three were held in Dhaka and others were held in three carefully selected cities:
Chittagong, Jessore and Rangpur. Chittagong is the second largest city as well as the hub of country’s
trade and commerce. Jessore represents the South-West region which is economically deprived and stands
to benefit from the construction of the Padma Bridge. It also presents opportunities for regional
cooperation with India. Rangpur belongs to the poorest Northern region of Bangladesh. The consultations
with the Government and DPs took place at ERD and the IFC Office. The consultation with civil society
and private sector representatives was held at the Lake Shore Hotel in Dhaka. The consultations in
Chittagong, Jessore and Rangpur were organized at Penninsula Hotel, BRAC TARC and Parjatan motel
respectively. The consultations in the field were attended by local government representatives, local level
elected officials, members of local chambers of commerce, civil society, members of academia and the
media.
11.
All downstream consultations began with a brief presentation by the Bank team explaining the
aim of the consultations followed by an open discussion. In case of the field consultations, additional
sessions were held with participants divided into break-out groups in order to have in-depth discussions
on each CAS pillar.
12.
Results. Governance surfaced as a cross-cutting theme throughout all consultations. Weaknesses
in the service delivery system and establishment of the rule of law were identified as the two major
governance issues in Bangladesh. The need for decentralization and capacity building received much
attention during the discussion. Majority of the participants criticized the current Upazilla Parishad (Local
Government) Bill which they believed would hinder grass root democracy and effectiveness of local
government. In addition, unanimous opinions were expressed for urgent actions to resolve the energy
crisis. Issues like corruption, climate change, poverty, SME development, regional disparity, increasing
gap between rich and poor, agricultural productivity and food security were also discussed at length. A
wide range of solutions were recommended, including transparency and accountability for good
governance, strengthening of the local government system, an independent judicial system and anticorruption unit, increased investment in human capital, scaling up of investment in agricultural
119

technology, use of alternative sources of energy including coal and nuclear power, and more focus on
equity and poverty reduction. The Bank team was also urged to design a simple CAS with simple
performance monitoring indicators. The main priority areas for the new CAS, as recommended by the
participants, were as follows: power sector, climate change adaptation strategy, strengthening local
government and good governance. Participants also recommended that the Bank maintain a neutral status
in the politically polarized environment of the country and to be transparent about its decision making
processes.
Proposed priority programs for the new World Bank CAS












Development of the energy sector, particularly gas and power.
Robust climate change adaption mechanism involving the wider community.
Strengthening local governance through establishment of an independent local government body.
Ensuring good governance through establishment of rule of law, proper service delivery system,
transparency and accountability.
Programs to increase productivity in agriculture to ensure food security.
Promoting and implementing regulatory frameworks in key sectors such as energy and utilities.
Scaling up investments in transport and communication sectors, particularly in railways and inland
water resources.
Focus on population control and planning.
Global and regional integration to alleviate disparities across regions.
Reflection of the lessons that have been learnt during the global financial crisis.
Management of water resources with focused attention on capital dredging.

What the World Bank should avoid






Not engage in any kind of activities which are not aligned with the country’s priority areas.
Political intervention, whether it be engagement in partisan politics, giving in to political pressure or
direct involvement in conflict resolution.
Not dictate the terms of development, rather it should play a supportive role to implement
government’s development agenda.
Not impose stringent conditions and avoid rigidity.
Making the CAS unnecessarily complicated with complex performance monitoring indicators.

Issues where there were divergent views on World Bank involvement







Government policy agenda: Some participants suggested that the Bank should advise Government
on critical policy issues. Other participants argued that the bank should not be involved in the
countries’ internal affairs and that it should only be involved in the projects and programs it is
funding.
Investment in infrastructure projects: Participants were divided with regard to the Bank’s
investment in infrastructure projects. A group of participants believed that more investments are
required both in road and water transport. Others stressed that there was no need for further road
development and suggested that the focus should shift toward railway and water transport, and
maintenance of the existing roads.
Use of coal as source of energy: Many felt that government should seriously consider coal for
generating electricity. Conversely, it was argued that since open pit mining has raised serious
concerns, the emphasis should now be put on the gas and nuclear power systems.
Labor migration: Although Bangladesh is receiving large remittance inflows from the expatriate
community, a group of participants believed that Bangladesh should stop sending unskilled people
abroad, and that the Government should design a plan to address the issue in the next Five Year Plan.
120

The opposing view suggested that the Government should look for new labor migration destinations
for its existing pool of labor, and have bilateral negotiations with concerned foreign countries.
Agriculture as a focus area: Some participants strongly recommended scaling up efforts to improve
agricultural productivity. Others cautioned that focusing on agriculture would be a short term
solution without addressing the country’s long term development challenges.
Evaluation of the World Bank’s performance: A majority of participants agreed that the public
perception of the World Bank is negative with the Bank often considered as part of the problem rather
than the solution. However, some participants commended the Bank for its good work, particularly
with the procurement law and reforms in public institutions.




13.
Feedback: All the consultation summary notes and presentation materials were uploaded on the
World Bank’s external website.
C.

CAS Formulation and Consultation Process

14.
The CAS process was launched internally through a consultation with the Dhaka Country Office
staff on June 7, 2009. The country team was asked to provide feedback on the results achieved during the
period of the previous CAS. Following this initial consultation with Country Office staff, a two day CAS
workshop was held in Dhaka in October 2009. This event was followed by a CAS workshop held in
Washington, D.C. in November 2009. A summary of CAS formulation and consultation process are
presented in the table:
Main CAS Preparation Steps
June 7, 2009- In-house consultation with Dhaka
country office staff
CAS multi-stakeholder upstream consultation:
June 8, 2009- Consultation with Development
Practitioners/NGO and Media
June 9,2009- Consultation with Academia/Think tanks
June 10, 2009- Consultation with Development
Partners and Retired Counterparts
June 14, 2009- Consultation with Private Sector
October, 2009- CAS workshop in Dhaka office

November, 2009- CAS workshop in Washington D.C.

March 9, 2010- CAS upstream review meeting
CAS multi-stakeholders downstream consultation and
media visit:
March 14, 2009- Consultation with the Government
March 14, 2009- Consultation with Development
Partners
March 16, 2009- Consultation in Chittagong
March 18, 2009- Journalist tour in Tangail
March 21, 2009- Consultation with private sector and
civil society
March 23, 2009- Consultation in Jessore
March 23, 2009- Journalist tour in Rangpur
March 24, 2009- Consultation in Rangpur
March 24, 2009- Journalist tour in Jessore

Highlights
Discussion to solicit feedback on the track record from
the previous CAS and very preliminary view on
priorities for future
Discussion with multi-stakeholders to receive feedback
on country’s development priorities and Bank support
under the CAS period, and how the Bank can support
the development process in Bangladesh

Extensive discussion involving the World Bank Group,
DPs, government representatives and consensus on the
broad CAS pillars
Initial Washington based Country Team meeting to
discuss the proposed CAS framework and linkage with
country’s draft NSAPR-II
Endorsement by management of CAS pillars and
results framework; guidance to move forward
Discussion with multi-stakeholders to receive feedback
on country’s development priorities, and how the Bank
can support the development process in Bangladesh

121

ANNEX FIVE: VULNERABILITY TO CLIMATE CHANGE AND
NATURAL DISASTERS
A.

Vulnerability to Climate Change

1.
Bangladesh is one of the most vulnerable countries to climate risks and the most vulnerable to
tropical cyclones6. Located between the Himalayas and the Bay of Bengal and with three major rivers
converging on its territory, Bangladesh is prone to floods, torrential
rains, erosion, and severe cyclonic
storms. The central and western
coastal regions, which have a low and
flat topography, are particularly
vulnerable to cyclones. The coastal
area of Bangladesh and the Bay of
Bengal are located at the tip of
northern Indian Ocean, which has the
shape of an inverted funnel. The area
is frequently hit by severe cyclonic
storms, generating long wave tidal
surges which are aggravated because
the Bay itself is quite shallow. The
adjacent figure7 shows the natural
hazards that different regions in
Bangladesh are susceptible to.
2.
Climate
variability
and
change are clearly critical development issues for Bangladesh. The
combination of frequent natural
disasters (e.g. cyclones, storm surges,
floods, and droughts), high population
density and growth, and low resilience
against economic shocks, makes
Bangladesh particularly vulnerable to
these climatic risks. The high incidence of poverty and heavy reliance on agriculture and natural
resources increase vulnerability to climate change impacts. In most years between 30-50% of the
country is affected by floods. Global climate models predict that for Bangladesh mean temperatures will
increase, with greater warming in winter. Along with this, changes in the pattern of rainfall are projected,
notably higher precipitation during the monsoon months and drier conditions in winter. These trends
could negatively impact the development prospects of the country.

6
7

UNDP (2004), A Global Report: Reducing Disaster Risk: A Challenge for Development.
Figure courtesy of CEGIS.

122

3.
Climate change is expected to exacerbate many
of the natural hazards and current problems that the
country faces. These include:
a. Increasing frequency and intensity of tropical
cyclones. Between 1980 and 2000, tropical cyclones
caused 250,000 deaths worldwide; 60% of them
were in Bangladesh10. Around 17% of all cyclonic
storms in the Bay of Bengal make landfall in
Bangladesh, where severe ones occur almost every
three years and routinely claim thousands of lives11.
Cyclones and storm surges are expected to occur
more frequently and with higher intensity with
climate change.

Impact of a cyclonic event in a changing
climate




Cyclone Sidr (a 10 year return period cyclone
with an average speed of 223km/hr) hit
Bangladesh in November 2007 and caused
damage and losses estimated at US$1.7
billion (around 2% of GDP)8.
If a 10 year return period cyclone (similar to
Cyclone Sidr) hit Bangladesh in 2050
additional damages and losses due to climate
change have been estimated at $4.2 billion9.

b. Heavier and more erratic rainfall. Bangladesh is geographically a delta of 3 largest rivers in the
world and suffers the second highest water flow in the world during flood season. 30 to 50% of the
country is affected by floods annually. Flood risks already pose a significant burden on the economy
with over two-thirds of the country lying below 5 meters above sea level mark12. Vulnerability to
floods and the potential for economic damage is considerable suggesting the need for a stronger
emphasis on protecting high value assets. Climate change is expected to bring about heavier rainfall
during the monsoon causing higher river flows leading to over-topping of embankments and
widespread flooding. The resulting river bank erosion is expected to cause loss of homes and
agricultural land to the rivers. Increased sedimentation in riverbeds is expected to lead to drainage
congestion and water logging.
c. Seal level rise. Global sea level rose at an average of 1.8mm per year between 1961 and 2003. This
rate increased to 3.1 mm per year between 1993 and 2003. Thermal expansions of the oceans and
decreasing glaciers and ice caps have contributed to this increase. In the coastal area of Asia, the
current rate of sea level rise is reported to be marginally greater than the global average13. The impact
in terms of people affected and land submerged in Bangladesh varies between15-17 million people
affected and 12 to 16% of total land area14.
B.

Climate Change Impacts

4.
Water related impacts of climate change will likely be the most critical concern for Bangladesh
in terms of urgency, severity, and economic consequence. These include:


Impact of sea level rise on coastal areas in terms of loss of vital assets and livelihoods resources.
Parts of the coastal area are also of global environmental significance. The Sundarbans are a
World Heritage Site and are the single largest productive mangrove forest in the world on which

8

Government of Bangladesh (2008), Cyclone Sidr in Bangladesh; Damage, Loss and Needs Assessment for Disaster Recovery
and Reconstruction.
9
World Bank (2010) Vulnerability of Bangladesh to Cyclones in a Changing Climate: Potential Damages and Adaptation Costs,
DEC Working Paper Series, forthcoming.
10
Same as footnote 1.
11
Government of Bangladesh (2009) Bangladesh Climate Change Strategy and Action Plan.
12
Same as footnote 3.
13
IPCC (2007) Fourth Assessment Report on Climate Change.
14
UNEP/Grid (2000) Vital Climate Change Graphic, UNEP/GRID Arendal Publication.

123







millions of families depend. A 45 cm sea level rise is projected to inundate 75% of the
Sundarbans.
The effect of saline water intrusion in the estuaries and into the groundwater would be enhanced
by low river flow, sea level rise and subsidence and will reduce relative availability of fresh water
supply in future. The adverse effects of saline water intrusion will be significant on coastal
agriculture and the availability of fresh water for public and industrial water supply will fall.
The combined effect of higher sea water levels, subsidence, siltation of estuary branches, higher
riverbed levels and reduced sedimentation in flood-protected areas will impede drainage and
gradually increase water logging problems, with the effect being particularly strong in the coastal
zone.
The effects of increased flooding and droughts are likely to be substantial. Severe flooding
potentially leads to losses in lives and livelihoods, agriculture sector and affects the transportation
and communication networks resulting in significant economic losses. The impacts on human
health from waterborne diseases and lack of safe drinking water are also noteworthy.

5.
Impact on Agriculture and Food Security is also likely to be significant. Agriculture is the
principal occupation in Bangladesh, employing over two-thirds of the labor force and contributing 22
percent of GDP. Changes in the water regime would affect crop agriculture, livestock production,
aquaculture and coastal shrimp production. The effects of climate change on key agricultural crops
remains uncertain. Most estimates suggest that elevated levels of carbon dioxide may lead to a modest
increase in rice yields. This could be offset by higher crop losses from longer periods of flood inundation
and increased salinity levels. In addition the areas suitable for agricultural production could decline due to
increased erosion, water logging and salinity.
6.
Forestry and biodiversity impacts could be substantial. The biodiversity (including both in the
forested areas as well as elsewhere) is already under threat due to human interventions and fragmenting of
habitats. Climate change impacts will add an extra dimension to these ongoing stresses. Increased rainfall
during the monsoon season would cause increased runoff in forest floor resulting in enhanced soil erosion
from the forest floor. Prolonged floods would severely affect growth of many timber species, while
enhanced evapo-transpiration in winter would cause increased moisture stress, especially in the Barind
and Madhupur Tract areas.

C.

The Government has already invested in climate change adaptation

7.
Over time, the country’s ability to manage disaster risks, in particular floods and cyclones, has
evolved and improved - this has been the result of a gradual shift from a response-based approach to a
strategy that incorporates elements of greater emergency preparedness and risk mitigation. Over the last
35 years, The Government has adopted various policies and invested over $10 billion to make Bangladesh
more resilient to climate change impacts15. Investment in disaster risks measures include the construction
of 2,100 cyclone shelters in the coastal area; 200 flood shelters to house people threatened by cyclone or
flood; about 6,000 km of coastal embankments to protect coastal land from inundation by tidal waves and
storm surges and more than 4,770 km of drainage channels. The Government has also undertaken an
important mangrove reforestation program along the coast to reduce the adverse impacts of cyclones and
storm surges. It has also initiated a number of agricultural programs, such as the development of drought
and salinity resistant rice varieties, to help manage climate related impacts.

15

Same as footnote 6.

124

D.

The Strategy forward

8.
Building on the National Adaptation Program of Action prepared in 2005, the Government has
prepared in 2009 its Climate Change Strategy and Action Plan. This is a comprehensive strategy that
addresses different aspects of climate change over the
next 20-25 years. The action plan is built on the six
Six Pillars of the Climate Change Strategy
pillars and prioritizes 44 programs in key affected
sectors.
1. Address the impacts on food security, social
9.
More recently, Bangladesh’s National Strategy
for Accelerated Poverty Reduction II has mainstreamed
the inter-linkages between poverty and climate change
and created a focus area dedicated to environment and
climate change.
10.
The climate change challenge in Bangladesh is
huge and cuts across a number of sectors and implementing agencies. The Government has already
invested in disaster preparedness and designed a
Strategy to tackle climate change. The challenge now is
to scale up its effort to finance and implement the
strategy in efficient and timely manner.

protection and health;
2. Strengthen further the country’s comprehensive
disaster management capacity
3. Climate proofing existing infrastructure and
ensuring future infrastructure building is fit for
purpose;
4. Improve research and knowledge management
to predict the likely scale and timing of climate
change on different sectors;
5. Incorporate mitigation and low carbon
opportunities in future growth path;
6. Focus on capacity building and institutional
capacity.

125

ANNEX SIX: CAS RESULTS FRAMEWORK MATRIX
End-FY 14 CAS Results and Outcomes

Indicative Milestones

World Bank Group Program

CAS Pillar 1: Increase Transformative Investments and Enhance the Business Environment
NSAPR II Goals: The NSAPR II seeks higher growth of 8 percent by 2013, through increased capital accumulation, promoting growth of sectors, improving the
business and investment climate, promoting urban development, and providing essential infrastructure for pro-poor growth
Issues: Government investments and tax collections are too low to sustain accelerated growth with macroeconomic stability; exports are highly dependent on
low-end garments; debt management systems are rudimentary.


Despite recent growth, private investment is much lower than desirable for accelerated growth, constrained by regulatory bottlenecks, inadequate access to
land for business use, poor IT infrastructure and skills, weak competition in the domestic market, and a framework that is inadequate to handle a scaled-up
PPP pipeline. Investment is also constrained by access to finance, which remains a problem for small and medium firms and agriculture, and the
undeveloped nature of long-term finance.
 Shortage of power is regularly cited as the single biggest constraint to doing business and private sector investment.
 Transport is over-dependent on a weakly-managed roads sector, and has seen weak ownership for reforms in Chittagong port and Bangladesh Railways,
resulting in high overall costs for transport, and inadequate incentives for transit trade.
 Urban management and services have not kept up with the concentrated economic and demographic growth in the two large metropolitan areas of
Bangladesh, thus reducing the growth and equity benefits of agglomeration.
 A modern VAT law, rules and procedures put in
Ongoing Financing:
Outcome 1.1: Increased public
place and implementation started, and online VAT
 MDTF on Strengthening Public Expenditure
investment and improved revenue
registration system introduced
Management
generation
 Improve quality of public investment management so
Indicator 1: Increase public investment
that actual investment increases to at least 85% of
Indicative Financing:
Baseline: 4.6 percent of GDP (FY09)
planned investment.
 Tax administration and modernization project
Target: 6 percent of GDP (FY14)
 Improve environment for export diversification
 Statistical Capacity Building project
including government investment in improved
Indicator 2: Increase revenue mobilization
logistics, rationalization of customs duties, and
Ongoing AAA/ Others:
Baseline: 11.5 percent of GDP (FY10)
increased regional and transit trade
 Study on trade growth and diversification
Target: 13 percent of GDP (FY14)
Indicative AAA/others:
 CEM on pro-poor and sustainable growth strategy for
attaining MIC status
 Diagnostic Trade Integration Study
 Poverty Assessment based on 2010 HIES

126

End-FY 14 CAS Results and Outcomes
Outcome 1.2: Improved environment for
private sector investment
Indicator 1: Private investment to GDP
ratio increases by at least 2 percentage
points of GDP

Indicative Milestones




Target: Increase by 2 percentage points
Indicator 2: Overall improvement in ease
of Doing Business Index
Baseline: 119 of 183 economies (35th
percentile)
Target: 40th percentile








Outcome 1.3: Increased infrastructure
provision, access and efficiency
Indicator 1: Increase in available power
Baseline: 4120 MW
Target: 4870 MW





PPP framework streamlined following good practice
principles and capability (technical and financial)
built to implement PPPs across key strategic
investment areas, including economic zones, power
generation, etc.
Elaboration and testing of a modernized deeds
registration system as well as testing of a sound land
records modernization program, completed, and
national implementation program agreed
National Resettlement Policy adopted; institutional
framework in place to handle social impacts of
project implementation
Government-business regulatory interface
streamlined and made more transparent
Policies for development and better regulation of
market for long-term finance (including
infrastructure, government debt market, and housing
finance) developed and implementation begun
Access to financial services improved through
preparation of a movable collateral law, introduction
of a privately operated credit information sharing
system, improved corporate governance, and
continued strengthening of regulation and
supervision

Sector revenue shortfall at no more than Tk 30
billion in FY2012 through better governance,
financial restructuring, and tariff adjustments as
necessary16
Attract capital sufficient to increase power generation capacity by at least 750 MW and electricity
grid and off-grid connections by at least 900,000

World Bank Group Program
Ongoing Financing:
BICF Regulatory Reform initiatives (IFC)
BICF Economic Zones initiatives (IFC)
Central Bank Strengthening Project
Joint Bank-Fund FSAP completed in FY10
Enterprise Growth and Bank Modernization
IFC-SEDF engagement on access to finance for SMEs
IFC-SEDF‘s Sustainable Value Chains (SVC)
interventions









Indicative Financing:
Private Sector Development Support (Economic
Zones) Project
 Long-term finance including housing and capital
market
 Strengthening Microfinance Sector
 ICT-enabled services sector project


Ongoing AAA/Other:
NLTA on land acquisition and resettlement
IFC Quarterly Business Confidence Survey




Indicative AAA/Other:
Continued work on regulatory reform in BICF
NLTA for Land Administration
NLTA on Digital Bangladesh related issues
Investment Climate Assessment
IFC support to PSD-related monitoring and evaluation
Ongoing Financing:
 Siddhirganj Peaking Power
 Haripur Power
 Investment Promotion Financing Facility (IPFF)
 Power Sector Dev’t Technical Assistance (PSDTA)
 Rural Electrification and Renewable Energy
Development (RERED)






16

This level of revenue shortfall would represent significant progress since under the business as usual scenario, the shortfall will grow considerably from its current level of
about Tk 35 billion. Moreover, this progress would suggest a path to zero shortfall over a 5 year period.

127

End-FY 14 CAS Results and Outcomes
Indicator 2: Increase in electricity grid and
off-grid connections
Baseline: 10 million connections
Target: add 900,000 connections

Indicative Milestones




Indicator 3: Increase share of population
with access to all-season road
Baseline: 43.6 % (FY10)
Target: 45% (FY14) or approximately 2
million

Provide basic transport infrastructure (improve union
and upazila roads and river jetties) and connectivity
between production centers and markets in 24
districts countrywide
Open opportunities for increased trade and improved
transit with South Asian countries (India, Nepal and
Bhutan) by streamlining border crossing particularly
at Petrapole-Benapole, and develop modalities for
off-dock clearance of containers and bonded
movement of containers by road.

World Bank Group Program





RERED Additional Financing (FY10)
Rural Transport Improvement Project
Skills Training and Enhancement Project (FY10)
IPFF Additional Financing (FY10)

Indicative Financing:
Bibiyana PRG
South Zone Power Distribution
Rural Electrification II
PSDTA Additional Financing
Power Generation Capacity Expansion and
Transmission strengthening
 Gas Debottlenecking and LNG Terminal
 Padma Bridge Project
 Bangladesh Railway Modernization Project including
inland Container Depot
 Inland Water Transport Project
 Second Rural Transport Improvement Project
 North-East Regional Program for multi-modal
connectivity






Ongoing AAA/ Others:
NLTA for designing performance indicators for energy
utilities
Indicative AAA / Others:
Port Master plan
Integrated Master plan for Natural gas and power
generation and transmission
 Just in time AAA
 NLTA South West Program: transport infrastructure
gaps and contribution of transport to economic growth
through Mongla port
 Governance in road sector NLTA



128

End-FY 14 CAS Results and Outcomes

Indicative Milestones

Outcome 1.4: Improved planning and
management of urbanization



Indicator 1: Tax records and billing
systems computerized in two-thirds of
urban local governments in the country.
Baseline: 75
Target: 200



Indicator 2: Local tax collection effort
(collections/total billing) increased in at
least 12 towns.
Baseline: 50 percent
Target: 60 percent



Formal development and management plans
established in at least 10 cities supported by the Bank
group
Improve urban policy framework to allow greater
contribution by local governments and private sector
in responding to demands of urban growth
Improvement in own source revenue collection
leading to better services to urban population

World Bank Group Program
Ongoing Financing:
Municipal Services Project (MSP)
MSP Additional Financing (FY10)




Indicative Financing:
Urban Services and Local Governance project (MSP
II)
 Major Cities Improvement Project
Ongoing AAA/ others:
 Urban Strategy Study


Indicative AAA/ Others:
TA to help formulate development strategies for
Dhaka and Chittagong



Pillar 2: Reduce Environmental Degradation and Vulnerability to Climate Change and Natural Disasters
NSAPR II Goals: Tackling climate change, disaster preparedness and ensuring environmental protection
Issues:
 Key climate change concern is water related impacts, the availability of safe water at appropriate times in appropriate quantities. Bangladesh lacks
information, infrastructure and institutions to better cope with water resource management challenges.
 Bangladesh is highly vulnerable to disasters - and there is a need to further enhance disaster preparedness shifting from response to resilience to minimize the
risks to lives and livelihoods.
 High vulnerability of coastal areas to impacts of sea level rise and adverse effects of saline water intrusion.
 Low agricultural productivity coupled with increasing population and climate change induced increased vulnerability of agricultural crops.
 Spiraling high industrial and air pollution and alarmingly low water quality of Dhaka watershed, dramatic and irreversible decline of ground water table,
especially under Dhaka city.
Ongoing Financing:
Outcome 2.1: Strengthened water resource
 At least 2/3 of the hydrological network
management and coastal protection
upgraded (2012)
 Water Management Improvement Project
2007 Flood Restoration Program (Implemented
 At least 50 km of coastal embankment is
Indicator 1: Upgrade hydrological network
through several ongoing projects)
repaired (2012)
Baseline: Hydrological network in poor condition
and inadequately maintained throughout the
country

129

End-FY 14 CAS Results and Outcomes

Indicative Milestones

Target: Hydrological network fully upgraded and
modernized nationwide (2014)

World Bank Group Program
Indicative Financing:
 Bangladesh Rivers Information and
Conservation
 Dhaka Integrated Environment and Water
Resources (DEW)
 River Bank Protection Project and
Reconstruction of Brahmaputra Right Bank
Embankment
 National Coastal Embankment Improvement
Project

Indicator 2: Rehabilitation of coastal embankment
Baseline: Coastal embankments damaged by 2007
Cyclone Sidr about 2,260km [360km (full) and
1,930km (partially)]
Target: 100 km repaired (2014)

Ongoing AAA/ Others:
 South Asia Water Initiative (incl. Abu Dhabi
dialogue)

Outcome 2.2: Improved agriculture production
and food security



Efficient irrigation and drainage management
for rice production in 150,000 ha of farmlands
ensured (2012)

Indicator 1: Rice production improved through
efficient water and drainage management
Baseline: The rice production in about 2 million
hectares is sub-optimal due to 2007 flood and
Cyclone damage to coastal embankments and
polders and inefficient water and drainage
management in most rice irrigation schemes
Target: Efficient irrigation and drainage
management for rice production in 500,000 ha of
farmlands ensured by FY 2014.
Outcome 2.3: Reduced environmental
degradation and strengthened natural resource
management
Indicator 1: Reduction in emission per brick kiln
adopting cleaner technologies by 20-30%

Indicative AAA/ Others:
 Institutional performance audit of the water
sector
Ongoing Financing:
 National Agriculture Technology Project
 Avian Influenza Preparedness Project
Indicative Financing:
 Productivity Enhancement Project
 Rural Livelihood Development Project
Indicative AAA/ Others:
 Improving Fertilizer production, distribution
and use in Bangladesh
 Sustainable use of tube-well/ground water
irrigation in Bangladesh




3 Brick kilns adopt cleaner technology (2012)
30 textile factories adopt cleaner
technology(2012)

Ongoing Financing:
 Clean Air and Sustainable Environment Project
(CASE)
 Carbon Finance Hybrid Hoffman Kiln (HHK)
Brick Project

130

End-FY 14 CAS Results and Outcomes

Indicative Milestones

Baseline: Emissions above 1,000 mg/m3 per brick
kiln
Target (2014): 10 Brick kilns adopt cleaner
technology with possibility for replication among
500 kilns.
Indicator 2: Reduce water pollution from selected
textile factories by reducing wastewater volume
generated in relation to production output by 20%
Baseline: More than 100 m3 of wastewater / ton of
textile
Target (2014): 100 factories adopt cleaner
technology

Outcome 2.4: Enhanced disaster preparedness
Indicator 1: Reduce gap of national cyclone shelter
Baseline: At least 1000 out of the 2133 existing
shelters need upgrading and new 2000 shelters need
to be constructed
Target (2014): The gap is reduced by 10%

World Bank Group Program
Indicative Financing:
 Pilot Program on Climate Resilience (PPCR)
 CASE Project Additional Financing
 Possible Trust Fund for Climate Change
Ongoing AAA/ Others:
 Implication of Climate Change on Flood
Restoration and Recovery Program (FRRAP)
 Economics of Adaptation to Climate Change
Study
 Social Dimensions of Climate Change in the
Ganges Basin (NLTA)
 Indoor Air Pollution: Improved Cook Stoves for
Better Health in Bangladesh Study

The gap is reduced by 3% (2012)

Indicative AAA/ Others:
 Energy Efficiency and Cleaner Technology in
the Brick Industry Study
 Global Tiger Initiative
 Biodiversity Conservation and Socio-economic
Development in the Sundarbans (NLTA)
 GFDRR financed technical assistance
 TA on Climate Change
Ongoing Financing:
 Emergency Cyclone Recovery and Restoration
Project (ECRRP)
Indicative Financing:
 Disaster Preparedness Project (Shelter and
Grain Storage)
 Indicative AAA/ Others:
 Ship Recycling Industry in South Asia
(Regional Knowledge Product)
 Possible TA under the Climate Change Trust
Fund

131

End-FY 14 CAS Results and Outcomes

Indicative Milestones

World Bank Group Program

CAS Pillar 3: Improve Social Services Delivery
NSAPR II Goals: Achieving the MDGs and improving quality of services in health, education and water supply, and providing social protection to the
vulnerable, and promoting gender quity.
Issues:

Fragmented, inefficient, and poor quality of public services

Regional disparities, inequity in access and low demand and utilization of services

Weak institutional sector organizational and management structure

Fragile systems (human resources, supply chain, operations and maintenance and system intelligence)
Outcome 3.1: Improved access to quality  Number of trained community-based skilled birth
Ongoing Financing:
attendants
is
increased
to
9,000
by
2010
health, population and nutrition services
 Health Nutrition Population Sector Program
 Vitamin A supplementation coverage among
children 9-59 months old is increased from 88%
Indicative financing:
Indicator 1: Births attended by skilled
(2007) to 90% by 2012
 Health Nutrition and Population Sector Development
personnel in two lowest income quintiles
 Proportion of children receiving all basic
Project
Baseline: 8% (2007)
vaccinations by 12 months of age is increased from
Target: 14% (2014)
76% (2007) to 80% by 2012
Ongoing AAA/Others:
 Bangladesh Health Sector Review
Indicator 2: Proportion of U5 children
 Nutrition: Operations Research
underweight
Baseline: 46% (2007)
Indicative AAA/Others:
Target: 42% (2014)
 Nutrition: Saving the Next Generation of Bangladesh
 Improving Health Service Delivery in Bangladesh
 Governance in the Health Sector
Outcome 3.2: Expanded access to safe
Ongoing Financing:
 Increased number of people accessing safe water
from WSS schemes in rural areas
 Bangladesh Water Supply Program Project
water and sanitation services
 Increase production of safe water in Chittagong
 Dhaka Water Supply and Sanitation Project

Increased
number
of
people
accessing
water
and
 Chittagong Water Supply and Sanitation Project
Indicator 1: Increased access to safe water
sanitation
from
distribution
and
collection
network
(FY10)
supply free from arsenic and pathogens in
in Dhaka and Chittagong including slum dwellers
rural areas
Baseline: 0.57 million
Indicative Financing:
Target: 1.25 million (2014)
 Rural Piped Water Supply and Sanitation Project
Indicator 2: Increased delivery of network
water supply in Dhaka and Chittagong
(including urban slums)
Baseline: 1.22 million

Ongoing and/or indicative AAA/Others:
 Trust Fund (WSP) support to expand the network of
water utilities

132

End-FY 14 CAS Results and Outcomes
Target:1.75 million (2014)
Indicator 3: Increased access to improved
sanitation (sewerage) in urban area
including improved sanitation in urban
slums
Baseline: 0.05 million
Target: 0.51 million (2014)
Outcome 3.3 Strengthened social
protection system to reduce
vulnerability
Indicator 1: Increased coverage of safety
nets (SSNs) and social insurance by poor
households
Baseline: 34% of the lowest expenditure
quintile covered by targeted SSNs (2008)
Target: 50% of the lowest expenditure
quintile covered by targeted SSNs (2014)
Indicator 2: Improved social care services
for disabled and vulnerable children
Baseline: a) About 25,000 persons with
disabilities b) Limited services for children
in state orphanages
Target: a) 10% increase in persons with
disabilities receiving services
b) Enhanced services for children in state
orphanages
Outcome 3.4: Improved student learning
based on quality education services17
Indicator 1: Increased primary and
secondary education completion rates
Primary

Indicative Milestones







World Bank Group Program


Number of extreme poor participating in workfare
program and new safety net project increases
Initiate policy dialogue aimed at introducing
sustainable and integrated (also with health
insurance) social protection system
Government develops minimum standards of care
for vulnerable children
Jatiyo Pratibandhi Unnayan Foundation (JPUF)
improves quality of social care services

Trust Fund (WSP): Union Parishad led Horizontal
Learning replicating best practices in WSS services

Ongoing Financing:
 Disability and Children at Risk Project
 Trust Fund (GFDDR and TFESSD) support to improve
local capacity to adapt safety net programs to climate
change and improving response in the aftermath of
disasters
Indicative Financing:
 Employment Generation Prog. for the Poorest Project
 JSDF for migrant workers (submitted)
 Social Safety Net Project
Ongoing AAA/ Others:
 Social protection programmatic TA
Indicative AAA/Others:
 Vulnerability of and employment opportunities for
migrant/informal sector workers
 Human Development Conditions of the Urban
Extreme Poor

 Increased education completion rates
Primary Baseline: 50.1% (2008) Target: 55% (2012)
Secondary Baseline: 38% (2006) Target: 46%
(2012)
 Increased Net Enrolment Rates
Primary Education (age 6-10, MOPME)

Ongoing Financing:
 Primary Education Development Program II
 Reaching out-of-School Children Project (ROSC)
 Secondary Education Quality and Access
Enhancement Program
 Higher Education Quality Enhancement Project

17

The indicator “increased primary and secondary student learning” is a core indicator but is not listed here since it is more long term. However, the student achievement is being
monitored via national student assessment (primary education) and examination results (secondary education).

133

End-FY 14 CAS Results and Outcomes
Baseline 50.1 (2008)
Target 65% (2014)
Secondary
Baseline 38% (2006)
Target 50% (2014)

Indicative Milestones
Baseline: Girls 94% (2008) Boys 87.9% (2008)
Target: Girls 96% (2012) Boys 90% (2012)
Secondary Education (age 11-15, HIES)
Baseline: Girls 47% (2005) Boys 37% (2005)
 Target Girls: 52% (2012) Boys 45% (2012)

World Bank Group Program
 ROSC Additional Financing (FY10)
Indicative Financing:
 Third Primary Education Program
 Secondary Education Sector Development Program
Ongoing AAA/Others:
 Madrasa study - Secondary and Primary
 ROSC Public Education Tracking Survey
 Cross-sectoral study on School Health and Nutrition

Indicative AAA/Others:
 Bangladesh Education Sector Review
 Stipends impact evaluation
CAS Pillar 4: Enhance Accountability and Promote Inclusion
NSAPR II Goals: Ensuring Participation, Social Inclusion, and Empowerment: Promoting Good Governance, and Ensuring Efficient Delivery of Public Services
Issues and Obstacles:
 Weak institutions of public financial management accountability
 Protracted bureaucratic procedures in procurement processing combined with inadequate transparency
 Bureaucratic culture of secrecy and resistance to implementation of the Right to Information Act
 Fragmented and under-resourced institutional framework for e-governance
 Resistance to more empowered elected local governments.
 Limited practice of CSOs engaging in advocacy or monitoring service delivery by field administrative entities and local governments
 Lack of institutional mechanisms for poor to exercise voice in local communities and local government decision making in managing public funds and
services
 Limited access of women to employment and assets and by implication their limited voice in the community and the economy
Outcome 4.1: Increased effectiveness and
Ongoing Financing:
 Budget Committees present in all 40 ministries
efficiency of public resource use
 Deepening the Medium Term Budget
 Improved legislative scrutiny of audit reports
Framework and Strengthening Financial
and audit backlog reduced by 50%
Accountability Project, continued through
Indicator 1: Increase in (i) comprehensiveness of
 Percentage of audit recommendations followed
2013, under the Strengthening Public
budget management, and (ii) quality and timeliness
by executive increases each year
Expenditure Management Program (SPEMP)
of financial reporting (accounting, recording and
reporting)

134

End-FY 14 CAS Results and Outcomes
Baseline: Utilizing the PEFA framework
(i) budget management- all six scores are C
or below; (ii) financial reporting-all four
scores are C or below; and iii) external
audit and legislative scrutiny: all three are
C or below
Target: Staff assessment utilizing PEFA
framework (i) budget management- three
out of six scores are C or below; (ii) two
out of four scores are C or below; and iii)
external audit and legislative scrutiny:
Only one score is C or below
Indicator 2: Increase in transparency and
efficiency of public procurement
Baseline: Based on PPA framework
efficiency- for key sectoral agencies (RHD,
LGED, BWDB, REB) , 30% contract
awards are made within initial bid validity
period.
Target: Based on PPA framework
efficiency- for key sectoral agencies (RHD,
LGED, BWDB, REB) , 60% contract
awards are made within initial bid validity
period.
Outcome 4.2 Enhanced transparency
and accessibility of public services
through Information Technology
Indicator 1: Number of applications for
information received and processed on
time as per the RTI Act and rules in 6 key
ministries
Baseline: 0

Indicative Milestones
 Reduced delays in making contract awards
 Improved procurement performance monitoring
including stakeholders engagement

World Bank Group Program
 Public Procurement Reform Project II (PPRP II),
continued through FY 13
Ongoing AAA:
 TF support for technical assistance to the Public
Accounts Committee
Indicative Financing:
 Strengthening Parliamentary Oversight and the
Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General
under SPEMP
 Strengthening electronic government procurement
system
Indicative AAA:
 Capacity assessment of consulting industry in
Bangladesh
 PEFA update

 Rules and regulations for implementing Right to
Information Act are in effect
 Annual Reports of Public Accounts, Estimate, and
Public Undertaking Parliamentary Committees p
and Comptroller and Auditor General prepared
and released
 Technical documentation for interoperability,
standards and security, and infrastructure for
deployment of ICT in Government agencies
adopted

Ongoing financing:
 Digitization of Land Records (IFC)
 Local Governance Support Project
Indicative Financing:
 Identification System for enhancing access to
services
 Technical Foundations for eGovernment
 Local Government Support Project II

135

End-FY 14 CAS Results and Outcomes

Indicative Milestones

World Bank Group Program

Target: Over 50 received in each ministry;
50% timely processing rate

 Validation of data and establishment of updating
procedures for secure national ID system

Ongoing AAA/Others:
 TF funded NLTA to support implementation of the
RTI Act

 Local government legal framework in terms of
functions, finances, and staffing further clarified
 Formula-based intergovernmental transfers
institutionalized
 Local government audit directorate in the
C&AG’s office established
 Mechanisms for horizontal accountability to
citizens for performance of local units of line
agencies implemented

Ongoing Financing:
 Local Governance Support Project
 Municipal Services Project (MSP)
 MSP Additional Financing (FY10)

Indicator 2: Establishment of reliable
comprehensive national ID system
Baseline: Existing ID system limited and
used only for voter identification and not
digitized
Target: At least 3 public services using the
comprehensive ID system
Outcome 4.3 Increased effectiveness of
public service delivery at the local level
Indicator : Increase in total per capita
expenditures of Union Parishads
Baseline: Union Parishads $0.50-60 per
capita annually (estimate);
Target: Union Parishads $1.5 per capita
annually

Indicative Financing:
 Local Government Support Project II
 Urban services and Local Governance project
(focusing on pourashavas and city corporations)
(MSPII)
Ongoing AAA:
 TF supported NLTA for Strengthening Local
Governance
 Horizontal Learning Program (WSP)
Indicative AAA:
 TF supported Institutional and Governance Review
on decentralization policy options
 AAA on local governments and service delivery
 Demand for good governance: an operational
assessment

136

End-FY 14 CAS Results and Outcomes
Outcome 4.4 Expanded participation in
local development and women’s
economic empowerment
Indicator: Increase in women’s
participation in short term employment
programs
Baseline: 20% of Employment Generation
Program for casual workers are women
Target: 30% of Employment Generation
Program are women

Indicative Milestones






At least 50% of women participate in village
assembly and ward level meetings to
priorities developmental needs and budgets
Employment services and support to women
from poorest areas entering paid employment
established
Village organizations and Ward Development
Committees constituted which represent at
least 80% of the identified/targeted poor and
women received budget envelop for
implementing their development priorities
Village organizations and WDCs practicing
social accountability tools

World Bank Group Program
Ongoing Financing:
 Social Investment Program Project (SIPP) “Nuton
Jibon” – three additional financings
 Local Governance Support Project (LGSP)
 SIPP II (FY10)
Indicative Financing:
 Local Governance Support Project II
 Northern Areas Reduction of Poverty Initiative
 Employment Generation Program for the Poorest
Ongoing AAA:
 TF supported NLTA on inclusive methodology
 TF funded report on women’s access to the garment
sector
Proposed AAA:
Policy note on integrating women into safety net and
livelihood programs

137

ANNEX SEVEN: EXISTING AND INDICATIVE PROGRAM (INCLUDING TRUST FUNDS)
BY STRATEGIC OBJECTIVES
Indicative World Bank Group (WBG) Program by Results Areas
Strategic Objective 1:
Increase Transformative Investments and Enhance the Business Environment
NSAPR II Goals: The NSAPR II seeks higher growth of 8 percent by 2013, through increased capital
accumulation, promoting growth of sectors, improving the business and investment climate, promoting urban
development, and providing essential infrastructure for pro-poor growth.
CAS Results Areas and Outcomes
Indicative Financing and AAA/ Other
Outcome 1.1: Increased public investment and Ongoing:
improved revenue generation
 BICF Regulatory Reform initiatives, including Sub Increase public investment
national Doing Business and trade logistics (IFC)
 Increase revenue mobilization by at least 1.5
 BICF Special Economic Zones initiatives (IFC)
percentage points of GDP
 BICF Institutional Capacity Building/Strengthening (IFC)
 SEDF engagement on access to finance – trade finance,
Outcome 1.2: Improved environment for
credit bureaus, collateral registries and secured
private sector investment
transactions, microfinance, SME banking, agricultural Private investment to GDP ratio increases by
finance, sustainable energy finance (IFC)
at least 2 percentage points of GDP)
 BICF Public Private Dialogue and Stakeholder
 Overall improvement in ease of Doing
Engagement (IFC)
Business Index
 IFC’s portfolio projects in the financial markets (incl. a
private equity fund, banks and micro-finance),
Outcome 1.3: Increased infrastructure
telecommunications, manufacturing (cement, textiles) and
provision, access and efficiency
agribusiness
 Increase in available power
 Central Bank Strengthening Project
 Increase in electricity grid and off-grid
 Enterprise Growth & Bank Modernization
connections
 Investment Promotion Financing Facility
 Increase share of population with access to
 Siddhirganj Peaking Power Plant
all-season road
 Haripur Power
 Rural Electrification Renewable Energy Development
Outcome 1.4: Improved planning and
(RERED)
management of urbanization
 Power Sector Development Technical Assistance (PSDTA)
 Tax records and billing systems
 Rural Transport Improvement Project
computerized in two-thirds of urban local
 Investment Promotion Financing Facility Additional
governments in the country.
Financing (FY 10)
 Local tax collection effort (collections/total
 RERED Additional Financing (FY10)
billing) increased in at least 12 towns.
 Skills Training and Enhancement Project (FY10)
IFC investments and advisory services during CAS period
 IFC’s investments in the financial sector, infrastructure
(incl. energy), the social sector, agribusiness,
manufacturing
 IFC’s advisory service for infrastructure
 SEDF’s advisory service for financial institutions for
corporate governance and risk management
Indicative Financing:
FY11
 Private Sector Development Support Project (PSDSP)
 South Zone Power Distribution Project
 Padma Bridge Project

138

FY12-14
 PRG for Bibiyana
 PSDTA Additional Financing
 Tax Administration and modernization project
 Statistical Capacity Building project
 Long term finance including housing and capital market
 Strengthening Microfinance Sector
 Power Generation Capacity Expansion and Power
strengthening
 ICT-enabled services sector project
 Gas Debottlenecking and LNG Terminal
 North- East Regional Program
 Railway Modernization Project including inland Container
Depot
 Inland Water Transport Project
 Major Cities Improvement Project
 Rural Electrification II
 Second Rural Transport Improvement Project
 Urban Services and Local Governance project (MSP II)
Ongoing AAA/Others:
 Study on trade growth and diversification
 NLTA on land acquisition and resettlement
 IFC’s quarterly business confidence surveys
 NLTA for designing performance indicators for energy
utilities
 Urban Strategy Study
Indicative AAA/Others:
FY11
 CEM on pro-poor & sustainable growth strategy to attain
MIC status
 IFC support to PSD-related monitoring and evaluation
 Land Administration
 Digital Bangladesh related issues
 Integrated Master Plan for Natural Gas and Power
Generation & Transmission
 Just in time AAA
 South West Regional development program through
Mongla port
FY12-14
 Just in time AAA
 Diagnostic Trade Integration Study
 Investment Climate Assessment
 Governance in road sector including Public Expenditure
Tracking Survey (PETS)
 Continued work on regulatory reform in BICF
 Formulation of development strategies for Dhaka and
Chittagong
 Poverty Assessment based on 2010 HIES
 Port Master plan

139

1.1

Increased public investment and improved revenue generation




1.2

Improved environment for private sector investment




1.3

Indicative Financing: The World Bank Group will support Bangladesh’s goal of reducing
poverty and reaching middle income status by 2021. The Bank and IFC will support reforms
in tax administration and tax policies through the Tax Administration and Modernization
Project. The Statistical Capacity Building Project will assist the Government through
availability of more reliable and timely data. The World Bank will also utilize the SPEMP - a
multi-donor Bank administered Trust Fund for assisting Government efforts to improve the
quality of public expenditure.
Indicative AAA/ Others: The World Bank Group will assist the Government of Bangladesh
with a range of advisory and analytical non-lending activities, including: (i) a CEM to analyze
constraints to Bangladesh’s goal to reach middle income status; (ii) a Diagnostic Trade
Integration Study; and (iii) a Poverty Assessment based on 2010 HIES.

Indicative Financing: The World Bank Group will continue its support to Government to
attract more private investment, strengthen productivity gains from investment, develop a solid
framework for promoting competition and a fairer business environment, as well as scale-up
GOB’s PPP pipeline in different sectors. The WBG will deepen its engagement for improving
the environment for private sector investment through the Private Sector Development Support
Project, and projects for long-term finance including the housing and capital market, an ICT
enabled services sector project and a microfinance project.
Indicative AAA/ Others: The WBG will assist the Government through a variety of advisory,
analytical and non-lending products to help accomplish this outcome. These include
continuation of the IFC-BICF’s advisory work on regulatory reform, IFC-SEDF’s work on
value chains, IFC’s Quarterly Business Confidence Surveys, IFC support to PSD related
monitoring and evaluation, an Investment Climate Assessment, a Land Administration NonLending Technical Assistance (NLTA) and an NLTA on Digital Bangladesh. IFC will explore
opportunities in housing finance, micro finance, insurance sector, and possible risk sharing
guarantees in smaller investment projects. In addition to this, the joint World Bank-IMF FSAP
will continue during the CAS period.

Increased infrastructure provision, access and efficiency




Indicative Financing: The World Bank Group will support Bangladesh’s strategy to reduce
infrastructure and energy deficits. It will support projects to enhance power generation and
transmission, including through enhanced use of natural gas. To reduce the infrastructure
deficits, the Bank will provide the largest share of financing for the Padma Bridge Project. The
Bank will also provide support for multi-modal transport investments through the Second
Rural Transport Improvement Project, the Inland Water Transport Project, the Railway
Modernization Project and the North East Regional Program. The Bank will support the
Government’s energy strategy through providing a Partial Risk Guarantee operation for
Bibiyana, supporting the South Zone Power Distribution project, the Rural Electrification II
Project, Gas debottlenecking and LNG Terminal project, the Power Generation Capacity
Expansion and Transmission Strengthening project, and through providing additional
financing to the Power Sector Development Technical Assistance Project. Policy based
lending support may also be considered. IFC will also be prepared to provide investment
services for viable and transparent projects in power and gas sectors through PPPs, and will
also explore investment opportunities in the transport sector.
Indicative AAA/ Others: The WBG will assist Government with its advisory, analytical and
non-lending products to attract the level of capital necessary to achieve the desired increase in
140

energy generation capacity and to define and implement structural and institutional changes.
The indicative AAA will include the Port Master Plan as well as an Integrated Master plan for
Natural Gas and Power Generation and Transmission and just in time AAA to meet analytical
and policy needs as they arise. To assist Government in improving the quality and efficiency
of infrastructure expenditures, the Bank will provide technical assistance on improving
Governance in the Road Sector. It will also provide assessment of the development
opportunities for the South West region through the Mongla port.
1.4.

Improved planning and management of urbanization




Indicative Financing: The World Bank will support the Government to address Bangladesh’s
urbanization challenges resulting from the high concentration of economic and demographic
growth mostly in Dhaka and Chittagong metropolitan areas, and the tremendous pressures put
on the capacity of the existing urban infrastructure and institutions. The Bank’s support to the
Government will include the provision of resources to build financial and managerial
capacities as well as infrastructure in over 100 municipalities through operations such as the
Municipal Services II Project and the Major Cities Improvement Project. The latter may also
include a multi-sector program covering, among other interventions, planning, transport,
drainage and municipal finance.
Indicative AAA/ Others: The Bank will assist Government with its advisory and analytical
non-lending services, including an indicative TA to help formulate development strategies for
Dhaka and Chittagong.

141

Strategic Objective 2:
Reduce Environmental Degradation and Vulnerability to Climate Change and Natural Disasters
NSAPR II Goals: Tackling climate change, disaster preparedness and ensuring environmental protection
CAS Results Areas and Outcomes
Indicative Financing and AAA/ Other
Outcome 2.1: Strengthened water resource
Ongoing Financing:
management and coastal protection
 Water Management Improvement Project
 Upgrade hydrological network
 2007 Flood Restoration Program
 Rehabilitation of coastal embankment
 National Agriculture Technology Project
 Avian Influenza Preparedness Project
Outcome 2.2: Improved Agriculture
 Clean Air and Sustainable Environment (CASE)
Production and Food Security
 Carbon Finance Hybrid Hoffman Kiln (HHK) Project
 Rice production improved through efficient
 Emergency Cyclone Recovery and Restoration Project
water and drainage management
 IFC’s portfolio project in agribusiness
Outcome 2.3: Reduced environmental
degradation and strengthened natural
resource management
 Reduction in emission per brick kiln
adopting cleaner technologies
 Reduce water pollution from selected textile
factories by reducing wastewater volume
generated in relation to production output by
20%
Outcome 2.4: Enhanced Disaster
Preparedness
 Reduced gap of national cyclone shelters

Indicative Financing:
FY11
 Bangladesh Rivers Information and Conservation
 Dhaka Integrated Env. and Water Resources (DEW)
 Rural Livelihood Development Project
 Trust Fund for Climate Change
FY12-14
 Disaster Preparedness Project
 National Coastal Embankment Improvement Project
 Pilot Program on Climate Resilience (PPCR)
 CASE Additional Financing
 Productivity Enhancement Project
 River Bank Protection and Reconstruction of
Brahmaputra Embankment
IFC’s investment services during CAS period
 IFC’s investments in water infrastructure
 IFC’s investments in agribusiness
Ongoing AAA/ Others:
 South Asia Regional Water Initiative (incl. Abu Dhabi
dialogue)
 Implication of Climate Change on Flood Restoration and
Recovery Program (FRRAP)
 Economics of Adaptation to Climate Change
 Social Dimensions of Climate Change in the Ganges
Basin (NLTA)
 Indoor Air Pollution: Improved Cook Stoves for Better
Health in Bangladesh
 SEDF’s Agri-Poultry Linkages Inclusive Supply Chains
and Cleaner Production Assessment
 SEDF’s Agri-SEED Linkages Inclusive Supply Chains
 SEDF’s Textiles: Enhance competitiveness of Washing
Dyeing and Finishing (Clean Production Assessment
and Sustainable Water Initiative)
Indicative AAA/ Others:
FY11
 Improving Fertilizer production, distribution and use in
Bangladesh

142

 Energy Efficiency and Cleaner Technology in the Brick
Industry
 Global Tiger Initiative
 Biodiversity Conservation and Socio-economic
Development in the Sundarbans
 Climate Change Adaptation costs due to Cyclones and
Storm Surges
 Ship Recycling Industry in South Asia (Regional
Knowledge Product)
 TA under the Climate Change Trust Fund
FY12-14
 Sustainable use of tube-well/ground water irrigation in
Bangladesh
 Institutional performance audit of the water sector
 Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery (GFDRR)
financed technical assistance
 TA on Climate Change
IFC’s advisory services during CAS period
 IFC’s advisory project on PPPs in infrastructure
 IFC’s advisory project for sustainable energy finance

2.1

Strengthened water resource management and coastal protection




2.2

Indicative Financing: The Bank Group will continue its support to Bangladesh on water
resources management and coastal protection to address the challenges of multiple natural
disasters. The Bank will support Government efforts to upgrade and modernize its water
information system; expand the water infrastructure for more reliable and productive water
uses and support institutional reforms and capacity building in key water resource
management institutions. The Bank will provide this support through the Bangladesh Rivers
Information and Conservation project. The Bank will support the Government’s coastal
rehabilitation efforts through the National Coastal Embankment Improvement Project and the
River Bank Protection Project and Reconstruction of Brahmaputra Embankment.
Indicative AAA/ Others: The Bank will assist Government with its advisory, analytical and
non-lending services, including an institutional performance audit of the water sector. The
Bank will also continue to support the South Asia Water Initiative (through the ongoing
regional Abu Dhabi dialogue).

Improved agriculture production and food security




Indicative Financing: The Bank Group will support increased agricultural productivity,
concurrently supporting operations to protect against disasters and extreme weather events.
The Bank will support the Government in addressing the agricultural and food security
challenges through the Productivity Enhancement Project and the Rural Livelihood
Development Project. IFC will explore opportunities in the agro-processing sector as well as
wholesaling and risk-sharing for smaller projects.
Indicative AAA/ Others: The Bank Group will also support studies related to improving
agriculture production including analytical work on improving fertilizer production,
distribution and use as well as the sustainable use of tube-well/ ground water irrigation.
Analytical work on climate change and on the Southwest region will have cross-sectoral
linkages with the agriculture sector and will examine the impact on productivity and food
security.
143

2.3

Reduced environmental degradation and strengthened natural resource management




2.4

Indicative Financing: The Bank will continue its support to Government’s efforts to reduce
environmental pollution and strengthen natural resource management through the Dhaka
Environment and Water Program, Additional Financing for the CASE project, Carbon Finance
(for CFLs), and a Pilot Program on Climate Resilience.
Indicative AAA/ Others: The Bank Group will assist Government through a range of
advisory, analytical and non-lending services. A study will be done on “Energy Efficiency and
Cleaner Technology in the Brick Industry”. The Bank will also conduct an NLTA on Climate
Change Adaptation for the Sundarbans and support the Global Tigers Initiative through a Trust
Fund. Technical Assistance for both government and non government institutions could be
provided through a potential Trust Fund for Climate Change. IFC’s SEDF will continue its
Sustainable Energy Finance Program and will work at the sector level to develop the Energy
Efficiency/Renewable Energy Portfolio.

Enhanced disaster preparedness




Indicative Financing: The Bank will continue to support the strengthening of the country’s
ability to manage disaster risks, including floods and cyclones. In addition to ongoing projects,
the Bank will provide assistance through the Disaster Preparedness Project. The operations for
protection, reconstruction and improvement of coastal embankments will also assist in this
area.
Indicative AAA/ Others: The Bank will also support analytical work on food storage and on
cyclone shelters through the GFDRR.

144

Strategic Objective 3:
Improve Social Services Delivery
NSAPR II Goals: Achieving the MDGs and improving quality of services in health, education and water
supply, and providing social protection to the vulnerable, and promoting gender equity
CAS Results Areas and Outcomes
Indicative Financing and AAA/ Other
Outcome 3.1: Improved access to quality
Ongoing Financing:
health, population and nutrition services
 Health Nutrition Population Sector Program
 Births attended by skilled personnel in two
 Bangladesh Water Supply & Sanitation project
lowest income quintiles
 Dhaka Water Supply and Sanitation project
 Proportion of U5 children underweight
 Chittagong Water Supply Improvement and Sanitation
(FY10)
Outcome 3.2: Expanded access to safe water
 Disability and Children at Risk Project
and sanitation services
 GFDDR TF on Climate Change and Safety Nets
 Increased access to safe water supply free
 Primary Education Development Program II
from arsenic and pathogens in rural areas
 Reaching out of School Children Project
 Increased delivery of network water supply
 Secondary Education Quality and Access Enhancement
in Dhaka and Chittagong (including urban
 Higher Education Quality Enhancement Project
slums)
 Reaching out of School Children Project Additional
 Increased access to improved sanitation
Financing (FY10)
(sewerage) in urban area including improved
sanitation in urban slums
Indicative Financing
Outcome 3.3: Strengthened social protection
system to reduce vulnerability
 Increased coverage of safety nets (SSNs)
and social insurance by poor households
 Improved social care services for disabled
and vulnerable children
Outcome 3.4: Improved student learning
based on quality education services18
 Increased primary and secondary education
completion rates

FY11
 Health Nutrition and Population Sector Development
Program – IDA/Multi-donor Trust Funds
 Employment Generation Program for the Poorest
 Primary Education Program III
FY12-14
 Social Safety Net Project
 Rural Piped Water Supply and Sanitation Project
 Secondary Education Sector Development Program
IFC’s investments during the CAS period
 IFC’s investments in health, education and drinking water
Ongoing AAA/Others:
 Bangladesh: Health Sector Review
 Nutrition: Operations Research
 TF (WSP) support to expand network of water utilities
 TF (WSP): UP led Horizontal Learning replicating best
practices in WSS services
 Social protection programmatic TA
 Madrasa Study- Secondary and Primary
 ROSC Public Education Tracking Survey
 Cross-sectoral study on School Health and Nutrition
Indicative AAA/ Others:
FY12-14
 Nutrition Study
 Improving Health Service Delivery in Bangladesh
 Governance in the Health Sector

18

The indicator “increased primary and secondary student learning” is a core indicator but is not listed here since it is too far
removed from the direct program. However, the results are being monitored via national student assessment (primary education)
and examination results (secondary education).

145

 Vulnerability and employment opportunities for migrant/
informal sector workers
 Human Development Conditions of the Urban Extreme
Poor
 Bangladesh Education Sector Review
 Stipends impact evaluation

3.1

Improved access to quality health, population and nutrition services




3.2

Expanded access to safe water and sanitation services




3.3

Indicative Financing: The World Bank Group will continue to support the Government in
improving access to safe water, sanitation and drainage services in both rural and urban areas.
The existing rural water supply project will be scaled up under the Rural Piped Water Supply
and Sanitation Project. Recently approved projects for Dhaka and Chittagong are supporting
urban sanitation and water supply services. The IFC may also provide assistance through
private sector’s engagement in developing infrastructure for drinking water.
Indicative AAA/ Others: The Trust Funds implemented through the WSP will continue to
expand water utilities’ performance benchmarking and will provide continued support for peer
to peer learning for lower tiers of local government through the Horizontal Learning program.

Strengthened social protection system to reduce vulnerability



3.4

Indicative Financing: The World Bank will continue its support to the Government to
improve access to quality health, population and nutrition services through scaled up delivery
of the HNPSP. The Program will continue to be supported by IDA, ADB and World Bank
administered MDTF.
Indicative AAA/ Others: A major AAA work called the “Bangladesh Health Sector Review”,
is ongoing. In addition a Nutrition Study and studies on improving health service and
improving governance in the health sector will be conducted.

Indicative Financing: The World Bank will assist Government in its efforts to enhance
support to the rural poor and vulnerable, especially women through EGPP. A national Social
Safety Net Project will also be considered during the CAS period.
Indicative AAA/ Others: The Bank is assisting Government with analytical and advisory
work on the country’s safety nets system and programs through programmatic Social
Protection TA. This will continue during the CAS period. A study on vulnerability and
employment opportunities for migrant/ informal sector workers and Human Development of
the Urban Extreme Poor will be conducted.

Improved student learning based on quality education services




Indicative Financing: The World Bank will deepen its support to the Government to improve
student learning for all students through quality basic educational services. The Bank will
provide this support through the Primary Education Program III and continue to support
institutional reforms through the Secondary Education Sector Development program. The IFC
will explore investment opportunities in the education sector, focusing on centers of
excellence.
Indicative AAA/ Others: The Bank will also assist Government with analytical and advisory
work through a comprehensive Education Sector Review. The last such ESW was conducted
in 2001. An impact evaluation of the Stipends program will also be completed.

146

Strategic Objective 4:
Enhance Accountability and Promote Inclusion
NSAPR II Goals: Ensuring Participation, Social Inclusion and Empowerment: Promoting Good Governance;
and Ensuring Efficient Delivery of Public Services
CAS Results Areas and Outcomes
Indicative Financing and AAA/ Other
Outcome 4.1: Increased effectiveness and
Ongoing Financing:
efficiency of public resource use
 Public Procurement Reform Project II
 Increase in (i)comprehensiveness of budget
 Digitization of Land Records (IFC)
management and (ii) quality and timeliness
 Local Governance Support Project
of financial reporting (accounting recording
 Municipal Services Project (MSP)
and reporting)
 Social Investment Program Project (SIPP) and two
 Increase in transparency and efficiency of
additional financings
public procurement
 SIPP II (FY10)
 MSP Additional Financing
Outcome 4.2: Enhanced transparency and
 Multi donor Trust Fund for Strengthening Public
accessibility of public services through
Expenditure Management (SPEMP)
information technology
 Number of applications for information
Indicative Financing:
processed as per the RTI Act in 6 key
FY11
ministries
 Identification System for Enhancing Access to Services
 Establishment of reliable and
 Northern Areas Reduction of Poverty Initiative
comprehensive national ID system for
eligible citizens capable of being used as a
FY12-14
platform in delivery of multiple public
 Strengthening e-government procurement systems
services
 Local Government Support Project II
 Technical Foundations for e-Government
Outcome 4.3: Increased effectiveness of
 PRSC (FY12)
public service delivery at the local level
 PRSC (FY13)
 Increase in total per capita expenditures of

PRSC (FY14)
Union Parishads
Outcome 4.4: Expanded participation in
local development and women’s economic
empowerment
 Increase in women’s participation in short
term employment programs

Ongoing AAA/ Others:
 TF support for TA to Public Accounts Committee
 TF funded NLTA to support implementation of the RTI
Act
 TF supported NLTA for Strengthening Local
Governance
 Horizontal Learning Program (WSP)
 TF supported NLTA on inclusive methodology
 TF funded report on women’s access to the garment
sector
Indicative AAA/Others:
FY11
 Institutional and Governance Review on
decentralization policy options
 PEFA update
 Demand for Good Governance (DFGG): An
Operational Assessment
FY12-14
 Capacity Assessment of Consulting Industry in
Bangladesh
 AAA on local governments and service delivery in
Bangladesh
 Policy note on integrating women into safety net and
livelihood programs

147

4.1

Increased effectiveness and efficiency of public resource use



4.2

Enhanced transparency and accessibility of public services through information technology




4.3

Indicative Financing: The Bank will assist the Government in its Digital Bangladesh agenda
to enhance transparency of public sector institutions and related service delivery through the
use of ICT. The Bank will support an upgrade of the country’s national ID system to ensure
more reliable data management and also further the Government’s Digital Bangladesh agenda
by promoting e-governance applications.
Indicative AAA/ Others: The Bank Group will provide technical and advisory support
through AAA and NLTA. This will include demand responsive policy notes and reports.

Increased effectiveness of public service delivery at the local level




4.4

Indicative Financing: The Bank will continue to assist the GOB’s PFM agenda through the
SPEMP, an MDTF and through a project to strengthen electronic government procurement
system.
Indicative AAA/ Others: The Bank will also support Government through its advisory and
analytical non-lending services to improve governance and local accountability. Key analytical
work will include public expenditure tracking surveys of key sectors such as roads; an
assessment of local consulting capacity, and a PEFA update.

Indicative Financing: The World Bank will maintain its support for local service delivery and
decentralization through the LGSP II. Multi-sectoral programmatic support could be
considered under development policy lending if there are strong reforms aimed at
strengthening local government and local service delivery.
Indicative AAA/ Others: The Bank, through the Institutional and Governance Review (IGR),
will engage in policy dialogue with the Government to strengthen the institutional framework
for local government and public service delivery at the local level. The Governance Trust
Fund will continue to support the IGR. In parallel an AAA on local governments and
service delivery in Bangladesh will be conducted to assess devolution, delegation and deconcentration of public services among local units of line agencies and local governments.

Expanded participation in local development and women’s economic empowerment




Indicative Financing: The Bank will scale up its support for CDD approach through the SIPP
II Empowered and Livelihoods Program. While the World Bank’s support for the economic
and social empowerment of women has been mainstreamed across the portfolio, the CAS also
includes a pilot operation for creating an enabling environment for the employment of young
women from the poorer Northern area of Bangladesh.
Indicative AAA/ Others: A comprehensive operational assessment of DFGG will be
conducted to determine the level of voice and participation in Bank assisted projects. While
gender is a cross cutting area and several dimensions will be assessed as part of analytical
work under the other CAS pillars, a specific policy note on Integrating Women into Safety Net
and Livelihood Programs will be prepared.

148

ANNEX EIGHT: AID EFFECTIVENESS AND PARTNERSHIPS
A.

Aid management in Bangladesh

1.
ODA continues to play an important role in Bangladesh’s development budget. During the first
two decades after independence, Bangladesh was heavily dependent on ODA, which amounted to around
10 percent of GDP in 1990. Bangladesh has since experienced a period of sustained economic growth and
poverty reduction. ODA flows have declined to about 2 percent of GDP, although this continues to be
almost half of the critical investments in poverty reduction funded by the ADP.
2.
A number of bilateral and multilateral development partners are active in Bangladesh. While the
use of country procurement and public financial management systems has increased for some donors, a
majority of development partners still rely on donor systems. In addition, parallel PIUs have been
increasing for some development partners. The Government of Bangladesh (GoB) has not yet established
a formal strategy and policy on aid management and delivery in Bangladesh, but initiatives are underway
to do so. Bangladesh has committed to increase the effectiveness of aid when it signed up to the Paris
Declaration on Aid Effectiveness (2005) and the Accra Agenda for Action (2008).
B.

Local Consultative Group

3.
At the policy level, the aid effectiveness agenda in Bangladesh is driven by the LCG. The LCG
constitutes the main mechanism for in-country donor coordination. It is currently composed of 39 bilateral
and multilateral DPs and the ERD of the Ministry of Finance. The LCG’s goal is to ensure effective and
efficient use of external resources in line with GoB’s Poverty Reduction Strategy (PRS).
4.
The LCG Plenary provides a forum for on-going dialogue between the GoB and DPs on the
country’s development challenges, national plans and strategies, and new development initiatives. It is
also responsible for preparing the annual BDF, which was last held in February 2010. The LCG Plenary is
chaired by the ERD Secretary and the Chair of the Executive Committee (ExComm). The World Bank has
chaired the Excomm and the LCG Plenary on a number of occasions, last from April 2007 to June 2009.
5.
The ExComm serves as the executive organ of the DP group. A revised structure of the Excomm
was endorsed in June 2009 by the DP Plenary. The Excomm represents seven electoral groups - three
permanent members from the multilateral organizations, ADB, WB and UN, and four groups of bilateral
donors. ExComm membership from the electoral groups of bilateral donors rotates annually. UK (DfID)
has been chairing the Excomm and LCG Plenary since July 2009.
6.
A number of LCG working groups are in operation in order to promote and facilitate more indepth dialogue and collaboration on specific sectors or thematic areas. GoB and DPs have agreed to
restructure the working groups to make them more effective and ensure alignment with the PRS process.
It is proposed that the working groups will formulate jointly agreed sectoral and thematic results
frameworks and report to the LCG Plenary on a regular basis, and be co-chaired by GoB and DPs.
C.

Bangladesh Development Forum (BDF)

7.
The BDF is a high level meeting between GoB and its DPs. Historically the World Bank
organized these annual meetings which used to be called “PRS Implementation Forum”. Before 2010, the
last BDF was held in 2005. The BDF proposed in 2007 was cancelled due to the political transition period
in Bangladesh. The BDF presents an opportunity for GoB and DPs to discuss progress achieved against
the PRS and to outline the major priorities and reform plans for the coming year. The BDF also provides a
venue for the international community to voice its financial, technical and political support to Bangladesh
in line with international aid effectiveness commitments.
149

8.
The latest BDF was successfully held from February 15-16, 2010. GOB shared its plans and
specific action programs for achieving its vision of middle income country by 2021. The forum also
provided an opportunity to publicly disseminate the NSAPR II, which formed the basis for discussions
between GoB and representatives from DPs and civil society. Six priority reform areas were discussed: 1)
Development Strategies, Governance and Human Development; 2) Energy and Power; 3) Agriculture,
Food Security and Water Resources; 4) Environment and Climate Change; 5) Transport and
Communications; 6) Digital Bangladesh and ICT Development. The forum concluded with 26 agreed
action points presented by the Finance Minister.
D.

Paris Declaration on Aid Effectiveness 2005

9.
GoB and its DPs signed up to the Paris Declaration on Aid Effectiveness in 2005. The Paris
principles recognize that reforming the way aid is managed and delivered is critical for achieving further
progress in poverty reduction and achieving the MDGs. The following five principles of working together
were endorsed in Paris:






Ownership - Developing countries set their own strategies for poverty reduction, improve their
institutions and tackle corruption.
Alignment - Donor countries align behind these objectives and use local systems.
Harmonization - Donor countries coordinate, simplify procedures and share information to avoid
duplication.
Results - Developing countries and donors shift focus to development results and results get
measured.
Mutual Accountability - Donors and partners are accountable for development results.

E. Harmonization Action Plan
10.
Following Paris, GoB and its DPs developed the Harmonization Action Plan (HAP) in 2006
through the LCG mechanism. The main objective of the HAP was to reduce poverty, improve partnership
collaboration and sustain development gains towards achieving the MDGs. The HAP was designed to be a
guiding framework for both GoB and DPs to implement the Paris Declaration at country level, and as such
was meant to be revised as and when required. However, implementation of the HAP has been slow for a
number of reasons, including the political transition period and lack of an institutionalized monitoring and
review mechanism.
F.

Accra Agenda for Action 2008

11.
Recognizing that more progress needs to be done in advancing the aid effectiveness agenda in
Bangladesh, GoB and its DPs committed to the principles of the Accra Agenda for Action which builds
on the commitments agreed in the Paris Declaration. It presents an agenda on how to accelerate progress
in advancing aid effectiveness at country level by focusing on strengthening country ownership, inclusive
partnership, and mutual accountability:




Predictability – donors will provide 3-5 year forward information on their planned aid to partner
countries.
Country systems – partner country systems will be used to deliver aid as the first option, rather
than donor systems.
Conditionality – donors will switch from reliance on prescriptive conditions about how and when
aid money is spent to conditions based on the developing country’s own development objectives.

150



Untying – donors will relax restrictions that prevent developing countries from buying the goods
and services they need from whomever and wherever they can get the best quality at the lowest
price.

Together, the Paris Declaration and the Accra Agenda constitute the aid effectiveness framework for
Bangladesh.
G.

Aid effectiveness challenges in Bangladesh

12.
A number of surveys and evaluations19 on aid effectiveness have been conducted in Bangladesh.
The findings were mixed. Some progress in improving aid effectiveness has been achieved at country
level, but significant challenges remain. Overall progress on the Paris dimensions was assessed as
moderate.
 Ownership - The process of formulating a poverty reduction strategy is established, but the latter
needs to be explicitly linked with the ADP and the medium-term budgetary frameworks at
ministry level.


Alignment - The use of GoB procurement and public financial management procedures has
increased due to real improvements by some DPs. However, continued use of donor systems
remains the modality for most DPs. Most DPs report a fall in parallel PIUs, but overall a rising
trend in PIUs was noted in 2008.



Harmonization - Sector wide programs have developed in education and health, but the overall
proportion of aid using program based approaches (PBAs) is on a decreasing trend. Moreover,
parallel donor funding alongside the sector programs continues.



Managing for results - Coordinating data collection efforts of various ministries and agencies
remains a major challenge for GoB. There is a need to establish effective linkages between the
PRS Policy Matrices, the ADP and the Bangladesh MDG monitoring.
Mutual accountability - Progress in implementing and monitoring the HAP has been slow. Some
joint assessments have been occurring at the level of sectoral mechanisms for the pooling of donor
funding.



H.

Joint Cooperation Strategy

13.
In August 2008, the GoB and 15 DPs signed a Statement of Intent (SoI) to develop a JCS in
support of the country’s national development plans and strategies. The Statement was adopted by
consensus and signed by GoB and the following DPs: ADB, Australia, Canada, Denmark, European
Union, Germany, Japan, Korea (Republic of), Netherlands, Sweden, Switzerland, UK, UN, United States
and World Bank. The SoI was presented at the third High-Level Forum on Aid Effectiveness in Accra
held in September 2008.
14.
The overall objective of the JCS is to improve the way GoB and DPs work together in order to
make aid more effective in Bangladesh. The JCS intends to outline a vision for improving aid
effectiveness at country level by establishing a mechanism to hold GoB and DPs mutually accountable for
implementing the Paris and Accra commitments. This mechanism will consist of a collective dialogue
structure through the LCG and a living and rolling JCS Action Plan. The JCS Action Plan will be revised
19

Paris Declaration Evaluation 2008
OECD/DAC surveys, 2005 and 2008
Donor Coordination and Harmonization in Bangladesh – A Joint Evaluation Paper, World Bank, Asian Development Bank, Japan
and the UK, 2009.

151

annually in order to provide GoB and DPs with the flexibility to adjust their joint actions according to
progress achieved and changing priorities. By addressing the aid effectiveness challenges in Bangladesh,
the JCS is expected to result in better harmonized and streamlined programs supporting the
implementation of the NSAPR II.
15.
The JCS has been developed by a working group consisting of donor representatives and ERD’s
Aid Effectiveness Unit (AEU). The World Bank has been an active participant in the JCS working group
and has taken on a leading role in the drafting process. During the BDF held in February 2010 the
Government expressed support for the JCS, and three additional development partners joined the process
(Islamic Development Bank, Norway and Spain). The JCS is planned to be signed by Government and 18
development partners by the end of FY10. GoB and DPs have welcomed wider participation of
development actors in the JCS process, including from emerging donors and global programs.
F.

Partnerships & Donor Mapping

16.
Partnerships and others. The Bank works closely with other development partners and across a
range of sectors, and has been instrumental in developing sector wide approaches in health and education.
In the health and nutrition program, the Bank is the coordinating agency to manage the program among the
eight development partners that pool their funds. They include the EU, Canada, Germany, Sweden,
Netherlands, UK and UNFPA. In the primary education development program, ADB manages the
program on behalf of eleven partners which includes the Bank and also Australia, Canada, EU, Japan,
Netherlands, Norway, Sweden, UK, and UNICEF. The Bank also has parallel and co-financing
arrangements in energy, infrastructure, water resources management, environment protection and local
government among others. The Bank actively collaborates with the IMF on macroeconomic assessments.
MDTFs, such as SPEMP, have emerged as good practice of donor collaboration and have strengthened
operational ties between the Bank and development partners. In Private Sector Development, IFC has
taken a leading role through its two facilities, SEDF and BICF, which are financed by the EU, Norway and
UK. In the area of governance, UK is financing a trust fund which has provided analytical support for a
range of sectors. The first table displays these existing partnerships in which the Bank is engaged in. The
existing partnerships have been grouped according to the CAS pillars, and according to the following
categories: analytic / advisory; project financing; program based financing; and trust funds. In addition,
the Bank is engaged in regular dialogue with all development partners through the LCG mechanism and
through bilateral contacts.
17.
The Bank is committed to promoting increased partnerships and aid effectiveness during the
period of the new CAS under the proposed lending program and analytical work. The JCS process will
intensify existing partnerships and enable new modes of collaboration. Amongst other actions, the JCS
Action Plan envisages greater collaboration in sector support. This includes the establishment of a donor
mapping (aid tracking) system. In the meantime, the JCS Working Group has established a simple donor
mapping based on agencies' self reporting as to which sectors they are engaged in. The mapping also
includes the agencies indications of their level of support to each sector. The resulting table is attached
after the partnership table.

152

Existing Partnerships in Operations, Analytical Work and Trust Funds
Program based financing
Analytic /
Project financing
Advisory
Pooled Funding
Parallel Funding
Strategic Objective 1: Accelerated Growth: Increase Transformative Investments and Enhance Business Environment
Economic management
IMF
Private sector development
UK
UK
Power and energy
ADB, Japan
ADB, Denmark, Germany,
Transport and communication
Islamic Development Bank, IMO,
Japan
Urban development
Strategic Objective 2: Reduce Environmental Degradation and Vulnerability to Climate Change and Natural Disasters
Water resource management

Netherlands

Netherlands

ADB

Agriculture productivity / food
IFAD
security
Environmental protection
Sweden
Disaster preparedness/ Climate
Change
Strategic Objective 3: Improve Social Service Delivery

EU, USA
UK

EU, Canada,
Germany, Sweden,
Netherlands, UK,
UNFPA

Health, population and nutrition

Water supply and sanitation
Social protection
Education

EU, UK

UK
Denmark,
Netherlands, UK

UK
ADB, Canada,
Japan, UK

ADB, Australia, Canada, EU,
FAO, Germany, Japan,
Netherlands, Sweden, UK,
UNAIDS, UNICEF, UNFPA,
USA, WHO
ADB, Denmark, Japan

UK

Trust Funds

Australia,
Switzerland

UK
Switzerland

ADB, Canada, EU,
Netherlands, Norway,
Sweden, UK

Australia, Japan, UNICEF

Strategic Objective 4: Enhance Accountability and Promote Inclusion
Denmark, EU,
Netherlands, UK

Public financial management
Access to information
Local government
Community Empowerment
Gender Equality

Switzerland

UK
Denmark, EU, UNDP/UNCDF
UK
Australia, UK

153

Bangladesh Donor Mapping as reported by individual agencies
Rural Development

Partner
Agri

Non-agri

FAO,
IFAD

UNDP,
UNFPA,
WFP, FAO,
ILO,
UNHCR

Water &
Sanitation

Power &
Energy

Transport
& Com.

Education

Health

Social,
justice,
gender

Governance

Public
Financial
Mgt.

Private
Sector &
Trade

Disaster
Prep. & Mgt

Climate
Change
& Env.

Food
Security

CDMP
(UNDP), plus 9
UN agencies
involved

UNDP,
WFP, FAO,
WHO,
UNESCO,
IOM

WFP, FAO,
IFAD

ADB
Australia
Canada
Denmark
EU
France
Germany
Japan
Korea
Netherlands
Norway
Sweden
Switzerland
UK

UN Agencies

UNDP,
UNICEF,
WHO,
UNHCR

FAO,
UNHCR,
ILO

UNICEF,
UNFPA,
UNESCO,
UNDP, FAO

9 UN
agencies
plus GF

UNDP,
UNFPA,
ILO, WHO,
UNHCR,
UNAIDS,
IOM

UNDP<
UNFPA,
UNICEF,
ILO, WHO,
UNAIDS

UNCTAD
(debt/aid
mgt with
ERD, BB)

UNIDO

USA
World Bank
Source: Joint Cooperation Strategy Working Group, February 2010

Focus area

Some support

Phasing out

Phasing in

154

ANNEX NINE: REDUCING CORRUPTION RISKS IN BANK OPERATIONS

A.

Selectivity in Operational Engagement and Support for Systemic Prevention

1.
Addressing corruption risks is a prime concern in the World Bank Group’s engagement in
Bangladesh. Bangladesh continues to face pervasive corruption problems according to both domestic
surveys and international indicators. Although reforms over the past few years have led to improvements
in perceptions of corruption in Bangladesh, corruption still has been a key factor in the public sector’s
increasing inability to ensure the provision of necessary infrastructure to sustain Bangladesh’s impressive
economic growth performance. Corruption also has had a direct effect on Bank-financed projects, as
ongoing investigations into allegations of corruption continue to highlight the risks of engaging in
Bangladesh. The scale and depth of the problem prompts the Bank to support systemic reforms in areas
like public financial management, Right to Information and e-governance. In addition to these
necessarily long-term reform efforts which facilitate better development outcomes, the Bank will put in
place strong measures to address the risks that corruption poses to its operations.
2.
The portfolio faces high institutional capacity risks and fraud and corruption risks. Noting
these, and learning from past experience, the country team will embark on new operations with increased
understanding and sensitivity to specific corruption risks in sectors and under proposed operations. The
Bank will invest more in conducting diagnostics of corruption through political economy and operational
risk assessments in key sectors of engagement in order to inform project preparation and design and to
define the extent and nature of risks across different sectors20. There will be increased cross-sectoral
support to task teams in identifying governance and corruption risks through the new ORAF. The Bank
will invest more in utilizing lessons learned from sectoral governance risk analyses in order to have the
experience of multiple operations inform the project preparation process. Projects which proceed to
approval will require rigorous assessments of fraud and corruption risks and corresponding mitigation
measures.
3.
The risk assessments mitigation measures will be monitored and updated regularly during
project implementation as per the ORAF. The Bank will be quick and decisive in addressing cases of
corruption as they may arise in any of its projects, develop systems to reduce opportunities for the
subsequent re-emergence of the problem, or, if problems cannot be properly addressed, disengage. The
Bank will promote third party monitoring and greater demand for good governance. Corruption and
governance analysis in the sectors will be conducted to the extent feasible in partnership with Bangladeshi
civil society organizations. The Bank will also actively engage the media to facilitate coverage of
governance issues. Projects will integrate right to information and other transparency measures such as
third party monitoring of procurement and execution of projects.

B.

Portfolio Issues

4.
Bangladesh is one of the largest IDA recipient countries, with an active portfolio of 24
projects and a net commitment of $2.9 b. During the last CAS period, the portfolio size increased
along with engagement in additional sectors as energy, environment, local government and rural
development to support poverty reduction, growth and human development. Overall, the portfolio
performance is similar to other regional countries. While the fiduciary risk flags emerge at the highest
level in the portfolio, these are lower than the regional average. A portfolio review of project ISRs and a

20

Three operations risk assessments (ORA) have been conducted for Roads, Local Government Engineering Department
(LGED) and Energy.

155

comprehensive internal portfolio risk assessment demonstrates a range of common risks facing
operations. These can be categorized as follows:







Fiduciary problems: Inadequate adherence to the provisions of Public Procurement Law/Rules;
large contracts often face political interference, or collusion of bidders as well as coercive
practices in the bidding process. Delayed production of audited financial statements is a common
feature. Implementing Agencies are slow in settling financial management irregularities. These
issues are also manifested in cases of fraud and corruption. During the last CAS period four INT
investigations were conducted and at least 31 allegations of corruption were made.
Staffing and management challenges: There are long delays in staffing of project units and
project directors; delay in consultants hiring; and absence of trained Accounting/FM staff.
Weak Client Capacity: The civil service capacity has depleted over the years manifesting itself in
weak capacity for implementing projects in a systematic and timely manner. Insufficient senior
level attention leads to decision making delays and poor monitoring of implementation and slow
follow up of committed actions.
Slow Disbursements: Disbursement performance, while similar to Bank averages, is affected by
implementation delays, irregular submission of Withdrawal Applications and weak monitoring of
disbursement performance.

5.
Governance filters have been incorporated in the country program. The governance focused
FY06-09 CAS prompted establishment of in-country (ORMAP) team which systematically reviewed the
pipeline. The functions and role of ORMAP and the monitoring of portfolio risks has been assessed.
Major findings include: (i) extensive risk assessment of the pipeline was conducted; (ii) there limited
attention to risk monitoring during supervision; (iii) risk mitigation plans and governance action plans
were not systematically monitored at the project or portfolio level; (iv) mitigation measures had limited
inclusion of third party monitoring, spot checks or field surveys; (v) portfolio reviews with government
focused exclusively on a ‘hot list’ of projects – problem projects or potential problem projects - thereby
not enabling a more comprehensive dialogue on cross cutting issues that affect the majority of portfolio.
C.

Reducing Portfolio Risks during the CAS period

6.
Portfolio management and monitoring arrangements are being modified for all stages of the
project cycle. These will be systematically implemented during the CAS period. The main platforms for
reducing fraud and corruption risks are presented below.
D.

Lending

7.
Risk assessment will be undertaken under the rolled out ORAF, while the internal ORMAP
country review processes will be modified. For identified high risk operations, specialized support from
the Governance Unit and CMU will be provided to teams through a modified ORMAP with oversight
during both lending and supervision. In a shift from past practices, teams will be provided initial
comments relating to sector risks at the project initiation stage prior to including the operation in the
country work program. Written comments will be required at PCN and QER stage, with governance
adviser and operations adviser required to participate in QER meetings. This oversight will ensure that
high risk sectors have appropriate measurable and monitorable actions included in project documentation
and agreed with the client. For identified high risk sectors and projects, technical advice and input from
INT will be sought. In sectors where Operational Risk Analysis (ORA) has been conducted, the teams
will ensure that the ORA findings are reflected in the new projects in the sectors, as has already been
initiated under the proposed second rural transport project.

156

8.
The Bank will also continue to work towards systemic improvements. On the fiduciary side,
specific measures are under implementation to build capacity in the public sector for strengthening public
financial management, improving audit performance and promoting more efficient legislative oversight.
Regarding procurement, while some revisions in the Procurement Act has diluted the transparency of low
value contracts, Bangladesh still has a world class Procurement Act which is slowly building government
capacity and improving the efficiency and transparency of public procurement (see Box 1 for more
details).
Box 1: Fiduciary Oversight on Project Design and Supervision
 A procurement risk mitigation plan (PRMP) with measurable performance indicators is prepared for all
new projects. Results show improved procurement outcomes e.g better competitiveness and
transparency, reduction in delays for small value contracts, and identification of cases with collusive
practices
 Frequent post reviews are now conducted on a project risk-based approach. In FY09, 35 contracts in
six projects, valued at about $1 million were declared as misprocurement, and the Government
debarred 20 national
 All prior review contracts are closely monitored during the review of procurement documents/
complaints using INT red flags
 For complex and high-risk projects, independent procurement expert/advisor provides better oversight
and quality of procurement documentations
 A centralized procurement monitoring system is being designed as part of the second procurement
reform project (PPRP II) to monitor procurement performance of key sectoral entities against a set of
indicators including for fraud and corruption
 Introduction of e-procurement for bidding
 A Bidder’s Grievance Address Mechanism is under implementation
 As part of a demand driven intervention, a Public-Private Stakeholders Committee (PPSC) has recently
been established to create greater accountability to citizenry.

E.

Portfolio management and monitoring

9.
Internal reviews. The country team, with support from CMU, has initiated internal risk
assessment of the portfolio. The first such self assessment was undertaken in 2009 to identify risks at the
sector and project level. This was followed by a risk assessment workshop through external facilitation
which validated the internal findings. In addition, a desk review was conducted to assess the performance
against the stated governance and/or risk mitigation plans. This review demonstrated that while almost all
projects included robust plans, implementation and monitoring against these is fairly mixed with
monitoring indicators not well spelt out in the projects. All ISRs will be reviewed bi-annually to
determine status of implementation and progress. This will enable timely detection of emerging issues
across the portfolio.
10.
A CAS multi-sectoral results team established for CAS preparation will continue through
CAS implementation. It will be adequately resourced, with team’s work recognized in annual results
agreements and performance assessments. The CMU capacity for results monitoring is being strengthened
to monitor a results based CAS. The CAS Results Team will be provided necessary technical support and
best practice international examples.
11.
Bi-annual CD chaired portfolio reviews will be instituted which will include review of high
risk operations and cross cutting issues, including corruption and governance. The purpose of these
reviews will be to assess portfolio progress and to serve as a forum for sharing experiences. This biannual review will be informed by a qualitative and quantitative analysis of progress by the CAS Results
157

Team, ISRs reviews, disbursements monitoring and findings of independent third party monitoring, if
available.
12.
Portfolio reviews with client. The CMU has already initiated comprehensive quarterly portfolio
reviews with the client covering all projects. The last batch was completed in the second quarter of FY10.
Annual CPPR has been agreed with the client. The CPPR will be conducted in the first quarter of FY11
with a focus on high risk projects and generic cross cutting issues including those related to fraud and
corruption. The CPPR will also assess portfolio performance against the CAS results matrix. Workshops
with Project Directors are also being instituted for capacity development and awareness building on
ORAF, IL Reforms and CAS results monitoring framework. The workshops will specifically review
progress against the anti corruption and governance plans and share experiences of good mitigations
practices across the portfolio.
F. External independent monitoring arrangements and local level accountability
13.
Projects will strengthen both internal and external monitoring arrangements. The
monitoring & evaluation arrangements under the SIPP present a best practice of building local level
accountability and demand for good governance (see Box 2). These are being strengthened under SIPP II,
and will also be replicated in other local governance operations.
Box 2: Social Investment Program Project (SIPP)
The project has introduced several levels of monitoring systems to bring transparency, local level
accountability and good management at all levels.
Community Level Monitoring, Learning and Oversight: The project has developed a simple and
community-friendly monitoring and benefit tracking system. Social accountability mechanisms enable
effective participatory monitoring. These include functioning of Social Audit Committees, use of highly visible
boards for public display of project financial and other information, beneficiary participation in village
meetings, community assessments using report cards, and grading of village performance. This community –
level monitoring processes flow monthly into the project MIS.
Project Level Monitoring, Learning and Oversight: Members of the national team undertake regular field
visits to field teams and village communities and monitor performance of the field and district teams and
community organizations. The field teams headed by district and national level operational teams organize
monthly learning and monitoring forums. Issues identified, decisions taken by management and responsibility
for actions are tracked in the Management Information System. Monthly and quarterly review of milestones
and results has been mainstreamed as part of the monitoring and learning system.
Independent Monitoring and Verification: A Process Monitoring Agency (PMA) independently determines
project performance. The PMA teams submit monthly and quarterly reports to the implementing agency and the
World Bank highlighting their observations of issues and status of follow-up and lessons learned, enabling
Project management’s real-time response and correction of key issues identified.

14.
Third party monitoring, independent verifications and spot checks will be key instruments
for reducing fraud and corruption risks. These are being incrementally incorporated in new operations
(see Box 3 for an example under an upcoming operation).

158

Box 3: Enhancing transparency and third party oversight in Bank operations.
The Employment Generation Program for the Poorest (EGPP) provides short-term employment to manual
workers during the lean season over two cycles that add up to 100 days in a year. The Bank is preparing a
performance-based investment lending operation to support this program. The program will move towards
wage payments through formal financial channels, as opposed to on-site cash payments. It will have rigorous
geographical targeting based on the national poverty map. The program has built in two sets of independent
assessments – the first is an impact evaluation to be conducted annually and the second are independent spot
checks to be undertaken in each of the two cycles. The Bank will support capacity building at the local level to
effectively monitor the program, including an electronic database of eligible beneficiaries. This list is expected
to be used for other safety net programs as well in a major step towards a universal targeting mechanism. The
experience of EGPP will also present examples for replication in other systems of safety nets delivery in
Bangladesh.

15.
In addition DFGG will be mainstreamed. DFGG analysis has been undertaken for nine projects
and will be extended across the portfolio to establish a baseline for CAS. This would be repeated at the
end of the CAS period to assess progress. Through this learning, the Bank will make increasing use of
social accountability mechanisms in its operations to promote greater participation of citizens, especially
women.

159

ANNEX TEN: COUNTRY FINANCING PARAMETERS
Items
Cost Sharing. Limit on the
proportion of individual project
costs that the Bank may finance.

Parameter
100%

Remarks/Explanation
The Bank may finance up to 100 percent of the costs of
individual operations. Counterpart funding will be encouraged. Cost sharing arrangements will be determined on a
case-by-case basis, taking into account the Government’s
development program and budget allocated for the concerned
sector(s), link to PRSP priorities, the project context and
impact of the cost sharing arrangement on project
implementation and achievement of project outcomes,
implications for the CAS envelope, and other potential
sources of co-financing. It is expected that the Bank’s
financing share could be higher, inter alia, in CDD projects;
provision of services at the local level, including local
infrastructure; and social and human development
investments. The Bank’s financing share may be lower in
general infrastructure investments.

Recurrent Cost Financing. Any
limits that would apply to the
overall amount of recurrent
expenditures that the Bank may
finance.

No countrylevel limit

Local Cost financing. Are the
requirements for Bank financing of
local expenditures met, namely
that: (i) financing requirements for
the country’s development program
would exceed the public sector’s
own resources (e.g., from taxation
and other revenues) and expected
domestic borrowing; and (ii) the
financing of foreign expenditures
alone would not enable the Bank to
assist in the financing of individual
projects.
Taxes and duties. Are there any
taxes and duties that the bank
would not finance?

Yes

The Bank will continue to monitor the medium-term fiscal
position and prospects and its implications for recurrent cost
financing. In determining Bank financing of recurrent costs
in individual projects, the Bank will carefully consider
sustainability issues at the sector and project levels, including
arrangements critical to operation and maintenance (O&M)
and implied future budgetary outlays. Simultaneously, the
Bank will continue to promote the consolidation of
development and revenue budgets and improvements in
O&M allocation.
The two requirements are met. The Bank may finance local
costs in the proportions needed in individual projects.

None

Taxes and duties are considered reasonable and nondiscriminatory. Subject to ongoing monitoring of the
country’s tax policy, the Bank may finance taxes and duties
associated with project expenditures. At the project-specific
level, the Bank will consider whether taxes and duties
constitute an excessively high share of project costs.

160

Bangladesh at a glance

2/25/10

Key Development Indicators
Bangladesh

South
Asia

Low
income

Age distribution, 2008

(2008)

Male

Population, mid-year (millions)
Surface area (thousand sq. km)
Population growth (%)
Urban population (% of total population)

160.0
144
1.4
27

1,543
5,140
1.5
29

973
19,310
2.1
29

GNI (Atlas method, US$ billions)
GNI per capita (Atlas method, US$)
GNI per capita (PPP, international $)

83.4
520
1,440

1,522
986
2,733

510
524
1,407

6.2
4.7

6.9
5.3

6.4
4.2

Poverty headcount ratio at $1.25 a day (PPP, %)
Poverty headcount ratio at $2.00 a day (PPP, %)
Life expectancy at birth (years)
Infant mortality (per 1,000 live births)
Child malnutrition (% of children under 5)

50
81
66
47
39

40
74
65
59
41

..
..
59
78
28

Adult literacy, male (% of ages 15 and older)
Adult literacy, female (% of ages 15 and older)
Gross primary enrollment, male (% of age group)
Gross primary enrollment, female (% of age group)

59
48
88
95

74
52
111
104

72
55
102
95

Access to an improved water source (% of population)
Access to improved sanitation facilities (% of population)

80
36

87
33

67
38

Female

75-79
60-64
45-49
30-34

GDP growth (%)
GDP per capita growth (%)

15-19
0-4
6

4

2

0

2

4

6

percent of total population

(most recent estimate, 2003–2008)
Under-5 mortality rate (per 1,000)
200

150

100

50

0
1990

1995

Bangladesh

Net Aid Flows
(US$ millions)
Net ODA and official aid
T 3d
Top
donors (in
(i 2007):
2007)
United Kingdom
European Commission
Netherlands
Aid (% of GNI)
Aid per capita (US$)

1980

1990

2000

2008

1,287

2,093

1,172

1,502

99
33
53

97
59
72

103
68
33

246
101
99

7.3
14

6.8
18

2.4
8

2.0
10

Long-Term Economic Trends

2000

2007

South Asia

a

Growth of GDP and GDP per capita (%)
8
6
4
2
0
95

Consumer prices (annual % change)
GDP implicit deflator (annual % change)

..
17.6

3.9
6.3

3.9
1.9

9.6
8.8

Exchange rate (annual average, local per US$)
Terms of trade index (2000 = 100)

15.5
..

33.3
..

50.3
..

68.6
..

05

GDP

GDP per capita

1980–90 1990–2000
2000–08
(average annual growth %)
Population, mid-year (millions)
GDP (US$ millions)

90.4
18,115

115.6
30,129

Agriculture
Industry
Manufacturing
Services

31.6
20.6
13.8
47.8

30.3
21.5
13.1
48.3

Household final consumption expenditure
General gov't final consumption expenditure
Gross capital formation

91.8
6.1
14.4

Exports of goods and services
Imports of goods and services
Gross savings

5.5
17.9
3.7

140.8
47,097

160.0
79,554

2.5
3.7

2.0
4.8

1.6
5.8

25.5
25.3
15.2
49.2

19.0
28.5
17.8
52.5

2.1
6.0
5.2
3.8

2.9
7.3
7.2
4.5

3.2
7.9
7.9
6.0

86.2
4.2
17.1

77.7
4.6
23.0

78.9
5.3
24.2

2.7
2.7
7.2

2.9
4.7
9.2

4.3
9.4
8.2

6.1
13.5
14.4

14.0
19.2
26.5

20.3
28.8
35.7

5.4
3.2

13.1
9.7

12.0
9.5

(% of GDP)

Note: Figures in italics are for years other than those specified. 2008 data are preliminary. .. indicates data are not available
a. Aid data are for 2007.
Development Economics, Development Data Group (DECDG).

161

Bangladesh at a glance (cont'd)
Balance of Payments and Trade

2000

2008
Governance indicators, 2000 and 2008

(US$ millions)
Total merchandise exports (fob)
Total merchandise imports (cif)
Net trade in goods and services

5,701
7,566
-2,510

14,151
19,481
-6,855

Voice and accountability

-337
-0.7

680
0.9

Regulatory quality

Workers' remittances and
compensation of employees (receipts)

1,968

8,985

Reserves, including gold

1,599

4,171

Current account balance
as a % of GDP

Political stability

Rule of law
Control of corruption
0

Central Government Finance
(% of GDP)
Current revenue (including grants)
Tax revenue
Current expenditure

8.4
6.4
7.5

11.5
8.7
9.5

-5.1

-3.6

25

Highest marginal tax rate (%)
Individual
Corporate

..
..

..
..

75

100

Country's percentile rank (0-100)

2000

higher values imply better ratings

Source: Kaufmann-Kraay-Mastruzzi, World Bank

Technology and Infrastructure
Overall surplus/deficit

50

2008

Paved roads (% of total)
Fixed line and mobile phone
subscribers (per 100 people)
High technology exports
(% of manufactured exports)

2000

2008

9.5

9.5

1

29

0.2

0.3

70
6.8
..

69
6.7
0.7

External Debt and Resource Flows
Environment
(US$ millions)
Total debt outstanding and disbursed
Total debt service
Debt relief (HIPC, MDRI)

15,740
799
–

23,644
1,046
–

Agricultural land (% of land area)
Forest area (% of land area)
Nationally protected areas (% of land area)

Total debt (% of GDP)
Total debt service (% of exports)

33.4
9.3

29.7
4.4

Freshwater resources per capita (cu. meters)
Freshwater withdrawal (billion cubic meters)

720
79.4

666
..

Foreign direct investment (net inflows)
Portfolio equity (net inflows)

280
1

973
10

CO2 emissions per capita (mt)

0.20

0.26

GDP per unit of energy use
(2005 PPP $ per kg of oil equivalent)

6.7

7.0

Energy use per capita (kg of oil equivalent)

133

161

2000

2008

IBRD
Total debt outstanding and disbursed
Disbursements
Principal repayments
Interest payments

24
0
5
2

0
0
0
0

IDA
Total debt outstanding and disbursed
Disbursements
Total debt service

6,431
357
129

10,613
820
290

48
46
44

112
98
0

2

19

80
0

78
0

Composition of total external debt, 2008
Short-term,
1986

IBRD, 0

Private, 535

World Bank Group portfolio
Bilateral, 3103

(US$ millions)

IDA, 10613

Other multilateral, 6721
IMF, 686

US$ millions

Private Sector Development
Time required to start a business (days)
Cost to start a business (% of GNI per capita)
Time required to register property (days)
Ranked as a major constraint to business
(% of managers surveyed who agreed)
Electricity
Corruption
Stock market capitalization (% of GDP)
Bank capital to asset ratio (%)

2000

2008

–
–
–

73
25.7
245

2000

2008

72.9
57.6

..
..

2.5
3.5

8.4
6.5

IFC (fiscal year)
Total disbursed and outstanding portfolio
of which IFC own account
Disbursements for IFC own account
Portfolio sales, prepayments and
repayments for IFC own account
MIGA
Gross exposure
New guarantees

Note: Figures in italics are for years other than those specified. 2008 data are preliminary
.. indicates data are not available. – indicates observation is not applicable.
Development Economics, Development Data Group (DECDG).

162

Bangladesh at a glance - Millennium Development Goals
With selected targets to achieve between 1990 and 2015
Bangladesh

(estimate closest to date shown, +/- 2 years)
Goal 1: halve the rates for extreme poverty and malnutrition
Poverty headcount ratio at $1.25 a day (PPP, % of population)
Poverty headcount ratio at national poverty line (% of population)
Share of income or consumption to the poorest qunitile (%)
Prevalence of malnutrition (% of children under 5)

1990
66.8
..
10.0
64.3

1995
59.4
51.0
9.3
58.0

2000
57.8
48.9
9.3
48.2

2008
49.6
40.0
9.4
39.2

Goal 2: ensure that children are able to complete primary schooling
Primary school enrollment (net, %)
Primary completion rate (% of relevant age group)
Secondary school enrollment (gross, %)
Youth literacy rate (% of people ages 15-24)

76
..
20
45

..
..
..
..

..
60
46
64

87
56
43
72

Goal 3: eliminate gender disparity in education and empower women
Ratio of girls to boys in primary and secondary education (%)
Women employed in the nonagricultural sector (% of nonagricultural employment)
Proportion of seats held by women in national parliament (%)

..
18
10

..
23
9

..
23
9

107
..
15

Goal 4: reduce under-5 mortality by two-thirds
Under-5 mortality rate (per 1,000)
Infant mortality rate (per 1,000 live births)
Measles immunization (proportion of one-year olds immunized, %)

151
105
65

122
86
79

91
66
76

61
47
88

Goal 5: reduce maternal mortality by three-fourths
Maternal mortality ratio (modeled estimate, per 100,000 live births)
Births attended by skilled health staff (% of total)
Contraceptive prevalence (% of women ages 15-49)

..
..
40

..
10
45

..
12
54

570
18
56

Goal 6: halt and begin to reverse the spread of HIV/AIDS and other major diseases
Prevalence of HIV (% of population ages 15-49)
Incidence of tuberculosis (per 100,000 people)
Tuberculosis cases detected under DOTS (%)

..
264
..

..
251
6

..
239
24

..
223
66

Goal 7: halve the proportion of people without sustainable access to basic needs
Access to an improved water source (% of population)
Access to improved sanitation facilities (% of population)
Forest area (% of total land area)
Nationally protected areas (% of total land area)
CO2 emissions (metric tons per capita)
GDP per unit of energy use (constant 2005 PPP $ per kg of oil equivalent)

78
26
6.8
..
0.1
6.1

78
28
6.8
..
0.2
6.1

79
32
6.8
..
0.2
6.7

80
36
6.7
0.7
0.3
7.0

Goal 8: develop a global partnership for development
Telephone mainlines (per 100 people)
Mobile phone subscribers (per 100 people)
Internet users (per 100 people)
Personal computers (per 100 people)

0.2
0.0
0.0
..

0.2
0.0
0.0
0.0

0.3
0.2
0.1
0.1

0.8
27.9
0.3
2.3

Education indicators (%)

Measles immunization (% of 1-year olds)

ICT indicators (per 100 people)

125

100

40

75

30

50

20

25

10

100
75
50
25
0
2000

2002

2004

2006

2008

0

0
1990

1995

2000

2007

2000

2002

2004

2006

2008

Primary net enrollment ratio
Ratio of girls to boys in primary & secondary
education

Bangladesh

South Asia

Fixed + mobile subscribers

Internet users

Note: Figures in italics are for years other than those specified. .. indicates data are not available
Development Economics, Development Data Group (DECDG) (02/25/10)

163

Selected Indicators* of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
As of date 4/1/2010
Indicator
Portfolio Assessment
Number of Projects Under Implementation a
Average Implementation Period (years) b
Percent of Problem Projects by Number a, c
Percent of Problem Projects by Amount a, c
Percent of Projects at Risk by Number a, d
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount a, d
Disbursement Ratio (%) e
Portfolio Management
CPPR during the year (yes/no)
Supervision Resources (total US$)
Average Supervision (US$/project)

Memorandum Item
Proj Eval by OED by Number
Proj Eval by OED by Amt (US$ millions)
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Number
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt

2007

2008

2009

2010

24
4.4
25.0
23.5
25.0
23.5
21.8

21
4.4
9.5
1.9
14.3
16.9
21.1

26
3.9
3.8
0.6
3.8
0.6
25.6

25
4.1
12.0
3.8
16.0
7.0
17.7

No
3021
104

No
3024
101

No
3671
127

No
3481
139

Since FY 80 Last Five FYs
156
18
8,870.8
1,482.0
28.8
27.8
25.9
24.3

a.
b.
c.
d.
e.

As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY).
Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio.
Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) and/or implementation progress (IP).
As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the
beginning of the year: Investment projects only.
* All indicators are for projects active in the Portfolio, with the exception of Disbursement Ratio,
which includes all active projects as well as projects which exited during the fiscal year.

164

Private Sector Development Support
Project
South Zone Power Distribution Project
Padma Bridge

120
150
1200

Strategic
Objective 2

Amt

Bangladesh Rivers Information &
Conservation
Dhaka Environment and Water Program
Rural Livelihood Development Program

Strategic
Objective 3

FY11

Health Nutrition Population Support
Program
Employment Generation Program
Primary Education Development
Support

Strategic
Objective 4

Strategic
Objective 1

Bangladesh - IDA Indicative Financing Program (FY11-14)
US$ (m)

Identification System for Enhancing
Access to Services
Northern Area Reduction of Poverty
Initiative

TOTAL

1

160
70
100

FY12

Amt

PRG for Bibiyana
PSDTA AF
Statistical Capacity Building Project
Long-term Finance including Housing
and Capital Market
ICT- enabled Services Sector Project
North East Regional Program
Second Rural Transport Improvement
Project

Tax Administration and Modernization
Project
Strengthening Microfinance Sector
Power Generation Capacity Expansion
and Power strengthening
Gas debottlenecking and LNG Terminal
Railway Modernization including Inland
Container Depot
Inland Water Transport
Major Cities Improvement Project
Rural Electrification II
Urban Services and Local Governance
Project

National Coastal Embankment
Improvement
Pilot Program on Climate Resilience

Disaster Preparedness Project
CASE Additional Financing
Productivity Enhancement Project
River Bank Protection and
Reconstruction of Brahmaputra

200

20

26501

Amt

Social Safety Net Project
Rural Piped Water Supply and Sanitation
Project
Secondary Education Sector
Development Program

350
150

150

FY13-14

Local Government Support Project II
Technical Foundations for
eGovernment
PRSC

Strengthening e-government procurement
Systems
PRSC

1300

2600

These are approximate amounts for projects under preparation for FY11. Actual delivery will be subject to progress in preparation and total IDA 15 envelope available in FY11

165

Bangladesh: IFC Investment Operations Program
2007
Commitments (US$m)
Gross
Net**

Net Commitments by Sector (%)
EQUITY
GUARANTEE
LOAN
Total

Net Commitments by Investment Instrument (%)
Equity
Guarantee
Loan
Total

2008

2009

16.56
16.56

44.43
44.43

100

100

100

100

100

100

100

100

98.36
98.36

12.03
72.72
15.25
100

12.03
72.72
15.25
100

2010*

75.65
75.65

100
100

100
100

* As of March 31, 2010
** IFC's Own Account only

166

Bangladesh - Indicative Analytical and Advisory Activities Program
FY11- 14
FY11:
Pillar 1
1
2
3
4
5
6

CEM on pro-poor & sustainable growth strategy to attain MIC status
IFC support to PSD-related monitoring and evaluation
Land Administration
Digital Bangladesh related issues
Integrated Master Plan for Natural Gas and Power Generation and transmission
South West regional development Program through Mongla port

Pillar 2
7
8
9
10
11

Improving Fertilizer production, distribution and use in Bangladesh
Energy efficiency and Cleaner Technology in the Brick Industry
Global Tiger Initiative
Biodiversity Conservation & Socio-economic Development in the Sundarbans
Climate Change Adaptation costs due to Cyclone and Storm Surges

Pillar 4
12
13
14

Institutional and Governance Review on decentralization policy options
PEFA Update
Demand for Good Governance (DFGG): An Operational Assessment

FY12-14:
Pillar 1
15
16
17
18
19
20
21

Diagnostic Trade Integration Study
Investment Climate Assessment
Governance in road sector including Public Expenditure Tracking Survey (PETS)
Continued work on regulatory reform in BICF
Formulation of development strategies for Dhaka and Chittagong
Poverty Assessment based on 2010 HIES
Port Master Plan

Pillar 2
22
23

Sustainable use of tube-well/ground water irrigation in Bangladesh
Institutional performance audit of the water sector

Pillar 3
24
25
26
27
28
29
30

Nutrition Study
Improving Health Service Delivery in Bangladesh
Governance in the Health Sector
Vulnerability & employment opportunities for migrant/informal sector workers
Bangladesh Education Sector Review
Stipends impact evaluation
Human Development Conditions of the Urban Extreme Poor

Pilllar 4
31
32
33

Capacity Assessment of Consulting Industry in Bangladesh
Policy Note on integrating women into safety nets and livelihood programs
AAA on local governments and service delivery in Bangladesh

167

Bangladesh: Social Indicators
Latest single year*
1985-90 1995-2000 2005-08
POPULATION
Total population (millions)
Growth rate (% of population)
Urban population (% of population)
Total fertility rate (births per woman)
POVERTY
(% of population)
National headcount index
Urban headcount index
Rural headcount index
INCOME
GNI per capita (US$)
Consumer price index (2000=100)
Food price index (2000=100)
INCOME/CONSUMER DISTRIBUTION
Gini index
Lowest quintile (% of income or consumption)
Highest quintile (% of income or consumption)
SOCIAL INDICATORS
Public expenditure
Health (%of GDP)
Education (%of GNI)
Net Primary School enrollment rate
(% of age group)
Total
Male
Female
Access to improved drinking water resources
(% of population)
Total
Urban
Rural
Immunization rate
(% of children age under 12 months)
Measles
DPT
Child malnutrition (%under 5 years)
Life expectancy at birth (years)
Total
Male
Female
Mortality
Infant (per 1000 live births)
Under 5 (per 1000)
Maternal (per 100,000 live births)
Birth attended by skilled health staff (%)

Same region/income group
South Asia
LIC

115.6
2.1
19.8
4.3

140.7
1.7
23.6
3.3

160.0
1.3
28.1
2.7

1522.0
1.4
30.6
2.8

1296.0
1.7
27.0
3.5

58.8
44.9
61.2

48.9
52.3
35.2

40.0
28.4
43.8

….
….
….

….
…
…

280.0
…
…

350.0
124.3
128.5

520.0
193.5
206.8

880.0
….
…

574.0
….
….

26.2
10.0
36.2

30.7
9.3
40.4

31.0
9.4
40.8

…
….
….

…
…
….

…
…

2.1
1.0

3.2
2.6

3.5
…

4.3
…

71.0
76.0
66.0

77.1
75.5
78.6

91.0
88.0
95.0

85.0
92.0
87.0

73.0
77.0
70.0

78.0
88.0
76.0

79.0
87.0
76.0

80.0
85.0
78.0

87.0
…
…

68.0
…
…

55.0
66.0
66.0

76.0
72.1
48.0

83.1
91.1
46.0

72.0

76.0

47.3

43.8

56.1
56.6
55.6

63.6
63.7
63.5

65.4
64.5
66.0

64.0
63.0
66.0

57.0
56.0
59.0

87.0
133.1
478.0
9.5

66.0
94.0
320.0
12.1

52.0
65.0
570.0
18.0

59.0
78.0
500.0
41.0

80.0
126.0
780.0
42.0

* Latest single year for which data is available

168

Bangladesh - Key Economic Indicators

2006

2007

2008

Estimate
2009

2010

2011

Projected
2012

2013

2014

100
20

100
19

100
19

100
19

100
18

100
17

100
16

100
16

100
15

Industry

28

28

29

29

29

29

29

29

30

Services

52

52

52

53

53

53

54

55

55

81.6
24.7
6.0
18.7

82.5
24.5
5.4
19.0

84.2
24.2
5.0
19.3

85.4
24.2
4.6
19.6

85.4
23.3
4.6
18.7

85.6
23.9
4.7
19.3

85.3
24.7
5.0
19.7

85.1
25.3
5.5
19.8

84.9
26.1
6.0
20.1

19
25

20
27

20
29

21
30

18
27

18
28

19
29

20
30

21
32

Indicator
National accounts (as % of GDP)
Gross domestic producta
Agriculture

Total Consumption
Gross domestic fixed investment
Government investment
Private investment
Exports (GNFS)b
Imports (GNFS)
Gross domestic savings

18

18

16

15

15

14

15

15

16

Gross national savingsc

26

26

26

27

26

26

26

27

28

61901

68415

79554

89381

99432

109863

121365

134196

147660

450

480

520

590

570

620

680

740

790

Real annual growth rates (%, calculated from 90 prices)
Gross domestic product at market prices
6.6
Gross Domestic Income
5.7

6.4
6.4

6.2
3.8

5.9
5.4

5.5
7.2

5.8
5.6

6.3
6.2

6.4
6.2

6.4
6.1

Real annual per capita growth rates (%, calculated from 90 prices)
Gross domestic product at market prices
5.0
4.9
Total consumption
3.1
5.1
Private consumption
3.0
5.1

4.7
3.6
3.7

4.4
5.4
5.6

2.6
6.6
5.9

4.0
4.5
5.7

4.4
4.7
4.8

4.5
5.0
5.0

4.5
5.0
5.0

Memorandum items
Gross domestic product
(US$ million at current prices)
GNI per capita (US$, Atlas method)

Balance of Payments (US$ millions)
Exports (GNFS)b
Merchandise FOB

11752
10412

13537
12053

16042
14151

17415
15583

17915
15868

20115
17843

23146
20646

26850
24148

31490
28568

Imports (GNFS)b
Merchandise FOB
Resource balance
Net current transfers
Current account balance

15664
13301
-3912
5438
824

18250
15511
-4713
6554
936

22897
19481
-6855
8529
680

23744
20291
-6329
10226
2536

26584
22856
-8669
12566
2435

30591
26561
-10475
14429
2262

35352
30977
-12207
15992
2091

40903
36148
-14053
17562
1715

47679
42516
-16188
19445
1275

Net private foreign direct investment
Long-term loans (net)
Official
Private
Other capital (net, incl. errors & ommissions)

743
498
528
-30
-1727

793
488
406
82
-724

748
752
1083
-331
-1849

941
493
568
-75
-6028

500
5755
1089
4666
-2059

1000
1156
1556
-400
-1940

1200
1608
1403
205
-1990

1350
2707
1158
1549
-1980

1500
2974
1230
1743
-1880

-338

-1493

-331

2058

-6631

-2478

-2909

-3791

-3868

-6.3

-6.9

-8.6

-7.1

-8.7

-9.5

-10.1

-10.5

-11.0

..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..

Change in reservesd
Memorandum items
Resource balance (% of GDP)
Real annual growth rates ( YR90 prices)
Merchandise exports (FOB)
Primary
Manufactures
Merchandise imports (CIF)

169

Bangladesh - Key Economic Indicators
(Continued)

2006

2007

2008

Estimate
2009

2010

2011

Projected
2012

2013

2014

Public finance (as % of GDP at market prices) e
Current revenues
10.7
Current expenditures
8.4
Current account surplus (+) or deficit (-)
2.2
Capital expenditure
5.5
Foreign financing
1.8

10.5
9.0
1.5
4.6
1.9

11.5
9.5
2.0
5.6
2.9

11.3
10.2
1.1
4.6
2.2

11.5
10.4
1.1
4.8
1.8

11.6
9.2
2.4
4.9
1.5

12.1
8.9
3.2
5.0
1.3

12.5
8.8
3.7
5.6
1.1

13.0
8.7
4.4
5.6
1.0

43.5
19.3
67.1

44.8
17.1
74.7

45.6
17.6
88.1

48.2
19.2
69.9

50.0
16.5
99.3

51.9
16.3
84.3

52.6
14.3
86.6

52.6
12.8
80.5

52.6
12.8
88.3

Price indices( YR90 =100)
Merchandise export price index
Merchandise import price index
Merchandise terms of trade index

..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

Real exchange rate (US$/LCU)f

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

7.2
5.2

7.2
6.8

9.6
8.8

4.3
6.4

5.7
6.5

5.7
6.0

5.3
6.0

5.3
6.0

5.3
6.0

Indicator

Monetary indicators
M2/GDP
Growth of M2 (%)
Private sector credit growth /
total credit growth (%)

Real interest rates
Consumer price index (% change)
GDP deflator (% change)

a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.

GDP at factor cost
"GNFS" denotes "goods and nonfactor services."
Includes net unrequited transfers excluding official capital grants.
Includes use of IMF resources.
Consolidated central government.
"LCU" denotes "local currency units." An increase in US$/LCU denotes appreciation.

170

Bangladesh: Key Exposure Indicators

Indicator 2004
Total debt outstandi

Actual
2005
2006
20,535
18959

Actual
2007
21,859

2008
23,644

Estimated
2009
24,131

2010
25,542

2011
26,551

Projected
2012
27,381

2013
28,169

2014
28,931

disbursed (TDO) (US$m)a
Net disbursements (

..

..

0

0

0

1152

1009

830

788

763

Total debt service (T

..

..

259

266

252

1,185

1,328

1,490

1,519

1,567

(US$m)a
Debt and debt service indicators
(%)
TDO/XGSb

138.3

123.0

110.6

97.8

88.7

86.4

79.8

71.7

63.5

55.9

TDO/GDP

31.5

33.2

31.9

29.7

27.0

25.7

24.1

22.5

21.0

19.5

TDS/XGS

..

..

1.3

1.1

0.9

4.0

4.0

3.9

3.4

3.0

91.0

88.2

87.7

84.5

84.1

81.0

78.2

75.3

71.7

67.8

Concessional/TDO

IBRD exposure indicators (%)
..

..

..

..

..

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

55.2

72.4

56.5

61.9

60.7

63.3

67.7

70.4

69.9

70.9

..

..

..

..

..

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

..

..

..

..

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

IBRD DS/public D
Preferred creditor
DS (%)c
IBRD DS/XGS
IBRD TDO (US$m

0

Of which present value of
guarantees (US$m)
..

..

..

..

0

0

0

0

0.0

9,297

10,077

10,613

10,655

9,916

10,638

11,243

11,601

12,005

Share of IBRD portfolio (%)
IDA TDO (US$m

8688

IFC (US$m)
Loans
Equity and quasi-equity /c

12.3

12.3

12.3

20.4

17.8

148.6

134.6

144.4

104.0

97.5

78.3

78.3

78.3

78.3

78.3

MIGA
MIGA guarantees (US$m)

a. Includes public and publicly guaranteed debt, private nonguaranteed, use of IMF credits and net short‐
term capital.
b. "XGS" denotes exports of goods and services, including workers' remittances.
c. Preferred creditors are defined as IBRD, IDA, the regional multilateral development banks, the IMF, and the
Bank for International Settlements.
d. Includes present value of guarantees.
e. Includes equity and quasi‐equity types of both loan and equity instruments.

171

Bangladesh: Operations Portfolio (IBRD/IDA and Grants)
As Of Date 3/1/2010
Closed Projects

184

IBRD/IDA *
Total Disbursed (Active)
of which has been repaid
Total Disbursed (Closed)
of which has been repaid
Total Disbursed (Active + Closed)
of which has been repaid
Total Undisbursed (Active)
Total Undisbursed (Closed)
Total Undisbursed (Active + Closed)

1,337.70
1.54
2,665.71
1,318.81
4,003.41
1,320.35
1,555.89
13.88
1,569.77

Active Projects

Project ID
P102305
P086661
P062916
P098151
P093988
P106332
P111272
P081969
P074841
P106216
P089382
P098273
P041887
P084078
P078707
P074966
P098146
P086791
P071794
P071435
P106161
P095965
P053578
P040712

Project Name
Avian Flu Preparedness
BD - Water Supply Program Project
Central Bank Strengthening Project
Clean Air and Sustainable Environment
Dhaka Water Sup &San. Project
Disability and Children at Risk
Emergency 2007 Cyclone Recovery &Rest Pr
Enterprise Growth & Bank Modernization
HNP Sector Program
Higher Education Quality Improvement
Investment Promotion Financing Facility
Local Governance Support Project
Municipal Services
National Agricultural Technology Project
Power Sector Development TA
Primary Education Development Program II
Public Procurement Reform Project II
Reaching Out of School Children Project
Rural Elect. Renewable Energy Dev.
Rural Transport Improvement Project
Secondary Educ Qlty & Access Enhancement
Siddhirganj Peaking Power Project
Social Investment Program Project
Water Management Improvement Project
Overall Result

Last PSR
Supervision Rating
Development Implementation
Objectives
Progress
MS
MU
MS
S
S
S
S
MS
S
S
MS
MS
S
S
MS
S
MS
MS
MS
MS
S
S
MS
MS
S
S
MS
MU
S
MS
MS
MS
MS
S
S
S
S
S
S
MS
S
MS
S
S
S
MS
S
MS

Difference Between
Expected and Actual
Disbursements
Fiscal Year
2007
2004
2003
2009
2009
2009
2009
2004
2005
2009
2006
2006
1999
2008
2004
2004
2008
2004
2002
2003
2009
2009
2003
2008

IDA
16
40
37
62.2
149
35
109
250
300
81
50
111.5
163.6
62.6
15.5
150
23.6
51
320.98
210
130.7
350
101.24
102.26
2922.18

Cancel. Undisb.
3.83
25.03

Orig.

11.06
8.50
31.70
62.59
141.82
33.09
98.11
65.21
74.14
81.66
4.87
62.51
4.07
50.80
7.79
34.64
18.09
12.54
100.53
54.83
104.19
340.20
63.41
89.50

0.42
28.24
27.07
-4.37
6.71
2.64
7.44
52.86
23.95
-0.79
-17.42
14.08
-23.31
3.56
6.76
19.65
3.94
6.79
-67.95
14.23
-7.06
62.65
-18.67
6.21

58.42 1555.89

147.63

19.96
1.39

0.13
0.00

8.08

a/

Frm Rev'd
6.19

-23.96

-67.95
-3.17

19.19
4.49
-65.22

172

a. Intended disbursements to date minus actual disbursements to date as projected at appraisal.

IFC for Bangladesh
Committed and Disbursed Outstanding Investment Portfolio
As of 1/31/2010
(In US$ Millions)
Committed
FY
Approval
2001/09
1997
1991
2009
2004
1998/00
2009

Company
Brac bank
Dbh
Dynamic textile
Frontier
brummer
Grameenphone
ltd
Lafarge/surma
Pran group

Total Portfolio:

Disbursed Outstanding

Loan

Equity

**Quasi
Equity

*GT/RM

Partici
pant

Loan

Equity

**Quasi
Equity

0
0.57
0

2.11
0.65
0

0
0
0

0
0
0

0
0
0

0
0.57
0

2.11
0.65
0

0
0
0

0
0
0

0
0
0

0

10

0

0

0

0

0.87

0

0

0

3
20.68
15

0
5
0

0
0
0

0
172
0

0
8.86
0

3
20.68
8

0
5
0

0
0
0

0
0
0

0
8.86
0

39.25

17.76

0

172

8.86

32.25

8.63

0

0

8.86

*GT/RM Participant

* Denotes Guarantee and Risk Management Products.
** Quasi Equity includes both loan and equity types.

173

To Gangtok

88°E

BHUTAN

89°E

90°E

91°E

B ANG LAD ES H
DISTRICT CAPITALS

Panchagar

To
Patna

DIVISION CAPITALS

To
Dispur

NATIONAL CAPITAL

PANCHAGAR
PANCHAGAR

MAIN ROADS
RAILROADS

T
HA
IR

NILPHAMARI
Nilphamari

THAKURGAON

N
O

Thakurgaon

LM
LA

26°N

RIVERS

BANGLADESH

Lalmonirhat

DISTRICT BOUNDARIES

Kurigram
Rangpur

To
Katihar

Dinajpur

DIVISION BOUNDARIES

KURIGRAM

RANGPUR

DINAJPUR

INTERNATIONAL BOUNDARIES

To
Goalpara

To
Katihar

I N DI A

Gaibandha

To
Dispur

GAIBANDHA
JOYPURHAT
JOYPURHAT

SERPUR

Joypurhat

25°N

Sunamganj

Serpur

NAOGAON
Naogaon

RAJSHAHI

NETROKONA

Jamalpur

BOGRA
Bogra

JAMALPUR

SUNAMGANJ

DHAKA

Serajganj
SERAJGANJ

Natore
NATORE
NATORE

Kishorganj

KISHORGANJ

TANGAIL
TANGAIL

GAZIPUR

PABNA
PABNA
Pabna
Manikanj
Rajbari MANIKGANJ

Chuadanga

CHUADANGA

Faridpur

Jhenaidah
Magura

JHENAIDAH

JESSORE

Narail

NARAIL

KHULNA

23°N

MUNSHIGANJ Munshiganj

G an g
es

FARIDPUR
FARIDPUR

MAGURA

To
Calcutta
Jessore

CHANDPUR
Chandpur
Feni

22°N

Luxmipur NOAKHALI

BARISAL

PEROJPUR
Jhalukathi
Bagerhat
JHALUKATHI
JHALUKATHI
Perojpur
BAGERHAT
BAGERHAT

Barisal

Patuakhali
PATUAKHALI
PATUAKHALI

D e l t a

ns
a
b
dar
n
u
S
ths
Mou

10

20

30

40

FENI
RANGAMATI
RANGAMATI

C H I T TA G O N G

Bhola

Rangamati

BHOLA

Chittagong

Barguna

Bandarban

BARGUNA

of

the

Karnali
Kar
nali
Reservoir
Reser
voir

CHITTAGONG
CHITTAGONG

es
g
n
Ga

Mt. Mowdok
(957 m)
BANDARBAN

Cox's Bazar

Bay of Bengal

50 Miles

MYANMAR
21°N

90°E

91°E

92°E

To
Sittwe

IBRD 34151

JULY 2005

This map was produced by the Map Design Unit of The World Bank.
21°N The boundaries, colors, denominations and any other information
shown on this map do not imply, on the part of The World Bank
Group, any judgment on the legal status of any territory, or any
endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.

89°E

22°N

COX’S
COX’
COX
’S
BAZAR

0 10 20 30 40 50 Kilometers

0

23°N

LUXMIPUR

BARISAL

s
G a n g e

Khagrachhari

Noakhali

KHULNA

SATKHIRA
SATKHIRA

To
Calcutta

Comilla

SARIATPUR
SARIATPUR
Sariatpur
Madaripur
MADARIPUR
GOPALGANJ
GOPALGANJ
Gopalganj

Khulna
Satkhira

NARAYNGANJ
NARAYNGANJ
Naraynganj
COMILLA

DHAKA

RAJBARI

24°N

BRAHMAN
BARIA

RACH

Meherpur

DHAKA

IN D IA

Brahmanbaria

KHAG

KUSHTIA Kushtia

MEHERPUR

NARSINGDI
Narsingdi

Gazipur

Me
gh
na

IN D I A

MOULVI
MOULVI BAZAR
Moulvi Bazar

Habiganj

Tangail
Tangail

24°N

HABIGANJ

HARI

Rajshahi

ges

To
Silchar

MYMENSINGH

amuna
JJa

G

an

25°N

Sylhet

SYLHET

NOWABGANJ
NOW
ABGANJ
Nowabganj
RAJSHAHI

To
Dispur

SYLHET

Netrokona

Mymensingh

92°E

