Public Disclosure Authorized

Document of
The World Bank

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Public Disclosure Authorized

Public Disclosure Authorized

Public Disclosure Authorized

Report No. 56630-TO

INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION
INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION

COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
FOR THE
KINGDOM OF TONGA
FY 2011 - 2014

September 17, 2010

Papua New Guinea, Pacific Islands and Timor Leste Country Management Unit
East Asia and Pacific Region
The International Finance Corporation

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance of their official
duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without World Bank authorization.

KINGDOM OF TONGA
CURRENCY EQUIVALENT
1 Tongan Pa’anga (TOP) = 0.53 US Dollar (USD)
(Exchange rate effective as of September 2010)
FISCAL YEAR July 1 – June 31
ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS
AAA
ADB
AusAID
CAS
CPAR
CPPR
DGF
DPO
DRR
EC
EITI
FIAS
FTI
GDP
GEF
GFDRR
GFRP
GNI
HDI
IBRD
IDA
IEG
IFC
IMF
ISN
JICA
M&E
MDGs
MDTF
MOF
NGO
NSPF
NZ
PALM
PASAI
PEFA
PFM

Analytic and Advisory Activities
Asian Development Bank
Australian Agency for International Development
Country Assistance Strategy
Country Procurement Assessment Report
Country Project Portfolio Review
Development Grant Facility
Development Policy Operation
Disaster Risk Reduction
European Commission
Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative
Investment Climate Advisory Service
Education for All Fast Track Initiative
Gross Domestic Product
Global Environment Facility
Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery
Global Food Crisis Response Program
Gross National Income
Human Development Indicators
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development
International Development Association
Independent Evaluation Group
International Finance Corporation
International Monetary Fund
Interim Strategy Note
Japan International Cooperation Agency
Monitoring and Evaluation
Millennium Development Goals
Multi-Donor Trust Fund
Ministry of Finance
Non-Governmental Organizations
Tonga National Strategic Planning Framework
New Zealand
Japan – Pacific Alliance Leaders’ Meeting
Pacific Association of National Audit Institutions
Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability
Public Financial Management

PFTAC
PF3
PIC
PPCR
PRIF
PSD
QER
REF
RAMSI
RSE
SDR
SPREP
TA
TERM
TESP
TOP
TSCP
UNDP
UNICEF
USAID
V-FLEX
WFP
WHO

IMF Pacific Technical Assistance Facility
Pacific Facility III
Pacific Island Country
Pilot Program for Climate Resilience
Pacific Regional Infrastructure Facility
Private Sector Development
Quality Enhancement Review
Pacific Regional Engagement Framework
Regional Assistance Mission to the Solomon Islands
NZ Recognized Seasonal Employment Scheme
Special Drawing Rights
South Pacific Regional Environment Programme
Technical Assistance
Tonga Energy Roadmap
Tonga Education Support Project
Tongan Pa’anga
Tonga Transport Sector Consolidation Project
United Nations Development Programme
United Nations Children's Fund
United States Agency for International Development
EC Swift Response Financing Instrument
World Food Programme
World Health Organization

IDA

IFC

Vice President:

James W. Adams

Rashad Kaldany

Country Director:

Ferid Belhaj

Karin Finkelston

Task Team Leader:

Robert Jauncey

Gavin Murray

KINGDOM OF TONGA
WORLD BANK GROUP
COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
Contents

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY…………………………………………...……...………………………………..i
I. RATIONALE FOR A COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY…………………….……………….1
II. COUNTRY CONTEXT AND DEVELOPMENT CHALLENGES………………………………...…2
Economic Geography………………………………………………………………...……………………2
Constitutional Reform……………………………………………………………………………………..4
Recent Economic Developments…………………………………………………………………………..4
Government Development Strategy: 2009-13………………………………………………………..…....7
Donor Engagement…………………………………………………………………………………...……7
III. WORLD BANK GROUP ENGAGEMENT WITH TONGA………………………………………....9
Current and Recent Engagement…………………………………………………………………………..9
Planned World Bank Group Engagement: FY11 – FY14………………………………………………..11
Encouraging Economic Reform…………………………………………………………………..….12
Generating Opportunities from Greater Global and Regional Integration…………………….……..14
Building Resilience Against Shocks………………………………………………………………....15
Implementation: Partnerships, Selectivity, New Ways of Doing Business, and Accountability….....17
Financing Envelope and Terms……………………………………………………………………....18
IV. RISKS…………………………………………………………………………………………..……..…19

Attachments
Attachment 1: Pacific Islands – Overview of World Bank Engagement………………………………...20
Attachment 2: Tonga Results Matrix……………………………………………………………………..36
Attachment 3: Tonga: Country at a Glance………………………………………………………………39
Attachment 4: Tonga: Selected Economic Indicators…………………………………………………….42
Attachment 5: Selected Indicators of IDA Portfolio Performance and Management……………………43
Attachment 6: IDA program Summary…………………………………………………………………..44
Attachment 7: IFC Portfolio……………………………………………………………………………...46
Attachment 8: Map of the Kingdom of Tonga…………………………………………………………...48

KINGDOM OF TONGA
WORLD BANK GROUP
COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
FY11 – FY14

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
i.
Development outcomes in the remote island archipelago of Tonga are relatively strong compared
with other Pacific island member countries – but progress has been volatile. Absolute poverty is rare,
health and education indicators are relatively strong, and Tonga has made good progress against most MDG
indicators. Like many other small and remote island economies, however, Tonga’s development prospects
are shaped by it economic geography. The economy is highly vulnerable to external shocks. Because of its
narrow economic base and heavy reliance on remittances from citizens living overseas, Tonga has been hard
hit by the slowdown in the US and other OECD countries, as well as by the food and fuel price shocks of
2008.
ii.
Renewing economic reform momentum will be vital for Tonga to bounce back more strongly from
current economic difficulties. Policy reform is a necessary although not always sufficient condition for
progress in many small and remote island states. While the Pacific island states are at the margins of the
global economy and highly reliant on relationships with metropolitan countries, experience also shows that
those countries that have done best have been those able attract new private investment to promote growth.
Tonga made a strong start on economic reforms, particularly associated with WTO entry in 2007. More
recent political reform has also marked Tonga’s continuing transition to a Constitutional Monarchy. Still,
significant challenges remain to further strengthen public expenditure policy and management, particularly in
light of emerging fiscal pressures, and to reinvigorate structural economic reforms.
iii.
The World Bank Group is committed to increasing its support for Tonga, in close collaboration
with other development partners. World Bank Group engagement will be structured around the themes of
supporting economic reform; generating opportunities through greater global and regional integration; and
building resilience against shocks. There is potentially room for the Bank to provide $50 million in grant
funds to Tonga over the next 4 years, significantly more than the $33 million has been provided in the period
since Tonga joined the Bank in 1985 until now. There is also scope for the Bank to provide flexible budget
support to meet needs emerging from recent economic shocks, although this will depend on the development
of a credible reform program by a new Government after elections in November 2010. The Bank anticipates
working in close cooperation with other partners to undertake analytical work to help provide a new
Government with the detailed information on which they can make policy choices.
iv.
Coordinated IDA and IFC engagement will also focus on encouraging opportunities for the
private sector and on strengthening service delivery through the transparent and competitive contracting
of functions to the private sector. New World Bank Group engagement with Tonga will build on the
successes that have been achieved to date, such as the coordinated Bank Group support for the telecoms
revolution that has swept the Pacific in the past few years, increasing the number of Tongans with access to
mobile phone services from 6% to 60% of the population. Just as IDA and IFC were able to play
complementary roles in encouraging the opening of the telecoms market, strengthening regulation, and
supporting new private investment, there is considerable scope to exploit synergies across both institutions to
make greater room for the private sector to generate opportunities.

I.

RATIONALE FOR A COUNTRY STRATEGY FOR THE KINGDOM OF TONGA

1.
The World Bank Group is significantly scaling up analytical and financial support to help the
Kingdom of Tonga and other small and remote Pacific island countries reduce the constraints of
economic geography and make the most of opportunities. Reflecting this scale up, this is the first country
strategy prepared for Tonga, as well as the first for any of the smaller Pacific island countries. The Bank’s
strategy for the Pacific island countries (PICs) was previously set out in a single Regional Engagement
Framework (REF) covering the period 2006 to 2009. As Bank Group engagement intensifies, however,
Pacific island clients are increasingly demanding individual “custom-tailored” strategies to reflect their
individual circumstances, and to incorporate the support that can be provided from across the Bank Group,
including both IDA and IFC. Of course, given the importance of greater regional integration if Pacific island
countries are to increase opportunities, such bespoke strategies will draw from key elements of a common
regional approach. An overview of current World Bank Group engagement across the Pacific island
countries is provided in Attachment 1. This is not intended as a formal strategy document to replace the
previous REF, but as a snapshot to provide a wider context for the individual country strategies that will be
developed over the next few years.
2.
Individual country strategies will allow for a greater acknowledgement of the different histories,
development situation, and challenges of the Pacific island countries, as well as a more nuanced
discussion of how common regional themes in the Bank Group’s engagement with the region are
translated into specific country contexts. While moving to a “custom-tailored” approach for individual
island countries, there will be constraints. While the Bank Group is significantly scaling up the staff
resources devoted to growing programs, strategies for each of the Pacific islands will inevitably need to be
relatively streamlined and focused, and will not necessarily be able to have the same level of details as for
some of the Bank Group’s larger clients. Country-specific engagement will be framed in CASs or ISNs
when possible and when data and substance are available (as with Tonga). Engagement in some countries
will, however, be approached through a lighter, more indicative snapshot intended to give a broad and
flexible framework for action.
3.
A country strategy for Tonga is being presented now in order to provide a broader context in
which to seek Board approval for the first development policy operation for Tonga, as well as investments
in the transport sector and post-tsunami rehabilitation. The Government of Tonga requested the Bank in
September 2009 to extend a DPO to assist the Government respond to the cumulative external shocks of the
2008 food and fuel price spikes, as well as the global economic slowdown. These shocks have resulted in the
3economy contracting in both FY09 and FY10, and to a significant decline in domestic revenue. While the
Government has reduced expenditures in real terms, a significant fiscal deficit is emerging and the
Government is now starting to face cash flow constraints. As is outlined in more detail through this
document, Bank management considers that the reform program undertaken by the Government justifies a
DPO. Other donors such as the ADB and EC have already provided or agreed to provide budget support, and
further delays could potentially affect service delivery in Tonga.
4.
Proceeding now with a DPO is important to provide the incoming Government that will be formed
after elections in November 2010 with the breathing room to carefully consider expenditure priorities in
the lead up to the FY12 budget. Management is presenting this strategy in combination with the proposed
DPO in order to clearly set out the Bank’s commitment to offer further budget support for any new
Government following elections, subject to agreement on a reform program on which to base such support.
Discussions with a new Government will obviously be required to reach agreement on the details any reform
program that might underpin further budget support, although this policy dialogue is likely to include fiscal
management, strengthened public financial management, and further encouragement to private sector led
growth. It is anticipated that a joint public expenditure review being undertaken during 2010 and 2011 will
provide a basis for partners to engage a new Government in a coordinated manner.
1

5.
As well as being discussed with Government, the Bank has consulted Parliamentarians and other
stakeholders from across the political spectrum in Tonga, who have emphasized the importance they place
on the Bank signaling upfront – through this CAS – its commitment to engage constructively with any
new Government. The strategy will clearly need to be implemented flexibly and take into account the
priorities of a new Government. The Bank is, however, consciously moving ahead of the elections with a
framework for engagement that could be construed as a white paper for a new Government’s consideration.
Wide consultations that underpinned the CAS suggest there is agreement from a broad range of stakeholders
on the priority of investments outlined, including in the transport, energy and telecommunications sectors. In
addition, the CAS provides a foundation to engage a new Government and to begin an early discussion to
influence its economic and social development program. While there are inherent risks in presenting a
strategy prior to elections, there are potentially greater risks to the Tongan economy and the Bank’s
credibility in delaying a DPO until after elections, or in providing budget support now without also setting
out the Bank’s commitment to engage constructively with any new Government and a potential framework
for such engagement.

II.

COUNTRY CONTEXT AND DEVELOPMENT CHALLENGES

Economic Geography
6.
Tonga is a Polynesian country with a history of human settlement extending back 2-3000 years
when the first Austronesian speaking voyagers reached the islands. As with other Polynesian cultures,
Tongan society is highly structured. The current monarch, King George Tupou V, is the descendant of a
royal line that has remained unbroken since 1845. Tonga is one of the few Pacific island countries never to
have been formally colonized, although it was a British protectorate between 1900 and 1970. Tongan
monarchs have in the past ruled territory encompassing parts of present day Fiji, Niue, Samoa, and Tokelau.
7.
Absolute poverty is rare, and development outcomes are relatively strong. Average annual per
capita incomes are approximately $3,200, higher than most of the Bank’s member countries in the Pacific
(although still well below some of those islands that are more integrated with metropolitan countries such as
the French Territories, American Samoa, or the Cook islands). Strong family and church networks, as well
as extensive subsistence agricultural production, means that food poverty is virtually non-existent. Unlike
many of the Pacific island countries, Tonga remains broadly on track to meet most of the MDGs, and has
among the best social indicators of any of the Bank’s Pacific island member countries. There is almost
universal literacy, with 98% of children ages 6–14 enrolled in school, and little or no difference between
enrollment rates for boys and girls. As well as the Government, which provides free primary education,
churches play a central role in Tonga’s education system particularly at the secondary level. Health
indicators have improved steadily, and access to safe water and sanitation is widespread. Life expectancy is
73 years for women and 70 years for men. About 98% of Tongan women give birth in the presence of skilled
birth attendants. Under-5 mortality is 23 per 1,000 live births (the best of any of the Bank’s Pacific island
member countries), and continues to decline steadily. Maternal mortality is low, with an average of 2
reported deaths per year associated with birth related complications, although this has proven stubbornly
resistant to further gains. Despite good health and education outcomes for women and girls, however,
women’s representation in Parliament is low. The key challenge for Tonga is to maintain achievements, with
anecdotal reports of declining educational outcomes despite strong enrolments, and a rapid increase in
lifestyle diseases such as obesity and diabetes.
8.
Tonga, as with many of the other small Pacific island countries, is shaped very much by its
economic geography. The country has a population of approximately 100,000, over half of which are
concentrated in the main island of Tongatapu, but with small populations scattered across 36 inhabited
islands among an archipelago of 171 islands. Tonga’s total landmass is about 750 square kilometers, spread
2

over 800 km from north to south. The capital, Nuku’alofa, is over 2,000 km from its nearest large market,
New Zealand, and over 3,000 km from Australia.
9.
Development gains are fragile; although at the margins of the global economy, Tonga is highly
volatile and subject to external shocks. Tourism is a growing source of foreign exchange, and has been a
key destination for limited foreign private investment, although this sector still makes up only 10% of the
economy. Agriculture also provides a source of livelihood for a large proportion of the population, although
export potential is largely limited to niche products such as squash on some fisheries products (Tonga does
not have the same size pelagic tuna resource as some of the more northerly Pacific island countries).
Tonga’s medium-term growth prospects are constrained by its geographic isolation, its narrow export base,
and impediments to private sector activity. Systemic volatility is due to the narrowness of the economy and
the limited scope for diversification. Comparative advantages are limited due to permanent cost wedges
associated with Tonga’s small size and remoteness from markets, making it difficult for the country to
compete in all but a few niche markets. Volatility is exacerbated by Tonga’s exposure to natural disasters.
10.
Tonga is heavily reliant, and likely to remain so, on relationships with regional and metropolitan
countries, through investment, trade, remittances and aid. As well as domestic policy performance,
development outcomes will reflect global economic developments.


Tonga is a small open economy. It is heavily reliant on imports, which are equivalent to about 40% of
GNI, and faces a large structural trade deficit. The country is also heavily reliant on external investment
in industries such as tourism.



Development cooperation is an enduring feature of the economy, with official development flows
equivalent to about 15% of GNI. ODA has been central to Tongan Government service delivery efforts,
and is likely to remain so.



Remittances are a key feature of the economy. As many Tongan nationals live and work abroad
(primarily New Zealand and the United States, as well as Australia), as live in Tonga. In total,
remittances have historically been equivalent to between about 40% of GNI. As shown below, Tonga is
the leading recipient of remittances relative to GDP among all the Pacific island countries. Remittances
are the largest source of foreign exchange, and a primarily used to fund consumption.
Chart 1: Remittances (percent of GDP)
60
50
40
Tonga
30

Samoa
Kiribati

20

Fiji

10
0
2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

Source: IMF Article IV Report April 2010

3

2008

11.
In this environment, good domestic policies and leadership are necessary but not always sufficient
for progress; external factors are crucial to development outcomes. Although there is always room for
further improvement, the domestic policy environment has strengthened steadily, and Tonga’s CPIA of 3.5
reflects not just a steady increase over the past few years but puts Tonga in the top half of all IDA recipients.
Good macro and structural policies are necessary to ensure that economies are resilient and attract
investment, and will also be important if Tonga is to attract concessional budget support from donors that
will be required to respond to the global slowdown. Nevertheless, good domestic policies alone may not be
enough by themselves in the small island states. Even where policy environments are strong, continued
remittances and generous, well-targeted, foreign assistance flows are likely to be needed to support current
levels of service delivery and lifestyles. More broadly, greater economic integration, more open labor
markets by regional metropolitan countries, and regional shared service delivery, will be vital for Tonga’s
longer-term future, as with many other Pacific island countries.
Constitutional Reform
12.
Tonga is embarking on significant constitutional reforms that will increase democratic
representation and embed a constitutional monarchy. The King appointed the first commoner to hold the
position of Prime Minister in 2006. Parliament, with the support of King George Tupou V, has also now
agreed to electoral reforms that will result in 17 of 26 members being directly elected through universal
suffrage, with 9 continuing to be elected from the 33 hereditary nobles. This compares with a Parliament
that now includes 9 elected members, 9 nobles, and up to 12 members of the King’s appointed Privy Council.
Following elections scheduled for November 25, 2010, it is anticipated that the Prime Minister will be
elected by Parliament, and will appoint his own Cabinet, largely drawn from Parliament. Nevertheless, this
transition is likely to require careful management to ensure that Tonga continues to be able to draw on the
executive experience available.
Recent Economic Developments
13.
Tonga, like many of its Pacific neighbors, has been hard hit by the global economic crisis,
particularly coming as it did on top of food and fuel price spikes which especially hurt remote island
economies. While Tonga experienced reasonably strong growth during the latter part of the 1990s and early
into the 2000s, recent economic performance has been volatile (as set out in the chart below). Declines in
remittances, tourism and exports associated with the global crisis have led to a slowdown in the economy.
This compounded difficulties caused by fuel price spikes in 2008, as soaring transport costs further limited
export competitiveness, and increased import costs – particularly for imported diesel for electricity
generation (fuel imports account for about 25% of all imports and about 10% of GNI). Economic activity
contracted by about 0.5% in FY09, and by a similar amount in FY10. These shocks came just as the
economy was starting to rebound following domestic disturbances in 2006 that led to riots in Nuku’alofa.
Chart 2: Tonga: Real GDP Growth FY95 to FY10
5
4
3
2
1
0
‐1
‐2
2003‐04

4

14.
Volatility has been exacerbated because of Tonga’s exposure to natural disasters. In September
2009, a tsunami devastated the communities on the remote northernmost Niuatoputapu islands. As recently
as December 2001 Cyclone Waka ripped through the Vava’u and Ha’apai island groups, causing significant
crop losses and damaging or destroying approximately 850 houses, with total losses estimated at $50 million
(equivalent to 15% of annual GNI). Tonga was subsequently hit again in 2010 by Cyclone Rene.
15.
As with many countries, the Tongan authorities responded to the economic slowdown by
loosening fiscal and monetary policy, and this will hopefully provide a foundation for recovery. Fiscal
pressures were also increased as a result of civil service salary rises during 2007 to 2009, although these were
partially offset by an associated rationalization of the public service and a redundancy program that saw the
civil service decline from 5,000 to 4,000 people. The accommodative policy responses, with additional
support from donors, appear to have provided some relief from external shocks. A modest rebound in
growth performance is anticipated in FY11, based on increased construction, tourism, and remittances –
although this is subject to considerable uncertainty and downside risks associated with the strength of the
global recovery and commodity prices.
Tonga: Medium Term Macroeconomic Outlook, FY2009/10–FY2013/14
2009/10 2010/11 2011/12

2012/13

2013/14

Proj.

Output and prices (annual percent change)
Real GDP
Consumer prices (period average)
Central government finance (percent of GDP)
Total revenue and grants
of which Total revenue
Total expenditure and net lending
of which Current expenditure
Overall balance
Balance of payments (percent of GDP)
Current account balance
Gross international reserves (end of period)
In months of imports (goods and services)
External debt (percent of GDP)
Public sector external debt

-0.5
2.2

1.7
4.2

1.7
4.1

1.8
5.1

1.8
6.0

25.3
18.7
29.2
23.9
-3.9

29.2
18.8
34.3
22.8
-5.1

27.2
19.7
32.0
22.3
-4.7

26.2
20.1
31.4
21.2
-5.2

25.7
20.3
28.6
21.1
-2.8

-17.4

-19.9

-20.2

-18.1

-16.2

5.3

4.8

4.5

4.2

3.8

44.2

50.7

52.7

51.1

48.5

Source: World Bank/IMF

16.
The room for continued expansionary policies is, however, constrained. The impact of
expansionary policies in small open economies is likely to be limited. In addition, the authorities will also
need to make a sustained effort to reduce the fiscal deficit, which has reached 4% of GNI, and which will
require external financing from bilateral and multilateral donors. Tonga’s fiscal balance has not deteriorated
to the extent of other small islands, such as the Maldives, but is now among the highest in the Pacific after
Kiribati. As well as increasing fiscal deficits, Government decisions to borrow significant funds from China
– although on terms that are broadly concessional - will result in a rapid increase in external debt, which is
projected to rise to over 50% of GDP in nominal terms (and over 30% of GDP in NPV terms) 1. As a result,
1

Tonga’s external public debt has increased from under 30% of GNI in 2006 to over 45% of GNI in 2010 largely as a
result of two loans from China’s EXIM Bank that became effective between 2007 and 2010 to finance reconstruction
of the central business district following the 2006 riots and road investments. These loans bear a 2% interest rate, a 5
year grace period, and 20 year maturity. Even in the current low interest rate environment, these loans carry a
concessional element of about 34%, and are focused on specific and priority infrastructure investments. As such, they
are not necessarily incompatible with the Bank’s policy on non-concessional borrowing. Elsewhere in the Pacific,

5

Tonga is in the “high risk” range of debt distress. This level of debt could leave the economy vulnerable and
will limit fiscal space to respond to future shocks or to scale up support for emerging development priorities.
In this context, the Government’s FY11 budget adopted realistic revenue forecasts, and attempts to limit
recurrent spending while protecting key service delivery functions in health and education. Other spending
increases are limited to an increase in donor funded activities. Nevertheless, fiscal management and
medium-term budgeting process will need further strengthening, as will efforts to improve revenue collection
and rationalize expenditure while maintaining services. The 2011-12 budget is likely to require difficult
decisions to reduce spending in lower priority areas, and efforts to strengthen revenue collection, especially
at the border. While external financial support from the donor community is likely to reduce the impact of
the crisis, the level of such financing is likely to be linked to reform progress.
Chart 3: Tonga: Fiscal Balance and External Debt FY05 to FY11
60
50
% of GDP

40
30
20
10
0
‐10
2004‐05
External Debt (Nom)

2006‐07

2008‐09

PV of PPG External Debt

2010‐11
Fiscal Balance

17.
Structural reforms undertaken by the Government promise to improve prospects for private sector
growth, although reform momentum will need to be maintained. The current Government has sought to
stimulate private sector-led growth, and Tonga is now rated as number 52 in the World Bank’s Doing
Business survey, the highest among all the Bank’s Pacific island countries. After a period of largely inward
looking economic policies, Tonga has since 2002 gradually adopted a more outward looking approach.
Efforts initially focused on trade reform, with Tonga becoming a member of the WTO in 2007, and ratifying
all regional trade agreements. A consumption tax was introduced in 2005 to replace most import duties.
Trade reform has been complemented by new foreign investment legislation, which came into effect in April
2007. An amendment to the Companies Act in December 2009 streamlined the process for registering a
company and introduced an electronic registry system using New Zealand registry software. This system
will reduce both the time and cost involved with registering a business. New business licensing legislation
was introduced in 2009, although did not remove ministerial discretion on the granting of business licenses
as recommended by IFC.
18.
Despite gains, however, renewing momentum for structural reforms will be important. Relatively
stronger growth over the past decade in neighboring Samoa illustrates the potential benefits of continuing
with reform over a longer time period than has yet been the case in Tonga. Priorities are likely to include
further reform of public enterprises, which control about 20% of fixed assets, and encouraging investment by
improving transparency and predictability of the business environment, including more narrowly defining or
repealing the list of industries reserved for domestic investment. Land tenure systems are intimately tied up
China has in the past also modified some loans to become grants.
Government, even on concessional terms, should be avoided.

6

Nevertheless, further borrowing by the

with the structure of society and reform will require sensitivity, but options to increase the length of leases
could encourage further investment. A Royal Land Commission report, for instance, found that the
administration of the land system required greater transparency and efficiency, and experience in Samoa –
where the transition from a deed to a title system in 2009 and a new IT system for property registration has
reduced processing times by 4 months – highlights options for reducing transaction costs. Finally,
strengthening governance and further improving transparency will remain priorities. Maintaining the
integrity of the judiciary will be especially important in this regard.
Government of Tonga’s Development Strategy
19.
The Tongan Government’s broad development strategy is set out in the National Strategic
Planning Framework 2009 – 13 of February 2009. The NSPF is a focused document that focuses on the
key determinants of economic and social progress, and concentrates on a limited number of uniquely national
and whole of government priorities that will need, by their nature, to be addressed in a flexible way over
longer-term period. The Government’s vision is “to create a society in which all Tongan’s enjoy higher
living standards and a better quality of life through good governance, equitable and sustainable private
sector-led economic growth, improved education and health standards, and cultural development”. To fulfill
this vision, the strategy sets out seven primary outcome objectives, underpinned by four enabling themes:


Facilitating community development by involving district and village communities in meeting their
service needs;



Support private sector led growth through better engagement with government, appropriate incentives
and streamlining of rules and regulations;



Facilitate the continuation of Constitutional reform;



Maintain and develop infrastructure to improve the everyday lives of the people;



Increase the performance of technical and vocational education to meet the challenges of maintaining
and developing services and infrastructure;



Improve the health of the people by minimizing the impact of non-communicable diseases;



Integrate environmental sustainability and climate change into all planning and execution of programs;



Continue the progress to smaller and more efficient government to transfer resources to improved
services and maintenance of assets;



Ensure state owned enterprises are accountable to government as the owner and provide dividends for
the benefit of the people in proportion to capital invested;



Improve the effectiveness of revenue collection to ensure a level playing field and to ensure that
services to the people can be appropriately funded; and



Ensure a more coordinated whole of government approach to donor funding.

Donor Engagement
20.
Tonga, like many small island states, is heavily reliant on international development cooperation
flows which on a per capita basis are some of the highest in the world. Net flows to Tonga average almost
$50 million per annum, equivalent to about 15% of GNI or $500 per capita per annum.
7



Australia is the largest donor in Tonga, as in most of the rest of the Pacific, providing assistance worth
slightly more than A$25 million (USD 22 million) per annum. The framework for Australian
cooperation with Tonga is set out in the Partnership for Development signed by respective Prime
Ministers in August 2009. The partnership commits Australia and Tonga to focus on four priority
outcomes, including (i) improving infrastructure to provide people with reliable and efficient links to
markets and services, (ii) reducing the prevalence of non-communicable diseases and improving
primary health care, (iii) building a more highly skilled workforce linked to industry demand, and (iv)
developing a more efficient public sector.



The Asian Development Bank has had a long-term engagement in Tonga, based around an integrated
program of analytical work and investments. The ADB’s base allocation to Tonga is $14 million over
4 years, although with room to increase. Given Tonga’s debt position, current ADB support is
provided as grants. ADB has traditionally played a leadership role in economic analysis and advisory
support, including on SOE reform, and is scaling up given pressures on Tonga from the current global
slowdown. ADB approved a two tranche budget support grant in December 2009, with the first
tranche released in early 2010. ADB has supported urban development, and will also be taking a more
central role on climate change adaptation issues in Tonga, and will be the lead donor for Pilot Program
for Climate Resilience (PPCR) support. The ADB is also exploring options for greater support in the
energy and social protection areas.



China’s support for Tonga has increased significantly in recent years, with significant concessional
lending for the reconstruction of the central business district, as noted above. After negotiations with
the Tongan Government, China has relaxed usual rules and increased the scope for local contracting
allowed under these investments.



The European Commission has €5.9 million ($USD 7.5 million) available for Tonga under the 10th
EDF National indicative program: 2008-2013. This is intended to focus on energy sector reform. The
EC is also in the process of approving a grant of approximately $1 million for the reconstruction of the
Niuas hospital damaged by the tsunami. The EC has scope to significantly scale up budget support to
Tonga in response to the global crisis through its V-FLEX facility, and is considering a €6.5 million
grant linked to the ADB’s current program of economic support. Previous EC assistance has supported
household level solar supply, and on community development in Vava’u.



Japan has provided assistance worth an average of $6 million per year to Tonga over the past decade.
The Government of Japan recently provided Tonga with a new ferry to replace the Princess Ashika,
which sank with tragic results in 2009, and was extensively engaged in the reconstruction of Vaiola
hospital in Nuku’alofa. Tonga is also eligible for support from the 6.8 billion yen (USD 66 million)
Pacific Environment Community Fund (PEC Fund) provided to the Forum Island Countries that the
Government of Japan announced in 2009 at PALM 5, and which will focus on solar power generation
and sea water desalination projects in the region.



New Zealand has a significant presence in Tonga, reflecting links between historically Polynesian
countries. The partnership with Tonga is New Zealand’s fifth largest bilateral program, with flows of
approximately NZ$18 million (USD 13 million) per annum. As outlined in a September 2008 strategy,
New Zealand assistance is focused on: (i) Lifting economic performance (particularly in the areas of
energy, transport and tourism); (ii) strengthening governance, (including political reform, police and
justice), and (iii) improving education outcomes. NZ has recently committed NZ$1.5 million (about
USD 1 million) in budget support, linked to the completion of analytical work on public

expenditure issues.


The United Nations system is active in Tonga, with UNDP and UNICEF providing support in response
to the tsunami in Niuas, and UNICEF and WHO providing technical assistance to the Parliament, and
to strengthen education and health service delivery respectively.
8

21.
Almost all donors recognize the importance of greater coordination to strengthen development
outcomes in Tonga and throughout the Pacific, as highlighted by Pacific Island Leaders in the Cairns
Compact agreed in August 2009. Greater coordination will be especially important to ensure a coordinated
policy dialogue as donors increasingly move to scale up budget support to assist Tonga respond to external
shocks and an economic slowdown. The importance of coordination is reinforced as ODA flows through
much of the Pacific, including Tonga, are set to increase further as major bilateral and multilateral actors
increase their engagement in the region, and with very significant new and additional financing anticipated
for climate change adaptation.

III.

WORLD BANK GROUP ENGAGEMENT WITH TONGA

Current and Recent Engagement
22.
The central element of the World Bank Group’s engagement in Tonga – as across most of the
Pacific islands over the past few years – has been to connect people more fully with the world. This has
been achieved by encouraging policy change that has enabled people to take advantage of new opportunities
from greater economic integration between Tonga and the global economy. Particular successes have been
achieved in encouraging temporary labor migration schemes, and in the telecoms revolution that has
occurred in the Pacific in the past 4 years.
23.
By supporting efforts by New Zealand and Australia to open their labor markets to temporary
unskilled workers from the Pacific islands, the Bank has helped to provide significant new opportunities
for Tongans. Labor is one of the few viable exports for the small and remote Pacific island countries, as
illustrated by the extensive remittances already received by Tonga. The Bank played a strong role in the
advancing labor mobility in the Pacific through the 2006 report ‘Home and Away’ (titled after a popular
Australian television series), advice to Australia and NZ on international best practice, and technical
assistance to strengthen the capacity of island countries to manage labor selection. The NZ Recognized
Seasonal Employer Scheme (RSE) has been operating for about 3 years. During that time, almost 9,000
Pacific islanders have been placed in horticultural industry jobs (primarily fruit and vegetables picking) for
periods of between 2 and 6 months. The cap for the number of people able to be employed under the scheme
has increased twice, and is now 8,000 people per year. Approximately 20% of these placements have been
provided to Tongans, in part reflecting the strong ties between Tonga and NZ. Studies suggest that workers
in NZ have, on average, earned approximately $4,400 after deductions and living expense). This could
generate a potential injection to the Pacific island economies of over $40m per year, including perhaps $6m
per year for Tonga. Australia is also introducing a similar scheme and, while this has got off to a slow start,
there is considerable potential for this to provide opportunities for thousands more Pacific islanders. As well
as the immediate financial returns, broader benefits have also flowed back into Pacific countries including
new found skills in agriculture, as well as computer literacy and English language skills. In a win-win
situation, New Zealand industry estimates that the scheme has produced benefits to NZ equivalent $150–200
million in terms of increased agricultural output, with the certainty of labor availability allowing firms to win
new export contracts. Building on these schemes, the Bank Group has been engaged with NZ regulators to
reduce the cost charged by financial institutions for remittances.
24.
The mobile telephone revolution throughout the Pacific, with Tonga one of the early adopters, has
also provided enormous opportunities for people. The Bank Group has played a significant role in the past
few years in encouraging telecoms reform to encourage competition and allow new private sector operators,
with Tonga being one of the first Pacific island countries to open its market. The Bank has been helping to
secure reforms by providing policy advice to strengthen regulation. Maximizing synergies across the Bank
Group, IFC investments have played a key role in encouraging the entry of new private operators. In Tonga,
for instance, an IFC investment of $6.8 million encouraged total new investments by Digicel of $29 million –
the largest single investment in the country. Across the Pacific, IFC has now invested $170 million to
9

promote new telecoms markets entrants investing a total of over $500 million in Fiji, PNG, Samoa, and
Vanuatu. The end result of reforms has been to dramatically lower telecoms costs and improve coverage –
with mobile phone usage increasing from about 6% of the Tongan population to almost 60% in only a few
years. Improved telecommunications has literally opened up the world to those previously disconnected.
Connectivity allows fishermen to access timely price information; enables mobile banking services; better
connects people to schools and health services, and provides entrepreneurs with better information.
25.
Providing credibility for our broader efforts to encourage policy change, the Bank has approved 6
investments in Tonga with IDA financing of $28 million since the country became a member in 1985,
mobilizing a further $5m in trust funds. Despite being above the usual operational cut-off for IDA, Tonga
remains eligible for concessional assistance from the Bank under IDA’s small island state exception,
intended to reflect the particular vulnerability and volatility of such countries. The Bank has been a
relatively small source of development finance for Tonga, and most activities have been undertaken in close
collaboration with other partners, with many seeing the Bank’s advantage as its ability not just to finance
activities but in the global knowledge it can bring. In addition to IDA support, co-financing of $5 million has
been mobilized through trust funds, with Bank activities also coordinated with and influencing parallel
investments by partners even when resources were not directed through coordinated systems. Given Tonga’s
debt position, all new IDA support since 2007 has been provided on grant terms.
Tonga: IDA and Trust Fund Operations
Completed projects
Tonga Development Bank
Tonga Development Bank 2
Cyclone Waka Emergency Recovery
Tonga Health Sector Support
Current projects
Tonga Education Support
Transport Sector Consolidation Project
Total

Year Approved

IDA

Trust Fund

1987
1990
2002
2003

2.0
3.0
5.8
10.9

1.0
0.2

2005
2008

1.0
5.4
28.1

3.8
5.0

26.
World Bank Group investments over the past decade have been effective in improving
development outcomes in Tonga. While individual counterparts have been very strong, given capacity
limitations inherent in a small country like Tonga, a key element of recent success has been to ensure that
projects have been focused, built on areas where Tonga has done well or replicated successes elsewhere in
the region, and because significant implementation support has been provided. While we have experienced
significant portfolio difficulties elsewhere in the Pacific, recent portfolio performance in Tonga has been
relatively strong. Lessons from engagement highlight the importance of ensuring that activities are simple
and focused, and that significant downstream implementation support is provided.


Following Cyclone Waka on December 31, 2001, the Bank moved quickly to begin an emergency
recovery project within 5 months. The project was successful in restoring the standard of living for
affected people, building 470 houses and rehabilitating a further 370. New houses were “climate
proofed” and the project strengthened nationwide resilience to natural hazards and new building codes.
The success of these efforts was evident when Cyclone Rene hit a wider area in 2010 – although wind
speeds were comparable to Cyclone Waka, infrastructure damage was limited.



The health sector program supported successful efforts to rehabilitate Tonga’s hospital services. By
strengthening core tertiary care, this has provided a foundation to underpin continuing improvements
in health service delivery. Tonga’s key health indicators – already among the best in the Pacific – have
continued to improve during this period. The Vaiola hospital reconstruction was undertaken in close
cooperation with parallel Japanese and Australian investments.
10



Education sector support has focused on the introduction of school grant mechanisms to provide
principles, teachers, and parents with greater input into decisions at the school level, increasing local
level oversight and accountability in an effort to improve education outcomes given already very high
primary enrolment rates. Through the Education for All Fast Track Initiative (EFA FTI) and in
conjunction with AusAID and NZAID, the Bank has also supported assessments of reading ability in
the early grades of primary education. This initiative is expected to help Tonga make a transition from
a focus on enrolments to a focus on improved learning outcomes. Education investments have been an
example of close donor coordination, with NZ financing exceeding that provided by the Bank.



A transport sector consolidation investment aims to replicate the successful experience in Samoa over
the past decade of strengthening the management of infrastructure assets2 and to improve civil aviation
and maritime safety. This has got off to a slow start, and is being restructured to increase the focus on
maritime safety after the tragic sinking in 2009 of the Princess Ashika ferry. Australia will be
providing $9.3 million through this investment, primarily to support improved road maintenance by
increasingly contracting such functions to local private sector firms, providing counter-cyclical
employment opportunities, at a time of economic slowdown.

27.
Underpinning growing World Bank Group engagement in Tonga, a joint liaison office was
established with the ADB in early 2009. The office, which is staffed by a local professional, has been
instrumental in improving dialogue with the Government and encouraging better cooperation with the ADB
and with other partners present in Nuku’alofa. This has been the first shared rather than simply co-located
office between the Bank and ADB, and has provided a model for similar joint offices being established
elsewhere in the Pacific.
Planned World Bank Group Engagement FY11 – FY14
28.
World Bank Group engagement over the next four years is anticipated to reflect the particular
circumstances of Tonga, as well as key features of the Bank Group’s broader approach to the Pacific
islands which face a range of common challenges. A four year framework has been chosen as this will
align the strategy with the electoral cycle in Tonga, although there will obviously be scope to tailor the
program to the priorities of a new Government that is formed in late 2010 after elections. Such a timeframe
will also align this strategy with the IDA replenishment cycle. Key themes running through Bank Group
engagement with Tonga, as with most of the rest of the Pacific, include:


Supporting policy reform to strengthen growth prospects and improve service delivery;



Generating opportunities through greater global and regional integration; and



Building resilience against shocks.

29.
As outlined in the introduction, a strategy is being presented now in order to provide a broader
context in which to seek Board approval for the first development policy operation for Tonga. The
Government of Tonga requested the Bank in September 2009 to extend a DPO to assist the Government
respond to the cumulative external shocks of the 2008 food and fuel price spikes, as well as the global
economic slowdown. These shocks have resulted in the economy contracting in FY09 and FY10, and a
significant decline in domestic revenue. While the Government has reduced expenditures in real terms, a
significant fiscal deficit is emerging and the Government is now starting to face cash flow constraints.
Responding to these shocks, the Government is continuing with reforms, and other donors such as the ADB
and EC have already provided or agreed to provide budget support.

2

The success of the Samoa experience was illustrated in the way the Government was able to mobilize private firms to
respond to the devastating tsunami in 2009

11

30.
Proceeding now with a DPO is important to provide the new Government that will be formed after
elections in November 2010 with the breathing room to carefully consider expenditure priorities in the
lead up to the FY12 budget. Given reforms to date and the movement by other donors, delaying a proposed
DPO would damage the Bank’s credibility, affecting the scope to influence policy over the medium term.
Delays would also adversely affect the Government’s fiscal position and ability to continue programs. As a
result of declining revenues, the Government is facing a significant fiscal deficit despite real cuts to
expenditures, and is also now starting to have to manage cash flow constraints.
31.
Presenting a country strategy at the same time as the DPO provides an opportunity to reassure all
parties in Tonga that the Bank is committed to working with any new Government, and to provide a
framework for early dialogue to engage a new Government and influence policy priorities. A new
Government will face significant fiscal pressures over the next few years, and is likely to need further budget
support from partners. By setting out the Bank’s willingness to engage constructively with any new
Government, the CAS minimizes risks that the Bank could be seen as playing politics by proceeding with the
current DPO. At the same time, while setting out the Bank’s commitment to work with any new
Government, the CAS also provides an opportunity for early dialogue with a wide range of stakeholders to
influence the discussion about economic and social priorities. In this sense, the CAS is potentially a ‘white
paper” upon which to base dialogue. While agreement will need to be reached with any new Government on
a detailed reform program to underpin further budget support, this is likely to depend on fiscal adjustment,
strengthening public financial management, and further encouraging private sector led growth. A joint
public expenditure review being undertaken by the ADB, IMF PFTAC and the Bank in conjunction with key
bilateral partners during the remainder of 2010 and 2011 will provide a basis for coordinated policy dialogue
with a new Government regarding reform priorities.
32.
Although the shape of a new Government will depend very much on the elections in late
November, there does appear to be a broad consensus for key reform programs in Tonga. Discussions
with the Government, Parliamentarians, and business and civil society groups suggest that there is broad
agreement for efforts to: (i) continue opening the Tongan economy and encouraging outward looking private
sector led growth; (ii) improve public financial management; (iii) address acknowledged fiscal pressures in a
way that will maintain key Government services; and (iv) continue reforms outlined in the Tonga energy
roadmap including the opening of the generation market and increased investment in renewable energy.
While there are obviously differences in approach and nuance between different groups, the Government
intends to seek Parliamentary commitment to key reform programs currently underway with World Bank and
other international support. Similarly, extensive discussions with a wide range of stakeholders in Tonga
suggest there is widespread support for key elements of the Bank Groups proposed engagement.
Supporting Economic Reform
33.
A central feature of Bank Group engagement in Tonga – as well as elsewhere in the Pacific
region – will be to scale up analytical and financial support for policy reform. World Bank engagement on
economic reform issues in the Pacific has been limited over the past decade, but is now being scaled-up in
order to respond to demands from Pacific clients as a result of the global economic slowdown, and reflecting
the Bank’s global comparative advantages. This will be done in close cooperation with other partners, many
of which have been more engaged on these issues in the Pacific in recent times.
34.
Joint public expenditure analysis will be especially important to engage and support the potential
efforts of a new Government to rationalize expenditures while maintaining and improving core service
delivery functions. Building blocks for this work are in place with health and education sector expenditure
analyses supported by the Australian Government. The Bank intends to contribute substantially to joint
public expenditure analytical work to be undertaken with the ADB, the IMF Pacific Financial Technical
Assistance Center (PFTAC), and key bilateral donors. This is intended to provide a foundation for initial
12

engagement with a new Government, as well as to support more detailed analysis of options to streamline
expenditure while maintaining service delivery at the sectoral level.
35.
Joint analytical work will be critical to provide a foundation to underpin a more coordinated
discussion between the Government and partners on potential budget support. Such operations will aim to
support both shorter-term economic recovery as well as help strengthen growth prospects and service
delivery over the medium-term. Given needs, a range of donors are likely to provide such support, with
ADB having approved $10m fast disbursing financing in 2009 linked to the prioritization of essential public
expenditure including protection of health and education spending, continued public financial management
and SOE reform, and social protection. The EC is considering providing approximately €5.5 million (USD 7
million) in budget support through its V-FLEX facility, linked to the 2nd tranche of the ADB operation. And
Australia and NZ have both provided or are considering limited sector specific budget support. A World
Bank energy sector policy operation of $5m will also provide fast disbursing support, reflecting the progress
in this sector (discussed further below) as well as progress in strengthening PFM systems. By helping to
meet immediate needs, this will ensure the Bank maintains credibility with the authorities and has a “seat at
the table” for more coordinated future discussions. Nevertheless, beyond the immediate round of support in
2010, a greater degree of coordination will be vital if such support is not just to fill short-term gaps but is to
encourage necessary reform to put the Tongan economy on a more sustainable footing.
36.
Should a new Government wish to engage in a substantive discussion on reform, there is scope for
the Bank to prepare a multi-year development policy operation, starting in FY12, to underpin an agreed
and coordinated program of reforms and to respond to the aftermath of current economic shocks.
Elsewhere in the Pacific, the Samoan Government and donors were able to agree of a single coordinated
matrix underpinning the provision of budget support by all partners. Similarly, in Solomon Islands, the Core
Economic Working Group has proved an effective mechanism to strengthen coordination. These might be
coordination models that could potentially be replicated in Tonga. The provision of budget support will,
however, require a commitment and action by the new Government to continue strengthening public
financial management systems, make hard fiscal decisions to reduce lower priority budget expenditures and
strengthen revenue collection, and pursue further structural economic reform.
37.
The Bank will continue to support the Tongan Government’s efforts to further strengthen
governance. Bank engagement is occurring against the backdrop of broader Constitutional reforms designed
to strengthen further the role of a more representative, popularly elected, legislature in overseeing executive
functions. Transparency International notes that since 2007, the Government’s “anti-corruption drive has
earned the support of local civil society organizations”. Reflecting this, Transparency International’s
corruption perceptions index (CPI) rating for Tonga has improved more than any other country between 2007
(when Tonga was first included in the index) and 2009. Tonga is now ranked 99 out of 180 countries on TI’s
CPI – and while this provides room for improvement, it also places Tonga in the top quarter of all IDAeligible countries. Bank support will focus especially on strengthening public expenditure management
systems and policy dialogue to support efforts to reduce discretion in the implementation of business
licensing legislation. The Government has moved ahead with a range of PFM reforms over the past few
years, including the establishment of an internal audit unit and new procurement regulations to be introduced
in 2010. A recent Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability (PEFA) assessment led by the Australian
Government, acknowledged a range of recent improvements in transparency, policy based budgeting, and
strengthened predictability and controls in budget execution, but which also highlighted the critical
importance of further strengthening audit functions. PEFA and PFM issues will need to be a key element in
any potential further DPO program. On the structural side, IFC advisory support since 2008 has assisted the
Government to introduce a new electronic company registry, streamlining procedures required to start a
business – strengthening the overall governance environment and reducing discretion and opportunities for
rent seeking. In the short to medium term, further business licensing reform to reduce ‘reserved’ industries
and provide greater certainty for potential investors in key sectors of the economy is likely to be especially
important, although broad progress on this front has been limited to date.
13

Generating Opportunities from Greater Global and Regional Integration
38.
While domestic reform is crucial, greater global and regional integration will also be vital for
small island states such as Tonga to overcome the constraints of economic geography. Rather than trying
to swim against the tide by spreading out economic activity in more remote areas, the 2009 World
Development Report and initial work by the World Bank on ‘Pacific Futures’ suggests that Pacific island
countries are more likely to achieve success by carefully planned economic integration, by reducing frictions
to ensure that peripheries can be more closely connected to economic hubs.
39.
The Bank anticipates building on success to date in temporary labor migration schemes, which
have provided opportunities for thousands of Tongans. This includes continued support to encourage the
further expansion of such schemes in the region. In addition, the Bank anticipates supporting efforts to
strengthen financial literacy among temporary laborers to help them make the most of opportunities to start
their own businesses on return. IFC’s Pacific micro-finance initiative will also potentially be a mechanism to
support a wide range of budding entrepreneurs, including returned seasonal laborers.
40.
The telecommunications revolution in the Pacific has been perhaps the major success story in the
region in the past 5 years, and an area in which continued World Bank Group engagement is anticipated.
IFC is exploring options for mobile phone banking in the Pacific, to build on the dramatic expansion in the
use of mobile telecoms technology in the region. The next key challenge in the ICT sector will be to
improve broadband connectivity for many of the smaller islands. The Bank is working closely with the
Government, as well as both major telephone service providers in Tonga, ADB and IFC, to explore options
for a public-private partnership to finance a broadband cable between Tonga and one of the major cross
Pacific cables. This might also potentially involve a broader regional network with Samoa, Solomon Islands,
and Vanuatu. Just as broadband connectivity has revitalized many small towns in the U.S., this has the
potential to provide opportunities to people in countries like Tonga to participate in and benefit from the
global economy. While the focus will be on maximizing the private investment that can be obtained while
ensuring that there is open access to bandwidth for all domestic service providers, Bank support for
remaining Government investments in landing a cable can be provided on grant terms and – due to IDA’s
regional facility – almost totally in addition to Tonga’s regular IDA allocation.
41.
In time, consideration by Tonga of further opportunities for service delivery to be undertaken
through cooperative regional arrangements could help to generate economies of scale, and the Bank
stands ready to assist Tongan Government efforts that may emerge in this regard.
42.
The Bank Group will support further structural reform by the Tongan Government that could
encourage new private investment and growth. Increasing opportunities for small and medium enterprises
to gain access to finance will be a focus of efforts to encourage greater opportunities from private sector led
growth. Only about 20% of small and medium firms throughout the Pacific have access to finance through
the banking system. The Bank Group is working around the region to improve financial infrastructure. In
Tonga, IFC is currently in discussion with the central bank and commercial banks with the aim of
establishing a credit bureau, which is a key constraint limiting expansion of financial services. IFC is also
engaging at the firm level through the Pacific Microfinance Initiative, to expand outreach and access to
financial services for the under-served population of the country. IFC has engaged with South Pacific
Business Development Foundation to assist its proposed plans to expand microfinance operations in Tonga.
IDA and IFC have been collaborating in PNG to establish a “first loss” facility that could potentially
encourage commercial banks to increasingly provide finance to the vibrant SME sector, and will explore
options to replicate a similar facility on a regional basis across the rest of the Pacific islands – for which
additional regional financing could potentially be made available over and above countries’ standard
allocations. IFC is also exploring opportunities to support new tourism and agribusiness investments in
Tonga, that have scope to encourage growth and employment in these areas where Tonga has a natural
comparative advantage.
14

Building Resilience Against Shocks
43.
Given the systemic volatility and vulnerability of many of the Pacific island countries, building
resilience will be a key theme of Bank Group engagement in Tonga and throughout the region. As well as
vulnerability to natural disasters, climate change adaptation will be central to development outcomes in the
Pacific and will become an increasing focus. Similarly, support to strengthen oil supply chain management
and open the electricity market to new private sector generation investments, including in renewable energy,
will reduce vulnerability to potential future oil price shocks.
44.
Building on successful reconstruction efforts after Cyclone Waka, the Bank will support
reconstruction of houses and public buildings on the Niuas islands that were hit by the 2009 tsunami. An
emergency reconstruction grant is being presented to the Board in parallel to this CAS, with financing
additional to Tonga’s normal allocation, and with the scope to retroactively finance work already undertaken
by the Tongan Government. As well as reconstruction or rehabilitation of 145 houses, investments will
support further efforts to strengthen the disaster management and response capacity of the National Disaster
Management Office. Investments will be closely coordinated with NZ efforts to provide temporary housing
through the Red Cross, EC support for the Niuas hospital reconstruction, and NZ support. Disaster risk
reduction efforts will be complemented by exploration of the feasibility of a possible catastrophe risk sharing
facility, as has been established in the Caribbean, as one element in a layered risk management framework
that could provide a quick response and potentially supplement donor support following natural disasters.
45.
Many of the Pacific islands are on the front line with climate change, and increased and better
coordinated support for adaptation efforts will be crucial. The ADB is leading efforts in Tonga under the
Pilot Program for Climate Resilience (PPCR), with the World Bank leading in Samoa. Japan has also been
active in this area. Nevertheless, Tonga is likely to be one of the priority countries for the Global Facility for
Disaster Reduction and Recovery (GFDRR), which will allow the Bank to provide some support for
integrated adaptation and DRR activities, in coordination with other donors – particularly in support of the
ADB led PPCR effort. A key lesson from previous adaptation and disaster risk reduction engagement is that
such work is likely to have most value if integrated closely with efforts to “climate proof” infrastructure
investments. The Bank will also ensure that adaptation measures are built into all infrastructure investments,
including road transport, energy, and school construction.
46.
Good coordination in the infrastructure sector has been achieved through the Pacific Regional
Infrastructure Facility (PRIF), and this could provide an example to strengthen coordination of the
variety of donors engaged in supporting climate change adaptation in the region. Reflecting commitments
to support adaptation made by countries at the Copenhagen summit, considerable additional support is likely
to be made available to assist the vulnerable Pacific island countries to adapt to climate change. While vital,
better coordination of these flows will be critical. Australian leadership was crucial to establish PRIF, which
now includes New Zealand, the ADB, and the World Bank – with the European Union in the process of
joining. PRIF has been instrumental in better linking investments to longer-term reforms in the way island
countries plan, manage, and finance their infrastructure needs. It has proven an effective mechanism to
marshal coordinated donor support for investments in economic infrastructure, and as a means to address the
problem of funding for infrastructure asset maintenance. In looking at options for better regional
coordination of climate change, South Pacific Regional Environment Programme (SPREP) – which has been
tasked by Pacific leaders to play a convening role – will also need to be closely involved.
47.
Reflecting the food and fuel price spikes of 2008, efforts to reduce reliance on volatile imported
fossil fuels and improve energy supply chain management are becoming a larger area of focus,
particularly in Tonga and the North Pacific. Early experience in Tonga with the development of an
integrated “energy roadmap” provides a potential model for donor coordination elsewhere in the region, and
provides a potential opportunity to strengthen collaboration with non-traditional donors such as China, which
is a highly competitive supplier of photovoltaic systems. With reforms focused on providing opportunities
15

for new private investment in generation capacity, there is also considerable scope to exploit synergies across
the public and private sector arms of the Bank Group. An energy development policy operation, presented
with this CAS, reflects the significant progress with the roadmap, and accelerated this reform agenda and
these reforms will be further supported through any potential future DPO program. The Bank also plans an
IDA investment, potentially supplemented with PRIF financing, in late FY11 to support these reform efforts.
48.
Given the successful experience with Samoan infrastructure management, where the Bank has
been engaged for over a decade, there is potentially scope during the IDA-16 period to begin a new phase
the current Tonga transport sector consolidation project. A key element of Bank engagement in this sector
– with support from the Australian Government – will be to increase local capacity to undertake road
maintenance and infrastructure work. As well as meeting urgent maintenance needs, this will provide
counter-cyclical employment opportunities for thousands of Tongans. The Princess Ashika tragedy
highlights the importance of renewed efforts to strengthen maritime safety. A new phase of the TSCP during
IDA-16 is also an opportunity to further mainstream disaster risk reduction and climate change adaptation
issues into infrastructure planning and management. The Bank Group is also considering initial approaches
from the Government to support the rehabilitation of airports throughout Tonga as part of a broader strategy
to open the domestic airline market to great competition.
49.
The Bank has successfully supported health and primary education service delivery in Tonga, but
reflecting principles of selectivity and donor coordination anticipates being less involved in these sectors
in future. Tonga is making relatively good progress toward the MDGs, with generally strong social
indicators. The Bank has supported service delivery, through the successful health sector support project
(2003 – 2009) that was undertaken in coordination with Japan and Australia and the continuing education
support project in conjunction with NZ that has focused on school grants as a mechanism to increase parent
and teacher oversight of investments at the school level. There are issues with increasing lifestyle diseases
and with educational quality. Nevertheless, there is also very significant – and growing – support from other
donors for Tongan Government efforts. The Bank will remain engaged in analytical work, particularly with
early grade reading assessments financed through the Education for All Fast Track Initiative (EFA FTI) and
in terms of options to reduce the prevalence of non-communicable diseases. New investments in the
education and health sectors are not planned at this stage, although this could be revisited if clear gaps
emerge and the Government and lead donors in each sector request further Bank support.
50.
Gender issues will continue to be mainstreamed into the Bank program. Gender outcomes in
Tonga are relatively good. Maternal and child health care is strong. There is little difference in school
enrolment between girls and boys (girls have slightly higher enrolment rates than boys at the secondary
level). And while there is almost universal literacy, rates among women are slightly higher than men. Bank
health and education programs have supported these outcomes, although other donors are likely to play a
stronger role in these sectors in future. Research by the Pacific Institute for Public Policy3 in Vanuatu
indicates that while men were initially more likely to adopt new communications technology, women quickly
follow and that telecoms reform has reduced the gender gap between women and men’s access to phones that
existed prior to market liberalization (although differences still remains significant in rural areas). The study
shows a clear link between economic productivity and access to mobile phones, with women successfully
making use of new opportunities (over 80% of the women in the main market, where women dominate
activity, are using mobiles to pre-arrange transport, contact suppliers, communicate with clients, and confirm
payment). Similar outcomes can be anticipated in Tonga, where women have higher literacy rates and face
fewer inequalities. The needs of women are being considered in post-tsunami housing reconstruction plans.
Experience elsewhere has shown that women also tend to benefit significantly from extended access to
electricity (as women tend to be prime collectors of fuel otherwise). Although energy reform in Tonga will
focus primarily on reducing price volatility (given already high grid access), global experience suggests that
3

“Going Mobile: Social and Economic Impact of Introducing Telecommunications Throughout Vanuatu”, Pacific
Institute of Public Policy, December 2009.

16

increases in available household income – as would be encouraged by reform – is positively correlated with
increased spending on education, especially for girls.
51.
As well as activities on Tongatapu, the Bank will be ensuring that the program reaches the outer
islands. Tsunami reconstruction will obviously be focused on Niuas. School rehabilitation currently
underway will include schools in Ha’apai and Vava’u. Road maintenance investments will include the outer
islands, and potential support for airports in Ha’apai and Vava’u could be considered in future along with
potential support for Fua’amoto airport. Efforts to widen access to the grid – although connection rates are
generally high – will especially focus on the outer islands.
Implementation: Partnerships, Selectivity, New Ways of Doing Business, and Accountability
52.
As highlighted by leaders in the Compact agreed at the Pacific Island Forum in Cairns in August
2009, better use of all resources available for development will be required to accelerate progress in the
region. This will require policy reform and more stringent public expenditure allocations and controls by the
island countries. On the donor side, stronger coordination, greater flexibility, and new approaches to
building long-term capacity will be important. It is in the small island states that the issues highlighted by
the Paris Declaration and the Accra Accords are thrown into starkest relief.
53.
The Bank is committed to coordinating more closely with partners in Tonga. Strong donor and
government coordination on economic reform issues in Tonga will be especially important, and the Bank
will contribute to joint analytical work to support a more coordinated policy dialogue. At the activity level,
virtually everything we are doing in Tonga is being done in partnership with other donors. The energy
roadmap has been one example where the Bank has taken the lead role among donors to support Government
efforts to improve coordination behind a strategic plan for the sector. Ongoing education projects are being
undertaken in close cooperation with New Zealand and the EFA FTI, while current transport investments are
being implemented in close collaboration with Australia. The proposed telecoms broadband investment will
be undertaken in partnership with ADB – potentially the first co-financed activity with ADB in the Pacific.
Tsunami reconstruction is being undertaken in coordination with UN and NGO support.
54.
While scaling up support for Tonga, Bank Group activities will be highly selective. The Bank has
historically provided only about 10% of total development assistance provided to the country, and selectivity
reflects coordination efforts. In particular, the Bank Group will be playing an increasing role in economic
reform dialogue, will continue strong experience in telecoms and energy, and will be looking to replicate
successful experience elsewhere in the region on transport infrastructure maintenance. As noted, however,
Bank engagement in the health and education sectors is anticipated to decline.
55.
A central element of Bank Group engagement will be to encourage competition and private sector
investment in the economy. The telecoms revolution throughout the Pacific illustrates the potential benefits
that can be generated by opening markets to competition and new private sector investment. While a
broadband cable investment is likely to require public and private investment, the Bank Group will be
encouraging as much private investment as possible. A central element of energy sector reform will be
opening of the generation market to new private sector investors. A key element of transport sector asset
management will be to increase local private sector contracting for road maintenance. ADB has taken the
lead in the broader discussion of SOE reform in Tonga, and this will be complemented by engagement by the
Bank Group in the transport and telecoms sectors.
56.
Reflecting the particular challenges of small island states like Tonga, we will try to be more
nimble in project preparation, and give greater attention to implementation support. The Bank can at
times be more of an elephant than a lynx. The EAP region has particularly been characterized by long
preparation times and, with such a focus on managing risk upstream, limited downstream implementation
support. This presents particular challenges for capacity constrained small island states. Without lowering
17

fiduciary standards, we intend to try to further streamline and accelerate activity preparation, and to
rebalance Bank engagement toward greater support throughout the project cycle. To do this, there is scope to
more fully use the suite of instruments that have been approved by the Board. The broadband connectivity
investment will be prepared as a “horizontal APL” that will allow the Bank to roll out similar investments
elsewhere in the Pacific in response to demand, streamlining preparation costs. OP 8.00 also allows for
streamlined procedures for emergency operations, such as Cyclone and tsunami reconstruction support. And
there is considerable scope to use additional financing and vertical APL instruments to increase support for
successful investments and to provide certainty about long-term Bank engagement.
57.
A results matrix at Attachment 2 sets out key objectives and anticipated outcomes and provides an
accountability framework for the Bank Group in its engagement with Tonga.
Financing Envelope
58.
There is scope for the Bank to commit about $50 million in IDA and trust fund resources to
Tonga over the next four year period. This would be significantly more than has been provided since
Tonga joined the Bank until now. Tonga’s regular allocation during the three year IDA-15 cycle (from FY09
to FY11) is approximately $7 million. With proposed changes currently being considered by IDA deputies
to increase the minimum base allocation received by all countries and remove per capita caps, Tonga’s IDA16 allocation (from FY12 to FY14) could increase to perhaps $13-14 million. On top of this base, additional
IDA funding has been agreed to support a response to the Niuas tsunami, the proposed energy policy DPO
will be financed in addition to Tonga’s regular allocation (either through IDA’s crisis response window or
from reallocations within the department), and most financing for Government involvement in a broadband
cable could be provided from IDA’s regional pool. Australian Government funds for road maintenance, and
additional grant financing through GEF and/or PRIF for investments to support the energy roadmap reforms
will also increase the total funds available. An outline of potential new IDA and trust fund commitments
over the next four years is below. Inevitably, however, there will need to be a degree of flexibility in
implementing the program outlined, particularly for the latter half of the CAS period. IFC remains very
interested in further private sector investments, although deals will need to be taken opportunistically.
Tonga: Proposed IDA and Trust Fund Operations (FY11 – FY14)
Year

IDA‐15
Niuas Tsunami Reconstruction
Transport (Road Maintenance)
Energy sector DPO
Energy Roadmap Investment
IDA‐16
Tonga Broadband Connectivity
Development Policy Operation #1
Development Policy Operation#2
Adaptation/Infrastructure
TOTAL

IDA

IDA

Regular
($m)

Additional
($m)

FY11
FY11
FY11
FY11

1

4

1
5

4

FY11
FY12
FY13
FY14

1
5
5
3
21

9

Trust
Fund
($m)

($m)

3

5
9.3
5
8

TBD
12.3

10
5
5
2+
50.3

9.3

17

Total

59.
Given Tonga’s debt position, new assistance during the remainder of the IDA-15 period will
continue to be provided as grants. Terms will be reviewed on a regular basis. Should debt indicators
improve, it is possible that IDA terms for Tonga could revert to concessional credits during IDA-16.
60.
Analytical work will be focused around the proposed joint public expenditure review designed to
provide a basis for a coordinated engagement with the Government to underpin potential future budget
18

support. A selective program of analytical work is also proposed in sectors where the Bank has been active
or is scaling up engagement. Analytical work for the first part of the CAS period is set out below.
Tonga: Proposed Analytical Work and Technical Assistance FY11 – FY14
FY11
Joint Public Expenditure Review (continuing in FY12)
Tonga Energy Roadmap Support
Broadband Connectivity: Regional Least Cost Options and Regulatory Strengthening
IFC Business Enabling Environment TA
FY12
Education: Early Grade Reading Assessment
Health: Non-Communicable Disease Prevention Options

IV.

RISKS

61.
Risks in Tonga are moderate. The country is generally making reasonably strong progress toward
MDGs. Constitutional reform has eased tensions that erupted in the 2006 unrest. The composition of a new
Government following elections scheduled for November 2010 is obviously unknown, although it is likely
that many new Ministers will have limited executive experience, and this will obviously require significant
support from the civil service, as well as donor partners and others, in managing the transition period in a
way that provides both a degree of certainty as well as room for a new Government to implement their own
priorities and legislative agenda. Reflecting this, the proposed country assistance strategy has been discussed
extensively with Government, Parliamentarians, as well as business and civil society to attempt to ensure
widespread support for the broad agenda outlined. The Bank Group will also engage closely with any new
Government on reform issues, and to ensure the program continues to be tailored to emerging priorities. In
this context, this CAS is intended to be a living document.
62.
Perhaps the most significant country level risk is the volatile economy, and the sustainability of
reforms efforts. Tonga has been hard hit over the past few years by commodity price shocks, the global
economic slowdown, and natural disasters. Further shocks could put the economy and government finances
in a very difficult position. At the same time, this CAS is built around efforts to help the Government to
improve expenditure efficiency while protecting service delivery, and to support business development. If
implemented, such a reform program could ensure that the economy is well placed to bounce back even more
strongly from current circumstances. The central focus on DPO instruments reflects both the financial needs
that the government currently faces as well as a judgment that this could be an effective instrument to
support real reforms. Nevertheless, while potentially having high rewards, the use of DPOs carries
significant risks – including both policy and fiduciary risks. Mitigating risks will require more extensive
analysis to underpin a coordinated donor dialogue with the authorities on reform, as well as further support
for PEFM reform. In the event that it is not possible to reach agreement with a new Government on a reform
program to be supported by DPO instruments, we will need to be ready to deploy investment instruments in
sectors where the Bank has a track record, or where development gains can be made.
63.
As in any capacity constrained small island state, investments face implementation risks. We will
attempt to address risks through simplicity of design, a greater focus on downstream implementation support,
a willingness to flexibly restructure activities as needed, and greater use of the instruments available to
ensure more flexibility and to rebalance support through the project cycle. Relatively good portfolio
performance in Tonga in recent years suggests that these issues can be addressed with attention. As well as
traditional capacity building support, a key theme running through many investments will be to increase the
scope for private sector engagement, which has proven elsewhere to be a successful way of overcoming
constraints on government service delivery in small states.
.
19

ATTACHMENT 1

Pacific Islands: Directions in IDA-15
Summary
1.
This note provides an overview of Bank Group’s approach in the 10 smaller Pacific island countries4
covered by the Bank’s Pacific, PNG and Timor Leste department5. The countries are shaped by their
economic geography, perhaps more so than any others. Because of their small size and remoteness, the
Pacific island nations are highly volatile and subject to external economic shocks. Geographical constraints
don’t end there. Within many countries, populations are often widely dispersed and located great distances
from capital cities and economic hubs. This has affected many Pacific island citizens’ ability to participate in
the formal economy and access services. Likewise, it has eroded many governments’ capacity to deliver
services to far-flung constituents. They are also highly vulnerable to natural disasters, with regular cyclones
and recent tsunamis and flooding.
2.
The development situation in the region is mixed. Although some countries have made relatively
good progress toward MDGs, progress in other countries has been extremely limited. In general, most
countries in the region will not meet most MDGs. Progress is correlated very closely with domestic policies;
those countries with stronger institutions and policies that encourage private investment and growth have
generally achieved better outcomes. But good domestic policies are a necessary but not always sufficient
condition for growth. The Pacific island nations are highly reliant on their relationships with regional and
metropolitan countries for aid, for investment, and for employment opportunities for their people. Decisions
made outside the region also have a significant impact on outcomes.
3.
World Bank Group engagement in the Pacific is structured around the themes of: (i) generating
opportunities through greater global and regional integration, and (ii) building resilience against external
shocks. As highlighted by the 2009 World Development Report, Reshaping Economic Geography, countries
at the margins of the global economy are more likely to achieve success by carefully planned economic
integration, by reducing frictions to ensure they can be more closely connected to economic hubs, and
generating opportunities for trade, investment, and growth. Given the fragile nature of many institutions in
the region, efforts to build capacity will be mainstreamed throughout the Bank’s program. This may also
require a different approach to service delivery, including exploring opportunities for greater regional or subregional cooperation, as well as the potential to increasingly contract service delivery in a transparent and
competitive manner to the private sector.
4.
The World Bank Group is significantly scaling up its engagement with the countries of the Pacific
region, building on a solid platform put in place over the past couple of years. Support for the smaller island
countries is being particularly expanded, reflecting their vulnerability and volatility, and could reach $130
million during IDA-15 compared to $40-50 million in IDA-13 and IDA-14. Not only does the Bank
anticipate providing record levels of IDA and trust fund support to the region during IDA-15, but rapidly
expanding new IFC investments in the region each year are now broadly equivalent to annual IDA
commitments. There is considerable scope for the Bank Group to exploit synergies across both institutions
to make greater room for the private sector to generate opportunities. The clearest example of this has been
the telecoms revolution throughout the Pacific. Bank support for policy change to promote competition and
to strengthen regulation has been combined with major investments by IFC to encourage new private market
entrants. The end result has been a dramatic increase in connectivity, with mobile phone subscribers
4

5

Federated States of Micronesia, Fiji, Kiribati, Palau, Marshall Islands, Samoa, Solomon Islands, Tonga, Vanuatu, and
Tuvalu (which joined the Bank in June 2010). While Papua New Guinea and Timor Leste share some similar
development challenges, the focus is primarily on the smaller island countries.
This note is not intended to be a Regional CAS; but is meant to provide an overview of the approach being taken
across the region in order to provide a broader context for country specific CASs that will be prepared and discussed
individually with the Board over the next few years.

20

ATTACHMENT 1
increasing from 6% to 60% of the population in several countries in the space of a few short years.
Particularly for remote island communities, this has been life changing.
5.
Although the Bank Group is increasing resources to the region, in terms of assistance it remains a
relatively small player. As important as finance is the global expertise the Bank Group can bring to build
coalitions for change with partners – governments, donors, regional bodies, the business community, and
civil society. In this, the World Bank Group is committed to the “Cairns Compact” set out by Pacific leaders
in 2009 to better coordinate all the resources available to encourage development, in order to make tangible
improvements in the lives of the people of the region.
Regional Context
6.
The economic geography of the Pacific countries shapes their development, perhaps more than
any other region. The Pacific islands are, on the whole, considerably smaller and more remote from key
export markets than even the Caribbean islands. In total, the countries of the region include approximately 2
million people, living on hundreds of islands, scattered across an area of ocean equivalent to about 15% of
the surface of the globe. This compares to 40 million people the Caribbean, in a sea equivalent to 0.5% of
the world’s surface area.
Figure 1: World Bank Pacific Region Member Countries

7.
Throughout the region, people face common challenges of remoteness and fragmentation. The
countries of the Pacific are marked by their diversity, evident most clearly in the 1,000 language groups
across Melanesia. “One size fits all” solutions are not appropriate. The development challenges facing some
of the larger, resource rich, Melanesian countries, are very different from Polynesian countries like Samoa
and Tonga, and even more so from the most remote Micronesian countries, which in some cases have total
populations of less than 20,000 people and very few natural resources beside fish.
21

ATTACHMENT 1
8.
Although at the margins of the global economy, Pacific countries are highly volatile and
vulnerable to external shocks. The Pacific island countries were some of the worst hit in the world by the
food and fuel price spikes of 2008. Many of the more remote countries are heavily reliant on imported
foodstuffs, as well as imported diesel for electricity generation, and transport costs soared. And the impact
of the global slowdown, although delayed, is now being felt though out much of the Pacific region.
Transmission mechanisms have varied from country to country, with the Polynesian countries being affected
particularly by declining remittances as well as job losses in nascent manufacturing industries; several of the
Micronesian countries hurt by declining value of trust fund revenues; and others such as Fiji by slowing
tourism as well as a loss of competitiveness in traditional garment and sugar industries. The economies of
most of the Pacific island countries are expected to contract in 2010. Only PNG and Timor Leste, buoyed by
continuing demand for their very significant resource deposits, have been largely immune from the
slowdown to date. The global crisis has been merely the latest manifestation of more systemic
vulnerabilities. The tsunami in Samoa and outlying Tongan islands in September 2009, as well as the series
of cyclones over the past 6 months in Solomon Islands, Fiji, Tonga and the Cook Islands, also highlighted
the vulnerability of these countries to natural disasters. On average, each decade one of the island countries
in the region has suffered a natural disaster causing damage equivalent to as much as 25% of annual GDP.
9.
Mixed development outcomes in the region partly reflect domestic policy and institutional
performance. As outlined in Table 1, there have been gains but progress has generally been less than
hoped. In most countries, most MDGs are unlikely to be met. Those countries with the strongest policy
settings have generally made best progress. Samoa, for instance, was in the mid-1990s among the first in the
Pacific to undertake a comprehensive program of structural reforms to strengthen macro-economic
management, improve the business environment, and deliver services. Although the country has recently
been affected by natural disasters and the global slowdown, growth over the past decade has been relatively
strong – at least compared to other small island states – and it remains on track to meet most MDGs.
Similarly, policy reform and domestic stability over the past decade has helped to make Vanuatu a “go to”
tourist destination. Vanuatu’s improved revenue collection and relatively strong growth allowed the country
to press ahead with temporary stimulus measures, including infrastructure, in response to the global
slowdown. On the other hand, despite some gains in difficult environments such as the Solomon Islands,
most MDGs will not be met in that country.
10.
Most of the countries of the region are fragile, and sustained development progress is likely to
require long-term cooperation to build leadership and institutions, as well as manage rapid social and
economic transitions. The Pacific region contains one of the highest concentrations of fragile states
anywhere in the world. At one extreme, both Timor Leste and Solomon Islands are still emerging from
conflict. In Solomon Islands, a low-level conflict from 1998 to 2003 was the result of ethnic divisions
associated with rapid change, internal migration, and perceived inequities in resource distribution. In both
countries, respective Governments invited international intervention to assist in restoring security, and in
both a very sizeable international presence remains and is responsible in practice for in-line support for
security and other services. To differing degrees, however, issues around natural resource sharing, land
alienation, and unrealized expectations regarding limited government service delivery, are putting pressure in
many countries on both formal institutions as well as coexisting traditional customary structures, which are
often the main source for authority outside urban centers. In several countries, strong national leadership
will also be important to overcome capacity constraints and build institutions. Capacity constraints are partly
a factor of very small populations, but also in some case reflect governance issues. In such a fragile
environment, building a coalition and capacity for change in several countries will require a long-term,
disciplined, and coordinated effort to strengthen representative and accepted institutions that can effectively
meet the expectations of citizens to transparently and equitably manage the development process. Of course,
given the diversity of the Pacific, this will require very different approaches in individual island countries.

22

Table 1. Pacific Region: Country Comparisons: MDG Progress, Average Growth, and Policy Performance
Melanesia
Fiji

PNG

MDG 1. Eradicate extreme
poverty and hunger

Low food poverty,
but off track to
Halve between 1990 and 2015 the
halve basic needs
proportion of people whose income is
poverty
less than $1 per day.

Off track

MDG 2. Achieve universal
Slightly off track
Off track
primary education
MDG 3. Promote gender equality
On track education
and empowerment
equality, off track Slightly off track

Eliminate gender disparities in
primary and secondary education

Polynesia

Solomon Islands

Samoa

Tonga

FSM

Kiribati

Palau

RMI

Low food poverty, Low food poverty, Low food poverty, Low food poverty, Low food poverty, Low food poverty, Low food poverty, Low food poverty,
but off track to
but off track to
but off track to
but off track to
but off track to
but off track to
but off track to
but off track to
halve basic needs halve basic needs halve basic needs halve basic needs halve basic needs halve basic needs halve basic needs halve basic needs
poverty
poverty
poverty
poverty
poverty
poverty
poverty
poverty
Slightly off track

Off track

empowerment

MDG 4. Reduce child (Under 5)
Slightly off track
mortality by two thirds
MDG 5. Improve maternal health

Vanuatu

Micronesia

Slightly off track

On track

On track

Slightly off track

On track

On track

Of concern

On track education On track education
On track education On track education On track education
Slightly off track equality, off track equality, off track Slightly off track equality, off track equality, off track equality, off track
empowerment
empowerment
empowerment
empowerment
empowerment

Off track

Slightly off track

Slightly off track

On track

On track

Slightly off track

Slightly off track

On track

On track

Off track

Off track

On track

Off track

On track

On track

Of concern

Off track

On track

On track

Off track

Off track

Slightly off track

Slightly off track

On track

Slightly off track

On track

Off track

On track

Slightly off track

Slightly off track

Off track

Off track

Slightly off track

On track

On track

On track

Off track

On track

Of concern

Slightly off track

Slightly off track

Slightly off track

Slightly off track

On track

On track

Slightly off track

Slightly off track

On track

Slightly off track

Average Annual GDP Growth 2000‐
2009

0.7

2.9

1.6

3.2

3.5

1.1

‐0.1

1.6

0.9

1.9

World Bank IDA Country
Performance Rating 2009

N/A

3.1

2.6

3.3

4.0

3.5

2.8

3.0

N/A

2.8

Reduce maternal mortality by three
quarters

MDG 6. Reverse the spread of
HIV/AIDS, malaraia and TB
MDG 7. Ensure environmental
sustainability
Integrate principles of sustainable
development into country policies

MDG 8. Global Partnership for
Development

23

11.
As well as domestic factors, however, systemic volatility also partly reflects the fact that, as a result
of their geography, most Pacific island economies are narrowly based, with limited diversification. The
Micronesians are highly reliant on fisheries, and the Polynesian countries on tourism and remittances.
Comparative advantages are limited as many of the countries face permanent cost wedges associated with
their small size and remoteness from markets, making it difficult for the islands to compete in all but a few
niche markets.
12.
In something of a “Pacific paradox”, the island countries are at the periphery of the global
economy, but remain heavily reliant on relationships with regional and metropolitan countries – through
investment, trade, remittances and aid. As noted, those countries that have done well tend to have good
domestic policies. But closer integration with the global economy has also brought improved development
outcomes, although this can also be associated with a degree of volatility.


Foreign investment is crucial in allowing countries to make use of natural resources, whether fisheries,
forestry, resource extraction, our through tourism. Across the region, foreign direct investment is
equivalent to approximately 6.5% of GDP, almost double the 3.7% average for developing economies as
a whole.



The small open nature of island economies is evident in the high levels of trade, which averages almost
80% of annual GDP across the region as a whole compared to less than 60% across all developing
economies (in fact, total imports and exports are well above 100% of GDP in some of the smaller Pacific
island economies). Exports are narrowly based and are primarily commodities (gas and minerals in PNG
and Timor, forestry in Solomon Islands) and tourism (which is equivalent to over 16% of total GDP in
the region, and as much as 60% of GDP in countries such as Palau). Many countries are heavily reliant
on imports, including for food and energy.



Across the region, remittances from foreign nationals make up an average of almost 12% of GDP,
compared to 2% for developing countries as a whole. In Tonga, where more nationals live overseas than
“on island”, remittances are equivalent to about 40% of GDP. Remittances from have been a major
benefit, but are also one of the transmission mechanisms through which the economy has been affected
by the global slowdown.



Island economies are heavily reliant on development cooperation flows, which are equivalent to about
10-15% of regional GDP. The North Pacific, which receives significant funding from the Compact of
Free Association with the US, and Solomon Islands, given the significant size of the Regional Assistance
Mission to the Solomon Islands (RAMSI), receive some of the highest levels of aid per capita of any
countries in the world (as much as $1,000 in some of the North Pacific countries).

13.
In this environment, good domestic policies and leadership are necessary but not always sufficient
for progress; external factors are likely to remain crucial to development outcomes in the Pacific. Good
macro and structural policies are necessary to ensure that economies are resilient and attract investment, but
may not be enough by themselves. Given geographic impediments, the reality that most Pacific countries
face is that aid will not be a transitional, pump-priming phenomenon. Even where policy environments are
strong, continued generous, well-targeted foreign assistance flows are likely to be needed to support current
levels of service delivery. Aid may need to be a semi-permanent wedge to offset the tyranny of distance.
More broadly, greater economic integration, more equitable natural resource agreements, and more open
labor markets will also be vital for the longer-term future of the Pacific. Some Pacific island economies are
unlikely to be economically viable without external financial support and opportunities for citizens to gain
overseas employment.

24

Transforming World Bank Group Engagement in the Pacific
14.
The Bank Group is scaling up its support for the Pacific islands very significantly. Concessional
and grant flows from both the International Development Association (IDA) and trust fund are expected to
reach over $130 million during IDA-15, compared to $50 million in IDA-14 and $35 million in IDA-13.
International Finance Corporation (IFC) investments over the same period are anticipated to reach a similar
amount.
Table 2: World Bank Group Pacific Island Commitments: FY00 - FY11
$120.0
$100.0
$80.0
$60.0

IFC
IDA and TFs

$40.0
$20.0
$‐
FY00 FY01 FY02 FY03 FY04 FY05 FY06 FY07 FY08 FY09 FY10 FY11

15.
Reflecting this scale-up, programs in the Pacific islands are likely to make up almost half of the
total IDA and trust fund support provided by the EACNF department during the IDA-15 period. Bank
engagement in Papua New Guinea also increased considerably during IDA-14, and this is expected to be
maintained during IDA-15. In Timor, however, significant World Bank engagement immediately after
independence has now slowed. Gaining access to potential IBRD financing for both PNG and Timor will be
a central element in opening scope for greater Bank engagement.
Table 3: IDA-15 and Trust Fund Resources: FY09-FY11
$30m

$115m
Timor
PNG
Pacific Islands
$130m

25

16.
World Bank Group engagement has made a real difference in the lives of people throughout the
Pacific. Bank Group assistance has helped to strengthen health and education service delivery for villagers,
improved telecoms and other critical infrastructure, and encouraged new opportunities for people.
17.
World Bank Group engagement is, however, only one small part of the overall effort to improve
development outcomes in the Pacific region. While growing, Bank financing is still a relatively modest
portion of the approximately $2 billion in annual aid flows provided to the region. And while aid is
significant, particularly in many smaller countries, it is equivalent to between 10-15% of annual GDP across
the region – a similar amount to receipts from tourism or remittances. This reinforces the importance of
selectivity in Bank Group engagement.
18.
The “Cairns Compact” outlined by Pacific leaders at the annual Forum in 2009 reflected the
importance of better development coordination to improve the effectiveness of all resources – domestic
and external – available to promote development in the region. The Bank strongly supports efforts to
improve the effectiveness and efficiency of development resources through better coordination among both
donors and governments across the region. The value of the World Bank’s engagement in the Pacific is not
principally defined in terms of the size of the lending program, but rather in the extent to which the Bank can
collaborate with other development partners to transfer global knowledge, build capacity, and provide timely
technical assistance and analysis that has an impact on Government policy.
19.
Although the World Bank Group is far from the largest financier, it potentially brings several
comparative advantages to its engagement in the Pacific region:


The Bank can “bundle” its global expertise and knowledge, and the high quality analytical work it is able
to bring, with financial resources (either from IDA or other donors) to assist countries undertake policy
reform and associated institutional change;



The Bank Group is able to exploit potential synergies available from its public and private sector arms to
support policy reform and directly encourage foreign investment in the region;



As a perceived impartial actor, the Bank is potentially able to collaborate with both Pacific island
countries and partners on sensitive issues and to influence broader relationships between the islands and
regional powers; and



Given its convening capacity, the Bank has the scope to undertake complex, large and difficult
investments.

World Bank Group: Pacific Engagement Themes
20.
World Bank Group engagement with the broader Pacific region over the next 4-5 years (through the
IDA-15 and IDA-16 periods) will be structured around the broad themes of:
(i) Promoting opportunities from greater regional and global integration; and
(ii) Building resilience against shocks, including both economic volatility and climate change and
associated environmental vulnerabilities.
21.
Reflecting the fragility of many countries in the region, a concerted effort to enhance capacity will
be integrated throughout all aspects of the program.
22.
These themes set out a broad structure for engagement; detailed implementation strategies will be
set out at the country level. The department anticipates developing more bespoke tailored approaches for the
26

countries previously covered by a single Pacific Regional Engagement Framework. This reflects the specific
features, challenges and expectations of the other Pacific island countries. The first individual strategy for
these countries was the Solomon islands ISN (April 2010), and a Tonga CAS is anticipated (October 2010)
Promoting Opportunities from Greater Regional and Global Integration
23.
The 2009 World Development Report, Economic Geography and Development, highlights the
importance of “sea locked’ Pacific island countries becoming more integrated with the global economy if
they are to overcome the challenge of their geography. One of the key messages from the WDR is that
growth is likely to remain geographically unbalanced. Rather than trying to swim against the tide by
spreading out economic activity in more remote areas, countries are more likely to achieve success by
carefully planned economic integration, by reducing frictions to ensure that peripheries can be more closely
connected to economic hubs.
24.
As well as greater global integration, regional cooperation offers significant potential benefits for
the Pacific countries. Greater regional and sub-regional cooperation, for instance, potentially offers
countries the opportunity to strengthen returns from regional resources, such as pelagic fisheries. And there
is potentially scope for regional efficiencies in public service delivery, as highlighted by successful efforts
over the past decade to rationalize and commercialize airline services across the Pacific, by cooperating to
improve fuel purchases and supply chain management, or regional approaches to strengthen telecoms
regulation or public sector audit institutions. The Pacific island countries generally remain less integrated
than the Caribbean islands. This reflects in part the greater distances between the Pacific nations, and the
differing interests of varying Pacific islands. In this, regional approaches need to be highly sensitive to
national identities and are likely to require long-term engagement for success.
25.
The Bank Group will continue to work collaboratively with clients and partners to help the island
countries derive greater benefits from closer integration with the metropolitan powers in the region and
stronger regional cooperation. Bank engagement will build on the success achieved in working closely with
Australia and New Zealand – as well as island countries – to assist with the expansion of temporary labor
migration schemes. This included the landmark “At Home and Away” report (2006), and technical advice
to both labor receiving and sending countries. The New Zealand Recognized Seasonal Employment (RSE)
scheme has now provided over 9,000 Pacific islanders from Kiribati, Samoa, Tonga, and Vanuatu, with
opportunities to work in the horticultural industry, returning home with skills and approximately $40 million
in remittances. In a win-win situation, the scheme has helped to provide growers with greater certainty of
labor supply, with Horticulture New Zealand estimating that this has increased output by between $150 – 200
million. The Bank will build on this by working with regulatory agencies in Australia and New Zealand to
reduce the cost of remittances; exploring opportunities for returning workers to use the skills and funds they
have obtained to open businesses; and by encouraging greater opportunities for skilled migration – as
Australia is offering to 90 Kiribati nurses currently undertaking their degrees. More broadly, a flagship
“Pacific Futures” study anticipated during 2010 will explore options for longer-term integration between the
island economies and the rest of the world. As the Pacific Island Forum countries begin negotiations on a
new regional free trade arrangement, the Bank anticipates undertaking analytical work to assist Pacific island
countries take advantage of the potential benefits from a more open trade environment, particularly should
discussions lead to greater opportunities for trade in services and further steps toward a regional labor
market.
26.
Structural economic reform will be vital if the island countries are to participate more fully in
global growth and attract and benefit from private sector investment. The Bank Group intends to reengage with clients and major development partners in a longer-term dialogue to encourage policy and
institutional changes needed to attract greater private flows and better use all available development
resources. Reforms over the past decade in countries such as Samoa and Vanuatu, for instance, have helped
to restore macro-economic stability; improve the environment for investment and private sector led growth;
27

and strength service delivery. This has led directly to improved development outcomes. As well as
appropriate policy settings, improved governance and policy implementation will also be vital to encourage
growth and investment.
27.
The Bank anticipates working increasingly closely with the IMF, the Asian Development Bank,
and key bilateral partners to re-engage in a coordinated macro-economic policy dialogue, with associated
financial support through development policy operations – where needed and where justified by the policy
environment. To do so, the Bank will need to rebuild its economic expertise and engagement, which has
been limited over the past decade as a result of the opportunity costs associated with the temporary labor
migration work and the difficult experience in adjustment programs in some countries the early parts of the
decade. Efforts to rebuild engagement are evident in the key role the Bank has taken with other partners to
establish a coordinated economic policy reform dialogue with the Solomon Islands’ Government, which has
already generated an articulation of policy reforms against which Australia, ADB, and EU have provided or
pledged coordinated support. In Samoa, the Bank has worked closely with the Government and other
partners to finance a coordinated reform program to allow the government to respond to tsunami losses and
the global slowdown. A similar effort is now underway in Tonga. More broadly, the Bank expects to
collaborate more closely with an expanded IMF engagement, having recently joined Fund missions in the
North Pacific, Fiji, and Tonga. At the regional level, greater Bank engagement with the IMF’s Pacific
Financial technical Assistance Center (PFTAC) is envisaged, to provide additional services to Pacific clients
and build institutional cooperation. Economic policy dialogue will also be underpinned by IFC technical
assistance to strengthen the business environment in PNG, Tonga, and Vanuatu. IFC is also playing an
increasingly active role in supporting foreign investment in the region, where policy environments are
appropriate and opportunities exist.
28.
Support for countries to strengthen management and gain better returns from the export of
natural resources will be a growing focus for the Bank Group over the next five years. In Solomon
Islands, the Bank anticipates increasing support for these countries to ensure gains from mineral and forestry
revenues respectively are able to flow through to benefits for citizens. Discussions on possible participation
in the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative (EITI) are underway with both governments. In PNG, the
Bank and IFC are collaborating to explore options for a risk sharing facility that could help to support local
firms to participate in the increased economic activity resulting from the construction and operation of the
potentially transformative LNG project and other major resource projects. Options will be explored to roll
out a similar instrument at the regional level across the Pacific region as a whole. Potential IFC engagement
in the mining sector in Solomon Islands also offers opportunities to encourage reputable foreign investors in
this sector.
29.
Countries are increasingly requesting support from the World Bank Group to assist them explore
options to gain a better return from the world’s largest tuna resource. Even a relatively small increase in
the 3-4% of the wholesale value of the fisheries catch received by island countries could make a very
significant difference in the resources available for development. The Bank anticipates providing support to
the newly established secretariat of the Parties to the Nauru Agreement (comprising those island countries
with the largest fisheries resource; as much as 30% of the global tuna stocks) to explore options to improve
returns while strengthening incentives for sustainable commercial management of the fisheries. Potential
support from IFC to could encourage private investment to increase the value added activities associated with
the fisheries industry in the region. Engagement will, however, reflect the considerable regional architecture
already in place in the fisheries sector.
30.
The telecommunications revolution in the Pacific has been an outstanding example of the
potential gains from global integration, and an area in which continued World Bank Group engagement
is anticipated. The Bank Group has played a significant role in the past few years in encouraging telecoms
reform to encourage competition and allow new private sector operators. The Bank is helping to secure
reforms by strengthening independent telecoms regulators, with activities in Samoa underway since 2002 and
28

new investments this year in Solomon Islands and Vanuatu. The Bank is also exploring options to assist
Kiribati and the North Pacific countries potentially open their markets. At the regional level, the Bank will
assist efforts to strengthen regulation of competitive telecoms markets by supporting the establishment of a
Pacific Regional Telecommunications Regulatory Resource Centre. This will encourage sharing of
information and industry data, improve awareness of sector performance across the region, and provide
direct assistance to policymakers and regulators. Maximizing synergies across the Bank Group, IFC
investments of about $100 million over the past 3 years in the Pacific islands (excluding PNG) have played a
key role in encouraging over $200 million in investments by new private sector telecoms operators. The next
key challenge in the ICT sector will be to improve broadband connectivity for many of the smaller islands;
and this is currently being explored by the Bank in conjunction with the Asian Development Bank, with a
view to mobilizing both public and private sector resources to finance a broadband cable between Fiji and
Tonga and, potentially, also with Samoa, Solomon Islands, and Vanuatu. Putting in place such infrastructure
will inevitably require significant degree of regional cooperation.
Box 1: The Telecoms Revolution in the Pacific
Telecoms reforms throughout the Pacific in the past five years have yielded enormous benefits for remote
and far flung communities.
Most of the Bank’s Pacific island member countries have now opened their telecoms markets to new private
operators. This includes Tonga (2002), Fiji (2006), Samoa (2006), Papua New Guinea (2007), Vanuatu
(2008), and Solomon Islands (2010).
The resulting competition has seen prices for mobile telephones fall dramatically and coverage improve.
There has been a rapid increase in mobile telephone use throughout the region. In Fiji, where reforms
started, mobile telecoms coverage has increased from 25% to over 75% of the population in 4 years. In
Samoa, Tonga, and Vanuatu, about 60% of the population now subscribe to mobile phone services,
compared to as little as 6% prior to reforms.
Improved connectivity offers a key opportunity for people in the islands to overcome the tyranny of distance
and take advantage of global economic opportunities. Improved telecommunications literally opens up the
World to those previously disconnected. Connectivity allows fishermen to know where the best price of the
day is; enables mobile banking services; better connects people to schools and health services, and provides
entrepreneurs with better information on which to base decisions.

Building Resilience against Shocks
31.
Given the systemic volatility and vulnerability of many of the Pacific island countries to
exogenous shocks, building resilience will be a key theme of Bank Group engagement. Just as structural
economic reform will be vital for the island economies to better participate in and benefit from global
growth, so too will reform be vital to build resilience. Those countries with dynamic and entrepreneurial
private sectors and those able to attract investment are likely to be those able to bounce back the quickest
from shocks. Commodity price shocks of 2008 highlighted the need to reduce dependency on highly volatile
oil prices for energy will important, as will investing in rural development as a front-line defense against
volatility in food prices. The Bank will assist countries develop infrastructure and facilities to better prepare
for environmental and natural disaster risks. Many of the Pacific islands are on the front line with climate
change, and support for adaptation efforts will be crucial. Improved health, education and social investments
will be vital to make progress toward the MDGs and ensure that people are able to lead fulfilling lives. And
all efforts to strengthen resilience and service delivery will need to be underpinned by further support to
enhance governance and institutional effectiveness.
29

32.
Reflecting the food and fuel price spikes of 2008, efforts to reduce reliance on volatile imported
fossil fuels and improve energy supply chain management are becoming a larger area of focus. The Bank
is now working with Tonga and the North Pacific countries, and Vanuatu has also expressed interest in
support to improve oil supply chain management. Early experience in Tonga with the development of an
integrated “energy roadmap” provides a model for donor coordination, and provides perhaps the best
opportunity in the region to strengthen collaboration with non-traditional donors (such as UAE and
potentially China). With reforms focused on providing opportunities for new private investment in
generation capacity, there is also considerable scope to exploit synergies across the public and private sector
arms of the Bank Group. In Solomon Islands, for instance, the Bank and IFC are collaborating closely in
order to encourage a new private hydropower generation investment at Tina River, which will significantly
reduce reliance on imported diesel. This complements efforts currently underway through the Solomon
Islands sustainable energy project to improve operations in the state dominated energy sector.
33.
Improving agricultural productivity is being given higher priority, reflecting the predominance of
rural poverty, especially but not only in Melanesia, and the importance of building resilience from volatile
global food prices. Smallholder agricultural production is often the de facto safety net for many villagers. In
Solomon Islands, for instance, the Government identified rural development as integral to its efforts to
reestablish lasting peace and security, and rural service delivery is currently the key element of the Bank’s
program in that country. Analytical work on strengthening agricultural supply chains in Samoa, and is
expected to lead to further support. Tonga has expressed interest in monitoring initial work in Samoa, and in
replicating this should the Samoa experience prove successful.
34.
The Bank anticipates continuing efforts to improve infrastructure asset management, and to
mainstream disaster risk reduction and climate change adaptation into infrastructure planning and
management. The Bank has a successful record of working in Samoa and, more recently, in Tonga, to
strengthen the management of infrastructure assets, which are an essential backbone for economic growth.
Road maintenance work by local private contractors has also proven an effective response to generate
employment at a time of global slowdown. Ensuring that maintenance is fully funded has been a critical
issue, rather than just continuing inefficient new capital expenditures. In addition, considerable additional
support is likely to be made available to assist the vulnerable Pacific island countries to adapt to climate
change. This reflects the commitments to support adaptation made by countries at the Copenhagen summit.
A key lesson from previous adaptation and disaster risk reduction engagement is that such work is likely to
have most value if integrated closely with efforts to “climate proof” infrastructure investments. The Bank
also has successful experience in supporting reconstruction and disaster risk reduction efforts following
cyclones in Samoa and Tonga, and more recently in response to the tsunami in Samoa and outlying islands in
Tonga. Disaster risk reduction efforts will be complemented by further work to explore the feasibility of a
possible catastrophe risk sharing facility, as has been established in the Caribbean, as one element in a
layered risk management framework that could provide a quick response and potentially supplement donor
support following natural disasters.
35.
Good coordination in the infrastructure sector has been achieved through the Pacific Region
Infrastructure Facility (PRIF), and this could provide an example to strengthen coordination of the
variety of donors engaged in supporting climate change adaptation in the region. Australian leadership
was crucial to establish PRIF, which now includes New Zealand, the ADB, and the World Bank – with the
European Commission in the process of joining. PRIF has been instrumental in better linking investments to
longer-term reforms in the way island countries plan, manage, and finance their infrastructure needs. It has
proven an effective mechanism to marshal coordinated donor support for investments in economic
infrastructure, and as a means to address the problem of funding for infrastructure asset maintenance.
36.
Translating stronger growth into strengthened service delivery and progress towards MDGs is
vital if the skills of people are to be fully utilized, and to increase opportunities for people to lead fulfilling
30

lives. The Bank has worked closely with other donors in the development of sector-wide programs in health
and education in Tonga, Samoa, and Solomon Islands. Health and education investments in Samoa and
Tonga have supported these countries in their successful progress toward the MDGs. In Solomon Islands the
Bank-managed Rural Development program has introduced community driven-development approaches to
rural service delivery while also supporting revitalized agriculture extension services. This will be backed up
by joint analysis with donor partners to review the experience with early-stage SWAPs, and incorporate
lessons into future sector programming. Given the extensive bilateral support for health and education
activities in the Pacific, future Bank engagement in these sectors is likely to be focused primarily in
Melanesia, where MDGs are significantly off track.
37.
Providing greater opportunities for women and youth will be important. While there have been
recent improvements, in most countries girls remain under-represented in primary school, again particularly
in Melanesia. And despite some very high profile women in the region, a gender gap remains in
representation of women at the most senior levels of government and business. In many countries, youth
also comprise more than half the population and are a significant proportion of the poor and vulnerable. In
Solomon Islands, the Bank will support government to provide training and work experience opportunities to
thousands of disadvantaged urban youth. This will help improve their individual prospects, education and
income; contribute to social stability, and match the needs of employees to the local labor market. As part of
this, the Bank will be specifically exploring the needs of adolescent girls.
38.
Stronger governance and institutions have been identified by leaders in the Cairns Compact as
vital to improve service delivery and development outcomes. Building and strengthening the institutions of
government remains a key priority for many of the young and capacity constrained countries in the region.
While performance varies widely, World Bank measures of government effectiveness suggest that even the
better performing countries in the region are only just above global averages. Perceptions of corruption
remain high in several countries. One key element in addressing these challenges will be to improve public
financial management. Without addressing PFM issues, interventions in key sectors of infrastructure, health
and education will tend to be project-based, ring-fenced and ultimately unsustainable. There is potentially a
significant role for the Bank to work with clients to improve the overall functioning of government and
public sector institutions. The Bank is also committed to supporting the Pacific Regional Audit Initiative,
which is a Pacific Plan initiative and was endorsed by Forum Leaders in 2008. The Bank will provide
financial and technical support for the Pacific Association of National Audit Institutions (PASAI) to support
PASAI improve the quality and timeliness of the audit in some members with lesser capacity and to
developing a medium term plan to strengthen audit skills in the region. Increasing Bank engagement in this
area will need to be coordinated closely with the Pacific Association of National Audit Institutions (PFTAC)
and the ADB, as well as key bilateral partners, which also have a long-term engagement in these issues.
Enhancing Capacity and New Ways of Doing Business
39.
Given the fragile nature of many of the countries in the region, building leadership and
institutions needed to manage change will require a longer-term effort to enhance capacity. The situation
across the region varies greatly. In most countries there is considerable expertise at the senior levels of
government, although thin, and impressive recent graduates emerging. But most partner governments face
real problems in attracting and retaining domestic expertise, and this is likely become more marked as their
economies further globalize. Several depend for core governance functions (policy setting, financing,
expenditure management, security) on external partnerships. Many services are 'co-produced' with external
partners. This dependence on external service providers will continue to increase, and as transnational
investments in resource exploitation increase, new kinds of high-end regulatory expertise will be required.
39.
Given the vital need to strengthen capacity throughout the region, this issue will be mainstreamed
throughout the program. Building capacity and ensuring the sustainability of investments will be more
successful if addressed at the design stage for all interventions, rather than treated as a separate standalone
31

activity. The Bank’s long-term engagement for over a decade with the Samoan Government to strengthen
infrastructure asset maintenance, for instance, has significantly strengthened capacity in this area. Different
approaches to strengthening capacity will also require exploring opportunities for greater regional or subregional cooperation in service delivery. Greater use of competitive and transparent contracting of service
delivery functions to the private sector also provides scope to improve outcomes (for instance, local
contracting of maintenance functions to the private sector, and with opening the telecoms and generation
markets to new private investment).
41.
The Bank will work with partners to explore opportunities to strengthen capacity at the regional
level. The Bank is one of the partners supporting the Pacific Association of National Audit Institutions, as
well as the Pacific Regional Telecommunications Regulatory Resource Centre. These offer opportunities to
share experience and build capacity across the region on these key issues. Anticipated Bank technical
placements with PFTAC will help to ensure that countries are able to access financial sector technical
assistance. The Bank intends to work with Australia and other partners to explore the potential scope to
replicate in the Pacific successful initiatives elsewhere in the world, such as the African Economic Research
Consortium, a not-for-profit organization devoted to advanced policy research and economics training.
42.
Nevertheless, effective capacity building is an area in which a renewed effort is potentially
required from both island countries and partners. Further support is needed to build credible national
educational institutions and enhance academic and professional capacity, which are essential building blocks
to strengthen national institutions. Stronger public financial management and governance arrangements will
be vital to increasingly move toward using country systems in the delivery of development assistance, and to
move away from “ring-fenced” donor investments. More broadly, the Bank’s Pacific Futures work may
provide a chance to consider in a more systematic way: (i) the scope for greater regional collaboration in
delivery of some services, including how some countries and partners are strengthening government-togovernment links to improve service delivery; (ii) options to translate the extensive international technical
assistance being provided to the region into longer-term institutional capacity; and (iii) opportunities
available from contracting out service delivery functions to the private sector in a transparent and
competitive environment with the government increasing focused on ensuring a level playing field rather
than directly providing services.
43.
Portfolio performance throughout the Pacific broadly reflects the operating environment in
differing countries. Portfolio performance in Samoa and Tonga has generally been strong, with the Bank’s
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG) confirming that all 5 activities exiting the portfolio since 2000 have
been broadly satisfactory in achievements. In contrast, in less strong policy environments, the Bank’s
portfolio in the Pacific region has a mixed history. While indicators suggest that the implementation of the
current portfolio is now proceeding relatively well (problem and risk projects in the department are
especially concentrated in Timor rather than the Pacific islands), a range of activities still remain at risk.
Performance records in the region highlight the importance of keeping project designs simple and realistic,
strong supervision, and extensive procurement and fiduciary support given capacity constraints in these areas
in many clients. Particularly as the Bank looks to expand engagement in non-traditional clients, it will be to
keep these principles in mind, as well as to focus on areas in which the Bank already has a proven track
record of success elsewhere in the region.
44.
The Bank will need to be creative about new ways of doing business if we are to effectively meet
the needs of small clients to respond quickly and in a less bureaucratic way. In particular, this will require
a shift in balance from upstream risk mitigation to downstream risk management. We will need to
significantly expand the implementation support we are able to provide, including more “hand holding” by
our teams during project implementation to address issues as they emerge and downstream risk management
as well as upstream risk mitigation. This will require an increase in supervision resources, as well as greater
on the ground presence – particularly a focus on development for our local staff and counterparts. Greater
fiduciary support will be especially important, and we are moving to increase our own capacity in this regard.
32

44.
Similarly, we need to move away from a “projects based” approach to provide longer-term, policy
driven assistance in a more flexible way. This will be a multi-year agenda…but is critical and can be
started now. In order to respond faster and more effectively to client needs, further efforts will be required to
make use of the flexibility provided by the range of Bank instruments. Additional financing instruments and
the use of streamlined crisis response processes allowed us to respond flexibly to the tsunami in Samoa in
FY10. During FY11, we intend to use a “horizontal APL” to seek Board agreement to a program of regional
broadband connections for differing clients. This instrument allows individual country investments to be set
within a broader regional context, streamline requirements for each individual investment, and potentially
helps to allow access to additional regional IDA financing over and above individual country allocations. A
similar approach could potentially also make sense for climate change adaptation, petroleum supply chain
management, and transport investments, which have been sought by a range of our Pacific clients. Similarly,
the successful experience in transport in Samoa over a decade and in agriculture in PNG over two decades
highlights the importance of long-term engagement, and “vertical APLs” might be one mechanism that could
be increasingly used in future to provide greater certainty on long-term engagement in these areas.
Country Focus
45.
In scaling up, the Bank will be looking both to deepen engagement with more traditional Pacific
island clients, such as Solomon Islands, Samoa and Tonga, as well as widen the program to scale up in
non-traditional clients such as Vanuatu, the North Pacific, and Tuvalu.
46.
In Solomon Islands, World Bank Group engagement is transitioning from post-conflict assistance
to focus on longer-term reform and development efforts. This represents the particular challenges of the
Solomon Islands, which are still emerging from the tensions of the early part of this decade, and in which
there is still a very large international military, policing and civilian presence through the Regional
Assistance Mission for the Solomon Islands (RAMSI). As with other Melanesian countries, Solomon Islands
society is highly fragmented. The opening of a World Bank Group office in late 2008, led by a Country
Manager, has been accompanied by a significant increase in activity. The Bank invested $20m in IDA and
trust funds during IDA-14, and expects a similar amount of business in IDA-15. The single largest project,
making up over half of the current portfolio, is the Solomon Islands Rural Development Program, which
commenced in 2008. The program aims to improve standards of living in rural areas through small-scale
infrastructure, revitalized agriculture extension services, and promotion of rural enterprises. Since the
opening of the office, three entirely new project and two major new pieces of analytical work have been
added, including the Sources of Growth report and a Public Expenditure Review. In addition the WBG has
played an important role in dialogue, particularly on economic reform issues. Significant co-financing has
been mobilized to support these activities, illustrating the fact that trust funds currently make up a larger
proportion of the portfolio than IDA. There is scope for the Bank to potentially back up this dialogue with
policy based support for the government, although this will depend critically on the policy environment that
emerges in the country during the course of what is an election year. In collaboration with IFC, the Bank is
engaging with the Solomon Islands Government in policy dialogue on resource management issues, and in
encouraging reputable private investors to the minerals sector. IFC invested $35m in FY09 to assist with the
restarting of production at the Goldridge mine. The Bank is working with IFC to assist in the reform of the
energy sector. This includes management reform of the Solomon Islands Electricity Authority, essential to
attracting private sector investment in the Tina River Hydro scheme. For Tina River, IFC is providing
transaction advice to Government, while the Bank and other donors are supporting Government in the overall
management and coordination of this complex but vital project.
47.
The Bank has provided extensive support to Samoa’s successful reform program since the mid1990s. Samoa, like Tonga, is a highly structured and cohesive Polynesian society. Longer term reform
efforts over almost two decades have helped Samoa raise the speed limit for growth and improve social
indicators (it is now broadly on track to meet most MDGs). Reflecting reform efforts, the Bank has had the
most extensive engagement with Samoa of all Pacific island countries, providing a total of $100m in
33

financing since the country joined the Bank. Nevertheless, Samoa was hit hard in FY09 by the global crisis
and by a devastating tsunami in September 2009. In response, the Bank more than doubled the available
IDA-15 resources to $40 million. Following the tsunami, Bank staff were in Samoa within 48 hours to work
collaboratively with the Government and donors to prepare a comprehensive damage and loss assessment.
The Bank worked closely with the Government and other partners to ensure a coordinated set of policy
actions to underpin financing support for this well performing country in response to the tsunami and the
effects of the global slowdown. The Bank will expand support for health and transport operations in
tsunami-affected areas, building on successful interventions in these sectors over a long-period. Looking
ahead, future engagement will focus on strengthening agricultural competitiveness, and further work to build
on successful investments to improve infrastructure asset maintenance, and “climate proofing” investments.
48.
Tonga is undergoing major Constitutional reforms as part of a transition from an absolute to a
constitutional monarchy. Over the past few years, Tonga has embarked on a program of economic reform,
and has made good progress toward most MDGs. Like Samoa, Tonga has been hard hit by the global
slowdown as well as the previous food and fuel price spikes. The Bank is preparing, in conjunction with
other partners, a package of support to assist the Government respond to the effects of the global slowdown.
The Bank is also replicating the successful experience with infrastructure maintenance in Samoa, and is
receiving significant financing from the Australian Government to support local road maintenance activities
as a means to provide employment opportunities given slowing growth. The Bank is working with the
Government and other partners to prepare a comprehensive energy road map and to explore options for a
broadband cable connection to improve connectivity. These activities will require close collaboration
between partners. Potential IDA and trust fund assistance of about $40-50 million to Tonga during the IDA15 and IDA016 period compares favorably with the $33 million provided by the Bank since Tonga became a
member in 1982. Tonga will be the first Pacific island country in which the Bank Group will prepare an
individual country assistance strategy.
49.
Given strong policy performance in Vanuatu, the Bank is actively exploring options to increase
support. Current Bank Group engagement with Vanuatu is focused on strengthening regulatory oversight of
the telecoms regulator as well as water and electricity utilities. Technical assistance is also being provided
by IFC for successful efforts to strengthen the business environment, and by the Bank on sensitive land
issues. The Bank’s engagement in Vanuatu is being supported by the Australian government. Although
Vanuatu last borrowed from the Bank in 1991, the Government has expressed interest in potentially
accessing IDA to assist with the landing of a broadband cable, as well as in petroleum supply chain
management and other key infrastructure investments.
50.
The Bank is responding to requests from Kiribati for additional financial and analytical support.
Comprised of remote atolls, Kiribati is extremely vulnerable to climate change. GEF financed adaptation
work being undertaken in conjunction with Australia and New Zealand is anticipated to continue and be
integrated even more closely with other investments. The Bank and ADB intend to jointly explore the
feasibility of strengthening transport infrastructure asset management in Kiribati, particularly maintenance of
the main road. GEF financing is potentially available for a grid-connected solar system in Tarawa to reduce
reliance on imported diesel, while oil supply chain management work in the North Pacific also holds
potential for Kiribati. At the request of the Government, the Bank is providing analytical advice regarding
options to open the mobile phone market to competition given the benefits elsewhere in the region, and could
potentially provide financing support if needed to support outer islands connectivity. Board approval for the
first ever IDA investment in Kiribati is anticipated during FY11.
51.
Like Kiribati, the other Micronesian countries of RMI, FSM and Palau are some of the most
remote and isolated communities in the world. These countries rely largely in their fisheries resources, and
the Compact of Free Association with the United States. Bank staff anticipate seeking Board approval in
later 2010 to make IDA resources available for the first time to FSM and RMI. The Bank has been working
with both these countries, as well as Palau, on options to strengthen oil supply chain management, and PRIF
34

financed technical assistance will be provided to both RMI and FSM to respond to requests for assistance to
reap the benefits of telecoms competition. The Bank is also working increasingly closely with the IMF to
engage in a dialogue on broad economic management.
52.
Tuvalu is the Bank’s most recent member country, having joined in June 2010, and is also the
smallest, with 10,000 people. During FY10, staff anticipate seeking Board approval to classify Tuvalu as an
IDA country. Proposed changes to the IDA allocation formula for IDA-16 could also potentially allow the
Bank to make about $10 million available to Tuvalu over that period. Assistance will be very selective, and
focused on replicating successful investments elsewhere in the region (telecoms, transport, energy) and on
supporting successful investments by other donors already active in Tuvalu. Given capacity constraints close
coordination by the bank with other partners will be especially important.
53.
Fiji is facing structural economic difficulties as a result of the longer-term decline of the sugar
and garment industries, which relied in part on preferential trade access. There has also been some
redirection of tourist flows away from the country, partly as a result of political uncertainty associated with a
series of coups over the past 20 years. Current World Bank engagement with Fiji is undertaken in
accordance with OP 7.30, which sets out policy for engaging interim governments. The Bank is currently
implementing a GEF financed sustainable energy financing investment in Fiji, and is providing technical
advice on telecoms reform, the management of the national provident fund, options to better target social
safety net systems, and broader economic issues.
Backing-Up an Expanded Program with Expertise
54.
Underpinning the World Bank Group’s expanded engagement with the broad Pacific region is a
strengthened backbone of decentralized offices, building client relations and allowing the rapid
deployment of sectoral expertise.


The Sydney office has now become a real hub for technical expertise able to be deployed by both the
Bank and IFC. Approximately 50 staff are now based in Sydney across both institutions, more than
double the number a few years ago. This includes over a dozen international staff and an expanded
complement of Australian-hired professionals.



A new country manager position was placed in Solomon Islands in FY09, complementing country
managers leading offices in Timor and PNG. Country offices have been expanded significantly,
including by the placement of internationally recruited deputies in Dili, Honiara, and Port Moresby.



A structure of “lean and mean” liaison offices are being opened jointly with the Asian Development
Bank through the Pacific to strengthen client interactions. Such offices are now open in Samoa and
Tonga, and are underway in Vanuatu and, potentially, Kiribati. These are the only places anywhere in
the world where the ADB and the World Bank share staff.

55.
Generous support from Australia and New Zealand has been crucial to allow the expanded
staffing presence supporting expanded engagement. Arrangements for this support will need to be renewed
in FY11 if the current staffing profile is to be continued.

35

Attachment 2: Tonga Results Matrix
Medium-term
Country Goals

Key Issues

CAS Outcomes
Expected (FY11 – FY14)

Milestones

WBG Instruments and
International Partners for
ISN Period

Strategic Area I: Accelerating Economic Reform to Strengthen Fiscal Stability and Public Expenditure Effectiveness
Sustainable Fiscal
Policy Framework

 Budget revenue estimates to be
 Public expenditure under
improved, including through
significant pressure as a result
better data systems
of global slowdown, with
growing fiscal deficit as
 Debt management system
revenues decline
functioning with new external
assistance on grant or
 External debt in “high risk”
concessional terms only
range (over 50% of GDP in
nominal terms and 30% in
 Quality of PFM systems
NPV terms)
improved as reflected in
improved PEFA scores –
 Lack of expenditure review
particularly in audit - from 2010
mechanism
baseline
 2010 Joint PEFA noted
significant improvements
since 2007 in budget
credibility,
comprehensiveness and
transparency, and policy
based budgeting.
 The 2007 Public Audit Act
provides a framework to
address continuing
weaknesses in terms of
external scrutiny, audit, and
the quality and timeliness of
annual financial statements

36

 Joint public expenditure review
completed identifying options
for improved expenditure
management
 Strengthened dialogue between
donors and Government on
economic and PFM reforms
linked to budget support
 New procurement regulations
consistent with WB/ADB
advice to be gazetted and in
force in 2010
 Treasury Instructions to Line
Ministries issued

AAA: Joint policy notes for
incoming government (2010),
Joint public expenditure review
(2011)
Operations: DPO series (FY12,
FY13)
Donor Partners: ADB, IMF,
Australia, New Zealand, European
Commission

Strategic Area II: Generating Opportunities from Greater Global and Regional Integration
Medium-term
Key Issues
CAS Outcomes
Country Goals
Expected (FY11 – FY14)
Improved connectivity
to provide
opportunities for
growth

Strengthened business
environment

 Telecoms reform in Tonga
expanded mobile phone
coverage from 6% to 60% of
the population in past 5 years
 Internet use limited due to
constraints in satellite capacity
and associated costs
 International studies suggest
that for 10% increase in
broadband penetration, growth
increases by 1.3%

 Significant reform associated
with Tonga’s 2007 WTO entry
has resulted in an increasingly
open and outward looking
economy
 2009 Companies Act
introduced electronic registry
and simplified process
 Business environment still
characterized by discretion,
fragmentation amongst far too
many agencies, and lack of
coordination

 Internet use to increase from
15% to 40% of the population
 Wholesale Connectivity
(bandwidth) costs to be reduced
from $3,500 megabits per
second per month to $800
Mbps/month or lower, flowing
through to reduced retail
internet and telecoms costs
 Regulatory environment that
allows competition with equal
access by all market players to
buy international bandwidth on
a fair and transparent basis at
the cable landing station
 Improved business
environment, as reflected in
Doing Business indicators
 Reduced cost of connectivity
translating into reduced
business transaction costs
 Reduced number of procedures
for obtaining a business license

37

Milestones

WBG Instruments and
International Partners for
ISN Period

 Fibre optic cable linking Tonga
with trans-Pacific cables

AAA/ TA: Telecoms/
connectivity regulatory TA (2011)
Operations: Pacific regional
connectivity program Horizontal
APL (2011)
Donor Partners: ADB, PRIF

 Ability to use personal property
as collateral for access to
finance is improved
 Investment approvals process is
simplified and made more
transparent, including licensing
systems for business operations
 Establishment of a credit bureau
to improve access to finance

AAA/TA: IFC Business enabling
environment TA
Operations: DPO series (FY12,
FY13), IFC Pacific Micro-finance
initiative
Donor Partners: IFC, ADB,
Australia, New Zealand, EC

Strategic Area III: Building Resilience Against Shocks
Reducing reliance on
 Tonga is reliant on imported
price volatile imported
petroleum products for 75%
fuel and increasing
of energy generation
affordability of energy  Imported fuel accounts for
10% of GDP and 25% of all
imports
 95% of the population has
access to grid supplied
electricity, but prices are high
(peak $0.50/ kWh in 2008)

 Improve petroleum supply chain
to reduce price and volatility of
energy supply
 Increase efficiency of grid power
system, including reducing
technical and non-technical
losses from 17.5% on Tongatapu
grid
 Increase renewable energy for
grid power to 20% by 2014

 Open electricity generation
market to new private
investment, with 4 new private
investments by 2013
 1 MW on-grid solar PV
generation capacity to be
introduced
 Landfill gas IPP implemented
 Proof of concept coconut oil
investment initiated

AAA/TA: Tonga Energy
Roadmap (TERM)

Improve transport
infrastructure and
provide
countercyclical
employment
opportunities

 Maritime and aviation safety
issues highlighted by the
tragic sinking of Princess
Ashika ferry in 2009
 Unemployment and
underemployment increasing
as a result of global economic
slowdown

 75 km of roads designed,
supervised and maintained by
local Tongan companies
 ICAO compliance levels to
improve from 48-56% to 80%

Operations: Transport Sector
Consolidation Project (2008) and
Australian PRIF grant (2010)

Improved resilience to
natural disasters

 Tonga highly vulnerable to
natural disasters and climate
change
 Outlying Niuatoputapu
islands hit by tsunami in
September 2009

 Consolidate MOT as unified
transport sector policy, planning
and regulatory ministry
 Improve civil aviation and
maritime sector compliance with
international safety standards
 Strengthened domestic private
sector road maintenance
capacity
 Niuatoputapu reconstruction
 Improved national disaster
management and planning
capacity

 Construction of 85 cyclone
resistant houses, and
rehabilitation of 60 houses
 Institutional strengthening of
Ministry of Land Survey and
Natural Resources and
preparation of community
disaster risk management plans

AAA/TA: Regional DRR/CAA
risk analysis

 School grants program
operational, with all schools
receiving grants on schedule
 School rehabilitation
completed at 20 most needy
sites

AAA/TA: Early grade reading
assessments

Improve education
outcomes

 Relatively high enrolment
rates but early grade reading
assessments highlighting
some issues about quality

 Net enrolment, dropout,
retention rates and student test
performance improved from
2005 baselines
 Increase local participation and
accountability through
introducing school based
management, with schools
engaging communities in
planning, budgeting, and results
assessment

38

Operations: Energy sector
policy DPO (2010), energy
roadmap investment (2011)
Donor Partners: IFC, ADB,
Australia, New Zealand, EC,
Japan

Donor Partners: Australia

Operations: Post-tsunami
Reconstruction project (2010)
Donor Partners: NZ, UN, Red
Cross

Operations: Tonga Education
Support Program (2005)
Donor Partners: NZ

Tonga at a glance

8/19/10

To nga

East
A sia &
P acific

Lo wer
middle
inco me

0.10
0.8
0.4
25

1,930
16,299
0.7
44

3,703
32,309
1.1
41

0.3
3,260
3,980

5,102
2,644
5,426

7,675
2,073
4,593

-0.4
-0.8

8.0
7.2

7.4
6.1

P o verty headco unt ratio at $ 1.25 a day (P P P , %)
P o verty headco unt ratio at $ 2.00 a day (P P P , %)
Life expectancy at birth (years)
Infant mo rtality (per 1,000 live births)
Child malnutritio n (% o f children under 5)

..
..
73
19
..

17
39
72
23
12

..
..
68
45
25

A dult literacy, male (% o f ages 15 and o lder)
A dult literacy, female (% o f ages 15 and o lder)
Gro ss primary enro llment, male (% o f age gro up)
Gro ss primary enro llment, female (% o f age gro up)

99
99
116
110

96
90
112
113

87
73
110
106

A ccess to an impro ved water so urce (% o f po pulatio n)
A ccess to impro ved sanitatio n facilities (% o f po pulatio n)

100
96

87
66

86
52

Ke y D e v e lo pm e nt Indic a t o rs

Age distribution, 2008

(2009)

Male

P o pulatio n, mid-year (millio ns)
Surface area (tho usand sq. km)
P o pulatio n gro wth (%)
Urban po pulatio n (% o f to tal po pulatio n)

Female

75-79
60-64
45-49
30-34

GNI (A tlas metho d, US$ billio ns)
GNI per capita (A tlas metho d, US$ )
GNI per capita (P P P , internatio nal $ )

15-19
0-4
10

GDP gro wth (%)
GDP per capita gro wth (%)

5

0

5

10

percent of total population

( m o s t re c e nt e s t im a t e , 2 0 0 3 – 2 0 0 9 )
Under-5 mortality rate (per 1,000)
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
1990

1995

Tonga

N e t A id F lo ws
(US$ millio ns)
Net ODA and o fficial aid
To p 3 do no rs (in 2008):
A ustralia
New Zealand
Japan

19 8 0

19 9 0

2000

2009

16

30

19

26

5
3
0

9
4
10

5
4
7

12
6
4

2000

2007

East Asia & Pacific

a

Growth of GDP and GDP per capita (%)
8
6
4

A id (% o f GNI)
A id per capita (US$ )

27.3
169

25.5
315

9.9
191

7.3
248

2
0
-2

Lo ng- T e rm E c o no m ic T re nds

-4
95

Co nsumer prices (annual % change)
GDP implicit deflato r (annual % change)
Exchange rate (annual average, lo cal per US$ )
Terms o f trade index (2000 = 100)

22.4
7.9

9.7
12.2

5.9
3.3

1.8
-1.2

0.9
..

1.3
..

1.8
..

2.1
..

05

GDP

GDP per capita

19 8 0 – 9 0 19 9 0 – 2 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 – 0 9
(average annual gro wth %)
P o pulatio n, mid-year (millio ns)
GDP (US$ millio ns)

0.1
53

0.1
114

0.1
189

0.1
311

-0.2
2.0

0.4
2.6

0.6
1.0

A griculture
Industry
M anufacturing
Services

38.5
14.5
7.0
47.1

35.6
13.9
6.1
50.5

22.8
21.3
10.5
55.9

19.6
18.5
8.1
61.9

0.4
1.8
5.6
2.5

1.3
2.6
-1.3
3.1

0.2
-0.5
0.4
1.7

Ho useho ld final co nsumptio n expenditure
General go v't final co nsumptio n expenditure
Gro ss capital fo rmatio n

92.8
14.8
30.1

93.6
19.1
18.5

91.6
18.2
21.7

99.6
19.7
26.1

..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

30.1
67.7
17.6

33.9
65.1
18.5

15.4
46.9
8.7

13.2
58.5
24.1

..
..

..
..

..
..

(% o f GDP )

Expo rts o f go o ds and services
Impo rts o f go o ds and services
Gro ss savings

39

Tonga
B a la nc e o f P a ym e nt s a nd T ra de

2000

2009
Governance indicators, 2000 and 2008

(US$ millio ns)
To tal merchandise expo rts (fo b)
To tal merchandise impo rts (cif)
Net trade in go o ds and services

10
71
-46

5
148
-127

Current acco unt balance
as a % o f GDP

-9
-4.8

-24
-7.7

Voice and accountability
Political stability
Regulatory quality
Rule of law

Wo rkers' remittances and
co mpensatio n o f emplo yees (receipts)

53

Reserves, including go ld

100

25

Control of corruption

60

0

C e nt ra l G o v e rnm e nt F ina nc e
(% o f GDP )
Current revenue (including grants)
Tax revenue
Current expenditure

21.5
15.9
21.3

25.3
14.5
25.5

Overall surplus/deficit

-0.3

-3.5

25

50

..
..

100

Country's percentile rank (0-100)

2000

higher values imply better ratings

Source: Kaufmann-Kraay-Mastruzzi, World Bank

T e c hno lo gy a nd Inf ra s t ruc t ure

Highest marginal tax rate (%)
Individual
Co rpo rate

75

2008

P aved ro ads (% o f to tal)
Fixed line and mo bile pho ne
subscribers (per 100 peo ple)
High techno lo gy expo rts
(% o f manufactured expo rts)

..
..

2000

2008

27.0

..

10

73

0.0

..

E xt e rna l D e bt a nd R e s o urc e F lo ws
E nv iro nm e nt
(US$ millio ns)
To tal debt o utstanding and disbursed
To tal debt service
Debt relief (HIP C, M DRI)
To tal debt (% o f GDP )
To tal debt service (% o f expo rts)
Fo reign direct investment (net inflo ws)
P o rtfo lio equity (net inflo ws)

65
5
–

101
5
–

34.6
15.5

32.6
7.0

..
..

..
..

A gricultural land (% o f land area)
Fo rest area (% o f land area)
Terrestrial pro tected areas (% o f surface area)
Freshwater reso urces per capita (cu. meters)
Freshwater withdrawal (billio n cubic meters)
CO2 emissio ns per capita (mt)

42
..
..

..
25.5

..
..

..
..

1.2

43

1.3

GDP per unit o f energy use
(2005 P P P $ per kg o f o il equivalent)

..

..

Energy use per capita (kg o f o il equivalent)

..

..

2000

2008

IB RD
To tal debt o utstanding and disbursed
Disbursements
P rincipal repayments
Interest payments

–
–
–
–

–
–
–
–

IDA
To tal debt o utstanding and disbursed
Disbursements
To tal debt service

4
0
0

22
1
0

–
–
–

–
–
–

–

–

–
–

–
–

Composition of total external debt, 2008
Short-term, 0

Private, 0

IBRD, 0
IDA, 22

Bilateral, 18

Wo rld B a nk G ro up po rt f o lio
(US$ millio ns)
IMF, 0

Other multilateral, 50

US$ millions

P riv a t e S e c t o r D e v e lo pm e nt
Time required to start a business (days)
Co st to start a business (% o f GNI per capita)
Time required to register pro perty (days)
Ranked as a majo r co nstraint to business
(% o f managers surveyed who agreed)
n.a.
n.a.
Sto ck market capitalizatio n (% o f GDP )
B ank capital to asset ratio (%)

2000

2009

–
–
–

25
8.2
108

2000

2008

..
..

..
..

..
..

..
..

IFC (fiscal year)
To tal disbursed and o utstanding po rtfo lio
o f which IFC o wn acco unt
Disbursements fo r IFC o wn acco unt
P o rtfo lio sales, prepayments and
repayments fo r IFC o wn acco unt
M IGA
Gro ss expo sure
New guarantees

40

Millennium Development Goals

Tonga

With selected targets to achieve b etween 1990 and 2015
(estimate clo sest to date sho wn, +/- 2 years)

T o nga

G o a l 1: ha lv e t he ra t e s f o r e xt re m e po v e rt y a nd m a lnut rit io n
P o verty headco unt ratio at $ 1.25 a day (P P P , % o f po pulatio n)
P o verty headco unt ratio at natio nal po verty line (% o f po pulatio n)
Share o f inco me o r co nsumptio n to the po o rest qunitile (%)
P revalence o f malnutritio n (% o f children under 5)

19 9 0
..
..
..
..

19 9 5
..
..
..
..

2000
..
..
..
..

2008
..
..
..
..

..

96
105
101
..

96
105
103

G o a l 2 : e ns ure t ha t c hildre n a re a ble t o c o m ple t e prim a ry s c ho o ling
P rimary scho o l enro llment (net, %)
P rimary co mpletio n rate (% o f relevant age gro up)
Seco ndary scho o l enro llment (gro ss, %)
Yo uth literacy rate (% o f peo ple ages 15-24)

97
133
98
..

G o a l 3 : e lim ina t e ge nde r dis pa rit y in e duc a t io n a nd e m po we r wo m e n
Ratio o f girls to bo ys in primary and seco ndary educatio n (%)
Wo men emplo yed in the no nagricultural secto r (% o f no nagricultural emplo yment)
P ro po rtio n o f seats held by wo men in natio nal parliament (%)

..
..
..

..
..
..

102
..
..

99

32
26
86

29
24
94

26
22
95

23
19
99

..
..
..

..
..
..

..
95
..

98

G o a l 6 : ha lt a nd be gin t o re v e rs e t he s pre a d o f H IV / A ID S a nd o t he r m a jo r dis e a s e s
P revalence o f HIV (% o f po pulatio n ages 15-49)
..
Incidence o f tuberculo sis (per 100,000 peo ple)
34
Tuberculo sis case detectio n rate (%, all fo rms)
72

..
31
67

..
28
88

..
25
53

G o a l 7 : ha lv e t he pro po rt io n o f pe o ple wit ho ut s us t a ina ble a c c e s s t o ba s ic ne e ds
A ccess to an impro ved water so urce (% o f po pulatio n)
..
A ccess to impro ved sanitatio n facilities (% o f po pulatio n)
..
Fo rest area (% o f to tal land area)
..
Terrestrial pro tected areas (% o f surface area)
..
CO2 emissio ns (metric to ns per capita)
0.8
GDP per unit o f energy use (co nstant 2005 P P P $ per kg o f o il equivalent)
..

..
..
..
..
1.1
..

100
96
..
..
1.2
..

100
96

6.8
0.3
0.1
0.6

9.8
0.2
2.4
1.3

24.7
48.7
8.1
5.9

G o a l 4 : re duc e unde r- 5 m o rt a lit y by t wo - t hirds
Under-5 mo rtality rate (per 1,000)
Infant mo rtality rate (per 1,000 live births)
M easles immunizatio n (pro po rtio n o f o ne-year o lds immunized, %)
G o a l 5 : re duc e m a t e rna l m o rt a lit y by t hre e - f o urt hs
M aternal mo rtality ratio (mo deled estimate, per 100,000 live births)
B irths attended by skilled health staff (% o f to tal)
Co ntraceptive prevalence (% o f wo men ages 15-49)

G o a l 8 : de v e lo p a glo ba l pa rt ne rs hip f o r de v e lo pm e nt
Telepho ne mainlines (per 100 peo ple)
M o bile pho ne subscribers (per 100 peo ple)
Internet users (per 100 peo ple)
P erso nal co mputers (per 100 peo ple)

114
107
99

4.6
0.0
0.0
..

..

..
..

..
..

..
25.5
1.3
..

Education indicators (%)

Measles immunization (% of 1-year
olds)

ICT indicators (per 100 people)

125

100

80
70

100

60

75
75

50

50

40

50

30

25

20

25

0

10
2000

2002

2004

2006

2008

0

0
1990

1995

2000

2007

2000

2002

2004

2006

2008

Primary net enrollment ratio
Ratio of girls to boys in primary & secondary
education

Tonga

East Asia & Pacific

41

Fixed + mobile subscribers

Internet users

Attachment 4. Tonga: Selected Economic Indicators, FY2006–FY2011 1/
FY2006

FY2007

FY2008

FY2009

FY2010

FY2011

0.5
7.0
6.4

‐1.2
5.1
5.6

2.0
9.8
12.2

‐0.4
5.0
1.2

‐0.5
2.2
4.3

1.7
4.2
4.1

26.6
24.9
1.7
29.4
28.8
0.8
‐2.8
…
0.4
2.4
0.0

28.3
24.6
3.7
27.3
26.2
0.9
1.1
…
0.1
‐1.2
0.0

26.3
24.9
1.3
24.7
24.3
0.4
1.5
…
0.2
‐1.7
0.0

24.0
17.4
6.6
27.3
24.1
2.3
‐3.3
‐3.3
‐0.7
8.6
‐4.6

25.3
18.7
6.6
29.2
23.9
2.7
‐3.9
‐2.4
3.6
0.5
‐0.2

29.2
18.8
10.4
34.3
22.8
8.6
‐5.1
‐2.5
5.4
‐0.3
0.0

13.3
16.6
25.8
22.6

13.3
11.9
11.6
9.5

6.7
8.2
11.6
18.0

‐1.1
‐1.8
‐4.2
‐2.9

4.3
2.0
‐11.2
‐11.0

1.4
2.5
1.3
2.0

5.2
9.0

5.6
9.4

5.7
10.0

5.3
10.0

...
...

...
...

15.4
‐122.2
‐7.8
2.8
‐5.0
88.9
102.0
‐22.8
‐22.8
‐7.9
0.6
‐12.0

13.3
‐108.6
‐17.9
3.5
‐14.4
84.2
93.3
‐25.5
‐25.5
‐8.4
4.2
21.9

12.4
‐138.1
‐3.3
3.4
0.1
94.7
106.7
‐30.9
‐30.9
‐9.0
‐1.4
‐6.1

5.5
‐130.1
‐2.6
4.6
2.0
75.8
84.0
‐46.9
‐46.8
‐14.3
22.6
0.1

5.2
‐115.7
‐3.3
3.2
‐0.1
59.1
63.0
‐51.5
‐42.6
‐17.4
2.9
...

6.3
‐131.5
‐5.0
3.1
‐1.9
66.7
70.7
‐60.5
‐45.0
‐19.9
1.3
...

Gross official foreign reserves
In millions of U.S. dollars
In months of goods and services imports

40.4
3.1

47.1
3.9

48.2
3.2

67.7
4.7

70.6
5.3

72.0
4.8

External debt (in percent of GDP)
External debt
Debt service ratio

29.0
1.1

27.1
1.1

25.3
1.4

31.5
1.2

44.2
1.1

50.7
1.5

Exchange rates
Pa'anga per U.S. dollar (period average)
Pa'anga per U.S. dollar (end of period)
Nominal effective exchange rate (1990=100)
Real effective exchange rate (1990=100)

2.0
2.1
70.5
103.6

2.0
1.9
68.4
103.5

1.9
1.8
66.0
105.9

2.1
2.0
67.6
111.7

...
...
...
...

...
...
...
...

Nominal GDP (millions of T$)

580.1

604.1

652.2

685.0

704.9

747.1

Output and prices (Annual percent change)
Real GDP 2/
Consumer prices (period average)
Consumer prices (end of period)
Central government finance (In percent of GDP)
Total revenue and grants
Total revenue
Grants
Total expenditure and net lending
Of which: Current expenditure
Capital expenditure
Overall balance
Overall balance (excl. China's EXIM bank loans)
External financing (net)
Domestic financing (net)
Privatization receipts
Money and credit (Annual percent change)
Total liquidity 3/
Of which: Broad money (M2)
Domestic credit
Of which: Private sector credit
Interest rates (end of period)
Average deposit rate
Base lending rate
Balance of payments (In millions of U.S. dollars)
Exports, f.o.b.
Imports, f.o.b.
Services (net)
Investment income (net)
Services and investment income (net)
Current transfers (net)
Of which: Private transfer receipts
Current account balance
Current account balance (excl. China's EXIM bank
(In percent of GDP)
Overall balance
Terms of trade (annual percent change)

Notes:
1/ Fiscal year beginning July. FY2010 and FY2011 data are projections.
2/ Including preliminary data.

42

Tonga CAS Annex 5
Selected Indicators* of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
As of 08.16.2010

Indicator
Portfolio Assessment
Number of Projects Under Implementation a
Average Implementation Period (years) b
Percent of Problem Projects by Number a, c
Percent of Problem Projects by Amount a, c
Percent of Projects at Risk by Number a, d
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount a, d
Disbursement Ratio (%) e
Portfolio Management
CPPR during the year (yes/no)
Supervision Resources (total US$)
Average Supervision (US$/project)

2008

2009

2010

2011

2
4.0
0.0
0.0
50.0
8.4
52.2

3
3.7
33.3
31.3
66.7
37.1
24.9

2
3.5
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
40.6

2
3.6
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.4

Memorandum Item
Since FY 80 Last Five FYs
Proj Eval by OED by Number
3
1
Proj Eval by OED by Amt (US$ millions)
10.5
6.1
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Number
33.3
0.0
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt
21.7
0.0

a.
b.
c.
d.
e.

As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY).
Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio.
Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) and/or implementation progress (IP
As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the

beginning of the year: Investment projects only.
* All indicators are for projects active in the Portfolio, with the exception of Disbursement Ratio,
which includes all active projects as well as projects which exited during the fiscal year.

43

Tonga CAS Annex 6a- IBRD/IDA Program Summary
As Of Date 8/16/2010

Country: Kingdom of Tonga

Proposed IBRD/IDA Base-Case Lending Program
a

Fiscal year

2011

IDA
(US$M)

Proj ID

Strategic
Rewards b
(H/M/L)

Implementation
b Risks
(H/M/L)

Tonga Energy Develop. Policy Operation

5

H

H

Tonga Energy Roadmap Project

5

H

M

Tonga Post Tsunami Reconstruction

5

M

L

Pacific Islands Regional Connectivity (Tonga
Broadband Connectivity)

10

H

M

H

H

H

H

Tonga Transport Sector Consolidation Project
2012

TF
(US$M)

3

9.3

Development Policy Operation # 1

5

2013

Development Policy Operation # 2

5

2014

Transport Sector Follow up

4

TBD

39

12.3

39

12.3

Result
Overall
Result

a. This table presents the proposed program for the next three fiscal years.
b. For each project, indicate whether the strategic rewards and implementation risks are expected to be high (H),

44

Tonga CAS Annex 6b
Operations Portfolio (IBRD/IDA and Grants)
As Of Date 8/16/2010

Closed Projects

IBRD/IDA *
Total Disbursed (Active)
of which has been repaid
Total Disbursed (Closed)
of which has been repaid
Total Disbursed (Active + Closed)
of which has been repaid
Total Undisbursed (Active)
Total Undisbursed (Closed)
Total Undisbursed (Active + Closed)

4

1.83
0.00
18.13
0.74
19.96
0.74
4.35
0.00
4.35

Active Projects

Project ID

Project Name

P079657
P096931
Overall Result

TO-Tonga Education Support Project
TO-Transport Sector Consolidation

Last PSR
Supervision Rating
Implementation
Development
Objectives
Progress
S
S

S
S

a. Intended disbursements to date minus actual disbursements to date as projected at appraisal

45

Original Amount in US$ Millions
Fiscal
Year
2005
2009

IBRD

IDA
1
5.44
6.44

GRANT

Cancel.

Undisb.
0.032991
4.3177536
4.3507446

Difference Between
Expected and Actual
Disbursements a/
Frm
Orig.
Rev'd
3.818
2.47787485
6.29587485

Tonga CAS Annex 7a
IFC Committed and Disbursed Outstanding Investment Portfolio
As of 7/31/2010
(In USD Millions)

Committed

FY Approval

Company

2009

Digicel Tonga
Total Portfolio:

Disbursed Outstanding

Loan

Equity

**Quasi
Equity

*GT/RM

Partici
pant

Loan

Equity

**Quasi
Equity

*GT/RM

Partici
pant

6.79

0

0

0

0

6.79

0

0

0

0

6.79

0

0

0

0

6.79

0

0

0

0

* Denotes Guarantee and Risk Management Products.
** Quasi Equity includes both loan and equity types.

46

Tonga CAS Annex 7b
Tonga: IFC Investment Operations Program

2008

2009

2010

2011*

Commitments (US$m)
Gross

6.79

Net**

6.79

Net Commitments by Sector (%)
Loan
Total

100
0

100

0

0

0

0

Net Commitments by Investment Instrument
(%)
Loan
Total

100
0

100

* As of March 31, 2011
** IFC's Own Account only

47

IBRD 33498
176°W

TO N GA

174°W

Niuafo'ou

DIVISION CAPITALS

NIUAS

NATIONAL CAPITAL

Tafahi
Niuatoputapu

16°S

REEFS
DIVISION BOUNDARIES
INTERNATIONAL BOUNDARIES

172°W
0

0

TONGA

18°S

25

50

25

75 Kilometers

50 Miles

18°S

Fonualei
Toku

VAVA ' U
Vava'u
Neiafu

Vava'u
Group

Late

SOUTH
PACIFIC
OCEAN

Ofolanga

Kao
Tofua

20°S

H A ' A PA I

Kotu
Group

Foa
Lifuka
Pangai
Uoleva
Uiha
20°S

Nomuka Nomuka
Group

Fonuafo'ou

Hunga
Ha'apai

Ha'ano

Ha'apai
Group

Otu Tolu
Group

Hunga
Tonga

TONGATAPU
Tongatapu

Albert Meyer
Reef

NUKU'ALOFA

EUA

Eua
Ohonua

176°W

174°W

This map was produced by the Map Design Unit of The World Bank.
The boundaries, colors, denominations and any other information
shown on this map do not imply, on the part of The World Bank
Group, any judgment on the legal status of any territory, or any
endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.

NOVEM BER 2004

