Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized

Document of
The World Bank
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Report No. 48666-PL

INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT

Public Disclosure Authorized

Public Disclosure Authorized

POLAND COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY

FOR THE PERIOD 2009-13

June 2,2009

Central and South-Central Europe and the Baltic Countries
Europe and Central Asia Region

This document has restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance o f
their official duties. I t s contents may not otherwise be disclosed without World Bank authorization.

Date o f Last Country Partnership Strategy: March 29, 2005

CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS
(Exchange Rate as o f June 2,2009)
Currency Unit = Polish Zloty (PLN)
US$l.OO = 3.13 PLN
FISCAL YEAR
January 1 - December 3 1

ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS
AAA
AAU
AHK
CAT DDO
CEM
CIS
CIT
COP 14
CP
CPS
CTF
DPL
DRG
EBRD
EC
ECA
ECB
EIB
ERM2
ESW
EU
EU8
EUlO
FBS
FCL
FDI
FIAS
FSAP
GDDKiA
GDP
GEF
GIS
IBRD

Analytic and Advisory Activities
Assigned Amount Unit
Polish-German Chamber of Industry and Commerce
Catastrophe Deferred Drawdown Option
Country Economic Memorandum
Commonwealth o f Independent States
Corporate Income Tax
Conference of the Parties
Convergence Program
Country Partnership Strategy
Clean Technology Fund
Development Policy Loan
Diagnosis Related Group
European Bank for Reconstruction and Development
European Commission
Europe and Central Asia
European Central Bank
European Investment Bank
European Exchange Rate Mechanism
Economic and Sector Work
European Union
Member States that joined the EU on May 1, 2004,
excluding Malta and Cyprus
EU8 plus Member States that joined the EU on
January 1,2007
Fee-based Service
Flexible Credit Line
Foreign direct investment
Foreign Investment Advisory Service
Financial Sector Assessment Program
General Directorate for Public Roads and Motorways
Gross Domestic Product
Global Environment Facility
Green Investment Scheme
International Bank for Reconstruction and
Development

Vice President
Director
Team Leader

IFC
IF1
IMF
LA
LFS
MIC
MOH
MTEF
NATO
NBP
NFZ
NGO
NHF
NMS
OECD
PER
PIT
Pis
PKO BP
PLN
PO
Powiat
PPP
PSL
R&D
SME
SWAP
TA
TEN-T
UNFCC
USD
VAT
WDR

International Finance Corporation
International Financial Institution
International Monetary Fund
Lisbon Agenda
Labor Force Survey
Middle Income Countries
Ministry of Health
Medium-Term Expenditure Framework
North Atlantic Treaty Organization
National Bank o f Poland
National Health Insurance Fund
Non-Governmental organization
National Health Fund
New Member States
Organization for Economic Cooperation and
Development
Public Expenditure Review
Personal Income Tax
Law and Justice party
Powszechna Kasa OszczqdnoSci Bank Polski
Polish Zloty
Civic Platform
County administrative unit, (379) NUTS3
Public Private Partnerships
Polish Peasant’s Party
Research and Development
Small- and medium-sized enterprises
Sector Wide Approach
Technical assistance
Trans-European Transport Network
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change
United States dollar
Value Added Tax
World Development Report

IBRD
Shigeo Katsu
Theodore Ahlers
Thomas Laursen

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

TABLE OF CONTENTS
I.

.

I1

.

I11

Introduction ...................................................................................

1

Country Context., ............................................................................
A Geopolitical Context, E U Relations. and Political Situation.................................
B Economic Developments. Labor Markets and Poverty Profile.......................
C . Medium-Term Economic and Fiscal Outlook ..........................................

1
1
2
6

Country Development Program ..........................................................
A . Overarching Objectives., .................................................................
B Government Priorities..

10
10
11

World Bank Program .......................................................................
A . Implementation o f 2005 CPS and Lessons Learned...................................
B. External Partners and Key Areas o f World Bank Value-added......................
C. Strategic Pillars o f Collaboration .........................................................
Pillar 1 : Social and Spatial Inclusion ................................................
Pillar 2: Public Sector Reform .....................................................
Pillar 3: Growth and Competitiveness............................................
Pillar 4: Regional and Global Public Goods .......................................
D. Proposed Program..........................................................................
E. Poverty and Social Impact .................................................................
F Results Framework., .......................................................................

13
13
15
17
18
-21
-22
25
27
29
30

.

.

IV

..................................................................

.

V

.

VI

.

Risks .............................................................................................

30

Consultationswith Government and Other Partners.,................................

31

Boxes. Charts. Figures. Tables:

Box 1:
Box 2:
Box 3:

Poverty in Poland since E U Accession
Supporting High and Sustainable Economic Growth in Poland over the Medium
Term
External Partners

Chart 1:
Chart 2:

At Risk of Poverty Rate in the EU8 (percent)
Public Debt Sustainability

Figure 1
Figure 2

EIB Lending to Poland in 1990-2008
EBRD Commitments by year

Table 1:
Table 2:
Table 3:
Table 4:

Poverty in Poland since E U Accession
Economic Developments and Prospects in Poland 2004-2011
Fiscal Developments and Prospects in Poland 2004-201 1
Proposed IBRD Lending Program and Selected Non-lending Services

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance o f
their official duties . I t s contents may not be otherwise disclosed without W o r l d Bank authorization .

Annexes:

A1
A2
B2
B3
B4
B5
B6
B7
B8
C

Results Framework
Poland at a Glance
Selected Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
IBRD Program Summary
IFC Program Summary
Poland Summary of Non-lending Services
Poland Social Indicators
Poland Key Economic Indicators
Poland Key Exposure Indicators
IBRD Operations Portfolio
IFC Operations Portfolio
2005 CPS Completion Report

Map (IBRD 33467R)

The Poland Partnership Strategy was prepared by a core team comprised of the following
World Bank Group staff: Thomas Laursen (TTL), Radek Czapski, Charles Griffin, Leszek
Kasek, Ewa Korczyc, Anna Kowalczyk, Albert0 Rodriguez, Jan Rutkowski, and Penny
Williams. Henry Kerali, Christine Kessides, John Pollner, and Gary Stuggins also provided
helpful contributions.

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance of
their official duties. I t s contents may not otherwise be disclosed without the World Bank authorization

Poland - Country Partnership Strategy 2009-13
I.INTRODUCTION
1.
This Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) sets out the country context, country
development program, and envisaged World Bank program for Poland for the period 200913, the remaining five years of the 2007-13 European Union (EU) financial perspective. It
also discusses the risks to this strategy and the planned consultations with Government and
other partners. The CPS replaces the open-ended 2005 CPS, which has been superseded by
recent crisis-related events in the global economy, although several aspects of it remain valid.

2.
The CPS should be viewed as a flexible tool to support the Bank’s work in Poland, in
line with the strategy for middle-income countries (MIC). The Bank’s dialogue with Poland
i s constantly evolving depending on external and domestic political and economic
circumstances, and this strategy reflects more our current assessment of priorities and
potential for Bank engagement in Poland than a firmly agreed strategy and pipeline with the
Government, at least beyond the first year. The Government i s interested in a continued
partnership with the Bank, including both borrowing (at least in the current adverse external
environment) and analytic and advisory Activities (AAA) drawing on the Bank’s global
knowledge. It i s envisaged that while lending may be increased significantly in the coming
couple of years, it would be phased out gradually over the medium term. Meanwhile, AAA
would be expected to increasingly be provided on a fee-for-service basis.
3.
Although a secondary partner to the EU, the Bank can continue to add significant
value to Poland’s development and convergence agenda for many years to come, while its
active policy dialogue and technical cooperation also benefits the Bank through enhancing its
knowledge to the benefit of other client countries both in the region and beyond. This i s thus
a win-win relationship.

4.
A Regional Framework paper for the ten countries in the Central and South-Central
Europe and the Baltic region i s under preparation. The Framework will provide a broad
diagnosis of the key challenges facing the countries in the region; describe the Bank’s valueadded; and outline the main areas o f Bank activity in the region. This Poland CPS shares
common elements with the proposed Framework paper.
11. COUNTRY
CONTEXT

A. Geopolitical Context, EU Relations. and Political Situation
5.
Poland has successfully managed its integration into the EU since accession in
2004. The EU and its institutions are now Poland’s main external partners, to which the
World Bank i s committed to play a supporting role. Poland has access to considerable
external financing, including large volumes of EU Structural and Cohesion Funds on a grant
basis and market financing (although absorption of EU funds has been somewhat slow and
market financing recently has become more difficult with the escalation o f the global
economic and financial crisis). While external relations are anchored in EU and North
Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) membership, for historical reasons Poland i s also
seeking closer ties with its Eastern neighbors, particularly with Ukraine to support closer
integration with the EU and co-hosting of the 2012 European Soccer Championship.

1

6.
The majority Government, formed after elections in late 2007 by the Civic
Platform (PO) and the Polish Peasant’s Party (PSL) and led by Prime Minister Donald
Tusk of PO, has remained broadly stable and enjoys strong social support. Recent
opinion polls show that support for the PO oscillates around 50 percent and that o f PSL
around 5 percent.

7.
However, lack o f qualified majority in Parliament may make it increasingly
difficult for the Government to advance its reform program over the next year and a half
as Presidential elections in fall 2010 approach. Consensus for major reform initiatives may
not be achieved given the strong opposition Law and Justice (Pis) party which also occupies
the Presidency. In some cases, such as the recent-tightening o f early retirement conditions,
the Government was able to overcome a Presidential veto through support from the smaller
opposition Social Democratic party. Elections to the European Parliament scheduled for
mid-2009 and subsequent Local Government elections are expected to generate heated
political debate.
8.
Poland does not have serious governance problems. Poland has a strong multiparty democracy and a vibrant, free press. Governance indicators suggest Poland i s in the 5075* percentile in governance matters worldwide’ and roughly equal to its peers in
Transparency ratings.* Poland’s Ministry o f Interior and Administration prepared a national
anti-corruption strategy in 2002 and this i s updated regularly. Since 2006, the Central
Anti-corruption Bureau has also been involved in anti-corruption activities, most recently
focusing on prevention and education.
B. Economic Developments, Labor Markets and Poverty

9.
Poland i s being strongly affected by the deterioration in the external
environment, but its vulnerability remains moderate. The initial position o f the Polish
economy has been robust and able to face the repercussions o f the global crisis after five
years o f strong growth and a historically low ‘unemployment rate. Meanwhile, inflation, the
current account deficit and external debt as well as public debt are moderate, and the
financial system i s relatively sound. While Poland avoided much o f the initial, direct
financial market shock, it i s being strongly affected by second-round effects through the real
economy: declining demand for Polish exports, tightening o f credit conditions, and lower
FDI inflows. The sharp weakening o f the zloty in the last quarter o f 2008 and early 2009
showed that there i s little room for complacency.

10.
Poland’s financial system i s well-poised to cope with the current adverse
external environment. While the banking system i s dominated by foreign banks whose
external funding conditions appear to have deteriorated owing to the problems in parent
banks, there are also some significant domestic banks including a large state-owned bank.
Further, credit growth in Poland and the overall level o f credit-to-gross domestic product
(GDP) has been moderate and much lower than in most o f the other countries in the region,
and most o f the credit expansion has been financed through domestic deposits, although
foreign financing has been playing an increasing role in recent years. A large share o f
domestic investment has been financed through enterprise profits. While there are some
concerns related to foreign currency mortgage lending, the overall level o f lending i s
relatively small and the recent depreciation o f the zloty has taken place after the strong real

’ World Governance Indicators 2008.
Poland ranks 58‘h in Transparency International’s Corruption Perceptions Index, equal to Lithuania and only
slightly behind regional peers such as Hungary, Latvia and the Slovak Republic.

2

exchange rate appreciation in 2007 and much of 2008. Bank profits have been record-high in
recent years and all banks remain well-capitalized, Credit conditions are likely to tighten
significantly this year and some enterprises may find it difficult to roll-over maturing shortterm loans (which constitute about one-half of total enterprise loans).
11.
Growth has slowed sharply but could remain slightly positive in 2009. Growth
was expected to slow down for cyclical reasons, but while growth remained buoyant at close
to 5 percent in the third quarter of 2008, the economy slowed more sharply to less than 3
percent growth in the fourth quarter o f 2008 and 0.8 percent in the first quarter of 2009 in
connection with the worsening o f international financial and economic conditions.
Investment growth has slowed sharply while consumption growth remains more resilient
with continued real wage increases, only slowly increasing unemployment, and still robust
credit growth. Poland i s less reliant on external demand than other, more open countries in
the region and will be relatively less affected by a recession in the euro area. I n 2009, the
contribution of net exports i s likely to remain broadly neutral as weaker prospects for exports
will be accompanied by moderation of imports due to lower domestic absorption and
exchange rate depreciation. Overall, in the best case scenario, growth could remain slightly
positive at 0-1 percent in 2009. However, forecasts are subject to unusually large uncertainty
in the current environment and there could be significant variations in growth in both
directions, depending mainly on external developments (notably in the e~ro-zone).~
12.
The higher than planned Government consumption and lower than assumed
non-tax revenues other than social contributions (largely EU funds) together with the
slowdown in economic activity towards the end of 2008 contributed to an unexpected
increase in the fiscal deficit. The 2008 general Government fiscal deficit reached 3.9
percent of GDP, some 1.2 percentage points higher than projected by the Government in the
December 2008 Convergence Program. This was due to higher-than-expecteddeficits o f both
local and central Governments (due to higher than planned expenditure and lower than
expected revenue), while social security funds performed according to plan. Poland i s very
likely to enter the EU Excessive Deficit Procedure, which i s triggered when the deficit-toGDP ratio exceeds 3 percent or debt-to-GDP ratio exceeds 60 percent and which requires
countries to produce a plan for how this will be corrected. The EC initiated this process on
May 13.

13.
Inflation accelerated in 2008, but the peak was reached in August and inflation
eased significantly as the crisis escalated. With GDP growth expected to slow sharply in
2009 and world commodity prices falling, expectations for inflation have eased and the
National Bank of Poland (NBP) began reducing interest rates in late 2008. Inflation i s
projected to return to around the middle of the target range of 1.5-3.5 percent in 2009
although in April it remained above the upper end o f the target range.
14.
The balance of payments has come under some pressure but Poland’s external
position remains relatively strong. The current account deficit widened slightly to 5 %
percent o f GDP in 2008, while weaker capital inflows were associated with a sharp
depreciation of the zloty in late 2008 and early 2009 following strong appreciation in recent
years. Following a hiatus o f seven months, the Government returned to international capital
markets with a euro 1 billion issue in January at a spread of about 300 basis points above
German Bunds and 5-year m a t ~ r i t y In
. ~ early May, the issue was re-opened and Poland
The IMF and EC project a decline in GDP of 0.7% and 1.4% in Poland, respectively.
At the end o f April 2009, the City o f Warsaw successfully placed a 5-year fixed rate euro-denominated bond
of EUR 200 million, priced at around 470 basis points above German Bunds.

3

successfully placed EUR750 million at a spread of about 40 basis points below the January
level. Poland’s external debt of about 56 percent of GDP i s moderate by regional standards,
but gross financing needs are ~izeable.~
However, the IMF precautionaryFlexible Credit Line
(FCL) arrangement of USD 20.6 billion approved in May should safeguard against downside
risks in financial markets. The ongoing economic slowdown and recent zloty depreciation
should translate into a lower current account deficit (about 4 percent of GDP in 2009).
Inflows of EU funds and FDI should finance a major part of the external gap. In current
circumstances, Poland’s floating exchange rate regime i s serving it well to help absorb the
external shock.

15.
After a remarkable improvement of labor market performance in recent years,
unemployment i s expected to rise in 2009 on the back of the economic slowdown. In
recent years, Poland recorded an unprecedented improvement of labor market conditions.
The Labor Force Survey (LFS) unemployment rate fell from over 20 percent in 2004 to about
7 percent in 2008. The data disaggregated by gender indicate that female unemployment rates
in Poland remain slightly higher than those for men, but also decreased considerably.
Unemployment i s expected to rise back to over 10 percent this year in tandem with the
economic slowdown.

16.
The decline in unemployment was associated with lower poverty. Relative
poverty levels6 have decreased (see Chart 1) and are now concentrated in rural areas and
among the long-term unemployed. Nonetheless, despite vibrant growth of real GDP and
domestic consumption, Poland still has a relatively high poverty rate compared to other
countries in the region, especially among children, although the 2004 reform to the family
benefit system has led to an improvement in the income status of families with children,
including single-parent families. Absolute poverty levels are considerably lower although
measurement depends on the choice of poverty line (see Box 1, Table 1).
Chart 1. At Risk of Poverty Rate in the EU8 (percent)

!JI?
g

&$

c

v

ii

Source: Eurostat.

About one-third of external debt i s short term. Foreign currency reserves of USD 64 billion (April 2009)
provide a cushion to absorb external pressures; covering about 95 percent o f short-term debt.
The EU poverty measure (“at risk of poverty”) i s defined as the share o f the population living in households
with income below 60 percent of the national median disposable income after transfers.

4

BOX 1. POVERTY I N POLAND SINCE EU ACCESSION

Household data available through 2007 show Poland’s substantial strides in lowering
poverty. Poverty - measured as the percentage o f population below the social assistance
income threshold - dropped from 19 percent in 2004 to 14.6 percent in 2007. The poverty
gap also narrowed, meaning that the incomes of the poor moved closer to those of the nonpoor. The main determinants of poverty in Poland include rural residence, low educational
attainment of a household head, unemployment o f a household member, and a large number
of children in the household.
Poorer households are generally well served by the social protection system. The
multiple elements of Poland’s social protection system (pensions, family benefits, and social
assistance taken as a whole) cover 76 percent of the population, and 95 percent of the poorest
20 percent. The system provides benefits to 98 percent of households in extreme poverty.
Reflecting the geography o f Poland’s poor areas, the system covers 81 percent of the rural
population (as compared to 73 percent o f the urban population).
The Government’s growing concern is for the newly vulnerable households in the wake
of slowing economic growth. The Government i s planning targeted regional interventions to
support the powiuts that are most affected by the drop in economic activity by both
improving the effectiveness of existing programs (employment and social assistance
programs) and, if necessary, by allocating additional resources and implementing
extraordinary programs.
Vulnerability to the crisis i s being mapped to target interventions. This initiative has
three components: first, the creation of a regional crisis vulnerability map to identify powiuts
that are at the highest risk of suffering from the current global economic crisis; second,
implementation of a monitoring system that will screen powiuts that are actually hit by the
crisis; and third, the creation of an agency with a mandate to support the worst affected
powiuts. The initiative will be ready by September 2009. The regions that are considered the
most vulnerable to the crisis are those with an export-oriented economy, rather than the poor,
lagging regions. The latter - rural, predominantly agricultural regions - are insulated from
the crisis, at least temporarily, and well covered by existing social protection programs.
Table 1. Poverty in Poland since EU Accession
Poverty rate

Percentage o f population living in households below

2004

2005

2006

2007

50% o f median expenditure

20

18

17.7

17.3

Social assistance threshold

19

18

15.1

14.6

Subsistence minimum

12

12

7.8

6.6

Poverty gap

Distance below poverty line

2004

2005

2006

2007

50% o f median expenditure

23

22

21

21

Social assistance threshold

24

23

21

21

22

22

19

19

Subsistence minimum
Source: HBS 2007

17.
The authorities have taken steps to preserve financial stability in the current
difficult external environment. I n reaction to the escalation of the global crisis in the fall of
2008, the NBP, the GovernmentParliament and the Financial Supervision Authority took

5

steps to maintain confidence and support the effective functioning o f the financial system. In
October, the NBP announced a “package of confidence” aimed at preserving trust and
liquidity in financial markets through expansion of its term liquidity management operations
and foreign exchange swap operations. The European Central Bank (ECB) agreed to provide
a EUR 10 billion rep0 facility. Further, the Parliament approved a bill raising the household
deposit insurance limit from euro 22,500 to euro 50,000. Legislation regulating state
guarantees for interbank deposits has been adopted by Parliament and i s currently awaiting
the President’s approval. The NBP also introduced other measures supporting bank liquidity
like early buy back o f T-bonds maturing in 2012 or extending the maturity o f rep0
operations. In late November, the NBP started reducing interest rates (for the first time since
March 2006), with a series of cuts bringing the rate down from 6 percent in November to
3.75 percent in May.
18.
Meanwhile, the Government has also moved to support the economy. In late
November, the Government announced a 7 percent of GDP “Plan for Stability and
Development” aimed at supporting the economy in 2009-2010, including a doubling of the
limit on state guarantees, support for lending to small- and medium-size enterprises,
acceleration of investments co-financed from EU structural funds, new investments in
renewable energy, already scheduled personal income tax cuts and value added tax (VAT)
simplification, and creation of a Reserve of Social Solidarity to support people vulnerable to
the projected economic slowdown (financed through higher luxury excise taxes). While some
of these measures were planned even before the crisis, and new direct spending programs are
only a smaller part of this package, it nevertheless constitutes an appropriate response to the
crisis in a constrained fiscal environment.

C. Medium-Term Economic and Fiscal Outlook
The global financial crisis has worsened Poland’s macroeconomic and fiscal
19.
outlook, although Poland i s faring better than other countries in the region. With fewer
resources and in a fast evolving economic environment, the Government faces the difficult
challenge of reconcilingthree objectives: ensuring fiscal consolidation over the medium term
as required under the EU Excessive Deficit Procedure; protecting priority programs for
economic and social development to enhance growth prospects; and mitigating the social
costs of the crisis. The room for fiscal maneuver i s constrained both by the need to preserve
public debt below levels that trigger corrective action according to the Constitution and the
Government’s aim to join the euro-zone in 2012 (discussed in more detail below).
Growth i s projected to recover only slowly in 2010 in tandem with the expected
20.
easing of the crisis and expected slow recovery in industrialized countries. Growth i s
likely to remain subdued through 2010, with most projections around 1 percent, before a
stronger recovery in 201 1. Inflation i s expected to remain stable at around the central
inflation target of 2.5 percent. Lower domestic absorption should lead to a significant
moderation o f imports and an improvement in the external current account deficit (around 4
percent of GDP in 2009-2010). Table 1 shows the recent macroeconomic forecasts for
Poland prepared by the Government and international organizations. Needless to say,
projections for next year are even more uncertain than for this year.

6

Table 2. Economic Developments and Prospects in Poland 2004-201 1
(change in percent unless otherwise indicated)
2004

CP December 2008
Real GDP (% change) EC Spring Forecast May
IMF W E 0 April 2009
WB May 2009
CP December 2008
Private consumption EC Spring Forecast May 2009
(% change)
IMF W E 0 April 2009
WB May 2009
CP December 2008
Gross fixed capital EC Spring Forecast May 2009
formation (% change) IMF W E 0 April 2009
CP December 2008
Consumer prices (% EC Spring Forecast May 2009
change)
IMF W E 0 April 2009
WB May 2009
Current Account
Deficit (% of GDP)

CP December 2008
EC Spring Forecast May 2009
IMF W E 0 April 2009
WB May 2009

2005

2006

3’6

62

5.3

2007
6.7

i:;

6.7

5.0

3,6

4.5
0.6
1.0
19

3.7
0.2
1.5
14

3.8

---

3.0

50

65
7.9
7.9

44
-6.2
-4.5

50
-0.8
2.5

86

14”

176
17.6
17.6
2.6
2.6
2.5
2.5

4.2
4.2
4.2
4.2

2.9
2.6
2.1
3.1

2.5
1.9
2.6
2.7

2.5

-4.7
-5.1
-4.7
-4.7

-5.1
-5.3
-5.5
-5.5

-4.2
-4.7
-4.5
-4.3

-3.6
-3.7
-3.9
-3.6

-2.9

-

2011
4.5

E::

2,2

-4,4

2010
4.0
0.8
1.3
1.0

5’0

6,4
6’5

2004
3.7
-1.4
-0.7
0.5

5.3
5.3
5.3
54

2,1

4,3

2008
5.1
4.8
4.8
4.8

---

44

---

--

--

2.5
-3.8

--

__

-4.1

Source: Poland’s Convergence Program (CP) Update December 2008; recent publications o f international
financial institutions; and World Bank staff.

2 1.
Against this background, the fiscal position i s likely to weaken further in 2009
and possibly 2010. The Government i s trying to adhere to fiscal targets for the state budget,
while financing infrastructure investment through extra-budgetary borrowing and allowing
automatic stabilizers to operate in the rest of the general Government (social security funds
and local Governments). In late January 2009, the Government revised downwards the 2009
real GDP growth forecast from 3.7 percent, as estimated in the December 2008 Convergence
Program, to 1.7 percent. To compensate for the expected shortfall in revenue, line ministries
were asked to prepare plans for reducing state budget expenditures by 0.8 percent of GDP.
Certain expenditure items, such as pension and disability payments, capitation grants to local
Governments for primary and secondary education, public sector wages, debt servicing, and
co-financing for the absorption of EU funds, were protected from these reductions. In
addition, the Government shifted transport infrastructure spending of 0.8 percent of GDP off
the state budget to the National Road Funde7With growth prospects further weakening, a
formal amendment o f the budget i s expected in June/July. This could include a combination
of additional expenditure rationalization and possibly an increase in the state budget deficit
target. The Government i s now projecting the general Government fiscal deficit to reach 4.6
percent of GDP in 2009.8

’ While this measure reduces the state budget deficit, it leaves the general Government deficit unchanged.
* This i s slightly higher than the IMF but lower than the EC which expects a deficit of 6.6 percent of GDP (but
this assumes to corrective action).

7

Table 3. Fiscal Developments and Prospects in Poland 2004-2011
(percent o f GDP unless-otherwise indicated)
Source
Fiscal balance

Structural balance

Primary balance

CP December 2008
EC Spring Forecast May 2009
G O ~Fiscal
.
Notification, April 2009
IMF FCL Arrangement, April 2009'
CP December 2008
EC Spring Forecast May 2009
Gov. Fiscal Notification, ADril 2009
IMF FCL Arrangement, April 2009'
CP December 2008
EC Spring Forecast May 2009
Gov. Fiscal Notification, April 2009
IMF FCL Arrangement, April 2009'

public debt

CP December 2008
EC Spring Forecast May 2009
Gov. Fiscal Notification, April 2009

Real GDP (% change)

CP December 2008
EC Spring Forecast May 2009
Gov. Fiscal Notification, April 2009
IMF FCL Arrangement, April 2009"

CP December 2008
EC Spring Forecast May 2009
Output gap
Gov. Fiscal Notification, April 2009
IMF FCL Arrangement, April 2009"
*) Based on IMF definition (including pension reform costs)

2004

2005

2006

-5.7

-4.3

-3.8

-

-3.9

-5.9

-

-4.1

--

2007

2008 F 2009 F 2010 F 2011 F
-2.7
-3.9
-3.9
-3.9

-2.5
-6.6
-4.6
-4.3

-2.3
-7.3

-3.9

-2.0
-1.9
-1.9
-2.0

-4.2

--

-3.2
-5.3

-2.6
-6.0

-2.0
-5.6

-1.8

-4.1

-2.4
-3.2

_-

I

-

--

--

-

-

-

-

-0.3
-1.7

0.1
-3.7

0.2
-4.3

I

-1.9
I

-__
-

I

0.5

-1.2

-0.3

-1.1

0.5
0.4

-

-1.3

-1.3

0.3

-1.7

-1.8

-1.5

--

45.9
47.1
47.1

45.8
53.6
51.0

45.5
59.7

44.8

47.7

44.9
44.9
44.9
6.7
6.6

3.7
-1.4

4.0
0.8

4.5

6,6

5.1
4.8
4,8

6.7

4.8

-0.7

1.3

--

1.1
3.4

1.2
3.5

0.1
-1.5

-0.4
-3.8

-0.4

-

__

-

45.7

47.1

5.3

3.6

6.2

__

__

--

0.6

0.1

1.7

---

-

__

-

__
__

__

-

-

-

I

-

-

-

I

-__

-

-_

-

--

Source: Poland's CP and EC Spring Forecast, May 2009.

22.
The 2010 budget will need to strike a careful balance between maintaining
reasonable fiscal discipline as required under the EU excessive deficit procedure and
necessary for euro adoption, and supporting the recovery. It i s too early to judge the
appropriate fiscal stance for next year, but it will be critical for the budget to be placed in a
strong, Medium-Term Expenditure Framework (MTEF) consistent with renewed fiscal
consolidation that targets an ambitious reduction in the structural fiscal deficit, at least
stabilizes public debt, and supports euro adoption. This commitment should be institutionally
strengthened by rapid passage of the amendment to the Public Finance Law aimed at
enhancing the MTEF,' consolidating budgetary units, strengthening precautionary debt rules,
and increasing performance-orientationin the budget. Given the recent lowering o f taxes and
the expenditure pressures arising from the need to protect or expand productive spending in
e.g. infrastructure and education and to strengthen social safety nets during the downturn,
medium-term fiscal consolidation will require ambitious expenditure reforms aimed at
rationalizing unproductive and inefficient spending programs, including in health and
remaining privileged pension arrangements.

23.

Analysis done by the IMF in the context of the F C L suggests that public debt i s
sustainable over the medium term even in the presence o f moderate further shocks. Fiscal
rules on public debt - embedded in the Polish Public Finance Law prompt corrective action
when public debt reaches 50 and 55 percent of GDP and there i s the 60 percent of GDP cap
imposed by the Constitution.

-

Further efforts will be needed going forward to establish a truly strong MTEF.

8

--

Chart 2. Public Debt Sustainability: (public debt in percent of GDP)
Infeest Rate Shock (in gerwaat)

Baseline and h1~.4orical
suenarius

70

e25

=t- %/

ea
7
--*

_._.-*-

Historical

45
50

13
8

2003

2005

2007

?DM

SbkDdr

3
2013

MI1

4 0
35

3hl
2003

/

,

,

,

,

58

Fl
HistoricaP:

LXCS

2007

200'61

2011

2013

%nary B a l m Shack and No Policy Change Scenao
[mstmr pnrnary ba!anfie)

70

85

do

-

45

-

4a

-

55

50

35-

Gmh
shock

65

.+.#

3aselne

Htstc+ical:

61

1

t

53

4.2

30

Rea! Deprec abm and Cuntingenr
LJb&bies Sfaockrs 31

2OOQ

2011

2013

Swrces: Interntonal Monetary Fwnd: Pdish aulhanties: and IMF staff edrrnates.
I!shadecl amas represent d u a l data Individual shccks we pemwnmt! mehat! standard deviation shocks. F~uresin the
buxw represen! m r a p pmfectims for &e respecvanabm m the &adme: and scendnc being prewnted. Ten-year
histot;cai awn* for ¶he vanable is JLSO shewn.
2t Pmanefln l J 4 standard dewatton shQCJL5applied to rear interm rate. grow& rare. and pnmary balance.
31 One-time
deppreciahmn d 30 percent ma 10 percent of GDP shock r0 mntngent lidrk9es occur in 2M)Q. wm real
depreclaton defined a5 nminal depreaatrosa (meawrrJ by percentage fail in &Ita value of luc-d currency) mrm5 domesic
infk&Ul I bJS& rJn
d&JlOrJ

Source: IMF report for the Flexible Credit Line arrangement.

24.
Poland's economic and fiscal outlook remains subject to unusually large
uncertainty in view of the unclear prospects for global economic recovery. While the
forceful policy responses in many countries have contained the risks o f a systemic financial
meltdown, there are reasons to remain concerned about the potential impact on activity o f the
financial crisis. The process o f deleveraging could be more protracted than has been factored
9

into the macroeconomic projections for emerging markets. Another risk relates to the
growing risks of deflationary conditions in advanced economies. Maintaining or accelerating
the reform momentum will be key to both ensuring a rapid return to high growth and further
enhancing the growth potential of the economy over the medium term.
BOX 2. SUPPORTING H I G H AND SUSTAINABLE ECONOMICGROWTH
I N POLAND OVER THE MEDIUM
TERM
Although recent economic performance has been impressive, Poland still faces important growth constraints
which may slow down the real convergence process over the medium-long term. In 2007, Poland’s GDP per capita at
purchasing power parity amounted to 53.6 percent o f the average for the EU-27. A continued rapid reduction o f the
income gap requires high and sustainable growth based on sustained productivity increases and higher employment and
investment rates.
There i s broad consensus (including among the World Bank, the EC, the International Monetary Fund (IMF),
and the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD)) that policy interventions aimed at
promoting high and sustainable growth should be focused on the following three broad areas:
(a) Public finance and administrative reform. Public finance and administrative reforms aimed at continued Jiscal
consolidation, lowering of the tax burden, re-orientation of spending towards more productive areas, improved public
finance management, and enhanced public administration. Further fiscal consolidation i s needed to improve
macroeconomic stability and provide room for countercyclical fiscal policy. A lower tax burden and simpler tax system
i s needed to encourage formal private sector activity. A re-orientation and restructuring of spending i s needed to provide
fiscal space for increased productive spending, notably on infrastructure, and improved outcomes o f key public services
(including health and education). Public administration reforms are needed to support more efficient management and
service delivery, including better policy coordination. This should include reforming and modernizing Poland’s courts
(which are a source of major delay for business transactions) and enhancing the capacity and results-orientation o f the
civil service and the public administration at all levels of Government.

(b) Structural reforms. Promoting private sector development through an improved investment climate, higher product
market jlexibilify, and restructuring of key sectors. Structural reforms are needed to improve the general investment
climate and support the restructuring o f low-productivity sectors. Poland ranks low on Doing Business Indicators even
among its regional peers, and further deregulation i s needed. This should include a simplification of Poland’s onerous
legal, tax and administrative environment for entrepreneurship and business development. Licensing requirements and
business startup regulations are particularly burdensome. In addition, the Government could facilitate the continued shift
away from old industrial and low-productivity sectors to new job-rich, high-productivity sectors. This would include
restructuring sectors such as coal or energy generation and removing incentives for people to remain in low-productivity
agriculture while accelerating the privatization process (including in what are considered strategic sectors). The
Government could also further support the high productivity sectors by promoting private sector research and
development.
(C) Labor supply mobilization. Increasing labor force participation and employment including tofurther reduce poverfy
and encourage social inclusion. Labor supply mobilization i s needed to raise low employment rates, not least among the
older cohorts and women, and improve the skills o f the workforce. This requires reform o f the system o f social
protection and labor taxation in order to enhance incentives to work along with development of more flexible forms of
employment, improved active labor market programs targeted at disadvantaged worker groups and promotion o f lifelong learning. Limiting the number o f professions entitled to early retirement would be in line with the principles of the
pension reform introduced in 1999 and in support o f increased labor force participation. Continued reforms in the
education system are also needed to improve labor market relevance and skills.

111. COUNTRY
DEVELOPMENT
PROGRAM
A. Overarching Obiectives
25.
Rapid real convergence to average EU living standards remains the overarching
policy objective and the Government sees joining the euro-zone as soon as possible as a
central strategy in this regard. Euro adoption i s one of the key elements and obligations o f
all the N M S , and countries that do not satisfy the Maastricht criteria in this regard are
required to prepare Convergence Programs that show how and when these criteria will be
met. The Government sees rapid euro adoption as key to maximizing the gains from
European integration and minimizing the risks associated with rapid capital flows and

10

potential currency mismatches. I t also provides an important anchor for the conduct of fiscal
policy and thus critical element in preserving market confidence during the ongoing crisis.
Further, fiscal discipline allows for an easier monetary policy. Euro adoption requires
amendment of the Constitution, which in turn would require qualified majority support in
Parliament.

26.
I n September 2008, the Government announced 2012 as the target year for euro
adoption, but acknowledges that there may be a short delay as a result of the crisis.
Earlier plans to enter the ERM2 in mid-2009 have been abandoned on the background o f
increased foreign exchange market volatility, a worse than expected fiscal outturn in 2008,
and difficulties gathering the required support in Parliament for changing the Constitution.
The Government now hopes that these problems will be overcome later in the year. While it
i s possible to enter the ERM2 prior to changing the Constitution, this would add an
undesirable element of uncertainty to the process. Euro adoption in 2012 would require that
the general Government fiscal deficit i s reduced to below 3 percent of GDP in 2010, which
now looks very difficult.
27.
The Government i s also seeking to accelerate structural reforms. Economic
policy objectives in the medium-term were identified by the Government in the March 2008
CP and confirmed in the December 2008 Update of the program. These objectives are: (i)
reduction o f the tax burden; (ii) increase of growth-enhancing expenditure (infrastructure,
science, education, and research and development (R&D)), shifting social spending towards
programs supporting growth of economic activity, and changes in health and pensions aimed
at enhancing efficiency; (iii) increase of labor activity; (iv) economic liberalization
(elimination of obstacles to doing business, administration reform, and better functioning of
judiciary); and (v) acceleration of privatization. These objectives are fully consistent with the
key impediments to growth identified in Box 2 above. In addition to these objectives, the
National Development Strategy 2007- 13 includes regional and rural development and
increased territorial cohesion.
28.
The main strategy for offsetting the fiscal costs of tax and pension/labor market
reforms i s based on general expenditure control, with only small nominal increases in
budgetary allocations across line ministries, along with increases in indirect taxes
(notably excises on alcohol, tobacco, and cars). There i s significant scope for rationalization
of administrative spending in line ministries, without adversely affecting core and mandated
spending programs, but a more strategic restructuring of public expenditures to enhance the
quality o f public finances i s needed.
B. Government Priorities

29.
As mentioned above, the priorities of the Government are to improve the
structure of public finances, increase employment, and promote private sector
development. The key plans in the various areas include:
Public sector reform
Reducing the tux burden: overall, changes are oriented towards shifting the tax
burden from direct to indirect taxes. In 2009, the Personal Income Tax i s being
simplified and reduced, along with other changes to support taxpayers working
abroad, while Corporate Income Tax i s being be lowered for producers o f biocomponents. In indirect taxes, simplified procedures are being introduced in VAT,
while excise duties on tobacco products are being hiked in line with EU requirements
and in order to finance the recently created Reserve o f Social Solidarity.

0

11

e

Increase in and greater eflciency of growth-enhancing expenditure: the Government
i s planning significant investments in transport, particularly in road construction and

rehabilitation to offset the projected slowdown in private investment. A broader
program o f infrastructure investment will support the Euro 2012 Soccer
Championship to be hosted by Poland and Ukraine. Associated with this program,
Poland will streamline and enhance its regulatory and legal framework as well public
procurement practices. The Government i s also planning a shift towards a low-carbon
economy both in order to comply with international and EU long-term policies on
climate change mitigation and to preserve energy security. Opportunities for
emissions reduction or carbon sequestration in agriculture, transport or forestry and to
tap new climate-relatedsources of financing will be explored.
Reforms in education and health aim to increase efficiency and effectiveness: in

education, curriculum reforms in upper secondary will integrate general and
vocational education and make teaching more relevant for the job market. Highquality early education, which has a widely recognized and well-documented impact
on education outcomes, will be expanded as will pre-school education through
increased flexibility for non-publicly managed institutions. Reforms in health aim to
improve resource mobilization and increase efficiency in resource allocation with
improved service delivery. The reforms include rationalization and corporatizationof
public hospitals and reform to the single health insurance system to introduce
competition among public and private insurers. Subsequent phases would include
developing a risk-equalization mechanism between insurers, establishing an
independent regulatory authority, and creating independent insurance supervisory
bodies with oversight of the insurance and provider market. The Government i s also
analyzing managed-care models.
Public finance management. Poland has made substantial progress in the last three
years in performance budgeting. An indicative performance budget-including a

programmatic breakdown of expenditures, program objectives, and key performance
indicators-is
now presented to the Parliament for information alongside the
traditional annual budget. Further improvements are underway in public financial
management to support fiscal consolidation and enhancing the quality of public
finances: a new Law on Public Finance i s expected in late 2009 and i s associated with
organizational changes to make the budget more transparent and performanceoriented while strengthening the medium-term orientation of the budget through
introduction of a multi-year State financial plan. The Law would also tighten
corrective measures triggered by increases in public debt, and expenditure control
would be strengthened through new regulations on internal control and external audit.
Private sector development
e Improving the business climate: the tax burden on labor i s being reduced (see above)
and onerous legal, tax and administrative obstacles for entrepreneurship are being
reviewed and streamlined. Reform proposals include amendments to the laws on the
freedom of economic activity and accounting. Work i s underway on a package of
laws aimed at facilitating the start-up and closure of a business, reducing red tape,
simplifying licensing and inspection procedures, and enhancing tax administration.
Building an electronic administration i s also an important part of the planned
changes.

12

0

Privatization: the Government aims to sell state shares in more than 700 enterprises

over the coming three years, although the program may move more slowly than
envisaged given current market conditions. The Government i s also keen to explore
options for Public Private Partnerships (PPPs) to help finance the large infrastructure
investment program.
Labor market
0
Increase in labor mobility: the Government plans to reduce inactivity incentives
created by social transfers and associated taxes. The tax wedge on labor has already
been substantially reduced, while a new program, known as “Intergenerational
Solidarity - 50+” includes incentives to stimulate labor force participation o f older
workers through a tightening o f early retirement provisions and “bridge pensions”. A
new law to regulate the payment o f second-pillar pensions was proposed along with a
law on individual pension accounts (third pillar) that would double the annual limit o f
savings for retirement exempted from capital gain taxation. Active programs include
enhancing workforce skills, developing life-long learning, reforming labor market
intermediation services, more effective active labor market programs, supporting
post-natal re-entry into the labor force and social campaigns to promote longer
working lives.

Iv. WORLD BANKPROGRAM
A. Imdementation o f 2005 CPS and Lessons Learned
30.
The CPS did not adequately differentiate the Bank’s potential role from that of
other development partners. Following EU accession, a range o f other financing sources
were available to the Polish authorities, including grants from the EU and loans from
regional institutions and development banks. The CPS for Poland did not situate the Bank’s
role and comparative advantage clearly within this context, and as a result, the Bank’s
potential contribution to Poland’s development goals was not clear.
31.
The flexibility inherent in the CPS design was appropriate but did not facilitate
a focused or strategic dialogue. The CPS was designed as a menu o f options for the Polish
Government. This flexibility was appropriate for a M I C that had just gone through a major
transition by joining the EU and for which client interest in a relationship with the Bank was
uncertain. However, the menu o f options left the dialogue with the Government o f Poland
somewhat open and unfocussed, which hindered a strategic dialogue or implementation o f a
coherent program. While the CPS aimed to move the Poland program beyond traditional
Investment Loans by introducing Sector Wide Approach (SWAPS), it did not pave the way
for a new type o f relationship with a M I C that was based on the Bank’s knowledge services.
32.
Implementation of the CPS was also hindered by successive changes in
counterparts. The CPS period was marked by several changes o f Government. As a result,
the dialogue and the program lacked an anchor at the heart o f Government. There was little
in the CPS to guide the relationship through changes in commitment or interest from the
authorities.
33.

The following lessons may be drawn:
0

Define the Bank’s role and value added:

13

o Establish clearly the Bank’s role and value-added vis-&-vis other external

partners and funding sources such as the EU, European Investment Bank
(EIB), EBRD and OECD;
o Practice selectivity in Bank involvement in terms o f areas of involvement and
modalities of support, focusing on the knowledge agenda;
o Test Bank involvement against the criteria defined as areas of Bank valueadded, strategic relevance and impact.
0

0

34.

Establish a flexible framework o f activities that can be scaled up or down
according to client interest:
o Establish a strategic and cohesive program o f Bank activities that i s not
wholly dependent upon one counterpart or one instrument;
o Maintain a core set of Economic and Sector Work (ESW) and diagnostic
products as a basis for scaling up or developing new activities;
o Be prepared to scale down or disengage if the Bank’s involvement i s
perceived to lack strategic focus or impact and switch gradually to a
knowledge-based partnership through reimbursement agreements.
Manage political transitions:
o Seek continuity of dialogue by developing relations at technical levels of the
civil service;
o Maintain contacts across the political spectrum and with strategic nonGovernment partners and sub-national entities;
o To the extent possible, align CPS and programming cycles around electoral
cycles.
These lessons have been incorporated into the design of this CPS:

o Complementarity and Value-Added: The Bank’s value-added has been explicitly
defined in this CPS (see below) and these definitions are used as criteria to test and
select areas of Bank engagement. For example, while EIB tends to provide larger,
faster funds for infrastructure construction, the Bank will focus on a complementary
role with smaller investments in institutional capacity, preparatory work, regulatory
and safety issues. Another example would be focusing the Bank on implementationo f
standards and goals that are defined by the European Commission (EC).
o Flexibility: The last CPS started with an open menu of options, which made it
difficult to anchor the program. This CPS program i s well-defined in the near term
and left more flexible in the outer years. In the first year of the CPS, the program i s
anchored with a DPL series and a few innovative operations supporting economic
activity during the crisis and the longer-term development agenda. This i s
underpinned by core analytical work, such as a Public Expenditure Review (PER) and
a Climate Change Economic Memorandum. In the outer years of the CPS, the
program will develop in some of the areas outlined as Strategic Pillars of
Collaboration (see below) and the mid-term CPS Progress Report will further define
the particular areas and operations proposed. The lending program could be scaled
down if the crisis abates more rapidly than anticipated and demand for borrowing
declines while the non-lending program could be scaled up if there i s client interest
and willingness to pay. This i s described in the Proposed Program section (see
below).

14

o Managingpolitical transitions: While not necessarily clear in the CPS document, the

Poland team’s engagement strategy reflects these lessons - communications take
place with all levels of Government and are inclusive of stakeholders from all
political parties and spectrum of society (see Consultations section below). Further,
close relations have been established with staff at the Ministry of Finance, which i s
acting as the focal point for relations with the Bank and helps coordinate activities
with line ministries.

B. External Partners and Key Areas o f World Bank Value-Added

35.
The EU and EU-related institutions have become Poland’s main external
partners. The EU has committed 67 billion euro in grants to Poland over the period 2007-13,
equivalent to about 2.5 percent of Poland’s GDP per year, to support income convergence of
the country and its regions with the wealthier parts of Europe. This support i s focused on
development of a knowledge economy and infrastructure (see Box 3 below). The EIB i s also
playing an important role in providing required co-financing for the EU structural and
cohesion funds through loans on attractive terms, and his stepped up its lending substantially
in recent years with further increases envisaged in response to the ongoing global financial
and economic crisis. The EIB has traditionally focused on infrastructure (especially
transport) projects, but has become more involved in other sectors of the economy as well as
sub-national lending. The EIB intends to step up its support for energy efficiency projects as
part of the EU climate change agenda. Meanwhile, the EBRD has largely phased out of
Poland and the Central Europe region, although this i s changing again in response to the
crisis.
36.
I n the medium term, the International Finance Corporation (IFC) will continue
its current selective strategy to support the entry of Polish companies into less
developed markets of the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) and Southern
Europe. In some cases, Poland may provide an opportunity to invest in innovative structures
or products. IFC will also explore opportunities in climate change related projects. In the
financial sector, IFC i s supporting a specialized microfinance bank in order to improve
access to credit by micro enterprises and SMEs and stimulate their expansion and new job
creation. Strengthening micro enterprises and SMEs will also facilitate greater
competitiveness of the economy. In addition, as part of the Joint IF1 Action Plan for Central
and Eastern Europe launched in February 2009 with the EBRD and the EIB, the IFC and
MIGA are poised to play a more active role in supporting Poland’s banking sector and
lending to the real economy.
37.
The Bank can still add significant value to Poland’s development agenda in a
number of areas within the domain of the Bank’s broader institutional and regional
strategic priorities and as a complement to EU programs. The Bank can play an
important role in helping to address global and regional public goods and in exchanging
knowledge on global development lessons. It can also complement the EU’s Lisbon Agenda
(LA) in support of growth and competitiveness and public sector reform, and it can be a key
partner on social sector reform-an
area largely excluded from the EU Acquis
Communautaire and EU-support programs-and in the discussion of regional development
policy, all drawing on its long-standing engagement in Poland in these areas and its global
knowledge. Both the Government and the EU thus see a continued important role for the
Bank to play. At the same time, a continued engagement with Poland i s important for the
Bank in that the knowledge acquired and lessons learned are likely to be of value for other,
less-advanced clients in the region and beyond.

15

Box 3. EXTERNALPARTNERS
The EU’s structural funds
For the 2007-13 period, Poland has
been allocated approximately EUR
67.3 billion: EUR 66.6 billion under
the Convergence objective and EUR
73 1 million under the European
T e k o r i a l Cooperation objective. To
complement E U investments, Poland’s
contribution should amount to EUR
18.3 billion, bringing the total amount
available for Cohesion policy
activities in Poland to some EUR 85.6
billion over the seven-year period.

Operational Program

allocation

16 Regional OPs:

16.556

I OP Development o f Eastern Poland I

2,274

OP Infrastructure & Environment

27,914

OP Innovative Economy
OP Technical Assistance

8,255

OP Human Caoital

9.707

I Performance reserve
European Territorial Cooperation
Objective

I

1,331

I

I

73 1

67,284

TOTAL

I Source: EuroDean Commission, staff calculations

I

The European Investment Bank
The EIB operations in Poland cover a variety o f economic sectors ranging from basic infrastructure,
manufacturing and services including: support to small- and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) through local
financial institutions to education and promotion o f a knowledge-based economy. The EIB’s projects have
grown from small amounts to a total o f more than EUR 18 billion at the end of 2008, of which more than EUR
10 billion has been granted after Polandjoined the EU.

Figure 1. EIB Lending to Poland in 1990-2008”
Breakdown by sector EUR 18.3 bln

Breakdown by year (EUR bln)

Urban inlrastfucture

[

3.0

,-Water, sewage
25
20

15
10
05

Health, education

Source: EIB, staff calculations
Notes: 2008 does not include projects that were signed in 2008, but not disbursed before Dec. 3182008

16

The European Bank for Reconstruction and Development
The European Bank for
Reconstruction and Development
(EBRD) has been present in Poland
since 1992. By the end o f 2007, EBRD
had contributed EUR 3.3 billion to
more than 190 projects o f a total value
exceeding EUR 13 billion. EBRD
assisted Poland in its economic
transition and the restructuring o f
enterprises in different sectors from
agribusiness to steel. After Poland
joined the EU, EBRD has focused its
activities around the enterprise and
financial sector, as well as
infrastructure and environment, but
new commitments have declined
substantially.

Figure 2. EBRD Commitments by year
(EUR mln)

Source: EBRD

The International Monetary Fund
In the context of the ongoing financial and economic crisis, the Fund plays an important role in Poland.
In addition to the regular Article I V consultations, the FCL arrangement in the amount o f SDR 13.69 billion
(about USD20.6 billion and 1000 percent of quota) approved by the I M F Board in early May 2009 i s central to
the Fund involvement in Poland. The FCL i s treated as a precautionary arrangement. Moreover, the Fund
provides just-in-time technical assistance in the area of Public Finance Management focused on introduction o f
the Medium-Term Expenditure Framework (MTEF).

The Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development
The OECD does regular macroeconomic monitoring and forecasting and occasional analytical work on
structural reforms (including education) and other issues such as regional development, climate change. I t also
conducts regular bi-annual country reports for Poland covering important issues of structural agenda.

C. Strategic Pillars of Collaboration

38.
The Bank’s envisaged strategic partnership with Poland would be based on four
pillars: (i) Social and Spatial Inclusion; (ii)Public Sector Reform; (iii)Growth and
Competitiveness; and (iv) Regional and Global Public Goods. Key policy areas identified
within these broader themes would include social sector reform, regional development,
public finance and financial management reform, transport infrastructure development,
deregulation and the enabling environment for doing business, climate change (notably
focused on the energy sector), and financial sector stability. I n the short term, particular
attention would be given to supporting adequate social safety nets during the economic
downturn, interventions aimed at supporting private sector credit growth and SME access to
finance, and infrastructure investments, while not losing sight o f the reforms needed to
support strong and high quality growth over the medium-long term. While this i s still a fairly
broad agenda, these are all critical areas of the development agenda where the Bank can add
important value, and it i s necessary to preserve some flexibility in the program, especially
beyond the first year, as Government priorities for collaboration with the Bank evolve.
Lending and strategic AAA would be limited to a narrower subset of core areas, while in
other areas it i s envisaged that collaboration would rely increasingly on fee-for-service.

17

Pillar 1: Social and Spatial Inclusion
Social Sectors Reform

39.
Pursuing the EU Lisbon Agenda of making Poland a competitive, knowledgebased economy with more and better jobs and greater social cohesion requires reforms
in the social sectors in order to improve the utilization of labor resources, including raising
labor participation rates among women, and to increase the productivity of the workforce.
This involves increasing the employment-to-population ratio (which at 57 percent i s well
below the Lisbon target of 70 percent), enhancing social inclusion (including the reduction in
the incidence o f long-term unemployment), improving the quality of and access to education
and promoting the responsiveness of the education system to the fast changing labor market
needs, and enhancing labor productivity through better health services.
0

Labor Market and Social Protection. The employment rate i s low in Poland mainly
due to very low labor force participation of older workers (which at 29 percent i s well
below the Lisbon target of 50 percent) and women. This reflects disincentives created
by the social security system. Recent reforms to the pension system," which aimed at

substantially reducing early retirement options, are likely to result in more favorable
employment outcomes among older workers. However, more needs to be done,
including lower subsidization of the farmers' social security system (KRUS), limiting
access to disability pensions, developing the system of adult education to equip older
workers with the required skills, and promoting flexible forms o f employment.
Moreover, in order to encourage employers to hire older workers, the generous
employment protection provisions granted to this worker group need to be revised.
Reaching the full employment target also requires improving labor market
adaptability so as to reduce the effects of adverse demand shocks on employment and
unemployment. This entails, among other things, the need for greater working time
and wage flexibility. Furthermore, addressing labor market exclusion - which
manifests itself in the relatively high incidence of long-term unemployment- requires
implementing activation policies and improving the human capital of the long-term
unemployed. The cost-effectiveness and targeting of existing active labor market
programs needs to improved, as does the coordination between employment and
social welfare offices. Finally, women face additional labor constraints due to the role
they perform as primary care providers to children and elderly.
Education reform. In education, the main challenge continues to be the relevance o f

skills for the labor market. In this regard, reforms in secondary education have been
successful in expanding and improving general secondary instruction while delaying
vocational schooling. Continuing and deepening these reforms i s important.
Moreover, to increase the availability o f financial resources for quality investments in
primary and secondary education, Poland will need to increase the flexibility of
teacher management and deployment to respond to the rapid demographic changes
that are reducing the size o f student cohorts. At the same time, it i s critical to revise
the financing mechanisms in tertiary education to make the system more equitable
and fiscally sustainable. Furthermore, Poland would be well advised to phase in
mandatory schooling from age six and to expand coverage and improve efficiency of
loUnlike many EU countries, Poland's pension system appears to be generally sustainable in the long run. First
pillar deficits are expected to fall over time, and second pillar pensions have earned healthy rates o f return since
the inception of the multipillar system in 1999. The projections of system balances have to be verified, though,
and there are concerns about the adequacy of future pensions.

18

preschool education. At the,other end of the education cycle, a platform for life-long
learning and a strategy for adult training should be developed.
0

Health sector reform. The key challenges of health sector reforms in Poland are to

achieve higher efficiency in resource allocation along with improved service delivery.
The health system i s well placed to protect the vulnerable during the economic
downturn as well as to protect critical public health programs. The efficiency agenda
includes both debt management and provider payment reform. With important
exceptions, hospitals have consistently accumulated public debts (failure to pay social
security and other taxes) and commercial debts (mainly to suppliers). The current
Government i s aiming to solve this problem permanently through an initiative to
corporatize hospitals under commercial law, but this will be done initially using a
voluntary approach. Close monitoring will be required for hospitals that are unlikely
to be corporatized but for which debt accumulation has been a persistent problem, as
well as for hospitals affiliated with universities. In addition, Poland has implemented
DRGs (Diagnosis Related Groups) as a cost accounting mechanism in all facilities in
2009. Further, the corporatization of hospitals will allow the Ministry of Health
(MOH) and NHF to improve the regulatory framework under which hospitals and
clinics operate. Other reform areas, including introduction o f a multiple competitive
private insurance system and expansion of long-term care services, are seen as more
medium-term challenges.

40.
The Bank i s uniquely positioned to assist Poland in building capacity to address
the challenges posed by the Lisbon Agenda and in developing the implementation
strategy The Lisbon Agenda identified four priority areas: investing in people and
modernizing labor markets, unlocking the business potential, investing in knowledge and
innovation, and energy and climate change. These priorities correspond closely to the Bank’s
strategic development pillars, which makes the Bank and the EU natural partners. This i s
particularly the case given that the Lisbon Agenda, despite great efforts to re-focus it in terms
of goals and policy areas, provides limited practical guidance on what to do and, more
importantly, how to do it. Such capacity i s critical since sizable amounts of EU structural and
cohesion funds are linked to the implementation of reforms related to the Lisbon strategy
(some 60 percent of cohesion policy funds for EUlO will be targeted for activities and
investments intended to meet Lisbon targets).
41.
I n recent years, the Bank has provided extensive support to the Government on
social sector reforms through investment lending, development policy lending, and AAA.
The 2008 DPL-1 contained a labor market component that aimed at improving labor supply
incentives and increasing the labor force participation rate, especially among older workers.
In addition, Bank staff contributed to a government policy paper on priorities for labor
market reforms, which provided the analytical underpinnings for the DPL-I , In education,
the Bank has engaged in policy dialogue through a Technical Cooperation program with the
Ministry of National Education and the Ministry of Science and Higher Education. In both
cases, the program i s focused on providing analytical and policy support for designing and
implementing key reforms in the education sector. One example i s the Bank’s participation in
a workshop on higher education reform and World Class Universities (March 2009). In the
health sector, the Bank supported the MOH during 2005/06 in preparing a “business plan” to
map out a strategy for improving the efficiency and effectiveness o f public expenditures on
health care, enhancing the quality of health services, and increasing the regulatory, planning
and policy-making capacity o f the MOH. In addition, the National Health Insurance Fund
(NFZ) was assisted in conducting a needs assessment to strengthen the health management
information system and build analytical capacity. The Government also actively participated

19

in Bank-organized workshops on private-public collaboration in health (Slovenia, December
2006) and on pharmaceutical governance (Hungary, February 2007).

Looking ahead, the Government i s interested in continued Bank support for
42.
social sector reforms, including employment promotion and pensions, social assistance,
education, and health .care. This support would be provided through the ongoing policy
lending program DPL2 has a strong focus on social sectors aimed at fiscal consolidation,
protecting priority programs and mitigating the social cost o f the crisis - and AAA, both
ESW (including the ongoing PER, which underpins the DPL) and technical cooperation. I n
labor markets and social protection, the Government may be interested in technical
cooperation with the Bank on: (a) improving functions and coordination between
employment and social welfare offices; (b) improving the targeting and cost-effectiveness o f
active labor market programs; (c) designing modern activation policies; (d) strengthening the
capacity o f the Ministry o f Labor to monitor and evaluate the net impact o f labor market
programs; (e) modeling and policy assistance for the agricultural pension system; (f) review
o f social assistance legislation and implementation; and (g) review and sharing o f
international best-practice in integration o f various types o f social benefits and informationsharing across benefit types. During the crisis, priority would be given to supporting active
labor market programs and strengthening the system o f unemployment insurance. I n
designing Bank assistance in these areas, equal gender opportunity policies would be taken
into account and mainstreamed into the planned operations. In education, the ongoing
program o f technical cooperation would be continued with the aim o f improving Poland’s
student assessment systems and outcomes, as well as creating world-class universities and
centers o f innovation that enhance Poland’s competitiveness. A similar program would be
developed in health, focusing on long-term care, health insurance competition and associated
regulatory agencies and supervisory bodies as well as the different types o f non-public
insurers and risk-equalization mechanisms, hospital reform (including PPPs and
corporatization, hospital debt management, and approaches to increase financial and
management autonomy).

-

Regional Development

43.
Since regional development and cohesion policies are the pillars around which
the EU financial support i s provided, the effectiveness of this policy framework and
capacity of Polish institutions involved in this process are key pre-conditions for
successful implementation of regional development programs in Poland. The Ministry o f
Regional Development i s currently in the process o f updating the National Development
Strategy for 2007-15. The new strategy will provide a legal framework for the government
policy towards regions with a focus on the mechanism o f cooperation and coordination
between sub-national entities. With this in mind, the three main goals for the regional policy
o f the Government are: increased competitiveness o f regions, use o f their internal capacity,
and provision o f equal opportunities. Several international and bilateral partners support the
Ministry to achieve these objectives.
44.
The Bank has supported the regional development agenda through various
analytical and advisory activities and indirectly through some of its projects. The
analytical work on regional development in Poland includes “Poland - Directions in
Regional Policy” (2004 and 2006 Update) and to some degree the Living Standards
Assessment (2004) which also looked at regional disparities. Also, in February 2009, the
Bank co-hosted a seminar on the lessons for Poland from the 2009 World Development
Report (WDR) on economic geography. Further, some o f the objectives o f the Rural
Development Project (closed 2005) as well as the on-going Post-Accession Rural Support
20

Project such as increasing social inclusion in underdeveloped municipalities and enhancing
the institutional capacity of local government have an indirect regional development focus.

45.
The Bank can continue to add value to the Polish authorities in their current
medium-term strategic assessment o f regional development objectives and programs
for 2009-13 and beyond. Based on the Bank’s global perspective as reflected in the 2009
WDR and its knowledge of the specific conditions in Poland, further analytical and advisory
support could be provided through focused studies on particular issues, seminars or
workshops, and technical assistance in the following areas: (i)analysis o f challenges to
economic integration across regions and with neighboring countries using the WDR
framework; (ii)assessing patterns of economic density, economic distance and divisions and
implications for range a of policies going beyond existing regional development program
approaches (e.g., by addressing issues of labor qualifications, land market distortions,
business climate-Le.,
spatially blind institutions); (iii) fostering and/or reinforcing
opportunities for inter- and intra-regional market linkages through urban agglomerations, in
part by means of spatially connective infrastructure; (iv) maximizingthe allocative efficiency
and effectiveness of different components implemented within Regional Operational
Programs, including the support to lagging regions; (v) introducing methodology for resultsfocused monitoring and evaluation of EU and Government supported priorities related to
regional, spatial, and territorial development. I t i s envisaged that future Bank services in this
area would largely be provided on a fee-for-service basis. There may also be interest in subnational lending to support lagging regions/municipalities or emerging growth poles (see
transport infrastructure section below).
Pillar 2: Public Sector Reform

46.
The public sector reform agenda remains one of the most challenging in Poland.
In the area ofpublicfinance management, the top priority of the Government’s medium-term
strategy i s to meet the conditions necessary for euro adoption in a sustainable manner.
Therefore, the most important challenge for fiscal policy in the medium-term i s to sustain
fiscal consolidation and continue to enhance the “quality” of public finances. The latter
would not only contribute to meeting the obligations under the Stability and Growth Pact but
also to better fulfilling citizens’ demands for improved quality of public service while
promoting growth and competitiveness. Improving public service delivery for citizens and
businesses alike also requires strengthening of public administration and governance.“ This
includes improved policy coordination, further reforms in the civil service and judicial
system, and good governance across the entire public sector.’*
47.
The Bank has been actively engaged over the years in helping Poland improve its
public sector and this i s widely seen as a key area where the Bank can continue to add
important value. In the area of public finance management, the Bank has done extensive
AAA, both in the form of regional and national ESW and targeted Technical Assistance, and
most recently also provided support through the on-going policy lending program (Public
Finance Management, Employment, and Private Sector Development Programmatic Policy

I’ See for example the Bank’s recent study on Public Administration Reform in the NMS: “Administrative
Capacity in the New Member States: The Limits of Innovation?” World Bank (2006).
I2

The major areas vulnerable to corruption include construction and spatial planning, public procurement, and
sub-national Government.

21

Loan).I3 In the area ofpublic administration reform and governance, the dialogue was quite
intense at the turn o f the decade but has since faded.I4

48.
Looking ahead, Bank support would target (i) analysis and capacity building
aimed at improving the quality of public finances; (ii) strengthening public finance
management practices and institutions, including performance-based budgeting, public
investment planning, and the medium-term fiscal framework; and (iii) efforts to
enhance public administration and governance. Bank support would not be restricted to
the central government level but would increasingly involve also sub-national governments
that are responsible for a large share of public services delivery and recipients of large
amounts of EU cohesion funds. Bank support would be provided through both the ongoing
DPL program and AAA, including on a fee-for-service basis.

49.
Cooperation is already under way and will be further developed in a number o f
different areas at national and sub-national levels. At the central government level, the
Bank i s updating its PER, focusing on both legal and institutional reforms to further
strengthen the quality o f public finances over the medium term and measures to address the
more immediate challenges of ensuring an adequate social safety net during the economic
downturn within the tight fiscal constraints. This PER i s part of the analytical underpinning
for the on-going policy-based lending program. The Bank i s also continuing to support the
development of Performance-Based Budgeting and MTEF through technical cooperation.
This could also include support for upgrading and integrating financial information systems.
Further, the Ministry of Justice may be interested in renewing cooperation on legal reform
issues, including the functioning of courts and case load management, while the Central
Anti-corruption Bureau has expressed interested in learning about good practices in
corruption prevention and education. There may also be interest in Bank support for the
Government's update of its Anti-Corruption Program and Strategy (beyond 2009). At the
sub-national level, a program of cooperation i s under way with the Mazowieckie region,
including an innovative sub-national Public Expenditure Review to improve capital
investment planning and debt management strategies and TA on a fee-for-service basis for
management of the transport infrastructure investment program. Similarly, cooperation with
other subnational partners will be pursued, using a broad range of financing schemes, in
various areas of their responsibility such as: (i)public passenger transport; (ii)health,
education and other social services; and (iii) public private partnerships.
Pillar 3: Growth and Competitiveness

50.
There i s broad consensus that development of infrastructure with emphasis on
transport and improving the environment for private sector development are critical
for high growth in Poland over the medium-long term. The road network, especially
motorways, remains severely underdeveloped, with even main citiedgrowth centers not well
connected. Railways and alternative modes of transportation, including inland waterways,
l3The AAA includes the Public Expenditure and Institutional Review (2003), the Country Financial
Accountability Assessment (2006), co-organization o f an International Conference on Performance Based
Budgeting - Lessons for Poland (2007), and the ongoing program of regional (EUIO) Regular Economic
Reports (with several Special Topics on public finance issues) andfiscal studies.
l4 The World Bank issued its first report on corruption in Poland in 1999. The report generated broad interest
from policy-makers, experts, business organizations, and civil society. Subsequently, the Bank supported a
number of anti-corruption activities in the early 2000s, both at the country and regional levels. The Bank also
co-financed research work o f non-Governmental organizations (NGOs), including on political parties financing
and conflict o f interest, which lead to adoption o f anti-corruption regulations in these areas.

22

will also need to play a much more prominent role, not only in meeting Poland’s transport
needs but also in helping to address the significant climate change challenges related to the
country’s dependence on coal (the energy sector agenda i s discussed under Pillar 4 below).
Investment needs substantially exceed what can be financed from EU structural and cohesion
funds, and PPPs will take time to phase in successfully. Although a small player, the Bank
can play an important role both in contributing to the financing of these investments,
including often neglected maintenance and rehabilitation, and in supporting the development
of the institutional framework. Poland’s business environment remain hampered by excessive
regulations and red tape as evidence in the country’s relatively poor Doing Business
rankings, and the Bank i s uniquely suited to help address these challenges.
Transport Influstructure Development

5 1.
Underdeveloped transport infrastructure i s perceived as one of the major
obstacles for further development of Poland. Development of transport infrastructure i s
one of the main priorities within the National Development Strategy with the majority o f EU
grant funds earmarked to co-finance new land transport infrastructure (roads and rail). The
planned increase in the road construction program will require strengthening the capacity o f
the General Directorate for Public Roads and Motorways (GDDKiA), which needs to adopt a
commercial administrative structure and to use modern asset and project management tools
for planning, programming and project implementation. Similar challenges are faced by the
railway sector which requires modernization and an improved regulatory regime aimed at
improving competitiveness of the sector.
52.
While the EU and EU institutions, notably the EIB, are the main partners and
external sources of financing for transport infrastructure development, the Bank can
continue to play an important role in helping to build institutions and in
complementary investments. With its extensive engagement in recent years in the roads
sector, the Bank i s well placed to support the road agency GDDKiA to commercialize its
management practices, particularly to improve the efficiency of resource utilization. In the
rail subsector, Poland has taken steps to implement the separation of rail operations from
infrastructure management in accordance with EU requirements, and the Bank can support
the reform process harnessing the vast experience from other EU member states, Further, the
Bank can support investments, policy analysis and related reforms in areas such as: (i)
maritime infrastructure and inland waterways; (ii)public transport financing as requested by
the City of Warsaw; (iii)management and financing of transport in the regions and
municipalities; (iv) improving road safety; and (v) increasing private sector participation in
transport infrastructure.

53.
Bank financing for the transport sector could support three broad categories of
activities to supplement programs financed by the Government, the EU and other
International Financial Institutions (IFI): (i)ongoing rehabilitation programs for road and
rail infrastructure that are not eligible for EU grants; (ii)improvement of transport
infrastructure to support the development of poorer regions within Poland; and (iii)policy
reforms and investment lending supporting the climate change agenda, including
improvement of public transport in urban areas or development of maritime and inland
waterways infrastructure. Financing from EU grants are focused on improving the
infrastructure along the Trans-European Transport Network (TEN-T) corridors with cofinancing from EIB. Although financing for maintaining transport infrastructure i s not
eligible for EU grants, this must remain a priority in order to protect the asset value in the
existing road and rail networks. Poland also needs to invest in intra-regional connectivity,
particularly to improve access to its poorer regions. The Bank could support the local
23

authorities to better prepare projects that are eligible for EU grant financing, and strengthen
the capacity of the regions to plan and implement projects. For large urban areas, Bank
support could focus on financing public transport investments aimed at reducing carbon
emissions, improving urban transport policy, regulatory frameworks, and tariff structures,
and providing alternatives to motorized transport through green investments (e.g. pedestrian
and cycle paths, inland waterways, etc.).

54.
Bank support to the transport sector can be provided through investment
lending, policy lending or a range of advisory services. Financing for the maintenance of
existing transport infrastructure could be through S WAp arrangements that would co-finance
with the Government and other partners the multi-annual investment programs or
subprograms. The third in a series of three such SWAps i s currently underway with the aim
of improving the quality, efficiency, financial viability and safety of Poland’s roads. Large
and complex individual projects or a group of projects that are of priority importance to the
Government could be financed through traditional investment lending or through policybased lending if significant reforms are necessary beforehand (e.g. reform o f financing for
public transport in large cities). The Bank’s advisory and analytical services could be
deployed to support the analytical work preceding such reforms. This could include a
strategic review of transport sector investment priorities. The Ministry of Infrastructure i s
also interested in Bank support for analyzing the feasibility of high-speed railways and
implementing PPPs in transport (the latter also being important for subnational
governments). In the absence o f new lending, much of these advisory services would be
expected to be provided on a cost sharing or fee-for-service basis.
Private Sector Development

55.
Private sector development remains hampered by important constraints to the
business en~ironment’~
and an unfinished privatization agenda. Poland i s ranked around
the middle in the global Doing Business indicators, significantly below several o f the other
New Member States (NMS) and with little or no improvement in recent years. The main
constraints relate to enforcing contracts, paying taxes, and obtaining permits for construction
etc. Further, the state remains in control o f “strategic” enterprises in energy and other
network sectors and retains a large amount of minority shareholdings in a range of nonstrategic companies.
56.
The Bank has played, and can continue to play, an important role in supporting
the environment for private sector development. The Government pays close attention to
the annual Doing Business rankings, and has been working with the Bank’s experts on
identifying in more detail the key shortcomings in the Polish business environment and
analyzing reform plans and legislative proposals. In this regard, the Bank may also help the
Government look at the important gender dimensions to the business environment, in
particular the inequalities in terms of women entrepreneurship and employment arising from
barriers to entry of new, small businesses. The Government i s also interested in working with
the Bank on options for streamlining tax administration, including unification of tax, social
l5 According to new research conducted by the Polish-German Chamber o f Industry and Commerce (AHK),
Poland i s the most attractive location for foreign investment in the region. Eighty two percent o f respondents are
content with the decision to locate their investment projects in Poland, with the opposite opinion expressed by 8
percent of the polled investors. In the eyes of foreign entrepreneurs and companies, Poland’s biggest assets
include presence in the EU, broad range o f local sub-suppliers, and the qualifications, commitment and
productivity o f Polish employees. On the other hand, investors are most disappointed with the quality of public
infrastructure, the tax system and administration, and the regulatory burden on businesses.

24

security, and customs payments.’6 Further, the Bank has done a lot of work on knowledge
economy issues, including innovation, and more i s under way as part of a broader regional
study. In addition to technical assistance and ESW, the Bank i s supporting the broader
private sector development agenda, including privatization, through its programmatic DPL.

57.
Another initiative that i s aimed at improving the enabling environment for businesses
in Poland i s the Financial Reporting Technical Assistance Project under the Swiss-Polish
Cooperation Program. The program i s planned for 2009-2015 and funded with a CHF 10
million Swiss grant. It will focus on improving the business environment and access to
financing for SMEs through introduction of international financial reporting and auditing
standards for Polish companies. The Bank has been invited to help implement this project.

58.
The Ministry of Economy i s interested in broadening the cooperation with the
Bank. In particular, the Ministry has asked the Bank to look at on-going initiatives and
lessonshest practices from other countries in: (i)PPP implementation (especially in nontransport sectors such as health and education); (ii)linear investments legislation (pipeline
investments in energy, telecommunications, etc.); and (iii)streamlining the system of state
supervision and control over the activities undertaken by business entities. While some
technical cooperation can be provided in the context of the DPL program, it i s expected that
such services would largely be provided on a fee-for-service basis.
Pillar 4: Global and Regional Public Goods
Climate Change

59.
Poland will face major challenges in meeting the EU climate change targets. At
the December 2008 EU Summit, EU members approved the “Energy and Climate Change
Package” referred to as “20x3 by 2020”. While the package i s less stringent than the EC
proposals from early 2008, it will still require substantial medium-long term adjustment in
Poland towards low carbon growth, especially given its dependence on coal for energy
production. Further, the EU targets are not accompanied by clear strategies on how countries
should reach the targets.

60.
The Bank has been actively engaged in Poland in various areas relating to the
climate change agenda. I n recent years, the World Bank has been active in supporting the
development o f Poland’s capacity to respond to natural disasters. The Odra River Basin
Flood Protection Project (2007) supports investments in the Upper and Middle Odra River
watershed to protect the population in the River Basin from loss of life and damage to
property caused by severe and increased flooding. The Bank has also remained engaged in a
few energy efficiency projects (wind farm, coke-to-gas, geothermal heating), particularly
aiming to provide models that could be adopted by private financing. Further, it supported a
Green Investment Scheme (GIS) Regional Forum in June 2008 in Warsaw, and during the
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCC) Conference o f the
Parties (COP14) held in Poznan in December 2008, the Bank signed a Memorandum of
Understanding with the Polish Government for a GIS transaction of 10 million Assigned
Amount Units (AAUs). The Bank actively participated in COP14 events, including a High
Level Event in Warsaw for Finance Ministers on “Low Carbon Growth”. Several discussion
papers, a recent regional report on adaptation to climate change, and the forthcoming World
Development Report 2010 pave the way for a substantive engagement on the analytical
agenda.
l6There

i s scope for collaboration with the IMF in this area.

25

61.
The Bank can continue to supplement the activities driven by other partners
(EU, EIB, OECD and IMF) and add value to the climate change agenda in Poland. The
EIB i s planning to expand its lending activity for energy-related projects. The IMF i s focused
on analytical activities relating to the impact of climate on the macro-economy, in particular
fiscal developments. Finally, the OECD has prepared many regional and global reports
related to climate change mitigation and adaptation. The Government i s interested in support
for assessing the future costs and benefits of various policy interventions leading to the
abatement of carbon emissions. Therefore, the Bank would focus primarily on energy as the
main source of C 0 2 emissions in Poland; but also on transport (options for “greening”
through development o f railways and waterways, promotion of bicycle paths in cities and
towns. etc.) and environment.
62.
Responding to the need for core diagnostics, the Bank has started work on an
innovative Climate Change Country Economic Memorandum (CEM) for Poland. The
study would help develop a climate change strategy aimed at minimizing the costs and
maximizing potential benefits according to various carbon mitigation scenarios. The study
will model the sector impact of mitigation under different assumptions, estimate their
macroeconomic implications, and illustrate an integrated, long-term, low-carbon growth
strategy. The work would draw on the considerable and growing body o f knowledge from
existing carbon studies in several other countries as well as the Clean Technology Fund plans
underway in some o f these and other countries. The sector investigations will discuss key
sector policy initiatives, including sector-specific taxes and subsidies, regulatory changes,
and R&D measures, as well as potential financing mechanisms for the identified investments
and interventions. Further, there i s interest in Bank support to look at ways to enhance
competition in the energy sector, including competitive access to the grid.

63.
Various operational interventions could be envisaged arising from this work. On
climate change mitigation, potential Bank interventions could include energy efficiency
projects, natural disaster mitigation (in particular against floods and also through the
Catastrophe Deferred Drawdown Option (CAT DDO)), assisting with GIS transactions,
supporting “clean carbon” technologies (including carbon capture and storage), and
renewable energy investments. On adaptation to climate variability and change in the water
sector related to natural disasters, potential World Bank interventions could include: (i)
increasing flood/disaster preparedness through development of a flooddisaster insurance
pool; (ii) spatial planning in flood plains to support vulnerable local and regional
governments in their risk assessment in local spatial plans; (iii)strengthening institutional
capacity towards emergency preparedness, including improvement of flood forecasting and
management,
Financial sector stability

-

64.
I n recent years, the Bank worked jointly with the IMF on FSAP reports the last
update was made in 2006. The objective o f the Financial Sector Assessment Program
(FSAP) was to assist the Polish authorities in identifying strengths and potential
vulnerabilities in the financial system that could have macroeconomic consequences, as well
as challenges in the development o f the financial system. The report attempted to identify
measures to improve the functioning, reduce the risks, and strengthen the operation and
oversight o f the financial system in Poland.

65.
Since Poland has one of the most solid financial systems in Europe, there has
been little reason for more active Bank intervention, but the environment has changed
26

dramatically following the outbreak of the global financial crisis. Given the significant
uncertainty around the financial crisis and i t s repercussions, the Polish authorities may be
interested in a renewed and broader Bank engagement in this area. Aside from technical
cooperation, this could also involve lending aimed at supporting those segments in the
economy which are most affected by the financial crisis. For example, the credit line under
preparationto support SMEs through PKO BP (as a wholesale bank) i s primarily a response
to the crisis and current short-term funding and risk aversion in the Polish financial system.

D. Proposed Program
66.
The extent o f World Bank engagement will depend on client demand for
borrowin and final resolution o f the procurement issue related to fee-for-service
business." Client demand for borrowing i s likely to be significant given large investment
needs and current adverse international financial market conditions. In addition to the
ongoing budget support related to the DPL program, several ministries and local
governments have expressed interest in borrowing from the Bank and the Ministry o f
Finance has expressed i t s willingness to consider additional, preferably quick-disbursing,
operations as well as guarantees for non-sovereign borrowing. The Bank may also provide
various types of credit enhancement instruments. While the Bank has recently concluded a
partial fee-for-service agreement and another i s pending, development of this line of business
has been constrained by the lack of clarity in the Polish procurement law regarding sole
sourcing of Bank advisory services.'*
67.
The planned lending program i s guided by the assumption that the global crisis
will not be protracted and by the Bank's notional lending resources available for
Poland. Lending i s expected to be substantial in FY09-IO before declining in FY 11, with
total exposure increasing to about USD seven billion. Lending would be focused on the DPL
program and a limited number o f other operations supporting economic activity and the
longer-term development agenda. This would be accompanied by a limited program of AAA
activities related to the DPL program and some additional strategic ESW. There would be a
modest expansion o f the cost-sharing/fee-based service (FBS) business over the medium
term. During the course o f this CPS, the Bank's business model in Poland i s assumed to
gradually rely more and more on fee-based provision of knowledge services which could be
scaled up if there i s client demand, including at the subnational government level. While FBS
would by nature be more opportunistic, they would still be confined to the strategic areas o f
engagement defined in the CPS. If the crisis were to be deeper or more protracted, the Bank's
ability to increase lending volumes would need to be revisited.
68.
The program in the first year will include continued implementation o f the
current active portfolio. The portfolio has a total exposure of about USD 2 billion and
consists o f a recently disbursed single-tranche DPL and four investment operations: one in
the roads sector (for maintenance and rehabilitation); one for flood protection on the Odra
River; one for rural support; and a Global Environment Facility (GEF) energy efficiency
project, as well as two Prototype Carbon Fund (renewable energy) operations. Disbursement
rates slowed during the last CPS period due to delays in establishing the necessary
arrangements for new projects, protracted inter-agency communications and decisionmaking, but the FY09 disbursement ratio has picked up and i s almost 22 percent, which
" The

planned engagement i s based on existing Bank administrative resources for Poland.

18

Polish procurement law prohibits sole-sourcing for contracts below [value], while the Bank cannot engage in
competitive bidding. An interpretation o f Polish procurement law issued by the Polish Procurement Office in
May 2009, following intensive discussions with Bank staff, should allow the Bank to undertake work for the
Polish authorities when requested in the future as fiscal pressures ease.

27

compares favorably with the overall Bank and Europe and Central Asia (ECA) region (19
and 12 percent, respectively). Two of the investment projects-road maintenance and rural
support-are performing well with project objectives either largely met or implementation
progressing steadily towards their achievement. The energy efficiency project very
successfully implemented energy efficiency projects in more than 20 schools in Krakow, but
the guarantee component has not taken off satisfactorily due to delays in finding the right
counterpart bank and reduced risk appetite due to the financial crisis; the Odra river project
was significantly delayed by changes in Government counterpart and a lengthy contracting
process during the first year of implementation, but i s now picking ups. Both project teams
are pro-actively engaged with counterparts to overcome the delays and bring implementation
back on track. The delays through the last CPS period and the current turn-around in
portfolio performance are closely correlated with the Government’s renewed interest in
working with the World Bank.

69.
Overall financial management performance of the current portfolio i s
satisfactory and the residual financial management risk i s moderate. The portfolio
includes large, complex and innovative projects using country system procedures or
implemented in a highly decentralized environment. This results in a substantial level of risk
that is mitigated by measures embedded in the design and supervision o f each operation.
Only one active project (the Odra river project) i s not currently rated satisfactory on financial
management, due only to delays. A remedial action plan i s under implementation and i s
being closely monitored by the Bank. The project i s expected to be upgraded shortly.
70.
The program in the first year o f this CPS will be anchored in the on-going DPL
series, while supporting economic activity and the longer-term development agenda
through innovative, non-sovereign loans. The DPL series provides an anchor for the
program as it cuts across most of the strategic pillars of engagement. The associated AAA
work includes the ongoing PER focused on social sector reform, regional and Poland-specific
work on public finance management reform (especially implementation of MTEFs and
Performance-Based Budgeting), and ESW/TA in education, health, and social protection. In
addition, two non-sovereign loans are planned to support economic activity and the longer
term development agenda: a sub-national transport infrastructure investment loan with the
City o f Warsaw and a financial intermediary loan with PKO to support SME development.
The former would be accompanied by a number of analytical studies, including on optimal
long-term tariff policy. There i s also an ongoing, innovative sub-national PER for the
Mazowieckie region that will be relevant for the City of Warsaw loan. This i s part of a
broader, cost-sharing arrangement with the region that will also support transport planning.
Further, an innovative climate change CEM i s under preparation, and we plan a strategic
transport policy review. Finally, the Ministries of Infrastructure, Economy, and Regional
Development are interested in working with the Bank on a fee-for-service basis on various
issues in line with the CPS pillars.
71.
Beyond the first year, the program i s less well-defined at present. However,
depending upon client demand, non-lending services could potentially be scaled up,
primarily on a fee-for-service basis. Lending would focus on transport infrastructure,
climate change mitigation and adaptation, and sub-national development. The Ministry o f
Infrastructure i s keen to enhance its cooperation with the Bank and the climate change CEM
could lead to new lending opportunities. If the City of Warsaw project i s successful, it i s
expected that this could be replicated in other major cities or less advantaged regions in
Poland. However, the lending program beyond FY 10 should be considered tentative and
subject to the Bank’s financial capacity to support it. There i s also strong demand for further
AAA work that complements the social sector aspects of the DPL agenda and ongoing PER,

28

as well as in other areas o f Bank comparative advantage. If client demand for lending falls,
the program could shift downwards towards a program of niche, fee-based services to
complement the Government’s own program and that of other external partners.
Table 4. Proposed IBRD Lending Program and Selected Non-lending Service~’~
Proposed IBRD Lending Program
DPL 2
Warsaw City SILISwap
PKO BP Credit Line
DPL3
City 2
Climate Change 1
City 3
Climate Change 2
TOTAL
Recent/ Proposed Non-lending Services
Performance-BasedBudgeting
Poznan Climate Change
DPL Education Reform TA
Mazowieckie Public Expenditure Review
Climate Change CEM
PER
DPL Health T A
DPL Social Protection T A
Warsaw City ESW
Transport Policy Note
City 213 AAA
Energy ESW
Transporthailways ESW
City 41516 AAA

FY
2009
2010
2010
2010
201 1
201 1
2012
2012

--

Amount US%(M)
1250
500
500
1250
250
3 00
150
3 00
4500

Completion FY
2009
2009
2009- 10
2009- 10
2009- 10
2009- 10
2010
2010
2010
2010
201 1
201 1
201 1
2012

E. Poverty and Social Impact
72.
The CPS supports sustainable poverty reduction in a number of ways. First, the
proposed program assists Poland to address the rapid deterioration of the economic
environment which, through a slowdown in growth and rise in unemployment, i s lowering
living standards across all income quintiles. By ensuring a recovery of growth over the
medium term, government reforms supported by the CPS create the space for raising living
standards among poor households. Second, the CPS supports measures that can be expected
to enhance Poland’s investment climate and competitiveness while improving Poland’s
capacity to respond to climate change. This in turn would facilitate employment creation,
economic growth and poverty reduction over time. Third, the CPS supports structural
reforms in the areas of education, health, pensions, infrastructure, and labor markets to
ensure equitable delivery of basic public service. Fourth, the CPS supports mitigation
measures to shield poor people from major adverse impacts of the economic crisis.
73.
As part o f the analytical underpinnings of the DPL series, the Bank i s drawing on the
2007 Poland Household Budget survey to update the profile o f poverty and vulnerability and
provide an incidence analysis o f public expenditures in the social sectors. This will form the
basis for an assessment of the social and poverty impact of the economic crisis, and of
the effectiveness of government programs to mitigate the impact of the crisis on poor

’’For further details, please see Annexes B3 and B4
29

households. This analysis will be updated with the help of the 2008 Household Budget
Survey which i s expected to become available in September 2009.

F. Results framework

74.
The envisaged Bank engagement i s expected to support the achievement o f key
Government objectives. I n addition to the general day-to-day policy dialogue, the envisaged
lending and AAA program should be supportive of key Government objectives in various
policy areas. The results framework largely reflects the results anticipated from the existing
portfolio and those operations planned for the first year of the CPS (see Annex Al).
However, the Bank program would be small in the context of Poland’s overall development
program and spending and cannot be expected to have an independent and measurable
contribution to broader outcomes. Nevertheless, the envisaged partnership and selected
interventions within broader policy areas i s seen as preferable to a potentially more narrowly
focused and substantive engagement where outcomes perhaps could be more closely related
to the Bank’s activities.

v. RISKS
Economic

75.
The medium-term macroeconomic scenario of slowing economic growth and
moderating inflation i s subject to further downside risks. While inflationary pressures
have abated significantly with the recent global slowdown and tighter credit conditions as
well as moderation of wage pressure, the recent depreciation of the zloty could rekindle
inflationary pressures. Poland has one of the most solid financial systems in Europe, but the
interbank market remains constrained due to lack o f confidence. The authorities may need to
respond with additional confidence-restoring and liquidity-enhancing measures. In the
context of the euro adoption agenda which requires fiscal discipline, the supply side o f the
economy needs to be hrther stimulated through acceleration of structural reforms.
76.
Poland’s external and financial vulnerability may be further affected by global
and regional developments. Recent developments demonstrate the existing risk of
contagion from other countries in the region, and access to external financing sources may
become more difficult and more expensive. Entering the ERh42 during significant volatility
on global financial markets poses risks for exchange rate stability over a minimum two-year
period as required by the relevant Maastricht criterion. At the same time, there i s risk of a
misaligned EURPLN central parity in ERh42 and during the ultimate conversion rate from
zloty into euro. On the other hand, the Government’s firm euro adoption plan and lends
credibility to fiscal policy and may help preserve confidence in a very difficult external
environment,
77.
I f these economic risks materialize and the crisis i s longer or deeper than
currently anticipated, there could be calls for the IFIs (including the Bank) to increase
their funding. The Bank could do this either by augmenting the DPL series and/or with
investment loans. This i s likely to be possible financially, given the small size o f Poland’s
outstanding debt to IBRD, but would stretch existing staff and resources.
Political

78.
The projected deterioration of economic prospects may undermine social
support to the Government and reduce its willingness to push for more radical reforms.
30

Reform momentum i s already constrained by the risk of Presidential veto on new proposed
legislation, in particular in the area of social services. In this context, there i s a risk of general
elections earlier than scheduled for fall 20 11. This may be provoked, for example, by internal
tensions in the governing PO and in the coalition if Prime Minister Tusk decides to run for
President in 2010. The Government’s lack of constitutional majority in Parliament and
elusive compromise with the opposition Pis, which demands a referendum on euro adoption,
could complicate the euro adoption plan and aggravates risks related to the ERM2 transition
period.

79.
Public and political support for a significant reform agenda i s often difficult. The
Government has been making strong communication efforts to explain the need for reform
and the global crisis has only heightened awareness of the need for reforms to remain
competitive. If public and political pressures weaken the reform agenda, the DPL program
may need to be scaled back. The Bank could continue with AAA and a lighter financing
program.
Institutional

80.
Policy formulation and coordination in Poland has tended to be fragmented and
technical and administrative capacity in some ministries remains weak. Aside from the
forthcoming election years, elements of the heavy bureaucracy may also be opposing change.
Absorption of the very large EU structural and cohesion funds and the organization of the
UEFA Soccer Championship in 2012 will require additional capacity and efforts from public
administration. In the absence of this, public investment would be unable to compensate for
the projected slowdown in private investment, and weaker absorption of EU funds could also
have political repercussions.
81.
This i s an on-going risk that i s difficult to mitigate. However, capacity-building i s
very much part of the Bank’s agenda and weaknesses are likely to delay, rather than derail,
the Bank’s program.

82.
All the risks above are considered to be low-to-moderate in likelihood and
impact.
VI. CONSULTATIONS WITH GOVERNMENT
AND OTHER PARTNERS

83.
The CPS design and implementation i s informed by broad consultations. In
addition to the ongoing dialogue with the Government, including on priorities for further
cooperation, the Bank circulated the draft CPS to key government ministries for comments
following the ROC meeting. Subsequently, consultations-based
on a power-point
presentation-were
also held with Parliament representatives and other stakeholders,
including civil society (the latter jointly with the Ministry of Finance). Further, web-based
consultations were conducted. I n parallel with the Bank-wide review, the draft CPS was also
shared with the IMF and the EC for comments. Following Board discussion, the final
multimedia CPS package would be posted on the web site. The final and endorsed CPS
would be also presented in a press briefing organized jointly with the Ministry of Finance,
and an op-ed would be prepared in one o f the leading Polish dailies. Time permitting, the
CPS would also be presented and discussed in the major Polish cities (Warsaw, Gdansk,
Krakow, Poznan, Lodz) as part of the Bank’s regional outreach effort.

31

m

M

VI

m

v)

W

Annex A2
Page 1 o f 2

Poland a t a qlance

Y12/09

Europe &
Central
Asia

Upper
niddle
hccme

446
23,972
0.2
64

E4
41 437
0,7
75

373.2
9790
14500

2,697
6,052
11.262

5,854
7,107
12.072

4.9
4.9

6.9
6.7

5.8
5.0

<2
<2

4
9
70
21

71
21

99
96
98
96

95
93
112
109

95
89

95
83

Key Development Indicators

Pobnd

Age distribution, 2007

(2008)

Pcpulifion, mid-year (milions)
S t r f s e aea(tlausrnd sq. km)
Pcpulition g&h (%)
Urban ppulifion( % oftotal populatim)

33.1
0.0

GNI (Atlas mdhod, US$ bllions)
GNI per capita (Alas metlad, US$)
GNI Der caDita(FFP.intemifional $)
GDP growth (%)
GDP per capita growth (%)

I

6

4

2

0

2

4

6

percent oftomlpapulabon

(mo.9 receni estimate, 20034008)

Pwerty heackount ratio if $1.25 a day (PPP, O h )
Poverty heackount ratio if $2.00 a day (PPP. %)
Life ewedancy at birth (years)
InBnt mortality (per 1,Om live births)
Chad mdnutiion(%ofchidren rnder5)
Adrlt literacy, male (% dages 15 ard alar)
Adrlt literacy, female (% of ages 15and older)
Gross primary enrollment. male ( % d age group)
Gross primary enrollment. female (% of agegrwp)

100
99

Amess to an improved water source (% d poputatwn)
AOC~SS
to 'inpmvedsaritation faalties (% ofpoputation)

Net Aid Flows

Isa,

fUS$ mllrons)
Net ODA m d offclal ad
Top 3dOn06 (10 200i)
European Canmislon
France
PUStM

A d (% of GNI)
A d per caplta (US$)

Under4 mortarty mte(per 1,000)

1990

2000

2008

1320

1,396

I,
524

289
2
27

838
197
124

I,
I01
197
83

2.4
35

0.8
36

0.6
40

I 6 0 1
50

40
30

20
10

I

0

1BD

I

I

1995

o?&nd

2000

2m7

obope&CentralAsla

Growth of GDP and GDP per capita ( X )
8
6
4
2

0
2
4
8

a

Long-Term Economic Trends

-(o

05

95

Consumer pnces (annual % chmge)
GDP mplcL deflator (annual % change)
Exchangerate(mnua1 average, local per US9
Terms d trade ndex (2000 = 1m)

70 3
55 2

10.1
7.2

4.2
3.1

0.9
104

4.3
100

24
102
198040 1990-2000
2000-08
(averageannuil gmowth %)

Pcpulifion, mid-year (milions)
GDP (US$ ml8ons)

38.5
171,276

38.1
526.93

Agicukure
Inchstry
Manufadurirg
sauces

(% ofGDP)
8.3
5.0
50.1
31.7
18.5
41.6
63.3

Household Rnal consumption experditure
General govY fhal consumption expmdibre
Grass cadtal formatwn

48.0
19.3
25.6

Exports of g o d s m d services
l m p r b ofgoods and services
Grosssawrgs

28.6
21.5
15 9

35 6

33.1
58,976

0.1
4.7

4.1
4.3

4.2
30.9
17.0
64.9

05
71
99
51

13
56
8.2
4.0

63.1
18.5
24.8

60.6
17.9
25.0

5.2
3.7
10.6

3.7
3.7
6.6

27.1
33.5
18.8

39.5
43.0
23.2

11.3
16.7

10.2
9.3

Note Fgures in l a b are fcr years otherthrn those specdied 2008data are pdtmnary
a A d data are fcr 2cO7
Dewlcpment Ecommics, Dwelopment Data Gmup (DECDG)

37

0.7

ndKateS data are not walable

Annex A 2
Page 2 o f 2
Poland
~~

~

Balance of Payments and Trade
(US$ m b n s j
Total rnerchindise emorts (bb)
Total rnerchindise mports (af)
Net t m B in p o d s and servces
Current aocarnt babnce
asa%ofGDP
Workers remttances and
mmpematan ofernpbyees (receipts)
Reserves trcludirg gob

2000

2008

I

Governance indicators, 2000 and 2007

31.729
49,023
-10.904

1%,647
195,906
-19,371

VOIce and a ccoune b My

-10,343
6.0

-29,029
-5.5

Regulaiwy qualty

1,726

10,496

Conrolof conupton

Pobtcal sebly

RUR oflaw

27,466

Q,180

0

s2w7

Central Government Finance

a2WO

(% of GDPj
Current revenue (mcludirg grants)
Tax revenue
Current expendture

38.1
19.8
38.2

39.2
22.8
37.6

w e m i sutptuvaetcn

-3.u

-3.Y

40
28

40

Himest marginal tax mte (%)
hdiwdual
Corpaab

19

25

50

75

100

Count!yspfcenik rank(O1W)
hgher * ~ l u B simply bBllermlrms

Swm KaufrnanwWaay-NBstnurl, Wodd Bank

Technology and lnfrast ructure

2000

2007

Paved ma& (%of total)
Fixed lne m d moblephone
subscribers (per 100 people)
High tectnolcgy exprts
(%of rnarufachred exports)

66.3

69 7

46

133

3.3

38

60
30.6
9.6

52

1.402
16.2

1.406

C02emissions percapita(nt)

7.6

79

GDP per unit of energy use
(2005 PPP $ per kg of o l ecpivalert)

5.1

57

2,325

2.562

External Debt and Resource flows
Environment
(US$ rnlons)
Total debt cutstindtgg and dsbuned
Total debt servce
Debtreief(HPC, MDRP
Total debt (% of GDP)
Total debt sewce(% of rxpcrts)
Foreim diced itwestment(net inflows)
P u t f d a equty (net inlows)

64,834
10,156

217,376
17,435

37.9

41.3

9,343
447

19,198
-2 134

-

-

Agricunural bnd (Oh of i m d area)
Forestaea(% oflandarea)
Natanal~pmtededareas (% of l a d area)
Freshwater r e m u m s Wr capita (cu meters)
Freshwaterwith&avrsi (bllbn cubic meters)

Energv use p a capta (kg d oil eauivilent)

J S$ millions

Private Sector Development

2000

limerewired tostat abusiness (days)
Cost to start a business (% of GNI per czpita)
Timerewired to register property (days)
Ranked as a rnqorcmstmht to t u s h e s
(% of rninagers surveyed who @reed)
Tax rates
Access tdcost of fnandrg
Stockmarket capBalization(% ofGDP)
Bink capital toasset rata ( O h )

2008

31
18 8
197
2000

2007

57 5
50 7
18.3
7.1

48.8
7.4
~

Note: Figures in itaics are f u years other thin those specifled. 2008data aeprel'minafy
.. hdicates dah are not walatie. -indicates cbservatim isnot Epplicatle.
Develcpment Ecommics, Dwebpmenl Data Group (DECDG)

38

5/12/09

Annex B2

-

CAS Annex 8 2
Selected Indicators* of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
As Of Date 2009-04-07

Indic at0 r
Portfolio Assessment
Number of Projects Under Implementation a
Average Implementation Period (years)
Percent of Problem Projects by Number
Percent of Problem Projects by Amount
Percent of Projects at Risk by Number a,d
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount
Disbursement Ratio (%) e
Portfolio Management
CPPR during the year (yeslno)
Supervision Resources (btal US$)
Average Supervision (US$/prqect)

Memorandum tern
Proj Eva1 by OED by Number
Proj Eva1 by OED by Amt (US$ millions)
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Number
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt

2006

2007

20 08

2009

IO.
2.9
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
69.2

8
3.0
25.0
13.0
25.0
13.0
43.5

7
3.4
14.3
1.5
14.3
1.5
9.7

4
3.1
50.0
42.0
50.0
42.0
21.9

Since FY 80 Last Five FYs
40
8
4,404.3
1,020.8
20.0
25.0
11.o
6.7

a.
b.
c.
d.
e.

As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY).
Average age of projects in the Bank’s country portfolio.
Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) andlor implementation progress (IP).
As defined under the Poftfolio Improvement Program.
Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank’s portfolio at the
beginning of the year: Investment projects only.
* All indicatorsare for projects active in the Portfolio, with theexception of Disbursement Ratio,
which includes all active projects as wellas projectswhich exited during the fiscal year.

39

Annex B3
Page 1 o f 2

-

CAS Annex 8 3 IBRD Program Summary

Poland

As Of Date 4/7/2009

Proposed IBRD Lending Program
Fiscal year

2009

2010

2011

2012

Prvj ID

UWMJ

DPL 2

1,250.0

Sub-total

1.250.0

Warsaw City SlUSwap

500.0

PKO BP Credit Line

500.0

DPL3

1,250.0

Sub-total

2,250.0

City 2

250.0

Climate Change 1

300.0

Sub-total

550.0

City 3

150.0

Climate Change 2

300.0

Sub-total

450.0

TOTAL

4,500.0

40

Strategic Rewards b
(HML)

lmplementakn b
Risks ( H M L )

H

WL

M
M
H

M
M
WL

M
H

M
M

M
H

M
M

Annex B3
Page 2 o f 2

Annex 9 3
Poland: IFC Investment Operations Program

C om mitments (US$m 1
Gross
Net*

8470.00
8470.00

Net Commitments bv Sector (%\
EQUITY
LOAN
Total

0

20,690
79,310
100,000

0

20,690
79,310
100,000

0

Net Commitments by Investment Instrument (%)
Equity
Loan
Total
0

* IFC's Own Account only

41

0

0

Annex B4
Poland
Summary of Nonlending Services
As of 4/712008

Completion FY

Cost ( U 8 0 0 0 )

Audience a/

Objectiveb'

Recent completions
Anti-corruption Follow-up TA
Public Administration Reform TA
Transition Brief
Second Generation PPP in Roads Sector
National Development Plans
Financial Services Development Plan
Technical Assistance Dialogue
Ownership Policy for SOEs II
Performance-BasedBudgeting

20 06
20 06
2006
2006
20 06
2005-07
2007-08
2007
2009

73.1
24
56.2
50.4
149
307.6
94.8
55.4
138.9

GIDIB
GIB
GIB
G/D/B
GIDIB
GIB
GIB
GIDlB
GIDIB

KGPS
KGPS
KGPS
KGPS
KGPDPS
KGPS
KGPS
KGPS
KGPS

Underway
Poznan Climate Change
DPL Education Reform TA
Mazowieckie Public ExpenditureReview
Climate Change CEM
PER

2009
2009-10
2009-10
2009-10
2009-10

50
142
195
450
3 00

GIDIB
GIB
GIB
G/D/B/PD
GIB

KG
KGPS
KGPS
KGPDPS
KGPS

20 I O
20 10
2010
2010
2011
2011
2011
20 12

100
100
3 00
100
3 00
100
100
3 00

GIB
GIB
GID1B
GIDIB
GIDIBPD
G/D/BPD
GIB
GIDIBPD

KGPS
KGPS
KGPS
KGPS
KGPS
KGPS
KGPS
KGPS

2009-10
20 10
20 I O
2010
2010

150
150
250
250
100

GIB
GIB
GIB
GIB
GIB

KGPS
KGPS
KGPS
K G PS
KGPS

Product

Planned dl
DPL Health TA
DPL Social Protection TA
Warsaw City ESW
Transport Policy Note
City 213 AAA
Energy ES W
Transporthailways ESW
City 41516 AAA

FBS~
Social HousingMortage(underway)
Mazowieckie Transport
Ministry o f Infrastruchm
Ministry o f Economy
Ministry o f Regional Development

a.
b.
c.
d.

Government, donor, Bank, public dissemination.
Knowledge generation, public debate, problem-solving.
Some costs shown for these tasks are estimates.
Costs shown forthese tasks are estimates.

e. Amounts shown for these tasks are overall costs of activities.

42

Annex B5

Poland Social Indicators
Latest single year

POPULATION
Total population, mayear (mllions)
Groah rate (% annual average for period)
Urban poplation (% of population)
Total fertility rate (tirths per wwnan)

1980-85

1990-95

2XII-W

Europe B
Central
Asia

37.2
0.9
59.9
2.3

36.6
0.2
61.5
1.6

38.1
-0.1
61.4
1.3

445.1
0.0
63.6
1.6

622.9
0.7
75.2
2.0

9, WJ
119
103

6,051
159

6,967
152

POVERTY
(“A ofpopulation)
National headcwnt index
Urban headcwnt index
Rural headcount index
INCOME
GNI percapita (US$)
Consumerprice index (2000=100)
Food price index (2000=100)
INCOMElCONSUWTlON DISTRIBUTION
Gini hdex
Lwest quntile(% of inwme OT consumption)
Highest quintile ( % of i n c m e or consumption)
SOCIAL IMICATORS
P W i c expenditwe
Health (?h of GDP)
Education (% of GDP)
Net primary school enrollment rate
(% ofage group)
Total
Male
Female
Access t o an improved water source
(% ofpopulation)
Total
Urban
Rural
Immunization rate
(% of chibren ages 12-23 months)
Measles
DPT
Child matnubition(% under 5 yeas)
Life expxtancyatblrth
(Yeam)
Total
Male
Female
Mortality
Infant (per1,WOlive births)
under 5 (per 1,000)
Aduk (15.59)
Male (per 1,000 population)
Female(per 1,WO population)
Matertwl (modeled, per 100,WOIive births)
Biths attended by skilled health staff (%)

Same regionlincome group
WPermiddle
income

-

23.6

0
0

2,970
55
62

25.2
9.8
35.0

32.4
6.5
39.1

34.9
7.4
42.5

5.2

4.3
5.5

4.1
4.6

3.6
4.7

97
97
97

96
96
96

91
92
90

94
94
94

100

100

95
99
66

95
98
83

92
94

96
96

99
99

97
95

94
96

71
67
75

72
$8
76

75
71
80

69
64
74

70
67
74

19
21

14
15

6
7

23
26

22

254
105

250
94

190
€6
6
100

2 99
123
44
95

258
137
97
94

Note Oor 0 0 means zeroorkssthan halfthe unt show Netenrdlment rate break n senes between 1997 and 1998 dueto
change from ISCED76 to ISCED97 Immuneabn refers to childrenages 12-23 months who recerved vaccinabons before one
year of ageor at any bme befwe the survey
World Development lndicatws database, Wwlcl Bank - 10 September 2006

43

26

Annex B6
Page 1 o f 2

-

Poland Key Economic Indicators

Indicator
National accounts (as % o f GDP)
Gross domestic product'
Agriculture

Actudl
2006
2007

2005

Estimate
2009

2008

Projected
2011
2012

2010

2013

100
5
31
65

100
4
31
65

100
4
32
64

100
4

100

100

100

100

4

4

4

4

100
4

31
65

32
64

32
63

33
63

33
62

34
62

Tooil Consumption
Gross domestic fixed investment
Government investment
Primte investment

81
18
3
15

81
20
4
16

79
22
4
17

79
22
4
18

80
23
5
19

79
24
5
19

79
25
5
20

79
26
5
21

79
27
5
22

EXPOIB (CNFS)~

37
38

40
42

41
44

40
43

34
38

35
38

34
38

33
38

33
39

Industry
Services

lmporls (GNFS)
Gross domestlc savrngs

19

19

21

21

20

21

21

21

21

Gross national sdvmgsc

18

18

20

19

19

20

21

22

21

303912

341670

424790

526923

405094

419374

442754

467437

493497

7270

8340

9790

11880

11810

11550

1 I260

11930

12640

Real annual growth rates (%, calculatedfrom 02 prices)
36
Gross domestic product at market pnces
Gross Domesbc lncome
41

62
63

6.7
7.5

4.8
4.1

0.5
0.2

1.0
1.8

3.0
3.7

3.0
3.7

3.0
3.7

Real annual per capita gowth rates (%, calculated from 0 2 pnces)
Gross domestic product at market pnces
37
63
Total consumption
28
53
Primte consumption
21
51

6.7
4.7
5.0

4.8
4.0
5.4

0.6
2.6
2.1

1.1
0.6
1.5

3. I
3.6
4.5

3.1
3.6
5.5

3.1
4.5
5.2

Memorandum items
Gross domestic product
(US%nullion at current prices)
GN! per caplta (US$, Atlas method)

Balance of Payments(US miltions)
EXPOIIS
(CNFS)~
Merchandlse FOB

Imports (GNFS)b
Merchandlse FOB
Resource balance
Net current transfers
Current account balance
Net prrvate foreign duect invesment
Long-term loans (net)

oficial
Pnvate
Other capital (na incl
Change in reserwsd

a r m & ommssions)

Memorandum items
Resource balance (?hof GDP)
Real annual growth rates (YR02 pnces)
Merchandlse exports (FOB)
Pnmq
Manufactures
Merchandlse imports (CIF)

112653
96395

138060
117468

174127
145337

212735
177278

183970
143144

195232
149425

202303
155581

209851
162194

217920
169310

114681
99161
-2028
8183
-3716

144330
124474
-6270
10612
-9394

186466
162394
12339
13651
-20100

232 106
201655
-19371
14296
-29029

2043 19
172864
-20349
16000
-23453

212161
179625
16930
16200
-20468

226282
191976
-23979
16300
-24200

241308
205135
-31457
I7400
-30202

255386
2 17247
-37466
18500
-34624

6951
4059
-7514
11573
841
-8135

10727
-367
-1976
1609
1514
-2480

17976
4627
-2533
7160
10534
I3037

12951
26559
-2125
28684
-12445
1964

6500
19339
-2125
21464
-2800
415

7500
13749
-716
14465
200
-98 1

8500
18328
775
17554
200
-2829

9500
24309
443
23866
200
-3807

10500
27492
418
27074
200
-3568

-07

-1 8

-2.9

-3.7

-5.0

4.0

-5.4

-6.7

-7.6

44

-

'

-

Annex B6
Page 2 o f 2

-

Poland Key Economic Indicators
(Continued)

Indicator
Public finance (as % o f GDP at market prices)
Current revenues
Current expenditures
Current account surplus (+) or deficit (-)
Capital expenditure
Foreign financing
Monetary indicators
M2iGDP
Growth of M2 (%)
Private sector credit growth /
total credit growth (%)

2005

Actual
2006
2007

2008

Estimate
2009

2010

Projected
2011
2012

2013

0.1

38 9
38 0
09
49
03

39.0
36.8
2.2
5.0
0.6

39 0
36 3
21
50
05

46.3
-8.4
100.7

47.6
6.5
109.1

48 8
81
108 7

50.0
8.2
108.2

50 3
61
IO8 2

3.1
2.4

2.1
2.5

25
25

2.5
2.5

25
25

38.8
39.0
-0.2
4.4
1.5

39.7
39.0
0.6
4.8
0.3

40.0
37.3
2.6
4.8
-0.3

39.2
31.8
1.4
5.4
2.5

39.0
38.9
0.1
4.8
0.2

38.9
38.6
0.3
4.9

42.2
12.6
103.6

45.4
15.9
109.7

46.7
14.2
132.4

52.0
20.2
92.5

133.3

136.0

141.8

155.9

2.1
2.6

1 .o
1 .5

2.5
3.9

4.2
3.1

Price indices( YR02 =loo)
Merchandise export price index
Merchandise import price index
Merchandise terms of trade index
Real exchange rate (US$/LCU)
Real interest rates
Consumer price index (%change)
GDP deflator (% change)

a.
b.
c.
d.

GDP at factor cost
"GNFS" denotes "goods and nonfactor services."
Includes net unrequited transfers excluding official capital grants.
Includes use of IMF resources.
e. Consolidated central Government.
f, "LCU" denotes "local currency units." An increase in US$/LCU denotes appreciation.

45

Annex B7

-

-

CAS Annex 87 Key ExposuB Indicators Poland
As Of Date 2008-04.07

2005

Acual
2006
2007

2008

98821

125831

182940

217376

327

-3105

16551

16612

16898

TDO/GDP

814
325

TDSKGS
Concessioml/TDO

137
14

Indicator
Total debt outstandingand

Estimated
2009

Projected
2012

2010

2011

2013

217376

239404

271067

304558

319752

21691

21691

22029

31663

33491

15194

20819

17550

17550

25558

22853

33294

42522

839
36 8

971
43 1

1043
63 1

1117
67 1

111.6
65.5

11 0
04

935
563
75
01

964
58 8

11 3
09

951
41 3
77
02

103
01

88
00

122
00

14.8
0.0

5.8
6.2

5.8
6.2

3.8
4.6

4.6
6.3

8.8
11.6

4.6
7.2

disbursed (TDO) (US$n$
Net disbursements (US$m)8
Total debt service (TDS)

(US$m)*
Debt and debt service indicators
(%)
TDOIXGS~

IBRD exposure indicators (%)
IBRD DWpublic DS
Prefemed creditor DS/public
DS (%)'
IBRD DSIXGS

IBRD TDO (Us$m)d

0.2

0.2

1796

1961

1870

0.2

2

2

0.1

1776

0.1

4408

0.1

5922

0.1

6161

0.2
6415

0.1

6650

Of which present value of
guarantees (US$m)
Shareof JBRD portfolio (%)

I

IDA TDO (US$m)d

2

2

2

2

2

2

0

0

0

0

0

0

IFC (US$m)
Loans
Equlty andquasi-equity /c

MIGA
MIGA guarantees (US$m)

a. Includes public and publicly guaranteed debt, private nonguamnteed, use of I M F credits and net shortterm capital.
b. "XGS" denotes exports o f goods and services, including workers' remittances.
c. Preferred creditors are defined as IBRD, IDA, the regional multilateral development banks, the IMF, and the
Bank for International Settlements.
d. Includes present value o f guarantees.
e. Includes equrty and quasi-equity types o f both loan and equity instruments.

46

Annex C
CPS COMPLETION REPORT

I.Background
1.
The Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) for Poland was designed to align the
Bank’s program both with Poland’s development challenges and priorities as a new EU
member. The CPS provided a broad and flexible framework for the World Bank to support
Poland in a selective manner in an environment where the need for external borrowing was
modest. The strategy took as i t s starting point Poland’s development priorities, including: i)
high and sustained economic growth with the objective o f reaching two-thirds o f the E U
average per capita income by 2013, ii)improved competitiveness o f firms and regions, iii)
recovery o f employment, and (iv) strong social cohesion. These priorities and overall strategy
were contained in Poland’s National Development Plan (NDP) 2004-06 and National
Development Strategy (NDS) 2007-13.
2.
The CPS set out a flexible framework to help the Government meet its objectives.
Key elements o f the CPS framework were:
Strategic and demand driven work program consistent with the Government’s
priorities:
Fiscal consolidation
0
Convergence/competitiveness
0
Employment and poverty reduction
Clear guidelines for engaging the Bank:
0
Demonstrated demand from Poland for Bank services
0
Significant policy or structural issues involved
0
Bank value added in terms o f technical excellence and comparative advantage
0
Effective partnerships
0
Rapid response and simplification o f procedures
A single lending case based on a conducive macroeconomic framework
Open-ended duration o f the CPS predicated on continued demand for Bank
services and existence o f a conducive macroeconomic environment consistent
with Poland’s convergence program under the EU’s Stability and Growth Pact.
11. Poland’s Strategic Goals

3.
At the time of the CPS, the Government’s overriding goal was for Poland to move
towards convergence with the rest of the EU by reaching two-thirds of the EU’s per
capita average income by 2013. The CPS was launched at the time that Poland had
achieved its overriding goal o f E U membership on May 1, 2004. The Government’s postaccession development strategy was contained in its NDP 2004-2006, and in the NDS 200720 13. The overriding objective o f the strategy was to put the economy on a path o f high and
sustainable growth through improved competitiveness o f f i r m s and regions, to contribute to
the recovery o f employment, and promote strong social cohesion. The strategy laid out three
challenges to be met:
0

Convergence to European income levels: To achieve the stated aim o f reaching
two-thirds o f per capita EU average income by 20 13, the Government recognized that
medium term convergence to European income levels would require sustained high
growth averaging 4.5 percent based on strong competitiveness in European and world

49

Annex C
markets. This would entail continued structural reforms to: (a) improve the business
environment, including broadening and deepening financial intermediation, initiating
judicial system reform and deepening public administration reform, including being
able to use the available resources from the EU effectively and efficiently; (b)
improve the energy and transport infrastructure: and (c) develop the knowledge
economy, including initiating tertiary education reform.
0

0

Fiscal consolidation and meeting the requirements for euro adoption: The
Government's medium-term macroeconomic plans were centered on meeting the
conditions for euro adoption in 2009. Poland's convergence program in 2004
envisaged a reduction o f the general Government deficit below 3 percent of GDP by
2007, while maintaining public debt below 60 percent of GDP in line with its EU
convergence program in the context o f the Stability and Growth Pact (SGP).20In
addition, ambitious reforms were foreseen for sectors that had been a burden to the
budget such as coal mining, railways and health, as well as reforms of social transfers
aimed at increasing labor market incentives (notably the farmers' pension system and
disability pensions). Public expenditure management systems and tax administration
also required further improvement.
Increasing employment and reducing poverty: I n Poland, there is a strong
correlation between family income levels and employment status of heads of
household. Employment creation remained sluggish at the start o f the CPS period,
and was indeed lower than it had been in the past when it had offset the considerable
job destruction associated with economic transition. As a result, unemployment was
high and long-term unemployment was increasing, leading to growing pockets of
long-term poverty and social exclusion. To stimulate new job creation, labor market
reforms were needed and small and medium enterprise (SME) development needed to
be revitalized. Large inequalities in education and skills were a key barrier to citizens'
capacity to find and hold a job and, thus, to staying out of poverty. There was also a
need to examine the system o f social transfers for better targeting, as evidence
suggested that in some circumstances social transfers had created a disincentive to
more active participation in the labor market. Growing pockets of long-term
unemployment and poverty also had to be dealt with, requiring actions to increase the
level of social inclusion.

111. Poland's Progress towards its Strategic Goals

4.
Poland has successfully managed its integration into the European Union (EU).
Macroeconomic performance through most of the CPS period has been favorable, with
strong output growth and a rapid decline in unemployment combined with low inflation and
external imbalances. Meanwhile, buoyant tax revenues have led to a decline in the fiscal
deficit. Growth has been built on a vibrant private sector which now accounts for threequarters o f the economy. High growth in domestic consumption reflects the rapid increase in
living standards for most Polish citizens. Likewise, poverty levels have decreased
considerably over recent years. Poland has weathered the financial crisis that hit the region in
2008 relatively well, but i s not immune from the effects of the global economic downturn,
which could reverse some o f the gains.

The main objective o f the SGP i s to enforce discipline in the Euro zone as a means to support price stability
and sustainable growth.

50

Annex C
While Poland’s reform momentum slowed down following EU accession, it has
5.
nonetheless met o r exceeded most o f its strategic goals set out in the CPS:
0

Growth and income convergence with the EU accelerated over the CPS period,
but growth has suffered a setback due to the global economic crisis and
sustaining strong growth will require renewed reforms: Economic growth
averaged 5.5 percent in 2004-2007, but will dip sharply in 2009 due to the global
crisis. As a result, Poland’s GDP per capita at purchasing power parity reached 55.5
percent o f the average for the EU-27 in 2008. The strong growth from 2004-07
reflects to a significant extent a rebound from the economic slowdown in the earlier
part o f the decade combined with a favorable external environment until the recent
global financial crisis hit. A continued rapid reduction o f the income gap with the EU
would require sustained high growth based on strong productivity increases and
higher employment and investment rates. This in turn would require a renewed focus
on reform which had slowed down in recent years: (i)public finance reforms to
improve the quality and efficiency o f public finances, (ii)structural reforms to
improve the general investment climate and support restructuring o f low-productivity
sectors, and (iii)labor supply mobilization to further raise low employment rates, and
improve skills o f the workforce.

e

Robust growth was accompanied by broadly sound macroeconomic
fundamentals. In line with global tendencies, from late 2007 inflation accelerated
above the inflation target (of 2.5 +/-1 percent), driven largely by cost factors (higher
food and energy prices) but also rising unit labor costs resulting from the sharp labor
market tightening. I n response, interest rates were hiked gradually from spring 2007,
while accompanying zloty appreciation made monetary conditions even more
restrictive. Although the external current account deficit widened further to 5.5
percent o f GDP in 2008, it remained moderate by historical and regional standards
and was almost fully financed by net foreign direct investment (FDI). Nonetheless,
the foreign-debt-to-GDP ratio increased to around 57 percent o f GDP in 2008, partly
because o f the significant zloty depreciation in late 2008.

0

The fiscal stance improved significantly from 2005 to 2007, which helped Poland
move closer towards Euro adoption by 2012. The general government deficit,
including the costs o f pension reform (around 2 percent o f GDP per annum),
amounted to 2 percent o f GDP in 2007 compared to 3.8 percent o f GDP in 2006 and
4.3 percent o f GDP in 2005. This impressive outcome was achieved due to strong
revenues and tight spending control, but this achievement may be at risk given the
sharp slowing o f demand for Polish exports in Western Europe. Due to strong
nominal GDP growth, zloty appreciation, and a primary fiscal surplus o f around 0.5
percent o f GDP, the public debt-to-GDP ratio declined from over 47 percent o f GDP
in 2005-2006 to 45 percent o f GDP in 2007. At the end o f 2007, Poland met the
reference values for deficit and debt and fulfilled the inflation and interest rate criteria
o f the Maastricht Treaty. In June 2008 the EC recommended closing Poland’s
Excessive Deficit Procedure (imposed in 2004) on the basis o f Poland’s updated
Convergence Program and confirmed that the deficit was reduced below the reference
value o f 3 percent o f GDP in a credible and sustainable manner. I n late 2008, the
Government announced a roadmap to euro adoption in 2012, which implied joining
the ERM-2 around the middle o f 2009. However, the economic crisis pushed Poland
towards a larger fiscal deficit than envisaged. According to the Spring 2009 Fiscal
Notification to Eurostat, the fiscal deficit in 2008 reached 3.9 percent o f GDP and i s

51

Annex C
projected to increase further to 4.6 percent o f GDP in 2009. Because o f a deficit
higher than the Maastricht threshold o f 3 percent o f GDP, in May 2009 the European
Commission issued a report initiating the re-opening o f the Excessive Deficit
Procedure. In addition, due to excessive exchange rate volatility and lack o f political
consensus to amend the Constitution, the plans for E M - 2 entry in the first half o f
2009 were abandoned, which may delay euro adoption.
0

0

Employment conditions improved considerably. Strong growth created new jobs
during 2004-07. As a result o f rising labor demand, and to a lesser degree external
migration, the unemployment rate fell from about 20 percent in 2003 to 7 percent in
2008. In tandem, the incidence o f long-term unemployment has recently declined
significantly. The growth in employment was accompanied by strong growth in real
wages, which averaged 3 percent per year over the last 5 years, accelerating in the last
two years and outpacing productivity gains. But despite the considerable progress in
reducing unemployment, the employment/population ratio remains one o f the lowest
in the E U (57 percent against the E U average o f about 65 percent) and well below the
Lisbon target o f 70 percent primarily due to the low labor force participation o f older
workers (ages 55 to 64). Anecdotal evidence suggests that some migration flows to
Western Europe are now declining or reversing.
The improvement in labor market conditions had a positive effect on poverty. As
a result, the official poverty rate dropped by almost 5 percentage points in just three
years: from the peak o f 19.2 percent in 2004 to 14.6 percent in 2007, with the trend
continuing in 2008, although these gains may be at risk with a temporary rise in
poverty anticipated in 2009 in particular among those in export industries as a result
o f the global economic crisis. Poland's tax and benefit system have also played a
strong redistributive role, thereby helping reduce income inequality considerably (the
Gini coefficient i s 0.329 - comparable with that o f UK, Estonia or Greece). Poverty i s
concentrated in rural areas and among the long-term unemployed.
%tors.2004-2010

Consumer prices (% change)
Current account deficit
Gross external debt
Fiscal balance*
Public debt*
Employment rate (%, 15-64)
Unemployment rate (%, 15-64)

35
-4 0
42.0
-5.7
45.7
51.7
19 4

21
-1 2
44.1
-4.3
47.1
52.8
18 0

1.o
-2.7
466
-3.9
47.7
545
14.0

25
-4 7
480
-1.9
44.9
57.0
97

42
-5.5
566
-39
47.1
59.2
7.2

lurid 2% o f GDP per annum. 2009 forecasts come from the Spring
2009 FiscalNotification' to Eurostat.
**) Official poverty line (refers to people eligible for cash social assistance benefits).
Note: Recently, the CSO revised the 2008 growth rate to 4.9% from 4.8% but because detailed national
accounts data were available in Annex B6 we use the growth rate before the revision.
Source: Eurostat, Central Statistical OfJice, World Bank, Ministry of Labor and Social Afsairs, Ministry of
Finance.

52

Annex C

IV. CPS Objectives

6.
The CPS set out a flexible framework to help the Government meet its objectives.
In view of Poland’s middle income status, the CPS did not set out a pre-determinedprogram
of Bank activities but rather a flexible partnership arrangement in which Bank activities in
Poland would be strategic and demand driven focusing on areas which were considered
consistent with Poland’s development priorities as laid out in i t s National Development Plan,
and where (i)significant policy or structural issues were involved; (ii) the Bank could add
value in terms of its technical excellence and comparative advantage; and (iii)effective
partnerships could be maintained with internal and external partners, including EU, EIB,
EBRD and CEDB. The Bank would support Poland with a full set of lending and nonlending instruments with Bank activities determined on an annual basis and consistent with
the Polish planning and budgeting cycle. Flexibility o f the CPS framework would permit
rapid response to emerging demand, with the intent to simplify project designs, shorten
preparation times, and simplify and align World Bank procedures with Polish and EU
practices in line with the World Bank’s initiative on the use o f country systems. The CPS
framework was designed to remain in force as long as Bank services were in demand and the
macroeconomic environment was consistent with Poland’s convergence program under the
EU’s Stability and Growth Pact.

7.

The CPS was to support three broad strategic priorities (the three CPS pillars)
laid out in Poland’s National Development Plan:

e

Fiscal Consolidation: Promote fiscal adjustment and reverse negative debt dynamics
through restructuring of public expenditures;
Convergence/Competitiveness: Promote convergence with the EU through an
improved investment climate and enhanced competitiveness; and
Employment and Poverty: Reduce poverty, encourage social inclusion, and bring
employment closer to the Lisbon targets.

8.
Overall, the priorities and framework for engagement laid out in the CPS have
been appropriate. The strategic priorities supported by the CPS have continued to be
relevant as demonstrated by the reform areas which continue to be important for securing
Poland’s future high growth. The flexible engagement framework of the CPS was also
appropriate and consistent with the Bank’s new approach in such well-performing middle
income countries (MICs). The following sections on CPS outcomes and results (section V
below) and Bank performance (section V I below) will ascertain whether CPS
implementationfollowed these principles of engagement.
V. CPS Outcomes /Results
Major factors affecting CPS implementation and outcomes

9.
Poland’s recurring political changes and related policy changes had a significant,
adverse impact on CPS implementation. The CPS period saw three different governments
with diverse interests in economic policy. Each of the governments was based on coalitions
with narrow parliamentary majorities, which in one case led to early elections. Within 6
months o f the CPS launch a significant political shift took place following general elections,
with a coalition led by conservative Law and Justice (Pis) party taking over from the
coalition led by the left-leaning Democratic Left Alliance (SDL). The PiS-led coalition
collapsed in the summer of 2007 which led to early elections and the emergence o f another

53

Annex C
coalition led by the Civic Platform (PO) party and Prime Minister Donald Tusk. All these
political changes made for a challenging turbulent political background and lack of
continuity for CPS implementation.

10. Frequent changes in Government also led to rapid turnover of key counterparts
which further affected continuity and ownership of Bank activities. Besides frequent
policy reversals, there was a frequent turnover of counterparts - ministers, undersecretaries
and even non-political staff. On various occasions, activities were started based on
understandings reached with one set of counterparts which had to be suspended after
preparation had advanced as a new set of interlocutors had moved in. This turned out to be a
problem in many o f the AAA activities undertaken.
11. I n addition, reform implementation slowed down as a result of reform fatigue
following Poland’s recent EU accession. As noted, Poland has seen robust economic
performance in recent years. This was, in part, due to a natural catch-up after Poland’s slow
growth earlier in the decade, the positive effects of its recent EU membership, and a buoyant
external environment. Nonetheless, Poland still has a considerable reform agenda in
completing privatization, improving the business environment, enhancing the quality and
efficiency o f public finances, developing infrastructure, and addressing emerging bottlenecks
in the labor market. The current Government has restarted reforms in a number of these
areas, which has opened the way for renewed Bank engagement in the form of a
programmatic policy loan (DPL) in support of public finance management, employment and
private sector development (FY09).

12. Finally, EU accession also brought access to new financing sources, including
sizeable EU grants, and market finance. These likely contributed to decline in interest in
IBRD loans. Interest in Bank loans re-surfaced with the recognition of the significant
analytical support associated with IBRD projects.
CPS Outcomes

13. There has been progress in achieving the outcomes foreseen under each of the
CPS Pillars. These outcomes have been assessed against the intermediate indicators included
in the CPS Results Matrix under each of three CPS Pillars (Fiscal Consolidation,
ConvergenceKompetitiveness, and Employment and Poverty).
Pillar 1: Fiscal Consolidation

(a) Consolidatepublic finances for entry into E N - 2
14. There i s broad consensus on the need to reform public finances in order for
Poland to enter the ERM-2 and subsequently adopt the Euro. The Government has
announced its intention to join ERM-2 in 2009 and prepare for euro adoption in 2012. Until
2009, Poland had made sustained progress towards meeting the requirements to enter the
ERM-2: the budget deficit was reduced from 5.7 percent of GDP in 2004 to 3.9 percent of
GDP in 2008 and public debt increased slightly from around 46 percent o f GDP in 2004 to
47 percent of GDP in 2008, safely below the,Maastricht Treaty reference value of 60 percent
of GDP. The Bank’s AAA work in this area (the EU8 Fiscal Policy work in 2005 2008 and
the Regional Economic Reports) has contributed both to the analytic underpinning of these
issues and to broader public understanding and debate. However, the effects of the financial

-

54

Annex C
crisis and economic downturn in Europe, and automatic stabilizes operating outside of the
state budget, pushed the fiscal deficit above the 3 percent of GDP threshold in 2008.

(b) Eliminate state support for reform of selected sectors and ensure their
sustainability

15. There has been substantial progress in eliminating the need for future state
support to reform selected sectors and ensure their financial sustainability. Specifically,
the hard coal mining companies have been operating within a hard budget constraint, have
met all of their obligations, including taxes and social benefits, have been profitable in 2005
and 2006, and all further restructuring costs are to be paid by the coal companies and not by
the state budget. The restructuring of the railway sector, while incomplete, has also made it
possible to progress toward a sustainable level of budget support for socially necessary
services, primarily as a result of devolving the responsibility for regional passenger services
to regional governments and capping subsidies at their 2005 levels. I n the health sector, the
Act on Health Care Services Financed from Public Funds (2004) i s being implemented.
Work i s ongoing to redefine a basic benefit package to be delivered within the existing health
insurance resources.
16. The Hard Coal Restructuring Program 2004-06 (2004-06 Program) was largely
implemented with the support o f two Bank loans. While progress was significant, the
specific targets were not fully met in terms of reduction of employment (from 136,500 to
119,000 instead of the target of 117,000) and capacity (from 102.6 million tons per year (tpy)
to 97 million tpy instead of 94.8 tpy), mainly as a result of the buoyant coal market, which
allowed companies to be profitable and meet all obligations, including taxes and social
benefits without budget support. The planned privatization was delayed due to the lack of
consensus with social partners but important preparatory steps were taken. While much has
been achieved, the largest company, Kompania Weglowa (KW) remains financially
vulnerable to declines in coal prices and made losses in the fourth quarter of 2006 due to
falling export prices. The Bank’s AAA work for the Hard Coal Sector has provided inputs
into the Government’s Action Plan for the sector for 2007-15. It addresses areas not fully
completed under the 2004-06 Program. It assumes that long-term viability of the sector will
be sustained by mining companies taking actions to: (i) control costs to keep production costs
below the coal price; (ii)adjust the production capacity o f coal to domestic market needs and
economically justified export markets; (iii) sustain financial liquidity and secure credit
worthiness of the companies; and (iv) identify new uses for coal and new markets for coal.
In addition, the plan calls for limited privatization of coal mining companies through public
listing on the Warsaw Stock Exchange. Such privatization would help strengthen the
governance of the mining companies and provide access to new sources of capital.
Privatized coal companies would enhance energy security for Poland just as they do for other
major producers such as Australia, South Africa, Canada and the United States.

17.

I n the health sector, the Bank supported the Ministry of Health to implement the
Act on Health Care Services Financed from Public Funds (2004), and more broadly, to
improve the efficiency and effectiveness o f public expenditures on health care, enhancing the
quality of health services, and increase the regulatory, planning and policy-making capacity
of the MOH. A “business plan” to map out a strategy for achieving the above objectives was
prepared, which has been used by MOH to: (i)pass a law for implementing a comprehensive
emergency care program; (ii)start the design o f a basic benefit package of health services for
financing through the public health insurance system; and (iii)develop a drug policy
comparable to EU standards and practices. Resources for implementing these reforms will

55

Annex C
come from the State and the National Health Insurance Fund (NFZ). No external financing i s
required: resources were included in the budget for 2007 and provisions have been made in
the budgets for 2008 and 2009. I n addition, the Bank supported the NFZ in conducting a
needs assessment to strengthen the health management information system and build
analytical capacity at the NFZ. The NFZ plans to finance the implementation o f next steps
suggested in these assessments. The Government also actively participated in Bankorganized workshops in Slovenia on private-public collaboration in health (December 2006),
and in Hungary on pharmaceutical governance (February 2007).
Pillar 2: Convergence/Competitiveness
(a) Improve the business climate

18. There has been an improvement in the business environment since 2005 despite a
slight deterioration in Poland’s ranking from 74 to 76 in the ease of doing business as
reported in the 2009 Doing Business Report. This deterioration has resulted from other
countries reforming their business environments more aggressively than Poland rather than
from a deterioration of the environment in Poland. In fact, there has been steady progress in
business confidence in Poland as evidenced by increasing levels of both domestic and foreign
investment. Despite these positive signs, a dynamic business climate requires continuous
policy refinement and reform. The Bank’s ROSC assessments of accounting and auditing,
and corporate governance, and the report on Obstacles to Contract Enforcement identified
important prospective reforms which are incorporated in the strategic documents prepared by
the Government for implementation by 2009. In particular they include: (i)the reform of
business, land and collateral registries, and of legal information system; (ii)automation of
registers and courtrooms; and (iii)enhancing the skills of the workforce, including judges,
Ministry officials, court staff etc., to improve the productivity and performance of public
officials. Various development partners such as the EU, Norway, and the World Bank are
expected to assist the Government finalize its approach and implement the reforms.
19. The financial sector i s performing relatively well amid the global turmoil, but
several developmental challenges remain and these have been exacerbated lately. The
sector has been expanding steadily over the last five to six years, primarily due to the pension
and insurance sectors, but banking has also grown and its indicators are generally positive,
although some risks are emerging related to a large increase in foreign currency lending. The
level of financial intermediation has been increasing, but it remains lower than the regional
average. In addition, much o f the growth in bank credit i s attributable to housing finance,
which has grown faster than overall bank finance, suggesting a slowdown in corporate
financing. A weak information environment may be a cause of the slowdown in corporate
lending, in particular as it relates to the operation of credit information bureaus. Several of
the Bank’s recommendations in this area provided in a series of financial sector policy notes
and an update of the FSAP have been taken on board by the Government and are now being
implemented. The unification of supervisory functions under the Financial Supervision
Authority in 2007 was a significant step forward.
20. There has been limited progress in improving the effectiveness, efficiency and
friendliness of the public environmental financing system to the private capital market.
While the targets for the share of private funds in the sector operational program for
environment were increased in the final Government document compared to the 2005
proposal, achieving these targets will require further efforts and concrete public financial
products to attract private financial institutions to environmental investments. Bank efforts to
56

Annex C
work with the Government to strengthen the public environmental financing system in the
2007-2013 EU financing period were limited to a diagnostic assessment of Poland’s progress
towards meeting environmental commitments of the National Environmental Policy and the
EU Accession Treaty obligations, and an analysis of environmental and water management
priorities of structural instruments o f the NDS 2007-2013.
(b) Improve infrastructure

2 1. There have been continued improvements in infrastructure, in particular in road
and rail transport, but also in the energy sector and in flood prevention. In the road
sector, there has been some progress, although slower than initially anticipated, in the
modernization of the national road agency (GDDKiA), including the preparation of a
modernization action plan, implementation of which will require a clear Government
commitment. GDDKiA i s now able to develop rolling multi-annual expenditure programs,
which are based on objective, economic criteria; the annual programs for 2006 and 2007
have been generated largely on the basis o f these criteria. The design of a Management
Information System has been completed and i s now being implemented with expected
completion in 2009. There has also been continuous and measurable improvement in the
quality of the national road network. The percentage of roads in good condition has increased
from 45.5 percent in 2004 to 54.9 percent in 2007, and the backlog of roads in bad condition
declined from 25.8 percent in 2004 to 22.5 percent in 2007. The yearly program of
rehabilitation o f roads in the national network has been implemented in fwll during calendar
years 2004-2006 with the support of the Bank through its series of three Road Maintenance
and Rehabilitation loans pooling resources with the state budget together with parallel
financing from the European Investment Bank (EIB). The use of these resources has been
closely linked to progress in the modernization and capacity building activities supported by
the Bank as described above.
22. Progress in the railway sector has been mixed. The restructuring of the national
railway company (PKP Group) has not been fully implemented, and although there
have been improvements in labor productivity and finances of the railway sector,
several challenges remain to ensure the financial sustainability of the sector. Reforms
supported by a Bank loan that closed in December 2005 helped improve labor productivity
by reducing staffing levels from 190,000 to 145,000, and splitting the previous monolithic
company into a number of separate businesses within a holding structure. However, the
assets have not yet been fwlly allocated and transferred to the different companies, and their
outstanding debt has not been fully waived or restructured. Policy dialogue continued under
the Bank’s Roads I1 loan and focused on regional passenger services, preparatory work for
the privatization of cargo services and the development of economic plans for the
rehabilitation of transport infrastructure. Responsibility for financing and subsidizing
regional passenger services was devolved to regional self-governments contributing to a
change from a loss of just over PLN 2 billion in 2004 to a profit of PLN 18 million in 2007,
still below the expectations at the start of the restructuring process. Standards and required
levels of passenger service have not yet been finalized; leaving room for further
improvement in this area. Contracts on the standards and levels o f service have not yet been
finalized; this includes performance contracts between the holding and subsidiary companies
and between the holding company and the Government. Consequently, there i s no clear
agreement on future infrastructure standards, quality of service, strategy for financing the
backlog o f maintenance and reduction of operating costs. There has been no concrete
progress on privatization, which was largely a result of strong trade union resistance and
insufficient political impetus. The latest strategy paper for the railway sector adopted by the
57

Annex C

’

Government in 2007 and currently under implementation aims to resolve gradually most of
the outstanding issues.

23.

Improvements were made in improving Poland’s seaport and maritime
infrastructure. Polish ports are handling approximately 30 percent o f total foreign trade, so
the current governmental strategy or seaports infrastructure development, adopted in 2007,
aims at further improvement in competitiveness of the Polish ports through their
modernization and development with approximately Euro 700 million earmarked for their
development until 2013. As part of a Port Sector Modernization Program that began in 1996
and focused on institutional reform and improved connections with land transportation
networks, the Bank supported a second phase during this CPS period with an investment loan
focusing on the Szczecin-Swinoujscieport complex and seaway. The loan aimed to improve
port capacity to handle container traffic and to clarify and consolidate the division of roles
’ and responsibilities between public port authorities and private port operators. Successful
civil works were undertaken to reinforce the embankment o f the Piastowski canal, which
significantly improved navigational safety by sheltering vessels from strong, irregular
currents; rebuild the breakwaters to prevent deterioration of the channel; provide navigation
lights on breakwater heads to improve traffic safety; slope protection along the banks of the
Katowice Peninsula and construction of new berthing facilities on Grabowski Island. Two
civil works activities that were not completed: (i)the containment facility, and (ii)unfinished
works on Katowicki Peninsula. Traffic cargo and container traffic increased, although this
may be due, in part, to strong global growth. In addition, the project provided significant
technical assistance to the seaway authorities in environmentally safe disposal methods for
contaminants. Finally the project facilitated the concession agreement that has established a
private operator in Szczecin port.

24. The program for the prevention o f floods in the Odra River Basin has been
finalized with technical support under the Bank supported Emergency Flood Recovery
project which was completed in 2005 and i s now being implemented. The EUR 505
million flood prevention program will be financed with resources from the Government of
Poland, EU Cohesion Funds, the Council of Europe Development Bank and a Euro 140
million World Bank loan approved in March 2007. The program aims to eliminate the risk of
flooding, loss o f life and damage to property for a population of more than 2.5 million people
in towns and rural settlements in three provinces in the Lower Silesia region. The project aim
will be achieved through the construction of infrastructure as well as continued institutional
strengthening aimed at better preparedness for emergencies through improvements in flood
forecasting and management. The Bank i s currently providing support on the resettlement
plan in relation to the Raciborz dry polder.

25.

I n the energy sector, the Government is still working within the general
framework o f the “Poland Energy Policy Until 2025.” It has adopted a specific “Program
for the Power Sector” which maps out the way ahead in opening the electricity market
according to the EC Electricity Directive. Some progress has been achieved in transferring
the transmission system assets to an independent transmission system operator but there i s
scope for improving the regulatory framework to create more competition and protect
consumer interests. The Bank stands ready to support the Government in the implementation
of this Program. Another concern i s that progress on implementing energy efficiency
measures remains slow and that grant funds for energy efficiency in public sector buildings
(especially structural funds) are used inefficiently with little leveraging of private sector
finance. The Bank’s Krakow Energy Efficiency Project has demonstrated a replicable model

58

Annex C
o f combining grant funds with commercial finance through Energy Service Companies
(ESCOs).
(c) Develop the knowledge economy

26. Since 2004, there has been sustained progress in developing the Knowledge
Economy in Poland. Legislation on an Innovation Fund with Government and EU financing
has been enacted (embodying the concept proposed in the Bank’s Knowledge Economy
Assessment (KEA)) to provide grants to innovating firms. A Capital Fund (similar to the one
proposed in the KEA) has been established to provide seed capital, and legislation i s being
considered to alter the incentives for state owned research institutes by providing a V A T
rebate when revenues from the commercial sector exceed 50 percent. The Government has
also adopted a strategy for L i f e Long Learning, one o f the education sector reforms proposed
in the KEA. EU accession has driven the liberalization o f the ICT sector, along with product
and labor markets.
Pillar 3: Employment and Poverty
(a) Support employment creation

27. After years of stagnation and even negative growth, employment started to
increase in 2005 and especially in 2006 with total employment (14.67 million) reaching
its highest level in the decade. Overall, employment increased by 600,000 net new jobs
since the end o f 2004, mainly as a result o f robust economic growth and increasing
investment. However, the employment rate i s still one o f the lowest in the EU. Increasing
employment will continue to be one o f Poland’s critical challenges. This issue has featured
prominently in the Bank’s M A work: it was raised in the regional study on internal labor
mobility (FY06) and earlier in several special topics o f the Quarterlymegular Economic
Reports (labor taxation April 2005, sustainability o f pension systems - October 2005,
sources o f economic growth February 2006, public finances - May 2006, international
migration - September 2006), EU8 cross-country fiscal studies (higher education - F Y 2005,
vocational education and social assistance - FY 2006), and the informal policy note for the
new Government (autumn 2005). Bank studies supported the public debate on impediments
affecting weak labor market performance in Poland and the labor tax wedge was reduced.
Further adjustments o f the social security system are anticipated in the DPL loan series.

-

-

(b) Increase level of social inclusion
28. Along with gradually declining unemployment and poverty, social exclusion also
shows a declining trend, although not at the same pace. Progress i s being made in
increasing delivery o f social services geared towards promoting social inclusion in 500 least
developed communities through the implementation o f the Bank-financed Post Accession
Rural Support Project (PARSP). Local social integration strategies have been completed and
4,606 contracts for the delivery o f social services have been signed and are now being
implemented. The project has been praised by local officials and civil society activists for its
innovative approach and impact in mobilizing local communities for social integration.

59

Annex C

VI. Bank Performance
a) Strategic Relevance, Impact

29. As noted, the CPS framework and overall priorities were broadly appropriate.
The three overall CPS priorities - fiscal consolidation, convergencehompetitiveness, and
employment and poverty - have continued to be relevant to the development challenges
faced by Poland. These priorities also match the broad areas where the Bank could expect to
provide continued value added to Poland’s development agenda. The flexible nature of the
CPS, with Bank activities determined as part of annual business plans agreed with the
Government, also underscored the demand orientation of the Bank’s involvement with an
advanced middle income country and helped address the lack of continuity in an uncertain
political environment by allowing for changes in the Bank program during CPS
implementation.

30. But CPS implementation fell short in terms of its strategic relevance, overall
coherence and impact. On the lending side, the Bank focused its involvement on a number
of niche areas where it had developed its reputation for technical excellence and had strong
connections with counterpart institutions. As a result, Bank lending continued in road
transport and flood protection, social support in rural areas as follow-up to the earlier rural
development lending, and final involvement in the coal mining sector based on the Bank’s
long standing involvement. The AAA program in turn was rather piecemeal with limited
connections to the lending program. It lacked core or flagship products such as a Public
Expenditure and Institutional Review (PEIR), Living Standards Assessment, and Knowledge
Economy Assessment undertaken in the previous CAS. While there were important activities
clustered around a set of financial sector activities (a series of policy notes, FSAP update),
sector policy dialogue (education, health, railways, energy, legal system), and ROSCs
(corporate governance, accounting and auditing, insolvency and creditor rights), they had
limited impact on the policy debate and only partially supported the overall CPS strategic
framework. As noted also by a QAG revied’, which included a review of six AAA activities
implemented under the CPS, the AAA program was rather opportunistic and not adequately
strategized upfront. While the internal quality of the AAA work was generally considered to
be of high standard, QAG felt that the Bank’s comparative advantage in carrying out certain
activities was not always apparent. It also gave low ratings for both coherence and
integration, and likely impact of the AAA program.
3 1. The weak strategic orientation of CPS implementation reflected the nature of the
Bank’s dialogue in Poland which lacked a strong anchor and coordination on
Government side. The Bank’s dialogue was largely bottom-up and built on the strong
connections it had built with selected ministries and agencies. For much of the CPS period,
the Ministry o f Finance showed limited interest in cooperating with the Bank as it was
ambivalent about Bank lending in Poland in view of its improved access to market finance
and the ample availability o f EU grant funds. I n the absence of another coordination point
for Bank involvement, the Bank built its activities around connections and demand from
selected counterpart agencies.

32. The recent re-engagement o f the Bank with the new Government has resulted in
a more strategic approach around a set o f core policy areas. At the center of this dialogue
has been a broad understanding with the Prime Minister’s Office and MOF on the nature of

’’QAG Review carried out in FY06107
60

Annex C

the Bank’s future involvement in support o f key policy areas closely linked to Poland’s
future growth and convergence agenda. This has resulted in recent agreement on an
integrated program o f policy lending and A A A focused on improvements in public finance
management, employment, and private sector development.
b) Quality of Bank Services

33. I n tandem with Poland’s increased access to external finance, the Bank’s lending
portfolio has reduced over the CPS period. During the period, four new lending projects
were approved as foreseen at the time o f the CPS while eight projects closed. As a result, the
lending portfolio (before the recent approval o f the DPL) fell from 13 projects for a total net
commitment o f about $1.4 billion in FY05 to 7 projects with total commitment o f $734
million in FY09. Until the recent approval o f the Public Finance Management, Employment
and Private Sector Development DPL, the lending portfolio in Poland was declining and
entirely made up o f investment projects with a strong infrastructure orientation built around a
series o f roads rehabilitation projects, as well as railways, flood emergency/protection, rural
development, and two coal sector operations (social mitigation and mine closure). The roads
projects used a sector-wide (SWAP) design which allowed for quick disbursement o f Bank
hnds in support o f the Government budget for road rehabilitation and maintenance and
which was extended as part o f the two roads projects approved during the CPS period.
34. The quality of the lending portfolio has been mixed. As shown in the table below,
despite a declining portfolio both the number o f problem projects and the commitments at
risk o f active projects in the portfolio has increased over the CPS period. In addition, IEG
rated the outcomes o f two o f the eight closed projects as marginally unsatisfactory
(geothermal district heating and environment, and coal mine closure). Sustainability o f
outcomes was considered ‘likely’ for six operations, and for the other two (hard coal social
mitigation and coal mine closure) IEG found that there was moderate and significant risk to
development outcome. With one exception (the geothermal project), Bank performance was
considered satisfactory. The earlier strong disbursement performance also weakened over the
CPS period as the quick disbursing roads projects came to an end and the more recent
projects (post-accession rural support, Odra flood protection) did not pick up the
disbursement pace. Somewhat surprisingly in view o f Poland’s advanced status, the portfolio
has suffered from a number o f implementation problems which have resulted in delays and
weaker than expected outcomes. These involve institutional weaknesses, including slow
establishment o f project implementation organizations, excessive bureaucracy in decision
making, turnover o f project staff, and inter-agency problems.
Poland: Investment Loan Portfolio Indicators, FY05-09

Includes projects that have closed during the FY.
b/Does not include US$1,250 million DPL.

61

Annex C

35. Despite the rather weak strategic orientation and coherence of the AAA program
noted above, the quality of individual AAA activities has generally been good. Despite
an overall reduced involvement in Poland, the Bank continues to have a high reputation for
its knowledge and analytical work. The QAG AAA review undertaken in FY06/07 for
activities undertaken during FY02-06 (including six activities during the CPS period) rated
the overall internal quality o f the products sampled as satisfactory, including for the quality
o f analysis and o f conclusions and recommendations o f the individual products.
Participation, consultation and dissemination efforts were seen as a particularly strong
element o f the Bank’s A A A activities in Poland. There was considerable involvement by
Polish counterparts, academics, institutes and local consultants. Dissemination in many cases
involved workshops and conferences, involvement o f the media, and translation into Polish
language. But as mentioned, the rapid turnover o f counterparts in the Polish administration
diminished the ownership and impact o f the Bank’s AAA activities. Under these
circumstances arguably even more should have been done to publicly disseminate the Bank’s
work and to involve non-governmental partners, as much o f the analysis and
recommendations has a shelf l i f e that exceeds the tenure o f a particular government. Overall,
QAG assigned a moderately satisfactory rating for the AAA activities it reviewed. QAG’s
conclusions on the quality o f Bank’s A A A in Poland continue to be relevant for activities
undertaken in FY07-08 given the nature o f the much reduced AAA output in these years. On
a positive note, mention should be made o f the considerable impact and visibility of the
Bank’s regional economic studies, particularly the ongoing EU8+2 Quarterly Economic
Reports and the series o f EU8 Fiscal Policy Studies undertaken in 2005, 2006 and 2007,
which addressed key areas relevant to improving fiscal management in Poland and the other
new EU members. Each o f these reports received broad public attention in Poland and helped
maintain the good name o f the Bank in terms o f its analytical work and regional/global
knowledge.
c) Delivery o f Bank Services
36. Most o f the Bank activities foreseen for FYO5-06 as part of the flexible CPS
framework were undertaken, although some AAA activities were suspended given
changes in counterparts and Government priorities. A l l four o f the new lending projects
envisaged in the CPS (Roads maintenance and rehabilitation I1 and 111, Post-accession rural
support, and Odra river basin flood protection) were prepared, approved and launched, albeit
with some delays. Total new lending commitments during FY05-07 exceeded CPS
expectations (actual commitments o f US$709.5 million equivalent as compared with the
$620-680 million range foreseen in the CPS). Similarly, most o f the AAA activities
envisaged for FY05-06 were undertaken although some were suspended given the change o f
counterparts following the changes o f government in 2005 and 2006. A few significant
additional AAA activities were undertaken in FY06 beyond those foreseen in the CPS,
including an FSAP Update, a Country Financial Accountability Assessment (CFAA), and a
Transition Brief for the then new Government outlining Poland’s key policy challenges and
possible role o f the Bank. Attachments 2 and 3 show details o f the lending and non-lending
activities included in the CPS and their actual status, together with any additional activities
carried out.
37. But beyond FY06, new Bank activities were much reduced until a renewed
engagement with the new Government took shape in FYOS-09. During FY06-07, Bank
involvement was reduced to monitoring the portfolio o f ongoing projects and a few A A A
activities which built on the Bank’s previous involvement (see Annex 2 for details). I n
tandem, the quarterly Regional Economic Reports and regional fiscal studies kept up the
62

Annex C
visibility o f the Bank’s analytical work in Poland. Only with engagement o f the new
Government starting in early 2008 did a new program of Bank activities start to emerge
which i s now being launched, centered around a Programmatic Policy Loan and related AAA
activities in public finance management, labor markets and employment, pensions and social
assistance, private sector development, healthcare and education sector reform.

38. Work i s now underway to develop AAA services under reimbursable
arrangements to respond to demands for more specialized work or demands which exceed
the program foreseen in the CPS. Government interest for these services includes such areas
as implementation o f the power market program, housing rental policy, ownership policies
for SOEs, and performance budgeting. These reimbursable arrangements are particularly
relevant for development of a new line of Bank AAA services at the sub-national level. Such
sub-national business has considerable promise in Poland and initial engagement with a
number o f regions and municipalities has shown the potential for future Bank involvement
on reimbursablebasis.
d) Country dialogue

39. As noted, the Bank’s country dialogue in Poland was problematic given the
frequent changes in government and lack of coordination o f Bank activities on the
Polish side. While for much of the CPS period the Ministry of Finance showed limited
interest in both Bank analytical work and financing given availability of other sources o f
funds, the Bank continued its engagement with selected ministries and agencies with which it
had developed strong relations in the past. This led to a rather opportunistic, bottom-up
approach in formulating the Bank’s role and activities in Poland. The flexible CPS
framework with Bank activities determined as part of annual business plans to be agreed with
Government was an appropriate approach in the case of Poland but could not be fully
implemented given the lack of a clear coordination point for Bank activities. The overriding
attention of the administration to meeting the needs of the EU following EU membership
contributed to the difficulties in engaging the Government.

VII. Overall Assessment and Lessons
40. The CPS was designed and implemented in a challenging country context. On the
whole, Poland performed well during the period of CPS design and implementation. I t had
just achieved its overriding objective of EU membership in May 2004. Economic growth
accelerated to the 6 percent per year range aided by a stable macroeconomic framework and
favorable external conditions. This helped accelerate implementation of Poland’s overriding
goal of moving towards income convergence with the EU. High unemployment was sharply
reduced and poverty fell during the period. EU membership also facilitated Poland’s access
to ample external funds which reduced the interest in Bank financing. At the same time,
frequent changes in government officials contributed to a slowdown in Poland’s reform
momentum. With much of the administration’s attention focused on meeting the needs o f the
EU and its institutions, and in the absence of a clear statement of the Bank’s value-added visa-vis other external partners, the Government’s interest in a continued strategic engagement
with the Bank was limited for most o f the CPS period.

41. I n this context, the design o f the CPS was generally appropriate. It set up a more
flexible, demand-driven arrangement around a broad set of strategic themes: fiscal
consolidation, convergence/competitiveness, and employment and poverty. These priorities
also match the areas where the Bank could expect to provide continued value added to
63

Annex C
Poland’s development agenda. The flexible nature of the CPS, with Bank activities
determined as part of annual business plans agreed with the Government, was appropriate for
the engagement with an advanced MIC and helped address the lack of continuity in an
uncertain political environment by allowing for changes in the Bank program during CPS
implementation.

42. But CPS implementation was mixed with insufficient strategic focus and
cohesion. The Bank focused its continued involvement on a number of niche areas where it
had developed its reputation for technical excellence and had strong connections with
counterpart institutions. But without an anchor in the MOF, the AAA program was rather
piecemeal, lacked core products and had only limited impact on the domestic policy debate.
In the absence of a more strategic engagement with Poland the Bank may have continued too
long in a fairly traditional country relationship based on a mix of investment lending and ad
hoc AAA activities rather than moving to a more selective knowledge partnership.
43. The recent re-engagement of the Bank with Poland has resulted in a more
strategic approach around a set of core policy areas. At the center of this dialogue has
been a broad understanding with MOF and the Prime Minister’s Office on the nature of the
Bank’s future involvement in support o f key policy areas closely linked to Poland’s growth
and convergence agenda. This has resulted in recent agreement on an integrated program of
policy lending and AAA focused on improvements in public finance management,
employment, and private sector development.

0
’

0

0

Lessons learned:
Establish a flexible framework of activities that can be scaled up or down
according to client interest:
o Establish a strategic and cohesive program of Bank activities that i s not
wholly dependent upon one counterpart or one instrument;
o Maintain a core set of Economic and Sector work (ESW) and diagnostic
products as a basis for scaling up or developing new activities;
o Be prepared to scale down or disengage if the Bank’s involvement i s
perceived to lack strategic focus or impact and switch gradually to a
knowledge-based partnership through reimbursement agreements.
Define the Bank’s role and value added:
o Establish clearly the Bank’s role and value-added vis-a-vis other external
partners and funding sources such as the EU, European Investment Bank
(EIB), EBRD and OECD;
o Practice selectivity in Bank involvement in terms o f areas of involvement and
modalities o f support, focusing on the knowledge agenda;
o Test Bank involvement against the criteria defined as areas of Bank
value-added, strategic relevance and impact.
Manage political transitions:
o Seek continuity o f dialogue by developing relations at technical levels of the
civil service;
o Maintain contacts across the political spectrum and with strategic nonGovernment partners and sub-national entities;
o To the extent possible, align CPS cycles around electoral cycles.

64

Annex C
Annexes:

1. CPS Results Matrix
2. Lending: Planned versus Actual
3. Analytical & Advisory Activities: Planned versus Actual

65

W
W

W

i?

Annex C2

Poland: Planned and Actual Deliveries, FY05-09
A. Lending Deliveries

FY09 None

Total FY05-09

620.5-680.5

Development Policy Loan
(DPL)
Subtotal FY09
Total FY05-09

1/ Approved on July 1, 2004, prior to the CPS. The operation was included in the previous CAS

73

1,250.0
1,250.0
1,859.5

Annex C3

B. Non-Lending Deliveries, FY05-08
(excluding Regional Studies)
FY

CPS Plans

FY05

Corporate Governance ROSC Update
Accounting & Auditing ROSC Update
Financial Services Development (Policy
Notes)
Influence o f the Legal System on the
Financial Market

FY05-06

FY08

Actual

Health Reform Implementation
Dialogue
Railways Reform Implementation
Dialogue
Public Administration Reform TA
Policy Dialogue on National
DeveiopmeniPlan 2007- 13
Second Generation PPP in Roads

I None

Actual, FY05
Actual, FY05
Actual FY06
Actual FY06; Converted to: Barriers to
Contract Enforcement
Additional Actual Products:
Education Policy TA

Actual, FY05
Actual, FY05
Actual, FY06
Actual, FY06
Actual, FY06

I Performance Based Budgeting
-

I Conference

I Insolvencv and Creditor Rights ROSC

74

IBRD 33467R

PO L A N D
SELECTED CITIES AND TOWNS
PROVINCE (WOJEWÓDZTWO) CAPITALS
NATIONAL CAPITAL

POLAND

RIVERS
MAIN ROADS
MAIN RAILROADS
PROVINCE (WOJEWÓDZTWO) BOUNDARIES
INTERNATIONAL BOUNDARIES

14°E

16°E

18°E

B a l t ic

20°E

22°E

24°E

Sea
RUSSIAN
FEDERATION

To
Gusev

Gulf of
Gdansk

LITHUANIA

Gdynia

POMORSKIE

Koszalin

Elblag

Wisla

ZACHODNIOPOMORSKIE
Szczecin

Notec

Gorzów
Wielkopolski

Torun

LUBUSKIE

Plock
Wisla

MAZOWIECKIE

WIELKOPOLSKIE

Zielona Góra

sa
Ny

Leszno

Biala
Podlaska

O
a
dr

Sieradz

Walbrzych

52°N

To
Kovel'

LUBELSKIE

LÓDZKIE

Piotrków
Trybunalski

Radom

Lublin

To
Kovel'

Chelm

Wroclaw

Jelenia
Góra

To
Pinsk

Siedlce

Lódz

Kalisz

Legnica

OPOLSKIE

Czestochowa

Opole

Tarnobrzeg
tula
Vis

Katowice

To
Prague

Kraków

CZECH R
EPU B LI C
REPUBLIC

BielskoBiala

,,
Zamosc

Kielce

SWIETOKRZYSKIE
S
an

SLASKIE

To
Prague

50°N

To
Baranavichy

Skierniewice

DOLNOSLASKIE

To
Dresden

Bu
g

WARSAW

Konin

ta
War

Bialystok

Ciechanów
ew
ar

Wloclawek

,
Poznan

52°N
To
Berlin

,
Lomza
Ostroleca

Warta

To
Berlin

PODLASKIE

Bydgoszcz

Pila

Od
ra

Olsztyn

K U J AW S K O POMORSKIE

To
Berlin

54°N

N

GERMANY

To
Neubrandenburg

Suwalki

WA R M I N S K O MAZURSKIE

BELARUS
BELA
RUS

To
Stralsund

54°N

To
Vilnius

´
Gdansk

Slupsk

PODKARPACKIE

Tarnów

Rzeszów

,
Przemysl

MALOPOLSKIE

50°N
To
L'viv

Krosno

Nowy Sacz

To
Brno

0

0

25

50

25

75

50

100 Kilometers

75 Miles

This map was produced by the Map Design Unit of The World Bank.
The boundaries, colors, denominations and any other information
shown on this map do not imply, on the part of The World Bank
Group, any judgment on the legal status of any territory, or any
endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.

Rysy
(2,499 m)

To
Zvolen

UK R AI
UKR
AINE

To
Kosice

SLO
VA K REPUBLIC
SLOVAK
18°E

20°E

22°E

24°E
MARCH 2007

