Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized

Document of
The World Bank

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Report No. 48476-AR

INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT
AND INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION
COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY

Public Disclosure Authorized

Public Disclosure Authorized

FOR
THE ARGENTINE REPUBLIC
FOR THE PERIOD 2010-2012

May 6, 2009

Argentina, Chile, Paraguay and Uruguay
Country Management Unit
Latin America and the Caribbean Region

This document has restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance
of their official duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without World Bank
authorization.

The last Country Assistance Strategy for Argentina was discussed by the Executive
Directors on May 4, 2006 (Report No. 34015-AR).

CURRENCY AND EQUIVALENT UNITS
(As of March 31, 2009)
Currency Unit = Argentine Peso
US$1 = 3.70 Argentine Pesos

WEIGHTS AND MEASURES
Metric System

FISCAL YEAR:
January 1 – December 31

IBRD
RegionalVice President
Pamela Cox
Country Director
Pedro Alba
Task Team Leader
Andrew Follmer

IFC
Regional Vice President
Regional Director
Country Manager
Task Manager

Jyrki I. Koskelo
Atul Mehta
Enrique Cañas
John Barham

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS
AAA
AFAP
AFJPs
AGN
ANSES
APL
BAPIN
BCRA
BOP
CAF
CAS
CASCR
CDM
CEA
CEM
CFAA
CPAR
CPI
CPS
CREMA
EMBI
ESW
FAC
FESP
FFS
FRESH
FSL
GAC
GDP
GEF
GoA
GPF
GRSF
HH
IBRD
ICR
IDB
IDF
IFC
IFIs
IFPA
INDEC
INTA
IRAP
ISDA
LAC
LIL
MDGs
M&E
MIC
MOH
MTESS

Analytical and Advisory Activities
Argentina Fiduciary Action Plan
Argentina’s Private Pension Funds
Argentina’s Supreme Audit Institution
National Social Security Administration
Adaptable Program Loan
Public Investment Projects Bank (Banco de Proyectos de Inversión Pública)
Proactive Central Bank
Balance of Payments
Andean Development Corporation (Corporación Andina de Fomento)
Country Assistance Strategy
Country Assistance Strategy Completion Report
Clean Development Mechanism
Country Environmental Assessment
Country Economic Memorandum
Country Financial Accountability Assessment
Country Procurement Assessment Report
Consumer Price Index
Country Partnership Strategy
Recovery and Maintenance Contracts (Contratos de Recuperación y Mantenimiento)
Emerging Markets Bond Index
Economic and Sector Work
Argentine Carbon Facility
Essential Public Health Functions (Funciones Esenciales de la Salud Pública)
Fee-For-Service
Focus Resources on Effective School Health
Fixed Spread Loan
Government and Anticorruption
Gross Domestic Product
Global Environmental Facility
Government of Argentina
Governance Partnership Facility
Global Road Safety Facility
Heads of Household Plan
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development
Implementation Completion Report
Inter-American Development Bank
Institutional Development Fund
International Finance Corporation
International Financial Institutions
Integrated Fiduciary Performance Assessment
Argentina National Statistics and Censuses Institute (Instituto Nacional de Estadística
y Censo)
Agricultural Technology Institute
International Road Assessment Program
International Swaps Dealers Association
Latin America and the Caribbean Region
Learning and Innovation Loan
Millennium Development Goals
Monitoring and Evaluation
Middle-Income Countries
Ministry of Health
Ministry of Labor, Employment and Social Security (Ministerio de Trabajo, Empleo y

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance of
their official duties. Its contents may not be otherwise disclosed without World Bank authorization.

ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS
NGOs
NOA
NPL
OECD
PAMI
PERMER
PIU
PJyJHD
PMM
PRAMU
PROINDER
PROMER
PROSAP
ProsperAR
PTUBA
PTUMA
REDD
R&D
ROSC
SAGPyA
SAL
S&P
SEA
SECOP
SENASA
SEPA
SINAPA
SINTyS
SISDIF
SLU
SMEs
SWAp
UNFCCC
WSS

Seguridad Social)
Non-governmental Organizations
Northwest Region
Non Performing Loans
Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development
Argentina’s Public Health Plan for Retired Senior Citizens
Renewable Energy for Rural Markets Project (Proyecto de Energías Renovables en
Mercados Rurales)
Project Implementation Unit
Heads of Household Plan (Plan Jefes/as de Hogar Desocupados/as)
Price Monitoring Mechanism
Uranium Mining Environmental Restoration Project (Proyecto de Restitución
Ambiental de la Minería del Uranio)
Small Farmer Development Project (Proyecto de Desarrollo de Pequeños
Productores Agropecuarios)
Rural Education Improvement Project (Proyecto de Mejoramiento de la Educación
Rural)
Provincial Agricultural Development Project (Programa de Servicios Agrícolas
Provinciales)
Argentina’s Investment Agency
Buenos Aires Urban Transport (Proyecto de Transporte Urbano de Buenos Aires)
Argentina Urban Transport for Metropolitan Areas Project
Reduce Emissions from Deforestation and Land Degradation
Research and Development
Reports on the Observance of Standards and Codes
Secretary of Agriculture, Livestock, Fisheries and Food
Structural Adjustment Lending
Standard and Poor’s
Strategic Environmental Assessment
Argentina’s E-procurement System
Animal and Plant Health Service
Procurement Plans Execution System (Sistema de Ejecución de Planes de
Adquisiciones)
National System of Administrative Professionals (Sistema Nacional deProfesionales
Administrativos)
Social and Fiscal National Identification System
Argentina’s Web-based Financial Management System
Local Unified Integrated Financial System
Small and Medium Enterprises
Sector-Wide Approach
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
Water and Sanitation Services

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

The World Bank Group greatly appreciates the collaboration and contributions of the
Government of Argentina in the preparation of this Country Partnership Strategy (CPS).
In particular, the World Bank Group thanks the following government officials for their
contributions to the CPS: Martín Abeles, Secretary of Economic Policy, Ministry of
Economy and Public Finance; Pablo Barone, National Director for Projects with
International Credit Institutions, Ministry of Economy and Public Finance; and Aníbal
López, Director for Projects with the World Bank, Ministry of Economy and Public
Finance; and Maria Florencia Jalda, Secretary for Budgetary Evaluation, Office of the
Chief of Cabinet of Ministers; and Pablo Salvioli, Subsecretary for Evaluation of
Externally-Financed Projects, Office of the Chief of Cabinet of Ministers; and Jorge
Roel, National Director of Externally-Financed Programs and Projects, Office of the
Chief of Cabinet of Ministers. Further, the World Bank Group extends a special thanks
to numerous non-government and government stakeholders who participated in CPS
consultations in November and December, 2008. We also thank the members of civil for
their contributions to the preparation of this program through the client consultations as
well.
Other contributors to the preparation of this CPS include Messes./Mmes: Mariela
Alvarez, John Barham, Carla Bonahora, Yanina Budkin, Paloma Años Casero, Diego
Cerdeiro, Jasmin Chakeri, Franz Drees-Gross, Frank Earwaker, Geraldine García,
Hermann von Gersdorff, Esperanza Lasagabaster, Carla Pantanali, Javier Pereira, Susana
Pérez, Kathrin Plangemann, Rafael Rofman, Dena Ringold, Felipe Saez, Verónica
Salatino, Eduardo Udarpilleta, and Eduardo Wallentin, who, together with the Country
Director and CPS TTL, comprised the Core Team. In addition, Marcelo Acerbi, Anjali
Acharya, Alexandre Arrobbio, Rafael Cortez, Michael Crawford, Todd Crawford, Robert
Davis, Tanja Faller, Fernando Hernández, Richard Hinz, Magali Junowicz, Fernando
Lavadenz, Nick P. Manning, Barbara Mierau-Klein, William Maloney, Ferenc Molnar,
Tawhid Nawaz, Beatriz Nussbaumer, Reynaldo Pastor, Luis Pérez, Andrés Pizarro,
Verónica Raffo, Fernando Rojas, Klas Sander, Manuel Schiffler, Claudia Sepúlveda,
Tomás Serebrisky, María Marcela Silva, Alvaro Soler, Lucía Spinelli, Laura Tuck, Julio
Vega, Dorte Verner, Gotthard Walser, Xiaoping Wang, Tevfik Yaprak, and David
Yuravlivker provided valuable inputs.

COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY FOR
THE ARGENTINE REPUBLIC
TABLE OF CONTENTS
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY ........................................................................................................ I
I.

INTRODUCTION.............................................................................................................1

II.

COUNTRY CONTEXT....................................................................................................2
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.

Economic Context ................................................................................................... 2
Private Sector Trends .............................................................................................. 6
Poverty, Inequality and the MDGs.......................................................................... 7
Political and Social Developments.......................................................................... 8
Governance.............................................................................................................. 9

III. DEVELOPMENT CHALLENGES...............................................................................10
IV.

GOVERNMENT’S DEVELOPMENT VISION ..........................................................14

V.

ARGENTINA – WORLD BANK PARTNERSHIP.....................................................18
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.

VI.

The Current Program............................................................................................. 18
Summary Findings from Completion Report........................................................ 21
Development Partners ........................................................................................... 22
CPS Consultations................................................................................................. 22
Rationale for WBG support to Argentina ............................................................. 23
Argentina – World Bank Country Partnership Strategy (FY10-12) ..................... 24
Strategic Approach of the Proposed CPS ............................................................. 24
Results Orientation and Monitoring ..................................................................... 24
The WBG’s Indicative 2010-2012 Program.......................................................... 25
World Bank Lending.............................................................................................. 30
IFC Activities......................................................................................................... 30
The Bank’s Analytical Agenda .............................................................................. 31
Treasury Services .................................................................................................. 33
Portfolio and Fiduciary Considerations ............................................................... 33

RISKS...............................................................................................................................33
A.
B.
C.

External ................................................................................................................. 33
Internal .................................................................................................................. 34
Risks to the World Bank Group ............................................................................ 36

TABLES
Table 1: CPS Program Objectives and Select Activities ............................................................ 26
Table 2: Planned lending deliverables (FY09-FY10)................................................................. 31
Table 3: Key Elements of the Partnership’s Analytical Agenda – Argentina CPS 20092012.............................................................................................................................. 32
BOXES
Box 1: Recent Progress in Public Sector Management .............................................................. 10
Box 2: Argentina and the IBRD Strategy for Middle-Income Countries ................................... 20
Box 3: The Heads of Households Program: A Successful Partnership ..................................... 21
FIGURES
Figure 1: Components of export growth in Argentina 1995-2004 (in %) .................................... 5
ANNEXES
Annex 1: Economic Performance 2003-2008 (Government of Argentina)
Annex 2: Argentina CPS Results Framework
Annex 3: CAS Completion Report
Annex 4: Argentina’s Public Debt
Annex 5: Banking Sector Update
Annex 6: IBRD and Carbon Finance Program Summary
Annex 7: IFC Program Summary
Annex 8: Proposed GEF Program
Annex 9: CPS Consultations
Annex A2: Argentina At A Glance
Annex B2: Selected Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
Annex B3: IBRD Program Summary
IFC Investment Portfolio Operations Program
Annex B4: Summary of Nonlending Services
Annex B5: Key Social Indicators
Annex B6: Key Economic Indicators
Annex B7: Key Exposure Indicators
Annex B8: Operations Portfolio (IBRD/IDA and Grants)
IFC Committed & Disbursed Outstanding Investment Portfolio
MAP
IBRD 33362

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Argentina’s macroeconomic performance in recent years was largely strong.
Consecutive years of rapid and pro-poor economic growth enabled poverty and
unemployment to be cut to levels experienced prior to the country’s 2001-2002 economic
crisis. However, the economy started to decelerate in late 2008 due to domestic and
international factors. The administration of President Cristina Fernández de Kirchner
seeks to maintain economic growth and stability, and the development of the global
economic crisis in 2008 has reinforced the Government’s view favoring increasing
regulation and further heightened the Government’s prioritization of social safety nets
and job creation.
The implementation of the 2006 Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) was largely
successful with Bank financed operations making significant contributions to the
Government’s development objectives. It structured Bank assistance in accordance with
the same three pillars established under the previous CAS, namely: (1) sustained growth
with equity, (2) social inclusion, and (3) improved governance. The International Bank
for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) lending program consisted entirely of
investment loans, thereby completing the transition from adjustment lending to
investment lending that started with the 2004 CAS. A key lesson of the 2006 CAS is that
by focusing selectively on areas of consensus within the Government’s development
agenda, the Bank was able to provide important support as the Government has made
remarkable strides in reducing poverty. After a strained relationship during and in the
wake of the crisis, the positive relationship that now prevails may be attributed to the
successful partnership that has evolved.
The proposed Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) (2010-12) seeks to advance the
Government’s development vision by providing pragmatic, performance-based support,
consistent with an uncertain policy environment but adequate to the opportunities and
reflecting the Bank’s positive experience in Argentina. Given the uncertain economic
outlook, a large share of the Bank’s proposed financial support will assist Government
strengthening of the social safety net system and other social programs. Given the
continuity in Government policy and the expressed demand, the CPS continues to focus
on the three pillars successfully supported under the previous CAS. However, there will
be a shift in the support provided toward rebalancing the portfolio, giving greater
emphasis to the social inclusion pillar as the Bank’s preventive response to the
deteriorating economic and social environment.
The CPS has a strong results orientation. In addition to specific support to build
institutional capacity for results-based management, the Government and Bank will
jointly monitor project-by-project results and their aggregate contribution toward the
anticipated country results. In addition, the Bank’s Analytical and Advisory Activities
(AAA) portfolio will be even more selective and focused on achievement of the CPS
results. This results focus is strengthened by the Bank Group’s program coordination
with Argentina’s other development partners, notably the Inter-American Development
Bank (IDB) and the Andean Development Corporations (CAF). There is especially

i

strong coordination with IDB on fiduciary matters, particularly with the harmonization of
procurement rules and procedures.
Government of Argentina Strategic Objectives
Pillar I
Pillar II:
Pillar III:
Sustainable Growth with Equity
Social Inclusion
Improved Governance
Outcomes toward which the CPS will contribute
Upgrade Argentina’s infrastructure
Consolidate the reduction
Strengthen the
to address potential bottlenecks to
in poverty and expand
effectiveness, efficiency,
competitiveness, and underpin
efforts to reverse the
transparency and
medium-term growth and poverty
longer-term poverty trend
accountability of public
alleviation
by increasing household
sector management
incomes and integrating
Improve competitiveness, quality,
marginalized groups into
Expand performance
and exports of agriculture and
the productive marketplace management and improve
livestock production
the quality of public
Consolidate improvements
expenditure, enhance
Address a growing problem of
in health indicators and
service delivery outcomes
resource degradation
improve quality of
and trust in institutions
education while reducing
drop out rates
Strengthen public sector
capacity to spur investment
and growth

The CPS proposes an IBRD lending envelope of US$ 3.3 billion for FY10-FY12, frontloaded through two operations to support Argentina’s safety nets during the critical next
two years. A rich menu of possible AAA activities will be the basis of annual
discussions with the Government to jointly select and commit to analytical activities that
respond to the country’s evolving needs.
The International Finance Corporation (IFC) strategy in Argentina is designed to support
the growth of export-oriented sectors and a select group of financial institutions, in order
to create jobs and meet the needs of low-income populations. The overarching strategy is
to proceed cautiously, with sponsors in strong industries that have an established record
of sound, profit-oriented, and therefore sustainable management. This means that IFC
will concentrate its activities on existing clients in both corporate and financial sectors.
While Argentina is better positioned than it was at the onset of the 2001 crisis, significant
risks remain. Among them, Argentina will have to weather the effects of the global
economic crisis which, when combined with internal factors such as limited access to
external financing and uncertainty over the course of economic policies, contributes to
slowing growth and creates fiscal and balance of payment vulnerabilities. Successful
mitigation of medium-term risks will require efforts to strengthen the investment climate,
support private sector development, and ensure a predictable legal and institutional
environment. The impending mid-term elections introduce an additional element of
political risk, and this CPS proposes a very proactive agenda for addressing the
continuing portfolio risks.

ii

I. INTRODUCTION
1.
The last World Bank Group Country Assistance Strategy for Argentina was
presented to the Board on May 4, 2006, at a time when Argentina was on the way to a
third consecutive year of rapid growth after a deep economic and social crisis in 2001-02.
The IBRD program of US$3.3 billion comprised only investment loans, completing the
transition from adjustment lending to investment lending begun with the 2004 CAS.
Given the continuity with respect to the long-term strategic goals of the Government, the
2006 CAS proposed that the Bank’s assistance strategy should be structured in
accordance with the same three pillars established under the previous CAS, namely: (1)
sustained growth with equity, (2) social inclusion, and (3) improved governance.
2.
The implementation of the CAS was largely successful with Bank financed
operations making significant contributions to the Government’s development objectives.
Innovative projects were implemented in the health and infrastructure sectors, and the
Bank fully committed the CAS lending targets. The portfolio was almost fully renovated
during this time period, and significant actions were taken to strengthen fiduciary
safeguards. Despite this good performance, whereas the 2006 CAS projected that Bank
exposure may decline from US$6.9 billion at end-2005 to US$5.9 billion by end-2008,
exposure had already declined to US$5.1 billion by end-December 2008 largely due to
disbursement lags in the wholly investment lending portfolio.
3.
Macroeconomic performance during most of the CAS period was largely strong.
Consecutive years of rapid and pro-poor economic growth enabled poverty and
unemployment to be cut to pre-crisis levels. The economy benefited from a significant
reduction in public debt following the 2005 sovereign debt restructuring. However, in
2008, the economy started to decelerate due to domestic and international factors. While
the economy grew at a healthy rate of 7.0 percent in 2008, real GDP growth is projected
to decline sharply due to weakening private domestic and external demand.
4.
This CPS covers the fiscal years 2010-12 and is aligned with the country’s
development goals. It will be implemented during a time of economic uncertainty and
volatility and proposes to maintain an indicative IBRD lending program of up to US$3.3
billion (frontloaded) to help Argentina weather the global economic crisis and address
structural development issues, together with an active IFC program. It also proposes
strengthening the Bank’s AAA program and further intensifying the focus on
implementation with a newly-approved Institutional Development Fund (IDF) grant.
5.
The CPS will seek to advance the Government’s development vision by providing
pragmatic, performance-based support, consistent with the uncertain policy environment
but adequate to the opportunities and reflecting the Bank’s positive experience in
Argentina. Given the uncertain economic prospects, a large share of the Bank’s proposed
financial support will assist Government strengthening of the safety net system and other
social programs. In addition the CPS will provide for more flexibility in loan design and
implementation, consistent with Bank policy. Finally the Bank will consider stronger
financial transfers and technical and analytical support to the subnational level.

1

II. COUNTRY CONTEXT
A.

ECONOMIC CONTEXT

6.
Argentina’s economic and social crisis of 2001-02 was one of the most severe
losses of income and downturns in living standards on record, and the last several years
have been largely dominated by the country’s recovery. Argentina’s focus in 2007 shifted
from recovery to sustainability, but now the Government faces the daunting challenge of
preserving the strides made against poverty and unemployment against the backdrop of
the worst global economic crisis since the Great Depression. While Argentina is, in many
ways, much better positioned going into this crisis than in 2001, the country’s ability to
implement counter-cyclical policies is limited by weak access to financing sources,
particularly external, and uncertainty of the global macroeconomic outlook and the
direction of economic policies. Annex 1 presents the Government’s assessment of
economic performance.
7.
Recovery from 2001 Crisis. In recent years, Argentina’s growth has been strong
and underpinned by twin surpluses (fiscal and external). In 2007, the economy grew by
8.7 percent, the fifth straight year of 8-9 percent growth since the financial crisis of 20012002. The recovery was supported by a strong domestic demand, including a dynamic
expansion in investment spending since 2003, improved fiscal performance and favorable
terms of trade (high commodity prices), particularly since 2006. The economy also
benefited from a significant reduction in public debt following the 2005 sovereign debt
restructuring. Twin surpluses (fiscal and external) allowed the country to accumulate
foreign reserves and reduce the debt burden. The Government’s economic framework,
aimed at supporting the growth momentum, rested on three main pillars: maintenance of
a competitive exchange rate; fiscal prudence; and active income policies. This strategy
was very successful. Poverty more than halved from 58 percent in 2003 to 23.4 percent
in 2007, and unemployment fell from 21.5 percent in 2003 to 8.3 percent in 2007 –
though poverty remains above the levels of 1970s.
8.
Recent growth performance. Since 2008, growth was adversely affected by
domestic and external factors. The four-month farm conflict that erupted in March 2008
took a toll on the economy, although growth kept its momentum until the second half of
2008 when the global economic crisis began to affect Argentina more strongly. The farm
conflict increased economic uncertainty which in turn led to a surge of capital outflows
and pressures on the currency, increases in domestic interest rates and a decline in pesodenominated deposits. The Central Bank acted promptly and stabilized the exchange
market and banking system. A second wave of financial sector stress resulted from the
deepening of the global financial crisis and the October announcement of the
nationalization of the private pension funds, but stability returned after intervention by
the Central Bank. More generally, market confidence has also been eroded by concerns
over inflationary pressures that surfaced in 2007,1 the increasingly unfavorable external

1

In early 2008 in response to these pressures, the Government reduced the real rate of growth of primary
expenditures so as to neutralize the fiscal impulse.

2

environment, higher financing needs, and uncertainty over the global macroeconomic
outlook and the course of domestic economic policies.
Response to Global Economic Crisis. Argentina has weathered the global
economic crisis relatively well to date, but the sharp decline in commodity prices
combined with the world economic slowdown and the strengthening of the peso relative
to Argentina’s main trading partners is affecting the economic outlook through its impact
on the fiscal and external accounts. In this context, balance of payment pressure (in
particular, potential pressures on the exchange rate and capital flight) is likely to be a
source of vulnerability in the medium-term. At the same time, Argentina still enjoys
ample foreign reserves (US$46.4 billion at end-2008) that could help mitigate the impact
of economic shocks. On the fiscal side, the key risk is that revenues are subject to further
declines in commodity prices and lower than expected domestic growth, assuming
primary expenditures remain contained, given the current need to maintain a countercyclical fiscal stance.
9.

10.
The Government is taking several counter-cyclical policy measures to mitigate the
negative impact of the decline in private aggregate demand and to strengthen the social
safety net system. These responses are framed under the authorities’ objectives to
preserve the primary fiscal surplus and exchange rate stability and confidence.
11.
The medium-term macroeconomic framework (2008-2010)2 incorporates the
preliminary impact of the global crisis on the Argentinean economy and the policy
measures undertaken by the Government in the second half of 2008 (the nationalization
of the pension system and the fiscal stimulus package in response to the crisis, in
particular, the increase in capital expenditures, and the recent local debt swap of
Guaranteed Loans). The CPS baseline macro projections are summarized below:
•

Growth and inflation. Growth is expected to decline sharply in 2009 and 2010, from
7.0 percent to a range of 0-1 percent. Recent activity indicators have all shown sharp
declines during the last quarter of 2008. Official figures place inflation at 7.2 percent
in 2008, whereas the GDP deflator is of 19.4 percent3. Inflation is also likely to
decline in 2009, but projections are subject to considerable uncertainty.

•

Fiscal accounts. The primary fiscal surplus of the Central Government was originally
estimated to decline from 3.1 percent of GDP by the end of 2008 to about 1.8 percent
in 2009 and 2.0 percent in 2010, before the effect of the private pension takeover.
Taking into account these additional resources, along with increased capital spending
and other counter-cyclical fiscal measures implemented by the Government, the
primary fiscal surplus is projected at 2.4 percent in 2009 and 2.6 percent in 2010.

•

Financing gap. Gross public sector4 financing needs are expected to remain broadly
constant over the medium-term. They are estimated at US$16.3 billion in 2008 and
are projected at US$15.8 billion and US$13.2 billion in 2009 and 2010, respectively,

2

Macroeconomic projections assume an average soybean price of about US$ 330 a ton in 2009.
CPI figures are contested by market analysts, thus the GDP deflator is also provided.
4
Including federal and provincial governments.
3

3

taking into account the recent debt swap of Guaranteed Loans. The net financing gap
of the Federal Government is projected at about US$3.0 billion in 2009 and US$0.1
billion in 2010, after taking into account the additional resources from the
nationalized social security contributions. In addition, gross disbursements from
international financial institutions (IFIs) -including the World Bank- are expected to
amount to US$ 1.0-1.8 billion in 2009, with a remaining financing gap easily met
from domestic sources. Argentina continues to lack access to international financial
markets, although the Government remains committed to advance in the pending
resolution of claims by the Paris Club and holdouts from a 2005 debt restructuring.
•

External accounts. The current account surplus is expected to deteriorate, but will
remain marginally positive in 2009 (0.1 percent of GDP) and 2010 (0.7 percent of
GDP). In 2008, this surplus is estimated to have reached around 3 percent of GDP
(2.9 percent in 2007). Due to recent volatility, gross international reserves declined to
US$46.4 billion by end-2008 (about 9.7 months of 2008 imports).

•

Monetary accounts. Money growth is expected to slow, reflecting weaker domestic
demand. Real growth of net credit to the private sector is expected to decline from
11.4 percent in 2008 to -7.5 percent in 2009 and +1.0 percent in 2010. The peso
depreciated from 3.14 pesos/US$ at end-December 2007 to 3.46 at the end of 2008.
By end-March 2009 the exchange rate had reached 3.70 and is likely to continue
depreciating further.

•

Financial system. The Argentine banking system is generally well placed to face the
international crisis. Bank liquidity is strong at 23 percent of deposits, compared to 17
percent a year ago. However, the flight to quality by investors has resulted in an
increase in Argentina’s already-high financing costs with sharp decreases in domestic
bond and stock prices and a substantial rise in the country risk premium. The capital
markets remain underdeveloped, and the banking system is too small to meet the
needs of the economy. As of September 2008, private sector loans represented only
12 percent of GDP. The Central Bank recently announced several measures to bolster
liquidity.

12.
Medium Term Growth Challenges. Despite five years of solid economic
performance, preserving high growth in today’s adverse international environment and
sustaining it in the future remains challenging. Prior to 2003-07 economic growth was
highly volatile. Breaking out of past volatility requires sustained investment and
improved productivity performance. Yet, investment rates have been volatile, and
productivity growth has not been as strong as in comparators. Previous studies show that
most of the output growth, including that achieved in the last five years, has been driven
by factor accumulation, particularly by labor accumulation- as reflected by the substantial
increase in employment since the crisis of 2002 (Coremberg, 2008). While this is an
expected outcome given the unemployment rates in 2002 (well above 20 percent), this
highlights the need for action to further improve the level and quality of investments in
the future. This will require further progress in strengthening the investment climate and
supporting private sector development, ensuring a predictable legal and institutional
environment; including in backbone infrastructure services (energy, transport, telecom
4

and finance). These actions would encourage improvements in resource allocation, and
support the entry of new more productive firms. Another challenge related to mediumterm economic growth is the role of exports. Export growth over the past years has been
to a large extent due to the ability of Argentine firms to export existing products, while
exports of new products have contributed less to overall export growth (although there
are noteworthy exceptions, including in the auto parts, pharmaceutical and medical
instruments industries). This calls for policy measures to improve the ability of existing
firms to innovate and compete successfully in global markets. Over the longer term,
there are the outstanding agendas in the energy sector and the efficiency of public
expenditures.
Figure 1: Components of export growth in Argentina 1995-2004 (in %)
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
-20
-40
-60

121
47

6

0

New exports of
new products to
existing markets

New exports of
new products to
new markets

-19
-55

Increase in
Fall in exports of
Extinction of
New exports of
exports of existing existing products exports of existing existing products
products to
to existing markets
products to
to new markets
existing markets
existing markets

13.
Downside Risks to the CPS Base Case. Given the uncertainty surrounding the
global crisis, a more pessimistic scenario could entail further drops in commodity prices,
and negative GDP growth for 2009 and 2010 (-3 and -2 percent, respectively), as a result
of a sharper contraction in both domestic and external demand. In this scenario, the
exchange rate would likely depreciate substantially. The fall in output would also impact
the fiscal accounts, and the primary fiscal surplus of the Federal Government could be as
low as 1.3 percent of GDP. As a result, net financing needs could reach US$7.7 billion,
doubling the projected financing needs of the base case.
14.
In sum, over the next eighteen months, Argentina will have to weather the
global economic crisis. The main transmission channel is trade, since Argentina's fiscal
and external positions remain vulnerable to swings in commodity and manufactured
export volumes and prices. Given the uncertainty over the global macroeconomic
outlook and the direction of economic policies, the Government has a limited margin to
use countercyclical policies. On the monetary front, with rapid exchange rate
depreciation in neighboring countries the real exchange rate lost competitiveness as the
Central Bank implemented a policy of more controlled depreciation to contain financial
volatility and inflationary pressures. Fiscal accounts are deteriorating although the
Government should manage to keep fiscal primary surpluses if growth of primary

5

expenditures is contained. In addition, the global crisis has increased risk aversion, and
that implies that Argentina will continue to have limited external financing options.
While the Government will likely be able to meet its financing needs during 2009,
Argentina’s economic outlook in 2010 would be challenging if world economic
conditions do not improve. In sum, a large stock of reserves and small primary fiscal
surpluses would help mitigate the negative impact of potential economic shocks.
B.

PRIVATE SECTOR TRENDS

15.
Response to 2001-2002 Crisis. The years immediately following the crisis were
marked by major restructurings and debt renegotiations that allowed the private sector to
deleverage and recover. Companies rebuilt their balance sheets and emphasized
liquidity. Where possible, large corporates diversified their investments and sales into
foreign markets, and consolidated their domestic market shares.
16.
Recovery from the 2001-2002 crisis led to increases in capacity utilization in
industry and private investment levels. Investment reached 21 percent of GDP by 2006,
compared to a low of 11 percent of GDP in the midst of the crisis. Post-crisis investment
surpassed levels recorded in the 1990s. Investment was mainly financed through higher
retained earnings due to improved firm profitability, and other financing sources played a
more modest role. Private sector credit has been increasing since 2004, but at 12 percent
of GDP remains low. It is nearly half the level prior to the crisis and nearly a fifth of
average levels prevalent in upper middle income countries.
17.
Current Context. Argentina’s best performing firms have tended to be in
agriculture and agro-industry, especially those with a global market orientation.
Argentina is the third-largest world supplier of soybeans and the second largest exporter
of corn and sorghum. About 70 percent of the country’s soy production is processed
domestically, making Argentina the world’s largest exporter of soybean oil and one of the
leading exporters of pellets and flour. Broadly speaking, the rest of the manufacturing
sector has alternated tactically between export and domestic markets. Excluding
agroindustry, the bulk of manufacturing exports, especially vehicles, goes to Brazil.
While there are pockets of excellence, manufacturing industry is generally less
competitive in other export markets and lacks economies of scale.
18.
Issuances by large corporations in the domestic capital market have been limited.
Net external corporate debt financing has been negative in recent years since Argentine
corporations could not regain access at reasonable cost to global financial markets after
the crisis. The private sector’s low debt levels probably caused some underinvestment,
but should enable companies to manage global economic uncertainties with greater ease.
Large companies generally are reported to have ample liquidity to cover debt falling due
in 2009. Foreign direct investment has recovered somewhat averaging nearly 2.5 percent
of GDP from 2004 through 2007 due to acquisitions and some Greenfield investments.
19.
Regulation and Governance. Argentina’s overall ranking on the Ease of Doing
Business has slipped to 113 in 2009 from 77 in 2006, compared to an average of 75 in
2009 for upper middle-income countries. Argentina’s performance on regulatory fronts

6

(starting a business, employing workers, protecting investors, paying taxes and trading
across borders) falls below average standards for upper middle-income countries5.
Indicators of regulatory quality and government effectiveness point to weaknesses in
Argentina6. Some progress has been made in recent years in a few of these areas, but
broadly speaking, the pace of reform has been slower than in peer countries.
C.

POVERTY, INEQUALITY AND THE MDGS

20.
Poverty and Equity. As detailed previously, poverty more than halved from 58
percent in 2003 to 23.4 percent in 2007, and the official number for the first semester of
2008 is 17.8 percent7. Over 11 million Argentines have been lifted out of poverty since
the crisis, moving Argentina toward achievement of its Millennium Development Goals.
However, poverty and inequality are still high by Argentina’s historical standards.
Poverty in the 1970s and until the 1987 crisis was around 10 percent8. After that crisis,
poverty fell again but only to 18.5 percent in 1992 and climbed steadily to about 27
percent in the late 1990s. During the crisis of 2001-03 poverty levels increased sharply,
and only in 2006 did poverty return to the levels of the late 1990s, much higher than the
historical experience. Developments on poverty levels went together with a substantial
increase in inequality with a Gini coefficient that increased from 0.344 in 1974 to 0.487
in 20069. Other inequality indicators confirm this trend, during the same period the
income share of the poorest quintile declined from 7.1 to 3.7 percent. Therefore, the
introduction of a safety net like Jefes y Jefas was not only in response to the 2001-03
crisis but was also an attempt to mitigate a longer term trend.
21.
Formal and Informal Labor. Argentina has made great progress in increasing
the formality of employment. However, about 40 percent of the employed still have
informal jobs. Even in the City of Buenos Aires, about 80 percent of the first jobs for the
young (under 29) are estimated to be informal. The economic slowdown is believed to be
having a stronger impact on informal employment to date. However, if the situation
worsens, as expected, the impact will also be felt by those in formal jobs. Qualified
formal sector workers will have access to unemployment insurance, whereas informal
workers have no access to any safety net as no new beneficiaries have been added since
2003. In addition to a negative impact on poverty, this could also lead to social tensions.
22.
Gender Equality. Argentina has taken important steps to promote gender equity
in health, social security, and gender-based violence, with more progress needed in the
labor market and domestic violence. Achievements include passing of the Reproductive
Health Law and the Sexual Education Law as well as a 2005 Presidential Decree which
expands pension coverage for women over age 60. Moreover, the Supreme Court has
created an Office of Domestic Violence to provide assistance to victims of domestic
5

Doing Business 2009 – Argentina http://www.doingbusiness.org/ExploreEconomies/?economyid=9
La Escuela de Gobierno de la Universidad Torcuato Di Tella, Índice de Confianza en el Gobierno – ICG,
January 2009
7
The poverty numbers in recent years are contested by many private analysts who believe that official
statistics under-report inflation since early 2007.
8
Based on extrapolation from Greater Buenos Aires to all urban population.
9
See “A Distribution in Motion”, CEDLAS Documento de Trabajo Nro. 78.
6

7

violence. However, women continue to lag behind in access to employment (only 53
percent of women age 25-49 years work compared to 97 percent for men in the same age
range). Female wages are on average 30 percent lower than men’s in the same
occupation.
D.

POLITICAL AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENTS

23.
President Cristina Fernández de Kirchner succeeded former President Néstor
Kirchner in December 2007 with high levels of support. She won the first-round election
with over 45 percent of the vote, outpacing the nearest rival by 20 percentage points.
President Fernández campaigned on the successes of the previous administration, namely
strong economic growth, improvement in social conditions, and public debt restructuring.
This implied an assertive stand with regard to international creditors and holders of
public service concessions, and she has maintained the previous administration’s general
policy direction.
24.
Despite her strong electoral performance, the President has faced significant
challenges. Inflationary pressures and a stand-off with farmers over export taxes
dominated the agenda during the first half of 2008, with the latter eroding the support of
middle class and small farmers. The Government lost the approval of a key agricultural
bill in July 2008, but regained momentum with approval of key initiatives such as the
nationalization of pension funds and the extension of the Economic Emergency Law, as
well as a tax moratorium and measures to encourage the repatriation of offshore capital.
25.
To overcome the impacts of the international economic crisis, President
Fernández launched major initiatives to regain public support and keep the economy
running. In December 2008 she announced a public works package totaling US$ 32
billion in a bid to sustain growth and employment next year. She also announced tax
benefits for middle class workers and initiatives to promote local consumption by
subsidizing the buying of new cars, household appliances, and domestic travel.
26.
The Government has also announced increases in gas prices for high consumption
households and in electricity tariffs as a way to reduce government subsidies to utilities
companies. While the increases are targeted to higher income households, they have
generated opposition by consumers. Consumer confidence is falling sharply, according
to a Poliarquia poll, which showed that 40 percent currently consider that the situation in
Argentina is bad and will worsen in 2009, up from 18 percent in December 200710. Also
since end-2007, President Fernández’s approval rating fell from 51 to 28 percent, and
approval of economic policy from 55 to 29 percent. With the deterioration in the social
and economic context, there are increased risks of social tensions.
27.
Mid-term legislative elections were scheduled for October, but the Government
has advanced them to June. The opposition has started some moves among the Radical,
Socialist and Civic Coalition parties to form a pre-election alliance, and some highly
visible defections from within the Peronist party have also taken place.
10

Country Profile, Oxford Analytica online. December 2008.

8

E.

GOVERNANCE

28.
Argentina has come a long way on the governance front from the serious
institutional and governance crisis that erupted in 2001-02. At that time, large scale
social unrest had significantly eroded the legitimacy of all branches of Government, and
there was very limited scope for constructing political and social consensus precisely
when the need for leadership and social consensus was critical. Argentina was able to
handle this acute social and political emergency while adhering to a fully functioning
democratic constitutional framework and within a context of social peace and respect for
human rights. It is widely recognized that the Bank-supported Heads of Household
Program was instrumental in reducing the social tension that would have been expected
in such a severe crisis environment. Despite the lessons learned from this extraordinary
experience and the substantial progress achieved, some of the ingrained issues affecting
governance performance continue to prevail, and the country continues to garner
governance ratings disjointed from its income level and human development.
29.
The Government has chosen to focus on a strategy of incremental public sector
strengthening, with an emphasis on the design and gradual application of new public
sector tools. It continues the efforts of the previous administration to approach state
modernization on the basis of a sequenced approach targeted at the strengthening of
institutions, systems and capacities, to improve the quality of service delivery and
respond to citizens’ demands. The strategy is focused on the short- and medium-term,
and includes active support to key institutions. Initial work is underway to design a new
public sector strategy. An Advisory Council composed of academics has recently been
created to advise Government on public sector modernization and help increase
institutional quality and credibility.
30.
Recent years have shown some progress in public sector modernization at the
Federal and Subnational level, both in terms of supply and demand, as shown in Box 1.
On the supply side, the Government has expanded the legal framework, strengthened and
expanded public management systems (financial management, public investment, public
employment, procurement and control); and has built institutional capacity for the design
and increasing use of these systems. On the demand side, work has begun towards
greater institutional quality through the expansion of channels for citizen participation,
initial steps towards the implementation of the Access to Public Information Decree and
the use of new technologies to enhance access to public services and improve servicedelivery.

9

Box 1: Recent Progress in Public Sector Management
•
•
•

•
•
•

Financial management: The financial management systems (SLU and SIDIF) cover 87% of
the federal administration.
Public Investment: The BAPIN II system has been implemented in 23 of the 24 provinces and
in 110 federal agencies.
Public Employment: The electronic registry for public employees includes the totality of
SINAPA employees (i.e., 26,000 employees), which amounts to more than 20 percent of all
permanent federal public employees.
Procurement: Argentina’s e-procurement system (SECOP) is operational for purchases up to
Arg.$10,000 (US$3,200) in four agencies (eight procurement units).
Quality Management: 80% percent of user surveys and focus groups show improved service
delivery in line with established targets for participating institutions.
E-government: 750 procedures are included in the electronic directory of government
procedures, out of which 50 can be processed electronically.

III. DEVELOPMENT CHALLENGES
31.
The most immediate challenge under the new CPS is to help the Government
mitigate the effects of the global economic crisis. However, a continued strong
framework for economic growth is important to mitigating those effects in the mediumterm, and that will require strategic attention to medium-term constraints such as
insufficient infrastructure, energy constraints, a stronger agricultural sector, and a social
safety net that sustainably transitions households out of poverty and into employment.
The rapid growth up to 2007 has also raised questions about environmental sustainability.
32.
Infrastructure Gap. Argentina’s social infrastructure endowments (particularly
access to improved water supply and sanitation) lag those of comparable middle-income
countries while its productive infrastructure stocks (electricity generation capacity, paved
roads and teledensity per worker) are generally somewhat higher. Because of economic
volatility and recurrent crises, Argentina’s rate of infrastructure investment has been
highly variable over the past 3 decades. While Argentina invested about 3 percent of
GDP (most of it from public sources) in infrastructure in the 1980’s, overall investment
levels declined to 1.7 percent of GDP in the 1990’s. While this decline reflects a broader
Latin American trend, the decline in Argentina was particularly severe, with public
financing for infrastructure investment amounting to less than 0.5 percent of GDP
between 1995 and 2003. This was only partially off-set by private infrastructure
investments, which averaged 1.2 percent of GDP in the 1990’s. Since the 2003 crisis,
public infrastructure investment has grown robustly, reaching levels of 1.3 percent of
GDP in 200711. A World Bank study12 suggests that improving infrastructure stocks to
the level of the regional leader could result in an increase in the rate of GDP growth by
1.3 percentage points per year; while raising infrastructure coverage and quality to the
East Asian median could add over 3 percentage points to annual growth. The same study
11

Includes direct investments and capital transfers by the national Government, but excludes provincial
investments or those from fiduciary funds or off-budget capital expenditures (such as those by public
enterprises).
12
Calderón and Servén, “The effects of Infrastructure Development on Growth and Income Distribution”,
The World Bank, 2004.

10

finds that the effect on poverty would be substantial as well: improving Argentina’s
infrastructure coverage and quality to the level of Costa Rica would reduce its Gini
coefficient by 0.04.
33.
Electricity. The Government faces several key challenges in the energy sector,
notably the significant probable need for generation capacity due to a tight
supply/demand balance once growth resumes and under-investments in generation.
Bottlenecks in transmission and low investment levels in distribution have been
exacerbated by the steep increase in electricity consumption between 2003 and 2008.
While residential coverage is relatively high, four percent of the population (mainly in
rural areas) continues to lack access to electricity service. The sector in Argentina also
faces regulatory challenges, in part the result of the pesification and tariff resetting
interventions following the 2001 crisis. These actions and the Government’s overall
move to a transitory emergency approach resulted in retrenchment by private investors,
reductions in the effective tariff which required increasing government subsidies, and
uncertainties about the Government’s sector strategy. Moreover, public investment both
in transmission infrastructure and new gas-fired generation capacity has gained relevance
as the Government becomes more active in the sector. Overall, some of these policies and
measures are helping to re-establish the basis for a stronger sector, but uncertainties
remain regarding the Government’s medium and long-term vision for the sector and, in
the short term, the success of its new tariff policy, which is being resisted by consumers.
34.
Developing Extractive Industries. The challenge of establishing an adequate
legal and regulatory framework is exemplified by the contrasting situations in the energy
and mining sectors. Although Argentina has the fourth largest natural gas reserves in the
region, the country has experienced gas shortages since 2004. Strong economic growth
and low prices caused an increase in energy demand, outstripping supply, and Argentina
is expected to become increasingly dependent on external gas supplies in the immediate
future. The development of the mining sector, where Argentina has benefitted both from
sector reforms undertaken in the late 1990’s and -- until recently – a boom in commodity
prices, has been markedly different. Since the crisis, the stability of the legal and fiscal
framework has attracted the characteristic long term investment needed in mining, and
the contribution to GDP of the mining industry has increased from 2.5 percent in 2001 to
6.0 percent in 2006. While the sector is generally still expected to grow, it might do so at
a slower pace (3.8 percent annual growth between 2008 and 2012 is expected).
Improving social and environmental management capacity in the sector and enforcing
established regulatory and fiscal regimes would help maximize both investments and
sector contribution to socio-economic development, mainly in rural areas.
35.
Sustainable Agriculture and Rural Development. The agroindustrial sector
continues to be a critical part of the national economy. It contributes around 60 percent
of total goods exports, 18 percent of GDP, and 22 percent of the value added of the goods
sectors. Crops make up the largest contribution followed by livestock (63 percent and 31
percent, respectively). Agriculture is also a major source of employment, directly
generating about 12 percent of national employment and over 20 percent when including
transport and commerce services related to food and agriculture. About 11 percent (4.4
million) of Argentina’s 40 million inhabitants live in rural areas, and over a million rural

11

inhabitants currently face one or more unmet basic needs. Building a more competitive,
diversified and inclusive agricultural sector will depend on strengthened national and
provincial institutions, particularly in the areas of agricultural technology, innovation,
and finance. Finally, increasing training and capacity building in policy and decisionmaking will enhance cooperation and harmonization between federal and regional levels,
facilitating progressive integration of small-scale producers in efficient product chains,
the expansion of their production and their access to increasingly demanding markets.
36.
In 2008, these structural challenges were compounded by a severe drought,
increasing pressure from the rural sector for a new approach. A drought emergency was
declared by the Government in January 2009 and affects 15 provinces under emergency
(agricultural losses more than 50 percent) or agricultural disaster (more than 80 percent).
Official numbers for 2008/09 estimate a reduction of the cultivated area of 11 percent
from last year. Regarding total production, drought affected crucial phases of the
cultivation. For wheat, a historical fall of 50 percent of the total production is expected.
37.
Environment. Argentina faces serious environmental challenges, some of which
compound the financial issues of farmers. The expansion of soy production over the past
several years has fueled deforestation, poor water resource management has increased
land degradation, and pesticide management practices have increasingly raised
environmental health concerns. Land degradation has affected 60 million hectares. The
deforestation rate of 0.75 percent in 2006 is twice the Latin American average, and
overfishing places stocks of hake, in particular, under significant stress. Water
contamination, particularly in the Matanza-Riachuelo and Reconquista urban river basins
in the Greater Buenos Aires area -- home to 3.5 million people -- is a grave concern, as
well as solid waste management (while 90 percent of municipal solid waste is collected,
only 45 percent is properly disposed). Finally, the health care costs associated with air
pollution in major urban areas is estimated at 1.6 percent of GDP annually.
38.
Social Safety Nets. The main challenge is to increase the level of labor force
formality while improving and consolidating existing protection arrangements, both for
formal workers and their families and for the most vulnerable sectors. These programs
must now move beyond crisis response to a comprehensive system of social protection.
Another area where much work is needed is to expand coverage of the social insurance
system to include workers who lack or have insufficient contribution histories and thus
are not eligible for insurance-based pensions, unemployment and family benefits. The
Government recently took a step in this direction with the expansion of pension coverage
to elderly who have not made the minimum payroll contributions to be eligible for
benefits under the pre-existing system. Challenges inherent to this transition include:
covering all vulnerable groups including those in the informal sector, ensuring that
benefits are adequate to meet the program’s objectives, avoiding gaps and overlaps
between programs, institutions, and levels of government, and ensuring that the overall
social protection system is fiscally and politically sustainable.
39.
Addressing the Inequities in the Health Sector. Several sources estimate that
the population without coverage by union schemes, private health insurance, and PAMI
(Public Health Plan for Retired Senior Citizens) equals between 35 and 39 percent of the

12

population; i.e., between 13.5 and 15 million individuals. Thus the focus should continue
to be on provincial health systems, which would provide care to these populations. There
is also inequity across provinces. For example, the infant mortality rate in the Province
of Buenos Aires is three times higher than in the City of Buenos Aires.
40.
Education Sector, the Key Challenges for Human Capital Formation are
Equity and Quality. Universal coverage has basically been achieved, but there is great
dispersion in test results between different socio-economic levels, gender and
geographical regions. In terms of educational outcomes, Argentina compares favorably
with other Latin American countries, but lags behind OECD countries. Recently
sanctioned laws take cognizance of these difficulties and set forth clear goals to be
achieved, but Argentina could do more to assure high-quality educational opportunities
for all, and to address the key issues that include: (i) half of school students do not
complete secondary education; (ii) gaps in educational attainment deepen social and
regional differences; (iii) the quality of the education of those who graduate from
secondary education is not always good enough to have the students ready for higher
education or for inclusion into the work force, and (iv) the university system does not
prepare graduates with the profile required by Argentina’s current development needs.
41.
Opportunities for Argentina’s Indigenous Population. Recent Argentine
legislation has advanced indigenous rights, but a gap remains between legal recognition
and the practical application of laws both in daily life and in public policy. Land
entitlements to indigenous communities, a right constitutionally granted, illustrates this
problem. Indigenous peoples are more vulnerable and lag behind other groups in access
to public services and incomes. Despite Government effort to increase access to public
services and having indigenous peoples take charge of their development—e.g. through
the recently-closed Indigenous Peoples LIL supported by the World Bank—indigenous
populations have difficulties obtaining equal access to education and health, for example.
The literacy rate of the indigenous population age 10 and over is 7 percentage points
lower than the average rate of the total Argentine population, and many indigenous
people drop out as early as primary school. Few continue on to receive secondary
education. While lack of money explains 60 percent of drop-outs, discrimination is also
an important factor. Indigenous communities face high levels of malnourishment,
infectious diseases, and high rates of adult and infant mortality. Moreover, the majority
of communities lack access to safe water, electricity and communication services. Two
out of three persons in the indigenous population lack health insurance.
42.
Governance. Public sector management remains a major challenge to achieving
greater growth and equity in Argentina. Key challenges include (i) strengthen the
efficiency, effectiveness and transparency of the public expenditure management; (ii)
improve service-delivery outcomes and restore trust in Government; and (iii) make the
public sector more accountable and responsive to citizens and the private sector.
43.
Strengthen Efficiency, Effectiveness and Transparency of Public
Expenditure Management. A key challenge is to expand the use of public management
tools to effectively guide policy-making. Important progress has been made through the
design of an initial performance-informed budgeting model and nine pilots carried out for

13

the 2007 and 2008 budgets, which through further expansion could lay the foundations
for an effective performance- management/- budgeting approach across government. The
new web-based financial management system, e-SIDIF, is key to achieving these goals.
Procurement requires a deepening of reforms, such as through the expansion of the eprocurement system SECOP across government. At the subnational levels, key
challenges include improved public expenditure management and greater compliance
with the Fiscal Responsibility Law.
44.
Improve Public Service Delivery Outcomes and Restore Citizen Trust in
Government. Citizens’ trust in Government and public institutions in general was
seriously affected by the 2001-2002 crisis, and while the Government has made efforts to
regain public trust, much still remains to be done. Citizens’ demands for greater
institutional credibility have risen, and require greater assurance that the analysis and
decision-making in public institutions will be done on the basis of technical criteria and
independent of political intervention. The institutional strengthening of key institutions
such as ANSES has contributed to recover citizen’s trust in one of the areas that has been
historically lagging behind, by reducing the time in the provision of benefits, expanding
the network of service delivery units and implementing enhanced service-delivery quality
standards. Within the framework of the incremental strategy, the challenge is to replicate
this “island of reform” to other areas of the public sector and help increase trust in
Government and restore the credibility of public institutions. It will be critical to restore
trust in the National Statistical Agency whose reporting is increasingly questioned by the
private sector, press and civil society.
45.
Make the public sector more responsive to citizens and the private sector.
While much of public sector reform has been oriented towards improving Government
internal efficiency, in recent years there has been a shift towards actively responding to
citizen’s and private sector demands and needs. Some initiatives, such as reaching out to
citizens with simplified e-government tools and processes, beneficiary participation in
ANSES and the Citizens’ Charter program, while isolated, have paved the way to deepen
responsiveness and social accountability channels. In particular, efforts towards the
adoption of law of access to information and effective implementation are promising
mechanisms on the demand side that can help improve transparency and accountability in
Argentina, effectively strengthening initiatives such as performance-based budgeting.

IV. GOVERNMENT’S DEVELOPMENT VISION
46.
The new administration of President Cristina Fernández that took office in
December, 2007, largely maintained continuity in the economic and development policy
frameworks. The objective for this new administration continues to be the maintenance
of economic growth and stability, while a special focus has been put into the building of
institutions and strengthening foreign relations. The onset of the global economic crisis
in 2008 has buttressed the Government’s pro-regulatory posture and further heightened
the Government’s prioritization of social safety nets and job creation. The Government’s

14

strategy for dealing with the global crisis includes requesting front-loading of the lending
envelope under the CPS while maintaining flexibility with phased operations.
47.
Infrastructure. The Government has given high priority to infrastructure
development over the past 5 years, both as a tool to reduce social inequality and as a
means to overcome potential bottlenecks to competitiveness. As operating deficits for
many infrastructure services have widened, the government raised several key tariffs and
fares over the course of 200813. In electricity and gas, in particular, tariff increases have
been steeply progressive, reflecting the Government’s emerging view that rate increases
should both reduce (and where possible eliminate) operating deficits and reduce income
inequality. Finally, with the onset of the worldwide economic crisis and slowdown, the
Government has come to see an aggressive infrastructure investment program as a key
component of a counter-cyclical economic stimulus package.
48.
Transport. Argentina has significantly improved the quality of its highway
infrastructure over the past decade, with about 90 percent of both its national and
provincial networks now in good condition. Going forward, the Government proposes to
further roll-out the largely successful CREMA model of highway maintenance (under
which private contractors rehabilitate sections of highway and then maintain them under
multi-year contracts) to more of the national and especially the subnational network. To
reduce logistics costs (which represent about 23 percent of sales costs for commodities on
average), the Government also plans to improve rail and road access to the Rosario port
system, which accounts for 57 percent of Argentina’s exports (mostly grains and
oilseeds) by volume. Finally, in urban public transport, the Government has focused on
eliminating localized infrastructure bottlenecks and increasing ridership. Physical
measures are increasingly expected to be accompanied by institutional improvements
(e.g. creation of a metropolitan transport authority for the Greater Buenos Aires area).
49.
Water and Sanitation. At 80 percent piped water supply and 48 percent piped
sewerage coverage (2007), Argentina compares unfavorably with other upper-middle
income countries and continues to lag behind some of its neighbors (Chile and Uruguay).
The same is true of waste water treated (10 percent), a figure that lags well behind both
Chile and Uruguay. Against this backdrop, the Government has established the goal of
reaching 83 percent piped water supply and 62 percent piped sewerage coverage by 2011.
50.
Electricity. In the last few years, the situation in the sector has begun to evolve,
with increases in investments, transmission tariffs and the approval of significant
increases in distribution tariffs in certain provinces and more recently for the Buenos
Aires metropolitan area. The Government has also taken steps to promote private
participation in the upstream segments of the sector, introducing the “Energy Plus
Regime” in September 2006 and the “Gas Plus Regime” in March 2008. In transmission,
the Government has sought financing from several multilateral development banks to
overcome bottlenecks, increase the operational security of the system and improve
service quality. On the demand side, the Government moved quickly in December 2007
13

These include urban transport fares and electricity tariffs in the Buenos Aires Metropolitan area, gas
tariffs nationwide, and nationwide wholesale electricity prices for large consumers.

15

to launch a new energy efficiency program and has secured a US$15.2 million grant from
GEF to support an aggressive program to replace incandescent light bulbs and to set up
an energy efficiency fund. Finally, in rural areas, the Government scaled up its efforts
under the US$30 million PERMER project with a US$50 million additional finance loan.
51.
Agriculture – the Pampean economies. There is a large gap between the
Pampas (which enjoy uniquely favorable natural conditions,) and the non-Pampean
“regional” economies. The Government views agricultural commodity exports as an
important source of fiscal revenue and maintains a system of export taxes on soy, wheat,
corn and sunflower seeds. The Government also argues that these taxes and other
restrictions advance longer-term goals in the agricultural sector, such as productivity and
crop diversification. Moreover, since 70 percent of soybeans are produced by large
farmers that represent only 22 percent of the overall farmer population, the Government
argues that export taxes support social equity goals. Given the slowdown in Argentina’s
economy, unemployment is another matter of concern for the Government. Comparing
different production systems, soy generates 1 job per 100 Ha, while cotton contributes 15
jobs per 100 Ha. The Government’s interest in maintaining lower export tax rates for
processed goods such as soybean oil or meal is oriented toward generating not only more
value added but also more employment. Other analysts counter, however, that the key
challenge facing the agricultural sector is to develop a predictable long-term policy
framework that provides incentives for increased production. Export taxes have been
raised three times by decree since 2002, making medium and long-term investment
planning more difficult. With the steep decline of commodity prices in 2008, in
particular combined with the effect of the draught, these analysts are also concerned that
the returns on farming of export commodities has declined substantially.
52.
Agriculture – the Non- Pampean Economies. In the non-Pampean economies,
the Government’s strategy is fundamentally different.
It emphasizes enhanced
competitiveness by: (i) strengthening the management and efficiency of irrigation
systems; (ii) improving roads, electricity, and other rural infrastructure; (iii) transferring
technology; (iv) establishing product sanitary and quality systems to meet international
standards; and (v) promoting agribusiness through collective actions in value chains. The
creation of a new Sub-Secretariat of Family Agriculture in the Secretariat of Agriculture,
Livestock, Fisheries and Food signals the Government’s intention to focus more
systematically on small holders, non-farm producers, rural workers and migrant workers.
53.
Environment. The Government has embarked on an ambitious program in
support of the brown environmental agenda (water pollution and solid waste management
in particular as well as the remediation of improperly closed uranium mining and milling
sites). It has also been active on the green environmental agenda, as evidenced by the
2007 Deforestation Law (Ley No. 26.331 de Presupuestos Mínimos de Protección
Ambiental de los Bosques Nativos) and initiatives to safeguard biodiversity, such as the
implementation of ecological corridors in rural landscapes, the connection of high-value
national and provincial protected areas, and promotion of sustainable resource use in the
buffer zones of the Chaco and Arid Patagonia eco-regions. The Government has also
pursued an active climate change agenda. The Argentine Carbon Facility (FAC), in
particular, has been strengthened to facilitate the development of new investment projects

16

with CDM potential14, as part of a broader mitigation policy. The Government is
planning to use GEF resources to strengthen capacity in designing sectoral policies as
well as measures to mitigate and adapt to climate change as part of the Third National
Communication under the UNFCCC.
54.
Social Protection Policy. The Government is maintaining the strategy it has
followed since 2003 around the three anchors of employment, universal policies, and the
effective inclusion of vulnerable sectors with an integral, territorial, and restitution of
rights perspective. The Government sees formal employment as the basis of inclusion
and has developed several policies to improve its quality and expand formality in the
labor market, including the improvement of payroll taxes enforcement programs, use of
collective bargaining to define salaries, increases in the minimum wage, and expansion of
coverage, increases in benefits and improvements in management of the Family
Allowances program. However, it is also updating approaches and programs to adjust to
new conditions and to address remaining pockets of poverty. The Government has
reaffirmed its vision that poverty is much more than the lack of income and is a problem
of economic, social, cultural, and political inclusion of citizens. The Government wants
to continue the reform of the program Heads of Households (Jefes y Jefas de Hogar
Desempleados-PJyJHD) orienting participants with employability problems towards the
program Familias para la Inclusión Social. Those participants with better employment
opportunities will be directed towards the training and employment services program
Seguro de Empleo y Capacitación. In addition there are high expectations for the
Lifelong Learning Program to start achieving high rates of coverage and with this
improve earnings of those employed and the employability of those searching for
employment.
55.
Health. The Government’s vision is to reduce the fragmentation of the public
health system while further developing interventions for vulnerable and poor sectors
through non-contributive health insurance and the ongoing programs Plan Nacer and
Remediar. The authorities are considering expanding the Nacer results-based approach
to other population groups. The fourth area of the Government’s Acuerdo Bicentenario
begins with health and centers on creating a more integrated national system—with better
coordination of public and private providers—through training and human capital
development in rural and isolated areas. Specific attention will be paid to generating a
new generation of nurses and improving the hospital infrastructure, particularly outside of
urban centers. The plan also recognizes the links to broader social issues such as
nutrition and other education support for families, and addresses the effects on
communities with high and persistent unemployment.

14

FAC provides services including: (i) technical guidance and assistance to projects with regard to the
conditions of resource utilization, submission of requests, and other aspects of project execution, (ii)
capacity building for different projects, (iii) coordination and implementation of studies at the national level
to identify potential projects and support their development, (iv) assistance for decision-makers in the
public and private sectors with regard to strategies and mitigation policies, and (v) identification of
portfolios of CDM projects eligible for financing.

17

56.
Education. The Government will continue working towards achieving the targets
that it set for itself in recent legislation. Among the most important ones are universal
school enrollment of 5 year olds and increasing public spending on education to 6 percent
of GDP by 2010, to be financed by national and provincial governments. Current level of
education spending is around 5 percent of GDP.

V. ARGENTINA – WORLD BANK PARTNERSHIP
A. THE CURRENT PROGRAM
57.
The 2006 CAS proposed that the Bank’s assistance strategy be structured in
accordance with the same three pillars established under the previous CAS, namely: (1)
sustained growth with equity, (2) social inclusion, and (3) improved governance. The
IBRD lending program consisted entirely of investment loans, thereby completing the
transition from adjustment lending to investment lending that started with the 2004 CAS.
58.
Status of the Bank’s Program in Argentina. The 2006 CAS has shown some
strong achievements that have renewed and strengthened the relationship with Argentina:
•

Bank lending in the health sector, with the introduction of an insurance-based
approach for maternal child care, has become a model for the efficient delivery of
basic health services at the provincial level that is expected will be extended beyond
maternal child care and also as a model to be replicated internationally.

•

Dialogue and solid analytical work have been undertaken to move the Heads of
Household Program from emergency income support programs to a more
comprehensive, long-term and sustainable strategy for social protection.

•

Successful direct lending in three provinces (duly guaranteed by the national
Government) has shown promising opportunities for an effective dialogue and
developmental assistance at the subnational level.

59.
Mainstreaming Governance in the CAS. The 2006 CAS mainstreamed its
governance focus and provided space for innovation within the partnership. The Bank
has had a selective approach in engaging Argentina in the area of governance via two
separate and distinct entry points. First, it has supported the authorities’ strategy of
incremental public sector strengthening, with an emphasis on the design and gradual
application of new public sector tools. The strategy is focused on the short-and medium
term, and includes active intervention in key institutions. Second, it has engaged the
authorities in the implementation of the Argentina Fiduciary Action Plan, a
comprehensive effort to improve fiduciary performance in the Bank’s investment
portfolio in Argentina.
60.
The Argentina Fiduciary Action Plan (AFAP). It is a collection of discrete but
conceptually linked initiatives in fiduciary management that improves transparency and

18

accountability in Bank-supported investment projects. The Plan reflects an approach that
is significantly different from past “ring fencing” of individual operations. It focuses on
measures that cut across projects and strengthen country systems for financial
management and procurement. Key achievements under the AFAP include:
•

A web-based information system (known as SEPA) that provides the public with easy
access to detailed information on all Bank-financed contracts in the country.

•

A methodology (known as IFPA) to simplify, summarize, and communicate
technically complex fiduciary assessments (at the project and portfolio level) through
an easily understood system of red, yellow, and green “traffic lights.”

•

An intensification of dialogue between the Bank and Argentina’s Supreme Audit
Institution (AGN). Audit support activities have improved on-time audit completion
and, more broadly, strengthened Government audit capacity.

•

A Price Monitoring Mechanism (PMM) on civil works contracts to help distinguish
higher prices attributable to legitimate supply responses from artificial price inflation.

•

An across the board effort to reduce the use and size of Project Implementation Units
(PIUs) and thereby strengthen the state’s own institutions and systems.

61.
The SEPA is one of the most successful components of the AFAP. Designed in
response to project-level challenges to disclose relevant information on project
procurement plans and their implementation via the web, its initial scope included all
contracts financed by the Bank in Argentina. With a recent decision by IDB to adopt
SEPA as its procurement dissemination tool, SEPA will de facto cover a substantial share
of Argentina’s public investment program and achieve impressive progress in the
transparency of public procurement in Argentina. Beyond Argentina, SEPA has been
implemented in Mexico, Honduras, Uruguay and Paraguay. Three additional countries
are in the advanced stages of implementation, and another four have recently begun
implementation of SEPA. Likewise, concurrent audits designed to ensure fiduciary
standards of a Bank-financed results-oriented maternal-child health insurance scheme has
gradually become the auditing standard for the health insurance scheme at the national
level and it is envisaged it may be adopted in future Government programs in the sector.
62.
Portfolio Management. There has been a strong focus on portfolio management
which has enabled an intensive dialogue with the Government at the highest levels to
address issues affecting the portfolio as a whole and ensure that the commitments made
in investments are effectively executed. In addition to regular joint portfolio reviews, the
Government has recently: (a) reorganized the handling of loan approvals within the
Ministry of Economy with the expectation that it will significantly streamline the process
of approval of loan agreements and subsidiary agreements with subnational and other
implementing agencies15; and (b) agreed to improve management information systems
15

See Ministerial Resolution No. 108/2009 dated March 16, 2009 issued by the Ministry of Economy and
Public Finance.

19

utilized by project entities to jointly monitor civil work contracts to identify undue
delays. This is a welcome initiative as over 60 percent of Bank commitments finance
high-value civil works contracts. The CAS completion report highlighted that progress in
this area should be continued and deepened, thus new activities will be supported with an
IDF grant and are expected to accelerate the pace of implementation.
63.
There have also been shortfalls from initial expectations regarding the pace of
implementation of the portfolio. A productive dialogue with the authorities has ensued,
and an action plan is in place to address the shortfalls. The overall country relationship
has been greatly strengthened in the past three years, consolidating improvements that
had steadily accrued since 2001-02. The IFC has realized similar accomplishments by
focusing its lending on companies that demonstrate social responsibility and a track
record of honoring contractual obligations. The IBRD not only reestablished its presence
in a number of sectors but opened new channels, particularly in the form of result-based
disbursements and direct lending to provinces, guaranteed by the Federal Government,
that have enhanced the Bank’s developmental contribution to the country.
Box 2: Argentina and the IBRD Strategy for Middle-Income Countries (MIC)

Argentina has presented a peculiar challenge in the implementation of IBRD’s MIC Strategy. In
the midst of the 2002-03 crisis, the possibilities of developing a strong partnership appeared
limited as the Bank was identified by the new authorities as partly responsible for the social and
economic debacle. Since then there has been strong progress in building trust and in designing an
investment partnership that has shown responsiveness and flexibility as the country transitioned
from acute crisis to a rapidly recovering economy. The current CAS period focused the
partnership in developing investment initiatives that could contribute to generating a solid basis
for continued pro-poor growth. In the growth dimension, the assistance efforts implied a move
from traditional transport projects --which continue to play an important role--to a focus on
logistic investments aimed at improving transport efficiency, improved non-Pampean agriculture
production and addressing major environment challenges. In the social dimension, it implied the
phasing out of the emergency assistance schemes for a focus on increasing the employability of
the poor through investments in life-long learning schemes and the improvement of health and
educational services. The proposed program includes new and challenging efforts to respond to
the country’s needs with customized and flexible approaches consistent with Bank policy.
As the country faces new challenges derived from some fragile policy approaches and the
international crisis, the Bank stands ready to further expand its partnership by expanding the array
of services, particularly in the areas of financial and knowledge services which have been
underutilized. In the financial services sector the Bank will continue to make available a full
menu of financing and credit-enhancement and risk-management tools that could help the
Government optimize the management of its debt and asset portfolios, particularly at a time of
significant financial constraints. In the knowledge service sector, the Bank will continue to make
available its research and expert services at the sectoral and country levels through analytic work,
training, institutional capacity building, technical assistance, and other advisory activities. The
recent experience with Fee-for-Service analytical work at the provincial level seems a promising
channel for increasing our knowledge contribution to the country.

20

Box 3: The Heads of Households Program: A Successful Partnership

The Heads of Household Program was Argentina’s main response to the social and economic
crisis in 2002. Government rapidly developed and implemented this assistance program which
provides a monthly payment equivalent to US$50 to individuals that (i) are the head of a
household; (ii) are unemployed; (iii) live in a household with minors, disabled or pregnant
women, and (iv) work 4 hours a day or take training or education classes. The Bank supported
the Program through the Heads of Household Project (Loan 7157-AR), approved by the Board on
January 28, 2003, and Heads of Household Transition Loan approved on March 23, 2006.
The Bank supported the part of the program in which beneficiaries did indeed comply with the
workfare requirement. The Program was very successful in (i) calming the social situation
(which had nearly erupted into violent conflict), and (ii) targeting the poor, mitigating effectively
the impact of the crisis. Government, with Bank support, has improved program governance
(better internal controls, database crosschecks and supervision). For example the Bank now
finances only transfers made with debit cards, a more transparent mechanism than cash payments.
Since 2002, the Bank accompanied Government implementation of the Program with analytical
studies of its poverty and inequality impact. Incidence data shows that the Program had good
targeting performance. The share of Program participants among the 40 percent better-off
households in Argentina was 6 percent in 2005 while the share of Program benefits going to the
bottom two quintiles was 80 percent. Given the good targeting performance, the HH Program
was instrumental in tilting the overall economic growth period in a pro-poor way. While the
number of indigenous beneficiaries is not known, the program is active in dozens of
municipalities with high proportions of indigenous populations.
Governance improvements to Jefes included building additional cross-checks into the registry
databases and adding additional controls within the MTESS. This included regular monthly crosschecks of the registry database with other databases by an independent agency (National System
of Tax and Social Identification –SINTyS). The MTESS also introduced cross-checks of the
registry against beneficiaries (and family members) among the participants in private health
insurance plans. In addition, the spouses of beneficiaries were cross-checked against private
employment registries.
Social accountability was also enhanced through greater use of public information and
participation mechanisms. The MTESS coordinated with the National Consultative Council staff
to hold a series of workshops on the program in order to consult and provide information,
promoting the participation of local organizations (non-governmental organizations, unions,
business groups, private companies, professional training centers, among others).
With the normalization of the overall economic and social situation, the Government reoriented
the HH Program. The strategy was to distinguish among those beneficiaries that have higher reemployment chances from those that require a different type of longer-term safety net, linked to
building human capital for children.

B. SUMMARY FINDINGS FROM COMPLETION REPORT
64.
Five consecutive years of rapid and pro-poor economic growth beginning in 2003
have enabled poverty and unemployment to be cut back to pre-crisis levels. Many of the
country development goals articulated in the CAS were achieved. Whereas the aim was

21

to reduce unemployment from 14 percent in 2005 to no more than 11 percent in 2009,
unemployment was already below 8 percent in 2008. Similarly a targeted reduction in
urban poverty from 38 percent in 2005 to no more than 30 percent in 2009 was already
surpassed by 2007. The Government has clearly been successful in further relieving a
massive social crisis during the CAS period; however, that achievement was made at the
cost of increasing inflationary pressures as detailed above.
65.
The anticipated CAS outcomes were largely achieved (see Annex 3). Outcomes
with respect to the lending program were also substantially achieved. During the CAS
period there was a significant renovation of the country’s investment portfolio which had
been virtually exhausted during the post crisis period. The Bank is on track to deliver 20
project loans for a total of US$3,425 million before end FY200916 under the current CAS.
There has also been a strong focus on fiduciary matters in all aspects related to the
preparation and implementation of the portfolio. The Bank also delivered a strong
program of AAA albeit less than envisaged in the CAS.
C. DEVELOPMENT PARTNERS
66.
The Bank Group’s program is coordinated with Argentina’s other development
partners, notably the IDB and CAF. In the case of IDB, the authorities have promoted a
division of labor among the two institutions in line with the requirements of the various
sectors. In human development, the Bank has taken a lead role in health while IDB has
taken a corresponding position in the education sector. In the case of social protection,
the Bank initially took a leading role with the Heads of Household Program; however,
IDB has recently become increasingly involved with its financing of the Familias
Program. In the infrastructure sectors, the Bank has a leading role in roads, flood
protection and water and sanitation; while IDB is predominant in regional infrastructure
development in the north of Argentina and urban development.
67.
There is strong coordination with IDB on fiduciary matters, particularly with the
harmonization of procurement rules and the decision of IDB to adopt SEPA as a tool to
make information on IDB-financed procurement available to the public. IDB is currently
in the process of preparing its country assistance strategy for the coming four years. Its
lending program (about US$1.5 billion per year) has been larger than the Bank’s and has
similar priorities and lending modalities. IDB also has greater exposure (about US$8.5
billion) and a larger portfolio (about US$7.1 billion) in Argentina than the Bank.
68.
The degree of coordination with CAF is less as they are mainly active in different
sectors from the Bank. CAF has a smaller presence (exposure about US$0.5 billion);
however, there is dialogue and consultations with CAF representatives in the field.
D. CPS CONSULTATIONS
69.
During December 2008, the CPS team conducted seven thematic consultations in
Argentina on the issues of: transportation and logistics, water and sanitation, agriculture,
16

One remaining project for US$840 million will be considered by Executive Directors before the end of
FY09 (AR Matanza-Riachuelo River Basin Clean-Up).

22

environment, social policy, federal-provincial relations, and public sector management.
Even with the diversity of topics covered and a methodology that allowed in depth
discussion of each topic, there were common concerns expressed: (i) the need to support
capacity building for public officials at the local and national level; (ii) the need to
identify strategic plans by sectors and the support the Bank could bring to do so; (iii) the
opportunity to work at the provincial and municipal levels as well as national, including
the need for the Bank to invest in capacity building at these levels; and (iv) participants
expressed an overall appreciation of the work done with the Bank yet they mentioned that
Bank’s rules could be more flexible to improve the execution of projects. These general
findings are reflected in the activities planned under this CPS, and the individual
consultations also provided useful input that has been taken on board by the respective
sectors. For example, the public sector management consultation yielded a call for
reinforcement of results-based management initiatives which will be taken up in a multisectoral manner as the CPS proposes to build on such initiatives in the health sector and
under the Performance-Based Budgeting project. The sessions on human development
and national-provincial relations provided useful input reflected in the CPS aims of
greater institutional strengthening of and support to the provinces. Annex 9 provides
additional details on these consultations and their outcomes.
E. RATIONALE FOR WBG SUPPORT TO ARGENTINA
70.
The strengthening of the relationship between the Bank and Argentina in recent
years has provided the basis for a broadened upstream dialogue. Building on the
pioneering dialogue in the health and safety net sectors, increasingly strategic dialogue
has been developed in sectors such as transport, environment and agriculture. In the
current context of potential serious effects from the international economic crisis and
amidst signals that the authorities may need to review and eventually revise some of their
policy and strategic preferences, it will be particularly important that the Bank maintain
its presence and remain a reliable and important source of advice and assistance to the
country. Requests for Bank support in mitigating the impact of the crisis with a Social
Safety Nets operation constitute an excellent opportunity to help the administration in
consolidating a solid social protection system. Likewise, there are potentially other
opportunities for the Bank to assist the country in mitigating the impact of the crisis while
addressing some of the structural issues derived from the current policy stance.
71.
A key lesson of the last CAS is that by focusing selectively on areas of consensus
within the Government’s development agenda, the Bank was able to provide important
support as the Government has made remarkable strides in reducing poverty. The
positive relationship that now prevails may be attributed to the successful partnership that
has been evolving towards making the Bank a borrower of choice when dealing with
complex investments particularly in the infrastructure and social sectors and, lately, in the
emerging field of environmental programs. In fact, the Government’s demand outstrips
the available IBRD resources, especially as the pipeline is rebalanced in response to the
global economic crisis to fortify Argentina’s social safety nets.

23

F. ARGENTINA – WORLD BANK COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY (FY10-12)
Strategic Approach of the Proposed CPS
72.
In this complex and challenging context, but capitalizing on the improvement in
relations since the crisis, it is essential to continue responding to emerging economic and
social issues, while managing risks. Given the continuity in Government policy and the
expressed demand, the 2010-2012 CPS will continue to focus on the three pillars
successfully supported under the previous CAS: (i) sustainable growth with equity, (ii)
social inclusion, and (iii) improved governance. However, there will be significant
evolution in the support provided as this flexible but focused framework will allow
rebalancing the portfolio toward even greater emphasis on the social inclusion pillar as
the Bank’s key response to the deteriorating economic and social environment. The CPS
proposes an approach characterized by the following, which are largely derived from the
lessons of the previous CAS – as detailed in Annex 6:
•

Joint work with the Government that: (1) is strategic and where there is strong
demand, and (2) in areas where the Bank has good dialogue with the authorities and
feels comfortable with the basic policy and institutional framework.

•

Focus on cross-cutting issues such as governance and institutional strengthening.

•

Focus on the national level of government and, in line with the federal nature of
government in Argentina, seek to deepen its engagement with the subnational levels
of government.

•

The Bank proposes to capitalize on the value-added of its expertise and experience
through more complex and likely larger programs or projects.

•

The Bank will strengthen its AAA program.

•

The CPS seeks to improve the implementation of the Bank portfolio.

•

The CPS proposes further efforts to improve fiduciary safeguards.

73.
The CPS will be performance-based. One inherent characteristic of the
investment lending-only portfolio is its self-selectivity. Along with macroeconomic
stability, portfolio management and fiduciary performance are among the factors that will
determine actual lending levels. At the sector level, the quality of the policy framework
and implementation performance will continue to determine the pace and extent of new
lending. At the project level, Bank-financed activities will continue to be designed
around clear development outcomes and incorporate incentives toward those outcomes
Results Orientation and Monitoring
74.
The Argentina CPS is based on the Results Framework (Annex 2). This
framework identifies and tracks specific outcomes the World Bank program is designed
to influence over the next three years. The mid-term CPS Progress Report will provide
an opportunity to assess progress and performance, and revisit the Results Matrix in order
that it may reflect any evolution in the Bank and Government’s relationship and shared

24

priorities. In addition, the Government and Bank’s semi-annual portfolio reviews provide
not only an opportunity for project by project results assessments, but also their aggregate
contribution toward the anticipated country results. The strengthening of the portfolio
management described during the previous CAS period, and the IDF supported efforts
that will be implemented under this CPS will further strengthen the linkage between this
semi-annual exercise and country results monitoring. The effectiveness of the Bank’s
AAA portfolio in supporting the achievement of the CPS results will be strengthened by
the joint annual AAA review exercise described previously.
The WBG’s Indicative 2010-2012 Program
Objectives and Outcomes
75.
As mentioned previously, the proposed program would provide selective,
performance-based support under the three pillars to influence specific outcomes in
support of Argentina’s strategic development goals. Annex 6 describes proposed
activities in greater detail, and Annex 2 elaborates the outcomes and milestones the
activities are expected to support. Given the need for flexibility in this dynamic global
context in order to be responsive to the Government’s needs, this list is indicative.
•

Objective: Upgrade Argentina’s infrastructure to address potential bottlenecks
to competitiveness, and underpin medium-term growth and poverty alleviation

76.
The Bank will undertake an innovative approach in supporting the Government’s
objective, with activities designed to contribute to improving the transport network,
increasing public transport ridership, increasing rural access to electricity supply, and
improved access to water and sanitation. The first outcome will be supported by a major
operation tackling logistic multi-modal problems affecting transport efficiency. The twostage APL for the Rosario Metropolitan Area Infrastructure project should help to reduce
high logistical costs associated with grain and oilseed exports through the Rosario port
system, which accounts for 58 percent of Argentina’s exports by volume. The Bank will
also expand its support for urban transport beyond the Greater Buenos Aires area under
the Metropolitan Areas Urban Transport project (PTUMA) and continue supporting
successful highway maintenance schemes under a National Highway Assets Maintenance
III Project. At the same time, the Bank would build on its long-standing involvement in
rural electrification (PERMER) and more recent support for energy efficiency (through
GEF) with a new Rural Electrification and Energy Efficiency Project. Beneficiaries of
these programs include some of the most vulnerable, including indigenous, populations.
Finally, the Bank will contribute toward improved access to water and sanitation with a
major environmental initiative. The proposed US$840 million loan (APL-1) in support
of the Matanza-Riachuelo Basin Sustainable Development Project would finance most of
the transmission, treatment and disposal infrastructure needed to provide the
infrastructure backbone for cleaning up an urban river basin that is home to some 3.5
million people and more than 4,000 industrial facilities stretching across 14
municipalities and the City of Buenos Aires.

25

Table 1: CPS Program Objectives and Select Activities

Government of Argentina Strategic Objectives
Pillar I
Pillar II:
Pillar III:
Sustainable Growth with Equity
Social Inclusion
Improved Governance
Outcomes toward which the CPS will contribute
Upgrade Argentina’s
Consolidate the reduction in
Strengthen the effectiveness,
infrastructure to address
poverty and expand efforts to efficiency, transparency and
potential bottlenecks to
reverse the longer-term
accountability of public
competitiveness, and underpin
poverty trend by increasing
sector management
medium-term growth and poverty household incomes and
alleviation
integrating marginalized
Expand performance
groups into the productive
management and improve the
Improve competitiveness,
marketplace
quality of public expenditure,
quality, and exports of
enhance service delivery
agriculture and livestock
Consolidate improvements in outcomes and trust in
production
health indicators and improve institutions
quality of education while
Address a growing problem of
reducing drop out rates
Strengthen public sector
resource degradation
capacity to spur investment
and growth
Selected Programs for Support
• Improving the transport
• Improving employability • Strengthening
network
of the most vulnerable
transparency of decisionmaking, increase access
• Increasing public transport
• Expansion of provincial
to information
ridership
health insurance
•
Expanding effective
• Increasing rural access to
• Hospital restructuring and
performanceelectricity supply
expansion
management and
• Improved access to water
• Strengthening health
performance-informed
and sanitation
sector governance
budgeting
• Increase the diversification
• Universal access to
• Improving compliance
of production in the
primary education
with the Fiscal
agricultural sector
• Lower teen dropout rates
Responsibility Law
Cross-Cutting Themes
Strengthen capacity of the Government to prepare, approve and implement investment projects in
line with the requirements of a medium-term investment partnership.
Ensure awareness and knowledge with Government about IBRD financial products that could
provide flexibility to Argentina in managing its debt, including the ability to change the financial
characteristics of existing and future loans as to better manage the financial risks relating to
currency, interest rate, roll over and commodity price volatility

77.
Most projects in the infrastructure portfolio generate significantly improved
conditions for the poor. While most of the Bank’s infrastructure investments under the
2006-2008 CAS supported maintenance and expansion of the national and subnational
highway networks, the new portfolio will present a more diversified picture with
investment initiatives conveying increased complexity and value added from the Bank
and a growing focus in producing improved efficiency and poverty alleviation.

26

•

Objective: Improve competitiveness, quality, and exports of agriculture and
livestock production

78.
The proposed CPS program will contribute to increasing the diversification of
production in the agricultural sector. Bank work in support of this objective will continue
to focus on enhancing the competitiveness of the non-Pampean (“regional”) economies
and increasing the assets and opportunities of small farmers and the rural poor. At the
national level, the Bank will seek to engage the Government in a discussion of
agricultural policy options that reflect the changing international and domestic context
based on just-in-time analytical work. The Government has recently sought additional
lending from both the IDB and the World Bank (which approved a US$300 million loan
in October, 2008) for the PROSAP program. It has also received an additional financing
loan for the PROINDER small farmers project (July, 2007) to reach deeper into poor
rural areas. In addition, the Government has expressed interest in a new Rural Poverty
operation that would address extremely poor and vulnerable indigenous and nonindigenous populations, including the landless and migrant workers. This project will be
the primary IBRD vehicle for combining natural resource management activities with
support to indigenous peoples. Finally, IBRD’s ongoing flood protection operations
contain strong elements of disaster preparedness planning in addition to physical works.
•

Objective: Address a growing problem of resource degradation

79.
The Bank program will provide support to (i) increase the areas of forest and
forest plantations under sustainable management, (ii) strengthen urban and solid waste
management, improve environmental management and governance, and (iii) increase
access to international carbon markets. Support for Argentina’s “green” (natural
resources) agenda will build on ongoing operations in Sustainable Natural Resource
Management (IBRD) and Biodiversity Conservation in Productive Forestry Landscapes
(GEF). The latter works with small farmers, including indigenous peoples, to introduce
biodiversity-friendly practices in productive forests.
These operations will be
complemented by a new GEF-funded Rural Corridors and Biodiversity Conservation
project which would stitch together conservation corridors necessary for the survival of
several endangered species and the sustainable management/ use of native forest and arid
steppe while strengthening the federal system of protected areas.
80.
The proposed CPS will support the second and third outcomes by expanding the
Bank’s work on “brown” environmental issues through the previously discussed
Matanza-Riachuelo Basin Sustainable Development Project and a proposed Sustainable
Industrial Development Project that will support the conversion of small and mediumsize industries in highly polluting sectors to cleaner production processes. These
operations will complement ongoing operations in urban solid waste management and in
the remediation of improperly closed uranium mining and milling sites. In addition,
several new operations will mainstream “brown” issues, such as air pollution control, as
parts of loans in other sectors. The upcoming PTUMA Project, for example, will
promote increased public transport ridership while the Rosario Logistics Project will
alleviate traffic congestion and promote a modal shift from road to rail for agricultural
commodities. Finally, Bank support for Argentina’s Third National Communication
27

under the UNFCCC is expected to deepen the absorption of climate change
considerations in sectoral planning, particularly in infrastructure and agriculture. A
country environmental assessment (CEA) (planned for FY10) is expected to help
Argentina and the Bank to set priorities for additional investments.
•

Objective: Consolidate the reduction in poverty and expand efforts to reverse
the longer-term poverty trend by increasing household incomes and integrating
marginalized groups into the productive marketplace

81.
A key element of the Bank’s ongoing and future policy dialogue toward this
objective is to improve the employability of the most vulnerable. The focus of social
service delivery has shifted from emergency relief and expanding access to basic services
to better inter-governmental coordination and improved quality of services. The Bank is
therefore supporting the Government in facilitating the transition of beneficiaries out of
Jefes and developing a longer term strategy for social protection. According to the
discussions with the national Government, the Bank is proposing to design and
implement new operations to extend and complement the existing social protection
programs. The first operation would focus on improving the equity, transparency, and
efficiency of social programs and on the Seguro Program to: (i) create conditions to
extend the services of Seguro to the population generally, beyond the former
beneficiaries of Plan Jefes (at this time the only ones eligible); (ii) improve the execution
and adaptation of employment services, taking into consideration the particular
conditions in each locality where the program is executed; and (iii) adapt the benefits
offered to the participants to ensure appropriate support and incentives. The proposed
second phase would focus on supporting policies to expand coverage of both programs,
in the direction defined by the first phase loan. Thus, the Project would finance further
improvements in design and operation of these programs, while supporting the inclusion
of vulnerable families and workers currently excluded, with the final goal of increasing
the efficiency and effectiveness of Argentina’s social protection policy.
82.
Another aspect that has been explored with the Argentine Government at various
levels is the possibility of supporting social inclusion policies at the subnational level, as
detailed in the next paragraph. To provide updated information on the trends and impacts
of social protection programs, the Bank will support the Government to enhance its
monitoring capacity by providing technical assistance in the design and implementation
of a national “Social Protection Survey”.
•

Objective: Consolidate improvements in health indicators and improve quality
of education while reducing drop out rates

83.
The Bank aims to expand support toward this objective through (i) expansion of
provincial health insurance coverage, (ii) hospital restructuring and improving services,
and (iii) strengthening the Ministry of Health and health sector governance. The program
aims to strengthen the governance capacities of the National Ministry of Health to
improve the operation of the health system, as discussed in paragraph 85 below.
Expected outcomes would be improved access, effectiveness, and transparency of health
services delivery. The proposed health projects would move forward with innovations

28

such as: (i) expanding the age groups that would benefit from existing provincial
insurance arrangements (e.g. to all school-age children); (ii) defining a broader
guaranteed service scope (e.g. to include chronic, non-transmissible diseases); and (iii)
introducing health quality attributes to services (e.g. reducing waiting lists). The project
would seek to achieve (i) gradual improvement in equity of access by providing all
Argentines with a similar health plan regardless of where they live; and (ii) a structured
and comprehensive approach to address the disease burden associated with chronic
conditions and regional pathologies that disproportionately affect the poorest population.
84.
Universal coverage of 5-year old children and retention of teenagers, particularly
those in the poorer segments of the population, are two of the key elements of the
Government’s strategy for strengthening the education system. The Bank’s program
targets exclusion from educational attainment, which is highest among children and
teenagers of the poorest families. The latest education legislation is increasing the
financing of the education sector to 6 percent of GDP by 2010. The Bank’s involvement
in subnational education systems over many years gives it a comparative advantage on
issues of improving quality of education and management of the education system. The
Bank's emphasis on provincial education can best be seen through an ongoing US$150
million rural education project that will provide support until October 2011.
•

Objective: Strengthen the effectiveness,
accountability of public sector management

efficiency,

transparency

and

85.
The proposed CPS will build on the on-going engagement on public sector
management strengthening by deepening engagement on existing loans and responding to
new requests with support for additional operational and analytical work. The ongoing
State and Subnational Modernization projects are complemented by the Institutional
Strengthening of the National Social Security Administration Project and the Social and
Fiscal National Identification System (SINTyS) second-phase APL. In addition, a
US$350,000 Governance Partnership Facility (GPF) grant for strengthening governance
in the health sector formulate and implement sustainable approaches to improving
governance in the health sector in Argentina. Achievement of the goals of the GPF grant
will be supported by a project to create a multi-stakeholder National Observatory for
Health Policy that would (i) deepen analysis of accountability and incentive mechanisms
in the health sector, assess lessons from experience and identify opportunities for scaling
up; and (ii) pilot and evaluate innovative approaches.
•

Objective: Expand performance management and improve the quality of public
expenditure and enhance service delivery outcomes and trust in institutions

86.
The program will concentrate on strengthening public expenditure management
tools, including an increased focus on performance-management and -budgeting,
proposed to be supported by the Foundations for Performance-Informed Budgeting
Project. While this is an important part of the Government’s long-term agenda, it is also
facilitates greater fiscal discipline in the short-term, including specific measures for
public financial management reform to address the financial crisis. Sectoral dialogue is
also focused on strengthened poverty-targeting in public expenditures, particularly

29

through the ongoing health and education portfolios and the proposed Basic Protection
Project.
The program also emphasizes support to cross-cutting public sector
management areas across the federal administration, such as human resource
management, e-government, procurement, quality management, and M&E through the
State Modernization II loan.
87.
Specific organizational reform issues will be addressed through the Institutional
Strengthening loan to ANSES, the National Social Security Administration and specific
e-government tools will be promoted through the second phase of the National Social
and Fiscal Identification System Project. At the subnational level, the program will focus
on a variety of public sector management areas at the provincial levels, such as
performance management and budgeting, human resource management, tax
administration, e-government and strategic planning. This will be supported by the ongoing Subnational Governments Modernization Project. In addition, Fee-for-Service
products are proposed for a number of subnational governments, starting with the ongoing FFS in the province of Corrientes.
World Bank Lending
88.
The Bank proposes an indicative lending envelope of US$3.3 billion for FY10FY12, front-loaded with two operations to support Argentina’s safety nets during the
critical next two years. IBRD’s exposure to Argentina declined from US$ 9.4 billion at
end-CY2001 to US$ 5.1 billion at end-2008, about the same level as in 1995. This
reduction is partly the result of reasonable commitment levels through mainly investment
operations that led to lower disbursements. At the same time, the special SALs of the late
1990s increased debt service during this period. With the proposed program, Bank
exposure in Argentina is expected to increase to US$5.6 billion by the end of the CPS
period as a result of front loaded assistance designed to help the country and its more
vulnerable population weather the impact of the global economic crisis.
89.
Due to uncertainty over the evolving international economic situation and the
need to maintain flexibility, lending amounts for some projects are not yet fixed and,
thus, are expressed in Table 2 as ranges. Furthermore, the Government’s desire for
flexibility in their response to the global crisis is reflected in a strategy to avoid
committing excessively large amounts to projects without a track record of successful
implementation and disbursement. Successfully implemented programs may be scaled
up through additional financing, repeater projects or multi-phase APLs. Lending plans
for FY11-12 will be specified in further detail in a progress report reflecting any changes
in demand, country conditions and the Bank’s lending capacity at the time.
IFC Activities
90.
IFC’s strategy in Argentina is designed to support the growth of export-oriented
sectors and a select group of financial institutions, in order to create jobs and meet the
needs of low-income populations, particularly those in frontier regions.

30

91.
Argentina represents IFC’s second-largest exposure in the region and IFC’s
seventh-largest country exposure by committed portfolio. It constitutes 12 percent of
IFC's committed portfolio in the Latin American and Caribbean region. IFC’s strategy in
Argentina is designed to manage existing risks prudently and seek out new investment
and advisory opportunities to selectively support the CPS pillars. The Corporation’s
investment bias is mainly toward export-oriented industries and a select group of
financial institutions, with a strong emphasis on attending “bottom of the pyramid”
population needs, particularly in frontier regions. The overarching strategy is to proceed
cautiously, with sponsors in strong industries that have an established record of sound,
profit-oriented, and therefore sustainable management. This means that IFC will
concentrate its activities on existing clients in both corporate and financial sectors. IFC
aims to continue renewing and even expanding trade finance lines to Argentine banks,
which have become strong IFC partners for onlending programs to farmers and MSMEs.
Additional information on IFC’s program is provided in Annex 7.
Table 2: Planned lending deliverables (FY09-FY10)
Project

FY and amount (in US$ Million)
FY09

Matanza-Riachuelo Development APL

840

Basic Protection Project (Phase I)

450

Foundations for Performance-Informed Budgeting

FY10

10-20

BA Provincial Infrastructure (AF)

50

Urban Transport in Metropolitan Areas

150

Provincial Roads (AF)

200

Cordoba Provincial Roads (AF)

30-60

Sustainable Industrial Development

40-60

Rural Poverty

30-50

San Juan Social Inclusion & Local Development

20-50

Provincial Government Modernization (AF)

15

Essential Public Health Functions - FESP (AF)

90

Health Sector Governance Strengthening*

4.5

Road Safety

20

Basic Protection Project (Phase II)

550

*Though listed separately here, will likely be included in FESP AF for a total loan of US$94.5m

The Bank’s Analytical Agenda
92.
A complete description of the Bank’s analytical agenda appears in Annex 6.
Table 1 summarizes key elements of the proposed agenda. As with the previous CAS,
there are few AAA activities planned under the Governance pillar as these are
mainstreamed in the operations themselves.

31

Table 3: Key Elements of the Partnership’s Analytical Agenda – Argentina CPS 2009-2012

Pillar 1: Sustainable Growth with Equity
Country Economic Memorandum (CEM): Productivity and Growth. The study will :
• Review short and long-run determinants of economic growth; study role of macro policies in
responding to external shocks and their effectiveness in mitigating output volatility
• Study link between the quality and composition of trade, and its long-term growth potential
• Look at the link between business environment and firm level productivity
Reducing Logistics Costs in the Buenos Aires Container Port System and the Northwest
(Logistics II). This study will:
• Focus on high logistics costs in the northwest region and policy alternatives to avoid
unnecessary transportation costs from the Port of Buenos Aires
• Prepare guidelines on how to set up a National Logistics Council that could become a
forum to anticipate and propose solutions to logistics bottlenecks in Argentina
Rural Transport Assessment.
• Analyze transportation access to health, education and other public services as well as
obstacles to the movement of goods in rural areas;
• Assess the rural and/or secondary road networks in Argentina, including coverage, quality,
management and maintenance, available financing and corresponding expenditures
Country Environmental Assessment (CEA) and Strategic Environmental Assessments (SEA).
• CEA will focus on environmental implications of key policies, and capacity to address
priorities;
• SEA’s will provide analytical options and participatory approaches for mainstreaming
environmental and social considerations in policies, plans and programs in different sectors
Private Sector Development, Innovation and Competitiveness Study:
• Focus on federal and provincial level based on demand from Governors.
Pillar 2: Social Inclusion
Safety Nets.
• Supporting efforts to improve effectiveness of the safety net for the poor and vulnerable
• Expanding coverage of poverty reduction programs, improving data, and more
• Strengthening provincial safety net programs and coordination with national programs
Impact of Labor Market Developments on Inequality.
• Analyze the effects of labor and social protection programs on income inequality,
• Generate new quantitative data for analysis of income inequality at the provincial level
• Analyze income distribution and policy impacts, and inform lending in social protection
Strengthening Management and Governance of Public Hospital Networks.
• Support efforts to strengthen hospital networks management
• In the framework of a National Plan proposed by the MoH to construct primary health
care and hospitals, document what works and what could work better to improve
innovation and entrepreneurial behavior in the public hospital system
Higher Education.
• Identify options for higher education to graduate professionals with the knowledge and in
the numbers required by Argentina’s development
Pillar 3: Governance
Public Sector Management.
• Performance-management and performance-informed budgeting at the subnational levels
Provincial Finances.
• Review provincial performance under Federal Fiscal Responsibility Regime and identify
options to support provincial fiscal sustainability within the existing inter-governmental
fiscal system.

32

Treasury Services
93.
Finally, in addition to lending and AAA, the Bank will ensure the Government’s
awareness and knowledge of IBRD financial products that could provide flexibility to
Argentina in managing its debt, including the ability to change the financial
characteristics of existing and future loans to better manage the financial risks relating to
currency, interest rate, roll over and commodity price volatility. These products can also
be applied beyond IBRD’s loan portfolio, to gain access to IBRD banking products to be
applied to Argentina’s other sovereign liabilities (e.g. bonds outstanding, third party
loans, etc.), thus taking advantage of the preferential pricing that IBRD’s AAA rating
commands. Staff of the World Bank’s Treasury are available to review with Government
the flexibility, depth and breadth of IBRD’s full menu of banking products and services,
including technical assistance in designing and implementing a broad strategy for public
debt management aimed at reducing both market risks and overall costs of funding.
Portfolio and Fiduciary Considerations
94.
An important lesson of the previous CAS was that the shift from adjustment
lending, which dominated Bank lending at the beginning of the decade, to an allinvestment lending program has strained the project implementation capacity of the
Government, particularly in areas of loan approval processing and the contracting of high
value civil works. Therefore Bank will continue efforts to strengthen the capacity of the
Government to prepare, approve and implement investment projects in line with the
requirements of a medium-term investment partnership. Key elements of this strategy
include (i) support the implementation of new project approval procedures at the national
level; (ii) improved design, preparation and approval procedures for subnational projects;
(iii) improved procurement capacity; and (iv) improved fiduciary risk and portfolio
monitoring. The emphasis on infrastructure and complex projects also brings an
increased element of safeguards risks, thus the partnership strategy includes an increased
focus on safeguards capacity and supervision.

VI. RISKS
A. EXTERNAL
95.
Adverse External Environment. Over the next 18 months, Argentina will have
to weather the global economic crisis and a declining primary fiscal surplus. External
factors will negatively impact the terms of trade, fiscal and external positions, and
competitive devaluations of trading partners. The country has few financing options, and
the capital account poses particular risks as a new round of capital outflows would cause
foreign reserves to drop. On the internal balances, Federal Government revenues are
expected to fall by 0.9 percentage points of GDP while primary expenditures would fall
by only 0.1 percentage points of GDP. In addition, the provincial primary fiscal surplus
is expected to further deteriorate. However, the Government will be able to maintain a
primary fiscal surplus of about 2.4 percent of GDP in 2009, assuming that commodity

33

prices stabilize by end-2009 and that the Government manages to contain nominal
expenditure growth in the face of mid-term elections in 2009.
96.
Limited Availability of Counterpart Funds. Relatedly, a deepening of the
economic slowdown and deterioration of the fiscal position could result in a decreased
availability of counterpart funds for the implementation of the Bank’s portfolio. Should
this occur, the Bank would respond as it has in previous crises with a restructuring of the
portfolio. While such a restructuring would be responsive to the specific needs of the
country, current contingency discussions anticipate that such a response would further
rebalance the portfolio toward social safety nets and health services, focusing available
funds on operations that disburse quickly and provide employment.
97.
High Indebtedness. Argentina’s public debt remains high at US$175 billion as
of end-September 2008, equivalent to 58 percent of GDP. Medium- and long-term debt
currently represent nearly 90 percent of total federal obligations, while short-term debt,
mainly due to the Central Bank and other Government agencies (including ANSES and
AFIP), accounts for 6 percent of total debt. Interest and capital arrears represent another
4 percent of debt. Once intra-public sector obligations are netted out, public debt as a
share of GDP is lower (55 percent). About 52 percent of Argentina’s debt is
denominated in foreign currency, while the bulk of the remaining peso-denominated debt
is indexed to inflation. The share of foreign currency-denominated and inflation-indexed
debt has been relatively stable since 2005, and exposure to foreign exchange and inflation
risk thus remains important. The Government has stated its intention of clearing arrears
with Paris Club members and has indicated that it will be making a fresh offer to hold-out
bond holders. In addition, the Government is taking further steps to improve liability
management, including the recently completed debt swap of Guaranteed Loans.
B. INTERNAL
98.
Slowing Economic Growth. GDP growth is decelerating, as detailed previously.
Consumer demand and private investment are expected to decline, and external factors
further complicate the economic outlook. However, the economy is more resilient than it
was back in 2001 due to largely solid fundamentals (twin surpluses and sizeable foreign
reserves) and a small and more solid banking system. The Government has launched a
package of countercyclical fiscal measures to mitigate the negative impact of the
economic slowdown. In particular, the authorities plan to use their strengthened fiscal
position from the nationalization of the private pension funds to protect the incomes and
employment of vulnerable groups through public work programs and through other
measures aimed at encouraging domestic consumption.
99.
Inflationary Pressures. Inflation remained high in 2008, but it could have begun
to recede by year-end. Looking forward, inflation is likely to recede gradually over the
next two years as recessionary pressures continue to build and declining commodity
prices contribute to this deflationary trend.
100. Financing Gap. The Government will face sizeable financing gaps during the
period 2009-2011, but they seem manageable if economic policies are prudent.

34

Refinancing risks have decreased, in spite of limited access to international financial
markets and high credit risk. In addition to IFIs and BCRA resources, the Treasury is
now allowed to borrow from Banco Nación up to 30 percent of its public deposits, which
would enable it to close the financing gap for 2009.
101. Potential Threats to Social Cohesion. If the economic crisis increases the stock
of poor not covered by social safety nets, pressures to increase coverage and benefits, and
create ad-hoc new social programs could lead to significant fiscal pressures through
increased and perhaps less-efficient social spending. The authorities are working with
the Bank and IDB to strengthen safety nets in view of the potential deterioration in social
conditions. In addition to the threats to social cohesion related to structural problems of
poverty and inequality covered earlier, the spring 2008 Farm Crisis has exacerbated
growing divisiveness within the country. This is likely to manifest itself more strongly in
increased political risk for the Government than in social instability.
102. Political and Social Instability. Mid-term legislative elections were scheduled
for October, but the Government has advanced them to June. Polls suggest that the
Government coalition will face significant competition and will likely have smaller
majorities. The resurgence of the farm conflict and defections from the Government's
majority even before the elections in both chambers have increased uncertainty. On the
positive side, however, a smaller majority in Congress could result in more efforts by
political parties to build consensus to address key national challenges, including working
out a response to the crisis. There may also be increased social unrest as the downturn in
economic activity results in higher unemployment and poverty. In addition to increasing
the difficulty of reigning in public spending, this introduces a degree of uncertainty in the
direction of policy. Our program however is in areas where there is wide consensus
focusing on medium to longer term development.
103. Legal Risks. Domestic and foreign investors have raised concerns regarding the
extension of the economic emergency laws and the legality of the evolving policy aimed
at providing the state with a larger role in the provision of social services and regulation
of the market. Additional such measures could risk a weakening of legal certainty and
rule of law. Recent nationalization measures risk diminishing confidence in GoA’s
credibility regarding contract rights and trigger another round of arbitration cases. These,
as well as MIGA’s disengagement, could eventually impact the credibility of Argentina
vis-a-vis the international financial community and negatively impact the ability to obtain
financing during the global crisis. In addition, there are possible legal risks associated
with the scope and practical application of the Government’s recently-enacted tax
moratorium, designed to encourage the repatriation of offshore capital. Concerns have
been expressed about the law’s unintended potential to open a gap in Argentina’s
defenses against illegal money laundering practices and terrorist financing.
104. Constrained Ability to Attract Private Capital. Argentina’s below-average
(for middle-income countries) performance on regulatory fronts and high corruption
perceptions weaken the basis for private investment, particularly in infrastructure.
Dialogue between the private sector and the Government to explore possible publicprivate partnerships would be helpful in mitigating this risk.

35

C. RISKS TO THE WORLD BANK GROUP
105. Strategic and Relationship Risk. Our program needs to adjust to changing
needs as the economic downturn deepens. It is important to re-calibrate our program
towards shorter term priorities, especially social safety net programs to help protect
vulnerable groups. This is also likely to increase disbursements over the next 18 months
with the objective of moderating or reversing the Bank's negative net transfers to
Argentina during the global economic crisis. In addition, we will strive to support
important visible infrastructure programs to address key infrastructure and environmental
deficiencies and cement more firmly the Government's demand for our support.
106. Implementation Risk. This reflects the 100 percent investment composition of
our lending program, as well as the complex and heterodox economic policy
environment. The most important include: (1) weakening in the economic or key sectoral
policy and institutional frameworks that would undermine the sustainability and
development impact of the Bank’s program; and (2) the standard implementation risks of
a large investment portfolio in partnership with weak institutions including
implementation performance, and fiduciary concerns; and (3) safeguards risks inherent to
the strong focus on infrastructure and complex projects which, while adding value in the
context of weak institutions, necessitate vigilance and proactivity in supervision. While
such risks are common for many countries, the high corruption perceptions, the size of
the country, and the complex inter-governmental relationships perhaps make Argentina
particularly challenging.
107. Conflict over Uruguay Pulp Mill. The Argentine authorities continue to oppose
the paper plant being financed in Uruguay by IFC. However, the authorities are pursuing
their differences with Uruguay over the plant in other international fora. In this regard,
the authorities have also indicated that potentially affected communities should refrain
from closing transit bridges to Uruguay.

36

Annex 1
Page 1 of 7

Annex 1
Page 2 of 7

Economic Performance 2003-2008
From 2003 through 2008 the Argentine Government focused its macroeconomic strategy
on three pillars: maintaining a competitive real exchange rate, fiscal prudence, and active income
policies. The fruit of that strategy was GDP growth averaging 8.8 percent in those years, with
repeated balance-of-payments current account surpluses, declining public sector debt, and
significant reductions in poverty and extreme poverty.
That 2003-2008 sustained growth chapter anchored in solid macroeconomic
fundamentals (budget and current account surpluses) is virtually unprecedented in Argentina. In
previous times, recurring balance-of-payments problems typically created fiscal sustainability
problems and made the financial system more vulnerable and unstable. With an uncompetitive
tradables sector (in many instances associated to an appreciated real exchange rate, as occurred
during the 1990s), a constant in previous growth processes was a widening of the current account
deficit and ultimately balance-of-payments and financial system crises that took a harsh social
and distributional toll.
Such turbulence had serious repercussions on the public finances as well. The public
account deficits that had been habitual in Argentina prior to 2003-2008 had prompted systematic
fiscal adjustments which slowed economic growth, with adverse consequences mainly for the
lowest-income population and for infrastructure spending, a key driver of sustainable long-run
growth. In contrast to the primary budget balances of prior decades—deficits averaging 3.1
percent of GDP in the 1970s, 5.4 percent in the 1970s, and 3.8 percent in the 1980s, then an
average primary surplus of 0.15 percent of GDP in the 1990s, the 2003-2008 period saw an
average primary surplus of 3.3 percent of gross output. Over that latter span the country posted
its first public sector financial surplus in more than fifty years.
The economic growth path of these past years cannot be ascribed solely to the abovementioned twin surpluses or to a relatively benign international environment: it also owes much
to structural changes in investment and economic productivity, diversification of the structure of
production, workings of the labor market, the financial system, and the public sector.
Investment and Productivity
Medium- and long-term growth sustainability depends, among other factors, on
significant investments to scale up production, transportation, warehousing, and distribution
capacity and increase productivity of the local supply base.
Gross fixed domestic investment as a proportion of GDP climbed from 11.3 percent in
2002 to 19.8 percent in 2005 and to 23.0 percent in 2008—1.9 percentage points past the 1990s
high (21.1 percent in 1998). Moreover, the GDP share of investment in producer durables (the
investment component that most heavily impacts the economy’s reproduction capacity and
productivity) jumped from 4.7 percent in 2003 to 10.1 percent in 2008, approaching in the latter
year Argentina’s all-time highs (over 10 percent in 1961 and in 1977).
The twofold aim of this suite of investments was to expand capacity, to be able to supply
the simultaneous increases in domestic and external demand, and to raise productivity. Increases
in productivity (measured as the ratio of GDP in constant local currency to employment) took the
average for this variable to 4.1 percent between 2003 and 2008. As well as marking a record
high, this performance, as a ponderable feature, was associated to modernization of production
plant and equipment, reorganization of plant layouts, and investment in R&D, and not to a
substitution of capital for labor (a pattern common to previous experiences).

Annex 1
Page 3 of 7

National Government public investment increased steadily in 2003-2008, from 1.2
percent to 3.6 percent of GDP. The bulk of this spending went to infrastructure, gaps in that area
being usually one of the most serious bottlenecks to sustained growth of developing economies.
By way of this approach the public sector helped achieve a high long-term growth rate without
affecting the budget surplus.
Structure of Production
Argentina’s production base became increasingly more diversified between 2003 and
2008, lessening vulnerabilities for sustained GDP growth. Unlike previous expansion eras,
economic growth during those years was balanced across the tradables sector (industry,
agriculture, mining), services (notably tourism), and construction.
Within the tradable goods sector—a crucial part of the economy for sustained real
current-account surplus growth—manufacturing became one of the leaders of this expansive
phase. The 9.5 percent average annual growth posted by this sector marked a sixty-year high,
surpassing even the increases of the 1960s, the era of fastest industrial growth in our nation’s
history.
This manufacturing growth was not concentrated in a handful of industry sectors but was
distributed fairly evenly across the industrial aggregate. For instance, in the past six years, the
rate of output growth in sectors where small and medium-sized enterprises predominate (textiles,
garment making, footwear, metal product industries) generally topped the growth rates of sectors
dominated by larger companies, whether export-oriented (automotive, food, base metals) or
selling to the home market (construction materials).
The Argentine export basket likewise became more diverse, as evidenced by the strong
cumulative growth rates in leading domestic metal industry sectors like the automotive industry
(+167 percent between 2003 and 2008) and machinery and mechanical devices (+91 percent), as
well as in railroad equipment (+54 percent) and metal manufactures (+63 percent). Growth
increases for medical, optical, and precision instruments (+50 percent) and electric equipment and
appliances (+73 percent) also outpaced the aggregate.
The automotive sector weighs heavily in the export basket (accounting for 19 percent of
the overall increase in exports in constant prices in recent years); other prominent export
segments were sundry chemical product industries (11 percent), aircraft and aircraft parts (5
percent), and machinery and mechanical devices (5 percent)—medium-high technology-intensive
sectors that made considerable inroads into the global marketplace during the period reviewed
here.
These moves to diversify Argentine production had as a fundamental backing an
exchange rate policy that sought to counter real exchange rate appreciation pressures stemming
from healthy current account surpluses (especially since early 2007, when agricultural commodity
prices skyrocketed), keeping “Dutch disease” at bay. In addition to diversifying its export basket
in 2003-2008, Argentina recorded one of Latin America’s highest year-on-year increases in
export volume.
Social Inclusion
The above-described growth chapter was associated to steady reductions in
unemployment, poverty, and extreme poverty rates and real-wage increases, which improved both
personal income distribution (Gini) and factor income distribution. On the labor market side,
employment-output elasticity averaged a record 0.6 in 2003-2008, a result of steady GDP

Annex 1
Page 4 of 7

increases, diversification of production (with labor-intensive industry sectors contributing
heavily), and intensive investment.
A combination of rising labor demand and a stable participation rate drove
unemployment rates down from 19.7 percent in the fourth quarter of 2003 to 7.6 percent in the
same period in 2008. The declining unemployment rate, in turn, systematically pushed up wages
(nominal and real), which recovered completely from their shrinkage during the previous phase of
job market decline. Between 2002 and 2008 the wage bill-to-GDP ratio increased from 34.6
percent to 43.6 percent, making for a more equitable income distribution.
Complementing the labor market’s internal dynamic was the National Government’s
active income policy. By way of example, systematic adjustments of the minimum wage (a
cumulative increase of 520 percent between January 2003 and December 2008) were intended to
make sure that wage increases reached primarily lower income workers, so as to maximize the
poverty and indigence reduction that comes with labor market recovery.
As for the situation of retirees and pensioners, between 2003 and 2008 the National
Government increased average pension benefits by a cumulative 44 percent, in real terms. The
recently enacted Pension Portability Law (October 2008) provides for two automatic pension
adjustments annually, tied to observed increases in wages in the economy and tax and social
security revenue intakes.
The Social Insurance Inclusion Plan furthered the pro-elderly income policy by giving
pension entitlement to people who had been left out of the current pension system because of
unregistered employment or unemployment problems. Bringing over 1.3 million new people into
the social security system has raised coverage rates for women over 60 and men over 65 to more
than 70 percent in 2008 (85 percent for those over 65), up from 49 percent in 2003 and, together
with the aforementioned increase in pension benefits, contributed to virtually eradicate severe
poverty among older adults.
Against that backdrop, the recent transfer of private pension fund contributors to the
public pension system was primarily intended to ensure continual increases in benefits to all
Argentine pensioners, the private system’s inadequate investments having jeopardized the income
of its contributors in the short and medium term.
Financial System Stability
The recent economic growth chapter unfolded concurrently with the rehabilitation of the
financial system, which had suffered the consequences of the late-1990s crisis. During that
period the system’s soundness indicators had been alarming: bank liquid holdings as a percentage
of total deposits was a 19.6 percent low; some 40 percent of all private commercial bank loans
were classed as substandard, public sector lending exposure was around 50 percent, bank
liabilities were excessively dollarized (49 percent), and there were severe mismatches between
loans’ currency of denomination and the currency received by borrowers, both for corporate and
household loans.
Prudential regulations adopted since 2003 have made bank balance sheets sounder and
more robust. That move, together with the economic growth dynamic, has produced structural
improvements in the condition of local financial institutions. In January 2009, financial system
liquidity was just under 30 percent of total deposits, with a public sector lending exposure of just
12.5 percent (an all-time low); the arrears rate for private commercial bank loans was 3.3 percent
of total private credit, and banks have been posting record profits since 2006. These strengths
signal a difference relative not just to previous growth eras in Argentina but also to the

Annex 1
Page 5 of 7

environment that other countries’ financial systems, in developed and developing economies
alike, are currently navigating.
The Argentine authorities also brought in a package of regulations to reduce exchange
risk, to mitigate one of the greatest drivers of instability in the domestic financial system. For
example, dollar deposits in the local banking system can be used only for foreign trade finance.
Thus, at present, foreign-currency deposits make up no more than 20 percent of total system
deposits.
Fiscal Sustainability
Thanks to the existence of a systematic primary budget surplus in a growing economy,
the national public sector gross debt stock plummeted from 138.7 percent of GDP in 2003 to 48.5
percent in 2008. That improvement, along with the 2005 public debt restructuring and the recent
bonds-for-loans swap, trimmed the debt and in the process created a sustainable debt maturity
profile.
Consequently, Argentina’s public accounts now are sound for the short, medium, and
long term. Interest payments on the public debt come to barely 6.6 percent of national
government revenues, down from the December 2002 level of 13.5 percent, and borrowing
requirements will decline nominally starting in 2010 and systematically through 2014.
Since new debt offerings were mainly local currency bonds, the public sector debt’s
foreign currency exposure dropped from virtually 100 percent in 2001 to just 52.5 percent in
2008, further reducing the economy’s external vulnerability. The share of variable-rate debt
declined as well, from 34.8 percent in 2002 to 27 percent today.
This improvement in fiscal sustainability indicators was not achieved at the expense of
social line items. Social expenditure of the consolidated public sector (aggregate national,
provincial, and municipal government outlays) rose from 19.2 percent of GDP in 2003 to 23.7
percent in 2008. Education took up 36 percent of the increase (60 percent of it for basic
education), health spending 19 percent, and social security 33 percent (the above-mentioned
Social Insurance Inclusion Plan figuring prominently in the latter).
A final noteworthy item is the increase in the Water Supply and Sewerage and the
Housing budget lines. Though these two items have less relative weight in the structure of social
spending, both increased in GDP share terms by 180 percent and 97 percent respectively, and
accounted for 11 percent of the overall growth in social expenditure.

Avenues of Transmission of the Global Crisis
The worldwide crisis is being transmitted via two channels: finance and trade. Because
of the nature of Argentina’s growth between 2003 and 2008, financed fundamentally with
domestic savings (the flip side of the current account surplus), its economy was better equipped
than ever in its history to fend off financial contagion. In Argentina the crisis would be felt
almost exclusively via the trade avenue, though thanks to some of the structural changes
mentioned above its impact was attenuated.
Financial Channel
The global crisis has spread chiefly through the financial channel; in most developing
economies this triggered a flight to safe assets. In numerous instances—especially in economies
running current account deficits—the reversal of the capital account balance prompted severe

Annex 1
Page 6 of 7

exchange adjustments and led to drops in countries’ stock and bond values and in local bank
system deposits.
This time, unlike past episodes of global turbulence, Argentina was not affected via the
financial avenue; there was no significant exchange adjustment or any significant contraction of
bank system deposits. The nation’s continuing budget and current account surpluses minimized
the impact of the external financing crunch, and its healthy international reserve stocks, bolstered
financial system mentioned earlier, and dedollarization of local contracts kept the local money
and currency markets stable.
Thanks to the exchange rate policy pursued in recent years there was less volatility in the
nominal exchange rate. Since September 2008 Latin American currencies have undergone strong
nominal depreciations against the U.S. dollar, ranging from 7.7 percent to 13.2 percent. But
Argentina was able to manage the value of its currency with the dual aim of remaining
competitive and keeping the financial system stable, as reflected in the low 5.3 percent volatility
observed in the depreciation of the local currency when the crisis deepened following the collapse
of Lehman Brothers.
A continuing current account surplus in 2009 will keep the Argentine economy’s external
and financial sectors stable. On the public finance side, the Government’s strategy to preserve
fiscal sustainability by means of liability management and local borrowing operations to ensure
that the State can honor its commitments, will cement the nation’s strong position in an adverse
global climate.
Trade Channel
Trade is the second avenue of transmission of the global crisis. The worldwide economic
downturn is showing up in slipping export growth in the different countries. Argentina has felt the
adverse impact of this transmission channel in recent months, but its 2003-2008 growth dynamic
has made it more resilient.
Recent years have seen a diversification in Argentine export destinations, with
diminishing exposure to the industrialized economies17 (in which growth will slow as a result of
the present turmoil) and more sales to recent rapid growth economies (where growth will be
comparatively high, albeit slower than in the recent past).
About 60 percent of Argentine exports are products with low elasticity to declines in
global income, such as food products. Consequently, the falloff in external demand will be
confined mostly to a cluster of local sectors, such as the automotive or steel industries, whose
export sales are highly sensitive to global activity levels and in which the government has
instituted specific policies to boost domestic demand.
The makeup of Argentina’s export basket also leaves it less exposed to commodity price
drops. Generally, countries that export food, energy, and mining commodities are hurt by drops
in world prices, but price corrections of Argentina’s agricultural export commodities were less
severe than for other products (such as some metal minerals), since previous price movements for
these items were not the result of largely speculative factors but of the rising demand for corn and
soya for alternative energy production, and sustained demand in emerging nations.

17

In 2008, the United States and the Eurozone took up 7 percent and 19 percent, respectively, of Argentine exports;
MERCOSUR and the ASEAN-China-India bloc accounted for 23 percent y 15 percent, respectively.

Annex 1
Page 7 of 7

Outlook for 2009-2010
Comparatively speaking, Argentina is solidly positioned to weather the global crisis, both
by virtue of its own experience and relative to other developed and developing economies. This
strong position is grounded not just in the country’s continuing “twin” surpluses but also in the
structural changes that took place in 2003-2008: an increase in economic productivity,
diversification of production, reductions in unemployment and poverty, improvements in the
income distribution, financial system rehabilitation, and bolstering of the public finances.
Given this backdrop, domestic economic policy should be able to manage the global
crisis via the usual fiscal, monetary, and exchange rate instruments, with the aim of easing the
impact of the global turmoil on Argentina’s macroeconomic aggregates without the need for a
restructuring of private-sector balance sheets. The immediate challenge is to keep the global
troubles from affecting investment in infrastructure and social protection, as occurred in previous
episodes of crisis in our region. Public investment and social spending will be critical, given their
positive impact on the economy’s systemic competitiveness and what such expenditure can do to
protect social welfare gains.

18

Water contamination, especially
in the Matanza-Riachuelo and
Reconquista urban river basins, is
a grave concern, as is solid waste
management.

Need for improved social and
environmental management
capacity in extractive industries
sector and for enforcing
established regulatory and fiscal
regimes.

4% of population (mainly rural)
lack access to electricity.

Bottlenecks in transmission of
electricity and low investment
levels in distribution paired with a
steep increase in electricity
consumption and retrenchment by
private investors

Rate of infrastructure investment
has been highly variable,
declining from 3% of GDP in the
1980s to 1.7% in the 1990s to less
than 0.5% in 1995-2003.

Improved Access to Water and
Sanitation, as indicated by:
• Increase access to water through
house connections to 83% in 2011.
• Increase access to sewerage to 62%
in 2011.

Increase rural access to electricity
supply

Improvements in public transport
infrastructure (integration, coverage,
etc.) and strengthening of institutional
planning capacities in the Buenos
Aires Metropolitan Region and
selected medium size cities.

Transport Network Improved as
indicated by at least 90% of national
and provincial18 paved nonconcessioned roads in good condition
(maintained with acceptable average
roughness (IRI<4) to avoid
accumulation of future liabilities and
reduce operational costs), and
increased capacity in key segments of
the network.

 Expand water and sewage coverage
for 128,000 poor residents in areas
of BA Province with high sanitary
or environmental vulnerability.
 Initiate construction of trunk
collection, transmission, treatment
and disposal infrastructure for
Greater Buenos Aires area.
 Reduce flood risk in BA city and
Corrientes.

• 25,000 households electrified with
sustainable electricity services by
2012
• 2000 rural schools electrified with
reliable, renewable electricity
supply by 2012

An increase of 5% in public transport
ridership in AMBA (Buenos Aires),
and of 5% in selected medium size
cities.

• 16,700 km of the national network
managed though CREMA.
• 2,104 km of the provincial network
managed through CREMA.
• 136 km of dual carriage ways
constructed.

PILLAR 1 - SUSTAINABLE GROWTH WITH EQUITY
Outcomes the Bank Program
Issues and Obstacles
Milestones
Expects to Influence
1. Infrastructure Development

In participant Provinces: Buenos Aires, Córdoba, Santa Fe, Entre Ríos, Chubut, Corrientes, Neuquén.

Upgrade Argentina’s
infrastructure to address
constraints on
competitiveness, and
underpin medium-term
growth and poverty
alleviation.

Country Strategic
Goals and Indicators

Argentina CPS Results Framework

Urban Flood Prevention and Drainage (APL1
and 2)
(approved FY05 and FY06)
Basic Municipal Services
(approved FY06)
Buenos Aires Province Infrastructure (APL-1
and APL-2)
(approved FY05 and FY07)
Matanza-Riachuelo Basin Sustainable
Development Project (APL-1) (LEN)

PERMER + Additional Financing
(approved FY99 and FY09)
Rural Electrification and Energy Efficiency
Project (PERMER II)
(LEN)

National Highway Asset Management APL I
and II
(approved FY04 and FY07, respectively)
Provincial Road II
(LEN)
Córdoba Road Infrastructure + AF
(approved FY07 and LEN, respectively)
Infrastructure Project for the Province of
Buenos Aires Infrastructure (APL1, II and
AF) (approved FY05, FY07 and LEN)
Santa Fe Road Infrastructure Project
(approved FY07)
Argentina Metropolitan Areas Urban
Transport Project (PTUMA)
(LEN)
Buenos Aires Urban Transport Project
(PTUBA) and Additional Financing
(approved FY97 and FY07)

Bank Program Instruments

Annex 2
Page 1 of 5

Address a growing
problem of resource
degradation.

Improve competitiveness,
quality, and exports of
agriculture and livestock
production

Country Strategic
Goals and Indicators

.

Poor water resource management
has increased land degradation,
and pesticide management
practices have raised
environmental health concerns.

Expansion of soy production has
fueled deforestation.

Modernization of research,
extension and regulatory
framework for food quality and
safety is required to ensure
continued and improved access to
export markets and protection of
domestic consumers.

Building an even more
competitive, diversified and
inclusive agricultural sector will
require strengthened national and
provincial institutions.

Increase access to international carbon
markets

• National REDD strategy and
monitoring system for emissions and
emissions reductions prepared.
• 1 CDM project, estimated annual
reductions of 176,622 CO2 tons)
• Reduction of 125,502 CO2 tons by
two stand alone CDM projects

• 1 mining site (Malargüe) safely
contained and appropriate closure
plans prepared for another 8 sites

Improved environmental management
and governance, as indicated by
• increased transparency and
• a more participatory approach in the
mining sector in Argentina

Develop and implement solid waste
management strategies.

• 15 provincial and municipal solid
waste management plans completed
by 2012
• 4 sanitary landfills built and
operating by 2012
• At least 5 major solid waste
dumpsites closed by 2012

• Proposal for the sustainable use and
protection of native forests and
biodiversity prepared
• institutional field capacity.
• Protected area system core areas and
corridors established in critical
ecoregions; synergy between forestry
and conservation initiatives created

 Provincial Agricultural Devt
Strategies designed and under
implementation in at least 12
provinces.
 50% improvement in efficiency of
irrigation systems and 2%
improvement in road transportation
in PROSAP areas.

Increase investments in urban waste

Increase by 30 percent areas of forest
and forest plantations under
sustainable management

Increase the diversification of
production in the agricultural sector by
promoting increased productivity and
competitiveness of the regional
economies.

Bank Program Instruments

Mining Environmental Restoration Project
(approved FY09)
Petrobras Gas Transport System Project
(FY10), Salta Landfill Gas Capture Project
(FY08), Olavarría Methane Capture Project
FY05)
Carbon Finance TA (approved FY07)
Carbon Partnership Facility
Forest Carbon Partnership Facility (FY09)

Solid Waste Management Project
(approved FY06)

IBRD Sustainable Natural Resources
Management Project.
(approved FY08)
GEF Biodiversity Conservation in Productive
Forestry Landscapes
(approved FY07)
GEF Rural Corridors and Biodiversity
Conservation
(FY10)

PROSAP I and II
(approved FY07 and FY09)
PROINDER and AF
(approved FY98 and FY08)

PILLAR 1 - SUSTAINED GROWTH WITH EQUITY
Outcomes the Bank Program
Issues and Obstacles
Milestones
Expects to Influence
2. Towards More Sustainable Rural Development and Environmental Management

Annex 2
Page 2 of 5

Consolidate improvements
in health indicators and
improve quality of
education while reducing
drop out rates.

Consolidate the reduction
in poverty and expand
efforts to reverse the longer
term poverty trend by
increasing household
incomes and integrating
marginalized groups into
the social fabric and
productive marketplace.

Country Strategic
Goals and Indicators

High rate of higher education
participation (16.6% of age
group) hide problem of relevance
of curriculum.

Large differences in educational
attainment by region, gender or
socioeconomic status.

Argentina’s high levels of school
attendance rates mask high rates
of drop-outs and repetition in
addition to quality issues.

Inequity in infant mortality rates
across regions, stagnation in
decline of maternal mortality.

Population without health
coverage is 35-39%

Move from emergency programs to
integrated long term SP, including
public income transfers that expand
coverage of children

• Complete transition out of Jefes y
Jefas
• Seguro de Capacitación y Empleo
opened to all Argentinians that
require it, and number of participants
has reached 300,000.
• Number of employment agencies
increased by 100.
• At least 100,000 participants in lifelong learning programs of which
25% are employed within a year.

Higher education and labor market
linkages

Strengthen leadership of MoH and
health sector governance.
Lower teenage dropout rates.

Hospital restructuring and expansion

Expansion of health coverage through
provincial health insurance

Build upon improved performance
achieved through performance
incentives and results based financing
towards:

• Progress towards MDG infant
mortality rate of 8.5/1000 by 2015
• Number of uninsured persons drops
from 15 mn. to 9 mn while regional
differences are reduced.
• Hospital access and efficiency
targets achieved
• New purchasing procedures
established
• Decreased Mortality rate
• 100% school enrollment for children
age 5
• Increased secondary education
completion rates for the 20-24 age
group

2. Improving Selected Health and Education Outcomes

Challenge of covering all
vulnerable groups including those
in the formal sector, ensuring that
benefits are adequate to meet the
program’s objectives, avoiding
gaps and overlaps between
programs, institutions, and levels
of government, and ensuring that
the overall social protection
system is fiscally and politically
sustainable.

Bank Program Instruments

Rural Education Improvement Project
(approved FY06)
Higher Education AAA
(LEN)

Provincial Maternal-Child Health APL1&2
(approved FY 04 and FY07)
Essential Public Health Functions Project
(approved FY07)
Health Sector Support Project
(LEN)
Health Sector Governance Project
(LEN)
Hospital Restructuring AAA (FY10)

)

Heads of Household Transition Project
(approved FY06)
Life Long Learning Project
(approved FY07)
Social Programs towards the Bicentennial
AAA (FY09)
Basic Protection Project
(LEN)
Employment Inequality AAA (FY10)

PILLAR 2 - SOCIAL INCLUSION
Outcomes the Bank Program
Issues and Obstacles
Milestones
Expects to Influence
1. Supporting Progress Towards Permanent Safety Nets and Fostering Employment

Annex 2
Page 3 of 5

Strengthen public sector
capacity to spur investment
and growth.

Expand performance
management and improve
the quality of public
expenditure, enhance
service delivery outcomes
and trust in institutions;

Country Strategic
Goals and Indicators

Key challenges include:
• Strengthening the efficiency,
effectiveness and
transparency of public
expenditure management;
• Improving service delivery
outcomes and restore trust in
Government; and
• Making the public sector
more accountable and
responsive to citizens and the
private sector.

Issues and Obstacles

Ensure compliance with the Fiscal
Responsibility Law

Expand effective performancemanagement and performanceinformed budgeting

Strengthen the transparency of
decision-making, increase access to
information

• Integrated financial management
(SLU/web- SIDIF) system fully
operational
• For the 2010 budget, seven sectors
("pliegos") plan, prepare and
negotiate their budgets on the basis
of budget performance indicators
selected in the performanceinformed budgeting pilot exercises
previously prepared. For the
budgets of 2011 and 2012, all
sectors prepare, negotiate, monitor
and report budget execution with
reference to publicly disclosed
budget performance indicators.
• Expansion of the public investment
system (BAPIN II) to all provinces
linked to ex ante and ex post
evaluations
• SINFO covers 90 percent of civilian
national executive branch
employees and personnel data
personnel data that appear in both
the SINFO and LUPI single file
systems are identical.
• User surveys showing improved
service delivery in the agencies
implementing the Citizens Charter
• Electronic directory of Government
procedures includes 20 % of
procedures which can be processed
electronically
• ANSES: Average time in the
provision of new benefits: 60 days
• Federal network of control agencies
fully operational
• Five ministries are participating in
the PIB scheme, including Public
Works, Health, Education, Labor
and Social Development

PILLAR 3 - IMPROVED GOVERNANCE
Outcomes the Bank Program
Milestones
Expects to Influence
1. Strengthening Public Institutions

Strengthening external audit and the control
environment at the subnational level

IDF - Strengthening of Office for
Administrative Investigations

Performance-based budgeting NLTA

Public Sector ESW, covering:
• Performance management
• Public financial management
• External control
• Subnational strategic planning
• Subnational restructuring of expenditure
and service-responsibilities

Subnational Public Financial Management
Assessment

Province of Corrientes –Strategic Plan (FFS)

State Modernization II Project
(approved FY07)
Institutional Strengthening of the National
Social Security Administration Project
(approved FY06)
Subnational Governments Public Sector
Modernization Project
(approved FY06)
SINTyS APL 2
(approved FY09)
Foundations for Performance-Informed
Budgeting Project
(LEN)

Bank Program Instruments

Annex 2
Page 4 of 5

Strengthen the capacity of
the Government to
prepare, approve and
implement investment
projects in line with the
requirements of a mediumterm investment
partnership.

Country Strategic
Goals and Indicators

Overall portfolio performance

Improved fiduciary risk monitoring
system

Improved portfolio monitoring

Improved procurement capacity of
agencies implementing investment
projects

Improved design, preparation and
approval procedures of projects at the
subnational level

Slow disbursements

Delays in large procurement
contracts.

Improved approval procedures of
projects at the national level

Delays in approval of projects at
the national level

• Time of approval of loans by the
Government is reduced to a
maximum period of 4 months,
aligning it with the approval of the
loan by the Bank.
• Time for approval of loans at the
subnational level is reduced to a
maximum of 6 months, aligning it
with approval by the Bank and at
the national level.
• 80% PPRs reflecting an S rating;
80% of PPRs reflecting qualified
procurement staff have been
appointed; 60% of planned
procurement processes under
procurement plans are contracted as
planned.
• 50% of projects provide reliable
information on contracts and
financial transactions, and this
information is available in a
consolidated system to be used by
implementing agencies, and the
Government and the IFIs for
monitoring purposes.
• Adjustment of existing risk
assessment tools to ensure strategic
focus on project fiduciary risks and
results.
• Framework Agreement for Phasing
out PIUs
• Fiduciary Action Plan
• Semi-Annual Portfolio Reviews

PORTFOLIO PERFORMANCE
Outcomes the Bank Program
Issues and Obstacles
Milestones
Expects to Influence
1. Building up the Government’s Project Management Capacity

Strengthening and strong coordination of
fiduciary team based in Buenos Aires.

IDF: Improving Investment Portfolio
Management – Building Up Institutions,
Systems and Human Capital.
(approved 2008)

Bank Program Instruments

Annex 2
Page 5 of 5

Annex 3
Page 1 of 32
March 16, 2009

ARGENTINA: CAS Completion Report
Date of CAS: May 4, 2006: Report No. 34015-AR
Period covered by the CAS Completion Report: 2006-2008
Summary
This document evaluates the achievement of CAS objectives in Argentina together with the respective
contributions of the Government and the Bank.
The 2006 CAS was prepared jointly by the IBRD and the IFC at a time when Argentina was well on the
way to a third consecutive year of rapid growth after having emerged from a deep economic and social
crisis in 2001-02. Poverty and unemployment, while still high, had fallen substantially from the peaks of
the crisis years. Progress was evident throughout the economy.
The objective of the CAS was to build an investment partnership in support of Government efforts to
transition from crisis recovery to sustained private-sector led growth that would result in a reduction of
poverty and greater equity. The IFC aimed to provide long-term financing and structured finance products
for companies and projects in strategic sectors with an emphasis on export-oriented and export facilitating
endeavors especially as they relate to South-South trade. The proposed IBRD operational program was
aimed at a substantial renovation and further expansion of the Bank’s investment engagement in the
country under the same three pillars that had been established under the 2004 CAS. This new CAS was
intended to complete the transition from adjustment lending to investment lending that began with the
previous CAS and establish the Bank as a reliable medium term investment partner. A broad program of
AAA was also envisaged in support of an active dialogue with the Government, civil society and the
private sector.
Both the IBRD and the IFC successfully delivered a program of lending and investment operations
consistent with the CAS. This period was characterized by dramatic improvement in the economy, greatly
strengthened relations between the Bank and Government, and innovation in project design. As envisaged,
the IFC effectively focused on sustainable projects with companies that had demonstrated social
responsibility and that had a track record of honoring contractual obligations. The IBRD reestablished a
presence in a number of sectors and supported projects that were innovative and which contributed
meaningfully to advancing the development agenda of the Government. There was also a strong emphasis
placed on fiduciary management as it was expected that the expansion in investment lending would
heighten tensions in this field. The normal lag in disbursements in investment lending and delays in the
approval of loans led to a decline in the overall exposure of the Bank in Argentina during the CAS period.
With respect to the program of AAA, the Bank delivered less than had been proposed in the CAS. Some
studies were circulated in draft without being finalized. In part, that reflected the Government’s lesser
interest in a formally structured policy dialogue at the federal level. Nevertheless, significant analytic work
was completed and delivered including a study of logistics costs, a study of rural poverty and policy notes
for the incoming administration of 2007. In addition, the lending and investment program of the Bank
Group in Argentina affords another avenue for dialogue at the operational level and at the policy level in
many sectors and at several levels of government.
The overall country relationship between the Bank and Argentina has been greatly strengthened in the past
three years, thereby consolidating the previous improvements that have steadily accrued since the crisis of
2001-02. In large part the positive relationship that now prevails may be attributed to the successful
partnership that has been evolving towards making the Bank a borrower of choice when dealing with
complex investments particularly in the infrastructure and social sectors and, lately, in the emerging field of
environmental programs. The Bank Group and Argentina are now well placed to continue moving forward
with a development dialogue backed by investment lending strategically targeted at areas where the Bank
and the IFC can contribute most effectively.

Annex 3
Page 2 of 32

I.

INTRODUCTION

1.
The 2006 Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) was the second to be submitted to
the Board following the severe economic crisis that beset Argentina in 2001-02. In
contrast with the preceding 2004 CAS which had been drafted in the context of a still
insecure economic recovery, the 2006 CAS followed three years of strong growth which
had lifted GDP to the pre-crisis peak. Prospects for continued growth appeared to be
good in the short-term although the longer-term sustainability of growth was seen to
depend on structural reforms to consolidate fiscal adjustment and foster investment in
public services and infrastructure.
2.
In that context the CAS sought to build an investment partnership supportive of
Government efforts to move Argentina forward from crisis recovery to sustained private
sector growth with equity and with a reduction in poverty which had become increasingly
structural. The Bank program of assistance was based upon the same three pillars as the
2004 CAS which had provided an effective operational framework in the previous two
years – sustained growth with equity, social inclusion and improved governance. The
International Financial Corporation (IFC) would complement International Bank for
Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) support by providing long-term finance and
structured finance products to companies and projects in strategic sectors with an
emphasis on export orientation and groups that were expanding on a South-South basis.
3.
It was clearly acknowledged in the CAS that an effective transition from crisis
recovery to sustained growth would depend upon the diligent implementation of
structural and policy reforms. In particular, the ability of IFC to support private sector
engagement in the provision of infrastructure and public services would depend upon the
adoption of a clear and stable policy framework conducive to private sector participation.
To that end the Bank Group sought to continue its dialogue with the Government and
with other stakeholders including civil society. At the same time it was also
acknowledged that there was room for advancing shared development outcomes in
selected areas, particularly in the infrastructure and social sectors, which provides the
Bank Group the opportunity to develop a significant medium term investment partnership
with Argentina. It was also recognized that expanding investment lending would stretch
the country’s fiduciary and project implementation capabilities, leading to the definition
of some specific initiatives aimed at reinforcing portfolio management and fiduciary
compliance.
II.

LONG-TERM STRATEGIC GOALS

THE GOVERNMENT’S PROGRAM
4.
During 2006-2008 the Government continued to implement the broad program
that was laid out by President Néstor Kirchner in an address to Congress when he took
office in May 2003. The preparation of a new CAS in 2006 afforded an opportunity for
the Government to convey to the Bank in detail its economic policy framework which
was attached as an annex to the CAS.

Annex 3
Page 3 of 32

5.
The economic policy guidelines communicated by the Government were
predicated on the view that, following three consecutive years of strong macroeconomic
performance, growth should no longer be viewed as a temporary rebound from a crisis
situation but as the start of a new era of sustained high growth for Argentina. Sustaining
growth would remain a central objective of Government policy.
6.
The administration of President Cristina Fernandez that took office in December,
2007, largely maintained continuity in these policies and has, by and large, maintained
substantial continuity in the Government teams. The new administration’s objective
continues to be the maintenance of economic growth and stability, while a special focus
has been put into the building of institutions and strengthening foreign relations.
7.
Other important objectives included social policies aimed at reducing
unemployment and poverty. Housing construction and improving the quality of
education were two special focuses of attention. In October 2005, the Government
submitted to Congress a proposal for lengthening the school day, eliminating illiteracy
and increasing the access of schools and students to computers and other technologies.
The aim was to increase Government funding (both federal and provincial) for education,
science and technology from 4.3 percent of GDP in 2005 to 6 percent by 2010.
8.
With respect to governance, the Government further developed the vision set forth
in a 2004 publication by the Ministry of Production and Economy to make Argentina
competitive in the global economy of the 21st century.19 Accordingly, the administration
aimed at modernizing state institutions to improve trust in government which, in turn,
would enhance inclusion, equity and citizen satisfaction. In terms of modalities the
Kirchner administration opted against further macro-reorganizations and legal changes,
choosing instead to work within established frameworks. Incremental adjustments were
adopted where necessary but the major emphasis was on making the system work. The
vision of Government was that the state has a key role in the provision of social services
and in regulating the market, including re-nationalizing private enterprises (such as
Aerolineas Argentinas) whose poor performance was deemed to threaten key national
interests. While a market economy was accepted as the major engine of growth, it should
be subject to pro-active regulation and state intervention as needed to ensure consistency
with the Government’s broader social and economic agenda.
9.
Within that vision the Government reaffirmed that a new policy framework had
emerged in Argentina. Whereas, throughout the 1990s, the role of the state in the
economy was steadily retrenched, the new framework required the Government to
exercise a more active role in addressing long-standing social problems that still beset
Argentina notwithstanding good macroeconomic performance and a strong recovery from
the 2001 crisis. Social transfer programs for the poor were extended to a significant
portion of the population at the time of the crisis, and they still play a prominent role,
albeit increasingly tied to employment generation. The Government became much more
directly involved in decisions affecting the provision of infrastructure and social services.
Government controls extended to tariffs and investments determining access to services.
19

“Argentina: Facing the 21st Century” Buenos Aires 2004 (www.jgm.gov.ar)

Annex 3
Page 4 of 32

10.
In late 2008, towards the end of the CAS period, Argentina suffered the effects of
a global financial crisis. The crisis prompted many governments, including those of the
United States and Europe, to adopt extraordinary measures of intervention to avert a
catastrophic financial collapse. Many Argentines interpreted the concerted actions of the
international community as a vindication of their own government’s pro-active regulatory
posture which had offered a measure of protection to Argentina. Nevertheless, although
the banking system remains fundamentally strong, the Argentina Government also found
it necessary to adopt additional measures including the nationalization of the private
pension system which the Government viewed as necessary to protect the system from
the effects of the crisis.
THE BANK’S PROGRAM OF SUPPORT
11.
Since there was continuity with respect to the long-term strategic goals of the
Government, the 2006 CAS proposed that the Bank’s assistance strategy be structured in
accordance with the same three pillars established under the previous CAS namely: (1)
sustained growth with equity, (2) social inclusion, and (3) improved governance.
12.
The previous CAS had already proposed a substantial shift in the Bank program
away from adjustment lending which had dominated the program in the late 1990s and in
the early years of the new millennium towards investment lending. The 2006 CAS
propelled that shift even further and proposed an all-investment lending program. It was
expected that such a lending program would be self-regulating in the sense that it would
automatically adjust if project performance, fiduciary management and the sector policy
framework fell short of requirements.
13.
The CAS also acknowledged that the Bank is a relatively small player in
Argentina and that it should be selective in its approach. The focus was on poverty
alleviation with projects and programs that would reach the poorest and most vulnerable
groups, foster equality of opportunity, strengthen governance and improve the
administration of public services to improve access for all Argentines. It was envisaged
that the focus on poverty alleviation would span all three pillars of Bank operations.
14.
The analytic agenda of the Bank featured prominently in the CAS because the
policy dialogue, which had suffered a setback at the time of the economic crisis, was
showing promising signs of progress. In particular, the Bank had undertaken a study on
growth and equality in close collaboration with authorities in the Ministry of Economy
and Production, and the study had successfully stimulated a dialogue on macroeconomic
issues such as the nexus between growth, poverty reduction and inequality.20 The sector
policy dialogue, especially in areas where the Bank was operationally active or where it
was preparing to become active, was also targeted as a focus of analytic work. In
addition, economic and sector work at the provincial level was identified as a potentially
fruitful focus of the CAS.

20

Argentina: Seeking Sustained Growth and Social Equity. World Bank Report No. 32553-AR, October
21, 2005.

Annex 3
Page 5 of 32

III. COUNTRY AND CAS OUTCOMES
15.
The CAS Results Matrix is reproduced in Annex A of this completion report
together with additional data on outcomes. The broad conclusion that emerges is that the
CAS was largely successful in meeting its targets.
PILLAR 1: SUSTAINED GROWTH WITH EQUITY
Macroeconomic performance
16.
The CAS adopted the Government’s own macroeconomic projections as a frame
of reference for the 2006-08 CAS period while, at the same time taking note that the
growth forecast presented in the 2006 national budget appeared conservative.
Table 1: Macroeconomic Indicators
(In percent of GDP or annual percentage change unless otherwise indicated)

GDP real growth
Investment/GDP
Federal Government primary surplus/GDP
Consumer prices (official index period average)
Exports of goods fob (US$ billion)
Imports of Goods cif (US$ billion)

CAS Projections
2006 2007 2008

Outcomes
2006 2007 2008
(est.)

4.0
21.5
3.3
9.1
41.3
31.5

8.5
23.4
3.5
10.9
46.5
34.2

3.5
21.7
3.4
8.1
44.4
34.9

3.5
21.7
3.4
7.5
47.3
38.0

8.7
24.4
3.2
8.8
55.7
44.7

6.0
n/a
3.3
8.6
71.3
57.6

Sources: CAS projections taken from the 2006 Government budget sent to Congress in October 2005
Outcomes from Ministry of Economy and Production

17.
Five consecutive years of rapid and pro-poor economic growth beginning in 2003
have enabled poverty and unemployment to be cut back to pre-crisis levels. Poverty
declined – at least until end-2006 when the last reliable data was available. Many of the
country development goals articulated in the CAS were achieved. Whereas the aim was
to reduce unemployment from 14 percent in 2005 to no more than 11 percent in 2009,
unemployment was already below 8 percent in 2008. Similarly a targeted reduction in
urban poverty from 38 percent in 2005 to no more than 30 percent in 2009 was already
surpassed by 2007 when urban poverty was estimated at 28 percent. It is difficult to
determine trends in poverty after 2007 with accuracy because the data is uncertain, but it
is clear that Argentina was able to make remarkable social and economic progress during
the CAS period.
18.
However, that achievement was made at the cost of increasing inflationary
pressures. Private sector estimates suggest consumer prices rose by 20-25 percent in
2007, and there is a lack of confidence in Government figures which place inflation only
at 8.8 percent for 2007. This inflation has likely negatively affected poverty during 2008,
but there is no data to verify this. In addition, the lack of credible inflation figures has

Annex 3
Page 6 of 32

eroded market confidence, which has also had negative macroeconomic impacts,
although actual inflation is now abating.
Country Outcomes
19.
Sector specific objectives identified in the CAS Results Matrix were largely
achieved. The country development goals were extracted selectively from diverse
Government publications. Since the sources were Government position papers that
frequently had a long-term horizon, they seldom specified expected outcomes for 2008.
Hence, reasonable progress towards long-term goals would indicate a positive outcome
where data is available.
20.
With respect to productive infrastructure, Argentina had already reached by 2008,
or was close to reaching, long-term targets cited in the CAS. In the case of oilseed and
cereals, the long-term goal was to produce 100 million tons compared with a baseline
figure of 75 million tons in 2005. The goal was close to being reached with the 2006/07
harvest which amounted to 93.6 million tons. Similarly, with respect to road
maintenance, the Government’s target was to have 90 percent of all national nonconcessioned roads in good condition. As of 2008, 89 percent were already found to be
in good condition.
21.
The CAS also identified a number of country development goals with respect to
environmental preservation. They included investments in forestry, urban waste
management and access to international carbon markets. Satisfactory progress was made
towards those goals as documented in Annex A.
CAS Outcomes
22.
Outcomes with respect to the Bank lending program were substantially achieved.
During the CAS period there was a significant renovation of the country’s investment
portfolio which had been virtually exhausted during the post crisis period. A substantial
effort was undertaken to prepare new and innovative investment initiatives and expand
the role of the Bank in the development of productive and poverty focused infrastructure
and in the social sectors, with a strong emphasis in the health and social protection
sectors. There has also been further support provided in the strengthening of institutions
and public sector agencies. The Bank is on track to deliver 20 project loans for a total of
US$3,425 million before end FY2009 under the current CAS21. Although it is premature
to make an overall judgment on the outcomes of this new cohort of investment initiatives,
there has been a serious effort to ensure the highest standards in the preparation of these
operations and a deliberate attempt to include the lessons learned from previous
engagement in the respective sectors. There has also been a strong focus on fiduciary
matters in all aspects related to the preparation and implementation of the portfolio.
Unfortunately, cumbersome and time consuming approval procedures within the
Government have inhibited timely and early implementation of the new operations and
affected portfolio performance.
21

One project for US$ 841 Million is in the pipeline to be approved until the end of FY09.

Annex 3
Page 7 of 32

The Bank also delivered a strong program
of Analytical and Advisory Activities
(AAA) albeit less than envisaged in the
CAS. The Bank has been most successful
when AAA is undertaken in a sector context
where the Bank has an operational presence
and where there is an active dialogue. A
study of transport logistics and a rural
development strategy are examples of high
quality analytic work that was successfully
delivered and well received.22
23.
Infrastructure. The CAS identified infrastructure development as a major focus
for Bank support with an emphasis on (i) expanding services to the poor and increasing
their mobility, and (ii) further developing the transport system to reduce logistics costs
and to enhance trade and commerce. It was envisaged that investment loans would help
the Government restore investment in infrastructure which had been declining for many
years. Total investment in infrastructure averaged less than 2 percent of GDP during the
1990s which put Argentina far behind several other Latin American countries such as
Chile and Colombia which invested upwards of 4 percent of GDP in infrastructure. In
previous years Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA) was actively engaged
in infrastructure projects but its exposure has been greatly reduced (see Box 1).
24.
A key CAS milestone was to increase the percentage of paved non-concessioned
roads maintained under the CREMA system, (performance based rehabilitation and
maintenance contracts known by their Spanish acronym). A National Highway Asset
Management Project (US$200 million), for which an Adaptable Program Loan (APL)
had been approved in 2004, was substantially implemented from 2006 to 2008. The
principal focus of that project was to improve the national road network by financing
CREMA contracts. This system has effectively improved the physical condition of roads
over and beyond the technical specifications identified at project appraisal. Building
upon that success, a second APL in the amount of US$400 million was approved in
March 2008 of which US$360 million will finance additional CREMA contracts.
25.
The success of the CREMA system at the national level prompted the Argentine
authorities to seek Bank support for a Provincial Road Infrastructure Project (US$ 150
million) and a loan was approved in 2005 to increase private sector participation in the
management of the provincial road networks though the expansion of the CREMA
system to four provinces. In addition, part of the loan was earmarked to finance road
paving and rehabilitation in roads that are crucial to the provincial economy but cannot be
included in CREMA-type contracts due to the nature of the work required.

22

Argentina: The Challenge of Reducing Logistics Costs. World Bank Report No. 36606-AR; December
2006 ;and Argentina: Agriculture and Rural Development Selected Issues. World Bank Report No. 32763AR; July 31, 2006.

Annex 3
Page 8 of 32

26.
The first phase of the Buenos Aires Sustainable Infrastructure Development
Project (US$200 million) has also had a positive impact, largely achieving its road
maintenance targets by mid-2008. These works will be augmented by the second phase
APL (US$270 million) which began in 2007. The Bank has also lent directly to the
provinces of Buenos Aires, Cordoba and Santa Fe, in support of road projects that also
contributed to the achievement of these milestones.
Box 1: The role of MIGA
As of June 30, 2008, MIGA’s gross exposure in Argentina stood at US$34.5 million, which is
approximately 0.4 percent of MIGA’s total gross portfolio. Net of reinsurance, MIGA’s exposure was
US$18.5 million, which is approximately 0.5 percent of its net portfolio. This constitutes a significant
reduction of exposure since end-FY01. At that time Argentina had the second largest gross exposure in
MIGA’s portfolio – amounting to US$693.6 million. The reduction in exposure has resulted from the
amortization of MIGA-guaranteed loans and from the cancellation of guarantee contracts. MIGA has not
issued any new contract for investments in Argentina since 2002 for reasons explained below.
MIGA has received two claims for expropriation in Argentina. In FY05, MIGA paid US$0.5 million of a
loss of US$1.4 million. The investor withdrew its claim to the remaining amount for reasons of its broader
commercial interests in Argentina. Argentine authorities have refused to recognize MIGA’s claim for
reimbursement of the amount paid. Pending resolution of this matter, MIGA will not support additional
foreign investment in Argentina.
MIGA received another claim in FY07 related to difficulties that had arisen with an infrastructure project.
However, that claim has been withdrawn for project-specific reasons and the project remains operational.
MIGA has provisioned in connection with another project, which is currently the subject of arbitration by
ICSID. MIGA’s liability will depend on the result of the arbitration but would not exceed US$24.2 million.

27.
The objective to scale up support for other types of road maintenance, as well as
expanding bank support to additional transport sub-sectors has been achieved. Beyond
the non-CREMA road support mentioned above, additional financing of US$100 million
was approved for the Buenos Aires Urban Transport Project (PTUBA) in 2007. That
project began in 1997 and addressed issues of urban rail transport and the interface
between rail and road transport in the Buenos Aires metropolitan area. As with many
projects of that period, progress was delayed by the financial crisis, but Bank supervision
reveals a successful implementation record following the economic recovery of 2003.
28.
The CAS also aimed for the National Directorate of Highways to undertake
actions under the Institutional Renewal Action Plan covering budgeting, road safety,
and environmental management.
Support under the National Highway Asset
Management Project toward this objective has not been successful to date, and the
Government has requested an extension of the closing date to complete the project.
29.
The CAS sought to expand water and sewer coverage for approximately 500,000
low income people in Buenos Aires Province. While the water components of the
Buenos Aires project are behind schedule, this target has been partially achieved with the
regulatory and institutional framework progressing well. The Province has signed
Framework Agreements with provincial water operators, and the Basic Municipal
Services Project (US$110 million) allocated 60% of proceeds to improving the coverage,

Annex 3
Page 9 of 32

quality and efficiency of water supply in six provinces. Initial implementation reveals
promising progress on these and other urban sub-projects financed by the loan.
30.
The CAS sought to reduce flood risk in selected urban areas through civil
works and the preparation of flood risk reduction plans. In many parts of Buenos Aires
Province, sustainable infrastructure development will only be possible if urban flooding
can be prevented. The Bank supported formulation of flood risk reduction plans in six
provinces, and Buenos Aires Province has adopted norms for urban land zoning,
measures for environmental protection and procedures for management and maintenance
of urban drainage systems. The Urban Flood Prevention and Drainage Project (€98
million), is now implementing satisfactorily and expected to make a major contribution
toward mitigating flood risk in the city of Buenos Aires. A second APL (US$70 million)
was approved in June, 2006, to extend flood protection measures to six other provinces.
31.
Agriculture and Rural Development. The Bank has supported a number of
initiatives in agriculture and rural development which contribute to growth with equity.
The principal objective has been to increase the productivity and incomes of small and
medium-sized producers. Hence the focus has been on the “regional economies” in the
north of the country and in the Andean region as opposed to the Pampas region where
agricultural production is typically on a large scale. The targeted outcomes for
agriculture and livestock were substantially achieved.
32.
The CAS objective to improve the capacity to analyze, design, and manage
agricultural and rural development investments was advanced with the establishment in
2008 of a sub-secretariat of family agriculture and rural development, though the new
sub-secretariat will require strengthening before it can fully meet its mandate.
33.
Another key milestone was for the National Government to complete an
agricultural and rural development strategy and implement it in at least one region. To
date, 19 provinces have adopted strategies, though at a national level there is no cleared
defined medium and long-term strategy for the agricultural sector.
34.
A third targeted outcome was the adoption and implementation of a Mercosur
strategy to be free of Aftosa (foot and mouth disease). The strategy was ratified in 2005,
and an action plan was adopted in May 2008.
35.
The final benchmark, to have a 20% increase in production area under
irrigation and to have integrated water resource management piloted in at least one
province, was partially achieved. A 6% increase was realized in the amount of cultivated
land under irrigation, and the Province of Mendoza has adopted an integrated water
resource management program.
36.
Achievements against these four benchmarks were supported through the
accelerated implementation of a Provincial Agricultural Development Project (PROSAP)
for which a loan of US$125 million was approved in 1997 but which suffered delays due
to the financial crisis. However, by 2006 implementation was progressing so well that
the Bank approved additional financing of US$37 million. Targets have been met with

Annex 3
Page 10 of 32

respect to the construction of irrigation canals, rural roads, rural electrification and
drainage rehabilitation. Farmers have received training in animal and plant health, and
ten centers were established to train young entrepreneurs. Impact assessments
undertaken by the project unit reveal significant increases in private productive
investments that are clearly connected to PROSAP-supported infrastructure investments.
Building upon this success and a study of the agricultural sector produced by the Bank in
2006, a loan for US$300 million was approved in 2008 for a second PROSAP.
37.
In addition, the implementation of a Small Farmer Development Project
(PROINDER) sought to increase the productive and organizational capabilities of poor
rural communities through demand-based sub-projects. A loan of US$75 million was
approved in 1997, but project progress was impaired for years by the financial crisis. By
2007, however, the project had fulfilled or over-fulfilled all its development objectives
and, in July 2007, the Bank approved additional financing of US$45 million to enable the
well-performing project to be scaled-up. The original project exceeded appraisal targets
and reached some 50,000 families through more than 9,000 sub-projects. Monitoring and
impact assessment surveys indicate that the family income of beneficiaries and their
quality of life improved significantly along with their organizational capabilities. The
additional financing is intended to expand the targeted coverage of rural households to
72,000, but implementation has not been satisfactory to date.
38.
Rural Poverty: An important CAS milestone with respect to more sustainable
rural development was that the baseline data and analysis of rural poverty be improved.
No progress has been made on that front, notwithstanding the delivery of Bank analytic
work on rural poverty which clearly identified the data gaps that need to be addressed.23
The lack of good data is a serious shortcoming because Argentina cannot advance further
towards a credible policy for poverty reduction without a solid data base.
39.
Expanded small and medium farmer investment in forestry was another CAS
milestone. The forestry projects described under Environmental Management below are
supporting investments by 5,000 small-scale farmers for 15,000 ha. of forests (triple the
target) in at least 3 different provinces.
40.
Environmental Management. The CAS recognized an urgent need to improve
environmental management in Argentina. In that context, it envisaged an Environmental
management APL that would provide strategic support for both pollution control and the
protection of natural resources. As preparatory work progressed, however, it became
clear that the sector issues could be addressed more effectively by dealing separately with
“brown” issues of pollution control (especially in urban areas) and with “green” issues of
land use management (especially in rural areas). Accordingly, separate lending operations
were undertaken in each of those areas. Start-up delays have prevented the achievement
of the CAS milestones, but prospects are good that the targeted outcomes will be reached
early in the following CAS period.

23

“The Invisible Poor: A Portrait of Rural Poverty in Argentina” Report No. 39947-AR; June 25, 2007

Annex 3
Page 11 of 32

41.
The CAS sought to complete integrated waste management systems in 3
provinces, an objective that was supported by efforts to address “brown” issues of
Pollution control under a National Urban Solid Waste Management Project for which a
loan of US$40 million was approved by the Bank in 2006. The project was based on a
National Strategy that had been developed with Bank assistance. Project implementation
was slow in the initial stages but accelerated in 2008. In addition, the Mining
Environmental Restoration Project (PRAMU, US$30 million), approved in 2008, will
seek to reduce the potential health hazard posed by a uranium processing facility used by
the government between 1954 and 1986 but never properly closed. Civil works have
already been contracted, and some 30 percent of the investment was complete by May
2008. Containment of 710,000 tons of low grade radioactive milling tailings is consistent
with internationally accepted best practice. The project also provides technical assistance
to study and design options for cleaning up another 7 sites as well as efforts to strengthen
environmental management of the mining sector more generally.
42.
Another key milestone was to realize integrated urban transport planning and
investment, combined with pollution reduction, in at least five cities. While this has not
yet been achieved, 30 pollution control projects are being developed with support from
the WBI Carbon Finance Assistance Program. Carbon purchase agreements were signed
under the Kyoto Protocol with the cities of Salta and Olavarria for the construction of
landfill gas capture systems (see Box 2).
43.
While still in the final stages of preparation, the largest and most ambitious Banksupported environmental project in Argentina is to clean up the Matanza-Riachuelo (MR) river basin, the most contaminated river basin in Argentina. More than 4,000
industries are located in the water shed and many of them discharge untreated effluents
into the storm drainage system or directly into the river. As it passes to the south of the
city of Buenos Aires, the river basin is home to one of Argentina’s largest concentrations
of urban poor. The project will construct the main sewage transmission, treatment and
disposal infrastructure to collect both the residential sewage currently discharged to the
river as well as pre-treated industrial effluents.
44.
“Green” issues of environmental management also figured prominently in the
CAS in support of the Government’s efforts to curb deforestation of native forests and
increase planted forests. In June 2007 a Global Environmental Fund (GEF) grant was
approved in the amount of US$7 million for Biodiversity Conservation in Productive
Forestry Landscapes Project that was blended with a 2008 Bank loan in support of a
Sustainable Natural Resources Management Project (US$60 million). The GEF project
innovatively seeks to mainstream biodiversity conservation into plantation forestry
practices and to demonstrate that the introduction of biodiversity conservation practices is
both economically and ecologically viable in the context of commercial plantations.
45.
The Sustainable Natural Resources Management Project will finance measures to
improve the management of protected areas and conservation corridors and support
sustainable plantation forestry in parallel with the GEF-supported project. The project
built upon the experience of a previous Native Forests and Protected Areas Project
which was closed in June 2007. The Implementation Completion Report (ICR) for that

Annex 3
Page 12 of 32

project showed that it was successful and achieved nearly all its development goals.24 In
particular, significant progress had been made in strengthening the National Parks
Administration and increasing tourism in a number of parks consistent with
environmental sustainability.
Box 2: GEF, Carbon Finance and the Montreal Protocol in Argentina
As envisaged in the CAS, a decentralized medium sized grants program was established in Argentina in
2006. The program is funded with US$3 million of GEF resources and it constitutes a pilot initiative for
the GEF worldwide. Managed by the Argentine authorities, the program has responded to small-scale
project proposals from civil society and the six grants that were authorized in 2007 have financed some
exceptionally innovative initiatives including (i) the conservation of Patagonian steppe fauna, (ii)
restoration of the upper Parana Atlantic forest, (iii) measures to combat land degradation in indigenous
communities, (iv) the establishment of an eco-regional corridor in Northern Patagonia and (v) the
production and use of hydrogen fuel.
Other major GEF financed projects in Argentina begun during 2006-08 include an energy efficiency project
and a project to conserve biodiversity in commercially productive forest landscapes. Greater detail on
each of those initiatives is given in the corresponding sections on Bank-supported projects.
Having ratified the Kyoto Protocol, Argentina participates in the Clean Development Mechanism (CDM)
established under the Protocol. In 2006 and 2007 respectively, carbon purchase agreements were signed
with the city of Salta and the municipality of Olavarria. Under the agreements, landfill gas capture systems
were constructed so that methane may be flared rather than released into the atmosphere. Both projects
also included social components. In Olavarria 5090 households were provided with drinking water and a
school was provided with solar heating. In Salta a recycling and separation plant was constructed to better
serve the needs of waste pickers.
The Bank also continued to assist with implementation of the Montreal Protocol during 2006-08. A plant
for the production of CFCs was closed in 2008 and supervision will continue for one more year to verify
that there are zero emissions. A second sub-project aims to change the propellant used in medical dose
inhalers from CFC to non-CFC. When that sub-project is complete, it will conclude the Montreal Protocol
program in Argentina.

IFC
46.
IFC’s strategy as outlined in the FY06-08 CAS is aimed at primarily contributing
to the pillar of “sustained growth with equity”, in the area where IFC has comparative
advantage. When the CAS was prepared, short-term credit to the private sector had
improved substantially and long-term credit was available but at a low level, and, to a
large extent, confined to blue chip companies. In this context, IFC shifted its focus from
short-term lines, where there is good liquidity at reasonable prices, to providing longterm financing both for its own account and through its syndication program. In addition
to providing long-term financing, IFC’s priorities for its direct investments were focused
on providing structured finance products to companies and projects in strategic sectors
with an emphasis on groups expanding on a South-South basis and export-oriented or
export-facilitating projects. Two important criteria in considering new projects were to
focus on corporate social responsibility (CSR) and sustainability, as well as on the track
record with respect to honoring contractual obligations. The strategic focus sectors were:
24

Implementation Completion Report No. ICR0000437; December 28, 2007

Annex 3
Page 13 of 32

oil, gas and mining; agribusiness and forestry products; and the financial sector with a
focus on high impact projects such as housing and support of export-oriented small and
medium enterprises (SMEs).
47.
Since 2006 IFC has committed US$1,597 million (including US$798 million for
syndications through the B-loan program) in 15 projects in the hydrocarbons, finance,
agribusiness and transportation sectors. As of August 2008, IFC’s committed portfolio
stood at US$996 million for IFC’s own account, and an additional US$843 million for
participants’ accounts, with oil and gas, food and beverages, and the financial sector
accounting for about 80% of the portfolio.
48.
In food and beverages, in FY06 IFC committed a US$280 million loan (including
US$210 million for syndications) for Arcor Group, a leading producer and distributor of
candies, chocolates and biscuits, to finance construction of plants in Chile, Brazil and
Mexico (South-South investments) as well as to modernize and refurbished existing
facilities. An additional 2,000 jobs are expected to be recreated as a result of these
investments. The company has a proactive linkage program to small and medium
farmers and expects to increase the number of farmers with which it works from 550 to
600 by 2010. In addition to new jobs created in other countries, Arcor operations support
over 13,000 jobs in Argentina. A follow-up loan for US$130 million (including $80
million in B-loans) was committed in FY08 to support further expansion investments.
49.
IFC’s investments in the financial sector during the period totaled $418 million
under the Global Trade Finance Program in operations with four banks, and a $50 million
loan to Banco Galicia for on-lending to SMEs, particularly in the poorer provinces of
Argentina. The SME overall portfolio is projected to increase by 15 percent a year. The
number of SMEs to be financed and the amount of finance going to poorer provinces are
expected to grow at an average of no less than 7 percent a year.
50.
Finally, in the oil and gas sector, IFC provided US$237 million from its own
account and US$420 million for syndications for three companies. One operation was
with an existing client, PAE, for $550 million which included IFC’s largest syndication
to date (US$400 million). This investment financed the company’s 2007-08 capital
expenditure program which will help them increase oil production by up to 30,000 barrels
of oil equivalent and gas production by 62 million cubic feet per day. The incremental
production generated from the investment is expected to result in US$2.1 billion in
government revenue for Argentina, including $414 million for the provincial
governments. In June 2006, IFC committed a $70 million loan (including $20 million in
a syndicated loan) for CAPSA, an independent Argentine oil producer operating in the
province of Chubut. The loan facility will finance CAPSA’s capital expenditures,
working capital requirements, and general corporate activities. At the time, the 10-year
facility was the longest IFC-syndicated tenor in Argentina since the crisis in 2001.
CAPSA operates in the Chubut province, a region with few employment opportunities
other than the oil and gas industry. CAPSA is a source of direct and indirect employment
in the region, and the majority of its workforce is sourced locally. The company also
procures about half of its purchases locally through community suppliers.

Annex 3
Page 14 of 32

Other support for Growth with Equity
51.
The CAS recognized the need to enhance the business climate and foster private
sector development in order to sustain growth. The contribution of the IFC was
particularly important in that regard as indicated in the section above. The Bank was
supportive of IFC efforts to enhance the business climate and foster private sector
development in order to sustain growth with a loan for US$150 million that was approved
in 2008 for an Unleashing Productive Innovation Project. The basic objective of the
project is to increase Argentina’s capacity for innovation in knowledge-based production.
That would be accomplished by (i) facilitating the establishment of new knowledgebased companies; (ii) educating and training human capital in skills that can forge a better
linkage between academia and industry and lead to the commercialization of new ideas
from research; (iii) financing venture capital in selected areas of the economy; (iv)
upgrading the infrastructure for research; and (v) strengthening the policy framework for
science, technology and productive innovation.
PILLAR 2: SOCIAL INCLUSION
52.
The broad country development goal under Pillar 2 was to consolidate the
reduction in poverty achieved since the crisis and expand efforts to reverse the longer
term poverty trend by increasing household incomes and integrating marginalized groups
into the productive market place.
Country Outcomes
53.
Country development goals identified in the CAS were largely achieved, though
data limitations make it difficult to precisely quantify recent trends in poverty.
Unemployment was reduced to 7.5 percent by end-2007, surpassing the 12 percent target.
Social security coverage for working adults easily reached the 61 percent country target,
and the Heads of Households workfare program was gradually reduced through a
successful, long-term effort to increase the sustainability of Argentina’s social safety net
programs and use the labor market as a cornerstone of social policy. As a result,
beneficiaries of this successful emergency program are being integrated into the
workforce or transferred to other programs according to schedule (see Annex A). A
number of country development goals were also identified in the education sector,
relating to school enrollment rates and completion rates and to the development of a
lifelong learning strategy. Satisfactory progress was made towards those goals in the
CAS period as detailed in Annex A.
CAS Outcomes
54.
CAS milestones were also largely achieved. The CAS proposed a lending
program focused selectively on education, health and social protection – three areas
where the Bank has a long record of support for Argentina. Thirty projects were
envisaged in the period through FY2009 for a total of US$3,300 million. The Bank is on

Annex 3
Page 15 of 32

track to deliver twenty project loans for a total of US$3,425 million before end-FY200925
under the current CAS.
55.
Under the first component of this pillar – Supporting Progress Towards
Permanent Safety Nets and Fostering Employment, the CAS sought improvements to
income support programs, notably making the transition from emergency income
programs to initiatives that foster employment, and the establishment of more
permanent safety nets providing direct support to vulnerable groups. When Argentina
was stricken by the economic crisis of 2001, a central focus of Bank support was for a
social assistance program targeted at heads of households. In 2006, when Argentina had
recovered from the crisis the Bank approved a Heads of Household Transition Project
(US$350 million) to move as many of the workfare beneficiaries as possible into
productive employment and to transfer the remainder to a longer-term safety net linked to
building the human capital of their children. Measures were introduced to increase the
employability of program participants by completing basic education, receiving job
training and participating in sub-projects designed to provide experience and skills for
future jobs. The goal has been achieved, as about one third of the beneficiaries
transitioned to the new Familias and Seguro de Capacitación y Empleo programs.
Another third were absorbed into the labor force, thus realizing another CAS milestone,
the reduction in the number of people needing to participate in workfare programs by
approximately one-third.
56.
As a compliment, the CAS set as a milestone the definition of an integrated,
inter-ministerial lifelong learning strategy. This strategy is being implemented with
support from a Lifelong Learning and Training Project (US$200 million), approved in
2006 to develop flexible learning opportunities for the unemployed and for low-income
workers to acquire skills to enhance prospects for productive employment in the labor
market. The project built upon Bank analytic work which focused on increasing the
linkages between the education system and the labor market.26
57.
The Bank has continued analytic work in these areas. A labor market study was
published in 2008 focusing on informal employment in Argentina.27 The study presented
the findings of a two-year program undertaken by the Bank in cooperation with the
Ministry of Labor and with the statistical institute (INDEC) to analyze the determinants
of informality and its impact on poverty and equity. It showed that informality in
Argentina is relatively high, rendering the state less effective in providing social
protection, especially for the poor and informal workers who are generally unable to
make up for their lack of social protections through private means. An important
recommendation of the study was that education and training including lifelong learning
programs could be instrumental in helping more workers to find employment in the
formal sector and thereby enhance their incomes and improve their overall welfare.

25

Three projects for US$ 273 Million are in the pipeline and may be approved until the end of FY09 (AR
Provincial Roads, AR Financial Management, AR Buenos Aires Infrastructure)
26
“Building a Skilled Labor Force for Sustained and Equitable Economic Growth: Education, Training and
Labor Markets in Argentina” Report No. 31850-AR, May 5, 2006.
27
“Informal Employment in Argentina: Causes and Consequences” Report No. 36092-AR, March 27, 2008

Annex 3
Page 16 of 32
Box 3: The Heads of Households Program: A Successful Partnership
The Heads of Household Program was Argentina’s main response to the social and economic crisis in
2002. Government rapidly developed and implemented this assistance program which provides a monthly
payment equivalent to US$50 to individuals that (i) are the head of a household; (ii) are unemployed; (iii)
live in a household with minors, disabled or pregnant women, and (iv) work 4 hours a day or take training
or education classes. The Bank supported the Program through the Heads of Household Project (Ln 7157AR), approved by the Board on January 28, 2003, and Heads of Household Transition Loan approved on
March 23, 2006.
The Bank supported the the part of the program in which beneficiaries did indeed comply with the workfare
requirement. The Program was very successful in (i) calming the social situation (which had nearly erupted
into violent conflict), and (ii) targeting the poor, mitigating effectively the impact of the crisis.
Government, with Bank support, has improved program governance (better internal controls, database
crosschecks and supervision). For example the Bank now finances only transfers made with debit cards, a
more transparent mechanism than cash payments.
Since 2002, the Bank accompanied Government implementation of the Program with analytical studies of
its poverty and inequality impact. Incidence data shows that the Program had good targeting performance.
The share of Program participants among the 40 percent better-off households in Argentina was 6 percent
in 2005 while the share of Program benefits going to the bottom two quintiles was 80 percent. Given the
good targeting performance, the HH Program was instrumental in tilting the overall economic growth
period in a pro-poor way. While the number of indigenous beneficiaries is not known, the program is
active in dozens of municipalities with high proportions of indigenous populations.
Governance improvements to Jefes included building additional cross-checks into the registry databases
and adding additional controls within the MTESS. This included regular monthly cross-checks of the
registry database with other databases by an independent agency (National System of Tax and Social
Identification –SINTyS). The MTESS also introduced cross-checks of the registry against beneficiaries
(and family members) among the participants in private health insurance plans. In addition, the spouses of
beneficiaries were cross-checked against private employment registries.
Social accountability was also enhanced through greater use of public information and participation
mechanisms. The MTESS coordinated with the National Consultative Council staff to hold a series of
workshops on the program in order to consult and provide information, promoting the participation of local
organizations (non-governmental organizations, unions, business groups, private companies, professional
training centers, among others).
With the normalization of the overall economic and social situation, the Government reoriented the HH
Program. The strategy was to distinguish among those beneficiaries that have higher re-employment
chances from those that require a different type of longer-term safety net, linked to building human capital
for children.

58.
The second component of this pillar sought improvement in selected health and
education outcomes. These outcomes and milestones were also largely achieved.
59.
Key milestones included improving health service delivery at the provincial
level, a reduction of the infant mortality rate and expanded coverage of maternal-child
health insurance. Under the Provincial Maternal-Child Health Investment Project
(US$300 million), infant mortality was reduced from 14.4 per 1000 births to 12.9, toward
a goal of 12.0 by 2009. Maternal and child health insurance was extended to 79 percent
of the eligible population by 2008, surpassing the CAS target of 50 percent. In addition to
increasing access to basic services, the project introduced important structural changes in
the way health finance is provided to the provinces by the national government and in the

Annex 3
Page 17 of 32

way the provinces pay health providers. For the first time in Argentina, the national
government is linking the provision of finance to outputs and outcomes as verified by
independent audits. In order to link financing to outputs, both the national government
and the provinces have introduced performance contracts and have strengthened their
monitoring and reporting systems. This has fundamentally changed the way in which
maternal and child health policy is discussed at the two levels of government.
60.
The CAS also sought the definition of a core package of public health goods.
With support from the Essential Public Health Functions and Programs Project (US$220
million), this was achieved in 2007.
61.
Another key milestone was to raise school completion rates and learning
outcomes, especially for children from disadvantaged families, evidenced by expanded
coverage of pre-school education and increased effective promotion rate for classes 7-9
in rural areas. With support from a Rural Education Improvement Project (PROMER)
(US$150 million), pre-school education rose from 89 percent in 2003 to 93.5 percent by
2007, nearly realizing the 95 percent target for 2010. The 2010 target of 80% promotion
from class 7-8 in rural areas was achieved in 2006.
PILLAR 3: GOVERNANCE
62.
The Bank supported the Government’s efforts to strengthen the effectiveness,
efficiency, transparency and accountability of public sector management; improve service
delivery outcomes and trust in institutions; and strengthen public sector capacity to spur
investment and growth. Bank support also focused on enhancing the implementation and
fiduciary integrity of Bank projects. The CAS envisaged support for five projects in the
total amount of US$135 million. The Bank is on track to deliver two projects before endFY2009 for a total loan amount of US$40 million. A fourth project to improve public
sector management at the provincial level has been postponed to the next CAS period to
accommodate the needs of the client for additional project preparation. WBI has also
been active in this area in Argentina with a focus on issues of governance and corruption.
No free-standing AAA was programmed for pillar 3 of the CAS because analytic and
advisory services are folded into the project work itself.
Country Outcomes
63.
The only specific country development goal identified in the CAS results matrix
was that the framework for co-participation should be strengthened to define more
clearly the division of fiscal responsibilities between the central government and the
provinces. No significant progress was achieved on that account in the CAS period.
CAS Outcomes
64.
The CAS sought to deepen the emerging investment partnership in favor of
institutional strengthening in selected areas of public sector management including
expenditure management, transparency, and service delivery. This was largely
achieved, as detailed below, with a package of Bank support. The State Modernization
Project began in 1998 and closed at end-2007, and it has been followed by the State

Annex 3
Page 18 of 32

Modernization II Project which aims to develop and expand public sector management
tools including e-government, procurement, human resource management and
information management. Another area supported by the Bank has been the Social and
Fiscal National Identification System (SINTyS). Established in 1998, SYNTyS aims to
enable the exchange and cross-checking of information between government agencies. A
first-phase APL in support of SYNTyS closed in 2005, and the Bank supported the initial
stages of a second phase by reallocation US$8 million from a State Modernization Loan
which closed at end-2007. The ICR for that project indicated that the SYNTyS
component fully achieved its objectives.28 In 2008, the Bank approved a second phase
APL of US$20 million that would support the second (ongoing) and third (forthcoming)
phases of the system. By the end of the project, all public sector agencies wishing to
participate in the project should enjoy unencumbered access to information exchange.
65.
A key milestone aimed to increase in user satisfaction of ANSES, the National
Social Security Administration, as measured by service-delivery outcomes and by
citizen satisfaction surveys. ANSES is particularly important because it constitutes the
administrative pillar of the social security system which, in turn, accounts for more than
one third of total federal government spending. The Bank has been supportive of
measures to strengthen the institutional effectiveness of ANSES since 1997. The ANSES
II Technical Assistance Project (US$25 million) supported interventions that reduced the
average time to process new benefits from 140 days in 2005 to 130 days by November
2007 and increased the number of regional centers and offices serving the public from
244 in 2005 to 298 by November 2007.
66.
The CAS also sought to support the expansion of the integrated financial
management (SLU/web- SIDIF) system (baseline: SLU covered 71% of federal level
public institutions in 2005). This objective was achieved, with the SLU being installed
in 82% of federal level institutions.
67.
In addition, the CAS included the expansion of the public investment
management system (BAPIN II) to additional provinces (baseline: 19 provinces in
2005). It has now been implemented in 23 of 24 provinces and 110 federal agencies.
68.
Finally, for provinces participating in the Sub-national Governments Public
Sector Modernization Project, the CAS set the following milestones: increase the
percent of provincial expenditures on human resources operating under integrated
payroll information systems from 30% to 45% in 2008 (and 55% in year 2009), and
increase the ratio between collected and emitted tax revenue for provincial real
property and motor vehicle taxes from 55 to 65 percent in 2008 (and 70% in 2009). As
of 2008, there had been no progress toward these targets.

28

Implementation Completion Report No. ICR0000778; June 30, 2008

Annex 3
Page 19 of 32

IV.

OVERALL BANK PERFORMANCE AND LESSONS LEARNED

69.
Bank performance has been strong. A strong lending program was
effectively delivered, and a successful partnership was forged in the wake of a
period of distrust of the Bank. The CAS proposed an all-investment lending program
in the amount of US$3.3 billion to be delivered in the period through FY09. The Bank is
on track to deliver a lending program of US$3.4 billion by end-FY09 (see Annex B).
Beyond the lending numbers, there has been a substantial dialogue and joint effort to
prepare innovative operations that imply significant improvements from past approaches,
including the highly successful maternal-child health insurance scheme, a new generation
of investment projects contracted directly with provinces and complex infrastructure
operations involving significant safeguard and technical challenges.
70.
The Argentina Fiduciary Action Plan (AFAP) has implied that Bank-financed
procurement activities are subject to close scrutiny by the public and there is an
integrated effort to continuously assess the fiduciary related project risks. The strong
integration of country, sector and fiduciary teams in matters related to portfolio
implementation constitutes an important innovation that has ensured improved
supervision and continuous risk assessment of the portfolio. The Plan reflects an
approach that is significantly different from past “ring fencing” of individual operations.
It focuses on measures that cut across projects and that strengthen country systems for
financial management and procurement. Key achievements under the AFAP include.
•

A web-based information system (known as SEPA) that provides the public with
easy access to detailed information on all Bank-financed contracts in the country.

•

A methodology (known as IFPA) to simplify, summarize, and communicate
technically complex fiduciary assessments (at the project and portfolio level)
through an easily understood system of red, yellow, and green “traffic lights.”

•

An intensification of dialogue between the Bank and Argentina’s Supreme Audit
Institution (AGN), the national body constitutionally mandated to audit all public
sector accounts and entities. Audit support activities have improved on-time audit
completion and, more broadly, strengthened government audit capacity.

•

A Price Monitoring Mechanism (PMM) on civil works contracts is currently
being developed to help distinguish higher prices attributable to legitimate supply
responses from artificial price inflation.

•

Finally, an effort is being made across the board to mainstream project
implementation by reducing the use and size of Project Implementation Units
(PIUs) and thereby strengthen the state’s own institutions and systems.

71.
The SEPA is one of the most successful components of the AFAP. Designed to
disclose relevant information on project procurement plans and their implementation via
the web, its initial scope included all contracts financed by the Bank in Argentina. With a
recent decision by IDB to adopt SEPA as its procurement dissemination tool, SEPA will

Annex 3
Page 20 of 32

de facto cover a substantial share of Argentina’s public investment program and achieve
impressive progress in the transparency of public procurement in Argentina. Likewise,
concurrent audits designed initially to ensure fiduciary standards of a results-oriented
maternal-child health insurance scheme financed by the Bank has gradually been
converted as the auditing standard for the health insurance scheme at the national level
and it is envisaged it may be adopted in future government programs in the sector.
72.
There has also been a strong focus on portfolio management which has enabled an
intensive dialogue with the Government at the highest levels to address some of the
issues affecting the portfolio as a whole and to ensure that the significant commitments
that have been made in investments are effectively executed. In addition to regular joint
portfolio reviews, the Government has agreed recently to revise its loan approval
procedures, improve the management information systems utilized by project entities and
to the joint monitoring of civil work contracts to identify undue delays and bottlenecks.
This last initiative is a welcome development since currently over 60% of Bank
commitments are represented by high value civil work contracts. These actions are
expected to contribute to accelerate the pace of execution of investments which has
deteriorated in recent years as a result mainly of project start up issues, including lengthy
loan approval processes.
73.
The ability to deliver a substantial program of investment lending and to work
jointly with the government counterparts in ensuring an effective implementation of the
portfolio has been an important factor in strengthening the country relationship with
Argentina which faces constrained access to the international financial markets and
which views the Bank as an important source of external finance for the public
investment program.
74.
At the same time the quality of Bank lending has been high. Projects
supported by the Bank have been innovative and are on their way towards making their
expected development contribution as evidenced by the progress made in achieving CAS
outcomes. QAG assessments have confirmed largely satisfactory quality at entry, and
especially of supervision. The successful implementation of the investment lending
strategy has helped dispel the difficulties in dialogue that characterized the crisis years,
and it has opened new doors for cooperation and trust building.
75.
In addition, AAA was envisioned to strengthen the dialogue on financial
accountability and procurement. On financial accountability, this was achieved with the
delivery of a Country Financial Accountability Assessment (CFAA) and a (Accounting
and Auditing Assessment) ROSC in FY07. The country dialogue on procurement has
likewise been significantly strengthened. Agreement was reached with the authorities on
protocols for the publication of procurement notices including improvements in technical
specifications, short listing, and the standardization of bidding documents. Agreement
was also reached on principles for the aggregation of contracts, procedures for evaluation
of contracts, and mechanisms for monitoring prices.
76.
The CAS included a number of targets related to some of the expected fiduciary
improvements. There were targets for increased audit compliance in Bank-supported

Annex 3
Page 21 of 32

projects of 45% in 2005, 60% in 2006, 75% in 2007, and 80% in 2008 which were
substantially achieved, albeit with some delay in 2008. Actual audit compliance reached
76% in FY06 and 81% in FY07. The corresponding figure for FY08 was initially only
48% due to delays in delivering audit reports. As of November, 2008, however,
compliance had reached 100%. The CAS sought to mainstream project management
under a framework agreement for phasing-out project implementation units (PIUs).
An agreement was reached in 2005, and there has been steady progress in
implementation. As part of this understanding, in the case of repeater and follow-up
projects, PIU staff were reduced by 46 percent between 2004/5 and 2006.
77.
The CAS provided also some specific outcomes related to portfolio
performance, namely, a continuous decline in problem projects and a reduction in the
number of projects at risk. The suggested outcomes did not anticipate the difficulties
that were encountered in the loan approval process which had a significant adverse effect
in the level of projects considered at potential or actual risk. The CAS sought to reduce
the incidence of problem projects. As of December, 2008, 13.8% of the portfolio was in
problem status, down from 21 percent in 2005. As reflected in Table 2, both problem
projects and projects at risk went well beyond their expected ranges during FY07 and 08
and have only recently began their descent towards more acceptable levels.
78.
Another key milestone was for the percentage of investment projects at risk by
amount to not surpass 20 percent. This target has not been achieved. As of December,
2008, projects at risk amounted to 24 percent of the portfolio, up from 19.5 percent at the
beginning of the CAS period.
79.
Bank exposure to Argentina declined over the CAS period. Bank exposure
had declined to US$5.1 billion by end-2008. This has derived from the initial focus
during these years on the renovation of a rather depleted portfolio and a slower pace of
disbursement expected from such an investment based portfolio. Efforts to improve
portfolio performance are an important part of the dialogue with the Administration and a
comprehensive program has been agreed to that effect. There is optimism that after the
significant start up problems faced by the project cohort approved in the CAS period,
performance will improve in the coming years. FY09 mid year disbursements already
suggest a significant improvement from the implementation levels achieved during FY08.
The Bank is also discussing with the Government ways to accelerate the approval of new
Bank loans so that project start-up may not be delayed.
80.
A significant program of AAA was also delivered in parallel to the lending
program. Six tasks were already in progress when the CAS was under preparation, and
all were completed and delivered on schedule. A further 14 tasks were programmed in
the CAS for FY07-08, of which six were delivered. Others were either postponed beyond
2008 or dropped from the program– sometimes for lack of client interest. For example,
the authorities requested the Bank not to undertake a CPAR.
81.
Experience with the program of AAA indicates that the Government is more
interested in analytic work that has a clear and direct operational application. In areas
where the Bank and the Government share a common vision of development issues, the

Annex 3
Page 22 of 32

Bank’s AAA has had significant impact. A study on the cost of logistics was particularly
well received and is providing valuable inputs for a Rosario Port project that is under
preparation. Similarly, a rural strategy that was delivered in March 2006 is helping the
Government to design the further development of its agricultural program (PROSAP).
Table 2: CAS Annex B2

Selected Indicators* of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
As of Date 01/06/2009

Indicator
Portfolio Assessment
a
Number of Projects Under Implementation
b
Average Implementation Period (years)
a, c
Percent of Problem Projects by Number
a, c
Percent of Problem Projects by Amount
a, d
Percent of Projects at Risk by Number
a, d
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount
e
Disbursement Ratio (%)
Portfolio Management
CPPR during the year (yes/no)
Supervision Resources (total US$)
Average Supervision (US$/project)

Memorandum Item
Proj Eval by OED by Number
Proj Eval by OED by Amt (US$ millions)
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Number
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt

2006

2007

2008

2009

29
4.6
27.6
31.1
48.3
38.1
38.4

29
3.9
3.4
1.0
41.4
21.4
21.7

28
4.2
25.0
31.3
57.1
60.0
12.4

32
4.0
12.5
16.9
28.1
29.6
8.4

Yes
3521
98

Yes
2973
90

Yes
2642
98

Yes
1470
49

Since FY 80

Last Five FYs

105
17,844.7
26.7
35.2

24
3,578.8
16.7
8.2

a.
b.
c.
d.
e.

As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY).
Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio.
Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) and/or implementation progress (
As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the
beginning of the year: Investment projects only.
* All indicators are for projects active in the Portfolio, with the exception of Disbursement Ratio,
which includes all active projects as well as projects which exited during the fiscal year.

82.
The average cost of AAA reports in Argentina was greater than in comparator
countries (see Table 3). Furthermore, the average cost of AAA reports produced in
Argentina under the 2006 CAS was 70 percent greater than reports produced under the
2004 CAS when Argentina was ranked as one of the least cost countries. The increase in
costs may reflect that a number of reports were begun and later dropped.
83.
With respect to the lending program, project preparation costs and supervision
costs in Argentina were similar to the corresponding costs in other countries. The
Argentina program ranked in the middle of the range.

Annex 3
Page 23 of 32
Table 3: Comparative Costs of Bank Program
(FY06-08, U$S Thousand)
Source: Business Warehouse as of August 15, 2008
Country

Average
Supervision
Cost
per Project

Supervision
Cost
Ranking

Average
Preparation
Cost
per Project

Preparation
Cost
Ranking

Average
Cost
AAA Report

AAA
Cost
Ranking

Argentina
Brazil
Chile
Colombia
Mexico
Poland
Russian Federation
Turkey

95
83
84
93
111
83
98
106

4
8
6
5
1
7
3
2

307
270
181
238
230
445
534
549

4
5
8
6
7
3
2
1

218
114
180
143
133
112
127
146

1
7
2
4
5
8
6
3

Lessons Learned
84.
Many lessons of the 2004 CAS are confirmed by the 2006-2008 experience. The
shift from adjustment lending, which dominated Bank lending at the beginning of the
decade, to an all-investment lending program has strained the project implementation
capacity of the Government, particularly in the areas of loan approval processing and
also the contracting of high value civil works. This is evident in slow disbursements and
underscores the importance of continuing to work with the client to improve its project
implementation capacity. There is a constructive on going dialogue with the Government
focused on initiatives to bring about improvements in project implementation capability
and a specific action plan is being worked out as part of CSP dialogue. There is a high
level commitment to make substantial improvements in project implementation capability
which is a central factor in making the investment led strategy successful.
85.
The Bank should work with the Government to reduce the lag between loan
approval and loan signing. Project implementation has been delayed because the
Government has been slow to sign loans approved by the Bank. This was particularly
acute in 2007, when authorities were preoccupied with elections. However, Government
procedures continue to result in long delays between Board approval and loan signing.
86.
The progress in CAS implementation –particularly the progress in project
preparation and the design of important and high quality investment initiatives-- has
proven that there is sufficient space to develop an ambitious investment partnership
despite the lack of coincidence in the structural reform agenda proposed by the
government. CAS should continue to focus on those areas where the Bank and the
Government share a common view with respect to the policy framework and the
operational environment. The CAS should also provide for the close monitoring of
progress

Annex 3
Page 24 of 32

87.
The Bank should tailor its program of AAA to address issues of priority interest
to the client. Experience with AAA reveals that the Government is more interested in
analytic work that has a clear operational application. An effort should be made to
develop a demand driven AAA Agenda that ensures the ownership of the study by the
Government and its endorsement by the Bank if there is a clear sense that it is consistent
with the Bank’s assistance priorities.
88.
Progress in the fiduciary front should be continued and deepened to further
ensure transparency and integrity of Bank operations. The Bank should continue to
promote a proactive and constructive dialogue with the Government to ensure
transparency and competitiveness in the procurement of goods and services under the
portfolio. There has been very significant progress made in the area of transparency with
the introduction of the Sistema de Ejecucion de Planes de Adquisiciones (SEPA). It
provides all actors with an interest in Bank-financed procurement --civil society, private
sector, suppliers and executing entities-- a clear picture of the transactions financed by
the Bank and facilitates monitoring the efficiency with which executing entities are
implementing their respective procurement plans. There has also been progress in
identifying and assessing risks related to competition constraints. There are, however,
further areas for improved fiduciary management. Among them the systemic review of
risk involved in the procurement and financial management of projects through periodic
integrated fiduciary assessments and the monitoring of contract processing to avoid
bottlenecks and ensure the efficiency of civil works contracting. The Government shares
and is committed to implement this expanded fiduciary agenda.

30

29

As of 2007, 34% of poorest
quintile had access to natural
gas.





As of 2007, 85% of bottom
two income quintiles have
access to water network.
As of 2007, 34% of poorest
quintile had access to sewage.

No data available





As of 2008, 89% of national
roads are in good condition.
Data on provincial roads is
not available.



Transport
• Leverage the progress achieved in road
transport by scaling up support for road
maintenance throughout the country and
expanding this support to include road
upgrades, as well as broadening the scope of
Bank support to encompass additional transport
subsectors.
• Increase percentage of paved non-concessioned
roads under the CREMA system (baseline and
increment to be determined National highways:
baseline 9,174 km in 2004 and target of 16,725
km by 2009; Provincial network: base line 0 km
in 2005 and target of 2,204 km by 2008.
• National Directorate of Highways undertakes
actions under the Institutional Renewal Action
Plan covering budgeting, road safety, and
environmental management.
Water
• Consolidate the emerging partnership on water
resources management, encompassing water
supply and sanitation, and flood protection – in
the context of moving towards more strategic
water resource management.
• Expand water and sewage coverage for
approximately one-half million low income
people living in areas of high sanitary or
environmental vulnerability in BA Province.
• Establish flood risk reduction plans in at least 5
provinces.
• Reduce flood risk in selected urban areas
including BA city and exposed provincial cities.

Partially Achieved: Coverage extended to 370,000 low income
people by 2008. Additional coverage is anticipated when project
is completed with additional finance.
Achieved: Reduction plans established in Santa Fe, Corrientes,
Entre Rios, Chaco, Misiones and Buenos Aires.
Partially achieved: Works have started in Buenos Aires.
Reduced flooding achieved in cities including Santa Fe. .




Not achieved

Not achieved

Partially achieved: As of 2008, the CREMA system applied to
13,600 km of national highways and 1,000 km of the provincial
network.

Achieved: Bank support for road maintenance at the national and
provincial levels through performance-based contracts.
Bank undertook analytic work on logistic costs and on ports and
an investment loan to improve port facilities at Rosario is under
preparation.

Actual Progress towards
CAS Outcomes and Milestones











PILLAR 1 - SUSTAINED GROWTH WITH EQUITY
Actual Progress towards
CAS
Development Goals
Outcomes and Milestones30
1. Infrastructure Development

Longer-term, higher-order development objectives identified by the country.
Country results to which the Bank expects to make a direct contribution through its CAS program. Indicators include shorter-term milestones where possible.

Water
• Increase access to safe water of
the bottom two quintiles to 7580%.
• Increase access to sewage in
greater Buenos Aires area by the
poorest quintile to 50%.
• Increase access to electricity and
natural gas by the poorest
quintile to 95% and 50%,
respectively.

Transport
• Roads in good condition: target
is 90% of national nonconcessioned roads network;
target is 50% of provincial roads
network.
• Disposable income dedicated to
transport by poorest quintile
reduced to less than 15%.

Upgrade Argentina’s
infrastructure to address potential
bottlenecks to competitiveness,
and underpin medium-term
growth and poverty alleviation.

Country Development
Goals29

ANNEX A: ARGENTINA CAS RESULTS MATRIX

Annex 3
Page 25 of 32

• Increase access to international
carbon markets, US$150 million
by 2010. (baseline 2005: less
than US$5 million).
26 CDM projects have been
submitted for approval to the
designated Argentine
authority for the Kyoto
protocol.

New landfill investments
made in Misiones, Salta and
Mendoza provinces. 55% of
solid waste is disposed
without treatment.





2007 legislation curbs
deforestation of native forest.
Forestry investments increase
planted forests by 40,000 ha.
annually.

No new measures of rural
poverty since 2005.

93.6 million tons in cereal and
oil seed reached in the
2006/7 harvest
Total meat export were
US$1.45 bn. In 2007.
No information on animal and
plant health losses





Reduce rural poverty
• Reduce poverty to 20% by 2015
(rural baseline is 34% in 2005).

Address a growing problem of
resource degradation.
• Preserve 11.3% of national area
as native forest in 2011 (baseline
12.6% in 1987; 11.2% in 2007
est.); and increase forestry
investments (baseline 2005: 1.1
million has).
• Increase investments in urban
waste management (baseline:
60% of solid waste is disposed of
without sanitary treatment).





Improve competitiveness, quality,
and exports of agriculture and
livestock production:
• Reach 100 million tons in cereal
and oilseed production (baseline
2005, 75 million).
• Reach US$3 bn in meat exports
(baseline US$0.5 bn in 2001,
US$1.4bn in 2005) and reduce
plant and animal health-related
losses (baseline: animal health
losses US$150 mn and plant
losses US$75 mn per year).

Country Development
Goals

ARGENTINA: CAS RESULTS MATRIX

• World Bank purchases of at least US$25 million
in Argentine carbon credits by end-2008
(baseline US$0.6 million in 2005).

• Integrated urban transport planning and
investment, combined with pollution reduction,
in at least five cities (baseline: 0 cities in 2005).

Environment
• Integrated waste management systems
completed in 3 provinces by 2007 (baseline
2005: 0 provinces).

Rural poverty
• Improved baseline data and analysis of rural
poverty.
• Expanded small and medium farmer investment
in forestry (at least 5,000 ha total, in 3 different
provinces).

Agriculture and livestock
• Improve the capacity to analyze, design and
manage agricultural and rural development
investments at national and provincial levels:
• National government to complete and implement
its agricultural and rural development strategy.
Implemented in at least one subregion by 2008.
• 20% increase in production area under irrigation
(baseline: 1.7 million ha, 2001), and integrated
water resources management piloted in at least
one province.
• Mercosur strategy to be free of aftosa (foot and
mouth disease) completed and implemented.







Not yet achieved. Bank purchases put on hold pending
improvements in project portfolio.

Not yet achieved. 30 pollution control projects are being
developed with support from the WBI Carbon Finance Assistance
Program.

Not yet achieved. Under a Bank-supported National Solid Waste
Management Project, 1 municipal solid waste management plan is
completed and another 5 are under preparation. 10 infrastructure
and equipment investments are planned.

Achieved. A Bank-financed project will support investments by
5,000 small-scale producers for 15,000 ha. of forests in at least 3
different provinces.



Achieved: Mercosur strategy was ratified in 2005. An action
program was adopted in May 2008.



Not achieved: No improvements in data

Partially achieved: Area under irrigation increased by 6%. The
province of Mendoza has adopted an integrated water resource
management program.





Achieved: National strategy is in place and 19 provinces have
adopted strategies as of 2007.

Achieved: Sub-secretariat of Family Agriculture and Rural
Development established in April 2008.





PILLAR 1 - SUSTAINED GROWTH WITH EQUITY
Actual Progress towards
Actual Progress towards
CAS Outcomes and Milestones
Development Goals
CAS Outcomes and Milestones
2. Towards More Sustainable Rural Development and Environmental Management

Annex 3
Page 26 of 32

• Reduce urban poverty from 38%
(2005) to 34 percent (2007) and
30% (2009).
• Reduce Extreme poverty from
13.6% in 2005 to 11% (2011) and
9% in 2009
• Reduction of unemployment rate
from 14% in 2005 to 12% (2007)
and 11% in 2009.
• Expand coverage and advance
reform of the Social protection
system:
1. Share of working adults
covered by social security
increases from 52.6 % (2005)
to 61 % (2007) and 65%
(2009).
• Transition of Heads of Household
program into new income transfer
schemes, including role of noncontributory unemployment
benefit and/or expansion of child
benefits.

Consolidate the reduction in
poverty achieved since the crisis
and expand efforts to reverse the
longer term poverty trend by
increasing household incomes and
integrating marginalized groups
into the productive marketplace.

Country Development
Goals

As of end-2007,
unemployment was 7.5
percent
As of 2007, Social Security
coverage was 61 percent

Heads of Household program
is being phased out with Bank
support and beneficiaries
transferred to new income
transfer schemes.









As of 2007, urban poverty
was 20.6 percent. No reliable
estimate available for 2008.
No reliable data available.



• Achieved: A strategy formulated by the Centro Integrador
Comunitario is being implemented in 195 municipalities nationwide.
• Achieved: Life-long learning project under implementation with
Bank support.

• Definition of integrated, inter-ministerial lifelong
learning strategy.

• Achieved: Numbers transferred from Jefes Program by mid-2008
were as follows:
340,634 to Familias program.
95,800 to Seguro program.

• Achieved: Participants in Jefes de Hogar program reduced from
1.4 million in June 2005 to 665,000 by June 2008 and 570,000 by
August 2008.

• Achieved.: Beneficiaries of Jefes de Hogar program now being
transferred to new Familias program and to new Seguro de
Capacitación y Empleo program.

• Formulation of integrated community service
strategy, including how nutritional and child
development strategies will be implemented at
local level.

• Improvements to income support programs,
notably making the transition from emergency
income programs to initiatives that foster
employment and establishing more permanent
safety nets geared to provide direct support to
vulnerable groups.
• Reduction in number of people having to
participate in workfare programs from 1.4
million (2005) to one million (2006) and less
than 0.5 million (2009).
• Transition of Heads of Household program into
new income transfer schemes, including role of
non-contributory unemployment benefit and/or
expansion of child benefits.

Actual Progress towards
Actual Progress towards
CAS Outcomes and Milestones
Development Goals
CAS Outcomes and Milestones
1. Supporting Progress Towards Permanent Safety Nets and Fostering Employment

PILLAR 2 - SOCIAL INCLUSION

ARGENTINA: CAS RESULTS MATRIX

Annex 3
Page 27 of 32

Education
• Enrollment rate of 5-year olds
increases from 91.6 (2005) to
95.0 (2007) and 98.0 (2009).
• Completion rate of third cycle of
basic education from 82.9 (2005)
to 87.0 percent (2007) and 95
percent (2009).
• Define lifelong learning strategy
between the Ministries of
Education, Economy and Labor.

Country Development
Goals

As of 2007, the enrollment
rate for 5 year-olds was 91.2
percent.
As of 2007, the completion
rate for the third cycle of
education was 85 percent.
Life long learning and
training project under
implementation with Bank
support.







Education
• Improve coverage of pre-school education for
children of 5 years of age in rural areas of
Argentina by 2009 (baseline 89% in 2003-04,
target is 95% by 2009-10).
• Improve effective promotion rate for classes 7-9
in rural areas (baseline 68% in 2003-04, target
is 80% by 2009-10).

Health
• Support efforts to improve health service
delivery at the provincial level; and raise school
completion rates and improving learning
outcomes, especially for children from
disadvantaged families.
• Reduction of infant mortality rate from 14.4 per
1000 births in 2005 to 12.0 per 1000 births in
2009.
• Expand coverage of maternal-child health
insurance from 20% of eligible population in
2005 to 50% in 2009 (9 NOE/NEA provinces).
• Definition of core package of public health
goods.

Achieved: As of 2008 coverage of maternal-child health
insurance was 79% of eligible population.
Achieved: The Bank and the Argentine authorities agreed on the
definition of a core package in September 2007.




Achieved: As of 2006, coverage of pre-school education for 5
year-old children in rural areas weas 93.5 percent.
Achieved: As of 2006, the effective promotion rate from class 7
to 8 in rural areas was 81.4 percent.






Achieved: Bank support for a Provincial Maternal-Child Health
Investment Project Was approved in November 2006.
Graduation rates for basic education thru 9th grade increased
from 83% in 2005 to 85% in 2007. Pre-school education for
rural children increased from 89% in 2003/4 to 93.5% in 2006.
Achieved: As of 2006 infant mortality was 12.9 per 1000 births.

Actual Progress towards
CAS Outcomes and Milestones



Actual Progress towards
CAS Outcomes and Milestones
Development Goals
2. Improving Selected Health and Education Outcomes

PILLAR 2 - SOCIAL INCLUSION

ARGENTINA: CAS RESULTS MATRIX

Annex 3
Page 28 of 32

--Strengthen the framework for
federal coparticipacion to clearly
define the fiscal responsibility
responsibilities between the nation
and the provinces.

Strengthen the effectiveness,
efficiency, transparency and
accountability of public sector
management; improve service
delivery outcomes and trust in
institutions; and strengthen public
sector capacity to spur investment
and growth.

Country Development Goals


The framework for
coparticipacion was not
strengthened from 2006 to
2008.

• Deepen the emerging investment partnership in
favor of institutional strengthening in selected
areas of public sector management including
expenditure management, transparency, and
service delivery.
• Increase in user satisfaction of ANSES as
measured by service-delivery outcomes and by
citizen satisfaction surveys.
• Expansion of the integrated financial management
(SLU/web- SIDIF) system (baseline: SLU
covered 71% of federal level public institutions in
2005).
• Expansion of the public investment management
system (BAPIN II) to additional provinces
(baseline: 19 provinces in 2005).
• For provinces participating in the Sub-national
Governments Public Sector Moderrnization
Project:
1. Percent of provincial expenditures on
human resources operating under
integrated payroll information
systems has increased from 30% to
45% in 2008 (and 55% in year 2009).
2. Ratio between collected and emitted
tax revenue for provincial real
property and motor vehicle taxes has
increased from 55 to 65 percent in
2008 (and 70% in 2009).
• Argentina’s rankings on WBI’s Global
Governance Indicators of “Government
Effectiveness” and Control of Corruption”
improve from current percentile ranks of 42.3, and
42.9, respectively.

PILLAR 3 - IMPROVED GOVERNANCE
Actual Progress towards
CAS
Development Goals
Outcomes and Milestones
1. Strengthening Public Institutions

ARGENTINA: CAS RESULTS MATRIX

Achieved: Average time for the provision of new benefits
reduced from 140 days in 2005 to 130 days in 2008. Data on
citizen satisfaction is not yet available.
Achieved: SLU installed in 863 agencies which constitute 82%
of federal level institutions.
Achieved: BAPIN II implemented in 23 of the 24 provinces and
110 federal agencies.
Not yet achieved: Participating provinces have developed a
strategic plan to improve management, competitiveness and
growth.









Achieved: In 2007 the percentile ranking for Government
Effectiveness was 51.7 and for Control of Corruption was 43.5.

2. Ratio between collected and emitted tax revenues for the
provincial real property and motor vehicle taxes stands at 55% in
2008.

1. Percent of provincial expenditures on human resources operating
under integrated payroll information systems stands at 30% in 2008.

Achieved: Public sector management strengthened as indicated
below including transparency and service delivery.



Actual Progress towards CAS Outcomes and
Milestones

Annex 3
Page 29 of 32

Strengthen the capacity of the
Government to prepare and
implement investment projects in
line with the requirements of a
medium-term investment
partnership.

• Not achieved: Projects at risk by amount rose to 60 percent in
2008. However, the rise was due to broad country-related issues
and not to project specific problems.
• Substantially achieved. Compliance increased to 76% in FY06 and
81% in FY07. After dropping temporarily to 45% in FY08 the
80% target was recovered 3 months later.

• % of investment projects at risk by amount does
not surpass 20% (baseline: 19.5% in fiscal
2005).
• Audit compliance for Bank project increases
from 45% (2005) to 60% (2006), 75% (2007)
and 80% (2008).

• % of problem investment projects by number
declines continuously through the CAS period
(baseline: 20.8% in 2005).

• Achieved.: (i) A framework for phasing-out PIUs was agreed in
mid-2005 and PIU staff for repeater projects were reduced by 46%
from 2004/5 and 2006; (ii) A fiduciary action plan is under
implementation. Information on all Bank-financed contracts is
posted on the web. Annual fiduciary assessments are now made
for all Bank-supported projects. (iii) Bank loans for a second
SINTyS Project and a Second State Modernization project are
successfully strengthening institutions and building capacity;
(iv) A CFFA and ROSC were delivered in FY07. (v) Additional
budget allocations were made in FY05-08 to enhance supervision
of projects at risk; (vi) Portfolio reviews have been done twice
annually with the authorities.
• Not achieved: After declining to 3.4 percent in 2007, problem
projects by number rose to 25 percent in 2008. The rise was due to
delays in the Government approving new loans and that problem is
being addressed.

Actual Progress towards CAS Outcomes and
Milestones

• Enhance government project mgt. capacity
through (i) a framework agreement to shift
implementation responsibility from stand-alone
PIUs to line ministries, (ii) a fiduciary action
plan to improve fiduciary control, (iii)
institutional strengthening investments to build
up capacity, (iv) AAA to strengthen the dialogue
on financial accountability and procurement, (v)
enhanced supervision of projects at risk, and (vi)
twice annual portfolio reviews with the
authorities.

PORTFOLIO PERFORMANCE
Country Development
Actual Progress towards
CAS
Goals
Development Goals
Outcomes and Milestones
1. Building up the Government’s Project Management Capacity

ARGENTINA: CAS RESULTS MATRIX

Annex 3
Page 30 of 32

Annex 3
Page 31 of 32

ANNEX B: Lending Program Summary (Base Case)
LENDING
Fiscal year
2006

Proj ID
AR Governance 21
AR Urban Flood Prevention (APL2)
AR Basic Municipal Services 1
Total FY 2006

2007

AR Provincial Agricultural Development
(supplemental financing for PROSAP)
AR Mining Decontamination (PRAMU)

25
70
110
205

Postponed to FY10 (Foundations for PerformanceInformed Budgeting
Approved 06/06/2006

28

Approved 06/06/2006

110

Total FY 2006

180

30

Approved 01/23/2007

70

37

35

Approved 07/31/2008

30 (FY09)

75

Approved 07/11/2006

75 (FY08)

AR Santa Fe Provincial Investment Loan

125

Approved 02/13/2007

126.7

AR State Modernization 2

25

Dropped

300

Approved 11/02/2006

200

Approved 11/21/2006

AR Provincial Preschool and Basic Education

25
100

AR Urban Public Transport

200

Total FY 2007

1,115

Approved 05/29/2007

300
220
20

Postponed
Approved 03/27/2007
As Additional Finance for Loan 4163
Total FY 2007

783.7
20

100

AR SINTyS (APL2)

15

Approved 07/08/2008

AR Environment Management (APL1)

75

Approved 03/18/2008

60

AR National Highway Asset Management (APL2)

200

Approved 06/28/2007

400

AR BA SIDP (APL2)

150

Approved 06/28/2007

270

AR Income Support for the Poor

300

Postponed

AR Infrastructure (Logistics Node of Rosario Port)

100

Postponed

477

AR Provincial Agricultural Development (PROSAP 2)

150

Postponed

300

AR Lifelong Learning

100

Approved 06/28/2007

200

100

Postponed

AR Integrated Water Resources Management (APL1)
Total FY 2008

2009

US$(M)

AR Cordoba Provincial Investment Loan
AR Catamarca Provincial Investment Loan
AR Maternal-Child Health Insurance Functions
(APL2+3)
AR Essential Health Functions

2008

STATUS OF DELIVERY as of 09/2008
US$(M)

1,190

Total FY 2008

1055
120

AR Provincial Roads

150

Postponed

AR Infrastructure (Freight Corridors)

175

Postponed

AR Environmental Management (APL2
AR Sub-national Governments Modernization

75

Dropped

40

Postponed

40

AR Early Childhood Development

90

Postponed

100

Approved09/25/2008

150

AR Innovation

100

AR Basic Municipal Services 2

60

Dropped

AR Rural Poverty and Growth

70

Postponed

AR Provincial Public Management

30

Postponed

Additional project not included in the 2006 CAS:
Matanza-Riachuelo Basin Sustainable Development
Total FY 2009

….

Programmed for 2009

Overall Result

(841)

790
3,300

3,436.7

Annex 3
Page 32 of 32

ANNEX C: AAA Program Summary (Base Case)
ECONOMIC & SECTOR WORK
Fiscal year

2006

Programmatic Poverty 1 (Informality)
Old Age Welfare and Social Security
Logistics and Transport Sector, Competitiveness
Infrastructure Finance
Rural Strategy
Institutional Governance Review

2007

Youth at Risk
CFAA (Federal Level)
Fiscal Space for Public Investment
Programmatic Poverty 2 (Rural)

2008

AR Programmatic Poverty
Delivered 06/29/2006
Facing the Challenge of Aging and Social Security
Delivered 10/13/2006
The Challenge of Reducing Logistics Costs
Delivered 07/03/2006
AR Infrastructure Finance
Delivered 09/29/2006
AR Rural Strategy
Delivered 03/31/2006
AR Institutional and Governance Review
Delivered 06/28/2006
Social Inclusion: Issues of Youth in Argentina
Delivered 06/20/2007
CFAA (Federal Level)
Delivered 06/19/2008
Dropped
The Invisible Poor: A Portrait of Rural Poverty in Argentina
Delivered 06/27/2007

Provincial Economic Memorandum 1 (Central Region)

Dropped

CPAR (Federal Level)

Dropped

ROSC

Accounting and Auditing Report (ROSC)
Delivered 06/08/2007

Programmatic. Poverty 3 (Urban and Water)
Programmatic Social Protection
(Options to Transition from Heads of Household Program)
Provincial Economic Memorandum 2 (Northern Region)

Dropped
Informal Employment in Argentina
Delivered 03/27/2008
Dropped

Country Environmental Analysis

CPAR (Provincial Level)

Postponed
Policy Notes
Delivered 12/19/2007
Dropped

CFAA (Provincial Level)

Postponed

Provincial Economic Memorandum (Buenos Aires)

Programmed for 2009

Policy Notes

2009

STATUS OF DELIVERY as of 09/2008

Ongoing Studies in Italics

Impact analysis of Reform in Education and Health Sectors

Not programmed

Social Accountability

Not programmed

Private Sector Development

Not programmed

Energy Review

Not programmed

Innovation Study

Not programmed

Financing of Development

Not programmed

Annex 4
Page 1 of 5

Argentina’s Public Debt
Overview
Argentina’s public debt stood at US$175 billion as of end-2008, equivalent to 58
percent of GDP. These figures account for the US$6.3 billion of interest and capital
arrears owed to the Paris Club and other bilateral creditors, and also include holdouts
from the 2005 debt restructuring that total US$29 billion, equivalent to 10 percent of
GDP (Table 1). It also includes approximately US$7 billion of provincial debt owed to
creditors other than the Federal Government. Medium- and long-term debt currently
represents 86 percent of federal performing debt, while short-term debt, mainly due to the
Central Bank and other Government agencies, and interest and capital arrears,
respectively account for 10 and 4 percent of debt.
Table 1: Stock of Public Debt (US$ billion)
Federal government debt
Performing Debt
Medium-long term
Short term
Arrears
Holdouts

1

Provincial debt2
Fed. gov. debt as % of GDP
excl. holdouts
incl. holdouts
Prov. gov. debt as % of GDP

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

191.3
191.3
141.5
4.5
45.3
0.0

152.2
128.6
116.0
7.8
4.9
23.6

162.8
136.7
122.9
8.4
5.4
26.1

173.6
144.7
128.8
10.5
5.5
28.9

175.0
146.0
125.7
14.0
6.3
29.0

5.8

5.0

5.5

6.1

7.1

126%
126%
4%

73%
86%
3%

64%
76%
3%

56%
67%
2%

49%
58%
2%

1\ Includes federally-guaranteed provincial debt
2\ Excludes provincial debt with federal government, and federally guaranteed debt with multilateral
organizations

Source: Staff calculations based on data from Ministry of Economy.

The average maturity of performing debt is close to 12 years and carries an average
interest rate of 4.5 percent. More than 60 percent of this debt is owed to bondholders
(US$85 billion) at an average interest rate of 5 percent, and a mean maturity of over 15
years (Table 2). Interest rates on bonds range from 11.2 percent (peso-bonds not linked to
inflation) to 2.0 percent (inflation-adjusted consolidation bonds). Loans from
international organizations account for 11 percent of total public debt, with the US$5.1
billion owed to the IBRD representing 3.7 percent of performing debt.

Annex 4
Page 2 of 5
Table 2: Composition of performing federal debt
by type of instrument
Average
Share in
Average
Total Debt maturity in interest rate
years
%
%

Instrument
Public Bonds
Domestic currency
Foreign currency
Loans
Guaranteed Loans
International Organizations
Paris Club and Official Bilaterals*
Guaranteed Provincial Bonds-BOGAR
Commercial Banks
Other Ceditors
Central Bank Advances
Short-term intra public sector debt
TOTAL

61%
22%
39%
29%
9%
11%
1%
8%
1%
0%
6%
4%
100%

15.4
6.2
5.5
6.4
3.7
5.9
13.6
1.1
1.0
0.9
11.7

5.0
5.0
5.2
3.5
4.4
4.0
3.0
2.0
2.0
0.0
9.3
4.5

* Excludes interest and capital arrears.
Source: Ministry of Economy.

52 percent of Argentina’s debt is denominated in foreign currency, while the bulk of
the remaining 48 percent of peso-denominated debt is indexed to inflation. The share of
foreign currency-denominated and inflation-indexed debt has been relatively stable since
2005, and exposure to foreign exchange and inflation risk thus remains important.
Figure 1: Currency composition of performing federal debt

Euro
10%

Other
currencies
2%

Peso
48%
US dollar
40%

not inflation
indexed
11%
inflation
indexed
37%

Source: Ministry of Economy.

Since the debt restructuring in 2005, Argentina has not accessed international capital
markets. Debt issuances have been concentrated in short-term notes to public sector
agencies, the direct placement of bonds to Venezuela and domestic issuances. In 2008,
the Government raised US$5.9 billion, of which 46 percent corresponded to intra-public
sector notes, mainly allocated to the social security agency, ANSES (49 percent), and the
tax collection agency, AFIP (30 percent). 49 percent were obtained from two direct sales
for more than US$2.8 billion in Bonar 2015 bonds to Venezuela (see Box 2), while
domestic issuances of peso-denominated bonds only accounted for 4 percent.

Annex 4
Page 3 of 5

Figure 2: Bonds and intra-public sector notes (US$ billion)
100%
80%

1.4

2.5

3.1

2.8

60%
40%

0.3

3.0

1.6
2.9

20%
1.0

2.7
2.0

0%
2005

2006

Intra-Public Sector
Venezuela

2007

2008

AR peso-Bonds
Other US dollar-Bonds

Note: Calculations based on cash values. Source: Ministry of Economy

Box 1: Venezuela as a financing source
Throughout the past four years Venezuela has bought nearly US$7.6 billion (cash value) in
Argentine bonds. Even though total outstanding debt to Venezuela only accounts for 7.7 percent
of the stock of performing public bonds, given Argentina’s lack of access to international capital
markets, issues to this country have become increasingly important. While in 2006 total direct
placements to Venezuela amounted to US$2.3 billion and represented 49 percent of that year’s
new bond issues, the US$2 billion of the Boden-2015 series bought by Chavez in 2008 account
for more than 88 percent of public bond issues during the year (cash value).
The last of these operations, at a record high spread of over 1,100 bps and an interest rate close to
15 percent, triggered fears about the Government’s payment capacity and generated turmoil in the
bond market. On August 8, 2008, the day on which this last US$1 billion placement to Venezuela
was officially announced, interest rates hiked 700 bps above those observed at the beginning of
the year, and were also 300 bps higher than those registered at the worst point of the conflict with
the farmers earlier in the year.
Argentinean Public Bonds Bought by Venezuela
(US$ million)
Nominal Value
% of total new bond issues

2005
1,563
39.2%

2006
2,865
53.4%

2007
2,254
34.2%

2008
2,825
91.0%

TOTAL*
9,506
49.9%

Cash Value
% of total new bond issues

1,290
38.3%

2,300
49.1%

2,021
33.5%

2,000
88.3%

7,611
46.5%

Return
Spread /UST
Price

8.5%
434
82.6%

8.1%
333
80.3%

10.2%
598
89.7%

13.9%
1029
70.8%

10.4%
620
80.1%

*

Total price, interest rate, spread, and average life figures correspond to nominal value weighted averages

Annex 4
Page 4 of 5

Debt Sustainability Analysis
Under the baseline scenario, the public debt-to-GDP ratio would be on a gradual
downward path. Based on the macroeconomic assumptions of the base case scenario
presented in Table 1 of the main text, public sector debt would fall only slowly from 58.3
percent in 2008 to 57.9 percent of GDP in 2010, as the primary balance is projected to
remain well below 3 percent of GDP and growth below 2 percent. Beginning in 2011, as
the fiscal accounts and economic growth recover, debt levels are projected to decline at a
faster pace, reaching 49.3 percent of GDP in 2013 (Table 3).
Table 3: Base case debt projections*
Act.
Base case scenario
Public sector debt 1/
o/w foreign-currency denominated
o/w domestic debt excl. short-term intra-public sector debt
o/w short-term intra-public sector debt
Key assumptions for baseline scenario
Real GDP growth (%)
Primary balance (% of GDP)
Overall balance (% of GDP)

Proj.
2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

67.3
23.9
39.3
4.1

58.3
18.6
35.0
4.7

58.1
23.2
28.7
6.1

57.9
23.2
26.8
8.0

57.2
22.9
24.6
9.7

53.1
21.2
22.7
9.2

49.4
19.7
20.7
9.0

8.7
3.4
1.4

7.0
3.1
1.3

1.0
2.4
0.2

1.5
2.6
0.9

3.0
2.8
1.0

3.0
3.1
1.0

3.0
3.0
1.0

1/ Defined as short-, medium- and long-term Federal Government and federally-guaranteed provincial
government debt. Includes intra-public sector debt.
Source: Ministry of Economy, and Bank staff estimates.

Stress tests show that public debt is particularly sensitive to a decline in real GDP
growth. Stress tests show that the most important deterioration of public debt levels vis-àvis the base case scenario would take place in a scenario of a combined shock to the real
domestic interest rate, real GDP growth and primary surplus of 1 standard deviation in
2009 and 2010. In this case, the public debt ratio would increase to 91.2 percent of GDP
by end-2010, compared to 57.9 percent under the base case scenario. Another scenario
with significantly worse outcomes than the base case is a scenario in which real GDP
growth falls two standard deviations below the historical average in 2009 and 2010,
which would lead to an increase in the debt stock to 75.3 percent by end-2010 (Figure 4).
However, stochastic simulations assign a low probability to the above-mentioned
extreme scenarios. According to the results of stochastic simulations, there is a 97.5
percent probability that the debt ratio will remain between 29 percent and 72 percent of
GDP during the projection period. There is only 2.5 percent probability that debt will be
above 72 and below 29 percent by the end of the projection period (Figure 5).

Annex 4
Page 5 of 5
Figure 4: Debt ratios under sensitivity tests
(% of GDP)

Figure 5: Probability of different public debt
levels (% of GDP)

100

80
90

70
80

60
70

50
60

40
50

30
40

20
30

Baseline

10

20

Second most extreme stress test (B2)

10

Most extreme stress test (B4)

0
2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

0
2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2.5-25

25-75

75-97.5

Baseline

B2: Real GDP growth is at historical average minus two standard deviations in 2009 and 2010
B4: Combination of shocks to interest rate, GDP growth and primary balance

2013

Annex 5
Page 1 of 7

Banking Sector Update
In the last years, the Banking System has
consolidated its recovery and seems to
have left behind most of the effects of
the 2001-2002 crisis.
Proactive Central Bank (BCRA) policies
coupled with proper banking regulation
and supervision were key elements in the
recovery process. Beginning on the third
quarter of 2003, financial system
deposits and credit started to recover and
have grown at a strong pace since then
(Figure 1). Asset quality has improved
as well with non performing loans
(NPLs) reaching record low levels in the
third quarter of 2008, but with high
variations among individual banks.
Banks profitability continued to improve
and additional capital contributions have
helped to further strengthen systemic
solvency, but capital adequacy ratios still
need some improvements among banks.
Although deposits have become the core
source of funding for most financial
institutions, banks have gradually started
to make use of alternative sources of
financing to manage their liquidity needs
in the form of debt issuance, capital
inceptions, loan sales and securitizations,
among others.
Figure 1: Financial System Deposits and
Loans
270,000
240,000

Ar$ Million

210,000
180,000
150,000
120,000
90,000
60,000
30,000
0
1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008
Total Loans

Source: Staff calculation on BCRA data.

Total Deposits

Nevertheless challenges remain: mainly
the increase in long term credit to the
private sector and better access to
financial services of certain groups of
the population, including low-income
households, microenterprises and small
farmers. In light of the international
financial crisis, reforms introduced after
the 2001-2002 crisis have helped the
system to be better prepared against the
turbulences striking from abroad. Local
banks are adopting different measures to
weather the storm. In addition, Central
Bank intervention has become a constant
need to assure financial stability.
The International Financial Crisis and
its effects on the Financial System
This section examines the channels of
impact the current international financial
crisis has taken on the Argentine
economy: 1) Stock and Bond Market 2)
Banking Sector 3) Real Economy
1) A Volatile Stock and Bond Market
One of the most apparent effects of the
international crisis has been the surge of
a widespread risk aversion. This has
translated into increased volatility in the
Argentine stock and bond market.
As it has been the case with many Latin
American countries and other emerging
economies, the Argentine stock market
has not been able to shield itself from the
global developments. During 2008, the
Argentina Merval index lost 54 percent
of its value. Additionally, the cost of the
Credit Default Swap for sovereign debt
has increased substantially reaching
nearly 50 percent of the insured amount,
as of December 2008.

Annex 5
Page 2 of 7

The Argentine bond market has also not
been immune from its effects. Prices of
Government bonds have deteriorated
with a partial rebound in December
2008. On October 31, 2008, S&P
downgraded the rating of the Argentine
long term and short term debt from B to
B- and from B to C, respectively. The
lower ratings were based upon a
weakening economic and political
environment. A similar course of action
was taken by Fitch. At the end of
December, 2008, the EMBI spread for
Argentina was above 1600 bps,
representing approximately 1200 bps
increase on a year basis.
2) Banking
System
indicators
experienced improvements although
liquidity risk has become a concern
After the domestic financial crisis of
2002, the banking system gradually
recovered and deposits soon became the
core source of funding for most financial
institutions. As of December 2008,
deposits represented more than 70
percent of total funding. In addition,
banks have made use of alternative
funding
to
promote
financial
intermediation and manage their
liquidity needs in the form of debt
issuance, capital contributions, loan sales
and securitizations, among others.
Figure 4: Banking system profitability
4.00%

20.00%
10.00%

2.00%

0.00%
-10.00%

98

99

00

01

02

03

04

05

06

07

08*

-2.00%

-30.00%

-4.00%
-6.00%

-50.00%
-8.00%

-60.00%
-70.00%

-10.00%
ROE

Liquidity Stress Episodes Remain
In the last year and a half the Argentine
banking system has witnessed the
development of three liquidity shortages
that placed financial institutions under
relative stress. These successive
episodes have contributed to show the
ability and commitment of the BCRA to
preserve financial stability:

0.00%

-20.00%

-40.00%

system continued to improve during
2008 with a ROA of 1.6 percent and
ROE of 14 percent as of October, 2008
(Figure 4). Furthermore, NPLs as a
percentage of total loans maintained its
decreasing pattern and achieved new
record low levels (below 3 percent) in
the third quarter of 2008 while
provisions covered approximately 135
percent of NPLs. The capital adequacy
ratio for the system appears adequate,
although there is variability among
banks. Under current circumstances
results have experienced some pressures
due mainly to a gradual slowdown in
origination volumes coupled with
increasing funding costs, growing
administrative expenses and the poor
performance of investments in public
bonds (most of them marked to market).
Systemic liquidity measured as liquid
assets (excluding BCRA paper) relative
to total deposits remains at adequate
levels. As of October 2008, these
liquidity levels were 25.5 percent
relative to 21.1 percent a year earlier.

ROA (right axis)

*As of October 2008.
Source: Staff calculation on BCRA data.

Despite the international financial crisis,
the overall profitability of the financial

•
In the second half of 2007, the
Argentine financial system experienced
the first significant episode of liquidity
stress as a consequence of the negative
prospects attributed to the subprime
crisis. Yet, by the end of the year the
situation went back to normal as BCRA

Annex 5
Page 3 of 7

interventions contributed to a recovery
of confidence.
•
Another situation of distress took
place in the second quarter of 2008, a
consequence of the farmers’ lock-out. In
this case, the system lost approximately
Ar$ 3,300 million in deposits and the
BADLAR rate rose from an average of 9
percent observed in the first quarter to a
peak of 18 percent. A package of
measures introduced by the BCRA
brought relief to the system.
•
Finally, a third episode of
liquidity stress was unleashed in
November
2008
due
to
the
nationalization of private pension funds.
As a result, deposits fell by Ar$ 4000
million pesos on average as of December
2008 relative to the levels observed in
October 2008. Interest rate on time
deposits, measured in terms of the
BADLAR benchmark rate, increased
significantly from around 12 percent to a
peak of 25 percent in November while
asset dollarization stepped in as a
reasonable
response
to
existing
uncertainty. Interbank call market rate
soared from 10 percent to a 19.5 percent
in November evidencing an incipient
funding shortfall. The Central Bank
introduced additional measures to again
ease the stress. Adverse conditions seem
to have eased but banks continue to
maintain a conservative approach.
Liquidity
System

Distribution

within

the

The liquidity stress seems to be
evidencing an uneven distribution of
liquidity within the system. The value
and interest rate of interbank money
market operations from entities that only
lend funds to entities that only borrow

funds increased from a level of less than
10 percent in October to almost 19
percent in the first week of December
2008. Additionally, time deposits
originally held by AFJPs which now
belong to ANSES pose additional
uncertainty towards liquidity distribution
among the system. At this point, the
situation seems to be contained although
elevated costs of funding still persist.
BCRA Commitment
Systemic Liquidity

to

Enhance

Starting in 2007 and throughout 2008,
BCRA has been implementing several
measures aimed at enhancing systemic
liquidity, achieve exchange rate stability
and ultimately assure financial stability.
Among these measures the most
traditional ones include repurchases of
Central Bank Notes (Lebac and Nobac),
repo facilities, open market operations of
Government securities and a liquidity
window; while less common and more
sophisticated actions include the
acceptance of more exotic assets as
collateral to receive liquidity assistance.
Recently, BCRA introduced additional
tools to boost systemic liquidity, mainly
the opening of a window to pre-approve
collateral in order to obtain liquidity
upon request; and redefined its strategy
in order to incorporate a wider range of
financial entities (mainly smaller and
segment oriented entities) in its liquidity
bailout program. For the time being,
actions taken by the BCRA seem to have
maintained adverse conditions under
control. Moreover, the BCRA has
demonstrated its willingness and ability
to preserve financial stability.

Annex 5
Page 4 of 7

3) Strong Growth on the Real Side of
the Economy
Higher disposable income resulting from
strong economic growth triggered
increased household consumption and
demand for credit. The overall level of
household indebtedness appears sound.
Despite the surge in consumer and
housing credit in the recent years, the
ratio of indebtedness to formal wages
only increased slightly to over 2 percent,
which is still a comparatively low level.
While the economy continues to perform
relatively strong, there are first signs that
the global economic situation led to a
deceleration of growth most likely due to
a slowdown of exports of primary goods
and agricultural manufactures. Most
recent forecasts predict a further
slowdown of economic activity for 2009.
If current forecasts finally materialized it
could have negative implications for the
financial system in terms of financial
intermediation,
asset
quality,
profitability and liquidity.

As of December 2008, total deposits
represented more than 70 percent of total
funding relative to 62 percent in
December 2005. However, measured as
a percentage of GDP, deposits are still
below pre crisis level. Moreover,
deposits are still very short term. More
than 75 percent of the deposits are for
less than 60 days, which continues to
limit the capacity of banks to provide
long-term credit.
Consumer and commercial credit
maintains its dynamism but long term
credit still shows signs of stagnation.
While
consumer
lending
has
significantly surpassed its pre-crisis
level, mortgage and corporate credit still
have
the
potential
for
further
improvement. As a ratio to GDP, private
sector credit represents approximately 12
percent compared to 23 percent prior to
the crisis (Figure 11)
Figure 11:
evolution

Private

sector

loans

25,00%

Banks Have Left Behind Many of the
Effects of the 2001-2002 Crisis

(% of GDP)
20,00%
15,00%

Figure 8: Deposits Distribution by Sector

10,00%

300,000

Public Sector

5,00%

Private Sector

250,000

0,00%
1999

Ar$ Million

200,000

2000

2001

2002

2003 2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

150,000

Source: Staff calculation on BCRA data.
100,000
50,000
2000

2002

2008

Source: Staff calculation on BCRA data.

Economic recovery consolidation and
the gradual improvement in confidence
have contributed to the normalization of
total system liabilities. In the last years,
private and public deposits have
experienced further growth (Figure 8).

Banks continued with the process of
reducing their balance sheet mismatches
(interest rates, currency and term) The
exposure to foreign currency mismatches
has been reduced significantly thanks in
part to BCRA regulation. In particular,
dollar denominated credits may only be
granted to borrowers whose income is
also denominated in foreign currency.
Additionally, these loans have to be

Annex 5
Page 5 of 7

paper) of total system assets decreased
from a high 32 percent in December
2005 to approximately 19 percent in
October
2008.
Different
BCRA
requirements such as the introduction in
July 2007 of a 35 percent limit for
holdings of public related assets have
contributed to the observed reduction in
public sector exposure.
Figure 13: Banking system net worth
45000
40000
35000
30000
Ar$ Million

funded with foreign currency deposits.
As of mid- 2008, foreign currency
mismatch relative to net worth had
declined to 27.3 percent from 40 percent
as of end-2005. Interest rate mismatch
has also decreased from 124 percent of
net worth as of December 2005 to about
75 percent of net worth as of June 2008.
Therefore, the risk of interest rate
mismatch shows up as moderate while
different measures are being considered
to reduce it even further such as the
introduction of interest rate swaps. Part
of the improvement observed in balance
sheet mismatch indicators should also be
attributed to a recovery in net worth
figures in the last years (Figure 13)

25000
20000
15000
10000
5000

As of June 2008, the banking system had
reported seven consecutive semesters of
profits (Figure 4). In general terms,
recovery of systemic profitability can be
explained by increasing banking
intermediation activity mainly related to
the private sector. Specifically, high
interest rate margins and the introduction
of new products combined with a wider
client base and increased fees and
commissions were the main drivers
behind the recovery. However, part of
the positive effect on net results has been
recently offset by the volatile
performance of bonds and securities
holdings and increasing administrative
expenses. Overall, the system seems to
have stabilized and strengthened its
recurrent earnings while declining NPLs
and loan loss provisioning provide
additional profitability enhancements.
Still, the full effects of the recent
international crisis are not yet apparent.
Since 2005, banks have managed to
reduce significantly their exposure to the
public sector (Figure 14). In particular,
public sector share (including BCRA

in Ar$ Million

0
Dec-02

Oct-03

Aug-04

Jun-05

Apr-06

Feb-07

Dec-07

Oct-08

Source: Staff calculation on BCRA data.

The system has improved its efficiency
since 2003. The efficiency ratio
measured as financial margin relative to
operating expenses has increased from
93 percent in 2003 to 169 percent in
October 2008. However, systemic
efficiency might deteriorate as financial
intermediation decelerates and operating
expenses increase due in part to effects
of the international financial crisis.
The capitalization of the financial
system has improved during the last
years as a result of an increase in
earnings and new capital contributions
(Figure 13). A more favorable operating
environment and a recovery of
confidence have allowed the financial
sector
to
increase
financial
intermediation and stabilize its sources
of recurrent earnings. BCRA regulations
have also contributed to enhance
systemic solvency. Improvements in
asset quality have also contributed to the
strengthening
of
capital
levels.
Moreover, legal proceedings (amparos)

Annex 5
Page 6 of 7

inherited from the crisis are no longer
significant for the system. Therefore, the
systemic capital adequacy ratio has
improved in the last years reaching a
level of 17.1 percent in October 2008
relative to 14 percent in December 2003.

standards. In addition, BCRA has proved
to be very effective in supervising and
enforcing current regulation.

Figure 14: System exposure to public sector

During the last years, the system has
benefitted from high consumer lending
interest rates and low deposits rates,
even negative in real terms. However,
increased competition among institutions
added to the episodes of liquidity
shortages have led to a reduction in the
interest rate gap. Moreover, deposits
interest rates which are currently high in
nominal terms are also positive in real
terms thanks in part to a slowdown in
inflation (Figure 17).

40.00%
35.00%
30.00%
25.00%
20.00%
15.00%
10.00%
5.00%
0.00%
2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

Public Sector Assets / Total Assets + Net worth

*As of October 2008.
Source: Staff calculation on BCRA data.

During the last three years, banks have
cancelled most of the BCRA assistance
received during the crisis. Moreover, the
number of entities indebted declined
from 24 to 1. As of June 2008, banking
debt to the BCRA represented 0.4
percent of total system liabilities.
Therefore, this debt has finally
disappeared from banks´ balance sheets.
As a result of the 2001-2002 crisis, some
foreign banks left the country and others
including local banks reduced their
operations in the market. However, since
2004 increasing financial intermediation
has led to a marked recovery in the
number of employees, branches and
ATMs. The number of entities has
remained stable, above 80 franchises,
after the significant dropped experienced
during the crisis and the aftermath.
The regulatory environment ruling the
Argentine banking system has been
significantly enhanced after the 20012002 crisis. At this moment, the system
exhibits a solid regulatory framework
which is in line with international

The Current Challenges and
Vulnerabilities

The tax on financial transactions is
another pending issue that does not show
signs of an imminent resolution. The
financial transaction tax lowers the
demand for payment services and
reduces banks´ fee-based income.
However, given its importance in fiscal
revenues, it is unlikely that this tax will
be eliminated in the foreseeable future.
Domestic supply of long-term lending to
the private sector remains a major
challenge. Although credit has recovered
since the crisis, major improvements
have only been observed in consumer
lending. In addition, available long term
credit usually supposes a relatively high
cost of financing. As part of the steps
for long-term credit recovery, measures
are needed to reconstitute domestic longterm funding and therefore reduce the
risks of long term lending. These efforts
become even more important taking into
account the effects of the international
financial crisis.

Annex 5
Page 7 of 7

There have not been any significant
improvements in the reconstitution of
long term funding in local currency. The
system has not been able to revert to the
predominance of very short-term deposit
funding as deposit confidence is still
very fragile. During the last years,
private pension funds (AFJPs) and life
insurance companies were seen as
options to fill the gap of long-term
financing. However, no significant
improvements were achieved except for
their contribution in the development of
the structured finance market which still
remains mostly short-term. The recent
nationalization of private pension funds
has provided ANSES with the
opportunity and the challenge of
developing missing long term financing.
Figure 17: Time deposits interest rate (real
terms)
6

4

30 days

More than 60 days

Annual %, in real terms. Monthly average

2

0

-2

-4

-6

-8

loans and credit
securitizations.

card

receivables

Broadening access to financial services
to the under-served remains a major
challenge. Low income households,
small farmers and microenterprises
continue to have limited access to
financial services although some
progress has been observed. The
domestic microfinance industry remains
underdeveloped relative to other
countries in the region. However, many
improvements have been introduced on
this matter such as the “Microcredit
Promotion Law” passed in 2006 that
assigns specific funds to support
originators of micro-credit. The BCRA
has also introduced certain facilities to
promote the microcredit industry.
Although, commercial banks presence in
the microcredit industry is still low,
many banks are showing increased
interest in the business. Additionally,
credit to small and medium sized
enterprises has still significant room for
improvement.

-10
oct-08

sep-08

ago-08

jun-08

jul-08

may-08

abr-08

mar-08

feb-08

ene-08

dic-07

nov-07

oct-07

sep-07

ago-07

jul-07

jun-07

may-07

abr-07

feb-07

mar-07

ene-07

dic-06

nov-06

oct-06

sep-06

ago-06

jul-06

jun-06

may-06

abr-06

mar-06

feb-06

ene-06

dic-05

oct-05

nov-05

sep-05

ago-05

jul-05

jun-05

may-05

abr-05

mar-05

feb-05

ene-05

*As of October 2008.
Source: Staff calculation on BCRA data.

Financial trusts have consolidated their
role as an alternative source of funding
linking banks and long term investors. In
particular, after the financial crisis of
2002, securitizations have emerged as an
attractive
investment
choice
in
Argentina.
Despite
the
current
international financial crisis, the
domestic securitization market has
maintained its dynamism compared to
other financial assets such as corporate
bond issuances in Argentina. The
Argentine securitization market has also
been very active when compared to other
markets in the region. However, the
market is still concentrated in consumer

What lies ahead?
Economic prospects for the upcoming
months are not very promising.
However, the banking system continues
to exhibit relatively good performance as
it is evidenced by most financial
indicators. In addition, it benefits from
the legacy of the 2001-2002 crisis in
terms of enhanced regulation and more
conservative
business
strategies.
Therefore, the system seems to have
some cushion to resist a deteriorating
operating environment. Moreover, the
menu of measures introduced by the
BCRA during the last year has so far
demonstrated its willingness and ability
to preserve financial stability.

Annex 6
Page 1 of 12

IBRD and Carbon Finance Program Summary
Strategic Approach of the Proposed CPS
1.
The 2010-2012 CPS will continue to focus on the three pillars successfully
supported under the previous CAS: (i) sustainable growth with equity, (ii) social
inclusion, and (iii) improved governance. However, there will be significant evolution in
the support provided as this flexible but focused framework will allow rebalancing the
portfolio toward greater emphasis on social inclusion as the Bank’s key response to the
global economic crisis. The CPS proposes the following approach:
2.
Joint work with the Government in sectors or themes that: (1) are strategic
and where there is strong demand not only from the authorities but from Argentine
society more generally, and (2) in which the Bank has developed good dialogue with
the authorities and feels comfortable with the basic policy and institutional
framework. The progress in implementing the previous CAS– particularly in project
preparation and the design of important and high quality investment initiatives – has
demonstrated that there is sufficient space to develop an ambitious investment
partnership despite the lack of coincidence is some areas of the Government’s agenda.
3.
The CPS will focus on cross-cutting issues such as governance and
institutional strengthening through a focus on public sector governance work both on
the supply and demand-side, in line with the Bank’s GAC agenda, as well as through
greater integration and mainstreaming of public sector governance across sectors. The
latter will be achieved through appropriate institutional strengthening activities tailored to
the needs of the specific sector, complemented by specific portfolio management
activities to enhance the quality of project management and impact.
4.
The CPS is performance-based. One inherent characteristic of the investment
lending-only portfolio is its self-selectivity. Along with macroeconomic stability,
portfolio management and fiduciary performance are among the factors that will
determine actual lending levels. At the sector level, the quality of the policy framework
and implementation performance will continue to determine the pace and extent of new
lending. At the project level, Bank-financed activities will continue to be designed
around clear development outcomes and incorporate incentives toward those outcomes.
5.
The CPS will focus on the national level of government and, in line with the
federal nature of government in Argentina, seek to deepen its engagement with the
subnational levels of government. This aspect focuses on strengthening the partnership
with subnational governments, particularly provinces. Strategic engagement with the
provinces takes place on the basis of the estimated social and economic impact,
particularly the poverty impact, as well provincial leadership and demonstrated reform
commitment. Collaboration with subnational governments will be carried out through
operations channeled through the national Government or operations and other support in
close coordination with (and duly guaranteed by) the national Government to ensure full
synergies between federal and subnational operations. This strategy includes using AAA
and NLTA to support conceptualizing development approaches and investment loans in
provinces that have demonstrated strong capacity to implement. To further complement

Annex 6
Page 2 of 12

lending and responding to strong subnational governments’ demands for Bank support,
the use of FFS at the subnational levels of government, such as the on-going FFS with
Corrientes province, may be expanded. Multi-sector SWAps, through which strategic
impact is feasible, are also explored in small provinces with high levels of poverty.
6.
The CPS proposes to capitalize on the value-added of its expertise and
international experience by preparing and implementing more complex and likely
larger programs or projects. Such an approach is responsive to the Government’s
expectations of the partnership and is more likely to make a significant impact on growth
constraints and/or poverty traps.
7.
The Bank will strengthen its AAA program, in particular by being more
selective and ensuring active client participation in identifying any significant activities
to be carried out. The key instrument to strengthen client demand will be to prepare with
the client annually a list of AAA to be carried out the following FY during the spring
portfolio review in which all main counterpart agencies participate.
8.
The CPS seeks to improve the implementation of the Bank portfolio. A key
lesson of the 2006 CAS is that the shift from adjustment lending to an all-investment
lending program has strained the project implementation capacity of the Government.
This CPS responds to those issues. The authorities will implement --with the support of
an IDF grant – the new procedures referred to in paragraph 62 (a) of the main text. The
country team is reviewing with the authorities the modalities of support to provinces both
to reduce administrative constraints and more importantly respond more flexibly to
requests from selected subnational governments.
9.
The CPS proposes further efforts to improve fiduciary safeguards. The
experience of the Fiduciary Action Plan under the last CAS has shown that attempts to
ring-fence Bank investments from potential fiduciary risks can be designed to expand
their impact beyond discrete Bank investments to encompass a broader sector and/or
national dimension. There are significant benefits to this bottom-up fiduciary approach
for developing a relevant governance dialogue in a country where there have traditionally
been misgivings regarding the role of IFIs in this area. The pilot nature of project-level
innovations like SEPA and their unpretentious approach in resolving practical fiduciary
challenges have opened productive opportunities for cooperation which could generate
important benefits to the country as the pilots are successfully mainstreamed.
The WBG’s Indicative 2010-2012 Program
10.
The Country Team is proposing an IBRD lending envelope of US$ 3.3 billion for
FY10-FY12. As mentioned previously, the proposed program would provide selective
support under the three pillars to influence specific outcomes in support of Argentina’s
strategic development goals. Annex 2 elaborates the outcomes and milestones the
activities are expected to support, and an indicative listing of the planned activities is
detailed below.

Annex 6
Page 3 of 12
Table 1: CPS Program Objectives and Select Activities

Government of Argentina Strategic Objectives
Pillar I
Pillar II:
Pillar III:
Sustainable Growth with Equity
Social Inclusion
Improved Governance
Outcomes toward which the CPS will contribute
Upgrade Argentina’s
Consolidate the reduction in
Strengthen the effectiveness,
infrastructure to address
poverty and expand efforts to efficiency, transparency and
potential bottlenecks to
reverse the longer-term
accountability of public
competitiveness, and underpin
poverty trend by increasing
sector management
medium-term growth and poverty household incomes and
alleviation
integrating marginalized
Expand performance
groups into the productive
management and improve the
Improve competitiveness,
marketplace
quality of public expenditure,
quality, and exports of
enhance service delivery
agriculture and livestock
Consolidate improvements in outcomes and trust in
production
health indicators and improve institutions
quality of education while
Address a growing problem of
reducing drop out rates
Strengthen public sector
resource degradation
capacity to spur investment
and growth
Selected Programs for Support
• Improving the transport
• Improving employability • Strengthening
network
of the most vulnerable
transparency of decisionmaking, increase access
• Increasing public transport
• Expansion of provincial
to information
ridership
health insurance
• Increasing rural access to
• Hospital restructuring and • Expanding effective
performanceelectricity supply
expansion
management and
• Improved access to water
• Strengthening health
performance-informed
and sanitation
sector governance
budgeting
• Increase the diversification
• Universal access to
• Ensuring compliance
of production in the
primary education
with the Fiscal
agricultural sector
• Lower teen dropout rates
Responsibility Law
Cross-Cutting Themes
Strengthen capacity of the Government to prepare, approve and implement investment projects in
line with the requirements of a medium-term investment partnership.
Ensure awareness and knowledge with Government about IBRD financial products that could
provide flexibility to Argentina in managing its debt, including the ability to change the financial
characteristics of existing and future loans as to better manage the financial risks relating to
currency, interest rate, roll over and commodity price volatility

Pillar 1: Sustainable Growth with Equity
11.
Country Economic Memorandum (CEM). This key AAA activity will review
short- and long-term determinants of economic growth and examine the role of
macroeconomic policies in responding to external shocks and their effectiveness in
mitigating output volatility. It will study the link between the quality and composition of
trade, as well as its long-term growth potential. In addition, and among other issues, it
will look at the link between business environment and firm-level productivity.

Annex 6
Page 4 of 12

12.
Private Sector Development, Innovation and Competitiveness Study. This
study would analyze the evolution of credit and support the authorities in identifying
alternative sources of credit to maintain its availability to the economy’s most vulnerable
sectors. This would include analysis of countries – to be identified in conjunction with
the Central Bank -- representing the Americas, Europe and Asia and utilizing the value
added of the Bank’s international perspective to draw lessons from other contexts to
inform the formulation of a strategy for Argentina.
•

Objective: Upgrade Argentina’s infrastructure to address potential bottlenecks
to competitiveness, and underpin medium-term growth and poverty alleviation

13.
Over the next several years, the Bank will both broaden the range of infrastructure
sectors it supports in Argentina and deepen the impact of its technical value-added by
focusing on those interventions within sectors that make best use of the Bank’s
knowledge and comparative advantage in complex, multi-jurisdictional projects. Many
of these projects (particularly in urban transport, water supply/sanitation and urban flood
protection/drainage) are also expected to expand the infrastructure assets of the poor,
including indigenous populations. While most of the Bank’s infrastructure investments
under the 2006-2008 CAS supported maintenance and expansion of the national and
subnational highway networks, the new portfolio will present a more diversified picture
with several complex investment operations that leverage the Bank’s technical valueadded and a growing focus on improved efficiency and poverty alleviation. The Bank
will undertake an innovative approach in supporting the Government’s objective, with
activities designed to improve the quality and safety of the transport network, increase
public transport ridership, increase rural access to electricity supply, and improved access
to water and sanitation. New activities to support these objectives include:
14.
Matanza-Riachuelo Basin Sustainable Development Project. The Bank will
contribute toward improved access to water and sanitation with this major environmental
initiative. The US$840 million loan (APL-1) will finance most of the transmission,
treatment and disposal infrastructure needed to provide the infrastructure backbone for
cleaning up an urban river basin that is home to some 3.5 million people and more than
4,000 industrial facilities stretching across 14 municipalities and the city of Buenos Aires.
An APL-2 loan in support of the same project is likely to be presented to the board after
the end of the proposed 2009-2012 CPS period.
15.
Rosario Metropolitan Area Infrastructure Project. The objectives of this
proposed two stage APL program are: (i) to reduce logistics costs for cargo shipped to
and from the Port of Rosario by improving accesses to port facilities and increasing the
railway’s modal share in freight transport; and (ii) to improve the quality of life in the
Metropolitan Area of Rosario by reducing traffic congestion and using the urban land
released by the project (i.e. railway tracks, warehousing and maneuver facilities) to
improve the quality of the urban environment. An APL-1 loan for US$460 million is
expected to be delivered under this CPS. Additional analytical work on logistics
bottlenecks hampering development of Argentina’s poor northwest as well as the Buenos
Aires container port system may provide the basis for further engagement.

Annex 6
Page 5 of 12

16.
Metropolitan Areas Urban Transport project (PTUMA). This proposed twophase APL would expand Bank support for urban transport beyond the Greater Buenos
Aires area and build on the results of Buenos Aires Urban Transport Project (Proyecto de
Transporte Urbano de Buenos Aires, PTUBA). PTUMA is being designed to improve
the quality, sustainability and efficiency of urban transport systems in selected cities.
The objectives are to: (i) support the creation of institutional frameworks and initiatives
that enhance the authorities’ ability to make decisions, plan, set priority and assign
resource for public transport; (ii) improve the physical integration of public transport
networks and safety conditions in Greater Buenos Aires; (iii) improve the quality and
operation of existing public transport systems in selected cities.
17.
National Urban Drainage project. Flooding is a major natural hazard in
Argentina. Floodplains cover over 1/3 of the country's geographic area and include most
of the developed industrial and agricultural zones. Over the past 50 years, the country
has seen 11 major floods. In terms of GDP exposure to flood risk, Argentina ranks
number two in LAC (behind Ecuador) in GDP terms and number one in absolute terms.
The proposed operation would build on the ongoing Argentina Flood Prevention and
Drainage APL-2 loan to further strengthen flood protection planning and defenses,
primarily in Argentina's highly vulnerable Littoral Provinces.
18.
National Highway Assets Maintenance III project. Under the ongoing
National Highway Asset Management program (APL-1 and APL-2 loans for US$200m
and US$400m, respectively), the Bank has supported a successful roll-out of
Rehabilitation and Maintenance contracts (CREMAs) with private contractors to nearly
15,000 km of the non-concessioned national highway network. The Bank may continue
support to highway maintenance as first-generation CREMA contracts turn-over and are
replaced by contracts with greater emphasis on maintenance and less on rehabilitation.
19.
Provincial Roads Project (Additional Financing). This operation would help to
complete the rehabilitation and/or upgrading of nearly 1,970 km of provincial roads, in
part by extending the use of Rehabilitation and Maintenance Contracts (CREMAs).
20.
Córdoba Road Infrastructure (Additional Financing). This operation would
allow the execution of rehabilitation and maintenance contracts (CREMAs) covering 287
km of the provincial road network and a paving contract for a selected segment of 48.9
km. It would build on achievements of the ongoing project, contributing to reducing the
maintenance and infrastructure backlog and enabling the Province’s road assets to keep
pace with the demands of its agriculture and tourism sectors.
21.
Second Generation Road Safety project. The Bank may provide support to the
National Road Safety Agency to reduce Argentina’s high traffic injury and fatality rates.
The objective of the proposed operation would be to support the reduction of road traffic
fatalities and injuries and resulting economic losses through the development of
improved institutional capacity to manage for results, enhanced monitoring and
evaluation of road safety performance, and the achievement of safety improvements with
targeted investments on defined pilot corridors. The Bank is leveraging its resources in
Argentina to bring the best in international practice and knowledge through pilot

Annex 6
Page 6 of 12

initiatives such as iRAP (International Road Assessment Program) and the Global Road
Safety Facility (or GRSF).
22.
Buenos Aires Province Sustainable Infrastructure Development Project
(Additional Financing). This operation will scale up a successful operation covering
water supply and sanitation, provincial roads and storm water drainage in the Province of
Buenos Aires, primarily in Greater Buenos Aires. The additional financing is expected to
provide access to sanitation to 120,000 poor beneficiaries, improve stormwater drainage
in an area with 555,000 poor beneficiaries and rehabilitate 185 km of provincial roads.
23.
Reducing Logistics Costs in the Buenos Aires Container Port System and the
Northwest (Logistics II). In 2006, the Bank completed a study entitled Argentina: The
Challenge of Reducing Logistics Costs. The study identified four areas that need to be
addressed in the short/medium term: road and rail bottlenecks (and their interface with
ports) in the area of Rosario, capacity constraints in the Port of Buenos Aires, high
logistics costs in the NOA region and the lack of an adequate institutional set up to
improve logistics performance. The logistics problems in Rosario will be addressed by
the Rosario Metropolitan Area Infrastructure Project. The other areas will be the subject
of a deeper analysis to be conducted during 2009. More concretely, the proposed
analysis will focus in the explanatory variables of high logistics costs in the northwest
region (NOA) as well as policy alternatives to avoid unnecessary transportation costs that
would arise from the Port of Buenos Aires operating at full capacity. Finally, the study
will give guidelines on how to set up a National Logistics Council that could become a
forum to anticipate and propose solutions to logistics bottlenecks in Argentina.
24.
Rural Transport Assessment. This study will analyze transportation access to
health, education and other public services as well as obstacles to the movement of goods
in rural areas. The objective will be to assess the rural and/or secondary road networks,
including coverage, quality of networks, management and maintenance practices,
available financing and corresponding expenditures. To provide a useful national
snapshot of the situation, the study will be based on a sample of provinces so as to
provide sufficient depth, but the sample should be representative of the national situation.
25.
Assessment of water and sanitation service (WSS) providers. Argentina has
more than 1700 public, private and cooperative WSS service providers of different sizes.
This would assess the performance of the larger WSS service providers as well as a
sample of smaller ones to identify strengthening needs.
26.
The Bank and Borrower may also consider a Rural Electrification and Energy
Efficiency Project (PERMER II) and/or a Power Transmission Project. The
PERMER II project would help further develop the energy efficiency and renewable
energy markets, building on the PERMER project and the GEF-financed energy
efficiency operation. Activities would include investments in rural electrification and
small hydro generation projects and mechanisms to foster investments in energy
efficiency. A Power Transmission Project would seek to increase availability, quality
and reliability of the power supply network, increasing the competitiveness of the country
and fostering economic growth. The project would finance the construction/upgrade of
key regional transmission lines identified as high priority to reduce risks of power supply

Annex 6
Page 7 of 12

interruptions and to increase service quality. Such reinforcements will also help reduce
the total fuel cost of the power sector by lessening transmission constraints.
•

Objective: Improve competitiveness, quality, and exports of agriculture and
livestock production

27.
The CPS will contribute to increasing the diversification of production in the
agricultural sector. Bank work will continue to focus on enhancing competitiveness of
the non-Pampean economies and increasing the assets and opportunities of small farmers
and the rural poor. At the national level, the Bank will seek to engage the Government in
a discussion of agricultural policy options that reflect the changing international and
domestic context based on just-in-time analytical work. The Government has recently
sought additional lending from both the IDB and the World Bank (which approved a
US$300 million loan in October, 2008) for the Second Provincial Agricultural
Development (PROSAP) project. It has also received an additional financing loan for the
PROINDER small farmers project (US$45 million in July, 2007) to scale up the
successful strategy of supporting productive and community projects for small farmers
and strengthening institutional capacities for the implementation of rural development
strategies at the national and provincial level. New activities are proposed to include the
following.
28.
Rural Poverty Reduction Project. The project would be complementary to
PROINDER and PROSAP, targeting indigenous people, rural workers, landless farmers,
and other rural citizens who are among the most impoverished in Argentina. The project
is being designed under a CDD format and would include resources for strengthening the
newly-formed Subsecretariat for Rural Development and Family Agriculture.
•

Objective: Address a growing problem of resource degradation

29.
The Bank program will support increasing the areas of forest and forest
plantations under sustainable management, strengthen urban and solid waste
management, improve environmental management and governance, and increase access
to international carbon markets. Support for green (natural resources) issues will build on
ongoing operations in Sustainable Natural Resource Management and Biodiversity
Conservation in Productive Forestry Landscapes (GEF). The proposed CPS will expand
the Bank’s work on brown environmental issues through the previously discussed
Matanza-Riachuelo Basin Sustainable Development Project.
30.
Rural Corridors and Biodiversity Conservation project. This GEF-funded
project would assist the Government of Argentina in its efforts to conserve biodiversity
of global and national importance by strengthening the Protected Areas System. At least
six new protected areas (including marine and terrestrial ecosystems) are to be
incorporated into the national system and effectively managed. The operation would
stitch together conservation corridors necessary for the survival of several endangered
species and the sustainable management/ use of native forest and arid steppe.
31.
Sustainable Industrial Development Project. The main objective of this project
would be to help small and medium enterprises (SMEs) in Argentina with inadequate

Annex 6
Page 8 of 12

access to credit to improve their compliance with environmental regulations, while
simultaneously boosting their industrial competitiveness. Focused on selected highly
polluting sectors, this would support Government efforts to better control, manage, and
prevent industrial pollution of river basins and other sensitive ecosystems. The project
would support conversion of small and medium-size industries in highly polluting sectors
to cleaner production processes.
32.
Argentina’s Third National Communication. Bank support for this activity
under the UNFCCC is expected to deepen the absorption of climate change
considerations in sectoral planning, particularly in infrastructure and agriculture.
33.
Country Environmental Assessment (CEA) or Strategic Environmental
Assessments (SEA). This analytical work is expected to help Argentina and the Bank to
set priorities for additional investments and was identified during CAS consultations as
one of the key country-level diagnostic tools which will help evaluate environmental
priorities for Argentina, the environmental implications of key policies, and the country’s
capacity to address the priorities identified. In parallel, SEAs will provide analytical
options and participatory approaches for mainstreaming and upstreaming environmental
and social considerations in policies, plans and programs to influence decision-making
and implementation processes at the strategic level in different sectors.
34.
Carbon Finance (CF). The Bank will complement the above lending and
analytical work with the Petrobras Gas Transport System project, a CF transaction to
recover waste heat from the combustion turbines of the gas compression plants on the
San Martín and Neuba II gas pipelines. By converting waste heat to energy, the project
will reduce the need for new thermal electricity generation, thereby limiting future
greenhouse gas emissions. The Petrobras project will complement two ongoing CF
transactions: The Salta Landfill Gas Capture Project (FY08) (which flares methane gas
release by three municipal landfills) and the Olavarría Methane Capture Project (FY05)
(landfill gas flaring at one municipal landfill). The pipeline for future CF transaction will
be built using the ongoing CF Assist grant for the national Secretariat of Environment.
Pillar 2: Social Inclusion
•

Objective: Consolidate the reduction in poverty and expand efforts to reverse
the longer-term poverty trend by increasing household incomes and integrating
marginalized groups into the productive marketplace

35.
A key element of the Bank’s ongoing and future policy dialogue toward this
objective is to improve the employability of the most vulnerable. The focus of social
service delivery has shifted from emergency relief and expanding access to basic services
to better inter-governmental coordination and improved quality of services. The Bank is
therefore supporting the Government in facilitating the transition of beneficiaries out of
Jefes and developing a longer term strategy for social protection. According to the
discussions with the national Government, the Bank is planning to design and implement
new operations to extend and complement the existing social protection programs.

Annex 6
Page 9 of 12

36.
Basic Protection Project. The first phase of this two-phase APL focus on
increasing the effectiveness of Argentina’s income transfer programs for the unemployed
and families with children by improving design features, transparency and accountability
in two core social protection programs and transferring beneficiaries from other, less
effective schemes to them. It would seek to improve the equity, transparency, and
efficiency of social programs and on the Seguro Program to: (i) create conditions to
extend the services of Seguro to the population generally, beyond the former
beneficiaries of Plan Jefes (at this time the only ones eligible); (ii) improve the execution
and adaptation of employment services, taking into consideration the particular
conditions in each locality where the program is executed; and (iii) adapt the benefits
offered to the participants to ensure appropriate support and incentives.
37.
Social Protection Survey. This AAA will be undertaken, under the above
project, to provide updated information on the trends and impacts of social protection
programs. The Bank will enhance the Government’s monitoring capacity by providing
technical assistance in the design and implementation of the survey.
38.
Safety Nets AAA. The proposed AAA would study the key social programs to
identify beneficiaries, overlaps, and conflicts to propose integration options to increase
the coverage of the most effective programs while improving the efficiency and
effectiveness of Argentina’s safety net.
39.
Impact of Labor Market Development on Inequality AAA. The objective of
this programmatic AAA is to deepen the analysis of the effects of labor and social
protection programs on income inequality, and generate dialogue among stakeholders
about policy approaches to reduce inequality and expand opportunities. The AAA will
generate new quantitative data for analysis of income inequality at the provincial level. It
will focus on answering key policy questions facing the Government including: (i) how
has income inequality in Argentina evolved over the past 10 years? (ii) why has
inequality been stagnant despite reductions in poverty and unemployment since the 2002
crisis? (iii) what is the potential impact of existing social protection programs and labor
market policies on inequality over the medium term? (iv) what are the equity impacts of
some specific public spending policies (in particular, social spending and subsidies)? (v)
what potential policy reforms could reduce inequality and expand opportunities – through
transfer and labor market programs?
40.
An additional aspect that has been explored jointly by the Bank and the Argentine
Government at various levels is the possibility of supporting social inclusion policies at
the provincial level. The implementation of programs that complement (in a coordinated
manner) the services of the national programs, financed and executed by provincial
governments, is a challenge which the Bank can help address based on its experience in
other countries and by providing technical training for their start up.
•

Objective: Consolidate improvements in health indicators and improve quality
of education while reducing drop out rates

41.
The Bank aims to expand the scope of its support for the realization of this goal
through (i) expansion of health coverage through provincial health insurance, (ii) hospital

Annex 6
Page 10 of 12

restructuring and expansion, and (iii) strengthening the leadership of the Ministry of
Health and health sector governance. Specific Bank-financed activities will focus on
promoting institutional transformations, improving information systems, increasing
transparency of outcome data, and providing financial incentives for provincial health
systems.
42.
The health project to continue the Plan Nacer would support the best options to
improve health outcomes and coverage. Currently this option is to expand provincial
health insurance, an alternative that was already identified in the San Nicolás Agreement,
as the base of the current Plan Nacer, that aimed at addressing insurance coverage at the
national level, supported by the provincial structure. The project would move forward
with several innovations, such as: (i) expanding the age groups that would benefit from
existing provincial insurance arrangements (for example to all school age children); (ii)
defining a larger service scope to be guaranteed (for example, related to chronic, nontransmissible diseases); and (iii) introducing health quality attributes to services (for
example reducing waiting lists). Once again, the federal administration, acting as primus
inter pares with all the provinces, could utilize the experience of the Plan Nacer in terms
of outcomes, incentives, and administrative systems to support the provinces in extending
effective coverage to other population groups and in a greater number of services. This
project would render positive results in terms of equity of access and health outcomes,
including (i) gradual improvement in equity of access, by providing all Argentines with a
similar health plan regardless of where they live; and (ii) with the services to be defined,
a structured and comprehensive approach could be generated to address the disease load
associated with chronic conditions such as cardiovascular diseases, diabetes, cancer and
regional pathologies affecting in greater level the poorest population.
43.
Health Sector Support Project. Based on AAA on strengthening management
and governance of the public hospitals network, the project would introduce a new
management system for the hospitals network that would improve the articulation
between first and second levels of health care. There would be clear criteria for patient
references to improve quality of health care and optimize use of resources. The new
management model would determine decisions to recover existing facilities and to
construct new ones. The Bank support to the funding of new health facilities would be
provided within a result-based framework, similar to existing Bank projects in Argentina,
to ensure close coordination between national and provincial health authorities.
44.
Essential Public Health Functions (FESP) (Additional Financing). The
proposed additional financing would include support for a Health Human Resources
program. Argentina has a serious imbalance in the health sector’s human resources. In
the public sector the clearest indicator of the problem is that there are too few nurses for
the number of doctors, with the source of the problem being both too many medical
doctors and too few nurses. The project would focus mainly on addressing the deficit of
nurses. Key project activities in this direction would be further professionalization of
nurses and a scholarship program. However, an improved supply of nurses by itself will
not solve the problem. The project would also work with health institutions in the
provinces to ensure improved hiring practices.

Annex 6
Page 11 of 12

45.
The Health Sector Governance program would reinforce the governance
capacities of the National Ministry of Health to improve the operation of the health
system in Argentina, in aspects related to the fairness of access, effectiveness and
transparency of health services delivery through the developing of management,
procurement and transparency and accountability arrangements.
46.
Strengthening Management and Governance of Public Hospitals Networks
AAA. The main objective of this study is to assist the National Health Ministry to
improve the current hospital management approach and create a framework for regulating
the hospital network decentralized system effectively. The findings will support policy
decisions in the context of the National Plan proposed by the MSN to construct primary
health care and hospitals and to strengthen hospital networks management for improving
health services access to the poorest and most vulnerable groups, strengthening the
efficiency and increasing the quality of care in public hospitals.
47.
“Healthy Schools”. The client has expressed its interest in having a proposal
from the Bank in the area of “healthy schools,” which could be supported under a health
sector support operation. Organizations such as UNESCO, UNICEF, WHO and the
World Bank partnered to develop the FRESH (Focus Resources on Effective School
Health) framework, an approach for effective implementation of health and nutrition
services within school health programs. Building upon the FRESH framework the Bank
is ready to support the MOH in identifying a system specifically designed for
Argentinean schools to identify and certify effective Healthy Schools.
48.
Universal coverage of 5-year old children and retention of teenagers are two
key elements of the Government’s strategy for strengthening the education system. The
Bank’s program targets exclusion from educational attainment, which is highest among
children and teenagers of the poorest families. Although attendance to primary school is
similar among all income groups, there are large differences in attendance to pre-primary
school and even larger ones in the attendance of the higher levels of secondary education.
The latest education legislation is improving the financing of the education sector to 6%
of GDP by 2010. The sector needs support to improve educational attainment and
retention rates in secondary education in poorer school districts. The Bank’s involvement
in subnational education systems over many years gives it a comparative advantage to
improve quality of education and management of the education system. The Bank's
emphasis on provincial education can best be seen through an ongoing US$150 million
rural education project that will provide support until October 2011.
49.
Higher Education AAA. The Government is committed to improve the
competitiveness of the economy through innovation. Argentina’s universities produce
some outstanding research but mostly cater to three traditional studies. Law, business
and economics, and medicine provide 44% of university graduates living in the country.
To help shape the discussion of reform options the proposed study will evaluate the
contribution of knowledge institutions to economic growth and in particular how
universities contribute to the dynamism of the local private sector. It will identify options
for the use of local knowledge institutions to promote local economic development.

Annex 6
Page 12 of 12

Pillar 3: Governance
•

Objective:
Strengthen the effectiveness, efficiency, transparency and
accountability of public sector management

50.
Building on the Government’s objective, the proposed CPS will build on the ongoing engagement on public sector management strengthening by deepening engagement
on existing loans and responding to new requests through support to additional
operational and analytical work. The ongoing State and Subnational modernization
projects are complemented by the Institutional Strengthening of the National Social
Security Administration Project and the Social and Fiscal National Identification System
(SINTyS) second-phase APL. In addition, a study of provincial finances will be
undertaken to review provincial performance under the Federal Fiscal Responsibility
Regime and identify options to support provincial fiscal sustainability within the existing
inter-governmental fiscal system.
•

Objective: Expand performance management and improve the quality of public
expenditure and enhance service delivery outcomes and trust in institutions

51.
The Bank program will concentrate on strengthening public expenditure
management tools, including an increased focus on performance-management and
budgeting. The program also emphasizes support to cross-cutting public sector
management areas across the federal administration, such as human resource
management, e-government, procurement, quality management, and M&E through the
ongoing State Modernization II loan. Specific organizational reform issues will be
addressed through the Institutional Strengthening loan of ANSES, the National Social
Security Administration and specific e-government tools will be promoted through the
second phase of the National Social and Fiscal Identification System Project. At the
subnational level, the program will focus on a variety of public sector management areas
at the provincial levels, such as performance-management and –budgeting, human
resource management, tax administration, e-government and strategic planning. This will
be supported by the on-going Subnational Governments Modernization Project. In
addition, Fee-for Services products will be carried out in a number of subnational
governments, starting with the on-going FFS in the province of Corrientes.
52.
Foundations for Performance-Informed Budgeting Project. This operation
will focus on public expenditure management, performance-management and budgeting.
Performance informed budgeting as a critical public sector reform aimed at improving the
whole public investment cycle has been identified as a longer term focus of Bank
interventions both at the national and provincial level.

Annex 7
Page 1 of 5

IFC Program Summary
1.
IFC’s strategy in Argentina is designed to support the growth of export-oriented
sectors and a select group of financial institutions, in order to create jobs and meet the
needs of low-income populations, particularly those in frontier regions. The overarching
strategy is to proceed cautiously, with sponsors in strong industries that have an
established record of sound, profit-oriented, and therefore sustainable management. This
means that IFC will tend to concentrate its activities on existing clients in both corporate
and financial sectors.
2.
Argentina’s private sector recovered strongly from the crisis of 2001-2002.
Companies did so first by reutilizing idle capacity and then by financing investments
from cashflow as their domestic and export markets grew strongly. However, they have
continued to face difficulties in raising long-term financing for investments. This problem
is likely to become more acute as the global financial crisis deepens. IFC will deploy
existing and new financial structures to support viable companies during this period of
uncertainty.
3.
IFC will work to provide medium- and long-term financing for select companies.
It will also work with its banking partners in Argentina to help meet the liquidity and
working capital needs of small companies and farms through trade finance and dedicated
MSME lines. The Corporation will concentrate its attention on those MSMEs,
companies, and banks that focus on underserved groups and frontier regions.
4.
Argentina represents IFC’s second-largest exposure in the region and IFC’s
seventh-largest country exposure by committed portfolio. It constitutes 12% of IFC's
committed portfolio in the Latin American and Caribbean region. IFC’s exposure to
Argentina peaked in 2000 and fell by half through 2005. Nonetheless, IFC remained
active in Argentina during this period. It worked closely to support those clients which
demonstrated underlying competitive strengths and helped clients restructure their
liabilities. Private sector demand for fresh IFC financing declined in the post-crisis period
as companies rebuilt their balance sheets and financed expansion mainly from their own
resources.
5.
By 2004-2005, companies began to seek additional financing. However, the local
banking system and capital markets were not able to fully meet private sector
requirements. Normally, companies would access global markets that typically offer
longer-term financing at lower costs than is available in the local markets. However,
access to international financial markets by Argentine banks and corporates narrowed
considerably in the post-crisis years (see Figure 1).

Annex 7
Page 2 of 5
Figure 1: Access to international financial markets narrows
Private sector external indebtedness - % of GDP
70%
60%
50%
40%

Non-financial sector
borrow ers

30%

Financial sector
borrow ers

20%
10%
0%
2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

Source: Ministry of Production

6.
IFC’s role in supporting Argentina’s private sector has grown in importance as a
result of this pattern. Our exposure to Argentina has climbed since 2005 to reach a
forecast US$860 million in FY 2009 (see Figure 2).
Figure 2: Argentina - Outstanding IFC Balance - $ million

7.
Argentina was able to sustain a strong recovery in investment levels. Gross fixed
capital formation as a percentage of GDP rose steeply and leveled out in 2006-2008 at its
highest level in over 25 years (see Figure 3). It is IFC’s objective to continue supporting
companies’ investment programs whenever this is feasible in risk and market terms, and
is aligned with our strategy to reach underserved low-income populations, frontier
regions, and industries with strong job-creation capacity.

Annex 7
Page 3 of 5
Figure 3: Investment rebounds

Source: World Bank, EIU

8.
The Corporation’s investments since 2007 (see Figure 4) have focused on
financial institutions, (with a heavy emphasis on trade finance), extractive industries, and
agribusiness. These investments have provided a good balance between risk management
objectives and financial returns.
Figure 4: IFC Commitments - Argentina 2007-2009
Sector
Global Financial Markets Group
Oil, Gas, Mining And Chemicals
Global Manufacturing & Services
Agribusiness
Infrastructure
Private Equity and Investment
Funds
TOTAL

Commitments (US$
million)
408.8
187
70
60
35
10
770.8

9.
IFC’s largest exposure in Argentina by sector is to the financial services
industry, where IFC has established partnerships with six foreign- and locally-owned
banks. Trade finance lines accounted for nearly all of IFC’s committed portfolio to
Argentine banks of almost US$409 million in 2007-2008. Trade finance has become a
lifeline for Argentine companies, particularly after the collapse of US banks in late 2008
that had provided liquidity to this market.
10.
Argentina has a large agribusiness sector and a significant oil and gas industry.
IFC finances export-oriented companies in both these sectors. Internationally-traded
commodities such as soy, wheat, and oil, are priced in dollars and are produced almost
entirely for export. This enables IFC to provide competitive financing for these
companies. Agribusiness and oil and gas producers withstood the 2001-2002 crisis well

Annex 7
Page 4 of 5

and have proven resilient to recent declines in international commodity prices due to their
efficiency.
11.
IFC’s exposure to Argentina’s oil and gas industry is about US$335 million,
with an additional US$510 million in B loans disbursed and outstanding. The portfolio
comprises six oil and gas projects. IFC clients in this industry are fully funded for the
foreseeable future, either through internal cash generation or through existing debt
facilities. The main risk to these companies’ future cash generation would be through a
severe and continued reduction in oil prices, or further Government intervention. These
risks are limited since the Government has capped domestic producer prices at US$42 per
barrel—now above market levels.
12.
IFC’s agribusiness portfolio in Argentina is mainly composed of exportoriented companies, which demonstrated their resilience during the 2001-2002 crisis and
grew steadily during the global commodity price boom. IFC has supported the
transformation of Argentina’s oilseeds complex into one of the most competitive in the
world by financing four major players in the industry. IFC has partnered with locallyowned companies with South-South expansion plans. IFC has also reached medium-sized
agribusiness companies through specialized funds.
13.
Given its great competitiveness, IFC expects Argentina’s agribusiness sector to
sustain its operations even in volatile market conditions. However, companies may be
constrained by working capital limitations. IFC’s trade finance lines can help clients
manage their liquidity and short term financing requirements more effectively during the
global financial crisis. IFC will also support established agroindustrial exporters to
enhance the competitiveness of Argentina’s food supply chains. The Corporation will
provide technical and financial support to farmers and agricultural MSMEs on a
sustainable basis. The Corporation has successfully worked through local banks to offer
secured lending to marginal farms in remote regions that have traditionally struggled to
access the financial system.
IFC’s Role In Supporting Argentina’s Small Companies
14.
Micro, small, and medium-sized enterprises (MSMEs) employ about 11 million
people, over half Argentina’s work force. MSMEs are typically under-capitalized, which
leaves them vulnerable to shifts in economic and market conditions. IFC aims to increase
its support for viable companies, allowing them to maintain employment levels during
the current crisis and position them for growth as the economy recovers.

Annex 7
Page 5 of 5
Figure 5: Employment and employers – Q1 2005
Em ploym ent and em ployers - Q1 2005
100%

3%

80%

45%

43%
Large companies

60%

Small companies
40%

Micro companies

47%

54%

20%
8%

0%

Employment

Number of
companies

Source: Ministry of Production

15.
Argentine MSMEs rely on short-term financing, usually cashflow and bank
overdraft facilities, to finance their operations. As a result, these companies are among
the first to reduce output and lay off workers when economic activity weakens. IFC
intends to support competitive MSMEs and small farms with longer-term financing at
more affordable rates provided through the banking system and microfinance partners.
This would enable viable companies suffering liquidity problems to remain in operation
and maintain employment levels.
Job creation by em ployers - Q1 2005

Jobs lost

24%

51%

25%

Large companies
Jobs created

Small companies

24%

47%

28%

Micro companies

Net change
0%

20%

24%

45%

31%
40%

60%

80%

100%

Source: Ministry of Production

16.
IFC reaches small companies through its microfinance, trade finance, and
dedicated SME lines provided through partner banks in Argentina. IFC has also
established partnerships with banks to support small companies and farms in northern and
western frontier regions. This support will become increasingly important as conditions
in local and global credit markets continue deteriorating.

Annex 8
Page 1 of 2

Proposed GEF Program
The GEF provides financing for activities that achieve global environmental benefits. It is the
designated financial mechanism for the international conventions on biological diversity, climate
change, persistent organic pollutants, and desertification. It also collaborates closely with the
Montreal Protocol - the legal instrument to implement the objectives set out in the Vienna
Convention on Ozone Depleting Substances - and regional and international waters agreements.
The three main GEF implementing agencies in Argentina are the World Bank, UNDP, and
UNEP.
Current GEF program
The current World Bank GEF program in Argentina comprises six operations with total financing
of US$ 38.14 million. Operations span biodiversity, climate change and international waters. The
Bank's GEF strategy in Argentina is to blend GEF-financed activities with Bank loans, not only
to better leverage GEF resources but also to better mainstream global environmental concerns in
country programs. World Bank’s comparative advantage for implementing GEF projects is based
on the following:
-

-

Leveraging investments, particularly as part of co-financing with IBRD operations in the
area. The GEF helps develop, catalyze, and complement investment operations.
Leveraging dialogue based on areas of current engagement and technical expertise. The
GEF is often a new entry point for dialogue in key sectors, including energy and
transport.
Fostering new ideas and innovation, often with NGOs, the private sector, and others.

The last Bank program included GEF co-financing in rural development, transport and
environmental projects, including in the following:
-

Biodiversity Conservation in Productive Forestry Landscapes Project (US$7.0 million)
Energy Efficiency Project (US$15.1 million)
Sustainable Transport and Air Quality Project (US$3.9 million)
Decentralized Medium-Sized Grants Program (US$2.5 million)
Coastal Contamination Prevention and Marine Management Project (US$8.5 million)
Second National Communication to the Convention on Climate Change (US$1.14
million)

GEF potential in Argentina
Argentina is a large client country that not been engaged in GEF as much as other countries of its
size. Many areas have been addressed – from land degradation, protected areas (national parks)
and coastal areas to climate change priority-setting and renewable energy -- but potential remains
for program deepening in nearly all GEF thematic areas. Current Government priorities are in the
areas of climate change, biodiversity, land and fisheries management, and air and water quality.
Whereas biodiversity and climate change have been the dominant areas of World Bank GEF
programming over the past few years, there are additional opportunities in nearly all areas eligible
for GEF support. Currently the World Bank is implementing large-scale projects on biodiversity
(Biodiversity Conservation in Productive Forestry Landscapes), climate change and energy
(Energy Efficiency) and smaller-sized ones in multi-focal areas (Decentralized Medium-Sized
Grants Program). These large projects are typically a blend between GEF-funds and WB loans
while some only receive financing from the GEF.

Annex 8
Page 2 of 2

A crucial issue to consider is the evolution of the Resource Allocation Framework that the GEF
Council adopted in September 2005, which implies a maximum allocation for Argentina in the
areas of Climate Change (US$14.5 million) and Biodiversity (US$15.1 million) over 4 years
divided among all Implementing Agencies. The current administration has decided to take
maximum advantage of GEF. Although not all projects have thus far been endorsed by the GEF
Secretariat, Argentina has planned the use of 96% of its biodiversity allocation and 53% of its
climate change allocation. A challenge in the future will be the size and the assignment of a new
Resource Allocation Framework for biodiversity and climate change, to be replenished by the
GEF Council during FY10.
During the proposed CAS period, the Bank will continue its strategy of blending GEF activities
with Bank loans and will support stand-alone operations in those areas where there is a high
potential of sector transformation while addressing global environmental issues. As an example
of this approach, the Bank will work with Argentina to finance the incremental costs of
conservation in rural areas by means of a corridors strategy in Arid Patagonia and Chaco thereby
strengthening the Federal System of Protected Areas. The potential of renewable energies and
energy efficiency in rural services programs (PROSAP) will be explored, and a new grant to
prepare Argentina’s Third National Communication under the UNFCCC is expected help
mainstream climate change considerations in sector planning. In addition, the Bank’s financial
support for infrastructure, environment and rural development under the proposed CPS are
expected to open additional opportunities for GEF co-financing.

Annex 9
Page 1 of 2

CPS Consultations
During December of 2008, the CPS team carried out a series of seven thematic CAS
consultations in Argentina on the issues of: transportation and logistics, water and
sanitation, agriculture, environment, human development, federal-provincial relations and
public sector management
The consultations were designed with the objective to engage in in-depth exchanges with
key opinion leaders from specific areas. Each thematic consultation was led by the
respective World Bank Sector Leader with the participation of other Bank staff.
Participants were representatives of the national and provincial government, private
sector, academia and non-governmental organizations.
Even with the diversity of topics covered and the methodology used that allowed in depth
examination of each topic, there were common cross-cutting concerns expressed:
•
•
•
•

The need to support with capacity building for public officials at the local and
national level.
The need to identify strategic plans by sectors and the support the Bank could
bring to do so.
The opportunity to work at the provincial and municipal levels and not just at the
national one. In relation to this, participants mentioned the need for the Bank to
invest in capacity building at these levels if there is a decision to work with them.
Participants expressed an overall appreciation of the work done with the Bank yet
they mentioned that Bank’s rules could be more flexible to improve the execution
of projects.

More specifically in the session on public sector management there were
recommendations that Argentina could develop a map of existing initiatives in public
sector management both at the national and provincial level in order to identify
inequalities and focus on the weaker regions. Other participants mentioned the
possibility of reinforcing results-based management initiatives in the areas of health,
education and social policies. The need to develop a medium term strategic framework
to promote results-based management was agreed among all participants as well as the
need to strengthen the professionalization of public officials in order to be able to
implement results based management, especially at the provincial and municipal level.
In the session on the environment, issues covered ranged from the need to enhance the
use of Clean Development Mechanisms to the need to promote the institutional
strengthening of the Secretary of Environment both at the national and local government
level. In terms of institutional strengthening participants also mention the need to do it for
non-governmental organizations. In relation to the experience of working with the Bank,
Government representatives highlighted that the experience has been very positive,
especially in the forestry sector and biodiversity conservation. A common concern
expressed by the participants, was the need to enhance training of public officials in
topics such as environmental impact evaluation or territorial development. Another
important concern raised during the consultation was the need to strengthen capacity

Annex 9
Page 2 of 2

building at the provincial level since in Argentina 80% of the natural resources are
protected areas depending from the provinces.
In terms of the human development agenda, the issue of institutional strengthening at
the provincial level was one of the main comments received. In terms of the education
agenda, the main issue to solve is the quality of education and the integration between the
national and provincial systems of education. In this regard, ideas to strengthen the
monitoring role of the national Government were expressed. In terms of the health
agenda, ideas to strengthen the formation of nurses and to implement a national health
program at the school level were mentioned, as well as the need to strengthen hospital
infrastructure. In terms of the social agenda, the need to open social programs such as
Heads of Households or other existing programs was presented.
During the session on water and sewerage the main discussion was around the issue of
tariffs in relation to water in Argentina, the need to cover with the tariff the operating
costs of the service and how to expand access to rural areas. Another key topic mentioned
by the participants was the need to have a strategic plan to identify priorities and the idea
of creating an institute to regulate the sector at the national level like the one that exists in
Brazil or Colombia.
At the consultation on agriculture the main concerns expressed by participants were the
recuperation of the grain market and how prices are determined at it; issues of access to
land, land distribution and taxing of land, infrastructure development at the rural level;
the impact of taxes in the development of the sector; rural poverty and how to diminish it;
The Bank also held a specific session on national-provincial relations in which
participants representing provinces in which the Bank has projects and Government
officials executing projects from the national Government at the provincial level
highlighted the significant support in terms of resources and technical contributions these
projects represents. Some participants proposed to focus investments in the north east and
north west, the poorest regions of the country. Others proposed to focus investment at the
municipal level rather than the provincial one to maximize implementation of them.
The session on transport was very effective to identify possible bottle necks to improve
the sector. Discussions range from the need to invest in a stronger railway system in
which most participants agreed, to whether to develop the Atlantic or the Pacific Rim, or
to re design the net of roads and expand coverage of provincial roads. In general,
participants expressed support to the CREMA model in which contracts are allocated to
maintain and recuperate a road for 5 years.

Annex A2
Page 1 of 2

POVERTY and SOCIAL
Argentina
2007
Population, mid-year (millions)
GNI per capita (Atlas method, US$)
GNI (Atlas method, US$ billions)

Latin
America
& Carib.

Upper-

-

income

39.5
6,050
238.9

Life expectancy

Average annual growth, 2001-07
Population (%)
Labor force (%)

1.0
2.3

Gross
primary
enrollment

capita

Most recent estimate (latest year available, 2001-07)
Poverty (% of population below national poverty line)
Urban population (% of total population)
Life expectancy at birth (years)
Infant mortality (per 1,000 live births)
Child malnutrition (% of children under 5)
Access to an improved water source (% of population)
Literacy (% of population age 15+)
Gross primary enrollment (% of school-age population)
Male
Female

92
75
14
2
96
97
112
113
112

Access to improved water source

Argentina
Upper-middle-income group

-

KEY ECONOMIC RATIOS and LONG-TERM TRENDS

GDP (US$ billions)
Gross capital formationlGDP
Exports of goods and serviceslGDP
Gross domestic savingslGDP
Gross national savingslGDP

1987

1997

111.1
19.6
7.9
19.9

292.9
19.4
10.5
17.1
15.2

..

Current account balancelGDP
Interest paymentslGDP
Total debffGDP
Total debt servicelexports
Present value of debffGDP
Present value of debffexports

Economic ratios'

Trade

,

Domestic
savings

..

,

Capital
formation

200.8
Indebtedness

1987-97

1997-07

2006

4.1
2.7
8.6

1.9
0.9
5.2

8.5
7.4
7.4

1987

1997

75.4
4.7
7.6

70.8
12.1
12.8

(average annual growth)
GDP
GDP per capita
Exports of goods and services

8.7
7.6

Argentina
Upper-middle-income group

STRUCTURE of the ECONOMY
Ioo6
2007

Growth of capital and GDP ( X )

(% of GDP)
Agriculture
Industry
Manufacturing
Services
Household final con'sumption expenditure
General gov't final consumption expenditure
Imports of goods and services

(average annual growth)
Agriculture
lndustry
Manufacturing
Services
Household final consumption expenditure
General gov't final consumption expenditure
Gross capital formation
Imports of goods and services

58.6
12.4
19.2

..

1

-60

G

C

F

-GDP

Growth of exports and imports ( O h )

-75

1
E x p o r t s

-Imports

Note: 2007 data are preliminary estimates.
This table was produced from the Development Economics LDB database.

* The diamonds show four key indicators in the country (in bold) compared with its income-group average. If data are missing, the diamond will
be incomplete.

I

I

I

Annex A2
Page 2 of 2

Argentina
PRICES and GOVERNMENT FINANCE
Domestic prices
(% change)
Consumer prices
Implicit GDP deflator
Government finance
(% of GDP, includes current grants)
Current revenue
Current budget balance
Overall surplus/deficit

1987

1997

2006

2007

169.2
127.1

0.3
-0.5

9.8
13.5

8.6
14.1

Inflation (%)
50

30

10

0.0
0.0
0.0

18.4
-0.4
-1.5

24.2
4.3
1.8

..
..
1.6

1987

1997

2006

2007

8,934
744
655
3,661
5,820
..
653
973

26,431
3,007
1,025
8,335
30,450
..
970
13,259

46,569
2,964
1,610
14,801
34,159
..
1,729
14,384

52,238
..
..
..
43,700
..
..
..

83
104
80

114
112
102

123
108
114

..
..
..

1987

1997

2006

2007

02

-10

03

04

05

06

GDP deflator

07

CPI

TRADE
(US$ millions)
Total exports (fob)
Food
Meat
Manufactures
Total imports (cif)
Food
Fuel and energy
Capital goods
Export price index (2000=100)
Import price index (2000=100)
Terms of trade (2000=100)

Export and import levels (US$ mill.)
60,000

40,000

20,000

0
01

02

03

04

Exports

05

06

07

Imports

BALANCE of PAYMENTS
(US$ millions)
Exports of goods and services
Imports of goods and services
Resource balance

8,134
7,627
507

30,943
37,481
-6,538

54,058
41,121
12,937

..
..
..

Net income
Net current transfers

-4,738
..

-6,202
..

-5,456
..

..
..

Current account balance

-4,239

-12,224

7,997

6,246

Financing items (net)
Changes in net reserves

2,070
2,169

8,951
3,273

-11,527
3,530

..
..

1,617
2.10E-4

22,320
1.0

..
3.1

..
3.1

1987

1997

2006

2007

58,458
2,146
0

128,156
5,494
0

122,190
6,206
0

..
5,674
0

Current account balance to GDP (%)
10
8
6

Memo:
Reserves including gold (US$ millions)
Conversion rate (DEC, local/US$)

4
2
0
01

02

03

04

05

06

07

-2

EXTERNAL DEBT and RESOURCE FLOWS
(US$ millions)
Total debt outstanding and disbursed
IBRD
IDA

6,244
224
0

18,192
635
0

18,994
1,480
0

..
1,387
0

Composition of net resource flows
Official grants
Official creditors
Private creditors
Foreign direct investment (net inflows)
Portfolio equity (net inflows)

5
664
939
-19
0

37
-69
8,765
9,160
2,319

47
-761
2,515
4,840
662

..
..
..
..
..

World Bank program
Commitments
Disbursements
Principal repayments
Net flows
Interest payments
Net transfers

639
795
133
662
91
571

1,221
797
299
498
335
162

960
459
1,134
-675
346
-1,021

1,184
505
1,037
-532
350
-882

Total debt service
IBRD
IDA

Note: This table was produced from the Development Economics LDB database.

Composition of 2006 debt (US$ mill.)

6206
35039

8635
4959

67351

A - IBRD
B - IDA
C - IMF

D - Other multilateral

E - Bilateral
F - Private
G - Short-term

9/24/08

Annex B2
Page 1 of 1

CAS Annex B2 Selected Indicators* of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
As of Date 04/23/2009

Indicator
Portfolio Assessment
Number of Projects Under Implementation a
Average Implementation Period (years) b
Percent of Problem Projects by Number a, c
Percent of Problem Projects by Amount a, c
Percent of Projects at Risk by Number a, d
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount a, d
Disbursement Ratio (%) e
Portfolio Management
CPPR during the year (yes/no)
Supervision Resources (total US$)
Average Supervision (US$/project)

Memorandum Item
Proj Eval by OED by Number
Proj Eval by OED by Amt (US$ millions)
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Number
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt

a.
b.
c.
d.
e.

2006

2007

2008

2009

29
4.6
27.6
31.1
48.3
38.1
38.4

29
3.9
3.4
1.0
41.4
21.4
21.7

28
4.2
25.0
31.3
57.1
60.0
12.4

32
4.2
12.5
15.8
25.0
26.9
12.6

Yes
3521
98

Yes
2973
90

Yes
2642
98

Yes
1983
66

Since FY 80 Last Five FYs
106
25
17,844.7
3,578.8
26.5
16.0
35.2
8.2

As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY).
Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio.
Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) and/or implementation progress (IP).
As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the
beginning of the year: Investment projects only.
* All indicators are for projects active in the Portfolio, with the exception of Disbursement Ratio,
which includes all active projects as well as projects which exited during the fiscal year.

CAS Annex B3 - IBRD/IDA Program Summary

Annex B3
Page 1 of 2

Argentina

As of Date 04/23/2009

Proposed IBRD/IDA Base-Case Lending Program a
Fiscal
year

Proj ID

2009

AR Basic Protection Project

450.0

AR (APL1) Matanza-Riachuelo Basin Sustain. Develop.

840.0

2010

2011-12

Strategic
Rewards b
(H/M/L)

US$(M)

AR (AF-C) Buenos Aires Province Sustainable Infrastr.

50.0

AR Foundations for Performance-Informed Budgeting process

10.0 - 20.0

AR (AF) Cordoba Road Infrastructure

30.0- 60.0

AR Sustainable Industrial Development

40.0- 60.0

AR Metropolitan Areas Urban Transport Project

150.0

AR-(AF-C) Provincial Road Infrastructure

200.0

AR Rural Poverty

30.0- 50.0

AR San Juan Social Inclusion & Local Develop.

20.0- 50.0

AR (AF) Provincial Government Modernization

15.0

AR (AF) Essential Public Health Functions- FESP

90.0

AR Health Sector Governance Strengthening

4.5

AR Second Generation Road Safety Project

20.0

AR Basic Protection Project (Phase II)

550.0

AR Rosario Metropolitan Area Infrastructure

460.0

AR National Urban Dreinage Project

100.0

AR National Highway Asset Maintenance Project III

200.0

AR Provincial Roads II

100.0

AR Health Sector Support

200.0

AR Provincial Health

300.0

AR Communities Integrating Social Services

170.0

Implementation b
Risks (H/M/L)

H
H

L
H

M
H
M
H
H
M
H
H
H
H
H
H
H

L
M
L
M
M
M
H
M
M
M
M
L
L

H
M
M
M
H
H
L

H
M
M
M
M
M
H

a. This table presents the proposed program for the next three fiscal years.
b. For each project, indicate whether the strategic rewards and implementation risks are expected to be high (H), moderate
(M), or low (L).

Annex B3
Page 2 of 2

Annex B3
Argentina: IFC Investment Operations Program

Commitments (US$m)
Gross
Net**

Net Commitments by Sector (%)
EQUITY
GUARANTEE
LOAN
QUASI LOAN
RISK PRODUCT
Total

Net Commitments by Investment Instrument (%)
Equity
Guarantee
Loan
Quasi loan
Risk product
Total

* As of March 31, 2009
** IFC's Own Account only

2006

2007

2008

2009*

666.50
283.50

177.47
117.47

973.28
483.28

263.52
173.52

70.21
29.79

7.66
40.61
51.73

100

100

70.21
29.79

7.66
40.61
51.73

100

100

92.77
5.29
1.94
100

92.77
5.29
1.94
100

48.13
48.99
2.88
100

48.13
48.99
2.88
100

Annex B4
Page 1 of 1

CAS Annex B4 - Summary of Nonlending Services - Argentina
As of Date 04/23/2009

Product

Completion FY

1. Recent completions
ESW
Programmatic Poverty (Rural)
FY07
Infrastructure Finance
FY07
Country Financial Accountability AssesFY07
A&A ROSC
FY07
Social Inclusion (Youth)
FY07
Logistics and Transport Sector Compe FY07
Policy Notes
FY08
Programmatic Income Support (ESW) FY08
Programmatic Poverty (Informality)
FY08
Technical Assistance & External Training
Seminar of Exports and Growth
FY07
CFAA Follow-up NLTA
FY08
Ministry of Interior Strategic Planning PFY08
Pollution Mngt , EIs and Inst
FY08
2. Underway
CFAA Provincial Level
FY09
Analysis of impacts of export taxes
FY09
Corrientes Strategic Plan
FY09
IFMS Province of Buenos Aires
FY09
Prov. Performance Informed Budgettin FY09
Prov Econ Memo Buenos Aires
FY09
3. Planned
Employment Inequality
Provincial Fiscal Framework
Logistics II AAA
Prov Econ Memo Buenos Aires
Country Environmental Assessment
Accountability services delivery

FY10
FY10
FY10
FY10
FY10
FY10

____________
a. Government, donor, Bank, public dissemination.
b. Knowledge generation, public debate, problem-solving.

Cost (US$000)

168.8
301.3
195.2
164.7
239.1
159.9
157.3
634.2
90.5
120.0
164.2
1.6
12.8

170.9
80.0
200.0
125.0
150.0
182.6

130.0
100.0
170.0
182.6

Audience a

Objective b

Annex B6
Page 1 of 2

CAS Annex B6 - Key Economic Indicators
As of Date 04/23/2009

2008
2009
(Annual percentage changes, unless otherwise indicated)

2010

2011

National income and prices
GDP at constant prices
Domestic demand (contribution to growth)
Net exports (contribution to growth)
GDP deflator

7.0
6.9
-0.4
19.4

1.0
0.9
0.1
12.2

1.5
1.3
0.2
12.9

3.0
2.7
0.3
11.6

16.6
71.3

4.3
53.9

5.0
55.6

5.0
59.2

57.6
27.6
28.8

52.2
-24.5
-9.4
-10.2
-9.4
-15.9

53.2
3.3
2.0
2.6
2.0
0.6

57.0
6.4
7.1
5.0
4.0
-1.6

332
200
442
482
347
97

190
150
330
280
190
35

190
150
330
280
190
35

190
150
330
280
190
35

3.29
3.45
20.6
46.4
8.3

3.71
3.97
22.8
41.9
8.1

4.19
4.40
16.3
38.0
7.2

4.67
4.93
14.5
33.8
6.0

38.2

33.7

29.8

25.5

28.8
31.0
3.2
3.1
1.2
33.0
31.7

9.8
13.2
2.2
2.4
-0.1
31.9
32.0

12.0
11.4
2.3
2.6
0.5
31.2
30.7

13.7
13.0
2.4
2.8
0.5
30.9
30.3

External sector
Trade balance (billions of US$)
Exports, f.o.b. (billions of US$)
Of which: net exports of hydrocarbons
Imports, c.i.f. (billions of US$)
Export growth (in US$ terms)
Import growth (in US$ terms)
Export volume
Import volume
Terms of trade
Commodity prices
Wheat (USD/ton)
Corn (USD/ton)
Soy (USD/ton)
Sunflower (USD/ton)
Copper (USD/lb)
Oil (USD/barrel)
Exchange rate (pesos per U.S. $)
Period average
End of period
Real exchange rate (ratio of domestic to foreign prices, p
Gross international reserves
(In months of imports of goods and services)
Net international reserves

(In percent of GDP)
Consolidated public sector
Nominal revenues (yoy)
Nominal expenditures (yoy)
Primary fiscal balance
Federal government primary fiscal balance
Overall balance
Revenues
Expenditures
Total debt (end-of-year)
Of which: external debt

Annex B6
Page 2 of 2
2008

2009

2010

2011

71.6
58.3
13.3
24.1
20.6
3.4

74.3
60.8
13.5
25.2
21.2
4.0

73.6
60.5
13.1
25.6
21.5
4.1

73.3
60.4
12.9
25.9
22.0
3.9

24.1
3.4
26.6

25.2
4.0
24.3

25.6
4.1
25.3

25.9
3.9
25.5

Trade balance
Net foreign direct investment
Non financial private sector capital account

3.2
5.3
1.2
-3.6

-0.4
1.3
1.0
-0.9

0.2
1.6
0.9
-0.9

0.1
1.5
0.8
-0.9

Gross international reserves (billions of US$)
In months of imports of goods and services
Net international reserves (billions of US$)

46.4
9.7
40.0

41.9
8.1
36.0

38.0
7.2
31.3

33.8
6.0
26.9

13.3
10.3
18.0
3.2
15.2
33.6
11.4

9.3
9.0
9.0
3.3
14.7
10.2
-4.2

14.1
11.6
11.6
3.4
14.9
16.0
4.5

21.7
16.7
16.7
3.4
15.2
17.1
4.6

2.6
1.3
1036.2

-1.0
0.0
1174.2

1.0
1.0
1346.0

2.0
2.0
1547.4

GDP ‐ demand side
Consumption
Private
Public
Investment
Private
Public

Saving‐investment balance
Gross domestic investment
of which: public sector
Gross national saving
of which: public sector
Current account balance

Money and Credit
M0 yoy growth
M1 yoy growth
M3 yoy growth
M3 velocity (ratio of nominal GDP to end-period stock of

Credit to the private sector
Nominal growth of credit to private sector
Real growth of credit to private sector
International prices (average cpi of advanced economies
Real GDP growth in advanced economies
Nominal GDP (billions of pesos)

Annex B7
Page 1 of 1

Argentina - Key Exposure Indicators
Estimated
2008
2009

Projected
2011

Actual
2005
2006

2007

165043

133045

121292

101032

95120

91918

88836

86327

83760

-4184

-3019

-8018

3900

-9679

-4989

-4385

-3956

-4327

2362

3122

4173

4696

4283

2605

2551

2342

2164

(%)
TDO/XGSb

477.3

329.4

261.1

180.6

133.3

170.7

159.7

145.9

..

TDO/GDP

107.8

72.6

56.6

38.5

30.2

29.0

27.6

26.0

..

Indicator
Total debt outstanding and
disbursed (TDO) (US$m) a
Net disbursements (US$m) a
Total debt service (TDS)
(US$m)a

2004

2010

2012

Debt and debt service indicators

TDS/XGS

6.8

7.7

9.0

8.4

6.0

4.8

4.6

4.0

..

Concessional/TDO

0.8

0.9

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

IBRD DS/public DS

42.3

37.6

37.5

16.4

15.7

22.4

21.6

21.1

20.7

Preferred creditor DS/public
DS (%)c

78.5

68.2

80.5

40.9

37.3

47.8

48.1

50.1

52.1

3.1

3.0

3.2

2.5

1.7

1.7

1.5

1.3

..

IBRD exposure indicators (%)

IBRD DS/XGS
IBRD TDO (US$m) d

7447

6881

6206

5674

5069

4864

5036

5541

6089

Of which present value of
guarantees (US$m)

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

6.7

6.6

6.2

5.7

5.0

4.1

3.7

3.7

3.7

0

0

0

0

0

3

0

0

0

FY04

FY05

FY06

FY07

FY08

FY09*

582

463

557

578

764

769

-

-

-

79

65

55

50

61

61

-

-

-

0

0

0

0

0

0

Share of IBRD portfolio (%)
IDA TDO (US$m) d
IFC (US$m)
Loans
Equity and quasi-equity /c
*as end of Mid-March
MIGA
MIGA guarantees (US$m)

0

0

a. Includes public and publicly guaranteed debt, private nonguaranteed, use of IMF credits and net short-term capital
b. "XGS" denotes exports of goods and services, including workers' remittances.
c. Preferred creditors are defined as IBRD, IDA, the regional multilateral development banks, the IMF, and the
Bank for International Settlements.
d. Includes present value of guarantees.
e. Includes equity and quasi-equity types of equity instruments.

0

0.00

2,817.97

Total Undisbursed (Closed)

Total Undisbursed (Active + Closed)

S
S
S
MU
S
S
U
S
MS
S
S
S
MS
S
MU
MS
S
S
S
S
MU
MS
S
S
S
S
S
MS
S
S
S
MS
S
S

a. Intended disbursements to date minus actual disbursements to date as projected at appraisal.

AR APL2 Buenos Aires Infr S
AR (APL1)Urban Flood PrevS
AR (APL2) Prov Maternal-C S
AR (APL2)Urban Flood PrevMU
AR 2nd Prov Agric Dev
S
AR 2nd State ModernizationS
AR APL2 National Highway S
AR B.A.URB.TSP
S
AR Basic Municipal ServicesMS
AR Energy Efficiency ProjecS
AR GEF Biod.Conserv in Pr S
AR Inst. Strengthening - AN S
AR Lifelong Learning Projec MS
AR Mining Environmental ReS
AR National Highway Asset MS
AR PROV AG DEVT I
S
AR RENEW.ENERGY R.MKS
AR Rural Education ImproveS
AR SMALL FARMER DV. S
AR SOC&FISC NTL ID SYSS
AR Solid Waste Manageme MU
AR Subnational Gov Public S
AR Sustainable Natural Res S
AR Unleashing Productive InS
AR(CRL1)Buenos Aires InfraS
AR- SANTA FE ROAD Infra S
AR-Cordoba-Road InfrastrucS
AR-Essential Public Health FMS
AR-GEF Sustain. Transp. anS
AR-Heads of Household TraS
AR-Provincial Maternal-ChildS
AR-Provincial Road InfrastruMS
AR-RENEWABLE ENERGYS
MP/AR-REDUCTION OF OZS

P105288
P088220
P095515
P093491
P106684
P101170
P095569
P039584
P060484
P090119
P094425
P092836
P095514
P110462
P088153
P006010
P006043
P070963
P006041
P101171
P089926
P070448
P100806
P106752
P088032
P099051
P099585
P090993
P114008
P055483
P071025
P070628
P045048
P005920
Overall Result

Implementation
Progress
Fiscal Year

IBRD

2007
2005
2007
2006
2009
2007
2007
1997
2006
2008
2007
2006
2007
2009
2004
1997
1999
2006
1998
2009
2006
2006
2008
2009
2005
2007
2007
2007
2009
2006
2004
2005
1999
1997
4434.5

350
135.8
150

25
200
30
200
162
80
150
120
20
40
40
60
150
200
126.7
75
220

270
130
300
70
300
20
400
300
110

IDA

10
25
61.49

3.99

15.50
7

GRANT

Cancel.

Undisb.

19.97
20.56
108.18
6.12
2.79
2833.89

7.00
18.29
188.19
30.00
12.77
22.74
53.28
118.94
45.00
19.45
38.06
37.13
59.85
150.00
39.00
98.79
36.52
145.76

255.51
119.21
240.95
67.42
300.00
15.26
372.91
87.94
96.31

19.97
20.56
88.72
6.12
-1.12
782.40

0.05
24.46
27.30
-0.15
0.00
38.00
52.09
32.19
47.78

12.29
24.86
0.00
12.77
-14.26
3.28
70.37

6.09
-27.09
-12.06
38.01

45.18
110.44
89.15
67.42

4.35
-1.12
-2.05

50.09

-14.26
1.86
-30.91

-12.06

Orig. Frm Rev'd

Disbursements a/

Supervision Rating

Original Amount in US$ Millions

Expected and Actual

Difference Between

Annex B8
Page 1 of 2

Last PSR

As Of Date 04/23/2009

Development
Objectives

Project Name

Project ID

Active Projects

2,817.97

15,176.47

19,899.43

14,895.22

18,298.12

281.25

1,601.30

117

Total Undisbursed (Active)

of which has been repaid

Total Disbursed (Active + Closed)

of which has been repaid

Total Disbursed (Closed)

of which has been repaid

Total Disbursed (Active)

IBRD/IDA *

Closed Projects

Operations Portfolio (IBRD/IDA and Grants)

CAS Annex B8 - Argentina

Annex B8
Page 2 of 2
B8 (IFC) for Argentina
Argentina
Committed and Disbursed Outstanding Investment Portfolio
As of 03/31/2009
(In USD Millions)

Committed

FY Approval

Company

2004
2006/08
2000
1998
2000/06
05/08/1999
2006
2009
2009
0
1998
1992
2004
0/97
1996/99
2006
2005/08
2008
1998
2008
2005
1995
1997
2000
1995
2007
2001
2005

Aceitera general
Arcor
Asf
Autcl
Bacs
Banco galicia
Capsa
Cencosud arg
F.v. s.a.
Grupo galicia
Hospital privado
Huantraico
Jumbo argentina
Milkaut
Neuquen basin
Noble argentina
Pae - argentine
Pampa fund
Patagonia fund
Roch
S.a. san miguel
Sancor
T6i
Tower fund
Tower fund mgr
Trp project
Usal
Vicentin
Total Portfolio:

Disbursed Outstanding

Loan

Equity

**Quasi
Equity

31.25
103.85
0.73
5.02
13.1
81.63
50
50
15
0
0
0
0
5.33
0
12
222.23
0
0
20
19.21
8.52
0
0
0
29.82
3.34
16.67

0
0
0
0
6.25
0
0
0
0
1.25
0
27
34.94
1.23
31.4
0
0
20
0.1
17.36
0
0
0
0.85
0.05
0
0
0

15
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
5
0
8.1
0
0
9.44
0
0
15
0
0
0
0
19.48
5
0
0
0
0
15

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
12.98
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

7.5
197.6
0.75
0
0
14.28
20
90
0
0
0
0
0
1.44
0
19
478.75
0
0
0
7.5
0
0
0
0
8.09
0
33.48

31.25
103.85
0.73
5.02
13.1
79.13
50
50
0
0
0
0
0
5.33
0
12
222.23
0
0
7.25
19.21
8.52
0
0
0
29.82
3.34
16.67

0
0
0
0
6.25
0
0
0
0
1.25
0
0
34.94
0
0
0
0
4.27
0
10.36
0
0
0
0
0.05
0
0
0

15
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
5
0
8.1
0
0
9.44
0
0
15
0
0
0
0
19.48
5
0
0
0
0
15

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
11
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

7.5
197.6
0.75
0
0
14.28
20
90
0
0
0
0
0
1.44
0
19
478.75
0
0
0
7.5
0
0
0
0
8.09
0
33.48

687.7

140.43

92.02

12.98

878.39

657.45

57.12

92.02

11

878.39

* Denotes Guarantee and Risk Management Products.
** Quasi Equity includes both loan and equity types.

*GT/RM

Partici
pant

Loan

Equity

**Quasi
Equity

*GT/RM

Partici
pant

IBRD 33362R

BOLIVIA To Tarija

70°W

60°W

J UJ
U J UY
UY
To
Calama

Pil

co

yo

s
d

SANTIAGO

CATAMARCA

Santiago Del Estero

Resistencia

n

DEL ESTERO

RIOJA

Cordoba

San Juan

Santa Fe

CORDOBA
CO

Desa

Cerro
Aconcagua
(6960 m)
Mendoza

guadero

Rosario

San Luis

To
Artigas

URUGUAY

To
Montevideo

BUENOS AIRES
La Plata

p
Salado

Colo

500 Kilometers

400

200

300 Miles

Mar del Plata

Bahía Blanca
gr
o

Viedma

40°S
C

CHUBUT

ARGENTINA

AT LA NT IC
O CEA N

Rawson

hic
o

t a g o
n i
a

C H ILE

100

300

Ne

To
Coihaique

200

EGRO
R I O N EGR

t
bu
hu

e s
A n d

To
Puerto Montt

0

100

NEUQUEN
Neuquén

40°S

0

BUENOS
AIRES

Santa Rosa

LA
PA M PA

rado

To
Los Ángeles

P a
m

To
Talca

30°S

To
Tacuarembó

ENTRE
RÍOS

s

SAN
LUIS

ENDOZA
M EN

BRAZIL

To
Santa Maria

Paraná

a

To
Valparaíso

á

S A N TA
FE

Laguna
Mar Chiquita

Pa
ra
ná

A

LA

ES

ON

SI
MI

y
ua
ug
Ur
To
Santa Rosa

La Rioja

SAN
JUAN

PACIFIC
OCEAN

Posadas
Corrientes

CORRIENTES

Catamarca

30°S

ua
y

Formosa

San Miguel De Tucumán

To
Copiapó

To
Cascavel
Paran

TUCUMÁN

CHACO

Pa
rag

e

o
Salad

C H ILE

To
La Serena

To
San Pedro

FORMOSA

Salta

S A L TA

PA RA GUAY

ma

San Salvador De Jujuy

50°W

C

Comodoro Rivadavia

Deseado

S A N TA
CRUZ

A R GE N TI NA

ca

FALKLAND ISLANDS (ISLAS MALVINAS)

P

a

Ch
i

A DISPUTE CONCERNING SOVEREIGNTY OVER THE
ISLANDS EXISTS BETWEEN ARGENTINA WHICH CLAIMS
THIS SOVEREIGNTY AND THE U.K. WHICH ADMINISTERS
THE ISLANDS.

50°S

50°S

SELECTED CITIES AND TOWNS
PROVINCE CAPITALS

Río Gallegos
Stanley

NATIONAL CAPITAL
RIVERS

TIERRA
DEL FUEGO
Ushuaia

80°W

70°W

MAIN ROADS
This map was produced by the Map Design Unit of The World Bank.
The boundaries, colors, denominations and any other information
shown on this map do not imply, on the part of The World Bank
Group, any judgment on the legal status of any territory, or any
endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.

60°W

RAILROADS
PROVINCE BOUNDARIES
INTERNATIONAL BOUNDARIES

50°W
AUGUST 2008

ARGENTINA
ADDENDUM TO THE PROPOSED COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY
The purpose of this note is to update Executive Directors on most recent economic
developments in Argentina, to be considered together with the Country Partnership
Strategy (CPS) that is scheduled for Board consideration on June 9,2009'.
While economic forecasts are subject to high uncertainty in Argentina, the economic
slowdown has led to a downward revision in the real GDP growth forecast for 2009.
The consensus forecast for Argentina's real GDP growth in 2009 has widened, now
ranging from 1.7 to -5.8 percent (note that the dispersion in consensus forecasts is
significantly wider for Argentina than for other countries in the world, as shown in the
graph below). Nevertheless, most analysts have revised Argentina's growth projections
downward, reflecting the economic contraction since the last quarter of 2008. The
economic deceleration results from weak demand in Argentina's main export markets as
well as adverse domestic demand and supply factors, including a severe drought. Ensuing
imports decline has been deeper than projected at the beginning of the year. Given these
developments, we have revised downwards Argentina's real GDP growth forecast for
2009 (from 1 percent in March 2009 to a lower range, between 0 and -1.5 percent, as of
May, 2009). Official economic indicators are more positive, and Government officials
still expect positive real GDP growth in 2009.

Consensus Forecasts GDP Growth in 2009
6

-

USA

-ARG

--

LAC

I

The slowdown in economic activity results from supply and demand factors.
According to private estimates2 the economy contracted at an average rate of 4 percent
(yoy) for six consecutive months (November 2008 through April 2009). The economic
deceleration reflects both demand and supply factors:

' Cut-off date for the update is May 4,2009
Source: Index of economic activity estimated by OJ Ferreres & Asociados. A similar pattern is observed in the IPI (index of
industrial production estimated by FIEL).

On the demand side, the slowdown reflects weakness in both external and
domestic markets. On the external side, exports fell by 27.2 percent in the first
quarter of 2009 (yoy). On the domestic front, with the exception of public
consumption, all other domestic demand aggregates (private consumption, private
investment) have contracted since the last quarter of 2008. With regards to net
exports, while they fell in the last quarter of 2008, the sharp contraction in imports
results in a positive contribution to growth in the first quarter of 2009.~
On the supply side, the slowdown is generalized across all sectors. In March,
overall economic activity fell by 2.4 percent (yoy)4. Industrial production dropped
by 12 percent (yoy) while the fall in the automobile sector reached 55 percent5.
There are also signs of deceleration in construction and other services (retail
trade). Agricultural production is expected to drop by around 27 percent6, due to
the most severe drought in the last fifty years, depressed domestic and especially
external demand, and continued concerns in the farm sector about the level of
export taxes and other regulations.
The combined impact of the global and domestic economic slowdown on external
balances is positive. The trade and current accounts are likely to deteriorate less than
expected. Whereas the dollar value of exports dropped about 24 percent (yoy) in
February, 2009, imports fell about 37 percent (yoy). These developments result in an
improved trade and current account position compared to our earlier forecasts.
Nevertheless, the current account surplus is expected to be lower, between 0 and 1.1
percent of GDP, compared to the previous year (3.2 percent of GDP in 2008).
In contrast, the fiscal accounts are likely to deteriorate. The lower levels of activity,
the drought and the smaller demand for Argentinean exports will affect tax revenue
collection and overall fiscal accounts. In March 2009, government revenues from export
and import taxes fell sharply (by 13 percent and 16 percent, respectively) while income
taxes, and in particular VAT revenues increased (3 percent and 9.5 percent respectively).
Nevertheless, the Federal Government maintained a primary fiscal surplus during the first
quarter of the year (of about 1.7 percent of GDP) thanks to the additional social security
contributions following the nationalization of the private pension funds. As a result, the
2009 overall fiscal balance is expected to close with a slight deficit of -0.4 percent of
GDP. The revised fiscal projections also take into account recent developments in the
exchange rate (see below) and in the fiscal position of provincial governments. In
particular, we have accounted for the measure announced by President Cristina
Fernandez on March 19, 2009 (about 30 percent of soybeans export tax revenues would
be subject to revenue sharing with provincial governments). While this measure might
result in a slight improvement in the fiscal position of provincial governments, the

'According to official data (Indec), in the first quarter of 2009 exports quantities fell by 13.0 percent (yoy), whereas imports quantities
contracted at 32.5 percent (yoy).
Source: OJ Ferrers &Associados
Source: FlEL
6The harvest area for soy and other commodities has declined according to official data and private analysts. Available data from the
Secretary of Agriculture points to a decline of about 26.8 percent (yoy) in the harvest area for wheat.

provincial primary fiscal balance is expected to remain in deficit in 2009 (-0.2 percent of
GDP).

In spite of recent depreciation pressures, the Central Bank continues to maintain
exchange rate stability. Following continued market uncertainty, and the announcement
of early elections, pressure on the peso has been rising in recent months. Argentina's
Central Bank, which still enjoys a comfortable reserve stock position, intervened in the
foreign exchange market during March to maintain exchange rate stability. The exchange
rate is currently at AR$ 3.71/US$ (about 7 percent higher than as of the end of 2008).
Futures contracts (for operations dated on May 4, 2009) suggest that the exchange rate
might reach levels slightly above AR$4NS$ by end 2009.
Despite this higher volatility, financial markets are stabilizing. Financial market
volatility increased during the month of March, on account of growing demand for hard
currencies and reduced supply from exporters. But the domestic financial conditions
improved in April, supported by external factors (improved global market sentiment
following the G20 meetings and an increase in soybean prices) and domestic events
(strong Central Bank intervention in the foreign exchange markets and increased forex
sales by soybean exporters). Higher volatility led to a slight increase in short-term interest
rates in March (by about 75bps), but since then interest rates have remained broadly
stable, since commercial banks have accumulated strong liquidity positions.
The combined result of these developments points to a moderate shift in the relative
weight of economic risks identified in the CPS. While the CPS underscored balance of
payment risks over fiscal risks, the main vulnerability now seems to lie on the fiscal
front. With low economic growth and collapsing imports, the consolidated primary fiscal
surplus will be lower than expected, at a time when public financing requirements are
high and financial conditions are tight. To offset the fiscal risk, growth in primary
expenditures (in the first quarter it reached 28 percent yoy) could be reversed during the
second half of the year as the government attempts to preserve its primary surplus target.
In this context, parliamentary elections (scheduled for June 28, 2009) contribute to
increased uncertainty as the outcome of these elections might eventually lead to a change
in policies.
Our updated CPS baseline macro projections for 2009 are summarized below:
Growth and inflation. In view of the deteriorating global and domestic economic
situation, we have adjusted our previous baseline scenario, correcting the outlook for
real GDP growth in 2009 from +1 percent to a lower range (between 0 percent and 1.5 percent).
Fiscal accounts. The primary fiscal surplus of the central government is estimated to
decline from 3.1 percent of GDP in 2008 to 2.1 percent (if the economy contracts by
1 percent) or to 2.2 percent (in the case of 0 percent growth).

Financing gap. Gross public sector7 financing needs are estimated at US$16.3 billion
in 2008 and are projected at US$15.6 billion and US$13.0 billion in 2009 and 2010,
respectively. The net financing gap of the Federal Government is projected at about
US$3.9 billion in 2009 and US$0.6 billion in 2010, after taking into account the
additional resources from the nationalized social security contribution^.^
External accounts. Compared to 2008 (3.2 percent of GDP), the current account
balance is expected to deteriorate, but will remain positive in 2009 and 2010. In 2008,
this surplus is estimated at 3.2 percent of GDP (2.9 percent in 2007). In 2009, if the
economy contracts by 1 percent, the current account surplus is projected at 1.1
percent of GDP, whereas in the case of zero growth the current account would reach
0.7 percent of GDP.

Monetaly accounts. Money growth is expected to slow, reflecting weaker domestic
demand. In 2009 the monetary base is expected to increase by 7-8 percent in nominal
terms,9 after growing at 10.2 percent in 2008.
The table below presents a summary of the medium-term macroeconomic framework,
under a baseline operational assumption of real GDP growth of -1 percent in 2009.

' Including the Federal and Provincial Governments.
The figures of the financing gap correspond to the scenario with -1 percent growth. In the case of zero growth, the financing gap is
projected to reach US$3.7 billion in 2009 and US$0.4 billion in 2010. This number does not take into account expected gross
disbursements of some US$I -1 .S billion by IFIs in 2009.
7.2 percent if the economy contracts at 1 percent, and 8.4 percent in the zero-percent growth scenario.

Table 1. Argentina: Selected Economic and Financial Indicators

2008
2009
(Annual percentage changes, unless otherwise indicated)
National income and prices
GDP at constant prices
GDP deflator
External sector
Trade balance (billions of US$)
Exports, f.0.b. (billions of US$)
Imports, c.i.f. (billions of US$)
Export growth (in US$ terms)
Import growth (in US$ terms)
Export volume
Import volume
Terms of trade
Commodity prices
Wheat (USDJton)
Corn (USDJton)
Soy (USDIton)
Sunflower (USDIton)
Copper (USDIlb)
Oil (USDIbarrel)
(In percent of GDP)
Consolidated public sector
Nominal revenues (yoy)
Nominal expenditures (yoy)
Primary fiscal balance
Federal gove;nment primary fiscal balance
Overall balance
Revenues
Expenditures

-

GDP demand side
Consumption
Private
Public
Investment
Private
Public

Saving-investment balance
Gross domestic investment
of which: public sector
Gross national saving
Current account balance
Trade balance
Net foreign direct investment
Non financial private sector capital account
Gross international reserves (billions of US$)
In months of imports of goods and services
Net international reserves (billions of US$)
Money and Credit
MO yoy growth
M l yoy growth
M3 yoy growth
M3 velocity (ratio of nominal GDP t o end-period stock of M3)
Credit to the private sector
Nominal growth of credit to private sector
International prices (average cpi of advanced economies)
Real GDP growth in advanced economies
Nominal GDP (billions of pesos)

2010

2011

