Public Disclosure Authorized

Document o f
The World Bank
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Report No: 47562-YE

Public Disclosure Authorized

INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION
AND
INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION

COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
FOR

Public Disclosure Authorized

Public Disclosure Authorized

THE REPUBLIC OF YEMEN
FOR THE PERIOD FY 2010-2013

April 29,2009

Yemen Country Management Unit
Middle East and North Africa Region
This document has restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in t h e
performance o f their official duties. Its contents may not be disclosed without
World Bank authorization.

The Date o f Last CAS for Yemen (Report no. 36014 YE) was May 17,2006

CURRENCY EQUIVALENT
(Exchange Rate Effective January 28,2009)
Currency Unit = Yemeni Rial (YR)
U S $ l = 200.75
Fiscal Year

January 1 -December 31
ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS
AAA
AFMIS
AHA
APL
AS
CAS
CAS
CR
CASPR
CG
CGAC
COCA
CPIA

cso
DFID
DPG
DPPR
DSA
EITI
EU
FDI
FIAS
GCC
GDP
GEF
GFRP
GST
GTZ

Analytical and Advisory Activities
Accounting and Financial Management
Information System
Aid Harmonization and Alignment Unit
Adaptable Program Loan
Advisory Services
Country Assistance Strategy
Country Assistance Strategy
Completion Report
Country Assistance Strategy Progress
Report
Consultative Group
Country Governance and Anticorruption
Central Organizationfor Control and
Audit
Country Policy and Institutional
Assessment
Civil Service Organization
Department for International
Development (UK)
Development Policy Grant
Development Plan for Poverty
Reduction
Debt SustainabilityAnalysis
Extractive Industries Transparency
Initiative
European Commission
Foreign Direct Investment
Foreign Investment Advisory Service
Gulf Cooperation Council
Gross Domestic Product
Global Environment Facility
Global Food Crisis Response
General Sales Tax
German Technical Cooperation

IDA
IDF
IFC
IMF
JSDF
LIC
M&E
MDG
MIGA
MNA
MOPIC
MSME
OBA
OECD
OPEC
PIU
PPP
PWP
SDR
SFD
SME
SNACC
TA
TB
TF
UN
USAID
WBI
WTO
YLNG

International Development Association
Institutional Development Fund
International Finance Corporation
International Monetary Fund
Japan Social Development Fund
Low Income Countries
Monitoring and Evaluation
Millennium Development Goals
Multilateral Investment Guarantee
Agency
Middle East North Africa
Ministry of Planning and International
Cooperation
Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises
Output-Based Aid
Organization for Economic
Cooperation and Development
Organizationof the Petroleum
Exporting Countries
Project ImplementationUnit
Public Private Partnership
Public Works Project
Special Drawing Rights
Social Fund for Development
Small and Medium Enterprises
Supreme National Authority for
Combating Corruption
Technical Assistance
Tuberculosis
Trust Fund
United Nations
United States Agency for International
Development
World Bank Institute
World Trade Organization
Yemen Liquefied Natural Gas

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

TABLE OF CONTENTS

............................................................................................................
I. COUNTRY CONTEXT............................................................................................................
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

i
1

A . Political Context ........................................................................................................
B. Social and poverty context .........................................................................................
C . Economic context.......................................................................................................

1
2
3

I1 GOVERNMENT’S VISION AND MEDIUM-TERM PRIORITIES
I11 REVIEW OF PAST BANK GROUP ASSISTANCE
Lessons learned..........................................................................................................
I V A NEW PARTNERSHIP, FY201(&13

8
12

.
.
.

..................................
.......................................................
................................................................................

A . Objective and expected results ................................................................................
B. Key principles ..........................................................................................................
C . Development partners ..............................................................................................
D. Strategic elements o f the Bank Group program ......................................................
E. Implementing Bank Group assistance......................................................................
F. Results-Based Monitoring and Evaluation ...............................................................

.

V MANAGING R I S K S

.............................................................................................................

15
16

16
17
17
20
26
28
28

BOXES:
B o x 1: Examples o f A i d Coordination and Harmonization in Yemen ...........................

19

ANNEXES:
Annex 1: Proposed IDA Program .................................................................................................. 31
Annex 2: Proposed IFC Activities ................................................................................................. 35
Annex 3: Yemen Active Trust Funds Portfolio .............................................................................
36
Annex 4: Debt Sustainability Analysis ..........................................................................................
37
Annex 5: Results Framework for the Yemen CAS FY2010-2013 ................................................
39
Annex 6: FY06-08 Country Assistance Strategy Completion Report ...........................................
45
Annex 7: IFC-IDA Joint Strategy Implementation ....................................................................... 89
Annex 8: Map o f Yemen ............................................................................................................. 104

CAS Annex A2: Yemen at a Glance .............................................................................................
92
CAS Annex B2: Selected Indicators o f Bank Portfolio Performance and Management ..............95
CAS Annex B3: IDA Indicative Financing Program .................................................................... 96
CAS Annex B4: Summary o f past non-lending activities ............................................................. 97
98
CAS Annex B6: Key Economic Indicators ...................................................................................
CAS Annex B7: Key Exposure Indicators ..................................................................................
100
CAS Annex BS: Operations Portfolio (IDA and Grants) ............................................................ 101
CAS Annex B8/2: IFC Investment Portfolio/Operations Portfolio ............................................. 102
CAS Annex BS/3: IFC Investment Portfolio by SectorProduct .................................................
103

a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance o f
their official duties. I t s contents may not be otherwise disclosed without World Bank authorization .

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MANAGERS AND STAFF RESPONSIBLE FOR THIS CAS REPORT

Vice President:
Country Director:
Country Manager:

IDA
Daniela Gressani
Emmanuel Mbi
Benson Ateng

IFC
Rashad-Rudolf Kaldany
Michael Essex
Frank Sader

MIGA
Izumi Kobayashi
James Bond

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

The preparation o f this CAS has been a team effort which involved the extended Yemen
country team, including IDA and IFC. Governments’ officials gave generously o f their
time and ideas at various stages and the final product has benefited greatly from their
inputs. Although it i s difficult to name all contributors, the final document reflects their
inputs for which the core team is most grateful.

This document has restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the
performance of their official duties. Its contents may not be disclosed without
World Bank authorization.

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
i. The poorest country in the M N A region, Yemen is facing daunting challenges in an
uncertain global and regional environment. Significant progress has been made over the last
few years, but living conditions for most o f the 22 million Yemenis remain difficult. Yemen’s
governance structures are complex and recent events have heightened concerns over security
issues. Yemen i s unlikely to reach most Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) by 2015, and
the situation i s particularly dire for women. The Government i s implementing a program o f
economic and governance reforms, but time i s o f the essence as o i l resources are rapidly
depleting while the population continues t o grow at a fast pace.

ii.The impact of the global crisis is already severe. The sharp fall in world o i l prices, and the
consequent shrinking in public expenditure, i s depressing economic activity. Moreover, while the
financial sector has remained relatively unscathed due t o i t s relative insulation, the impact on the
real sector i s expected to be significant through declines in FDI, remittances (especially from the
Gulf), and external financing. The Government realizes the pressing need for a comprehensive
fiscal adjustment, but the risks o f a deterioration o f the economic situation are high.

iii. The Government has set out an ambitious vision for the country’s development with far
greater emphasis on diversifying the economy (through private sector-led activities), enhancing
governance, improving social conditions, and managing natural resources than previously
articulated in Yemen. The deterioration in the global environment has further heightened both
the needs t o implement this ambitious agenda and the difficulties in doing so.
iv. The Bank Group has a long-standing relationship with Yemen, and implementation of the
2006-2009 CAS is rated moderately satisfactory (results were achieved partially or completely
for 20 o f the 26 performance indicators). The impact o f the program i s expected to be sustainable
in the medium-term, provided continued Government commitment and efforts in the next CAS
period. Past experience shows that the Bank Group has been effective at supporting reforms as
well as at strengthening overall implementation capacity (in the sectors where there i s an active
program). Experience also highlights the importance o f providing hands-on implementation
support in an environment o f weak institutional capacity.
v. The overall objective of the Bank Group’s program proposed in this CAS is to facilitate
Yemen’s further uromess towards the MDGs. This objective reflects a consensus view
expressed by Government and stakeholders with regard to the challenges the country i s facing
and the optimal use o f Bank Group resources. In a context where the lack o f economic and social
opportunities i s often seen as creating an environment where frustrations can be exploited by
violent extremists, successful development efforts are also likely t o contribute to strengthening
the prospects for the country’s (and the sub-region’s) medium-term stability.
vi. The proposed CAS program foresees a broad-based, yet selective engagement across a
variety of sectors. The authorities, stakeholders, and other development partners have called on
the Bank Group to substantively engage in a number o f sectors in order to provide a core program
around which others can coalesce. In order t o avoid a dispersion and dilution o f efforts, however,
the Bank Group will apply selectivity: (i)
in the choice o f thematic areas for engagement (at both
sectoral and sub-sectoral levels); (ii)in the choice o f instruments for engagement (Technical
Assistance, analytical work, financial support through IDA or IFC); and (iii)in the design o f
individual products (keeping them simple so as to facilitate implementation).

1

vii. The proposed CAS program was designed in close cooperation between IDA and I F C , as
one o f the pilots under the recent initiative by the joint IDA-IFC Secretariat. This i s translating
the joint
into an effort to better integrate relevant activities by both institutions, through: (i)
design o f the results framework; and (ii)the identification o f “target strategic themes” (Le.
financial sector, business environment, energy, mining, and health) where mechanisms have been
put in place to pursue close cooperation throughout the CAS period.

...

‘

viii. Bank Group assistance under the CAS is organized around four strategic objectives,
which are closely aligned with the Government program:
(i)Help accelerate and diversify economic growth (macroeconomic stability; private sector
development; infrastructure; support to non-oil drivers o f growth);
(ii)Help enhance governance (transparency; public finance management; civil service);
(iii)Help foster human and social development (cross sectoral issues such as gender, youth,
and qat; education and health; community development and social protection); and
(iv) Help manage natural resource scarcity and natural risks (water resources; natural
disasters and climate change).
ix. The Bank Group intends to use the full spectrum of available instruments: managing the
existing portfolios (IDA and IFC); providing continued financial support (IDA, Trust Funds, IFC,
and possibly MIGA); using the Bank Group’s convening power (to help mobilize, implement,

and harmonize aid); providing further analytical and advisory services (IDA and IFC); and
scaling up capacity-building and learning activities.
x. I n particular, the Bank Group will aim to make use of its resources to support the
Government in facing the challenges associated with the global crisis, building on lessons
learned during the food crisis and using options available under the IDA Fast-Track Facility and
the IFC Crisis Response Initiatives. In the short-term, this includes providing macroeconomic
policy advice (underway), identifying possible re-allocations o f IDA resources within the existing
portfolio to help mitigate the impact o f the crisis on the poor, and working with private partners to
provide liquidity support through trade finance facilities. As the global situation evolves, the
Bank Group may propose substantial adjustments to the proposed program in the CAS Progress
Report, which i s currently scheduled for FY11 (but could be advanced or delayed if appropriate).
xi. The proposed CAS program entails an element of risk which will have to be carefully
managed. Consistent with past experience in Yemen, the proposed approach i s based on proactive risk management rather than risk avoidance. Key risks include: fragility o f the political
and security environment; negative external economic environment and macroeconomic shocks;

diminished Government’s commitment or ability to reform; and fiduciary risks.
xii. Executive Directors may wish to consider thefollowing issues:
(i)D o Executive Directors support the proposed areas o f focus (against the backdrop o f
requests by both Government and stakeholders for a broad-based Bank Group
engagement that would help mobilize others and strengthen implementation capacity)?
(ii)
Are Executive Directors satisfied that the proposed risk management approach i s
appropriate, including with regard to risks deriving from current global economic
uncertainties ?
(iii)Do Executive Directors support the proposed approach t o integrate IDA and IFC
activities under the CAS framework?

..

11

I.COUNTRY CONTEXT

1. The poorest country in the MNA region, Yemen is facing daunting challenges in an
uncertain global and regional environment. Significant progress has been made over the last
few years, but living conditions for most o f the 22 million Yemenis remain difficult. Time i s o f
the essence in making the necessary reforms: o i l resources are rapidly depleting while the
population continues t o grow at a fast pace - and the geopolitical stakes are high. Yet, this will
be a difficult process, and will require determined and coordinated efforts by the Government,
stakeholders, and international partners.

A. Political Context

2. Yemen’spolitical context needs to be analyzed against the backdrop of the country’s history.
“Arabia Felix”, Yemen i s a key station on both ancient and modern trade and communications
routes at the Southern entrance o f the Red Sea. A strong sense o f national identity led to the 1990
reunification o f North and South Yemen and, in spite o f the 1994 c i v i l war, s t i l l infuses political
and social life. Yet, Yemen has also long been one o f the most secluded places in the world, with
very poor communication between remote valleys in a largely mountainous and arid country.
This has had a significant impact on the social fabric o f the country and i t s governance structures.
3. Overall, Yemen’s governance structures remain complex.
The political system is a formal multi-party democratic system. There i s a relatively
free press, and an active and vocal opposition. President Saleh was elected in September
2006 for a six-year term in an election which was called by EU observers “an open and
genuine contest”, despite shortcomings. Parliamentary election originally scheduled for
April / M a y 2009 were postponed t o 2011 through an agreement between the majority
and the main opposition parties.
The underlying social structure is largely based on a tribal system, where the power o f
traditional leaders places limits on State authority. Most Yemenis tend t o define their
identity and affiliations through this tribal system, and in a country where weapons are
commonly available the sheikhs often play a significant role at the local level.
Most institutions are relatively weak, as reflected by the l o w CPIA (3.3). Insufficiencies
are related to capacity issues, corruption, over- or inadequate staffing in the civil service
(a legacy o f the 1990 reunification when existing civil services were merged without
reform), and the persisting need t o clarify institutional mandates and structures.
The society is going through a transformation process. N e w forces are coming into the
fore, with the growing role o f the private sector and the gradual emergence o f civil
society. In a mountainous country, where until recently the valleys in which a large part
o f the population lives were severely isolated, urbanization and modernization are
challenging some o f the long-entrenched features o f the traditional order.
4. Over the last years, Yemen has had to face a number of security issues, especially following
the 2000 attack on the U S S Cole. While an overwhelming majority o f the population lives in safe
and peaceful environments, the situation remains complex. A (Shiite) insurgency in the

1

northernmost province o f Sa’ada, sporadic attacks against foreign interests (most recently an
attack on the US embassy in September 2008), controversies over the Government’s efforts to
manage the threat posed by terrorist groups, and social unrest linked to persisting poverty - all
have contributed to projecting the image o f a country afflicted by endemic violence.

5. I n this context, continued efforts will be needed to consolidate political stability and security
throughout the country - two key pre-conditions for effective economic and social development.
Although there are diverging views among observers as t o the prospects for such efforts to be
successful, there i s a consensus that particular attention should be paid in the coming period t o the
following areas:
First, political inclusion. The challenge i s t o ensure that important constituencies can
continue to meaningfully participate in the political process. The holding o f free and fair
Parliamentary elections, the establishment o f a constructive relationship between the
majority party and the opposition, and the continued development o f adequate
mechanisms t o channel popular sentiment into the political debate through peaceful
means will all be key in that regard.
Second, violent extremism. The issue i s whether the Government will be in a position t o
effectively reduce both the threat o f terrorism within the country and the ability o f
extremist groups t o use Yemen as a rear base for international operations. This i s likely
t o require strong Government action, the close involvement o f a variety o f domestic
stakeholders, and cooperation with foreign partners both in the region and worldwide.
Third, successful return topeace in Sa’ada. An agreement was reached with the former
rebels in 2008, but recent incidents suggest that significant efforts remain needed t o
prevent a new round o f fighting and further consolidate the situation.
And fourth, interplay between the Government’s authority and tribal structures.
Observers have continuously watched closely the extent t o which the Government
chooses t o assert i t s authority or prefers to find a compromise with tribal leaders. The
dynamics o f institutional strengthening in a complex social environment are likely t o
remain at the heart o f many political governance issues in Yemen.

B. Social and uovertv context
6. Despite some progress, Yemen is unlikely to reach key Millennium Development Goals
(MDGs) by 2015. With GDP per capita standing at about US$930, over 40 percent o f the
Yemenis live in poverty (vs. a 2015 target o f 19 percent), especially in rural areas. Yemen ranks
153 out o f 177 countries on the 2007 Human Development Index. There has been progress with
. regard t o life expectancy (from 42 years in 1970 t o 62 in 2005), and a significant, though s t i l l
insufficient, increase in basic education enrollment (from 3 million in 1996 to 4.3 million in
2007). Yet, much remains t o be done, especially in the areas o f infant and child mortality (82 and
113 per 1000 live births respectively); maternal mortality (365 per 100,000 live births);
malnutrition (46 percent o f 5-year old are underweight); and the quality o f education. In addition,
in spite o f significant investments in the last decade, Yemen has not caught up on i t s
infrastructure lag, with access t o many rural areas remaining difficult, electricity coverage limited
(about 47 percent nation-wide, and about 20 percent in rural areas), and access t o safe water
insufficient (36 percent). Unemployment i s widespread, especially among youth.

2

7. Yemeni women face particularly difficult conditions as reflected in almost all social and
economic indicators. Traditional rules limit women’s rights and opportunities, and early
marriages (52 percent o f women marry before the age o f 15) continue to affect school enrollment,
fertility rates, and maternal mortality. Despite progress over the last years, gender parity in
education remains low (0.66 for basic, 0.45 for secondary, and 0.35 for university education) and
female literacy stands at only 31 percent. Deep-rooted traditions also constrain the ability o f
women to engage in the broad labor force. Overall, a recent World Economic Forum report on
gender issues (“Global Gender Gap 2007”) ranked Yemen the lowest o f 128 countries.

8. The rapid depletion of water reserves (aquifers) is a major threat to the country as a result o f
three factors: (i)climate change-induced alterations o f rainfalls which are starting to exacerbate
the country’s aridity; (ii)extension and intensification o f agriculture; and (iii)fast growth o f
urban centers (at 5 percent a year, the fastest in the MNA Region). In large swaths o f rural areas,
economic prospects and the sustainability o f livelihoods are in jeopardy. In some important cities
(e.g., Tai’z), running water i s already available only a few hours every other week and aquifers o f
urban centers such as the capital, Sana’a, may well be fully exhausted in the next 20 years. This issue
has the potential to wreak havoc on the country.
9. The widespread use of qat further affects Yemen’s social conditions andprospects. Qat i s a
locally-produced plant, the leaves o f which are chewed as a stimulant. Consumption in Yemen i s
widespread and extensive: about 72 percent o f men and 33 percent o f women are regular or
frequent chewers. The impact o f excessive qat consumption i s multi-fold: at the individual level,
poor health and reduced productivity; at the household level, diversion o f scarce financial
resources to non-productive uses (the average household devotes 10 percent o f i t s income to qat);
at the national level, substitution o f agricultural products (land planted with qat has increased by
11 times between 1970 and 2005) and accelerated drawing on water resources (qat cultivation
consumes one-third o f the abstracted groundwater). Yet, qat consumption i s deeply rooted in
Yemen’s culture and social behaviors. Qat also represents one third o f agricultural GDP and i s
the main source o f income to 14 percent o f the population.
10. Overall, Yemen’s social challenges are exacerbated by a fast-paced demographic growth.
Nearly 50 percent o f the population i s below 15. Despite a 25 percent decline between 1960 and
2003, the total fertility rate remains among the highest in the world, at 6.2 births per woman, i.e. a
demographic growth rate o f over 3 percent a year. At this pace, Yemen’s population could grow
from 22 million today to 50 million by 2035 - in an environment o f limited and depleting natural
resources.

C. Economic context
Recent developments
11. Over the last decades Yemen’s economy has been based on oil, with the redistribution o f
corresponding rents through civil service salaries and a generous subsidy system. Hydrocarbon
output (oil and gas) represents about one third o f GDP (Figure l),
almost three quarters o f
Government revenues, and 90 percent o f exports. However, Yemen’s o i l reserves are rapidly
depleting (Figure 2): in the absence o f new discoveries, and based on current exploitation rates
(about 300,000 barrels per day), crude o i l reserves are expected to be exhausted in the next 10 to
12 years.

3

I

Figure 1: Structure of the Economy (2006)

I I,

I

I

Figure 2: Oil Production (millions bbls)

I

Source: World Bank, 2008.

Source: World Bank, 2008.

12. Since 2004, the Government has made efforts to enhance the business environment and
facilitate private sector-led economic diversification. Recent achievements include: improving
the regulatory environment (Yemen was top reformer for “starting a business” under Doing
Business 2009, and i t s overall ranking improved by 15 places); amending legislations on foreign
investment, mining, land registration, and income tax; further liberalizing trade; and developing a
dialogue to strengthen regional economic cooperation with the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC).
13. I n parallel, the Government has taken some steps towards improving governance and
fighting corruption. Key measures include: joining the Extractive Industries Transparency
Initiative (EITI); effectively establishing the Supreme National Anti-Corruption Committee
(SNACC); taking steps towards eliminating “ghost workers” and “double dippers” from the
public service payroll; adopting a new procurement law based on international good practices;
and starting to improve public finance management.

14. Overall, these efforts are starting to pay offt but signijicant challenges remain. While
national accounts remain weak and significant discrepancies exist across sources o f key
macroeconomic data, all indicators point toward overall progress. According to the IMF, Yemen
recorded an average non-hydrocarbon growth rate o f 5.5 percent per annum over 2004-08, which
was largely driven by agriculture, urban services, and construction. Overall real GDP growth
nevertheless remains lower, averaging about 4 percent a year, due to the sharp contraction o f o i l
output estimated at an average o f about 6.5 percent per annum over the same period (Figure 3).
Annual average inflation has been volatile and in double digits (Figure 4), partly driven by
Yemen’s dependence on imports for basic products. The country was hard hit by the 2008 food
crisis, which especially affected the poorest (with overall inflation peaking at 19 percent).
10.0

I

Figure 3: Disaggregated GDP Growth

1 ?E2Hvdrocabon

EZ3Non-hvdrocarbon-+-RealGDP

Figure 4: Annual Average Inflation Trends

Growth1

Source: IMF Staff Report, February 2009.

Source: IMF Staff Report, February 2009.

4

15. Fiscal sustainability is the foremost macroeconomic issue, as the reduction of oil revenues
i s not sufficiently compensated by increased revenues from other sources (tax revenues remain
very low at around 7 percent o f GDP). Government spending i s driven by a large public sector
wage bill and unsustainably high fuel
subsidies (around 14.5 percent o f
GDP in 2008), which together
account for 72 percent o f current
expenditure.
The fiscal deficit
ballooned to 5.8 percent of GDP in
2007 (Figure 5) due to a sharp fall in
oil revenues and rising current
expenditure. The fiscal deficit i s
estimated to remain in the range of 5
to 6 percent of GDP in 2008 in the
context o f declining oil prices,
continued rigid expenditures, and
limited improvements in tax and nonoil revenues. Towards the end o f 2008, a large supplementary budget was approved (as in
previous years) to allow for additional spending on fuel subsidies and an increase in wages,
pensions, and social welfare transfers.
16. The external position remains satisfactory, but significant vulnerabilities remain. The
Government has been maintaining a "managed float" exchange rate system, and monetary policy
has focused on exchange rate stability and control of excess liquidity in the banking system. The
rial has remained steady against the US dollar, which has helped mitigate imported inflation. The
current account balance moved into a large deficit in 2007 mainly due to FDI-financed imports
for the Yemen Liquefied Natural Gas (YLNG) plant. While record high o i l prices in early 2008
have helped reduce the current account deficit to around 2 percent o f GDP in 2008 (Figure 5
above), the external sector will remain vulnerable to the more recent declines in o i l prices. On a
positive note, gross official reserves are estimated to remain at the 2007 levels o f around US$7
billion in 2008, providing a substantial cushion of about 13 months of imports.

17. Although external debt has steadily declined,
its sustainabilitv continues to be at risk due to
Yemen's vulnerability to oil prices, and to
sustained difficulties in implementing fiscal and
subsidy reforms. Yemen's external debt has
declined steadily to an estimated 22 percent o f
GDP in 2008, but domestic debt (all short-term and
expensive) i s on the rise - estimated at nearly 16
percent of GDP in 2008 (Figure 6). Unless the

Figure6: Externaland Domestic Public Debt
35

3o
25

2o

5

o
Source IMFStrff Repon, Fcb 2W9

+External

Debt

+Domesbc

Debt

of GDP to over 65 percent of GDP in the medium-term, primarily due to a more than doubling o f
domestic debt. The most recent debt sustainability analysis (DSA) indicates that even with full
implementation o f fiscal and structural reforms, one debt indicator (the present value of debt-toexports) i s above the sustainability threshold over the long-term (see Annex 4 for further details).

5

Short-term prospects and medium-term outlook

18. The impact of the global crisis is already severe. The sharp fall in world oil prices, and the
consequent shrinking in public expenditure, i s depressing economic activity. Moreover, while the
financial sector has remained relatively unscathed due to i t s relative insulation, the impact on the
real sector i s expected to be significant through declines in FDI, remittances (especially from the
Gulf), and external financing. The short-term impact on growth may be partly mitigated (or
masked) by the coming on-line of the large natural gas project in 2009 (YLNG) which i s expected
to boost hydrocarbon growth in 2009 by up to 45 percent, resulting in overall GDP growth of 7.7
percent. Concerted efforts (monetary and exchange rate) will remain necessary to curb annual
average inflation to around 14 percent in 2009, in spite of easing pressures due to lower global
commodity prices. And while detailed data are not available, the crisis i s expected to
disproportionately affect the poorest and most vulnerable (a household survey i s under
preparation and i s expected to take place by Spring 20 10).
19. I n this context, the Government realizes the pressing need for comprehensive fiscal
adjustment. This would entail reducing expenditure (fuel subsidies and the public sector wage
bill), which i s a politically sensitive endeavor. Fuel subsidies were reduced slightly in August
2008 with the raising o f the price o f diesel for sales to select industries - a positive but
insufficient measure given the size of the overall subsidy. In order to keep the fiscal deficit at
least at last year’s level (below 6 percent of GDP) in 2009, the authorities need to reduce fuel
subsidies substantially by mid-year, implement a nominal freeze on the public sector wage bill,
and boost tax revenues. In order to reduce inflation and maintain confidence in the rial, the
Central Bank i s expected to continue to focus on exchange rate stability in the short-term. The
authorities are also currently discussing a public debt law with ceilings for domestic, external, and
overall public debt, as well as measures to drastically cut the investment budget. In the mediumterm, Yemen needs to develop alternative sources o f growth and fiscal revenues.

20. At this stage, the scope of possible external shocks is such that detailedprojections and
scenarios are of limited value and bound to change substantially. The baseline macroeconomic framework i s based on an ambitious reform program for which substantial Government
commitment and external support would be needed. This program i s focused on: (i)gradually
eliminating fuel subsidies by 2011; (ii)reducing the civil service wage bill by around 2
percentage points o f GDP by 2013; and (iii)implementing substantial tax reforms, including full
implementation of GST as well as an increase in rates, and streamlining income tax. This
adjustment scenario i s guided by a debt sustainability analysis geared to keeping total public debt
below 50 percent o f GDP over the medium-term. Based on these adjustment measures, and
assuming an average oil price o f almost US$70 per barrel, Yemen’s average economic growth
would be around 4.5 percent a year during 2010-2012. Annual inflation would decrease, but
remain in double digits. The average fiscal deficit would decline to around 3 percent of GDP.
The average current account deficit would stabilize at about 1.5 percent of GDP, while gross
reserves would decline to around 8.5 months o f imports during this period (Table 1).

6

Table 1: Selected macroeconomic indicators under a baseline adjustment scenario

Real GDP
Real hydrocarbon GDP
Real non-hydrocarbon GDP
CPI Infiation (annual avg. including qat)
Investment (% of GDP)
Total Investment
Private Investment
Government finance (% of GDP)
Revenue (including grants)
Hydrocarbon
Non-hydrocarbon
Grants
Total expenditure and net lending
Overal deficit (cash basis)
Non-Oil primary balance
Gross Public Sector Debt (% of GDP)
External debt
Domestic debt
External Sector(% of GDP)
Gross reserves (months of imports)
Current account balance (% of GDP)
Memorandum items:
Crude oil Production (1000 barrels Der
, davl
,*
IAverage oil export pr&(US$ barrel)
Sources: World Bank and IMF Staff Estimates, February 2009.

4.0
-5.0
5.4
12.5

5.6
-0.8
6.5
11.8

3.2
8.3
4.7
18.2

3.3
-13.1
5.3
12.5

3.9
-5.4
4.8
19.0

7.7
44.5
4.4
14.0

4.6
1.0
5.1
10.4

20.3
8.2

18.5
10.6

16.4
9.1

17.2
10.0

16.9
9.8

15.5
9.5

17.4
11.0

32.0
22.6
8.7
0.7
34.2
-1.7
-22.1
52.1
38.5

34.9
26.2
8.3
0.4
36.8
-1.8
-24.7
43.8
30.9
12.9

38.6
28.9
9.3
0.4
37.4
1.2
-27.2
40.8
28.7
12.1

33.2
22.6
10.3
0.3
40.3
-7.2
-26.1
40.4
26.9
13.5

37.4
27.5
9.5
0.4
43.0
-5.6
-30.9
38.1
22.3
15.9

24.9
14.4
9.7
0.8
30.6
-5.7
-17.6
41.1
21.8
19.3

25.2
13.1
11.6
0.5
28.4
-3.2
36.1
36.5
18.2
18.0

15.0
1.6

11.6
3.8

10.0
1.1

10.2
-7.0

13.3
-2.0

10.3
-2.4

8.5
-1.5

396.0
36.6

393.0
51.2

357.0
62.8

310.0
72.3

293.0
96.0

424.0
52.8

445.7
68.9

21. The above scenarios hinge on the severity and duration of the global economic downturn,
which will become more apparent later in the year. Early stress tests indicate that Yemen will be
affected in the following manner by a continued decline in o i l prices, a weakening o f regional and
global growth, and limited access to external financing:

A continued fall of oil prices would cause fiscal and current account imbalances to
rise. For each US$lO/bbl decline, the overall fiscal and current account balance would
deteriorate by almost 1 percentage point o f GDP. The fiscal impact could be mitigated
by a corresponding decline in fuel subsidies, and pressure on the external account may be
partially alleviated if global commodity prices keep falling.
Slower regional and global growth would bring lower levels of non-oil FDI,
remittances, andpossibly aid. A 50 percent decline in non-oil FDI would likely reduce
growth and the current account deficit (each by around 0.5 percent o f GDP). A 50
percent fall in remittances would widen the current account deficit by 0.5 percent o f
GDP, marginally lower real GDP growth, and have an important impact on poverty. A
50 percent fall in aid disbursements would marginally widen the overall fiscal deficit, and
increase domestic debt by 1.2 percent o f GDP. A combined loss o f non-oil FDI,
remittances, and donor financing would result in the fiscal and current account deficits
deteriorating by 1-1.5 percent o f GDP, public sector domestic debt rising by around 2.5-3
percent o f GDP, and international reserves dropping by one month o f imports.

7

11. GOVERNMENT’S VISION AND MEDIUM-TERM PRIORITIES

22. The Government has set out an ambitious vision for the country’s development with far
greater emphasis on diversifying the economy (through private sector-led activities), enhancing
governance, improving social conditions, and managing natural resources than previously
articulated in Yemen. While this program was developed prior t o the onset o f the global crisis,
and will hence have to be adjusted to factor in the deterioration o f the global environment, i t s
overall priorities remain sound to tackle the medium-term challenges the country i s facing.

23. The “Strategic Vision 2025” has been translated into a series of successive nationalplans,
which have been discussed with Parliament, stakeholders, and international partners. The Third
Socio-economic Development Plan for Poverty Reduction (DPPR), currently under
implementation (2006 t o 2010), i s built on 8 pillars which provide a prioritized framework for
action: (i)macroeconomic policies and targets; (ii)good governance (iii)development o f
productive and promising sectors; (iv) water, environment, and basic infrastructure; (v) human
development; (vi) Government services; (vii) social safety net, social protection and social
security; and (viii) women’s empowerment. The DPPR was the subject o f a Mid-Term Review in
January 2009, which took stock o f implementation progress and identified areas for increased
efforts. A fourth DPPR i s expected to be prepared in the coming year.
24. The DPPR is complemented by the National Reform Agenda and the Public Investment
Program. The National Reform Agenda sets a broad agenda o f priority reforms for the country
t o accelerate economic growth, improve economic governance, broaden opportunities and
participation, and strengthen cooperation with development partners. It focuses in particular on
the following issues: (i)judicial reform; (ii)administrative reforms and civil service
modernization; (iii)investment and business climate; (iv) anticorruption, transparency, and
accountability; and (v) political reforms. The Public Investment Program identifies priority
investments in support o f the DPPR.
25. Overall, these plans revolve around a narrow set of overarching goals andprovide a sound
framework for identzfiing priorities -yet, as in many other IDA countries, they reflect some of
the capacity and data constraints Yemen is facing. In particular, the priorities remain very broad
and the means to achieve some of the intended results are unspecified. The recent Mid-Term
Review o f the DPPR highlighted these weaknesses and encouraged the Government to strengthen
i t s capacity for implementation o f both reforms and investments.

26. The first overarching goal is to accelerate economic growth through private sector-led
diverszjication. T o that effect, the DPPR aims to attract private investment and develop an
export-oriented strategy directed toward the GCC markets and beyond. The current deterioration
in the global environment makes the need for such efforts both even more pressing and even more
challenging. Action will be required in a number o f areas:
Macroeconomic policy. The DPPR underscores the importance o f continued efforts to
reduce the budget deficit (through an increase in non-oil revenues and a reduction o f
expenditure), contain inflation, and manage a slow depreciation o f the rial against the
US$. This will be especially important in the coming period t o mitigate the impact o f the
global crisis. While the specific targets are ambitious, and based on optimistic
assumptions o f high o i l prices and significantly increased aid flows, the general policy
directions are sound. The DPPR also highlights the need t o strengthen national accounts,
and more generally the country’s statistical capacity.

8

Regulatory reform. The DPPR aims to encourage private investment through fwther
regulatory reforms aimed at easing business (further liberalize foreign trade, facilitate
private investment, rationalize tax and customs clearance procedures; encourage
competition, and decentralize private sector-related Government services t o the
appropriate regional levels) and strengthening the poorly-developed financial sector.
The challenge in these areas will be for the Government to move with sufficient
determination to enhance the credibility o f the reform program. With regard to trade, the
Government’s efforts are aimed at achieving accession t o the World Trade Organization
(WTO) and fulfilling all requirements o f the Greater Arab Free Trade Zone and the GCC,
two objectives which are indeed critical for Yemen t o effectively stimulate non-oil
exports, but where progress i s likely t o depend heavily on political considerations.
Improvement of infrastructure services. The DPPR highlights the need for both
substantial investments (to pursue the ongoing efforts aimed at expanding the still
insufficient systems) and sectoral reforms (to drastically increase efficiency and better
manage scarce resources). The specific targets set in the document may be ambitious, but
overall the proposed strategic directions are sound. For electricpower, the objective i s t o
increase access and reliability, through the construction o f further generation and
transmission capacity, the development o f renewable sources o f energy (including wind
and solar power), the expansion o f transmission and distribution networks in rural areas,
and most importantly a substantial reform o f institutions in the sector, t o improve their
performance and financial sustainability. For transport, the aim i s t o further expand and
upgrade infrastructure systems, while strengthening the institutional and financing
arrangements necessary for their effective operation and maintenance. With regard t o the
urban sector, the focus i s on enhancing infrastructure and services to improve
competitiveness and the ability t o attract private investors.
Support to traditional sectors. With regard to oil, the Government’s aim i s to limit the
rate o f decline in production, and t o identify and exploit new reserves throughout the
country (and offshore). This approach i s sound, but i t s success critically depends o n t w o
factors o n which Yemen has little control: international o i l prices and the geological odds
o f a major find. With regard t o agriculture, the DPPR focuses on increasing productivity
through more efficient irrigation, enhanced and better regulated use o f fertilizers and
pesticides, and strengthened marketing, research, veterinary, and extension services.
Development of new sources of growth. By far the most promising new source o f
economic growth (and fiscal revenues) i s the natural gas sector. The DPPR aims t o
build on the YLNG experience to incite foreign companies t o expand their gas
exploration and extraction activities, through significant adjustments to the existing
regulatory framework. The expanded use o f natural gas for domestic power production i s
also expected t o contribute t o non-oil growth in the next t w o to five years. The DPPR
aims to achieve high growth in the manufacturing sector, but this i s constrained by the
lack o f infrastructure, and especially by the insufficient availability o f energy (in addition
t o regulatory issues).
The fisheries sector i s promising (and has potential for
employment generation), with a variety o f investment opportunities in fishing,
processing, and exporting - but sustained high growth in the sector will require careful
management o f the fish stock to prevent i t s depletion, as well as availability o f power,
processing, and transport infrastructure. Finally, the DPPR identifies two further
“promising” sectors, mining and tourism, but these will need time t o realize their full

9

potential: large-scale mining development i s hindered by poor infrastructure, perceptions
o f a high level o f risk, and the lack o f readily available geological information; tourism
development i s hampered by limited infrastructure and insecurity.

27. The second overarching goal is to enhance governance. The overall governance agenda i s
very broad and a number o f the priorities identified in the DPPR (and the National Reform
Agenda) are aimed at dealing with issues which are o f a political or social nature, e.g.,: modernize
the security services, ensure the respect o f human rights, enhance the electoral system, and
deliver cultural and religious Government services. A further set o f priorities i s related t o the
necessary strengthening o f the judiciary through increased independence and enhanced capacity.
Priority economic governance reforms are essentially related t o three sets o f issues:
0

Transparency. The DPPR emphasizes the importance o f fighting corruption in all areas,
and highlights a number o f priority actions to that effect, including effective
strengthening o f SNACC and the Central Organization for Control and Audit (COCA) to
ensure that they are able to identify and effectively prosecute cases o f corruption, further
progress in the o i l sector through the EITI process, and the continuation and full
implementation o f ongoing reforms o f the budget system, financial management, and
public procurement. The key to success i s the Government’s ability t o maintain and
further strengthen the credibility o f these efforts through short-term, high-visibility
decisions which can help sustain the momentum for further progress.
Public finance management. The DPPR’s aim o f improving efficiency and transparency
has been operationalized in a Public Finance Management Reform Strategy, which was
designed by the Government with the support o f a group o f donors (including the Bank
Group). The key components o f this strategy are general budget reform (preparation,
execution and information systems); controls and accountability; procurement; and skills.
The challenge for the authorities will be to rapidly make progress where possible in the
short-term, while preparing for an effort that will need to be sustained over the mediumterm.
Administrative capacity. The DPPR aims to strengthen capacity through the further
modernization o f the civil service. This would include a rationalization o f institutional
mandates (to reduce overlaps and clarify accountability), the internal re-engineering o f
key administrative entities (to increase efficiency), progress towards decentralization, and
a continuation o f ongoing efforts aimed at gradually reducing the payroll. The challenge
will be to set the right pace for such reforms, which are urgently needed but will need to
be implemented amidst abundant technical complexities and vested interests.

28. The third overarching goal is to improve living conditions and social indicators. Over the
last period, the Government has successfully focused on expanding access t o basic services in a
context o f rapid demographic growth. The DPPR aims t o pursue this effort, while at the same
time reforming or even transforming delivery mechanisms t o improve effectiveness and quality.
The Government i s also beginning to underscore the significance o f creating synergies among
sectors to magnify impact o f sector outcomes and influencing the MDG outcomes.
0

Gender. The DPPR aims to further tackle a complex web o f economic, social, cultural,
and legal obstacles t o women’s empowerment. In particular, the DPPR aims to increase
women’s employment in both private and public sectors and their participation in local
and parliamentary elections, both as candidates and voters. Yet, the DPPR does not

10

provide a clear action plan t o move from what can be achieved through legal means t o the
necessary social transformations that can underpin sustainable progress.

Qat. The DPPR highlights the complexity o f the qat issue and i t s link with agricultural
growth. It hence recommends to address it in an “objective, informed, and gradual
fashion”, with a focus on “striking a balance between i t s economic, social, health and
environmental aspects”. Efforts t o date have focused on raising awareness and launching
a dialogue with stakeholders.
Youth. The DPPR’s concern with children and youth issues has translated into the
adoption o f a Bank Group-supported Children and Youth Strategy. This Strategy aims t o
make progress towards the relevant MDGs through a concerted and integrated effort
across sectors, based on an assessment o f needs, gaps, challenges, and possible solutions.
The Strategy recommendations were further elaborated in form o f Action Plans to include
specific activities and targets for relevant line ministries as part o f their respective sector
programs. The success o f implementation will depend on the authorities’ effective ability
to deploy an integrated program across a broad range o f ministries and technical entities.
Education. The challenge in the sector i s t o continue t o absorb a rapidly growing schoolage population while improving the quality and relevance o f education. For basic
education, the objective i s to further increase enrolment rates (currently at about 74
percent), especially for girls and young women - and to reform curricula, further develop
teacher training, and strengthen overall quality management. For technical education,
the DPPR focuses on strengthening the links with the private sector. For higher
education, the aim i s t o develop a system that can respond dynamically to the needs o f
local and regional markets, through widespread institutional reforms and a diversification
o f sources o f funding. These priorities are sound, but will require sustained efforts over a
long period o f time.
Health and population. Significant improvements have been achieved over the last
years, in large part thanks to a dramatic expansion o f health facilities, increased
immunization coverage, and improved control o f major diseases (malaria, TB). The
DPPR aims t o build on this foundation to accelerate progress towards the MDGs through
a renewed focus on the modalities o f service delivery. In the health sector, priorities
entail improving management and planning capacities, involving local communities, and
strengthening quality o f services. With regard to population, the DPPR calls for a
substantial strengthening o f reproductive health services in order to reduce the annual
population growth rate t o 2.75 percent. Progress in this area will require not only
technical measures but also societal changes.
0

Social safety nets. Yemen has developed a multi-tier safety net, including highly
successful community-driven programs (notably under the Social Fund for Development
and the Public Works Program), and the provision o f limited cash transfers t o the poorest
(through the Social Welfare Fund). Yet, the largest share by far o f social expenditure i s
consumed by an expensive and untargeted subsidy system (essentially for energy
products). The DPPR takes a cautious approach t o this politically-sensitive issue, and
focuses on the need to strengthen existing programs. Still, the Government i s aware that
in an increasingly constrained fiscal environment it may not be possible to delay for
much longer the necessary reform o f the subsidy system, an issue which i s likely to take
some degree o f prominence in the coming period.

11

29. Thefourth overarching goal is to manage natural resource scarcity and natural risks. The
DPPR highlights the natural constraints to Yemen’s development and the need t o take forceful
action t o allow for development efforts to be sustainable. This i s expected t o be particularly
difficult as it requires considerable upfront efforts which in many cases will have only limited
immediate benefits - in fact, even in the medium-term, such efforts will at best result only in a
partial mitigation o f the threats. Particular effort will be needed in several areas:
0

Water resources management. The DPPR highlights the dual challenge o f extending
access t o water and sanitation services (including irrigation, which consumes the bulk o f
the resource) while reducing groundwater abstraction to more sustainable levels. To that
effect, the DPPR focuses on the need t o achieve efficiency gains through technical
measures (e.g., improving irrigation productivity) as well as sectoral reforms (e.g.,
management systems, cost-recovery, and community involvement).
Natural disaster response. Yemen i s naturally prone t o such events which can be
devastating at the level o f entire provinces, as demonstrated by the October 2008 floods
in the Eastern governorates. While the DPPR does not explicitly emphasize the need for
both preparation and mitigation, such objectives are consistent with i t s general principles.
Climate change adaptation. Climate change i s expected to amplify some o f the longstanding natural constraints t o Yemen’s development, in particular through lower overall
rainfall (and increased occurrence o f dramatic floods) and the rising o f sea levels. The
authorities are aware o f the challenges ahead and have demonstrated a strong ownership
o f the climate change agenda, which i s expected to affect a number o f the DPPR
priorities.

111. REVIEW OF PAST BANK GROUP ASSISTANCE

30. The Bank Group has a long-standing relationship with Yemen. The former Yemen Arab
Republic and People’s Democratic Republic o f Yemen joined IDA in 1971. Since then, IDA has
approved 143 projects for Yemen, valued at about US$2.8 billion. Assistance was substantially
increased in the aftermath o f the civil war and the Bank Group developed a strong and substantive
trust-based relationship with the Yemeni authorities. Since 1995, IDA has approved 47 projects,
for a total o f US$1.7 billion and has provided substantial analytical and technical support. I F C
restarted i t s activities in Yemen in 1998 and has substantially increased i t s program and
commitments in the last three years. I F C i s also providing a broad array o f advisory services,
through I F C Advisory Services, several o f them in partnership with IDA. This partnership has
been underpinned by the continued strengthening o f the (co-located) Bank Group offices in
Sana’a: the IDA Country Office, where an increasing number o f Task Team Leaders and sectoral
specialists are based, and the I F C office which was opened in 2005.
3 1. Implementation of the 2006-2009 CAS is rated moderately satisfactory (see attached
CASCR for a detailed evaluation). The proposed C A S program was relevant t o Yemen’s needs
and was aligned with the Governments’ priorities, as expressed in the DPPR and the National
Reform Agenda. Results were achieved partially or completely for 20 o f the 26 performance
indicators. Overall, the impact o f the program i s expected to be sustainable in the medium-term,
even though i t s eventual impact will closely depend on the Government’s continued commitment
and efforts in the next C A S period.

12

32. Specific achievements under each pillar include:
Diversijying growth through better governance and better delivery of public services.
The Bank Group financial, analytical, and Technical Assistance helped achieve notable
results across a broad range o f sectors, including business regulatory environment
(simplified business start-up procedures and tax system), infrastructure (expanding rural
energy and roads access), agriculture and fisheries, as well as enhanced urban
development for business. Support t o higher education and skills development was
moderately unsatisfactory.
0

Accelerating human development through more efficient service delivery and improved
safety nets. The Bank Group continued t o focus on supporting Government’s efforts to
expand access t o basic services. Progress was made, especially in sectors such as
education (primary school enrolment), health (including safe-motherhood), water (in both
rural and urban areas), and children and youth (even though some o f the original CAS
indicators appear in hindsight t o have been over-ambitious). The Bank Group provided
substantial and effective support t o community-driven development through the Social
Fund for Development and the Public Works Program. The Bank Group also initiated
efforts in the areas o f safety nets and gender where much remains to be done.

0

Improving flscal sustainability through improved public expenditure management.
Support provided by the Bank Group was key in facilitating the design, adoption, and
implementation o f important reforms including with regard t o transparency (joining EITI,
establishing SNACC), procurement (passing a new procurement l a w and associated
regulations), public financial management (adopting a modern budget system), and
administrative reforms (identifying “ghost workers” on the civil service payroll). The
phasing out o f fuel subsidies, however, was postponed in the context o f a complex social
situation and a global increase o f food prices.

0

Increasing resource sustainability through improved management of water resources
and reduced population pressure. Bank Group financial and Technical Assistance
supported progress to improve efficiency in managing scarce water resources, through
enhanced irrigation, groundwater management, and soil conservation. Results on
population-related indicators were limited, however, reflecting in part the complexity and
social sensitivity o f this issue.

33. This has been achieved through a combination of instruments, including:
A substantive IDA program of Analytical and Advisory Activities (AAA). AAA was
aimed to share global knowledge, to advise the authorities on the preparation o f key
reforms, and to provide the analytic underpinning for lending operations. It included
analytical work across a broad range o f sectors (with 39 pieces o f AAA delivered over
the period vs. 36 planned in the CAS), as well as Technical Assistance by IDA. Overall,
the program was satisfactory and implemented with sufficient flexibility to respond to
Yemen’s emerging needs (e.g., o n anti-corruption, safety nets, climate change).
0

Significant IFC Technical Assistance. In close coordination with IDA, and in
partnership with other donors (including DFID and the Netherlands), IFC’s Advisory
Services has provided substantial assistance focused on business regulatory reform and

13

investment climate improvement, mining policy reform, SME development, financial
markets (especially in the areas o f leasing, corporate governance, and SMEs), and public
private partnerships (PPPs).
0

I D A financial assistance. During the CAS period, IDA provided financing under 16
new projects (including seven additional financings), for a total commitment o f US$478
million. The use o f additional financing proved an effective way to scale up the impact
o f successful operations and to gradually reduce portfolio fragmentation. A substantial
part o f the IDA program was also focused on responding to emerging priorities and
addressing emergencies (avian flu, food crisis, floods).

0

Implementation of the ongoing IDA portfolio. The current IDA portfolio includes 2 1
projects, for a total commitment o f US$1,026 billion, o f which US$684 million
undisbursed. Overall, in spite o f a challenging environment, performance, including
fiduciary performance, remains satisfactory (with only two projects currently rated less
than moderately satisfactory). Progress i s significant if considered over the mediumterm: the share o f unsatisfactory projects f e l l from 50 percent in FY95 to 6 percent in
FY09, and the disbursement ratio rose from 10 percent to 23 percent. Yet, the pace o f
implementation remains slow, reflecting capacity constraints which translate into late
effectiveness and slow procurement.

0

Trust Funds. Yemen i s a relatively large recipient o f Bank Group-managed Trust Funds,
with a portfolio o f over $80 million in net grant amount. Trust Fund activities are well
integrated in the Bank Group program (both financial and advisory). Trust Fund
financing has proven especially instrumental: (i)to provide a rapid response to
to
emergencies (e.g., GFRP Food Crisis Response, GFDRR for flood emergencies); (ii)
scale up the impact o f successful operations (e.g., Education For All - Fast Track
Initiative); (iii)to expand the Bank Group’s ability to provide advisory services,
including in sensitive areas (e.g., EITI); and (iv) to pilot activities for an eventual
streamlining (e.g., Output-Based Aid (OBA), pilot programs to improve water supply
mechanisms, JSDF program for Cultural Industries Development for Poor Communities).

ZFC investments. IFC has provided increasing support over the CAS period, with a focus
on the financial sector, S M E development, education and health, manufacturing, and
agribusiness. IFC’s portfolio has grown to US$l50 million, up from only US$16 million
in FY2005, thus supporting private sector development.
M I G A does not have any outstanding guarantee in Yemen. In coordination with IDA
and IFC, MIGA has however provided advisory services on the overall investment
promotion arrangements in Yemen.

34. The Bank Group’s engagement has also had significant indirect results thanks to a strong
dialogue with the authorities as well as with stakeholders and partners. The Bank played a major
convening role in donor coordination, in particular through the co-chairing o f the Consultative
Group (CG) meetings and the design o f multi-donor programs. As in other low-income countries,
renewed donor engagement sent a strong signal to the private sector about potential investment
opportunities, and IFC helped Yemen attract sophisticated new investors, in addition to its own
project financing.

14

Lessons learned

3 5.
The lessons learned through the implementation of the CAS program point to a series
of recommendations, which have been discussed extensively within the country team and are
incorporated in the proposed strategy.
Bank Group assistance has proven effective in supporting specific reforms. The quality
o f the dialogue established with both the authorities and stakeholders has made it possible
to promote and influence the design o f important reforms. The Government i s highly
appreciative o f the Bank Group’s efforts to share global knowledge and adjust it to the
country’s situation.
0

I n a context of limited institutional capacity, implementation remains challenging
although with significant variations across sectors. Overall, the pace o f disbursements
i s broadly in line with MNA and IDA averages, and risks (including fiduciary risks) are
w e l l managed - but continued efforts are needed t o further strengthen and accelerate
implementation. Emerging good practices in that regard include: (i)simplifying project
designs and streamlining implementation arrangements; (ii)
focusing on results based on
a realistic assessment o f capacity constraints; (iii)using decentralized implementation
arrangements where appropriate; and (iv) promoting rapid results approaches (such as the
“1 00-day initiative” which has been very successful in the health sector).

The Government sees Bank Group involvement in a given sector as an effective way to
strengthen overall implementation capacity in this sector, and hence to help mobilize
donors and facilitate execution o f their pledges. This has typically been achieved through
the design o f multi-donor sectoral investment programs (e.g., energy, water, education,
community development, etc.), as well as capacity building activities.
Synergies within the Bank Group have proven effective to provide enhanced support at
both program and project levels. CAS results have been underpinned in large part by the
close cooperation and synergies developed within the Bank Group. One o f the strengths
o f the Bank Group’s program in Yemen has been to conceive, design and implement
activities as complementary parts o f an overall effort. The Government has expressed i t s
satisfaction with the efforts made t o further maximize these synergies through integrated
packages o f knowledge, advisory services, Technical Assistance and financing.
The link between CAS objectives and instruments was insufficient in some sectors. In
hindsight, specific objectives were over-ambitious in view o f the Bank Group
interventions in the corresponding area. The timing o f interventions (e.g., project
approval late in the CAS period) was not always factored in the definition o f outcome
indicators. This resulted in a performance that was lower than expectations in several
cases, even where notable progress was achieved on the ground. The proposed results
matrix for the new C A S will need t o improve the correlation between outcome indicators
and instruments.
0

I n some sectors, there is a trade-off between the short-term focus on results and the
medium-term need to strengthen capaciq. The use o f Project Implementation Units
(PIUs) or cross-sectoral entities, such as the Social Fund for Development (SFD), to
channel resources has proven an efficient way t o achieve results on the ground. Yet,
there i s a risk that such mechanisms undermine the broader capacity-building agenda.

15

Parallel efforts need t o be made t o strengthen capacity within sectoral ministries, with a
view t o preparing for an eventual transfer o f responsibilities, as may be adequate.

Monitoring and evaluation (M&E) remains weak, in an environment where reliable
statistical data are often lacking. Further efforts are needed to enhance the design o f
outcome indicators and the corresponding collection methods. This will require providing
technical and financial assistance in support o f statistical systems as w e l l as improving
the choice o f outcome indicators for upcoming operations.

IV. A NEW PARTNERSHIP,FY2010-13

A. Obiective and expected results

36. The overall objective of the Bank Group’s program proposed in the CAS is to facilitate
Yemen’s further uropress towards the Millennium Develoument Goals. This overall objective
reflects a consensus view expressed by Government, c i v i l society, academia, the private sector,
and parliamentarians, with regard to the key challenges the country i s facing and the possible
optimal use o f Bank Group resources in support o f Yemen’s development agenda. It should be
noted that in a context where the lack o f economic and social opportunities i s often seen as
creating an environment where frustrations can be exploited by violent extremists, successful
development efforts are also likely t o contribute to strengthening the prospects for the country’s
(and the sub-region’s) medium-tern stability.
37. The CAS is articulated around a results framework which i s designed to help focus the
Bank Group’s efforts and the dialogue with the authorities and stakeholders on a clear set o f
measurable objectives (see Annex 5). Progress against these indicators will be assessed on a
continuous basis through regular consultations with the Government, key stakeholders, and
donors, to ensure that Bank Group programs are managed for results and focused on making a
measurable difference on the ground. However, while it provides explicit strategic direction, the
results framework i s not expected to be used as a rigid blueprint, but t o leave scope for
appropriate adjustments in order to respond to evolving priorities and needs.
38. I n an uncertain global environment, the Bank Group will aim to make best use of its
resources to support the Government in facing the challenges associated with the global crisis.
This effort will build on lessons learned during the Bank Group response to the food crisis (within
the context o f the GFRP) and emphasize responsiveness and flexibility. The Bank Group intends
in particular to provide just-in-time analytical advice and Technical Assistance t o the authorities,
and to make use o f available options under the IDA Fast-Track Facility and the IFC Crisis
Response Initiatives. In the short-term, this includes providing policy recommendations on
macroeconomic management (underway), identifying possible re-allocations o f IDA resources
within the existing portfolio to help mitigate the impact o f the crisis on the poor, and working
with private partners t o provide liquidity support through trade finance facilities.

39. As the global economic situation evolves, the Bank Group may propose substantial
adjustments to the proposed program in the CAS Progress Report, which i s currently scheduled
for FY 11. The current assistance program i s based on information available at the time o f i t s
design, and does constitute an adequate response to Government requests and stakeholders
concerns in that context. Yet, the global crisis may affect in Yemen in ways as yet not identified,

16

in which case the Bank Group may have to dramatically shift i t s assistance program. The CAS
Progress Report (which could be advanced or delayed if appropriate) would provide the strategic
framework for such revisions.

B. Kev principles
40. The proposed CAS program is derived from the Government program, as articulated in the
DPPR and the National Reform Agenda. The actions proposed under the CAS are closely aligned
with the priorities identified by the authorities and stakeholders.
4 1. The proposed CAS program foresees a broad-based, yet selective engagement across a
variety of sectors. The Bank Group i s seen by the authorities and many stakeholders as an honest
and trusted partner - a solid reform proponent with the ability to translate global knowledge into
priorities which reflect country circumstances. It i s also perceived as a large financier to both the
public and the private sector. In this context, the authorities, stakeholders, and other development
partners have called on the Bank Group to substantively engage in a number o f sectors in order to
provide a core program around which others can coalesce. In order to avoid a dispersion and
dilution o f efforts, however, the Bank Group will apply selectivity: (i)in the choice o f thematic
areas for engagement (at both sectoral and sub-sectoral levels); (ii)
in the choice o f instruments
for engagement (Technical Assistance, analytical work, financial support though IDA or IFC);
and (iii)in the design o f individual products (keeping them simple so as to facilitate
implementation).
42. The proposed CAS program was designed in close cooperation between IDA and I F C , as
one o f the pilots under the recent initiative by the joint IDA-IFC Secretariat. This i s translating
into an effort to optimize the integration and complementarity o f activities by both institutions,
through the joint design o f the results framework. In addition, several “target strategic themes”
(i.e. financial sector, business environment, energy, mining, and health) have been identified
where mechanisms have been put in place to ensure a close cooperation during implementation o f
the proposed CAS program (see Annex 7).
43. Finally, the CAS is prepared in the broader context of the Bank Group’s strategic focus on
the Arab World. While Yemen i s one o f the few Low-Income Countries (LIC) in the Arab
World, and as such has to address simultaneously a broad range o f issues, most o f the key
challenges it i s facing (and most o f the areas in which the Bank Group intends to provide support)
reflect those identified in the broader Arab World Initiative, including: (i)supporting economic
reform and integration with the global economy, including transport and infrastructure; (ii)
helping to enhance education quality to improve skills in the labor force; (iii)supporting social
integration through work in areas such as gender, health, and social safety nets; and (iv)
supporting reforms in the management o f water resources.

C. Development partners
44. Bank Group assistance will be provided against the backdrop of a signijicant international
effort. Until the early 2000s, the level o f aid to Yemen was lower than that provided to other
IDA countries (with fewer donors and a largely project-based assistance): financial assistance f e l l
from about US$400 million in 1990 to less than US$lOO million in 1995, following the 1991 Gulf
War and the 1994 civil war. Following the launch o f the reform program in 2004, however,
Yemen has been able to successfully rebuild i t s relationship with development partners, and a
number o f donors have stepped up their engagement.

17

45. At the 2006 meeting of the Consultative Group (CG), Yemen received about $5.3 billion in
new pledges from 39 bi- and multi-lateral donors. GCC countries and GCC-based entities are
providing almost two thirds o f the total (Figure 7). Financial assistance by the Bank Group
accounts to about 8 percent o f the total pledges (compared t o about 50 percent o f all
commitments in the pre-CG period). The Government and donors are working closely together t o
ensure an effective implementation o f the pledges - and are reviewing progress through formal
meetings, held annually. Overall, implementation i s often constrained by capacity issues, but
progress i s encouraging and disbursements have increased significantly.
Figure 7: 2006-2010 CG Pledges’

Islamic
Netherlands
Development
Bank
Arab
Monetary
Fund

Kuwait
Saudi Arabia

I

UK

WB

Qatar

I-.
I A.-F

rab Fund for
SocioEconomic
Development

46. I n this context, the Bank Group has developed a close cooperation with a number of
Yemen’s development partners. Most new IDA projects are jointly financed by a number o f
partners who are committed t o using a similar design and harmonized implementation
arrangements, including (i)
development agencies from France, Germany, Italy, the Netherlands,
the United Kingdom, and the United States; (ii)
the European Commission; (iii)
United Nations
agencies; and (iv) regional development entities such as the Islamic Development Bank or the
OPEC Fund. The World Bank Group i s also working closely with the IMF on the
macroeconomic dialogue. The United Kingdom’s Department for International Development
(DFID) has provided Trust Fund resources to establish key technical positions in the World Bank
Country Office (which are now financed from IDA’S administrative budget) and i s financing a
three-year FC-managed technical assistance program o f US$14 million. A close dialogue has
also been established with the GCC Secretariat and bilateral agencies from the sub-region.
Overall, cooperation with both “traditional” and “non-traditional” donors i s solid.

Ministry o f Planning and International Cooperation -AHA Unit - December 5,2006

18

-

47. Yemen is as a pilot country for implementation of the OECD Principles for Good
International Engagement in Fragile States. Yemen i s committed to working with development
partners to increase aid effectiveness through the implementation o f the Paris Declaration and has
set up an Aid Harmonisation and Alignment Unit (AHA) within the Ministry o f Planning and
International Cooperation (MOPIC) to coordinate such efforts. A recent OECD report suggests
that some progress has been made towards harmonization, and yet that further efforts are needed
to meet the Paris Declaration targets for 2010.2 This report has also identified priorities for
further action (see Table 2).

48. The Bank Group’s main contribution will hence be closely linked to its continued and
further strengthened effectiveness in being the ‘(gkle” of external support programs. In
practical terms, during the CAS period the Bank Group will further focus on: (i)
helping to
mobilize donors; (ii)supporting the Government in designing sound sector-wide and thematic
strategies; (iii)building multi-donor investment programs; (iv) helping to strengthen
implementation capacity through i t s own projects for a broader use by other donors; (v) assisting
in improving core Government systems; (vi) demonstrating new implementation approaches that,
if successful, can be mainstreamed by the Government and other development partners; and (vii)
helping to further advance the aid harmonization agenda in line with the Paris Declaration.

“2008 Survey on Monitoring the Paris Declaration Making Aid More Effective by 2010”, OECD.
http:llwww.oecd.orgldataoecd4ll6Ol42224622.pdf

19

Table 2: Paris Declaration Challenges and Priority Actions

D. Stratepic elements of the Bank Group propram
49. Bank Group assistance under the CAS is organized around four strategic objectives, which
are closely aligned with the DPPR focal areas and are inter-related (so that sustainable progress in
one area depends on progress in the others): (i)help accelerate and diversify economic growth;
(ii)help enhance governance; (iii)help foster human and social development; and (iv) help
manage natural resource scarcity and natural risks. Each o f these objectives i s expected t o be
supported through a combination o f instruments (financial, analytical, and advisory support), with
complementary actions from across the Bank Group. Accountability for delivering results will be
joint (IDA and IFC) except in those areas where support i s provided by one institution only.
Overall

50. I n addition to the activities identified under each strategic objective, the Bank Group will
support the Government in updating its development strategy, based on recent developments
and newly-available information. During the CAS period, the Bank Group will provide
Technical Assistance to help in the review o f “Vision 2025”, to support preparation o f the Fourth
Socio-Economic Development Plan for Poverty Reduction, and to help strengthen the country’s
monitoring and evaluation (M&E) capacities.
Proposed instruments: (i)
IDA Technical Assistance; (ii)IDA analytical work (Country
Social Analysis).

Strategic Objective 1: Help accelerate and diversifi economic growth

5 1 . I n the context of the global crisis, the effective diversification of the economy will require
sustained efforts in a number of areas - yet the Bank Group resources remain limited.

20

Drawing from the experience acquired under the previous CAS, the Bank Group will engage
selectively using the full range o f its instruments. Selectivity will be applied in each sector or
thematic area (rather than across areas) and the Bank Group will in particular focus on: (i)
providing analytical and technical advice in areas where it i s seen as the prime source o f support
for critical reforms; and (ii)providing financing where it can help t o mobilize and catalyze
significant additional resources from both public and private financiers.
52. Maintain macroeconomic stability over the medium-term (Thematic Area 1.1). The
Government has indicated i t s appreciation o f the support in this area provided by the Bank Group
over the last C A S period (in coordination with the IMF and other key donors). Against the
backdrop o f the global crisis, the Bank Group intends to provide very substantial assistance in this
area, the focus o f which will be adjusted throughout the C A S period t o respond to evolving needs.
Possible areas o f focus include: (i)macroeconomic risks analysis and identification o f policy
responses; (ii)design o f medium-term macro-economic scenarios (including to manage the
decline in o i l revenues); (iii)strengthening o f national accounts; and (iv) analysis o f poverty
trends to inform policy making.

Proposed instruments: (i)implementation support for the ongoing IDA Institutional
Reform Grant ($27 million undisbursed); (ii)
IDA analytical work (Country Economic
Memorandum, Poverty Assessment); and (iii)IDA technical assistance (macroeconomic
policy, poverty monitoring, statistics).
53. Strengthen the foundations for private sector development (Thematic Area 1.2). Over the
last period, the Bank Group has engaged selectively in this area, through both IDA and IFC, with
significant results. The Bank Group will build on this track record and pursue an approach o f
focused engagement in support o f key reforms, with a focus on: (i)
improving key aspects o f the
regulatory environment (along the line o f the Doing Business reports); (ii)
strengthening selected
areas o f financial sector management (e.g., assisting banks in risk management and corporate
governance, helping develop a regulatory framework for leasing and housing finance); (iii)
expanding access t o credit for the formal private sector, either directly (e.g., for micro and small
and medium enterprises (MSMEs) and women entrepreneurs) or by supporting the development
o f finance institutions (e.g., microfinance and leasing institutions); and (iv) accompanying the
Government’s efforts to tighten economic links between Yemen and the GCC, with a view to
facilitating both trade and investment.

Proposed instruments: (i)IDA analytical work (Investment Climate Update, Financial
Sector Strategy, Trade and GCC); (ii) IDA Technical Assistance (regulatory
environment, regional trade and investments); (iii)IFC Technical Assistance (financial
sector and business environment); and (iv) IFC investments, including in trade finance,
banking, and regional investments.
54. Enhance infrastructure services (Thematic Area 1.3). Within each key infrastructure sector,
the Bank Group will focus on those areas where it can build on an existing track record o f solid
implementation performance and resource mobilization. This includes support to: (i)further
expand the rural road network and establish adequate institutional and financial arrangements for
road maintenance; (ii)expand rural electrification, improve the operational and financial
performance o f the power sector, and develop alternative sources o f energy (e.g., natural gas,
solar, and wind); (iii)
develop urban services t o enhance competitiveness in key cities (Sana’a,
port cities); and (iv) explore opportunities for Public Private Partnerships (PPPs) especially for
power and ports.

21

Proposed instruments: (i)implementation support for ongoing IDA projects, Le., Rural
Access Project, Power Sector Project, Rural Energy Access Project, and Port Cities
Development Project (with a total $45 million undisbursed); (ii)
IDA grants for transport
(additional financing for the Rural Access Project for $40 million), alternative energy
(Mocha Wind Park Project for $20 million), and urban competitiveness (Port Cities
Development Project I1 for $35 million, Integrated Urban Development Project for $30
million); (iii)IDA analytical work (Energy Sector Reform, Urban Development
Strategy); (iv) IDA technical assistance (energy pricing, road sector management); (vi)
IFC Technical Assistance (PPP support); and (vii) possible IFC investment (power PPP,
ports PPP).
55. Support selected drivers of non-oil growth (Thematic Area 1.4). The Government has
identified a number o f priority sectors to spur diversification, in a deteriorated global
environment. The Bank Group will engage selectively with a view to maximizing the impact o f
its assistance and will hence focus on those activities that are most likely to yield sizable and
sustainable non-oil growth in the short- to medium-term. This includes: (i)
increasing agricultural
productivity in rain-fed areas (e.g., extension services, quality standards, supply chains, access to
markets); (ii)promoting the sustainability o f fishing resources management; (iii)encouraging
private investment in the natural gas sector (incentives for exploiting oil-associated natural gas
and for new investors, facilitation o f mid- and downstream investments including power plants)
as well as in mining and tourism (regulatory improvements, support to private operators); and (iv)
exploring avenues to facilitating skills development and the school-to-work transition into these
sectors.

Proposed instruments: (i)implementation support for the ongoing IDA Rain-fed
Agriculture and Livestock Project and the Fisheries Resource Management Project (with
a total $24 million undisbursed); (ii)
IDA grant for an Agriculture Development Project
($30 million); (iii)IDA analytical work (Pathways out o f Rural Poverty, Agriculture
Development Strategy, Natural Gas Sector Strategy, Skills Development); (iv) IDA
Technical Assistance (gas regulatory framework, management o f midstream gas projects,
mining, skills development); (v) IFC Technical Assistance (agribusiness, mining,
tourism, and SME support); and (vi) IFC investments (through IFC Ventures) in financial
institutions for on-lending to MSMEs, and in strategic high growth sectors.
Strategic Objective 2: Help enhance governance

56. The issue of governance cuts across the entire CAS,from the efficiency of service delivery
to the rules that govern economic activities. The Bank Group program will integrate governance
across sectors, in line with the recommendations o f the recent Country Governance and
Anti-Corruption Assessment (CGAC) and building on the ongoing experience in the water sector.
The Bank Group has also been asked to help tackle specific overall governance issues, but given
the capacity, political, and social constraints, selectivity i s key. Efforts will hence focus on three
areas where the Bank Group has been encouraged to take the lead by the Government and a group
o f donors involved in supporting governance reforms.

57. Further strengthen transparency (Thematic Area 2.1). In coordination with other donors
(including USAID and GTZ), the Bank Group i s currently providing Technical Assistance to the
authorities, including to SNACC. During the CAS period, the Bank Group will build on this
partnership and provide Technical Assistance to help: (i)further develop SNACC and COCA
capacity; (ii)finalize and implement the National Strategy and Action Plan to Combat

22

Corruption; (iii)
support civil society organizations t o promote demand for good governance; and
(iv) further implement the EITI process.

Proposed instruments: IDA Technical Assistance (anti-corruption, civil society, EITI).

5 8. Improve effectiveness and efficiency of public finance management (Thematic Area 2.2).
Over the last years, the Bank Group helped implement the Public Finance Management Reform
Action Plan which was adopted by the Government and a group o f donors (including DFID, the
Netherlands, and UNDP). During the CAS period, the Bank Group will further intensify this
effort with a focus on: (i)
budget preparation and execution processes (including the adoption o f a
Medium-Term Expenditure Framework, MTEF); (ii)implementation o f the recent procurement
law; (iii)continued implementation o f the Accounting and Financial Management Information
System (AFMIS) and expansion o f i t s coverage; and (iv) improvement in financial management
(commitment control mechanisms, monitoring o f expenditure, forecasting and cash flow
management systems, fiscal decentralization, public access t o information).
Proposed instruments: (i)IDA grant for a Public Finance Modernization Project ($10
million); (ii)IDA analytical work (Public Expenditure Review, Country Procurement
Assessment Update); (iii)
IDA Technical Assistance (procurement reform, public finance
management); (iv) IFC Technical Assistance (customs and tax administration).

59. Further support civil service reform (Thematic Area 2.3). In coordination with other
donors, the Bank Group i s currently providing financial and Technical Assistance in this area
albeit with mixed results. The Bank Group will pursue this effort with a focus on: (i)
consolidating the removal o f “ghost workers” and “double dippers” from the civil service payroll;
and (ii)
re-engineering pilot institutions.
Proposed instruments: (i)implementation support for the ongoing IDA C i v i l Service
Modernization Project ($22 million undisbursed) and the Support t o Ministry o f Legal
Affairs IDF; (ii)
IDA Technical Assistance (civil service reform, support t o ministry o f
legal affairs).
Strategic Objective 3: Help foster human and social development

60. Improving living conditions in Yemen will require taking sustained action on a number of
fronts, through a combination of sectoral and cross-sectoral approaches. In an environment o f
limited resources, and building o n existing programs and partnerships, priorities for Bank Group
engagement will include: (i)encouraging and supporting national debates on deep-rooted
problems, such as those related t o gender, youth, and qat; (ii)promoting cross-sectoral
interventions where appropriate and possible; (iii)building or further consolidating multi-donor
umbrella programs t o facilitate coordinated approaches in areas where substantial financial
assistance i s needed; (iv) providing analytical and Technical Assistance in support o f critical
reforms; and (v) facilitating the engagement o f the private sector in the social sectors.

61. Promote debate and cross-sectoral approaches on three issues that are at the root of
Yemen’s development constraints: gender, youth, and qat (Thematic Area 3.1). There i s a broad
consensus that effective action in these areas i s o f critical importance for Yemen t o make
sustainable social and economic progress; that this will require a concerted effort across sectors;
and that success will only be possible if reforms are driven by Yemeni stakeholders (rather than
external partners). In each o f these three areas, the Bank Group will hence focus on: (i)
ensuring
that all projects and activities prepared and implemented during the CAS period duly reflect the

23

need t o make progress on these issues; (ii)
contributing to the national debate by analyzing and
documenting critical aspects o f these issues (e.g., gender equality, especially in the legal /
regulatory sphere; youth and employment; social, medical, and environmental effects o f qat
consumption) and by sharing relevant international experience; and (iii)
strengthening capacity o f
relevant advocacy and implementation-oriented C i v i l Service Organizations (CSOs). In addition,
the Bank Group will: (iv) help promote female and youth entrepreneurship; (v) support
implementation o f the children and youth strategy; and (vi) pilot innovative ways t o prevent or
limit qat consumption by children.

Proposed instruments: (i)IDA analytical work (Gender Assessment Update, Youth and
Employment, Qat and Water); (ii)
IDA Technical Assistance (national gender dialogue,
implementation o f the Children and Youth Strategy, qat dialogue); (iii)IFC Technical
Assistance (Business Edge Training for women and youth); and (iv) I F C investments for
S M E support targeting women.

62. Further strengthen delivery of education and health services (Thematic Area 3.2). The
Bank Group will build on existing programs and partnerships with a view to: (i)
strengthening (in
the education sector) or further developing (in the health sector) integrated multi-donor programs;
and (ii)
supporting private sector provision o f education and health services. In education, the
sectoral focus will be placed on access (especially in rural areas and for girls), quality, and
efficiency in the use o f public resources across all levels o f education (basic, vocational, higher).
In health, the sectoral focus will be on strengthening capacity and efficiency for the delivery o f a
basic package o f health services, improving delivery o f reproductive health services, and reducing
the incidence o f schistosomiasis.
Proposed instruments: (i)
implementation support for the ongoing IDA Basic Education
Development Project, Secondary Education and Girls Access Project, Second Vocational
Education and Training Project, and Health Reform Support Project (with a total $39
million undisbursed); (ii)IDA grants for a Basic Education Project ($40 million), a
Higher Education Project ($10 million), a Health and Population Project ($30 million)
and a Schistosomiasis Project ($20 million); (iii)IDA analytical work (Education
Country Status Report; Health, Nutrition, and Population Strategy); (iv) IDA Technical
Assistance (education, capacity building to the National Population Council); (v) IFC
Technical Assistance (PPP initiatives); and (vi) possible IFC investments (private health
service providers, private education and vocational training).

63. Implement community-level development actions and enhance the social protection system
(Thematic Area 3.3). The Bank Group i s supporting two entities which have a strong track record
o f resources mobilization and implementation performance: the Social Fund for Development
(SFD, whose main focus i s on village-level infrastructure and social development) and the Public
Works Program (PWP, whose main focus i s on small infrastructure and environment). The Bank
Group has also initiated a dialogue on the gradual replacement o f general consumption subsidies
by targeted cash transfers to the most vulnerable. During the C A S period, the Bank Group will:
(i)help further scale-up SFD and PWP activities, further tighten their linkages with sectoral
ministries, initiate strategic consultations on the mainstreaming o f these activities, and use these
instruments t o promote cross-sectoral approaches in support o f specific MDGs (e.g., nutrition,
maternal health); and (ii)help design a strategy for subsidy and social protection reform
(including macroeconomic, energy, social protection, and communications aspects) and
strengthen the necessary capacity for implementation (e.g., targeting system, Social Welfare
Fund, labor market policies).

24

Proposed instruments: (i)implementation support for the ongoing IDA Social
Development Fund Project (including the additional grant from the Global Food Crisis
Response Program and the Public Works Project (for a total o f $36 million undisbursed);
(ii)
IDA grants for follow-up Social Development Fund Project ($50 million) and Public
Works Project ($40 million), and for a Subsidy Reform Development Policy Grant ($30
million); (ii)
IDA Technical Assistance (social policyhubsidy reform).
Strategic Objective 4: Help manage natural resources scarcity and natural risks
64. The challenge in dealing effectively with scarcity and risk is to take forceful preventive
action - especially to slow down the depletion o f water resources, to mitigate the impact o f
natural disasters, and to foster adaptation to climate change.

65. Slow down the depletion of water resources (Thematic Area 4.1). The Bank Group has been
working with a core group o f donors who are partnering in support o f the National Water Sector
Support and Investment Program. During the CAS period, the Bank Group will consolidate and
further expand this work, with a focus on: (i)reduction o f groundwater abstraction to more
sustainable levels; (ii)
expansion o f water and sanitation coverage in rural as well as peri-urban
areas; (iii)enhancement o f irrigation eficiency and productivity (more crop per drop); and (iv)
capacity building, including through the implementation o f the well-articulated sectoral anticorruption action plan.
Proposed instruments: (i)implementation support for the ongoing IDA Rural Water
Supply and Sanitation Project, Urban Water Supply and Sanitation Project, Groundwater
and Soil Conservation Project, and Water Sector Support Project (for a total $196 million
undisbursed); (ii)
IDA grant for a Water Sector Support Project additional financing ($90
million); (iii)IDA analytical work (Water Strategy Update); and (iv) possible IFC
investments in MSME water service providers through IFC Ventures and on-lending
mechanisms.

66. Mitigate the impact of natural disasters and invest in climate change adaptation (Thematic
Area 4.2). Over the last years, the Bank Group provided substantial financial and Technical
Assistance to help respond to natural disasters and prepare a national strategy to increase
resilience to the impact o f climate change. The Bank Group will further pursue this effort, with a
focus on: (i)
strengthening the capacity o f relevant Government agencies to establish an advanced
alert system where possible and to manage natural disasters and their aftermath; (ii)providing
exceptional assistance, if and as may be possible, to support recovery efforts; and (iii)
support the
implementation o f priority elements o f the climate change strategy (and help enhance crosssectoral approaches).
Proposed instruments: (i)
implementation support for the ongoing IDA Flood Protection
and Emergency Reconstruction Project ($50 million undisbursed); (ii)possible IDAmanaged Trust Fund resources for climate change; (ii)
IDA-managed GEF resources for
an Agrobiodiversity and Adaptation to Climate Change Project ($4 million) and a Solar
Energy Technology Project; (iii)IDA Technical Assistance (capacity for disaster
management, climate change mitigation); and (iv) IFC Technical Assistance
(environmental and social sustainability).

25

E. ImDlementinP Bank Grow assistance
67. Overall, the Bank Group intends to use the full spectrum of available instruments:
financial, analytical, and advisory support, from IDA, IFC, and possibly MIGA. Annexes 1 and 2
present a summary l i s t o f instruments (by category) which are expected to support CAS
implementation.
68. Managing the existingportfolios. Supervision o f ongoing activities will remain the first and
foremost priority for both IDA and IFC. With about US$685 million undisbursed for IDA, and
about US$l50 million in commitments for IFC, the ongoing program i s significant and i t s
effective implementation i s critical to getting results in the CAS period (projects already
underway are the ones that are most likely to translate into actual results on the ground in the
coming years). This will require hands-on implementation support at both design and
implementation stages. It will also require continued attention to fiduciary issues (e.g., tightened
mechanisms for implementation, relatively low threshold for procurement prior reviews, and
stringent financial management arrangements).

69. Providing continuedfinancial support. Such financial support i s expected to be provided
through a combination o f IDA resources, Trust Funds, IFC instruments, and possibly MIGA
guarantees.

IDA resources. IDA resources are expected to be provided throughout the IDA 15 cycle
(FY09-FY 11). The amount would be adjusted annually on the basis o f several factors,
including implementation performance and Country Policies and Institutional Assessment
(CPIA) and the terms o f the assistance (grants, credits or a mix o f the two) would be
determined annually based on the country's debt ~ustainability.~
The overall size o f the
IDA envelope during the CAS period i s assumed to be about SDR 300 million, i.e. an
average annual allocation o f about SDR 75 million (about $120 million at current
exchange rates). IDA i s intending to make use o f a variety o f instruments subject to the
following considerations: (i)focus resources on a relatively small number o f large
operations which can have a significant development impact on the ground (and will not
require a disproportionate share o f IDA's administrative budget for supervision); (ii)
minimize implicit commitments for the post-CAS period (when the IDA allocation i s
unknown), such as those resulting from the use o f Adaptative Program Loans (APLs);
(iii)scale up success through additional financing for well-performing operations; (iv)
explore innovative instruments such as IBRD enclave or guarantee as may be appropriate
(e.g. in the mining sector); and (vi) make full use o f the flexibility allowed under the new
Country Financing Parameters (approved in October 2005). IDA i s also planning to
provide financial assistance in support o f the subsidies reform through a Development
Policy Grant (DPG) - based on the satisfactory experience (including on the fiduciary
front) under the current Institutional Reform Development Policy Grant. Finally, IDA
will use flexibility in the selection, focus, and design o f financial instruments to allow for
The CAS covers the period FY10-FY13, which includes the remaining two years of the IDA15 period
(FY10-ll), and the first two years of IDA16. Estimates o f IDA resources available for FY10-13 are
indicative only and are subject to change. Actual annual allocations will be determined annually on the
basis o f several factors including: (i)total IDA resources available (in particular, FY12 and FY13
indicative allocations assume that the total amount o f resources available under IDA 16 will be similar to
IDA15); (ii)
Yemen's CPIA performance relative to the performance o f other IDA countries; and (iii)
the
terms o f IDA's assistance to Yemen (grants or credits) and to other IDA countries. IDA allocations are
made in SDRs and the U S $ equivalent amounts are dependent upon the prevailing exchange rate.

26

adjustment to developments on the ground if warranted (e.g. in support o f the subsidies
reform).
0

Trust Funds. IDA intends to further seek and deploy Trust Fund resources during the
CAS period. Priority will be given to using such resources in a manner that helps IDA to:
(i)enhance i t s responsiveness and flexibility in helping the Government face emerging
challenges; (ii)pilot innovative mechanisms; (iii)provide substantive Technical
Assistance; and (iv) scale up successful operations. The Bank Group will pay continued
attention to ensuring the effective integration o f these activities in the program developed
under the CAS.

0

IFC investments. The level and areas o f I F C financial support will depend to a large
extent on the actual demand for equity or debt financing by strong sponsors, both local
and international. Yet, IFC i s committed to reach out and proactively work with potential
investors to further scale up i t s investment activities, and especially t o foster further
South-South investments into Yemen. The global IFC Ventures project (implemented in
select IDA countries) has allocated US$6 million for risk capital investments in Yemen,
targeting 25-50 firms with an investment size under US$500,000, as well as US$2.4
million to cover advisory services expenditures in Yemen. In the coming CAS period,
I F C will place a particular focus on areas such as financial sector, infrastructure
(including PPPs), health and education, and support t o SMEs in high-growth sectors.

0

M I G A guarantees. Yemen’s authorities and stakeholders are keen on stepping up their
engagement with MIGA, with a view t o developing a solid pipeline o f guarantees which
would complement IDA and I F C support.

70. Using the Bank Group’s convening power. The CAS proposes that the Bank Group
continues to play a leading role in efforts aimed at donor mobilization and harmonization. The
Bank Group’s role will in particular include the continued co-chairmanship o f annual donor
meetings (to follow up on commitments made during the 2006 CG meeting) and an active
participation in the various donor groups (including sectoral and thematic groups) which regularly
meet in Sana’a. Moreover, the Bank Group will pursue i t s efforts to design projects in such a
way that they can easily become vehicles for multi-donor financing, and to strengthen
Government technical capacity to implement other donors’ contributions, as may be possible and
appropriate.
7 1. Providingfurther analytical and advisory services. The Bank Group (both IDA and IFC)
will continue t o invest in high-quality analytical and advisory services, with a particular focus on
sharing global knowledge and helping the Government to analyze key challenges the country i s
facing and to design specific measures to address them. This will require hands-on assistance and
capacity building, attention t o tailoring recommendations t o the country’s circumstances, close
synergies between IDA and IFC, and effective dissemination o f Bank Group’s knowledge
products. As part o f the monitoring o f CAS implementation, task teams will also be required to
systematically document how specific analytical products contribute to achieving CAS outcomes.
72. Scaling up capacity-building and learning activities. During the CAS period, the Bank
Group (both IDA and IFC) will place a special emphasis on providing such support across all
thematic areas, with a focus on: (i)informing and supporting policy making; (ii)facilitating an
accelerated implementation o f Government and donor-financed investments; and (iii)
strengthening capacity within the private sector and related institutions. This will be achieved
through a combination o f instruments, including both specific Technical Assistance as well as

27

imbedded support under IDA-financed projects and IFC-supported investments - and a further
scaling up o f WBI programs.

73. Formalizing arrangements for the integration of I D A and IFC programs. Such
arrangements are expected to remain light and flexible, but t o allow for close monitoring o f the
actual complementarity o f activities between both institutions. This includes both a commitment
to hold semi-annual reviews o f progress by the joint management o f both institutions (at Director
level) and close collaboration between relevant IDA and I F C teams throughout the CAS period in
implementing activities under the five “target strategic themes” (financial sector, business
environment, energy, mining, and health).
74. Furthering decentralization. Effective implementation and management o f the Bank Group
program requires a strong presence in the field. The IDA and I F C Country Offices are expected
t o play a key role in this respect. Security permitting, both IDA and IFC intend to strengthen
these offices through decentralization o f both professional staff and responsibilities.

F. Results-Based Monitoring:and Evaluation

75. Monitoring progress towards the CAS outcomes is expected to be complex, in an
environment where country systems remain too weak for effective detailed poverty, economic,
and human development monitoring. Consequently, the selection o f outcome indicators has
focused on those that can be relatively easily monitored through systems that are already in place
or that will be in place in the near future. This i s expected t o be complemented by project-level
data gathering to monitor progress at the level o f each IDA- or IFC-supported operation. In
parallel, the Bank Group will pursue i t s efforts t o gradually strengthen Yemen’s statistical
capacities and will work with the newly-created Monitoring and Evaluation Unit at the Ministry
o f Planning and International Cooperation t o help prepare the monitoring and evaluation
framework for private sector development reforms. Overall, it i s expected that using the CAS as
a management tool will help staff at all levels t o closely monitor progress in the outcomes that are
sought, and will also serve as an incentive t o design simpler, more results-oriented projects that
reflect actual implementation capacity.

V. MANAGINGRISKS

76. The proposed CAS program entails an element of risk, especially given the uncertain
global environment today, which will have to be carefully managed. Consistent with past
experience in Yemen, the proposed approach i s based on pro-active risk management rather than
risk avoidance. For each key risk, such approach includes three elements: (i)warning
mechanisms, to detect problems at an early stage; (ii)response mechanisms, t o mitigate the
immediate impact; and (iii)
risk reduction mechanisms, to gradually reduce the likelihood and
potential impact o f such risks over time.
77. Fragility of the political and security environment. Implementation o f the Bank Group
program could be hampered by: (i)
deteriorating security conditions in parts or the whole o f the
country; or (ii)
social unrest and political agitation.

28

0

Warning. These risks are in areas which are outside the Bank Group’s mandate, and
their early identification typically requires access t o intelligence and capacity for political
analysis. Staff will work closely with key bilaterals and specialized UN entities to
monitor political and security developments, and to assess their possible impact on the
proposed CAS program.

0

Response. The proposed contingency response t o a country-wide deterioration o f the
security situation is t o maintain a significant Bank Group engagement, although with an
incremental and targeted scaling down o f specific activities as the situation may require
(rather than immediate withdrawing). The proposed contingency response t o a localized
deterioration o f the security situation i s the suspension o f activities in the relevant areas.

0

Risk reduction. The Bank Group will contribute t o risk reduction through i t s programs
aimed at improving the economic, social, and governance environments.

78. Negative external economic environment and macroeconomic shocks. The successful
implementation o f the Bank Group program would be jeopardized by a severe and long drawn out
global slowdown o f economic growth, especially if it were to affect in a durable and significant
way o i l prices and economic prospects in GCC countries.
0

Warning.
The Bank Group will closely and continuously monitor economic
developments in Yemen and in the region, and assess their possible impact on the
proposed CAS program.

0

Response. The proposed contingency response will consist o f sustained Bank Group
engagement through a combination o f analytical work (to inform strategic decisions the
Government may need to take), Technical Assistance (to assist in the implementation o f
specific measures), and possibly financial resources (to help mitigate the short-term
impact o f a shock). The Bank Group could also adjust the scope and focus o f i t s
assistance program if needed, which would be formalized through the CAS Progress
Report.

0

Risk reduction. In a global context o f economic crisis, there i s little that the Bank Group
could do through i t s Yemen program t o dramatically reduce the risk. Action will need to
be taken at a global, or at least regional, level. Bank Group programs in Yemen may
contribute t o a limited extent to this endeavor, including by supporting economic
diversification (and reduced reliance on o i l revenues) and strengthening social protection
in Yemen.

79. Diminished Government’s commitment or ability to reform. Further reform efforts will be
key to the effective implementation o f the program supported under the C A S - and yet may be
difficult in the face o f a difficult external context and possible popular opposition. Capacity
constraints may further hamper the Government’s ability to design and implement critical
reforms.
0

Warning. The Bank Group will work closely with other development partners and
stakeholders t o continuously assess the implementation o f the reform program, against
the backdrop o f economic and social developments. Such assessment will in particular
focus on progress in implementing the National Reform Agenda (and i t s successor
programs) and policy reforms supported under specific projects.

29

0

0

Response. This will aim to support and strengthen the Government in i t s reform efforts through an intensification o f the policy dialogue and an adjustment o f planned
interventions, as well as through the provision o f targeted Technical Assistance to
mitigate capacity constraints where needed.
Risk reduction. This includes the provision o f hands-on support to the Government’s
reform efforts to address capacity issues (e.g., through Technical Assistance). It also
includes maintaining a trust-based policy dialogue with the authorities and engaging in a
sustained dialogue with key stakeholders (such as private sector and civil society) to help
build or strengthen the constituency for reforms as appropriate.

80. Fiduciary risks. The main risk i s related t o the misuse o f resources made available under
Bank Group-financed projects. A secondary risk i s that “ring-fenced” fiduciary arrangements
result in undermining institutional capacity development efforts.
0

0

0

Warning. The Bank Group will continue t o closely monitor fiduciary aspects o f project
implementation through regular reviews and external audits.
Response.
With regard to corruption under Bank Group-financed operations,
management will use applicable legal remedies. With regard to the tension between
“ring-fencing” projects and capacity building activities, the Bank Group will take a caseby-case approach to define appropriate arrangements (e.g. gradual transfer o f
responsibilities, substantive involvement o f sectoral entities in non-fiduciary aspects o f
implementation, sector-wide approaches).
Risk reduction. The Bank Group will support the Government’s efforts to improve
governance, within the overall context o f i t s Governance and Anti-Corruption work, and
in particular to strengthen capacity for procurement and financial management, as
described under the second strategic element o f the CAS. The Bank Group i s also
engaged in an effort aimed at strengthening audit f i r m s in Yemen.

30

Annex 1 - ProDosed IDA Program

Annex 1: Proposed IDA Program
IDA Financing
FY
FY 10

I

FY 12

FY 13

,

US$ million**
35
20
10

Indicative Program*
Port Cities Development Project I1
Mocha Wind Park Project
Higher Education Proiect I1

I

Total

Health and Population Project
Subsidy Reform DPG
Total
Basic Education Development Project (additional financing)
Public Works Project I V
Rural Access Project (additional financing)
Total
Water Sector Support Project (additional financing)
Agriculture Development Project
Total
Financial Sector D P L
Natural Gas Proiect
Ibb Flood Protection Project
Power Sector Project
Social Welfare Fund Project

140

30
30

100
40
40
40
120

90
30
120

30
15
30
40
10

31

I

Annex 1 - Proposed IDA Program

IDA Analytical Work
FY
FY 10

FY 11

FY 12

FY 13

Indicative Program
Public Expenditure Review
Investment Climate Update
Financial Sector Strategy
Pathways Out of Rural Poverty
Urban Development Strategy
Education Country Status Report
Trade and GCC
Agriculture Development Strategy
Natural Gas Sector Strategy
School to Work Transition Strategy
Gender Assessment Update
Qat and Water Analysis
Country Economic Monitoring Memorandud Development Policy Review
Energy Sector Reform
Country Procurement Assessment Update
Health, Nutrition and Population Strategy
Poverty Assessment
Country Social Analysis
Water Strategy Update

32

Annex 1 - Proposed IDA Program

IDA Technical Assistance

I

I

I

Support to Vision 2025 Update and preparation o f the Fourth DPPR
Macroeconomic policy
Poverty monitoring
Support in discussions with GCC
Business environment (FIAS)
Financial sector
Road Sector Management
Energy pricing
Options for sustainable water supply to Taiz
Natural gas regulatory framework
Management o f midstream natural gas projects
Mining sector
Transparency
Public finance management
Procurement reform
Civil service reform
Support to Ministry o f Legal Affairs
Decentralization
Support to children and youth action plan
Support to the gender national dialogue
Capacity building to the National Population Council
Education
Social policy reform
Support to the qat national dialogue
Capacity for disaster management
Climate change mitigation

33

I

I

I

IDA Implementation Support
Project

Closing
FY

Civil Service Modernization
Institutional Reform Credit (DPG)
Health Reform Support Project (HRSP)*
Basic Education Development Program
Social Fund For Development I11*
Second Vocational Training Project
Secondary Education. Dev. and Girls Access Project
GPOBA W3 - Yemen Health
Rural Water Suuelv & Sanitation *
Urban Water Supply & Sanitation A P L *
Sana'a Basin Water Management *
Port Cities Development Program
Taiz Municipal Dev & Flood Protection
Groundwater & Soil Conservation Project
Third Public Works
Second Rural Access
Power Sector
Fisheries Res. Management & Conservation
Rainfed Agriculture And Livestock
As of February 22,2009.
* Project set to close in 2009 -possibly extended

34

2010
2010
2010
2013
2015
2012

2010
2010
201 1
201 1
2010
201 1
201 1
2012

Project
Amount (US$
million)

Undisbursed
(US$ million)*

44.00
50.93
27.53
65.00
75.00
15.00
20.00
6.23
40.00
130.00
24.00
23.40
65.20
70.00
74.84
40.00
50.00
25.00
20.00

21.59
26.99
3.77

36.69
5.75
15.97
19.05
6.18
15.63
50.28
12.07
7.5 1
14.94
40.08
29.47
20.69
52.07
23.99
16.39

Annex 2 - Proposed IFC Activities

Annex 2: Proposed IFC Activities
AdvisoryITA activities in the following areas:

Business enabling environment (IDMIFC):
o Framework for investment regulation and attraction
o Doing Business Reform Agenda
o Tax administration simplification
o Start-up simplification national rollout
o Customs and logistics reform
o Free zone reform
Access tofinance:
o Credit information
o Leasing
o Microfinance
o Housing finance
o SMEbanking
o Corporate governance
o Secured Lending Framework
Public private partnerships in:
o Power
0 Ports
o Health
Industry reforms and support:
o Management training (Business Edge)
o Industry specific assistance (IDNIFC)
Environmental and social sustainability:
o Mining industry stakeholder framework
o Environmental sustainability
0

Monitoring and evaluation

Investment activities in the following areas:
0

Financial sector (including banking, trade finance, S M E finance, microfinance, leasing)
Direct investments in SMEs through IFC Ventures Project, and in other strategic sectors,
including possibly agribusiness
Private educatiordvocational training sector
Private health providers
Private investments in infrastructure (e.g., concessioned ports, PPP in power generation)

35

m

m

m m m m m

m m m m m m m m m m o o o

r

r

- - - - a

rrrrr

o o o o o o m e e - - o o m

m m m m w

0
0

c?

m

t-

0
0

r
$

4B

..
x

0

X

4

0
0

s

ti

t0
0

0 0 0 0 0
0 0 0 0 0

rc?c?c?c?

c o w w w m

0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 - - 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0

0

0

w w w w w w m z z z w w ~

t-

2

mwt-mc-ammcawwtimt-

t0
0

rrrrrrrrrrcrr

2 2
c ? c c ~ c P c r c c c c rT r

- -......-..
r

0 0 0 0 0
0 0 0 0 0

0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0

O O N N N -

mm.m
. e . .- m- tm
- c-w..
2r
ta -

c r r r r
.D o
o o w
o - - -

- -

a
r r r r r Q r r r r r r
m - - - t - m w t i - - o m m

--

z

r
2

ea
0
0

2r
z

Annex 4 - Debt Sustainabilitv Analvsis
Annex 4: Debt Sustainability Analysis

1. Debt ratios are presently relatively low by international standards, and hence Yemen
does not meet the highly indebted poor countries (HIPC) criteria for debt relief. External debt has
declined steadily to an estimated 22 percent o f GDP in 2008, but domestic debt (all short-term
and expensive) i s on the rise - estimated at nearly 16 percent o f GDP in 2008. N e t public debt
(domestic and external) i s also on the rise after three years o f continuous decline, reaching 35.2
percent o f GDP in 2007. This i s a potentially large ratio primarily due to the Government’s l o w
capacity t o mobilize revenues (non-hydrocarbon revenue was only 10 percent o f GDP in 2007, o f
which tax revenue was only 7 percent).
2. Yemen i s at a high risk of external debt distress in view o f the medium-term fiscal
outlook, characterized by dwindling o i l production and volatility in o i l prices. The January 2009
Debt Sustainability Analysis (DSA) done jointly by IDA and IMF highlights that even in the
context o f comprehensive fiscal and structural reforms (Le., an adjustment scenario), the present
value (PV) o f debt-to-exports ratio i s projected to rise above the 100 percent threshold by 2018,
while the PV o f debt-to-GDP ratio i s projected to approach the 30 percent threshold by 2028.
Although other indicators (notably debt service t o revenue ratio) remain below their respective
thresholds, D S A projections indicate that the outlook will worsen as debt accumulates and
resources available t o service it decline as a result o f the drying up o f o i l exports around 202 1.
3. External debt sustainability could be further weakened by adverse shocks, especially a
depreciation in the exchange rate, lower export growth, and less favorable financing terms. For
instance, standard D S A stress tests indicate that a one-time 30 percent devaluation o f the rial in
2009 would bring the PV o f debt above 40 percent o f GDP and almost 200 percent o f fiscal
revenue by 2028. Similarly, if export growth remains one standard deviation below i t s historical
average in 2009 and 2010, the P V o f debt would peak at 245 percent o f exports by 2025 and
exceed 130 percent o f fiscal revenue by 2028; external debt service would rise above 10 percent
o f exports. The P V o f debt would peak above 240 percent o f exports in 2025, if interest rates on
new external borrowing were 2 percent higher than in the adjustment scenario.

4. Yemen’s external debt would become rapidly unsustainable in the context o f a nonadjustment scenario. All thresholds would be breached quite rapidly, even when assuming
external financing available on comparatively favorable (though not fully concessional) terms.
Moreover, all thresholds will be exceeded by a considerable margin over the medium-term.
Under such a non-adjustment scenario, Yemen will have little room for absorbing the shocks
associated with a depletion o f o i l production by 202 1.
4. The DSA assumes that the Government responds to falling oil production and lower oil
prices through a concerted and sustained commitment to: (i)
fiscal adjustment (by enhancing
revenue mobilization and containing recurrent expenditure); (ii)increased exchange rate
continuation o f current efforts t o contain inflation; and (iv) structural reforms t o
flexibility; (iii)
improve the business environment and encourage investment.

5. All o f Yemen’s external debt is owed to official creditors, mostly on concessional terms.
External debt was US$5.8 billion (26.9 percent o f GDP) at end-2007, o f which over half was
owed t o multilateral creditors (including US$2.1 billion to the World Bank, US$0.6 billion to the
Arab Fund for Social and Economic Development, and US$170 million to the IMF). The other
half was owed to bi-lateral creditors (US$1.2 billion t o Russia, US$0.3 billion to Saudi Arabia
and US$240 million to Japan). Yemen has already benefited from a series o f rescheduling

37

Annex 4 - D e b t Sustainabilitv Analvsis
arrangements under the Paris Club in 1996, 1997, and 2001. Domestic debt consists mainly o f
Treasury bills held by domestic banks and non-bank investors.

6. The international community i s committed to supporting Yemen through grants and
concessional loans in the medium- and long-term. In the context o f an unsustainable external
debt situation in the long term, it i s critical that the Government undertakes early action on key
reforms t o strengthen public finances, improve debt management, and boost prospects for
investment and growth. Such efforts by the Government would likely help mobilize greater
external financing from donors over the years- another element critical for ensuring debt
sustainability in Yemen.

38

>

.r

+
t

c

-c
+
U
r

;
I
lr

iS

E
U

I

k

.r

+
T

c
t
U
7

c

i

I

I
I

tE
E

a

0
d

51
C

2

b

1

N
d

?

.r

+
t

c

+U
c

i

a

Fr

I
V

+

a

E
E
4

B
Y

a

0

B
8
m

u

'E

%

3
0
1

.E
5

'5

m
d-

*

.F

+
c

t

c
+
U

r

ti

$
I

v

kE
E

a

Annex 6 - CAS C o m d e t i o n ReDort
Annex 6: FY06-08 Country Assistance Strategy Completion Report
Country: YEMEN
Date o f CAS: M a y 17,2006
Date o f Progress Report(s): None required
Period Covered by CAS Completion Report: FY2006-2009
CAS Completion Report Completed by: Fabrice Houdart, with contributions from Yemen Core Team
Members: Maher F. Abu-Taleb, Afrah Alawi Al-Ahmadi, Pierre Audinet, Alexander E. Bakalian, Anush
Bezhanyan, Jean-Charles Crochet, Giulio D e Tommaso, Xavier Devictor, Rapti Goonesekere (IFC),
Chandrasekar Govindarajalu, Amanda Green (Consultant), M i r a Hong, Ali Khamis, Yoshiharu
Kobayashi, Andrew Makokha, Somin Mukherji, Sameh Naguib Wahba, Shinsaku Nomura, Rory
0’Sullivan, Karine Pezzani, Anwar Ravat (IFC), Guido Rurangwa, Andrew Stone.

I.INTRODUCTION
1.
This CAS Completion Report evaluates the effectiveness of the FY2006-2009 Country
Assistance Strategy (CAS) for the Republic o f Yemen. The CAS, which covered only the activities o f
the International Development Association (IDA), was dated M a y 17, 2006, and discussed by the World
Bank Executive Board in June 2006. This CASCR constitutes a self-evaluation by the Bank’s country
team o f the alignment o f the CAS with Yemen’s longer-term strategic goals, the extent to which expected
outcomes were achieved, and the Bank’s performance in contributing to those achievements. The lessons
learned from this experience have been taken into account in the design o f the CAS for FY2010-20 13.

2.
This assessment i s based on discussions within the country team and with government
counterparts, as well as a variety o f reference document^.^ The country team has also benefited from a
series o f external evaluations o f the country program, including the Independent Evaluation Group’s
(IEG) Country Assistance Evaluation o f August 2006 (Report No. 36527), an Independent Procurement
Review (IPR), and Project Assessments by the Quality Assurance Group (QAG).
11. YEMEN’S LONGER TERM STRATEGIC GOALS
3.
The 2006 CAS focused on supporting the main objectives o f the Government’s mediumterm strategy, embodied in the Third Socio-Economic Development Plan for Poverty Reduction (DPPR
2006-10)6 and subsequent National Reform Agenda for 2008-2010. Yemen’s DPPR, which also serves as
i t s Second Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (PRSP) for’the same period, has defined the country’s
development dilemma as “a m i x o f chronic structural challenges pertaining to population growth and
dispersal throughout the country, rampant illiteracy and unemployment, major technological and
knowledge deficits, and water resource ~carcities.”~
The DPPR has also acknowledged the deficiencies o f
the governance system and the urgent need for economic diversification prompted by the rapid depletion
o f the country’s o i l reserves.

Reference documents include the CAS for FY2006-2009, Project Appraisal Documents, ImplementationStatus
and Results Reports, supervision reports (Aide-Memoires and Back-to-OfficeReports), recent Economic and Sector
Work, ImplementationCompletion Reports, and the 2008 Country Performance Portfolio Review.
6
Available at http://www.yemencg.org/library/en/DPPR.pdf
Republic of Yemen. 2006. “The Socio-Economic Development Plan for Poverty Reduction (2006-2010),” p. 18.

45

Annex 6 - CAS Completion Report
4.
The priorities set out in the DPPR focus on two inter-related themes: (i) achieving
accelerated economic growth and employment generation; and (ii)intensifying poverty reduction
efforts. These themes represent a high degree o f continuity from the objectives o f the previous PRSP.
Within these broad themes, the DPPR i s built on eight pillars that provide a prioritized framework for
action: (i)
macroeconomic policies and targets; (ii)
good governance; (iii)
development o f productive and
promising sectors; (iv) water, environment, and basic infrastructure; (v) human development; (vi)
Government services; (vii) social safety net, social protection, and social security; and (viii) women’s
empowerment.
5.
I n 2006, the Government developed a National Reform Agenda (NRA) to overcome
obstacles to DPPR implementation.The NRA addressed the major reform areas o f anticorruption, rule
o f law, investment climate, and political participation. Having made good progress o n NRA reforms early
on, the Government has since sought to accelerate and deepen reforms. The resulting second phase o f the
NRA for 2008-2010 set out five specific objectives: (i)
judicial reform; (ii)
administrative reform and
c i v i l service modernization; (iii)investment and business climate; (iv) anticorruption, transparency, and
accountability; and (v) political reforms. Individual reform activities and relevant donor support will be
monitored through a joint Government-donor results-based matrix.
6.
The Government is preparing a mid-term review of DPPR implementation. The DPPR
review will evaluate the performance o f the DPPR during the first two years and will function as a revised
planning document for the remaining period (i.e. until 20 lo), taking into account changing circumstances
and emerging challenges since the DPPR’s inception (such as the more moderate outlook for o i l
production and the possible impact o f the global economic crisis). Special emphasis i s likely to be placed
on strengthening economic diversification, improving energy efficiency, and strengthening social safety
nets. Reform efforts are expected to focus particularly on financial sector development, governance and
anticorruption, decentralization, and the investment climate.

111. YEMEN’S PROGRESS TOWARDS ACHIEVING ITS DEVELOPMENT GOALS’
7.
The country’s long-term strategic goals, to which the CAS was aligned, remain relevant. At
this stage, however, Yemen’s critical development goals o f sustaining higher economic growth rates
(above 7 percent), halving poverty by 201 5,’ and moving from L o w t o Medium Human Development by
20251° are not likely to be met. The mixed progress toward these long-term objectives i s acknowledged
by the draft mid-term DPPR review, though it i s also noted that the development plan targets set out in
the DPPR were highly optimistic and in some cases unrealistic.
8.
Several exogenous factors influenced Yemen’s overall performance. These factors include
highly volatile international o i l prices, a sharper-than-expected decline in domestic o i l production, the
spike in international food prices combined with regional drought conditions that drove up the price of
some agricultural commodities, persistent geopolitical tensions in the region, continued internal conflicts
in the North o f Yemen, and devastating floods in the Hadramout and Al-Mahara governorates in October
2008. Oil prices surged from about U S $ 50 per barrel in mid-2005 t o a record high o f over US$ 146 per
barrel in July 2008. Together with a steep drop in domestic o i l production, these high prices increased the
weight o f fuel subsidies in total public expenditure (from 8.7 percent o f GDP in 2007 t o 11.5 percent in
8

Recent achievements. This draft CASCR was produced three months before the end o f the CAS period.
Therefore, some achievements have not been factored into this evaluation because they occurred after the report was
completed.
Millennium Development Goal #1: “Reduce by half the proportion o f people living on less than a dollar a day.”
10
These rankings are compiled annually by the UnitedNations Development Programme, using the Human
Development Index.

46

A n n e x 6 - CAS Completion Report
2008). Oil prices have since dropped below U S $ 4 0 per barrel, leading t o a sharp downgrade in expected
revenues. The Government has consequently adopted a series o f austerity measures t o control spending
over the remainder o f FY2009.” Yemen was also heavily affected by the global food crisis because o f i t s
limited endowment o f water and cultivable land. Moreover, the internal security risks mentioned in the
CAS materialized during the period.
9.
Economic performance improved during the CAS period, but not enough to raise the
standard o f living, reduce unemployment, o r generate productive job opportunities to ensure longterm sustainable economic growth. On average, Yemen’s economy grew by about 3.5 percent per year
in real terms between 2006 and 2008, slightly below the average annual real GDP growth rate o f 3.9
percent observed during the previous CAS. Oil production decreased from 384,000 barrels per day (bpd)
in 2006 to an estimated 290,000 bpd in 2009. High o i l prices and increasing exports o f liquefied natural
gas (LNG) partly offset the steep drop in o i l production (by more than 12 percent in 2007, but only 3.3
percent in 2008). Hydrocarbon’s contribution to GDP remained stable at 33 percent. However, the
coming on stream o f the Yemen LNG plant in 2009 could boost overall GDP growth considerably, to an
average o f around 5.6 percent in 2009-10 despite slowing domestic demand. Real non-oil GDP growth
was more dynamic at about 5 percent on average during the period, but this remained well below the
DPPR’s goal o f 10.1 percent average non-oil growth over 2005-2010. Greater economic diversification
remains an important challenge to ensure j o b growth and poverty reduction in a climate o f high
population growth. At about 3 percent per year, Yemen’s population i s increasing rapidly and, as a result,
nominal per-capita income remained at US$578 in 2007 (GNI, Atlas method).
10.
I n an effort to improve Yemen’s investment climate, the Government implemented reforms
to promote private sector development. The country launched a one-stop shop for business start-ups
and eliminated i t s minimum capital requirement, which was previously the fourth highest in the world at
over 2,000 percent o f per-capita income. These measures helped boost Yemen’s ranking on starting a
business by 128 positions t o 50* out o f 181 countries in the 2009 Doing Business Suwey. Yemen has also
made good progress on the overall ease o f doing business, moving from 123‘d in 2008 t o 98* o f in 2008.’*
Indicators are lower, however, for other important elements o f the country’s investment climate such as
credit availability, investor protections, corporate taxes, and trade barriers.

11.
Yemen has made concerted efforts to improve important aspects of governance. The
country’s commitment to strengthening transparency and accountability and combating corruption i s
evidenced by i t s progress in implementing the NRA. Recent achievements include strengthening judicial
independence; establishing an anticonuption authority, the Supreme National Authority to Combat
Corruption (SNACC); joining the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative (EITI); and adopting new
land registration and procurement laws. The Government acknowledges, however, that more work i s
needed to further strengthen public financial management and the rule o f law.13
12.
On the human development side, good progress was made in reducing urban poverty and
increasing school enrollment and rural water access, but overall human development outcomes
11

Cabinet Decree No. 467 o f 2008 calls for a 50 percent cut in the planned wage and benefit increase and in
allocations for “second tier” spending on goods, services, and properties (except for water and power, land and
building rental, and food and clothing for members o f the armed forces). The Decree also stipulates that biometric
identification and retirement provisions in the civil service should be accelerated, and renewed effort focused on
revenue collection.
International Finance Corporation and World Bank. 2007. Doing Business 2008: Comparing Regulation in I78
Economies (these rankings were later adjusted to reflect changes in methodology and the addition o f 3 countries.);
2008. Doing Business 2009: Comparing Regulation in 181 Economies.
13
The World Bank Institute’s 2007 Worldwide Governance Indicators rank Yemen in the bottom fifth o f the world’s
countries on “rule o f law.” When compared to other MENA countries, Yemen ranks second to last after Iraq.

’’

47

A n n e x 6 - CAS Completion Report
have lagged. While urban poverty decreased significantly from 32 percent in 1998 to 21 percent in 2005,
rural poverty remained at about 40 percent.14 Gross primary enrollment increased from 5 8 percent o f the
school-age population in 1997/98 t o 73 percent in 2008. Access t o safe water sources reached 56 percent
in urban areas and 34 percent in rural areas in 2007. Progress on health indicators has been slow in the
face o f a rapidly growing population and limited resources. Yemen ranked 153rd out o f 177 countries in
the 2007 UNDP Human Development Index, and the social safety net remains insufficient to help poor
people successfully cope with shocks. Under these conditions, it i s unlikely that Yemen will be able t o
reach most o f the M D G s by 2015.
Table 1: Key Indicators o f DPPR Progress
Baseline
2006

Goal

Indicator

Sustain higher economic
growth
Diversify the economy

Real GDP, average growth rate over past
five years (%)
Real non-oil GDP, average growth rate
over past five years (%)
Poverty incidence (% below national
poverty line)
Subsidies (YOo f GDP)
Private investment (% o f total investment)

Reduce poverty
Eliminate subsidies
Promote private sector
development
Increase school enrollment
Increase girls’ school
enrollment
Reduce maternal mortality
Control population growth
Expand access to safe water

Expand access to electricity
Expand road network

Basic education enrollment (% net)
Enrollment o f girls in basic education (YO
total enrollment)
Maternal mortality ratio (national estimate,
per 100,000 live births)
Population growth rate (%)
Access to improved water source
(% o f urban population)
(% o f rural population)
Access to electricity (YOo f population)
Length o f asphalt roads (kilometers)

Target
2010

Actual
2008“

Progress
ToDate

4.1

7.1

3.7

Reversal

5.1

10.1

5.3

Slow

34.3

19.8

30.0

Slow

7.7
59

0.0
63

11.5
57

Reversal
Reversal

68.9
38.7

100
45

70
41.8

Slow
Steady

365

23 8

336

Slow

3.0

2.75

3.0

No
progress

60.3
7.4
30
10,982

71
47
53
19,107

56
34
47
12,500

Reversal
Good
Good
Slow

d Most recent data available per World Bank Implementation Status Reports and other project documents.
Sources: Baselines and targets from Government of Yemen DPPR; actualsfrom Economic Intelligence Unit; World Bank.

IV. OVERALL ASSESSMENT OF A C H I E V E M E N T S AND PROGRESS TOWARD CAS
OUTCOMES
13.
Consistent with the key focal areas of the DPPR, the CAS for FY2006-2009 encompassed
diversifying growth through better governance and better delivery o f public services; (ii)
four pillars: (i)
improving human development through more efficient service delivery and improved safety nets; (iii)
increasing fiscal sustainability through improved public expenditure management; and (iv) increasing
resource sustainability through improved management o f water resources and reduced population
pressure. During the CAS period, IDA intended to provide about US$ 100 million annually in credits t o
Yemen through a selective program o f lending operations complemented by analytical and learning
services. Given the relatively limited amount o f IDA resources available to Yemen, the World Bank also
aimed to contribute t o the achievement o f CAS outcomes by leveraging the resources o f other
Republic o f Yemen, UnitedNations Development Programme, and World Bank. 2007. “Poverty Assessment.”

l4

48

Annex 6 - CAS Comuletion Regort
development partners, providing Technical Assistance (TA) to the Government, and working with other
donors to mainstream new implementationapproaches that can enhance performance in the sectors.

A.

Assessment Methodology

14.
The CAS Results Matrix contained 26 CAS outcomes, defined as country results deemed
achievable during the CAS period and which the Bank expected to influence through its
interventions.The matrix also included about twice that number of milestones, or progress markers of
CAS implementation. A few of the CAS outcome indicators were imprecise or missing baseline and
target values, which has made it difficult to evaluate progress in some areas as compared to their status at
the start of the CAS period. Overall, however, the Results Matrix has proved to be a solid framework with
which to assess the Bank’s contributionto Yemen’s development over the CAS period.
15.
This evaluation uses the Results Chain (Appendix 1) contained in the CAS to discuss
progress on each key outcome identified within the four strategic pillars. The CASCR then reviews
the overall achievements made under each pillar and the relevance of the lending and non-lending
instruments to that pillar, discussing whether, how, and why the assistance program did or did not achieve
each of the CAS outcomes. Finally, the document draws lessons from the experience of CAS
implementationand provides recommendations for the next CAS.
B.

Assessment Summary

16.
Overall, performance under the CAS for FY2006-2009 i s rated Moderately Satisfactory. The
challenges facing the Government o f Yemen grew considerably over the CAS period, a time when the
World Bank resources available to the c o u n t y remained limited. In this context, the CAS embodied an
appropriately focused strategy to lay the foundation for sustainable economic growth and help Yemen
meet its long-term goals, while supporting the Government in showing immediate, tangible results
through the Social Fund for Development and activities under the Public Works Project. The CAS thus
reached its objective of better balancing the country’s need for short-term growth with the longer-term
needs of capacity development and public sector accountability, as recommended in the CASCR for the
previous CAS period. The CAS succeeded in reaching many o f i t s planned outcomes in a positive context
o f strong public commitment to reform, and the impact of the strategy i s generally expected to be
sustainable in the medium term. Table 2 summarizes the ratings for each strategic pillar and individual
CAS outcome. (A detailed CAS Completion Matrix i s attached in Appendix 2.)

49

-

Annex 6 CAS Completion Report

Table 2: CAS FY2006-2009 Summary Ratings

CAS Strategic
Pillars and Ratings
Pillar I:Diversifying
Growth through Better
Governance and Better
Delivery o f Public
Services

Country
Development
Goals
Increasing non-oil
growth as
measured by
growth rate o f nonoil GDP.

Moderately Satisfactory

Pillar 11: Accelerating
Human Development
through More Efficient
Service Delivery and
Improved Safety Nets

Improving human
development as
measured by
progress towards
achieving relevant
MDGs

Moderately Satisfactory

Pillar 111: Improving
Fiscal Sustainability
through Improved
Public Expenditure
Management

Increasing fiscal
sustainability as
measured by
reduced non-oil
primary fiscal
deficit

Satisfactory

Pillar IV: Increasing
Resource Sustainability
through Improved
Management o f Water
Resources and Reduced
Population Pressure

Increasing
resource
sustainability

Outcome Indicators

Outcome Ratings

(i) Improving Business Regulatory
Environment:
(a) New Business Registration
(b) Tax Policy and Administration
(c) Customs and Inspections
(d) Land Titling and Registration
(ii) Improving Infrastructure:
(a) Roads
(b) Power
(iii) Improving Skills:
(a) Technical Education and Vocational
Training
(b) Higher Education
(iv) Improving Regulatory Framework and
Public Investments in Key Sectors:
(a) Irrigated Agriculture
(b) Rainfed Agriculture and Livestock
(c) Fisheries
(d) Gas Sector
(e) Urban Manufacturing
Improving Access, Equity, and Quality o f
(i)
Basic Education
(ii) Improving Access and Quality o f Health
(iii) Improving Safety N e t Programs
(iv) Improving Water Supply and Sanitation
(v) Children & Youth
(vi) Gender

Moderately Satisfactory
Moderately Satisfactory
Moderately Satisfactory
Moderately Satisfactory
Moderately Satisfactory

(i)
(ii)

Satisfactory
Moderately Satisfactory

Improving Revenue Transparency
(a) Improving Expenditure Management
(b) Reduced Fuel Subsidies
(iii) Public Sector Reform
(a) Central Government
(b) Local Government
(iv) Improving Public Procurement
(v) Improving Public Financial Management
(vi) Improved Water Resource Management
(vii) Improved Control Over Population Growth

Satisfactory

Moderately Satisfactory

Moderately Unsatisfactory

Moderately Satisfactory

Moderately Satisfactory

Moderately Satisfactory

Satisfactory
Satisfactory
Moderately Satisfactory
Unsatisfactory

Moderately Satisfactory

The next CAS will benefit from careful consideration o f the key strengths and weaknesses
17.
in implementing the CAS for FY2006-2009. These strengths and weaknesses are laid out below:
Strendhs
(a) Trust-based relationship with the Government. A close collaboration with the authorities, based on
mutual trust, has developed over time and facilitated the implementation o f the CAS program while

50

Annex 6 - CAS Completion Report
strengthening the World Bank’s role in supporting economic policy in Yemen. Additionally, the Bank’s
strong field presence has enabled the Bank t o deliver the C A S program successfully.

(b) Flexibility. The Bank has demonstrated i t s responsiveness to country needs through a readiness t o
adjust the C A S program and react flexibly t o newly emerging priorities such as the Avian Flu, the 2008
food crisis, and the recent devastating Hadramout flood. Moreover, the Bank delivered several TA
activities that were not planned in the C A S in response t o the client’s emerging needs and requests,
particularly in the areas o f anticorruption and governance, safety nets, mining, financial sector
development, the environment, and climate change.
(c) Use o f new instruments. During the C A S period, seven additional financing operations were
approved with the objective o f scaling up successful programs while gradually reducing the fragmentation
o f the portfolio. The Institutional Reform Development Policy Grant (IRDPG) as the first Development
Policy Lending (DPL) operation in recent times, served as a tool for continued country dialogue o n policy
reforms in the areas o f economic diversification and improved governance and public financial
management. Finally, the World Bank built on ten years o f experience with water sector reform in
Yemen, and analytical work conducted in 2006 on the country’s readiness, to launch a sector-wide
approach (SWAP) operation in the water sector under a pooled multi-donor funding framework.

(d) Convening power. There i s broad recognition that the Bank’s strong presence in Yemen has helped t o
bring the country’s development partners together around a common agenda and to attract new donors to
Yemen. The Bank’s convening role has ranged from holding regular and substantive informal discussions
to co-chairing the formal Consultative Group (CG) meeting with the Government. The latest C G meeting,
held in London in November 2006 and followed up with meetings in Sana’a in 2007,2008, and 2009, was
sponsored by the GCC and helped bring significant new aid pledges t o Yemen from donors, especially
including neighboring Gulf countries.
(e) Donor coordination. Yemen’s development partners have cooperated closely during the CAS period,
strengthening the harmonization o f aid resources and alignment o f donor programs with country
priorities. Bank teams worked with bilateral donors (particularly DFID and the Netherlands) and
multilateral institutions (particularly the Islamic Development Bank and European Union), mainly
through the co-financing o f several projects in sanitation, transport, education, and civil service
modernization. In the education sector, Bank projects leveraged more than US$ 48 million in cofinancing. The US$ 90 million IDA grant for the Water Sector Support Project in support o f the Water
Sector Support Program leveraged about US$ 340 million in total financing from Government and other
donors. The Bank’s presence in the power sector also catalyzed significant donor interest in rural
electrification and renewable energy, laying the foundation for a strong investment program in rural
electrification. l5

Weaknesses
(a) Slow implementation. Looking ahead, particular attention will need to be paid to strengthening the
timeliness o f program implementation. Delays experienced during the CAS period typically resulted
from: (i)late effectiveness; (ii)
l o w readiness o f procurement packages at the time o f effectiveness; (iii)
slow pace o f the procurement process itself; (iv) complex design given local implementation capacity;
and (v) overoptimistic assessments o f Government ownership or changes in the institutional environment.

l5Preliminary cost estimates for Phase Io f the Rural Energy Access Project amount to about U S $ 125 million, o f
which U S $ 15 million would be devoted to strengthening access to off-grid electricity based on renewable energies
such as photovoltaic solar power, wind energy, etc.

51

Annex 6 - CAS Comdetion ReDort
Realistic timelines, candid disbursement plans, and implementation in phases might help accelerate
implementation (and reduce the number o f extensions that are not justified by additional financing).

(b) Mixed record on monitoring and evaluation (M&E). IEG’s evaluation o f the C A S for FY20022005 recommended that the Bank be more realistic in assessing the ownership, speed o f implementation,
and feasible outcomes o f planned operations by setting achievable targets with interim indicators by
which to measure progress and improve results. The M&E framework included in the C A S for FY20062009 did represent a considerable improvement from the previous period; however, limited local
capacity-particularly in statistics management-constrained the collection o f accurate, detailed data and,
thus, the determination o f realistic projected and actual outcomes for some projects. Some C A S outcome
indicators and milestones were not easily measurable or consistently monitored by the relevant agencies.
In addition, the M&E frameworks for individual projects were o f uneven quality and not systematically
aligned with the CAS outcomes. The long lists o f indicators in some M&E frameworks made it difficult
t o track the essential intermediate indicators through which to evaluate the project’s success in achieving
i t s development objectives.

V. DETAILED REVIEW OF PROGRESS TOWARD CAS OUTCOMES
18.
The following section reviews progress against each individual outcome specified in the
CAS for FY2006-2009 and assesses the Bank’s contribution to the country’s achievements under
each o f the four strategic pillars. The country team has assigned ratings to the Bank’s performance on
each pillar, as well as each associated CAS outcome. Detailed achievements against C A S outcomes and
targets are included in the CAS Completion Matrix in Appendix 2.

A.
Pillar I:Diversifying Growth through Better Governance and Better Delivery o f Public
Services
19.
The first pillar included CAS outcomes in four areas: (i)
business regulatory environment; (ii)
road and power infrastructure; (iii)skills development; and (iv) regulatory frameworks and public
investments in key sectors. The CAS envisioned that this pillar would be supported through eight ongoing
projects, nine new loans (eight were delivered along with two additional financing operations), and six
non-lending activities (ten were delivered, including two activities conducted by the International Finance
Corporation (IFC) and Foreign Investment Advisory Service (FIAS)). Trust funds supported DPPR
implementation and monitoring, public sector management, social development, and rural electrification
and renewable energy. Table 3 shows the various elements o f the CAS program that have supported Pillar
Iactivities.

52

Annex 6 - CAS Completion Report

Table 3: Bank Group Assistance Under Pillar I
Ongoing Lending at
Start of CAS

Civil Service
Modernization
Port Cities
Development Phase I
Higher Education
Southern
Governorates
Agricultural
Privatization
Irrigation
Improvement Phase I
Sana’a Basin Water
Management
Rural Access Phase
I
Social Fund for
Development I11

Lending

New Activities Delivered During CAS Period
ESWITA
Trust Funds

Rural Access Phase I1
Power Sector
Fisheries Resource
Management & Conservation
Rainfed Agriculture &
Livestock
Institutional Reform
DevelopmentPolicy Grant
Vocational Training I1
Rural Electrification &
Renewable Energy
Development
Civil Service
Modernization (additional
financing)
Social Fund for
DevelopmentI11 (additional
financing)
Rural Energy Access
(FY2009)

Develoument Policy
Review
Investment Climate
Assessment
Gas Incentive
Framework Study and TA
IFC Advisory Services
FIAS
Petroleum Governance
TA
Land Tenure Study
(FY2009)
Transport Sector Note
(FY2009; unplanned)
Financial Sector
Reform (unplanned)
Mining Study
(unplanned)
ESMAP-funded study
on electricity, trade, and
interconnection

IDF =ant for M&E
of PRSfand reform
programs
DFIDTF for
macroeconomic
management, public
sector governance and
water resource
management
TFESSD grant on
Land Tenure for Social
and Economic
Inclusion
GEF funding for
Rural Electrification
and Renewable Energy
DevelopmentProject

Planned
Activities
Not
Delivered
Investment
Climate
Update

20.

Overall performance on Pillar I outcomes i s rated moderate& satisfactory. Significant
progress was made against the indicators laid out in the CAS, particularly with regard to targets on
improving the business regulatory environment. Progress on skills development outcomes has been
slower, however, due to delays in project effectiveness. (Detailed achievements are presented in
Appendix 2.) In general, the Pillar ICAS outcomes were relevant and adequately ambitious to support the
Government’s goal of diversifying Yemen’s economy.

2 1.
Business regulatory environment. Satisfactory. Substantive reform measures planned in the
Government’s National Reform Agenda and Matrix of Good Governance were achieved.
The Government (at national and sub-national levels) established simplified business start-up
procedures to minimize bureaucratic obstacles for private investors. As a result, Yemen was listed
as the Top Reformer on starting a business in Doing Business 2009. Progress in this area was
supported through Bank and IFC policy dialogue and T A on improving the investment climate
along with quick-disbursing budget support, backed up by Bank and IFC analytical work on the
business enabling environment. The next step in consolidating these reforms w i l l be to translate
successes in creating and amending laws and regulations into concrete implementation to support
private sector growth.
0

On tax policy and administration, the Government developed a new corporate income tax law
and replaced hidden turnover taxes with a 5 percent sales tax. The total tax burden on companies
i s lower, but there i s room for improvement in actual tax collections. The Bank supported these
reforms through dialogue, technical help, and development policy lending triggers to draft the
new income tax law, in conjunction with ongoing T A from FIAS and IFC to provide an
assessment o f tax incentives and support for legal and administrative reform.

53

Annex 6 - CAS Completion Report

0

0

Customs tariff rates have fallen. The Government introduced the A S Y C U D A customs
management system in major entry points, covering 90 percent o f imports, but the system i s not
fully operational. The Bank has provided assistance through ongoing policy dialogue and budget
support, though implementation o f customs administration re-engineering activities has been
subject t o some delays. A review o f customs procedures and efficiency has been conducted, and
additional financing has been approved.

Finally, a new land registration law was approved by the Cabinet and i s expected t o be referred
t o Parliament soon for approval. This step will be followed by the appointment o f an independent
registrar and the establishment o f an organizational structure for the General Authority for Lands,
Survey, and Urban Plans. The Bank has worked closely with the Land Policy Task Force,
providing TA to strengthen administration o f property rights and management o f public land
assets, including development and presentation o f the law.

Road and power infrastructure. Moderately Satisfactory. Significant steps have been taken t o
22.
expand infrastructure important to rural development, especially rural roads and power.
0

In the roads sector, good progress has been made toward the goal o f reducing travel times and
transport costs by 30 percent, and prices o f essential commodities by 15 percent, thus reducing
isolation for close to one million rural residents. Nearly all (97 percent) households benefiting
from the Social Fund for Development report improved access to markets and social services.
The Bank’s lending assistance has focused on improving rural access roads, while progress on
institutional development and road maintenance has been slow due t o capacity limitations and the
Government’s focus on civil works. An overview o f transport sector performance, issues, and
priority investments i s being prepared in FY2009.

0

In the power sector, the Government has developed a Rural Electrification Strategy and
Renewable Energy Development Plan. However, the public electricity company’s financial
situation has been deteriorating following initial improvements during the CAS period; this has
resulted in part from the high cost o f electricity rental arrangements. Bank lending and strategic
TA has focused on strengthening power access, distribution, and reliability, though some
implementation setbacks have resulted from procurement delays, unsatisfactory consultant
performance, and changes in key Government officials. The Bank has also supported community
projects and catalyzed the interest o f other donors in rural electrification and renewable energy
development. As these efforts typically take time t o yield results, it will be important for the next
CAS t o continue playing close attention t o supervision o f infrastructure activities.

Skills development. Moderately Unsatisfactory. Progress on vocational training development
23.
has been moderate. Policy dialogue was sustained, contributing t o substantial progress in relations
between the public and private sectors with respect to skills development and t o new initiatives involving
employers and the private sector in the operation o f training institutions. Bank lending assistance in this
area was delayed by capacity constraints and, in particular, by a long and difficult process o f
parliamentary review o f the revised law for the Skills Development Fund. A national higher education
strategy was finalized and a plan o f activities for 2006-201 1 was prepared, published, and disseminated.
Only two o f seven universities completed their strategic plans, however, and these were not linked to
faculty budgets. The Bank has informed the policy debate in this sector and contributed significantly to
the development o f the higher education strategy. Yemen continues to face daunting challenges in the
area o f skills development, especially in view o f rapid population growth and the urgent need for
economic diversification. Reforms in this area are complex, and more efforts will be needed in the next
CAS t o translate strategy development into concrete implementation progress.

54

Annex 6 - CAS Comuletion Reuort
24.
Regulatory frameworks and public investments in selected sectors. Moderately Satisfactory.
Policy and institutional frameworks improved over the CAS period in irrigated agriculture, livestock and
rainfed agriculture, fisheries management, private sector participation in the gas sector, and ports.

In support o f irrigated agriculture, the Government has been implementing a series o f water
sector projects to improve participatory irrigation management through Water User Associations
and Water User Groups. These activities have also focused on rehabilitating irrigation
infrastructure and increasing agricultural productivity (more crop per drop). Pilot work i s
underway to test the concept o f integrated water management. The creation o f a National
Irrigation Program at the Ministry o f Agriculture and Irrigation has centralized the government’s
management o f irrigation activities and thus improved upon the previous approach, in which
these activities were dispersed across fragmented Project Management Units. The Bank’s lending
assistance has focused on strengthening spate irrigation through infrastructure rehabilitation,
participatory approaches, extension services, and capacity building.
On rainfed agriculture and livestock development, the General Seed Multiplication Corporation
and contracted farmers produced 75 tons o f rainfed cereal seeds that were sold back to 1,646
farmers operating in rainfed areas (covering an area o f 4,721 hectares). This outcome has
benefited from fruitful collaboration among various agricultural research organizations.
Veterinary training programs are underway, and 92 community groups are being formed in 11
districts to develop local income-generating activities that will benefit group members and local
communities. New government funding allocations have supported livestock health and
production as well as the creation o f formal and informal cooperatives among farmers and
beneficiaries to strengthen their capacity to identify problems, prioritize needs, and seek financing
to help them prepare and implement income-generating projects. Bank lending assistance has
focused on enabling poor rural producers in rainfed areas to improve production (through better
use o f land and seeds), processing, and marketing systems; protect their assets through improved
livestock husbandry and health services; and become better organized through improved access to
public and private services, markets, and information.
Onfisheries, a contract has been signed for Ministry o f Fish Wealth restructuring and creation of:
(i)
Fishermen’s Authorities in coastal governorates; (ii)
a Fish Research Authority; and (iii)
a Fish
Port Authority. The aim i s to reformulate the ministry as a policy-making and monitoring body
while transferring fisheries management to the local authorities and Fisheries Cooperatives in
coastal governorates. Bank lending assistance has concentrated on strengthening sustainable
fisheries resource management, targeting improvements in ministry capacity, facilities and
handling, and cooperatives management; implementation has been delayed, however, due to
changes in institutional support.

In the hydrocarbons sector, a constructive debate i s underway on gas pricing for domestic use
and on the introduction o f gas clauses in production sharing contracts to boost natural gas
exploration and production. The legal and regulatory framework for private sector participation i s
gradually improving. Bank TA has focused on natural gas development, in cooperation with IFC.
A review o f macroeconomic incentives for gas sector investment was completed and TA was
launched to help structure investments in natural gas utilization projects.
Progress on urban manufacturing has been supported by the development o f updated physical
and investment planning in major port cities (Aden, Al-Hodeidah, and Al-Mukallah). Bank
engagement has been limited, occurring mainly through strategy preparation activities on national
ports and city development.

55

Annex 6 - CAS C o m d e t i o n ReDort
B.
Pillar 11: Accelerating Human Development through M o r e Efficient Service Delivery and
Improved Safety Nets
25.
The second pillar included CAS outcomes in six areas: (i)
access, equity, and quality o f basic
education; (ii)
access and quality o f health; (iii)
safety net programs; (iv) water supply and sanitation; (v)
children and youth; and (vi) gender. The CAS planned t o support these objectives through nine ongoing
projects, two new projects (four were delivered, including emergency support for food security and two
additional financing operations), and 12 non-lending services ( 13 were conducted, including unplanned
activities on rural poverty, targeting cash transfers, and a children and youth action plan t o advance
achievement o f the MDGs). A strong portfolio o f t r u s t funds complemented IDA assistance, particularly
in the education sector. Table 5 shows the various elements o f the C A S program that have supported
Pillar I1activities.
26.
Overall performance on Pillar 11outcomes i s rated moderately satisfactory. M i x e d progress
was made against the indicators established t o measure CAS outcomes in this area. (A detailed analysis o f
achievements i s presented Appendix 2.) The identified CAS outcomes supported and complemented the
Government’s strategy and thus remained relevant to the country’s long-term strategic goals. However,
the outcomes sought were either too ambitious to be achieved through the Bank’s interventions (as in
education, health, and water) or too modest to fully support achievement o f Yemen’s MDG targets (as in
safety nets and gender).

Table 5: Bank Group Assistance Under Pillar I1
Ongoing Lending
at Start of CAS

Higher
Education
Health Reform
support
Basic Education
Expansion
Basic Education
Development
Child
Development
Public Works I11
Rural Water
Supply & Sanitation
Urban Water
Supply & Sanitation
Phase I
Social Fund for
Development I11

Lending

New Activities Delivered During CAS Period
ESWiTA
Trust Funds

Secondary
Education
Development and
Girls’ Access
Vocational
Training I1
Rural Access
Phase I1
Rural Water
Supply (additional
financing)
Social Fund I11
(additional
financing)
Public Works I11
(additional
financing;
unplanned)
Food Security
(unplanned)

Social Protection Workshop
National Disability Study
Country Social Analysis
Poverty Assessment
Health Sector Consultation
and Dialogue
TA on Health Sector
Review (FY2009)
Children & Youth Strategy
Secondary Education
Strategy Note
Urban Poverty Analysis
(Taiz)
Qat Awareness Report
Pathways Out o f Rural
Poverty (FY2009; unplanned)
Cash Transfer Targeting TA
(unplanned)
Children & Youth Action
Plan (unplanned)

Multi-Donor Basic
Education Trust Funds
JSDF: Socio-economic
Inclusion o f Marginalized
Youth
PHRD: Health Reform
Support Project
PHRD: Secondary
Education Developmentand
Girls’ Access Project
GAVI: Health, Nutrition,
Population Strategy
HRBFproposal
preparation
Gender Action Plan TF:
Gender & Transport
JSDF: Women & Coping
Strategies for Climate
Change Adaptation Using
Agrobiodiversity Resources
AvianFluTF

Planned
Activities Not
Delivered
Population I1
(New Health and
Population
Project to be
delivered in
FY2010)
Poverty
Reduction
Support Credit I
(replaced by
Water Sector
Support FY2009)
QatTA
Gender Status
Update (FY09)
Strategic
Communications
TA

27.
Access, equity and quality o f education. Moderately Satisfactory. Overall achievements in the
education sector have been significant. Noteworthy reforms in basic education have included the abolition
o f school fees, improvements in annual work planning, contracting o f female teachers in remote parts o f
the country, tying o f teacher posts to the school rather than to the individual, reductions in teacher
absenteeism, and capacity building at all levels o f education service delivery. Pilot work has been
undertaken conditional cash transfers and capitation grants. The Cabinet approved a Secondary Education

56

Annex 6 - C A S C o m d e t i o n ReDort
Strategy in 2007. The Bank’s contributions in the education sector have included support for
implementation o f a sector-wide approach in education, assistance in fundraising under the Education for
All Fast Track Initiative, TA on secondary education strategy development, and lending assistance for
basic education development and expanding girls’ access to secondary school. In addition, Bank
initiatives on public works and social fund development helped support the construction o f schools.
Despite this important progress, however, the CAS targets were not fully met. It has become clear, in
hindsight, that the general outcome indicators laid out in the CAS were overly ambitious. A lack o f
credible population data and the use o f several inconsistent data collection methodologies resulted in
inflated educational data from 1999-2004, which in turn led t o inflated baselines and targets in the CAS.
The Ministry o f Education i s in the process o f recruiting Technical Assistance to strengthen education
data collection, reporting, and verification. Quality control mechanisms are being put in place for both
retrospective and future data.
Access and quality o f health. Moderately Satisfactory. Performance has improved significantly
28.
over the previous CAS period following a shift in Government priorities toward broader systemic
reforms. Access to health services has improved, but utilization o f these services has yet to be assessed.
The Bank’s lending assistance has focused on increasing access to maternal and child health care,
strengthening the effectiveness o f public health programs in malaria and health education, and supporting
human resource development in the sector. The Bank has provided substantial TA on setting results-based
policy options and strategies, analyzing health financing trends, and facilitating donor coordination and
aid harmonization in the sector. Finally, Bank initiatives on public works and social fund development
helped support the construction o f health facilities.
Safety net programs. Moderately Satisfactory. This area o f support became increasingly urgent
29.
in the context o f the food crisis o f 2008. The Government i s working to put in place a targeted social
safety net to mitigate i t s effects on poverty and livelihoods. Pro-poor targeting has improved under the
Social Fund for Development, with 69 percent o f resources going to people in the lowest three income
deciles. The Bank provided grant funding and lending assistance to support j o b creation and income
generation and delivered emergency assistance in response to the food crisis. Additional financing was
approved to scale up support to the Social Fund for Development. The Bank also provided TA on the
development o f a social protection strategy and just-in-time advice on establishing a cash transfer
mechanism to mitigate the impact o f price shocks and allow for an eventual reduction o f energy subsidies.
These activities were supported by a wide range o f analytical work on poverty analysis, social
development, and disabilities.

30.
Water supply and sanitation. Moderately Satisfactory. Local water and wastewater corporations
have been established in 14 cities (well above the 4 targeted in the CAS). Coverage o f urban water supply
services has thus increased, albeit more slowly than originally planned due to capacity constraints. A new
Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Strategy was prepared and, though not yet approved, i s in useleading to improved efficiency o f rural water supply management on the part o f Water User Associations.
Access to water remains constrained in both rural and urban areas, however, owing to rapid population
growth combined with the rapid lowering o f the groundwater level in a few key aquifers. (See Section D
below for a discussion o f water resource management progress under Pillar IV). Bank assistance took the
form o f lending activities in urban and rural water supply and sanitation. Going forward, these efforts will
be integrated into the newly created Water Sector Support Project.
3 1.
Children and youth. Moderately Satisfactory. A Children and Youth Strategy was approved in
FY2006, and an associated action plan was adopted in FY2009. The next step i s to incorporate the
strategy recommendations across line ministries. The Bank provided significant TA to the development o f
the strategy and action plan.

57

Annex 6 - CAS Completion Report
32.
Gender. Moderately Satisfactoly. Girls’ enrollment in basic education i s improving, with the
share of girls in basic education rising from 40.5 percent in the 2004/2005 school year to 41.8 percent in
August 2008; however, ambitious CAS targets in this area have not yet been achieved. Women are
gaining access to improved income generating activities in the rainfed agriculture sector. The Bank has
mainstreamed gender considerations throughout i t s program o f lending and analytical work, paying
particular attention to gender equality issues in access to basic education and health services.

C.
Pillar III:Improving Fiscal Sustainabilitythrough Improved Public Expenditure
Management
33.
The third pillar included CAS Outcomes in five areas: (i)revenue transparency; (ii)
expenditure management; (iii)public sector reform; (iv) public procurement; and (v) public financial
management. The CAS envisioned that Bank support for these activities would consist o f six ongoing
projects, two new loans (of which one was delivered, along with three additional financing operations),
and six non-lending activities (twelve were delivered, but the planned Public Expenditure Review was
postponed to FY2010). Implementation of these activities was enhanced through several bilateral and
multi-donor trust funds. Table 7 shows the various elements of the CAS program that have supported
Pillar I11activities.
Table 7: Bank Group Assistance Under Pillar Ill
Ongoing
Lending at Start
of CAS
Irrigation
Improvement
Phase I
Rural Water
Supply 85
Sanitation
Port Cities
Development
Civil Service
Modernization
Public Works
I11
Taiz
Municipal
Development and
Flood Protection

Lending

New Activities Delivered During CAS Period
Trust Funds
ESWITA

Institutional
Reform
Development
Policy Grant
Rural Water
Supply and
Sanitation
(additional
financing)
Public Works I11
(additional
financing)
Civil Service
Modernization
(additional
financing)

DevelopmentPolicy Review
Country Social Analysis
Poverty Assessment
Urban Poverty Analysis
(Taiz)
InvestmentClimate
Assessment
Public Expenditure
Management and Tracking
Subsidy Reform TA
(FY2009; unplanned)
Pathways Out o f Rural
Poverty (FY2009; unplanned)
PEFA Assessment (FY2009)
Baseline survey on corruption
incidence (FY2009; unplanned)
Diagnostic Review of Legal
and Regulatory Framework
(FY2009; unplanned)
CGAC Assessment (FY2009;
unplanned)

Netherlands TF for
Civil Service
Modernization
IDF Grant: Monitoring
and Evaluation of PRSP
and Reform Programs
IDF Grant: M&E for
Benefit Streams in Mineral
Resources Operations
DFID Support for
Public Sector Management
DFID Support for
Macro-economic
Management
PHRD Grant for Port
Cities Development I1
EITI multi-donor Trust
Fund

Planned
Activities Not
Delivered
Public
Expenditure
Review (to be
finalized in
FY 10)

34.
Overall performance on Pillar I11 outcomes i s rated sutisfuctory. Working with a reformminded government, the Bank was successful in achieving i t s objectives of improving revenue
transparency, procurement management, and public financial management. Institutional and
administrative reforms established as principal objectives of the DPPR were also tackled. Fuel subsidies
were not reduced, however, against the backdrop of external factors such as the hike in oil prices and civil
unrest in response to rising costs. (Detailed achievements are presented in Appendix 2.) Despite these
important successes, achieving fiscal sustainability remains a major challenge for Yemen, requiring
concerted efforts to foster sustained economic growth and diversification. The Pillar I11 CAS outcomes

58

Annex 6 - CAS Completion Report
were highly relevant to the country’s long-term development goals o f intensifying economic growth and
poverty reduction.

35.
Revenue transparency. Satisfactory. Yemen formally joined EITI and set up a National EITI
Council to support EITI implementation. The council comprises representatives from Government, o i l
and gas companies, and civil society organizations and has taken initial steps to begin implementing EITI
requirements. Bank Group support has included policy dialogue, TA, and analytical work on EITI
accession and implementation. These efforts have been backed up other donors, particularly the United
States Agency for International Development. In addition, Yemen has been selected as a pilot country for
the Bank’s Country Governance and Anticorruption (CGAC) initiative, which seeks to identify innovative
approaches to engage with clients and partners in strengthening a country’s particular governance
challenges. An initial CGAC assessment was conducted to underpin preparation o f a CGAC strategy in
FY2009. The Bank i s also providing TA to the anticorruption agency, SNACC, and has completed a
baseline survey on the incidence o f corruption crimes, as well as a Diagnostic Survey o f Anticorruption
Legal and Regulatory Framework, toward assisting SNACC in the development o f a comprehensive
national strategy for combating corruption.

36.
Expenditure management. Moderately Satisfactory. Good progress has been made in improving
budget comprehensiveness and transparency, in line with the Public Finance Management Strategy. The
Government has set up a road map for establishing a Medium-Term Expenditure Framework (MTEF)
consistent with the DPPR and taken steps toward implementation. The Capital Budget has been linked
successfully to the Public Investment Program (PIP), though development o f a three-year MTEF for
budget formulation i s s t i l l at an early stage. In the context o f i t s broader policy dialogue on governance
and institutional reform, the Bank has provided TA to support development o f an MTEF with budget
ceilings that are consistent with MDG requirements. This work has been buttressed by analytical work on
public expenditure management and tracking and a multi-donor assessment o f public expenditure and
financial accountability indicators. Though fuel subsidies became increasingly unsustainable due to rising
fuel prices at the start o f the CAS, subsidy reforms have not taken place given the high degree o f political
resistance to this reform and the recent drop in fuel prices. The Government i s evaluating options for
future reductions in subsidy levels. The Bank i s providing comprehensive TA in this area, backed up by
macroeconomic monitoring and an analysis o f the potential impact o f fuel subsidy reductions on poverty
and social development. This work has also benefited from the Bank’s efforts to support the Government
in defining a national social protection strategy (see Pillar I1above).
37.
Public sector reform. Moderately Satisfactory. Substantial results were achieved on central
government reform, including the implementation o f an early retirement plan, definition o f a national
wage strategy, and rollout o f a human resources database that includes biometric verification o f civil
servants and computerized links to the payroll system. Capacity has improved, and the Ministry o f Civil
Service and Insurance (MoCSI) has embarked on a re-engineering process. The MoCSI has hired all o f i t s
high-level staff using competitive and merit-based selection. Progress has been slower on other aspects o f
restructuring and re-engineering and with respect to other pilots, though diagnostic work has been
completed. Bank support has taken the form o f lending assistance on civil service modernization and
policy dialogue on institutional reform. Local administration planning capacity has improved following
the completion o f four city master plans, construction o f local council buildings, and preparation o f
several city development strategies. The Bank has supported these efforts through lending assistance for
municipal development and decentralization initiatives, drawing on analytical work on urban poverty in
Yemen’s second-largest city o f Taiz.

38.

Public procurement. Satisfactory. The Government enacted a new Procurement L a w that i s
consistent with international best practice. The High Tender Board was restructured, and a National
Procurement Manual and associated standard bidding documents have been prepared and are being rolled

59

Annex 6 - CAS Completion Report
out to pilot ministries. In the context o f the Bank’s policy dialogue on institutional reform, significant TA
was provided to draft the Procurement Law and facilitate i t s adoption. The Bank i s now supporting the
Government in developing the executive by-laws for the Procurement Law.

39.
Public financial management. Satisfactory. The Government o f Yemen has adopted a
comprehensive public financial management (PFM) reform strategy, approved by the Cabinet in 2005,
that includes general budget reform, enhancement o f control and financial accountability, reform o f the
system o f bidding and procurement, and improvement o f competence and skills. Bank TA has assisted the
Government in conducting an assessment o f public expenditure and financial accountability, in order to
identify strengths and weaknesses o f P F M systems and make adjustments to the Government’s P F M
Reform Action Plan. TA i s also helping the Government to prepare Phase 2 o f the P F M Action Plan;
facilitating an improved alignment between Yemen’s development agenda, i t s PIP, and i t s recurrent
budget; and supporting the P F M Action Plan to which several major donors have agreed. Amendments to
the External Audit L a w are being proposed to ensure the independence o f the Central Organization for
Control and Audit (COCA) from the executive. COCA has been selected as a pilot institution for
restructuring under the civil service modernization program. An Accounting and Financial Management
Information System (AFMIS) was deployed in four central ministries and i s being expanded to the
remaining Ministry headquarters in Sana’a. Throughout 2008, AFMIS was used in parallel to the manual
system in executing the budgets o f the largest four Ministries (Education, Health, Finance, and Public
Works). AFMIS has also been used to prepare the 2008 final accounts for these four Ministries and the
2009 government budget (including functional as well as economic classifications). Furthermore, the
2009 budget was published on the Ministry o f Finance (MoF) website at the same time as it was
presented to the Parliament. The Bank has provided support to these activities through TA on PFM,
policy dialogue on institutional reform, lending assistance on civil service modernization, and capacity
building initiatives to support government staff in conducting more effective internal audits.
D.
Pillar IV: IncreasingResource Sustainability through Improved Management o f Water
Resources and Reduced PopulationPressure

40.
The fourth pillar focused on CAS outcomes in two areas: (i)
water resource management and
(ii)
control over population growth. Planned CAS support included seven ongoing projects, three new
projects (two were delivered, along with three additional financing operations), and seven non-lending
activities (all but two were delivered). Water resource management activities have been buttressed by
trust funds on coastal zone management, community water management, and water sector support. Table
9 shows the various elements o f the CAS program that have supported Pillar N activities.
4 1.
Overall performance on Pillar IV outcomes i s rated moderately satisfactory. Good progress
was made against CAS indicators established to measure achievements in the water sector, but results on
population-related indicators were limited. (A detailed analysis o f achievements i s presented Appendix 2.)
Despite unsatisfactory progress on population objectives in the CAS, an overall rating o f moderately
satisfactory i s justified due to the comparative weight o f the Bank’s planned and actual programming in
the water sector and the relatively positive results achieved by those programs. The Pillar N CAS
outcomes were and remain highly relevant to Yemen’s longer-term development goals in light o f critical
issues surrounding the sustainability o f water resources, rapid population growth, and low reproductive
health status in Yemen. Given these urgent concerns, the CAS was appropriately ambitious in this area.
Results were incomplete, however. Approaches to water resource management did not address
substantively the role o f qat in disproportionately consuming scarce water resources. Activities targeting
improvement o f control over population growth were largely symbolic, and the Population I1 project was
not delivered despite the critical challenges associated with demographic transition.

60

Annex 6 - CAS Comdetion Retlort
Table 9: Bank Group Assistance Under Pillar I V

Development and
Flood Protection
Sana’aBasin
Water Management
Phase I
Irrigation
Improvement
Urban Water
Supply
Sanitation
Rural Water
Supply
Sanitation
Groundwater &
Soil Conservation
Health Sector
Reform Support

Livestock
Secondary Education
Development and Girls’
Access
Rural Water Supply &
Sanitation (additional
financing)
Taiz Municipal
Development and Flood
Protection (additional
financing)
Groundwater & Soil
Conservation (additional
financing)

Implementation
(FY2006)
Poverty and Social
Impact Assessment for
Water Reform
Water Sector
Strategy Support
(FY2007)
Health Sector
Consultation and
Dialogue
Secondary
Education Strategy
Note

Management Along the
Gulf o f Aden
JSDF grant for
Community Water
Management Project
DFID Support for
Water Sector

(New Health and
Population project
to be delivered in
FY2010)
Poverty
Reduction Support
Credit I(replaced
by Water Sector
Support Project
FY2009)
TAonQat
T A on Strategic
Communications

42.
Improved water resource management. Moderately Satisfactory. Satisfactory progress i s being
made toward sustainable water use in three spate irrigation schemes. The establishment o f Water User
Associations in Sana’a Basin and three governorates has led t o substantial groundwater savings. Coverage
o f public water resources has improved in the Sana’a Basin and water abstraction rates have decreased
slightly. The Bank has supported these objectives through lending assistance in irrigation, groundwater
management, and soil conservation, together with significant TA on water sector strategy development.
International assistance in this critical sector has recently shifted from individual operations to a
comprehensive multi-donor Water Sector Support Project, which has been negotiated and i s expected to
be launched in FY2009.
43.
Improved control over population growth. Unsatisfactory. Efforts to control Yemen’s rapid
population growth rates have focused thus far on indirect interventions such as boosting girls’ enrollment
in secondary education in order t o provide incentives for later marriage; progress has been limited so far.
Bank support in this area has consisted o f analytical work and TA on secondary education strategy
development and lending assistance on secondary education development, with a particular focus on
strengthening girls’ access to schooling. This lending only became effective toward the end o f the CAS
period, however, so i t s contribution has been limited. In the health sector, work has been done to increase
the contraceptive prevalence rate, but progress in this area i s difficult to measure in a rural and
traditionally conservative society. Planned lending o n population was not delivered, reflecting in part the
complexity and social sensitivity o f this issue. As a result, CAS outcomes were not achieved.

VI. WORLD BANK GROUP DELIVERY AND IMPLEMENTATION PERFORMANCE
A.

Quality of Products and Services

IDA Lending: Volume, Instruments, and Costs

61

A n n e x 6 - CAS Completion Report
44.
Actual I D A credits during FY2006-2009 totaled U S $ 484.8 million.’6 This allocation was
higher than the U S $ 415 million planned in the CAS Base Case Scenario. The factors behind this
increased allocation include: (i)a slight improvement in Yemen’s Country Policy and Institutional
Assessment (CPIA) rating (which i s a factor in determining a country’s overall IDA allocation); (ii)
fluctuations in the exchange rate against the Special Drawing Rights (SDR) in which IDA allocations are
denominated; and (iii)the addition o f U S $ 35 million in emergency flood assistance approved by the
World Bank’s Board. IDA funding covered eight out o f the 12 projects planned, one investment project
that was not initially planned (Water Sector Support, which replaced the planned Poverty Reduction
Support Credit), and seven additional financing operations. O f the nine projects implemented, one (Rural
Access 11) was the second phase o f an Adaptable Program Loan (APL). The number o f projects in the
portfolio remained stable at around 20, which has been the average for Yemen over the last 15 years.
45.
During the CAS period, I D A has made efforts to use a broader range of available lending
instruments. The second phases o f APLs that were approved under the previous CAS were not
systematically developed when the projects could be integrated into more innovative or broader projects
with substantial medium-term policy impact. For example, the Water Sector Support Project (scheduled
for approval in FY2009) aims t o consolidate the lessons from the five ongoing IDA-funded water projects
and several pieces o f economic and sector work (ESW), t o build o n other development partner activities
in the sector and integrate sector support within a harmonized platform. The Bank also delivered i t s f i r s t
quick-disbursing loan in recent times, the IRDPG, which proved effective in supporting key reforms,
especially on governance initiatives such as procurement and land reform. During the CAS period, seven
additional financing operations were processed under OP/BP 13.20 o n Additional Financing for
Investment Lending with the objective o f scaling up successful operations while gradually reducing
fragmentation o f the portfolio. The relatively l o w preparation costs o f these additional financing
operations created budget space t o increase the number o f E S W and TA activities conducted under the
CAS.

Actuals for FY2009 are projections at this stage, amounting to US$ 160 million o f the total amount.

l6

62

Annex 6 - CAS Completion Report
Table 11: List of Approved I D A Projects FY2006-2009
Year

# New
Projeets
1

Project

Rural Access I1
FY06

FY07

# Additional
Financing

IDA
Commitment
40.0

Power Sector

1

50.0

Fisheries Resources Management & Conservation

1

25.0

Total

Vocational Training I1

3
1

Rainfed Agriculture and Livestock

1

Social Fund for Development 111 (additionalfinancing)

1

2

Total

0

1

Secondary Education Development and Girls' Access

FY08

Institutional Reform Development Policy Grant (DPL)
Civil Service Modernization (additionalfinancind
Rural Water Supply (additionalfinancind
Public Works 111 (additionalfinancingj
Taiz Municipal Development & Flood Protection (additional
financind

50.0
20.0

1

50.9
14.0

1
1

20.0
29.8

1

20.0

4

154.8

Groundwater & Soil Conservation (additionalfinancing;)

1

15.0

Emergency Flood Protection I1 (additionalfinancind
Rural Energy Access

1

2

Total

FY09'

115.0
15.0
20.0
15.0

Water Sector Sumort
Total

35.0
25.0
90.0

2

2

160.0

9

7

484.8

~~

CAS Total

*Forecast based on FY09 Business Plan

46.
Average cost and time of preparation was relatively high, excluding additional financing
operations. At U S $ 472,000 (US$ 557,000 with PHRD grants) for FY2006-2008, the high average cost
o f preparation was driven by the considerable preparation expenses for highly decentralized p r o j e c t ~ . ' ~
Human and rural development projects are typically more costly to prepare than projects in other sectors.
Limitations in borrower capacity are also a factor. In contrast, preparation costs for additional financing
operations in FY2006-2008 averaged U S $ 66,000, as they often built on extensive supervision activities.
The average time o f preparation--from concept note to approval-was 23.8 months when excluding
additional financing and 15.39 months for all Yemen operations (as compared to 13 months Bank-wide
and 17.75 months in the Middle East and North Africa (MNA) region. The IRDPG took only nine months
to develop -from concept note to approval.

SuDewision

47.
The Bank devoted greater resources to project supervision, resulting in improved
supervision quality. Average supervision resources grew from U S $ 54,000 in FY03 to US$ 110,000 in
FY08, bringing the average for FY2006-2009 to U S $ 103,000-slightly above MNA's average. As a
result, IEG ratings for Bank Performance at Supervision show an increase from 62.5 percent under the
previous CAS to 66 percent in the CAS for FY2006-2009 (see below).

l7Examples include Fisheries Resource Management and Conservation, Vocational Training 11, and Rainfed
Agriculture and Livestock.

63

A n n e x 6 - CAS C o m p l e t i o n Report

A) Portfolio Performance and Risk Management
48.
Portfolio performance improved significantly over the CAS period. At the beginning o f
FY2009, Yemen’s portfolio o f 19 projects and seven additional financing operations was the second
largest in MNA, with infrastructure accounting for more than h a l f o f commitments.” Concerted efforts to
follow up on the recommendations o f the 2008 Country Portfolio Performance Review (CPPR)
strengthened portfolio risk management, reducing commitments at risk from an average o f 12 percent in
the C A S for FY1999-2001 and 8 percent in the CAS for FY2002-2005 to 0 percent in the C A S for
FY2006-2009. Proactivity remained at 100 percent during the entire period. However, after having
decreased significantly under the previous strategy, effectiveness delays began t o increase toward the end
o f the C A S period, reaching an average o f nine months for FY2006-2008. N o project approved during
this period reached the 2005 CPPR’s target o f limiting effectiveness delays to less than three months.
These delays can be explained by the complex parliamentary ratification process in Yemen. The
disbursement ratio for projects in Yemen, at 24 percent, i s slightly ahead o f regional and Bank-wide
averages (23 percent and 22 percent, respectively). The portfolio’s average age was 4.6 years in October
2008, above the MNA and Bank-wide averages for FY08 o f 3.7 and 3.8 years, respectively, due to heavy
use o f project extensions.
Table 12: Yemen Portfolio History at end FY2008
Portfolio Highlights
Number o f Projects in Portfolio
Commitments
New Credits
Number o f Entries’
Number o f Exits
Unsatisfactory Projects (% o f total)
by number
by amount
Projects at Risk (% o f total)
by number
by amount
Disbursement Ratio
*Including additional financing

No6
20
747.7

FY07
21
711.0

FYOS
20
851.5

115
1
3

50
3
2

159
7
1

6
6

5
5

0
0

6
4
24

11
22
26

0
0
22

B) Fiduciary Risk Management and Safeguards

49.
Particular attention has been devoted to managing fiduciary risks in IDA-financed projects,
but the level o f financial management country risk remains high. Fiduciary risks in Yemen result
from the relatively weak institutional capacity (both within project units and in external audit functions),
especially in accounting and reporting, budgeting systems, internal controls, and procurement. In
procurement, these risks have been mitigated through deployment o f procurement staff in the Sana’a
office, l o w thresholds for prior reviews, and frequent post-reviews. The continuous presence o f financial
management staff in the Bank’s Sana’a office has helped to monitor projects, and support project teams in
meeting financial management requirements. Furthermore, project teams have developed a close working
relationship with the Bank’s Department o f Institutional Integrity during project preparation t o help
identify measures to prevent corruption. Nonetheless, a recent financial management assessment o f the
upcoming Water Sector Support operation found a high level o f risk inherent in the country situation and
significant project-level financial management risks. Across the portfolio, risks to the financial
l8H a l f o f these

commitments were in the water sector.

64

A n n e x 6 - C A S Completion Report
management o f projects include weak institutional capacity, the limited number o f qualified financial
management and auditing professionals in the country, and a weak internal control environment.
Managing these risks will require close monitoring by the Bank, coupled with activities geared toward
strengthening country financial management capacity.
The Bank strengthened its oversight of procurement. There was one case o f misprocurement
in one o f the water projects, but procurement performance improved in projects that encountered
procurement problems during the previous CAS period. These improvements were supported by
procurement staff in the field. Oversight also improved as a result o f careful diagnostic work carried out
by the regional MNA procurement department, including an Independent Procurement Performance
Review (IPPR) for the country and Independent Procurement Reviews (IPRs) for individual projects.

50.

N o safeguard issue arose during the CAS period. The Bank conducted a safeguards portfolio
51.
review, including a field review o f risky projects, and provided TA to the Environmental Protection
Authority (EPA) for the review o f existing laws, bylaws, and regulations; preparation o f sectoral
guidelines; and training o f EPA staff. At the project level, the review showed that many Category B
Project Management Units (PMU) do not systematically identify specific staff responsible for
implementation o f safeguards mitigation measures. Moreover, safeguards appear to be a high priority
only in project preparation, not always during supervision. Going forward, the priorities are to: (i)
strengthen national safeguards compliance through improved capacity in line ministries to comply with
national laws and improved EPA capacity for monitoring and enforcing compliance; (ii)increase
strengthen monitoring and reporting on safeguards compliance.
supervision focus on safeguards; and (iii)

IEG and OAG Evaluations

52.
I E G conducted four project exit evaluations. Given the number o f extensions granted through
the seven additional financing operations, only four projects closed during the CAS period. Two closed in
FY2006 (Southern Governorates Agricultural Privatization and Child Development) and two in FY2007
(Basic Education Expansion Project and Rural Access improvement program), having disbursed a total o f
US$ 153 million. Bank and Borrower performance were deemed satisfactory for the two projects that
closed in FY2007, and the quality o f supervision was rated highly satisfactory. Borrower performance
was rated unsatisfactory for the two projects that closed in FY2006 due to low government ownership
(particularly for “soft” components such as capacity building), reforms that were exceedingly difficult,
and low P M U capacity. Institutional development was considered modest or negligible for the two
projects that exited in FY2006. The Implementation Completion Report for the Southern Governorates
Agricultural Privatization project was rated exemplary. IEG recommendations included: (i)
closer on-theground supervision, particularly for “soft” components; (ii)simpler project design adapted to the local
s t a f f decentralization to facilitate rapid response to project-related problems and improved
context; (iii)
donor coordination. It was agreed in the Yemen 2008 CPPR Action Plan that Bank task managers would
strengthen efforts to ensure realistic portfolio assessment prior to project exit so as to diminish the gap
between projected and actual project outcomes, and avoid triggering a Country Record flag.
53.
The net disconnect between the actual outcome o f projects leaving the portfolio and the task
team’s supervision assessments o f performance prior to exit was highlighted in the 2008 CPPR. In
the last two CAS periods, Bank supervision assessments have been typically more optimistic than the
actual outcomes recorded in completion reports and IEG project exit evaluations. Between 1998 and
2007, 29 percent o f projects f e l l short o f their development objectives while only one o f 20 projects (5
percent) was designated as a “problem project” at any given time and no project was considered “at
risk.”lg During the CAS period, the team devoted particular attention to the candor o f Implementation
19

An “at risk” project has three supervision risk flags.

65

A n n e x 6 - C A S Completion Report
Status Report (ISR) ratings, but as o f November 2008 the portfolio s t i l l did not include an unsatisfactory
or “at r i s k ” project.
Economic rate o f return (ERR) was acceptable. IEG assessments o f the ERR at completion for
54.
the Southern Governorates Agricultural Privatization Project and the Rural Access Improvement Program
were well over the threshold rate o f 12 percent but substantially lower than ERR at appraisal (19 and 19.2
percent, respectively, against 63 and 29.9 percent).

55.
QAG conducted quality assessments on four projects in the CAS portfolio.2oThe likelihood
o f reaching project development objectives was rated at least moderately likely for three out o f the four
projects, with concerns about the Basic Education Development Project (BEDP) based on previous
performance indicators, which were based on inflated data and have since been revised. Quality o f design
was deemed at least moderately satisfactory overall. Where there were concerns about design, these
tended to center around project complexity, results frameworks, and M&E. Quality o f implementation
was deemed at least moderately satisfactory overall, with minor concern expressed over the timeliness o f
programs that were not fully on schedule. Ratings on quality o f supervision were split; one project was
rated satisfactory, one moderately satisfactory, and two moderately unsatisfactory. Concerns about
supervision related to the quality o f oversight o f financial management or environmental aspects o f
projects, continuity o f task management and timeliness o f management attention, and the candor and
realism o f Implementation Status Reports (ISRs). This last indicator i s the one on which Yemen has
historically rated the lowest (72 percent over all Quality o f Supervision Assessments as compared to 67
percent for MNA and 70 percent Bank-wide); however, it was rated at least moderately satisfactory for
three o f the four projects in this latest round o f assessments.
Analytical and Advisorv Activities (AAA)

56.
The CAS showed some flexibility on ESW. Most o f the planned studies were delivered, albeit
with some delay, and were o f high quality. A total o f 19 pieces o f ESW were planned and 19 were
delivered, though the program was adjusted in response to shifting circumstances and client demand. A
few core products (PER, CFAA, CPAR) were not delivered. Additional reports were produced in the
areas o f economic diversification, social safety nets, and subsidy reform. The FY2006 Development
Policy Review provided a solid foundation for the Government’s National Reform Agenda. Informal
policy notes summarizing the Bank’s views on a broad range o f issues and drawing lessons from
international experience have also facilitated the policy dialogue. The unplanned studies o n GCC
integration and mining studies have the ambition t o be reference pieces for the Government and the donor
community. Both studies will underpin important components o f the future CAS, respond t o needs
expressed by the Government, and were accommodated within the existing program.
The CAS delivered more TA than anticipated. TA activities were contained to 20. Though
57.
well above the 14 originally planned, this increase can be explained in part by the growing focus on
governance activities through the Government’s NRA and Yemen’s role as a pilot country for the CGAC
initiative. In response to the food crisis o f 2008, the Bank provided TA on rural poverty, cash transfer
targeting, and subsidy reform. The Bank also provided technical support to the development o f a Children
and Youth Action Plan following successful work on a strategy in that sector. Planned TA on reducing
qat consumption and strengthening strategic communications was not delivered.

58.
There i s evidence that the Government values the Bank’s intellectual contributions, as does
the donor community. The formal transport sector note, completed in FY2009, led the Government to
20

These projects included Public Works 111, Basic Education Development, Civil Service Modernization, and
Groundwater and Soil Conservation.

66

Annex

6 - CAS C o m d e t i o n Regort

convene a meeting o f donors in the sector. Other sectors in which AAA recommendations have proved
influential include gas, water, higher education and health (Box 1). Analytical work has generally been
responsive and relevant to key country issues and disseminated widely, in both English and Arabic, and in
an accessible, useful format. In addition, the Bank's country office in Sana'a maintains an external
website in both English and Arabic, with access to development news, recent ESW, and project
information.
Box 1: The Influence of World Bank Analytical Work on Water Sector Strategy and Policy in Yemen

The World Bank's interventions in the water sector have been guided by the sector work that produced the frst
Country Water Resources Assistance Strategy (CWRAS) in 2005. This strategy provided for five areas o f support
in lin e with National Water Sector Strategy and Investment Program (NWSSIP) o f 2004: (1) sector restructuring
and institutional development; (2) decentralized water resources management through assistance to the National
Water Resource Authority (NWRA) and basin and local-level initiatives; (3) water resources management and
water use efficiency through irrigation improvement; (4) urban water reform and investment to expand coverage;
and (5) rural water and sanitation reform and investment. These approaches were incorporated into the 2006 CAS.
Working together with other donors and under the leadership o f the Ministry of Water and Environment and the
Ministry of Agriculture and Irrigation, the Bank supported NWSSIP implementation through five water sector
operations backed up by strong analytical work, including a Country Social Analysis, a study on a possible sectorwide approach (SWAP) in the water sector, a Poverty and Social Impact Analysis (PSIA) on groundwater,
irrigation, and rural water and sanitation sub-sectors, and a PSIA on the urban water and sanitation sector.
Based on this body of ESW, the Government requested that the Bank and development partners move forward
with a SWAP to guide and coordinate program implementation in the sector. This move has culminated in the
preparation o f the Water Sector Support Project (WSSP) co-fmanced by Germany and the Netherlands.

Table 13: List of Completed ESWs FY2006-2009
Year

FY06

FY07

Project
Development Policy Review
Investment Climate Assessment
Country Social Analysis
Urban Poverty Analysis (Taiz)
Secondary Education Strategy Note
Qat Awareness
Poverty Assessment
Social Protection Strategy
Public ExpenditureMgmt and Tracking

FY06

FY07

Gas Incentive Framework Study
GCC Integration
FY08
Social Protection Strategy
Financial Sector Reform
Yemen Mineral Sector Review
Public ExpenditureReview
FY09*
Land Tenure study
Adaptation to Climate Change
Pathways out o f Rural Poverty
Transport Sector Note
Total
19
*Forecast based on FY09 Business Plan

FY08

FY09*

Total
'Forecast

67

EnvironmentalHealth
Public Financial Management
Water Strategy Implementation
Children and Youth Strategy
Social Protection Workshop
Aden City Development Strategy
National Disability Study
Health Sector Consultationand Dialogue
Water Sector Strategy Support
Children and Youth Action Plan
Implementation
Petroleum Governance
Public Finance Management
Anticormution
Clean DeGelopment MechanismTA
Cash Transfer Targeting
National Agenda for Reform
Health Sector Review Support
GAC Diagnostic Survey
Anticorruption
Public Finance Management
20
based on FY09 Business Plan

Annex 6 - CAS Comoletion Reoort
Trust Funds

59.
Yemen benefited from a rich and varied trust funds (TF) portfolio, reflecting the Bank’s
strength in leveraging additional resources from partner organizations. There are 30 active TFs in
the portfolio, with total commitments o f about U S $ 82 million in FY2009. Three-quarters o f these
commitments represented multi-donor co-financing. More than half o f Yemen’s multi-donor TF
allocations (US$ 58 million) are currently directed to multi-donor TFs in the education sector (basic
education and the Education For All Fast Track Initiative). The multi-donor Global Food Crisis Response
Program represented the second-largest allocation, after education, at US$ 10 million. The Netherlands
provided a US$ 5.7 million TF to co-finance the Civil Service Modernization Project, and a U S $ 1
million multi-donor grant was approved to develop the capacity o f the Directorate General o f Animal
Health to better respond to a potential Avian Flu crisis.
60.
Trust funds were strategically integrated into the Yemen country team’s business planning
process. Policy and Human Resource Development (PHRD) grants supported the preparation o f three
lending operations delivered during the period for a total cost o f U S $ 1.1 million. Stand-alone activities
included funding o f US$ 700,000 from the Public-Private Infrastructure Advisory Facility (PPIAF) for
public-private partnership (PPP) models o f domestic gas pipeline financing; two Institutional
Development Fund Grants; a Global Environment Facility (GEF) rural electrification project; funding o f
three co-term positions in the Bank country office; and support from the Japan Social Development Fund
(JSDF) and the Trust Fund for Environmentally and Socially Sustainable Development (TFESSD).
Annual TF disbursements o f U S $ 19.2 million in FY2008 were equivalent to roughly one-fifth o f annual
lending disbursements for IDA projects.
The TF portfolio performed well overall. Trust-funded activities tended to perform better than
61.
the broader portfolio, in part because these trust funds are linked to the portfolio’s better-performing
projects. In addition, trust-funded activities have benefited from slightly different disbursement
procedures and, in many cases, monitoring by multiple donor partners. Recipient-executed trust funds
experienced some slow disbursement and implementation delays due to weak local capacity, limited
familiarity with Bank procedures, and delays in the procurement process. Such risks were mitigated
through close cooperation with the regional TF coordinator to flag slow or non-disbursing trust funds for
special attention.
Decentralization

62.
The Country Office in Yemen played a major role in coordinating CAS activities and
following up on portfolio performance. Total staff numbers in the country office remained stable over
the CAS period, though the number o f field-based technical and professional staff has increased. A DFID
trust fund has supported the addition o f three international staff in Sana’a, including a macroeconomist,
public sector management specialist, and water specialist. The presence o f fiduciary staff was
strengthened through the deployment o f an International Procurement Specialist in Yemen, and
implementation support was facilitated by an expanded presence o f Task Team Leaders in the field: 42
percent o f the 19 projects in the current portfolio are managed from the field. This increased field
presence has helped the country team respond in real time to government requests for assistance, as in the
case o f Technical Assistance on new procurement legislation and the development o f the NRA. For the
most part, low turnover in task management helped ensure continuity and strengthen implementation. In
the area o f portfolio management, the Country Manager in Yemen and other country staff are members o f
a CPPR follow-up committee involving senior officials from MoPIC and MoF.

68

A n n e x 6 - CAS Completion Report

Donor Coordination and Aid Harmonization
63.
A growing number o f donors have become active in Yemen. Under the previous CAS, Bank
support represented about half o f Yemen’s aid resources. By contrast, at the last C G meeting in 2006,
IDA and IFC pledges represented only 8 percent o f the total (Table 15)?’ Aid harmonization became
increasingly critical in this context. Yemen has pledged to adhere to the Paris Declaration on Aid
Effectiveness and regularly monitors performance against indicators o f ownership, alignment,
harmonization, managing for results, and mutual accountability. Nonetheless, donor coordination has
notably improved over the CAS period, particularly in education, water, public financial management,
and health.
Table 15: Donor Assistance in Yemen
Donor
Saudi Arabia
Arab Fund for Socio-Economic Development
Qatar
United Arab Emirates
World Bank (IDA)
United Kingdom
Arab Monetary Fund
Islamic Development Bank
Kuwait
Netherlands
Germany
Eurooean Commission

2006 CG Pledge
US$ million
1,000
700
500
500
400
224
220
200
200
114
90
78

64.
Given its comparatively moderate financial contribution, the World Bank Group’s larger
role i s as the “glue” o f external support programs. In an effort to maximize the effectiveness o f i t s
financial assistance, the Bank has focused on: (i)helping to mobilize other donors; (ii)supporting the
Government in designing sound sector-wide and thematic strategies; (iii)building sector-wide multidonor investment programs; (iv) helping to strengthen broader country implementation capacity through
i t s own projects; (v) assisting in improving core Government systems; and (vi) demonstrating new
implementation approaches that, if successful, can be mainstreamed by the Government and other
development partners. The Bank has also played a major convening role in donor coordination and aid
harmonization through i t s role as co-chair o f the C G meeting in November 2006, which brought a host o f
new donors to the table, particularly from the Arab World. This renewed donor engagement has
strengthened the development debate and sent a signal to private investors that attractive new investment
opportunities are on the horizon in Yemen.
65.
Under the CAS, the Bank Group has made considerable efforts to build effective
partnerships, including among non-traditional development partners. At the country program level,
Yemen has been selected as a pilot country for implementation o f the OECD Principles for Good
International Engagement in Fragile States, and an Aid Harmonization Assistance Unit has been
established in MoPIC to lead the Government’s donor coordination effort. At the sector level, the Bank
has provided substantial input to the design o f projects financed and jointly supervised by a broad group
o f donors; focus areas include education, social fund and public works programs, and water (in addition to
traditional co-financing in roads, civil service reform, and other sectors). The moved toward sector-wide
I t i s important to note, however, that disbursement rates have not followed this trend in aid allocations; IDA hnds
s t i l l account for about half o f net overseas development assistance to the country.

21

69

Annex 6 - CAS Completion Report
programming in the water sector and the Government-organized meeting o f donors in the transport sector
illustrates good progress in donor harmonization over the CAS period. Yemen has also made progress in
expanding i t s partnerships beyond the traditional group o f donors to include GCC countries and
institutions. The Bank has support this move through i t s dialogue, as well as in ESW on GCC integration
delivered in FY08.
B.

Building Capacity in Yemen: the Role o f World Bank Institute (WBI)

66.
Acknowledging that weak institutional capacity i s the most formidable challenge to
Yemen’s development, the CAS envisaged a more integrated approach to capacity development
with W B I as a full-fledged partner. W B I ’ s multi-year program for Yemen was closely aligned with the
CAS for FY2006-2009. While modest in size, the WBI program offered substantive and relevant capacity
building initiatives in a number o f key areas, as evidenced by the steady increase in participation o f
Yemenis in WBI activities.
Children and Youth: In FY2007, at the Government’s request, the Bank and WBI provided capacity
building and TA to the main agencies tasked with implementingthe new Children and Youth Strategy
in designing and implementingtheir action plans.
Health: The Training and Capacity Building Program in Yemen was part o f the WBI Flagship
Program on Health Sector Reform and Sustainable Finance. I t s aim i s to build a constituency o f
health care managers and decision-makers who share a common understanding o f the challenges and
paradigms o f health sector reform, and appreciate the advantages and disadvantages o f different
reform options. This initiative assisted the Government in i t s effort to reform health insurance and
decentralize the health sector. The program consisted o f four training courses on health sector reform
and one course on Rapid Results Assessment to strengthen health project implementation.
Groundwater Management and Monitoring: WBI support focused on implementation o f the
national water strategy, especially on water use regulation; on working with water user groups to reenforce groundwater withdrawal regulation; and on building PPPs to improve water use efficiency
and service delivery.
Governance Diagnostics: Starting from FY2008, WBI has been supporting a major World Bank
governance initiative by working with an MNSED Anti-Corruption Technical Assistance Project
aimed at supporting the SNACC in developing and implementinga National Anticorruption Strategy
and Action Plan. Under this program, WBI i s assisting the government in undertaking a Country
Governance and Anticorruption Survey to diagnose the scope and nature o f corruption and poor
governance and the sector and sub-sector level. The survey would focus on the barriers to service
access and quality and provide baseline data on corruption and service delivery that would help the
government evaluate future progress in i t s fight against corruption.
C.

InternationalFinance Corporation

67.
Collaboration between the Bank and IF’C has increased under the CAS period. IFC opened
an office in Sana’a in 2005 (co-located with IDA), and substantially increased i t s operations during the
CAS period, focusing on the financial sector, small and medium enterprise (SME) development,
education and health, manufacturing, agribusiness, and infrastructure (including PPP transaction advice,
power and transport sectors). Though the CAS for FY2006-2009 was prepared by IDA only, both
institutions worked to ensure coherence between their programs and to cooperate in areas o f mutual
interest.

70

A n n e x 6 - CAS Completion Report
68.
I F C has helped Yemen attract sophisticated new investors, most notably from Saudi
Arabia, in addition to financing projects in key sectors vital for diversified economic growth. IFC’s
portfolio has grown to US$ 150 million, up from only US$ 16 million in FY2005. IFC’s commitments
have risen steadily in Yemen, from US$ 35 million in FY2006 to US$ 91 million in FY2007. In FY2008,
IFC committed US$ 24 million through three projects. Recent IFC commitments in Yemen include the
Maghrabi Hospital (US$ 10 million), University o f Science and Technology (US$ 8 million), Saudi
German Hospital (US$ 20 million), the Trade Finance Facility Line with Saba Islamic Bank (US$ 5.8
million), and Arabian Yemen Cement Company (US$ 70 million). All investments have contributed to
employment generation and socio-economic development, in line with the DPPR objectives.
69.
I n close coordination-and
often direct collaboration-with
World Bank teams, IFC’s
Advisory Services have provided substantial assistance to Yemen in partnership with other donors,
including DFID and the Netherlands. In addition to the advisory services described under Pillars Iand
I11above, IFC i s engaged in the following areas:
Business enabling environment and investment climate: (i)business start-up simplification
tax simplification along with FIAS (design o f a new income tax law,
(registration and licensing); (ii)
assistance for its implementation, simplified tax reporting and auditing, development o f an SME tax
system); (iii)
investment policy and promotion (including to optimize the use o f existing free zone
and industrial estates in Yemen); (iv) mining policy reform (legal, fiscal, institutional, and
administrative reform)

SME development: management training through Business Edge; since 2005, IFC’s five accredited
Business Edge providers have sold 17,600 training seats to 5,700 unique trainees
Financial markets: (i)support to “regional champion” banks from GCC to invest in the banking
sector in Yemen and establish new benchmarks and international best practices; (ii)assistance in
developing the legal and regulatory environment for financial leasing; (iii)
advisory services to banks
on corporate governance, risk management, SMEs, etc.; (iv) support to the establishment o f Yemen’s
first commercial microfinance institution and leasing company
Public-private partnerships: (i)transaction advisory services (including concession design,
marketing o f the investment, and structuring and evaluation o f bids) for an Independent Power Project
support to MoPIC in establishing a PPP unit
(IPP); and (ii)

70.
I n January 2009, IFC signed a cooperation agreement with the Government of Yemen and
DFID to support a three-year advisory program worth US$14 million. The program will help further
expand IFC’s advisory activities in the areas o f business enabling environment, financial markets, SME
development, PPPs, and sustainability.
71.
Yemen i s also included in a global effort, IFC SME Ventures, which i s designed to promote
the SME sector in select I D A countries through integrated investment and advisory services. IFC
will contribute the initial US$ 6 million to establish an investment fund that will provide risk capital to
SMEs. IFC has also allocated approximately US$ 2.5 million for associated advisory services to support
the SME sector.

D. Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA)
72.
MIGA has not been active in Yemen, and no activities were under preparation during the CAS
period.

71

Annex 6 - CAS Completion Report

VII. LESSONS LEARNED AND RECOMMENDATIONS FOR CAS DESIGN
73.
Despite real challenges, reform can happen-and i s happening-in Yemen. The country’s
high levels o f poverty, limited resources (particularly the scarcity o f water), and rapidly growing
population pose critical challenges to sustainable development. Though not defined as a fragile state, the
volatility o f natural resource revenues, weak institutional capacity, and vulnerability t o sporadic security
problems point to the need for long-term, integrated attention to the interlinkages between governance,
poverty, and security. Nonetheless, it i s important to recognize that reforms and project implementation
are possible in Yemen and are indeed achieving results and maintaining fiduciary safeguards. As noted in
the 2008 CPPR, Yemen’s disbursement rates, project sustainability, and financial management have
improved significantly in recent years; this sends an important message t o donors that it i s possible t o
achieve satisfactory project implementation in the country. Given the serious challenges ahead, and the
positive forward momentum (as captured by improvements in the country’s CPIA ratings), Bank Group
support to Yemen should be scaled up under the next CAS.
74.
A valuable relationship of mutual trust has developed between the Bank Group and the
Government o f Yemen. The quality o f dialogue established with the authorities and other stakeholders
has made it possible for the Bank Group t o promote and influence the design o f important reforms. The
next CAS will need t o continue nurturing this open, trust-based dialogue through innovative
programming, alignment with country strategies and systems, and institutional support within the Bank
for time-intensive but rewarding dialogue initiatives.
75.
The Bank Group’s convening role i s increasingly important in an environment where aid
resources are growing and administrative capacity remains limited. Under the next CAS, the Bank
Group will need to continue to mobilize Yemen’s development partners in support o f common goals
(including through the CG process), to design multi-donor sectoral investment programs, and t o
strengthen the Government’s capacity to implement projects financed by other partners. In addition, the
Bank’s ability to share global knowledge and help the Government adjust and apply this knowledge
country’s unique circumstances i s highly regarded as one o f the Bank’s key comparative advantages.
Analytical and advisory work will thus need t o remain at the center o f the Bank Group’s program.
76.
Synergies within the Bank Group have proven effective in providing enhanced support at
both program and project levels. The C A S will need t o further maximize these synergies through truly
integrated packages o f knowledge products, advisory services, Technical Assistance, and financing. It is
proposed that the next C A S be developed jointly between the World Bank and IFC in order to highlight
the critical importance o f economic diversification and private sector investment t o Yemen’s long-term
development agenda.
77.
Implementation remains challenging - although the situation varies significantly across
sectors. Overall, the pace o f disbursements i s broadly in line with MNA and IDA averages, but
implementation could be further strengthened and accelerated - in particular through: (i)making
continued efforts to simplify project designs and streamline implementation arrangements; (ii)further
strengthening the focus on results based on a realistic assessment o f capacity constraints; (iii)
enhancing
the use o f decentralized implementation arrangements where appropriate; and (iv) generalizing best
practices such as the Rapid Results ApproacW’lOO-day initiative” which has been very successful in the
health sector.
78.
I n some sectors, there i s a trade-off between the short-term focus on results and the
medium-term need to strengthen capacity. The use o f Project Implementation Units (PIUs) or crosssectoral entities, such as the Social Fund for Development (SFD), to channel resources has proven an

72

A n n e x 6 - CAS C o m d e t i o n Rer>ort
efficient way t o achieve results on the ground. Yet, there i s a risk that such mechanisms undermine the
broader capacity-building agenda. Parallel efforts need t o be made t o strengthen capacity within sectoral
ministries, with a view t o preparing for an eventual transfer o f responsibilities, as may be adequate.

79.
Monitoring and evaluation (M&E) remains weak, in an environment where reliable statistical
data are often lacking. Further efforts are needed t o enhance the design o f outcome indicators and the
corresponding collection methods.

73

/

-

n

n

I

I

n

I

+

I

1

7

!

f

I

E
S

C

.r

c

6

7

t

E

L

v:
d

L
I

c

tS
S

a

3

00

-E
C

E

a:

E
C

+

.r

a

7

c

E

L

v:
d

L
I

c

tS

E
U

t

E

ec

C

C

+
a

.r

C

E

L
v:
Q

L
I

U

kE
E

a

Annex 6 - CAS Comdetion ReDort

Appendix 3: Planned Lending Program and Actual Deliveries
CAS for FY2006-2009
-

FY06

US$
m
40

Rural Access
A P L I1
(delivered)

US$
m
20

FY07

Rainfed
Agriculture &
Livestock
(delivered)

Fisheries

(delivered)

I

25

I Vocational

Development
(delivered)

FYO8

Urban Water
Supply A P L I1
(US$50 m not

US$m

0

delivered; replaced
by WSSP)

I

15

Girls Secondary
Education
(delivered for $20
mm instead of 15)
4 additional
financing
(unplanned)
Institutional
Reform (planned
for FY07; delivered
for US$50.9 m
rather than US$50

20

FY09

Population (not
delivered; under
preparation to be
delivered F Y I 0 at US$
25 m)
Port Cities A P L I1 (not

US$30 m)
PRSC I(US$40 m not
delivered; replaced by
WSSP)

0

0

90

(unplanned; delivered
instead of Urban Water

50.9

I Rural Energy ("$25

0

m planned for FY08;
under negotiation to be
delivered May 2009)

Groundwater & Soil
Conservation additional
financing (unplanned)
Flood Protection and
Emergency
Reconstruction
additional financing
(unplanned; delivered)

154.7

87

US%
m
0

15

35

140

Annex 6 - CAS Completion Report
Appendix 4: Lending Preparation Cost

Fiscal
Year

2006

Project

1

2007

2o08

2009

~

PHRD
cost

Actuals

Actuals
(u~’000)
95

(us!§’ooo)
Second Rural Access
Power Sector
Fisheries Res. Mnemnt & Conservation
Second Vocational Training Project
Rainfed Agriculture And Livestock
Social Fund For Development 3 (Supplemental)
Sec. Educ. Dev. And Girls Access Project
Institutional Reform Credit (DPL)
Civil Service Modernization Supplemental
Rural Water Supply Additional Financing
Public Works I11 Additional Financing
Taiz Municipal Development Additional Financing
Groundwater & Soil Conservation Add’l Financing
Rural Energy Access
Water Sector S u ~ ~ o r t
Average [ N 0 5 - N 0 8 )
Average Additional Financing [FY05-FY08]
Without Additional Financing [FY05-N08]
A

Average

Delivery
cost

I

88

709
590
41
363
3 12
129
71
46
43
46
143
305
303
66
472

554

500

383

Total

427
448
548
1,263
590
41
863
3 12
129
71
46
43
46
143
305
399
66
557

A n n e x 7 - IFC-IDA Joint Strategy Implementation

Annex 7: IFC-IDA Joint Strategy Implementation

A.

Translating a joint strategy into operational cooperation

1. The CAS a i m to leverage synergies across the Bank Group, in line with President
Zoellick’s vision o f a “One World Bank vision”.
With support from the IDA / IFC
Secretariat, the CAS was hence developed as a truly joint product with substantial and
substantive involvement by both IDA and IFC in i t s design.
2. The joint approach is built on a solidpre-existing foundation. IDA and IFC teams are colocated in the same country office (in Sana’a) and use the same technical hub (in Cairo).
Sustained efforts have been made over the last years to ensure an adequate flow o f information
across the two organizations and to strengthen coordination (e.g. joint sectoral meetings in the
energy sector, joint supervision o f the ongoing Safe Motherhood Program) - in large part
thanks to management effort. A number o f sector teams have demonstrated their willingness
to learn about the other side o f business and to develop strategic interactions, albeit informal.
The Yemeni authorities have also indicated their strong support to an integrated Bank Group
approach.

3. The CAS proposes to take this agenda forward. Both IDA and IFC are seeking a more
formalized cooperation to further leverage each other and achieve better results on the ground.
At the strategic level, this requires developing a shared assessment o f constraints and
priorities, and a coordinated selection o f proposed instruments - which was done through the
CAS process. At the level o f each sector, this will rest on practical tools which will vary
across sectors, and can include: (i)preparing joint activities; (ii)designing a comprehensive
program o f complementary activities; (iii)strategically sequencing separate activities to
ensure optimal complementarity; or (iv) coordinating policy dialogue.

4. This approach is reflected in the proposed arrangements for the integration of IDA and
IFCprograms. Such arrangements are expected to remain light and flexible, but to allow for
close monitoring o f the actual complementarity o f activities between both institutions. This
includes both a commitment to hold semi-annual review o f progress by the joint management
o f both institutions (at Director level) and close collaboration between relevant IDA and IFC
teams throughout the CAS period in implementing activities under the five “target strategic
themes” (financial sector, business environment, energy, mining, and health).

5. For each strategic theme, I D A and IFC teams developed a common program. Strategic
themes were selected as those sectors / areas where enhanced cooperation i s expected to yield
the highest results (in view o f the current status o f the programs). Management also
highlighted that the challenge for IDA and IFC teams i s to develop a business culture o f close
cooperation. Hence joint sectoral approaches should be developed in such a way that they
translate into enhanced cooperation throughout CAS implementation (and not only during
CAS design). Within the context o f the CAS preparation, each IDA-IFC sectoral team was
hence requested to jointly: (i)identify possible obstacles to an effective and genuine
cooperation; (ii)develop an agreement on sectoral priorities and respective instruments; and
(iii)
build an action plan to ensure sustained follow up throughout the CAS implementation
period.

89

A n n e x 7 - IFC-IDA Joint Strategy Implementation

B. Findings of thejoint sectoral teams: challenges andpossible solutions for enhanced
cooperation

6. K e y challenges for enhanced cooperation identified by the joint teams include:
0
The need to agree on a clear sharing of roles and responsibilities in sectors where there
i s potential overlap (e.g., private sector development (IDA) / business enabling
0

0

0

environment (IFC));
The need to strengthen communication between teams in order t o send consistent
messages to the clients;
The need to deal explicitly with differences in institutional approaches, in particular: (i)
differences in clients targeted by operations and advisory services in the same sector (e.g.
private and public banks in the financial sector); (ii)potential conflicts between the
relatively slow pace o f reforms supported by IDA and the eagerness to increase
investments by IFC (e.g. financial, power and mining sectors); (iii)
potential conflict o f
interests within the Bank Group (e.g., reforms supported by IDA leading t o investment
opportunities for IFC);
The lack of corporate incentives for joint work as well as for management t o guide and
monitor implementation o f the joint sectoral strategies.

7 . Practical approaches proposed by the joint teams to overcome these obstacles during CAS
implementation include:
0
Strengthen communication, e.g., through systematically copying both institutions on

0

0

0

0

relevant sectoral correspondences (e.g., Statement o f Mission Objectives, AideMemoires);
Consult on a regular basis to discuss and address potential issues, possibly through inthe-field meetings among those involved from both sides;
Continue to involve the IDA-ZFC secretariat throughout the CAS implementation
process t o take stock o f progress, provide advice and experience sharing, as well as
document teams efforts;
Agree on procedures to mitigate the risks of potential conflicts of interest with the
Conflicts o f Interest Office;
Joint ZDMZFC missions in the field t o discuss Government’s strategic directions and
possible jointkomplementary projects (e.g., health and financial sectors).

C. Specificjoint activities in the new CAS

8 . The joint teams have identified a number of joint activities to be undertaken in the
upcoming period.
0
Private sector development / business environment. IDA and IFC will continue t o
maintain the strong collaboration in supporting PSD reforms in Yemen. This will include
supporting the Government in preparing a coherent strategic approach to private sector
development, especially through the direct involvement o f the private sector through publicprivate dialogue mechanisms. In the short-term, IDA and I F C will assist the Government in
designing a well articulated and communicated PSD strategy in line with the C A S and the
National Development Plan. In the medium-term, both institutions will develop IDA AAA
and ESW work, including an Investment Climate Assessment (ICA) Update t o help provide
the necessary analytical tools for the Government t o guide the PSD strategy.

90

Annex 7 - IFC-IDA Joint Strategy Implementation

0

0

0

0

Financial sector. IDA and IFC will initially focus on capacity building activities to
support the implementationo f the Yemen Financial Sector Reform Action Plan and begin
strengthening associations in the sector and selected private bank, on corporate governance,
risk management and MSME financial services. In a second phase, the joint team will work
on improving the legal and regulatory framework as well as the Central Bank’s supervision
and oversight in areas o f corporate governance and risk management on private banks.
Mining. In the short term, IDA and IFC (including IFC Advisory Services) will work
together on policy issues to mitigate risks involved in investing in the mining sector. The
IDA team will continue implementation o f the ongoing trust funds focused on mining
institutional arrangement and promotion o f mining, and both teams will continue their
cooperation in the sector. Complementarity of approaches will be sought in operations
going forward (Le. the planned IFC Advisory Services operation and the proposed IDA TA
work and sector dialogue).
Energy. While no specific joint activities are envisaged at this point, complementarity
between IDA and IFC programs will be maintained. IDA will continue to promote power
sector reform in Yemen, while IFC will support the Government in instituting a PublicPrivate Partnership program (PPP) in the sector. In the short-term, IDA will work towards
improving the business climate for private sector investments in the power sector; in the
medium-term IDA will work with IFC in developing PPPs in power (including renewable
energy) as well as natural gas midstream investments. IFC will provide institutional
support and transaction advice for a small number o f pilot PPP transactions.
Health. The joint team will contribute to the acceleration of the achievement o f MDGs 4 &
5 through the Health and Population Project and the ongoing Safe Motherhood Program.
While IDA will focus on financing investments of the primary and secondary health care
levels, IFC will assess potential private health sector investment opportunities, and possibly
undertake advisory support jointly with IDA for a PPP to strengthen Gomhoriya hospital
(tertiary care level) which will complement the broader Aden health coverage plan
supported by IDA.

91

CAS Annex A2
CAS Annex A2: Yemen at a Glance

Yemen, Rep. a t a glance

9/24/08

Yemen

M. East
a North
Africa

LOW
income

22.4
528
3.0
30

313
8,778
1.7
57

1.296
21,846
2.1
32

19.4
870
2,200

876
2,794
7,413

749
578
1,500

3.6
0.6

5.8
4.0

6.5
4.3

Key Development Indicators

1I

(2007)

Population, mid-year (millions)
Surface area (thousand sq. km)
Population growth (%)
Urban population (% of total population)
GNI (Atlas method, US$ billions)
GNI per capita (Atlas method, US$)
GNI percapita (PPP. international $)
GDP growth (%)
GDP per capita growth (%)

I

Age dlttrlbutlon, 2007
Male

Female

7578

"I

percent

(mwt m e n t eEtimah, 200Cr2007)
Poverty headcount ratio at $1.25 a day (PPP, %)
Poverty headcount ratio at $2.00 a day (PPP, %)
Life expectancy at birth (years)
Infant mortality (per 1,000 live births)
Child malnutrition (% of children under 5)
Adult literacy, male (% of ages 15 and older)
Adult literacy, female (% of ages 15 and older)
Gross primary enrollment, male (%of age group)
Gross primary enrollment, female (% of age group)
Access to an improved water source (% of population)
Access to improved sanitation facilities (% of population)

Net Aid Flows
(US$ mil/ions)
Net ODA and offiuai aid
Top 3 donors (in 2006):
Germany
United States
Nethellands

Aid (% of GNI)
Aid per capita (US$)

5
19
70
34

62
75
41

I

73
35
100
74

83
63
108
103

72
50
100
89

66

89
75

68
39

46

Under-6 mortality rate (per 1,000)

57
85
29

1980

1990

2000

2007

571

400

263

284

20
15
20

38
41
30

32
57
34

41
32
29

68

8.3
32

30
14

1.6
13

44.9
17.1

8.1
25.8

5.5
15.0

26.2
80

161.7
100

199.0
157

II

lSas 2aa

OYfemen,Rep

OMlddlc East & North Alma

a

115T

Growth of GDP and GDP per caplta (Oh)

Long-Term Economic Trends
Consumer prices (annual %change)
GDP implicit deflator (annual % change)
Exchange rate (annual average, local per US$)
Terms of trade index (2000 = 100)

46

1980-90

1990-2000
2000-07
(avenge annual grolvth %)

Population, mid-year (millions)
GDP (US$ millions)

18.2
9,441

22.4
22,523

Agnwiture
industry
Manufactunng
Services

(% of GDP)
24.2
10.3
26.8
46.5
9.3
5.2
49.0
43.2

14.3
40.3
4.7
45.4

56
82
57
50

Household final consumption eqenditure
General gov't final consumption expenditure
Gross capital formation

73.8
17.5
14.6

60.7
14.1
19.5

62.4
16.7
24.4

28
17
11 4

Exports of goods and services
Imports of goods and services
Gross savings

14.3
20.1
27.9

42.3
36.6
33.6

38.0
41.4
28.3

I 66
83

84

12.3
4.828

Note Figures in italics are for years other than those speclfied 2007 data are preliminary
a Aid data are for 2006
Development Economics, Development Data Group (DECDG)

92

38

indicates data are not available

39
60

30
40

CAS Annex A2

Yemen, Rep.
Balance of Payments and Trade

2000

(US$ millions)
Total merchandise exports (fob)
Total merchandise imports (cifl
Net trade in goods and services

3,797
2,484
540

I

2007

6,624
4,538
1,214

Workers' remittances and
compensation of employees (receipts)

1,288

1,283

Current account balance
asa%ofGDP

1,266
13.4

709
4.2

Reserves, including gold

2,822

6,198

Governance indicators, 2000 and 2007
Voice and accountability
Politicalstability

Regulatoly quaiily

Rule of law
Control of cormDtion
0

02007
02000

Central Government Finance
(% of GDP)
Current revenue (including grants)
Tax revenue
Current expenditure

39.2
7.7
25.8

345
6.7
28.3

8.0

-2.2

I

25

50

Source Kaufmann-Kraay-Maobuui,World Bank

Paved roads (%of total)
Fixed line and mobile phone
subscribers (per 1,000 people)
High technology exports
(% of manufactured exports)

Highest marginal tax rata (%)
Individual
Corporate

100

hm%rvaiuer rnm bdlermlmgs

Technology and Infrastructure
Overall surpius/deficit

75

Counlry's percentilerank (0.100)

2000

2007

15.5

8.7

2

18

0.0

5.1

34
1.o

34
1.0
0.0

External Debt and Resource Flows
Environment
(US%millions)
Total debt outstanding and disbursed
Total debt service
Debt relief (HiPC, MDRi)

5,075
243

5,563
226

53.8
4.5

29.2
2.6

6

1,121
0

-

Total debt (% of GDP)
Total debt service (% of exports)
Foreign direct investment (net inflows)
Portfolio equity (net inflows)

0

Agricultural land (% of land area)
Forest area (% of land area)
Nationally protected areas (% of land area)

-

Freshwater resources per capita (cu. meters)
Freshwater withdrawal (% of internal resources)

C02 emissions per capita (mt)

Composition of total external debt, 2006
Shon-term, 318

1

,IBRD.O

194
161.7
0.87

1.0

GDP per unit of energy use
(2005 PPP $per kg of oil equivalent)

7.7

6.9

Energy use per capita (kg of oil equivalent)

268

319

IBRD
Total debt outstanding and disbursed
Disbursements
Pnnclpa repayments
Interest payments

0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0

IDA
Total debt outstanding and disbursed
Disbursements
Total debt smice

1,216
65
23

2,058
122
49

12
12
8

27
27
20

0

1

-

-

IDA 1 6 9 4

(US$ millions)

IMF 246

...

,

US$ millions

.

I d e l d . 612

Private Sector Development
Time required to start a business (days)
Cost to start a business (% of GNI per capita)
Time required to register property (days)
Ranked as a major constraint to business
(% of managers surveyed who agreed)
n.a.
n.a.

2000

2008

-

-

13
93.0
19

2000

2007

IFC (fiscal yea0
Total disbursed and outstanding portfolio
of which IFC own account
Disbursementsfor IFC own account
Portfolio sales, prepayments and
repaymentsfor IFC own account
MlGA
Gross exposure

Stock market capitalization(Om of GDP)
Bank capital to asset ratio (%)
Note: Figures in italics are for years other than those specified. 2007 data are preliminary.
.. indicates data are not available. -indicates observation is not applicable.
DevelopmentEconomics, Development Data Group (DECDG)

93

9/24/08

CAS Annex A2

Millennium Development Goals

Yemen, Rep.

Witb selected targets to achieve between 7990 and 2075
(estimate dosest to date shown, +/- 2 yean)

Goal 1: halve the rates for extreme poverty and malnutrition
Poverty headcount ratio at $1 25 a day (PPP, %of population)
Poverty headcount ratio at national poverty line (% of population)
Share of income or consumption to the poorest qunitile (%)
Prevalence of malnutntion (% of children under 5)
Goal 2: ensure that children are able to complete primary schooling
Pnmary school enrollment (net, %)
Pnmary completion rate (% of relevant age group)
Secondary school enrollment (gross, %)
Youth literacy rate (% of people ages 15-24)

1990

1995

2000
41 8
74

61
47 6

75
60
46

75

60

Goal 3: ellminate gender disparity in education and empower women
Ratio of girls to boys in pnmary and secondary education (%)
Women employed in the nonagnculturalsector (% of nonagncultural employment)
Proportion of seats held by women in national parliament (%)

7.2
41 3

58
55
43

50

2007

1

56
7
1

66

4

Goal 4: reduce under-5 mortality by two-thirds
Under-5 mortality rate (per 1,000)
Infant mortality rate (per 1,000 live births)
Measles immunization (proportion of one-year olds immunized, %)

139
98
69

122
89
46

110
81
71

100

Goal 5: reduce maternal mortality by three-fourths
Maternal mortality ratio (modeled estimate, per 100,000 live births)
Births attended by skilled health staff (% of total)
Contraceptive prevalence (% of women ages 15-49)

16
10

22
21

120

119
1

101
54

72
34

70
39
1.o

0.8
8.5

0.8
8.2

0.9
7.7

10
00
00

12
01

19
02
01
02

0

75
80

430

Goal 6: halt and begin to reverse the spread of HlVlAlDS and other major diseases
Prevalence of HIV (%of population ages 1549)
Incidence of tuberculosis (per 100,000 people)
Tuberculosis cases detected under DOTS (%)
Goal 7: halve the proportion of people without sustainable access to basic needs
Access to an improved water source (% of population)
Access to improved sanitation facilities (% of population)
Forest area (% of total land area)
Nationally protected areas (% of total land area)
C02 emissions (metric tons per capita)
GDP per unit of energy use (constant 2005 PPP $ per kg of oil equivalent)
Goal 8: develop a global partnershlp for development
Telephone mainlines (per 100 people)
Mobile phone subscribers (per 100 people)
Internet users (per 100 people)
Personal computers (per 100 people)

28
1.o

00
01

27
23

78
43

66
46
1.0
0.0
1.0
6.9

45
13 7

14
28

Education indicators (%)
'w

1

+Primary
+Ratio

net enrollment ratio

of girls to boys in primary &
secondary education

0 Yemen, Rep

Note: Figures in italics are for years other than those specified.

Middle East & North Africa

.. Indicates data are not available.

Development Economics, Development Data Group (DECDG).

94

9/24/08

CAS Annex B2

C A S Annex B2: Selected Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management

indicator
Portfolio Assessment
Number of Projects Under Implementation a
Average Implementation Period (years)
Percent of Problem Projects by Number a,
Percent of Problem Projects by Amount
Percent of Projects at Risk by Number a,
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount
Disbursement Ratio (%) e
Portfolio Management
CPPR during the year (yedno)
Supervision Resources (total US$)
Average Supervision (US$/project)

Memorandum item
Proj Eva1 by OED by Number
Proj Eva1 by OED by Amt (US$ millions)
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by #
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt

2006

2007

2008

2009

18
3.4
5.6
2.8
5.6
2.8
25.6

19
3.6
5.3
17.6
10.5
21.8
27.6

19
4.3
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
23.3

19
4.5
5.3
5.3
5.3
5.3
18.4

No
2,039
102

No
2,361
111

Yes
2,284
114

No
1,095
55

Since FY
Last Five
80
FYs
113
7
1,681.O
313.0
28.8
28.6
21.3
13.2

As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY).
Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio.
Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) and/or implementation progress (IP).
As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the
beginning of the year: Investment projects only.
* All indicators are for projects active in the Portfolio, with the exception of Disbursement Ratio,
which includes all active projects as well as projects which exited during the fiscal year.

a.
b.
c.
d.
e.

95

CAS Annex B3

CAS Annex B3: I D A Indicative Financing Program
Proposed IBRDIIDA Base-Case Lending Program a'
Fiscal year
2010

Project

UWWJ

Port Cities Development Project 11

35.0

tvbcha Wnd Park Project

20.0

Hgher Wucaton Project II

10.0

Schistosomiasis Project

20.0

Social Development Fund Roject N

140.0

Public Finance tvbdernization Project

10.0

htegrated Urban Development Roject

30.0

Health and Population Project

30.0

Subsidy Reform DPG

30.0

Result
2012

100.0

Basic Education Development Project (addition;

40.0

Public Works Project N

40.0

Rural Access Project (additional financing)

40.0

Result
2013

120.0

Water Sector Support Project (additional financ

90.0

Agriculture Development Project

30.0

Result

120.0

Overall Result
Outer years

Implementation b
Risks ( H M )

55.0
Result

2011

Strategic Rewards b
(HM)

Financial Sector DPL

480.0

30.0

Natural Gas Project

15.0

ibb h w er Project

30.0

Power Sector Project

40.0

Sical Welfare Fund Project

10.0

*,,idicative average annual allocation: SDR 75 million, i.e. $I 1 million. Amounts for F Y I I ,
FY12, and FYI3 are indicative only and will be adjusted on the basis of IDA allocations.
*Projects (including "outer years" operations) may be advanced or delayed during CAS
implementation based on a re-prioritization of needs which would reJect development on the
grounds and/or changes in the external environment.

96

CAS Annex B4

CAS Annex B4: Summary o f past non-lending activities
Product

Completion FY

Cost (USSOOO)

Audience a

Objective

Recent completions
ESW
Development Policy Review (DPR)
Investment climate Assessment (ICA)
Country Social Analysis
Urban Poverty Analysis (TAIZ)
Secondary Education Strategy Note
QAT Awareness
Povery Assessment
Social Protection Strategy
Public Expenditure Management and TI
Gas Incentive Gramework Study
GCC Integration
Social Protection Strategy

2006
2006
2006
2006
2006
2007
2007
2007
2007
2007
2008
2008

294
312
153
82
76
57
481
142
92
122
36
50

Government, B i Knowledge generation
Government, B i Knowledge generation
Government, B i Knowledge generation
Government, B i Knowledge generation
Government, B i Knowledge generation
Government, B i Knowledge generation
Government, B i Knowledge generation
Government, B i Knowledge generation
Government, B i Knowledge generation

TA
Environmental Health
Public Financial Management
Assistance on Water Strategy lmplemei
Children and Youth Strategy
Social Protection Workshop
CA: Aden CDS for Local Economic De\
National Disability Study
Halth Sector Consultation & Dialogue
Water Sector Strategy Support
Implementation Children & Youth Plan 1
TF: Peteroleum Governance TA
Public Financial Management
Anti-Corruption
CDM TA for Yemen
Cash Transfer Targeting Assistance

2006
2006
2006
2006
2006
2007
2007
2007
2007
2008
2008
2008
2008
2008
2008

12
16
69
154
20
140
63
133
35
75
500
85
67
30
44

Government,
Government,
Government,
Government,
Government,
Government,
Government,
Government,
Government,
Government,
Government,
Government,
Government,
Government,
Government,

Underway
Public Expenditure Review
Financial Sector Reform
Mineral Sector Review
Transport Sector Review
Land Tenure Study
Health Sector Review
Anti Corruption
Public Finance Management
Institutional Framework for Energy Effic
Improving Administration of the SWF TI
Electricity Trade and Interconnection TF
GAC Diagnostic Survey

2009
2009
2009
2009
2009
2009
2009
2009
2009
2009
2009
2009

350
60
175
260
90
40
75
50
40
50
40
40

Government, B i Knowledge generation
Government, B i Knowledge generation
Government, B i Knowledge generation
Government, B i Knowledge generation
Government, B i Knowledge generation
Government, B i Knowledge generation
Government, B i Knowledge generation
Government, B i Knowledge generation
Government, B i Knowledge generation
Government, B i Knowledge generation
Government, B i Knowledge generation
Government, B i Knowledge generation

a. Government,donor, Bank, public dissemination.
b. Knowledge generation, public debate, problem-solving.

97

Government, B i Knowledge generation
Government, B i Knowledge generation

Be Knowledge generation
B i Knowledge generation
B i Knowledge generation
B i Knowledge generation
B i Knowledge generation
B i Knowledge generation
B i Knowledge generation
B i Knowledge generation
B i Knowledge generation
B i Knowledge generation
B i Knowledge generation, pri
B i Knowledge generation
B i Knowledge generation, pri
B i Knowledge generation, pri
B i Knowledge generation, pri

CAS Annex B6
C A S Annex B6: Key Economic Indicators

National accounts (as % of GDP)
Gross domestic producta

100
11

100
10

100

100

100

100

100

10

9

9

9

8

100
8

100
8

Industry

44

47

47

32

33

32

29

26

26

Services

44

43

43

59

58

59

63

66

66

Total Consumption
Gross domestic fixed investment
Government investment
Private investment

79
21

76
18
8
10

75
17
7
10

72
21
7
14

R
20
7
13

n
19
6
13

72
17
6
11

71
16
6
10

71
17
7
10

=ports (GNFS)~
Imports (GNFS)

36
35

40
35

41
32

29
35

36
35

26
27

21
23

21
21

20
20

Gross domestic savings

21

24

25

28

28

29

29

22

22

26

31

25

23
22

28

Gross national savings‘

27

28

28

13873

16745

19082

23618

26539

28463

34489

39930

45534

580

670

770

890

9 60

1130

1240

1370

1570

Real annual growth rates (%, calculated fkom 90 prices)
Gross domestic product at market prices
4.0
Gross Domestic Income

5.6

3.2

3.6

3.9

7.7

5.0

4.4

4.5

0.1

0.6

0.9

4.6

2.0

1.4

1.6

Agnculture

Memorandum items

Gross domestic product
(US$ million at current prices)
GNI per capita (LJSS, Atlas method)

Real annual per capita growth rates (?h,calculated k o m 90 prices)
Gross domestic product at market pnces
0.9
2.5
Total consumption
Private consumption
Balance of Payments (US$ millions)

Exports (GNFS)b
Merchandise FOB

5015
4676

6843
6413

7865
7316

7773
7050

9475
8628

7283
63 12

8537
7441

8972
7752

9146
7802

Imports (GNFS?
Merchandise FOB
Resource balance
Net current transfers
Current account balance

491 8
3859
127
1444
22 5

6003
4713
840
1418
646

7781
5926
84
1382
232

9357
7490
-1584
1426
-1508

9350
7473
125
1482
-531

7779
5716
-496
1298
-690

8516
6271
21
1218
-4 14

9209
6822
-23 8
1369
-582

9907
7340
-76 1
1609
-882

144
26
44
-18
22 5

-302
49
131
-82
371

1121
236
245
-9
-132

917
232
201
31
366

4 63
176
90
86
-359

129
338
23
3 15
3 87

-329
499
-49
548
4 89

-388
537
-7 9
616
866

-316
60 9
-112
722
1176

-61 9

-764

-1457

-7

251

-164

-245

-433

-588

0.9

5.0

0.4

-6.7

0.5

-1.7

0.1

-0.6

-1.7

-7.4
-15.7

20
-9.2

-6.7
2.8

-16.7
9.3

-6.1
-23.5

31.7
37.7

-1.7
-8.5

-5.5
-1.3

-4.5
2.1

Net private foreign direct investment
Long-term loans (net)
Official
Private
Other capital (net L ~ C I e r r m & ommissions)
Change in reservesd
Memorundum items

Resource balance (?A o f GDP)
Real annual growth rates ( YR90 prices)
Merchandise exports (FOB)
Merchandise imports (CIF)

98

CAS Annex B6

Public finance (as % of GDP at market prices)'
Current revenues
Current expenditures
Current account surplus (+)or deficit (-)
Capital expenditure
Foreign financing

31.7
24.1
7.6
98
01

34.6
26.6
7.9
9.8
0.6

38.5
28 3
10 2
9.1
0.5

30.4
27.7
2.7
8.2
1.o

37.4
34.1
3.3
8.4
0.7

24.9
23.1
1.8
7.0
1.2

24.6
21.9
2.7
7.0
1.4

26.0
20.9
5.0
7.3
1.3

25.1
18.9
6.2
7.7
1.3

Monetary indicators
M2/GDP
G r o w t h o f M 2 (%)
Pnvate sector c r e d t growth/

38.0
13.9
33.9

34.5
13.7
20.0

37.6
27.7
16.7

35.1
16.8
35.0

35.4
13.7
20.8

37.0
12.1
1.8

33.8
10 8
25.8

32.0
9.7
22.1

30.5
8.9
22.2

Price indices( YR90 =loo)
Merchandise export price index
Merchandise import price index
Merchandise terms o f trade index

159.1
159.1
100.0

214.1
214.1
100.0

261.9
261.9
100.0

302.9
302.9
100.0

394.9
394.9
100.0

219.2
219.2
100.0

262.9
262.9
100.0

289.9
289,9
100.0

305.5
305.5
100.0

Real exchange rate (VSSLCU)'

115.9

120.4

133.0

137.7

12.5
14.1

11.4
18.4

18.4
13.7

12.6
20.6

16.6
8.7

14.0
-0.4

12.3
15.5

11.6
11.0

7.4
9.2

Real interest rates
Consumer price index (% change)
G D P deflator (%change)

a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f

GDP at factor cost
"GNFS" denotes "goods and nonfactor services.''
Includes net unrequited transfers excluding official capital grants.
Includes use of IMF resources.
Consolidated central government.
"LCU" denotes "local currency units."An increase inUS$/LCU denotes appreciation

99

Annex B7
CAS Annex B7: Key Exposure Indicators

Total debt outstandmg and
msbursed (TDO) (US$m)a

5363

5561

5530

6550

6582

6879

7349

Net disbursements (rrS$m)a

155

25 2

Total debt semce(TDS)

15 5

166

76.4
32.0
2.2
87.0

7862

20 1

176

32 5

338

499

5 37

168

21 5

227

228

2 56

281

68.0
29.1
2.0
88.8

72.7
25.1
2.1
89.1

69.1
24.7
2.3
86.2

90.4
23.1
3.1
89.3

80.6
19.9
2.7
89.8

81.9
18.4
2.9
90.4

86.0
17.3
3.1
91 1

0.0
69.5

0.0
68.5

0.0
74.1

0.0
0

0.0
0

0.0
0

0
1689

0
1894

0
2058

15.20
0.90

48.40
0.90

131.85
0.00

151.31
0 .oo

160.00
0.00

200.00
10.00

250.00
20.00

320.00
30.00

(rrS$m)a

Debt and debt Service mdicators
(%)
TDOiXGSb
TDOiGDP
TDSiXGS
ConcessionaliTDO

IBRD exposure mmcators (%)
IBRD DSipublic DS
Preferred creditor DSipubhc
DS (?'o)c
IBRD DSiXGS
IBRD TDO (US$m)d
Ofwhich present value of
guarantees (US$m)
Share of IBRD p o d o l ~ o(%)
I D A TDO (US%m)d
F C (US%m)
Loans
E q u t y and quasiequity /c

MIGA
M I G A guarantees (USSm)

a. Includes public and publicly guaranteed debt, private nolyuaranteed, use o f l M F credits and net shortterm capital.
b. "XGS" denotes exports ofgoods and service$ including wokers' remittances.
c. Preferred creditors are defmed as IBRD, IDA, the regional multilateral development banks, the IMF, and the
Bank for International Settlements
d Includes present value o f guarantees.
e. Includes equity and quasi-equitytypes of both loan and equity i n s m e n i s .

100

20

.
I

c,

E
&

..

0
00

n
I

-

0

z

0

0

0

vl

8 8 8

0

0

0

0

L-

8 8
(u

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

8

8

t':
m

8 8 8

8

8 8 8

8

8 8

8

s

8 8 8

9

8m 8 8

x

u
u

2

m
0
0

(u

-

CO

0
0
(u

-

LO
0
(u

-

L0
0

m

-

..

U

MAP SECTION

46E

REPUBLI C O F
Y EM E N

48E

50E

52E

54E
This map was produced by the Map Design Unit of The World Bank.
The boundaries, colors, denominations and any other information
shown on this map do not imply, on the part of The World Bank
Group, any judgment on the legal status of any territory, or any
endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.

SELECTED CITIES AND TOWNS

20N

20N

GOVERNORATE CAPITALS

SAUDI

REP. OF
YEMEN

NATIONAL CAPITAL

ARABIA

RIVERS
MAIN ROADS
GOVERNORATE BOUNDARIES
INTERNATIONAL BOUNDARIES

42E

OMAN
18N

44E

To Abha

Sanaw

HADRAMOUT
SAADAH

ak

Saadah

Maydi

Al Luhayyah

ALMAHWIT

Hajjah

Re

MARIB

SANAA

HODEIDAH
DAH

Ra

Se
a

Harib
DHAMAR
(3199 m)
RAIMH Dhamar
Rida
A
L-BEIDA
Wad Zabid
i
IBB
ALAl Beida
(3227 m)

t

Wad
i

Al Ghuraf

Nisab

At Turbah

Lahej

LAHEJ
Aden
ADEN

Had

Mt

Damqawt

Al Ghaydah

Mar’ayt
ram
ou
t

Hawra

Ataq

H

a

d

m
r a

tt
a
o uw

Qishn
Sayhut

Shihr

Al Mukalla

Al Huwaymi

14N

A B YA N
Ahwar
Shaqra

Gulf

Zinjibar

of

Ade n
Qalansiyah

Qadub

Socotra

46E

50

100

50

150 Kilometers

Samha

Darsa

The Brothers

12N

100 Miles
48E

50E

52E

54E

IBRD 33513

OCTOBER 2005

0

44E

16N

Nishtun

'Abd al Kuri

DJIBOUTI

To Mirbat

ns.

Bir Ali

0
42E

ser

Shabwah

B

ana

At
Turbah

TA I Z

Al Dhale'e
i
ad
W

ERITREA

De

DHALE'E

Taiz
Mocha

Sa

b'a

n
tay

S H A B WA

Dhamar

rat

adi Al Jiz
W

Nuqub

Ibb

12N

Marib

as

t
mla

SANA'A

Al Hodeidah

d
14N

Jaw
f

Amran

Al Mahwit

Salif

Wad
i

Habarut

Mah

n

Zamakh

Al Hazm

HAJJAH AMRAN

16N

Thamud

di M
Wa

AL-JOWF
¸ Huth

hu

To Thamarit

ALM
MA
AH
H RR A
AH
T

