Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized

Document of
The World Bank Group
For Official Use Only

Report No. 24114-PAK

MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENT
OF THE
INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT
AND THE

Public Disclosure Authorized

INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION
AND THE
INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION
TO THE
EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS
ONA
COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY

Public Disclosure Authorized

FOR
THE ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF PAKISTAN
May 15, 2002

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance of
their official duties. Its contents may not be otherwise disclosed without World Bank authorization.

The last Country Assistance Strategyfor Pakistan (R9S-213/1) was discussed on December 19, 1995 and
a Progress Report (R2001-0076) was discussed on June 12, 2001
CURRENCY AND EQUIVALENTS

Currency Unit = Pakistan Rupee
US$1 = PKR 60.50 (March 2001 Floating Inter Bank Rate)
FISCAL YEAR

July 1 - June 30
ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS
AAA
ADBP
AsDB
AG
AIDS
AJK
BMP
CAS
CBR
CFAA
CGA
CIP
CPAR
DLC
DEC
DFIs
DISCOs
DPR
ESR
EU
FESCO
FMCs
FSDIP
GBHP
GDLN
GDP
HBL
HIPC
HIV
HUBCO
IBRD
ICT
IDA
IFC
IMF
IPPs
I-PRSP
JSA
JSDF
KESC
LHW
LIL
LPG

Analytical and Advisory Activities
Agricultural Development Bank of Pakistan
Asian Development Bank
Auditor General
Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome
Azad Jammu Kashmir
Bait-ul-mal
Country Assistance Strategy
Central Board of Revenue
Country Financial Accountability Assessment
Comptroller General of Accounts
Community Infrastructure Project
Country Procurement Assessment Review
Distance Leaming Center
Development Economics &Chief Economist
Development Finance Institutions
Distribution Companies
Development Policy Review
Education Sector Reform
European Union
Faisalabad Electric Supply Company
Fiscal Monitoring Committees
Financial Sector Deepening and
Intermediation Project
Ghazi Barotha Hydropower Project
Global Development Leaming Network
Gross Domestic Product
Habib Bank Limited
Highly Indebted Poor Countries
Human Immunodeficiency Virus
The Hub Power Company
Intemational Bank for Reconstruction and
Development
Information, Communication and Technology
Intemational Development Association
International Finance Corporation
Intemational Monetary Fund
Independent Power Producers
Interim Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper
Joint Staff Assessment
Japan Social Development Fund
Karachi Electric Supply Company
Lady Health Workers
Leaming Innovation Loan
Liquified Petroleum Gas

MDG
MIGA
NAB
NBP
NCBs
NCSW
NDP
NEPRA
NEAS
NHA
NGOs
NRB
NWFP
OFWM
OGDC
PACs
PHC
PHRD
PIFRA
PPAF
PPF
PPL
PREM
PRGF
PRSC
PRSP
PTCL
RDPR
SAC
SAL
SAP
SBP
SDR
SME
SMEDA
SRO
TABS
UBL
UNICEF
UNDP
USAID
WAPDA
WBI
WHO

Millennium Development Goals
Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency
National Accountability Bureau
National Bank of Pakistan
Nationalized Commercial Banks
National Commission for the Status of Women
National Drainage Program
The National Electric Power Regulatory Authority
National Education Assessment System
National Highway Authority
Non-Governmental Organizations
National Reconstruction Bureau
North West Frontier Province
On-Farm Water Management
Oil &Gas Development Corporation
Public Accounts Committees
Primary Health Care
Policy and Human Resource Dev. Fund
Improvement to Financial Reporting and
Auditing Project
Pakistan Poverty Alleviation Fund
Project Preparation Facility
Pakistan Petroleum Limited
Poverty Reduction &Economic Mgmt
Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility
Poverty Reduction Support Credit
Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper
Pakistan Telecommunication Limited
Rural Development Policy Review
Structural Adjustment Credit
Structural Adjustment Loan
Social Action Program
State Bank of Pakistan
Special Drawing Rights
Small and Medium Enterprise
Small and Medium Enterprise Dev. Agency
Statutory Rule Order
Technical Assistance for the Banking Sector
United Bank Limited
United Nation Children's Fund
United Nation Development Programme
United States Agency for Intemational Dev.
Water and Power Development Authority
World Bank Institute
World Health Organization

The World Bank
Vice President
Country Director
Task Manager

.

:
.

Mieko Nishimizu, SARVP
John W. Wall, SACPK
Zoubida Allaoua, SACPK

The International Finance Corporation
Vice President
Country Director
Task Manager

:
:
.

Assaad Jabre, CIOVP
Mary Ellen Iskenderian, CSADR
Neil Gregory, CSASC

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
TABLE OF CONTENTS

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY............................................................
I.

POLITICAL, SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC CONTEXT-A TURBULENT DECADE . .

..................... 1

A.
B.
C.

From Crisis to Growth ...........................................................
1
Development Challenges ...........................................................
1
Recent Economic Developments ........................................................... 5

H.

PAKISTAN'S POVERTY REDUCTION STRATEGY ...........................................................

A.
B.
C.

Restoring Sustainable and Rapid Growth ..........................................................
6
Restoring the Integrity and Accountability of State Institutions ...................................................... 9
Accelerating Human Development ..........................................................
11

m.

THE BANK GROUP'S ASSISTANCE STRATEGY OVER FY03-05 ..................................................

14

A.
B.
C.
D.

Overview of Bank Group Strategy ..........................................................
Inputs to Strategy Formulation ..........................................................
Strategic Engagement Principles ..........................................................
Program Priorities ..........................................................

14
15
17
21

IV.

WORLD BANK PORTFOLIO AND ASSISTANCE PROGRAM ..........................................................

27

A.
B.
C.
D.
E.

IBRD/IDA Portfolio Management .......................................................... 27
Donor Coordination ..........................................................
29
FY03-05 Lending Program and Implementation Challenges ............................................ 30
Non Lending Services ..........................
34
Monitoring & Evaluation ..........................
35

V.

IFC PORTFOLIO AND PROGRAM ..........................

35

VI.

MIGA PORTFOLIO AND PROGRAM ..........................

35

VII.

OPERATIONAL DECENTRALIZATION ..........................

36

Vmi.

RISKS MANAGEMENT ..........................

36

6

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the
performance of their official duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without
World Bank authorization.

BoxEs
Box 1
Box 2
Box 3
Box 4

Who Are the Poor? ..........................................................
Land Ownership and Productivity ..........................................................
The Lady Health Worker Program: Documented Success - Impressive Potential ..............
Consultations for the CAS .........................................................

2
3
13
17

TABLES

Table
Table
Table
Table
Table
Table
Table

1
2
3
4
5
6
7

Social and Economic Indicators ..........................................................
2
Pakistan-Macroeconomnic Indicators 1998/99-2003/04 .......................................................... 5
NAB Performance 2001-2002 ..........................................................
11
Debt Service Ratios .........................................................
31
Lending Scenarios - FY03-05 .........................................................
31
Triggers for Bank Assistance Over FY03-05 .........................................................
32
Components of Non-Lending Tasks and AAA for Pakistan, FYOI-FY05 ........................... 34

ANNEXES

Annex
Annex
Annex
Annex

I
II

m
IV

Annex V
Annex BI
Annex B2
Annex B3
Annex B4
Annex B5
Annex B6
Annex B7
Annex B8

Consultations with Pakistan Citizens
Pakistan Private Sector Strategy
Bank Partnerships with Bilateral and Multilateral Agencies
Millennium Development Goals (MDGs), Targets and Selected Output Indicators
for Pakistan
Pakistan Country Program Matrix (FY03-05)
Pakistan at a glance
Selected Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
Bank Group Program Summary for Pakistan (IDA, IFC, MIGA)
Summary of Non-lending Services
Pakistan Social Indicators
Key Economic Indicators
Key Exposure Indicators
Status of Bank Group Operations and Statement of IFC's Held and Disbursed
Portfolio

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

From Crisis to Growth-Pakistan's Poverty Reduction Strategy
1.
Pakistan has started the new millennium with more hope. Starting from a position of extreme
vulnerability at the end of the 1990s-a financial crisis, domestic tensions, and external isolation-it has
achieved a remarkable turnaround. A major factor behind this turnaround is strong leadership in the
country with internal cohesion and a clear sense of direction. The latter is manifested in the InterimPoverty Reduction Strategy (I-PRSP) anchored in a comprehensive reform program for poverty reducing
growth, human development, and governance improvement. The government is engaged in fundamental
political, institutional, economic, social and gender transformation for Pakistan's transition to a modern
Islamic state.
2.
The government implemented a far reaching devolution program which led to locally elected
officials with the legitimacy and mandate to improve public service delivery. Women were given more
voice than in the past (33 percent of the total local governments seats were reserved for them and the
number of reserved seats was tripled in the future national and provincial assemblies). Despite severe
shocks-the worst drought in decades-GDP at factor cost grew by 2.7 percent in 2000/01; inflation is
low and reserves have reached US$3.5 billion on March 31, 2002, one third of imports, their highest
level in a decade. The government formulated a credible education and health reform strategy. It started
also a pro-poor public works program to ease the impacts of the economic shocks and the drought.
3.
Pakistan, however, still faces formidable challenges (political, attitudinal, and policy) to fully
develop human capital, improve the investment climate, and increase productivity growth to bring the
economy to the 5-6 percent annual growth rate achieved in earlier decades, or even higher, to
significantly reduce poverty.
4.
The policy reform record of the military government which took over on October 12, 1999, has
gradually renewed hope that these development challenges can be seriously tackled. This optimism has
been reconfirmed in the recent Interim Poverty Reduction Strategy. The full PRSP is expected to be
completed after the October 2002 elections (A Joint Staff Assessment on the I-PRSP was discussed by
the Boards of the Bank and the IMF on December 4, and 6, 2001, respectively).
Bank Group Strategy
5.
The main goal of the Bank Group's Assistance Strategy is to support these fundamental reforms
for a transition to a modem Islamic state through a program of analytical services, institutional capacity
building, and demand-pull lending. The triggers underpinning the Bank Group's assistance strategy will
be based on measurable outcomes which have the MDGs as a frame of reference in alignment with
corporate priorities and global public goods.
6.
The Bank Group CAS has been shaped by: (i) the lessons learned from the implementation of the
past Bank Group CAS in Pakistan, including IFC's and MIGA's experiences as investors and advisors;
(ii) the results of the 2000 Client Survey; and (iii) the concerns of Pakistani women and men expressed
during the extensive consultations held by the Bank Group all through 2000.
Strategic Engagement Principles
7.
The Bank Group's support will be guided by three strategic engagement principles: (i) Strong
"client pull" to reform and selectivity; (ii) A programmatic approach focused on transfer of knowledge

ii

PakistanCountry Assistance Strategy

and capacity building first; and resources second, in a flexible pursuit of key development outcomes; and
(iii) Partnerships and Outreach.
8.
Selectivity. The Bank Group's strategic priorities will be subdivided into three categories: (i)
Deep engagement; (ii) Low engagement; and (iii) Monitoring. IFC's investments and support will also
depend on progress in establishing a competitive market framework.
*

Business Areas for Deep Engagement. While cooperating with other donors, the Bank Group
will take the lead on support to:
>

economic management and financial governance, including technical and financial assistance
to the State Bank of Pakistan (SBP), the Comptroller General of Accounts (CGA), the
Auditor General's Office (AG), support for the reforms of the Central Board of Revenue, the
civil service,

>

investment climate, including support to reform the governance and regulatory environment
for power, gas, oil, financial sector, pricing and tariffs reforms, and privatization

> provincial and district governments reforms, including education, health, water management
and rural development, district services, and community infrastructure. The level of support
at this stage of the Bank Group engagement will include both non-lending and lending
services as required.
*

Business Areasfor Low Engagement. The Bank Group will keep a low level of engagement in
areas where the client has been "reform-shy" such as for urban development and transport or
where there have been reversals of reforms or slow progress. The Bank Group will focus on
analytical services and leveraging the resources of WBI to play an advocacy role to encourage
reforms.

*

Business Areas With No-Lending Services. These are areas where the Bank would monitor
developments such as on areas where the IMF has comparative advantage (macroeconomic
stabilization); areas where the reforms are on-going (sometimes with other donors support) or
need only IFC or MIGA's engagement (capital markets, SMEs); and areas where the
commitment to reform is very low. Areas of business from which the Bank has disengaged
completely will also figure in this category. This includes financing physical investments in
railways, telecom and ports, oil and gas, public industries, agricultural services, and tourism,
where the private sector can invest with the support of IFC and MIGA as required. No lending
will take place at this level of engagement.

9.
ProgrammaticApproach. Pakistan's I-PRSP sets out the process underlying a sweeping and
ambitious reform program covering political, institutional, economic, and social areas, including gender
equity. These reforms are inherently long term in nature as acknowledged by the government and can
therefore be more effectively supported by multi-year programs-both at the national, provincial, and
district level-hence the need for a programmatic approach for the Bank Group's assistance strategy.
The system wide reforms being envisaged for example for the tax administration (CBR), the institutions
in charge of financial management (the Comptroller General of Accounts, the Auditor General's Office),
the civil service, also require a programmatic approach.

10.
ProgrammaticInstruments. The instruments used under this CAS follow directly from the
strategy. The Bank will use (i) policy based fast disbursing lending to pursue the economic management

PakistanCountry Assistance Strategy

iii

10.
Programmatic Instruments. The instruments used under this CAS follow directly from the
strategy. The Bank will use (i) policy based fast disbursing lending to pursue the economic management
and governance agenda at both the federal and provincial levels and the sectoral reform agenda (finance,
power); (ii) programmatic sector and investment lending to support the implementation of the reforms to
improve the economic and social infrastructure and delivery systems for education and health, and
community infrastructure services (including water management) at all levels of governments; and (iii)
analytical work and other non-lending services to monitor developments in the areas of low engagement
and encourage reforms. The Bank Group will use its non-lending services to build a coherent strategy for
capacity building, fill the knowledge gaps in key areas of reforms to help the government articulate its
reform strategies and strengthen its implementation strategy.
11.
Partnerships and Outreach. The Bank has been instrumental-as it pursued the Comprehensive
Development Framework approach-in pulling along donors to build stronger partnerships in support of
the government's reform program and its I-PRSP. The Bank Group will continue under this CAS its
close collaboration with the IMF, the AsDB, and UN agencies (based on each institution's comparative
advantage). Facilitating partnerships and donor coordination by the Bank will assume an even greater
role over the CAS period now that sanctions have been lifted and many bilateral donors are reviewing
their assistance strategy to Pakistan with a view of scaling it up. An important complement to
partnership is the Bank Group's overall outreach. The Bank has increased its interactions with the
different levels of governments, the Pakistan media, civil society, and business community to establish
partnerships based on a shared vision for Pakistan's development.
Bank Group Program Priorities
12.
The Bank Group's program priorities will be focused on the reforms to (i) strengthen
macroeconomic stability and government effectiveness; (ii) improve the business environment for
growth; and (iii) improve equity through support for pro-poor and pro-gender equity policies.
Strengthening the Basis for Macroeconomic Stability and Government Effectiveness
13.
Macroeconomic Stability. The Bank will support in partnership with the IMF the macroeconomic stabilization program agenda to restore fiscal sustainability, reduce the internal and external
debt burdens to sustainable levels, and improve the competitiveness of the economy through supportive
trade, monetary, and exchange rate policies. The Bank Group's key contributions will be in improving
public expenditure management and supporting reforms of tax administration, safe and sound banking,
efficient public utilities, and structural fiscal and governance reforms. In particular, the Bank will
continue to carry out the annual reviews of the Government's Public Sector Development Program at the
federal level and will complete a National Public Expenditure Review in FY03.
14.
Governance Reforms. Improving government effectiveness at federal, provincial, and district
levels, will remain at the heart of the Bank's assistance strategy. Specifically, over the past years the
Bank has had a significant program of analytical work, including the civil service reform, the Country
Financial Accountability Assessment (CFAA), and the Country Procurement Assessment (CPAR)
reports, which has been instrumental to the policy dialogue in this area. The Bank will support in the
future (i) furthering transparency and accountability through Freedom of Information, effective
functioning of the Public Accounts Committees, and the establishment of a lasting institutional basis for
the agency mandated to fight corruption-the National Accountability Bureau; (ii) the extension of the
modernization of the government's accounting and auditing functions to district governments through a
second PIFRA project which is currently under preparation; (iii) the implementation of the first stage of

iv

Pakistan Country Assistance Strategy

the Central Board of Revenue functional re-organization and the fundamental cultural change within the
tax administration; (iv) the development and implementation of medium-term fiscal frameworks at the
federal and provincial levels to improve accountability; (v) the implementation of the CPAR's
recommendations, including the establishment of a Public Procurement Authority and the promulgation
of a Procurement Ordinance to foster competition and transparency through a uniform set of procurement
rules at the federal level and across provinces and public agencies; (vi) policy advice and financial
assistance to implement the necessary deregulation and other policy reforms to reduce the incentives for
corruption and improve the investment climate; (vii) the completion of the corporate governance reforms
in the financial sector; and (viii) civil service reform through analytical work and advisory services for
the continued implementation of the systems for better performance evaluation, merit-based promotions,
and training programs, as well as the implementation of the reforms of the pay and pension systems.
15.
The Bank's support to governance reform will also include support for the design of in-depth
governance and corruption diagnostic surveys and institutional capacity building for oversight and
monitoring. This will be done through training in the areas of public expenditure and financial
accountability, media development, and the interaction between parliament and the Auditor General,
including support to strengthening legislative oversight once parliament is reinstated.
Strengtheningthe EnablingInvestment Climate
16.
The Bank Group's support to strengthening the investment climate will include a combination of
analytical work and financial assistance targeted to reforms in key sectors. The Bank Group will
continue to encourage the federal and provincial governments to pursue the trade liberalization and
modernization of industrial, business and labor regulations that are already under way. To build the
knowledge base to underpin the policy dialogue on private sector development, the Bank Group plans to
carry out a significant program of analytical work. In addition to a Development Policy Review
(completed in FY02) which provides the Bank's assessment of the adequacy of the current development
policy agenda, including for rural development, to achieve rapid growth and poverty reduction; the Bank
will complete in FY03 an Investment Climate and Economic Performance Study. The latter aims to
relate key aspects of the investment climate (basic economic infrastructure, and regulatory and
governance frameworks) with the performance and productivity of private manufacturing firms, small
and large. An analysis of the trade regime will also be undertaken in FY03. In addition to the
governance reforms which have a direct bearing on the investment climate, the Bank Group will also
continue to support financially the reforms of the governance and regulatory environment for power, gas,
oil, financial sector, pricing and tariffs reforms, and privatization, as well as support to provincial and
district governments reforms to improve the quality of basic infrastructure and social services.
17.
IFC will support the development of new products to better meet the needs of the private sector
(e.g., long-term finance for infrastructure), and expand access to financial services to new clients (e.g.,
the bankable poor through micro-finance or leasing institutions), and to the under-served small and
medium enterprises sector.
SupportingPro-Poorand Pro-Gender-EquityPolicies
18.
The Bank Group will support the I-PRSP's core objective to empower people by creating greater
opportunities for increasing real incomes by improving access to education and health services,
especially for girls, and to safety nets programs. The Bank's support to these three areas-promoting
education and health, supporting pro-poor rural development and community infrastructure, as well as
supporting targeted poverty alleviation programs reflect their importance as well as the Bank's
comparative advantage.

Pakistan Country Assistance Strategy

v

19.
Educationfor All. The World Bank Group's assistance strategy will be driven by support to the
implementation of the Education Sector Reform (ESR) Strategy. The Bank support will focus on those
interventions in the education sector that would help the goal of achieving universal primary education,
with particular focus on improving the quality of education provided, and giving priority to the poor and
disadvantaged, particularly girls and children in rural areas. In particular, increasing children enrollment
will be crucial to the fight against child labor. Accordingly the Bank will focus on: (i) sector adjustment
lending to support the National Education Sector Reform Strategy; (ii) support to the National Education
Assessment System through a LIL; (iii) a program of analytical work to underpin the policy dialogue
during the implementation of the ESR; and (iv) province-based support to implementing the ESR within
the fiscal and economic reforms of Sindh and NWFP to start with. The support could also include advice
and technical assistance to reform higher education.
20.
The Bank Group assistance to health sector reforms, will support the govermment's priority of
strengthening the public health programs-immunization, communicable diseases such as malaria, TB,
HIV/AIDS; and maternal and child health and family planning. To this effect, the Bank will use multiple
instruments, including analytical work, technical assistance, policy dialogue, and adjustment and
investment lending as appropriate. IFC will seek opportunities to invest in private education and
healthcare providers.
21.
Supporting the rural sector through community-based infrastructure projects (particularly for
water supply and sanitation services) and the spread of micro-credit have been part of the Bank Group's
strategy to reduce and mitigate risks for Pakistan's poor. The Bank will continue, under this CAS, to
pilot new approaches, and also help scale up those which have proven effective such as the Conumunity
Infrastructure and Services Project (CIP) and the Pakistan Poverty Alleviation Fund (PPAF). The NGOimplemented program of building social and physical capital and extending micro-credit schemes under
the PPAF is a very successful scheme which will be scaled up during the coming CAS. The on-going
PPAF has already provided loans to over 60,000 borrowers, over two thirds of which are women. A
social risk assessment is also planned for FY03 which will also help underpin the Bank Group's
integration of social protection in the Bank's future operations.
22.
Pro-Gender-Equity Policies. The Bank Group plans to intensify its efforts to mainstream
gender. The most effective policy through which to improve gender equity is to improve access to and
quality of education and health, particularly to women and children, girls especially. In this context, the
Bank Group will assist the government implement the component of the ESR focused on boosting
incentives- through vouchers system, food for school, and other targeted subsidies-to increase girls
enrollment. There are many other candidates for gender-specific programs through which the Bank
Group's support can improve gender equity and help reduce poverty. These are water supply schemes at
household level, female literacy programs, extensive micro-credit systems, and rural employment
schemes.
23.
A significant program of analytical work is also planned to show the opportunities that genderresponsive policies create for enhanced growth and poverty reduction. The Bank, the government, and
the other donors, including UNDP and DFID, have been working together to strengthen the
government's analytic capacity on gender sensitive policies. The Bank has a Poverty Assessment
underway, with a survey geared to capturing gender issues with a view of informing public policy
regarding the formulation of a gender strategy. A Country Gender Assessment is planned for FY04,
which would provide the knowledge base for future Bank's policy dialogue and operational
interventions.

vi

PakistanCountry Assistance Strategy

World Bank Portfolio and Assistance Program
24.
The quality of the Pakistan portfolio has improved considerably, although problems affecting two
major projects remain, which loom large now that the "lean portfolio" strategy has taken hold. By early
FY03, with the closure of SAPP2 and resolution of issues related to these two large projects (NDP,
GBHP), the "commitments at risk" are expected to fall to a single digit.
25.
Lending Scenarios and Triggers. An SDR 1.0 billion (equivalent to US$400 million per year)
IDA allocation has been set for the base case and SDR 1.4 billion (equivalent to US$600 million a year)
for the high case over FY03-05. The Bank will resume IBRD lending under the high case starting from
FY04. Three lending scenarios (low, base, and high case) combining in base and high case policy based
lending and investment lending are outlined for FY03-05. The lending scenarios will be guided by two
sets of triggers; (i) self-activating entry and exit triggers linked to provincial reforms; and (ii) global
triggers linked to each of the three pillars of the assistance strategy, macroeconomic stability and
governance, enabling enviromnent for private investment, and human development.
26.
IFC and MIGA. Future investment will depend on further progress in key policy reforms to
open up opportunities for private investment. IFC's ability to do new business is constrained by its
ability to provide competitive financing. IFC's equity and foreign currency loans are unattractive because
of the high country risk premium. IFC is therefore exploring providing local currency financing by
means of partial credit guarantees. MIGA's portfolio is diverse, covering 7 investments in the financial,
infrastructure, and manufacturing sectors. Over the last two years, foreign investors in general have
adopted a wait-and-see attitude toward Pakistan, which is reflected in the small number of projects that
MIGA has underwritten.
27.
Non-Lending Services will be used to support the PRSP process, strengthen governance reforms
at both the federal and provincial levels, and support capacity building and knowledge sharing. To
recapitulate, over the period FYOO-02, the Bank Group would have completed a CPAR, a CFAA, a
National Public Expenditure Review (PER), a Development Policy Review (DPR), a Poverty
Assessment, a Provincial Finances Report, A Punjab PER, and a number of other important policy notes.
Over FY03-05, the Bank Group non-lending services will include a Financial Sector Assessment (FY03),
a CFAAHI (FY03), a National Public Expenditure Review (FY04), Provincial Economic Reports (FY0305), and a Gender Assessment Review (FY04). Other analytical work in FY03 will include a policy note
to launch the policy dialogue with the new govemment after October 2002, an Investment Climate
Review, an Oil and Gas and Power Sectors Report, a Rural Development Policy Review (FY04), and a
Water Resource Management study (FY04). The analytical work will underpin the Bank Group's
support to capacity building and will be reinforced by a series of leaming and knowledge dissemination
programs to be delivered by WBI, in collaboration with Pakistani think tanks and academic institutions.
28.
Risk Management. Pakistan's economy faces serious challenges and major risks emanating
from a variety of intemal and external sources. The main risks associated with this CAS are:
29.
There is unavoidable uncertainty about the sustained implementation of the reform agenda
outlined in the I-PRSP post October 2002, particularly in the face of domestic opposition from vested
interest, possible future opposition to the modemizing policies introduced by this government; in
particular the reform of the elementary education system, including the attempt to regulate the Madaris
(religious schools), and the pro-gender equity policies. The govemment has rightly decided not to
complete the full PRSP until after the new government is in office to ensure that it endorses it. Hence,
continuity and change issues will be discussed in a CAS Progress Report after the full PRSP is completed

PakistanCountry Assistance Strategy

vii

to determine whether the main objectives of the CAS remain valid. In addition triggers have been
designed to help the Bank Group manage this political uncertainty.
30.
Technical and institutional capacity constraints especially for the reforms that involve
governments at the provincial and district levels, the improved international reserve position, and the
access to increased concessional financing may pose a risk of implementation or complacency. To
manage the implementation risk the Bank and other donors are working together with the government to
build capacity. The complacency risk is mitigated by the sound, if daunting, debt reduction strategy
which has been under implementation for the past three years to rapidly restore creditworthiness and
reduce over-reliance on International Financial Institutions' financing.
31.
There are also several other risks to the achievement of the poverty reduction outcomes. The
low tax/GDP ratio may prove difficult to raise significantly over the next three years. Lower growth
caused by the impact on exports of a longer than expected global slowdown or protracted military
operations in Afghanistan, or weather related shocks to agricultural output. These shocks could be, in
part, weathered by the floating exchange rate regime but would have also to be met through a
combination of additional adjustment measures and external financing-none of which can be taken for
granted. If concurrent with timid debt relief, exogenous shocks would also delay the return to external
sustainability, which is a key condition to achieving Pakistan's growth and poverty reduction objectives.
32.
The portfolio risks are manageable in this CAS period. Credit worthiness indicators are moving
in the right direction (though the preferred creditor ratio will continue to increase as debt rescheduling
decreases the share of bilateral debt in total debt). To manage this risk, however, IBRD lending is
planned only under the high case and starting in FY04 when the uncertainty regarding continuity of
reform would have been resolved. Given on-going repayments, this leads to negative net IBRD lending.
33.
The Bank Group support program is self-adjusting to mitigate the risk of reform derailment.
Substantial lending will continue only as long as Pakistan continues its excellent implementation
performance of the past two years. Adjustment lending is subject to Pakistan being "on track" in
implementing the poverty reduction and economic management strategy, including those under the
PRGF.
34.
The Pakistan CAS has been prepared during a period of renewed prospects for a recovery leading
to sustained growth and improved governance. At the same time this is a period of increased
uncertainty-arising from the impact of the war in Afghanistan, domestic tensions with the hard-line
fundamentalist groups, tensions with India, and the scheduled return to democracy with national and
provincial elections in October 2002-which as discussed above may increase the risks facing the
implementation of the assistance strategy. Notwithstanding these risks, the government remains engaged
in fundamental reforms for Pakistan's transition to a modern Islamic State.
35.

Issuesfor BoardDiscussion
*

Does the Bank Group strategy adequately support the Government's Poverty Reduction Strategy?

*

Are the Bank Group's engagement principles and its focus on provincial reforms appropriate?

*

Are the triggers appropriate to regulate lending and mitigate risks?

*

Is the proposed lending and non-lending program commensurate with the country's efforts, track
record, and needs?

PAKISTAN
COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY

I. POLITICAL, SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC CONTEXT-A TURBULENT DECADE

A.

From Crisis to Growth

1.
Pakistan entered the new millennium with more hope. Starting from a position of extreme
vulnerability at the end of the 1990s-a financial crisis, domestic tensions, and external isolation-it has
achieved a remarkable turnaround. A major factor behind this turnaround is strong leadership in the
country with intemal cohesion and a clear sense of direction. The latter is manifested in the Interim
Poverty Reduction Strategy (I-PRSP) anchored in a comprehensive reform program for poverty reducing
growth, human development, and govemance improvement. The govemment is engaged in fundamental
political, institutional, economic, social and gender transfornation for Pakistan's transition to a modern
Islamic state.
2.
The current government implemented a far reaching devolution program which led to locally
elected officials with the legitimacy and mandate to improve public service delivery. Women were given
more voice than in the past (33 percent of the total local govemments seats were reserved for them and
the number of reserved seats was tripled in the future national and provincial assemblies). Despite severe
shocks-including the worst drought in decades-GDP at factor cost grew by 2.7 percent in 2000/01;
inflation remained low at 4.4 percent, and reserves have reached US$3.5 billion on March 31, 2002, one
third of imports, their highest level in a decade. The govermment formulated a credible education and
health reform strategy. It started also a pro-poor public works program to ease the impacts of the
economic shock and the drought.
3.
Pakistan, however, still faces formidable challenges (political, attitudinal, and policy) to fully
develop human capital, improve the investment climate, and increase productivity growth to bring the
economy to the 5-6 percent annual growth rate achieved in earlier decades, or even higher, to
significantly reduce poverty.
B.

Development Challenges

4.
Pakistan's past track record as a reformer has been erratic. Over the previous decade, Pakistan
had failed to complete on schedule any of the nine programs supported by Fund arrangements. Progress
was made in some areas, particularly on trade liberalization and banking sector reform; and reversal of
reforms has been rare. Successive governments started off well with ambitious home grown reform
programs but failed to carry through sustained reform. This undermined investors' confidence and
prevented lasting improvements in the fiscal and external positions, as well as human development.
5.
Pakistan became more inward looking in the 1990s at a time when competing Asian economies
were aggressively integrating into the global economy (see Annex II). A large share of Pakistan's private
sector was content with operating behind high protective barriers and special tax privileges-rentseeking behavior often referred to as the Statutory Rule Order (SRO) culture-or "tailor made
privileges"-which have prevented it from reaping the benefits of integrating into world markets. This
situation created an increasingly unfavorable investment climate which has constrained Pakistan's
growth potential by discriminating against exports, SMEs, and productivity growth in the industrial
sector.

2

PakistanCountry Assistance Strategy

6.
As a result, average annual growth hovered around 4 percent over the 1990s. A falling tax ratio
-to 15-16 percent of GDP resulting from a narrow tax base, poor governance, and weak collection and
enforcement- limited government's ability to provide critical social services and infrastructure. The
fiscal deficit remained well above 6 percent of GDP throughout most of the 1990s, causing a continuous
increase in public
sector
Table 1. Social and Economic Indicators
indebtedness
1990-97
1998 2001 I-PRSP
Low

which
combined
abuse
of

when

2004

Income

with
the

Targets

2000

Headcount Poverty Index (%)

28.2

32.6*

Illiteracy rate, adult female (% of females 15+)
Illiteracy rate, adult male (% of males 15+)
Illiteracy rate, adult total (% of people 15+)
Life expectancy at birth, total (years)

75.6
46.4
60.4
60.1

71.1
42.0
56.0
61.7

Limited budgetary
space
for

Mortality rate, infant (per 1,000 live births)*

103.7

90.0

development
expenditure

GDP at market prices
4.1
2.5
3.4
5.5
5.1
GDP at factor costs
4.6
3.5
2.7
5.5
Per capita GDP at market prices
1.6
0.1
0.9
3.7
1.3
* The head count index is for 98/99. Infant mortality rate for 2001 is from Pakistan Reproductive
Health & Famnily Planning Survey.
Source: PRSP page 6.World Development Indicators 2001.

banking

sector

kept real interest

rates high (now at
10
percent).

and

inefficiency-if

not
outright
corruption-in
expenditure

Growth Rates

67.7
39.2
52.9
63.9
85.0

..
..

40.0
64.4
77.0

47.2
28.5
37.8
59.1
77.3

%

management
resulted in poor social indicators (see Table 1). On the external front, protectionism and an
uncompetitive foreign exchange regime discouraged export diversification and resulted in unsustainable
current account deficits.
Low private
s0s~~~Bo
1: Who Are the Poor?
investment inflows and the recourse to short- .

term debt and foreign currency deposits only
delayed an external debt crisis, which was
eventually triggered by economic sanctions

following Pakistan's nuclear test in 1998.
Thus, the economy grew increasingly
vulnerable, balance of payments crises

recurred, leaving Pakistan with debt indicators
higher than those of the HIPC group of
countries (see Pakistan Development Policy

Review, April 3, 2002. Report No.23916-

In urban and rural areas, the poor are wage laborers in farm and
non-farm sectors or self-employed indicatng the importance of
srnall household enteprises for livelihood. According to the
1998!99 household survey, poverty incidence is highest (47
percent) among the illiterate, especially the rural (more so for

women) illiterate. Only 6 peTeentofthose With college educanon
are poor. In addition, as much as 43 percent of total population
is concentrated within a small range of 75 to 125 percent of the
po.erty line. This inplies that unanticipated shocks, such as
illness, death, drought, have the potential to drive large numbers
into poverty.
Inaddition to the social and gender gaps, ahighly skewed pattern

PAK).

of distribution of land (see Box 2). contributes to poverty and
vulnerability of a large number of rural households. Rural

7.
There are also significant gender gaps
in both literacy and health status in Pakistan

poverty incidence is highest and most severe among the landless
(who represent more than 50 percent of the rural population) and

which are compounded by outright
discrimination against women (due to

Ealls steadily as ownership of land increases. Close to 75 percenc
of Pakistan's poor are iandless and constitute 70 percent of the
rural poor, while less than 3 percent of households owning 10

institutional and attitudinal factors) in access to

acres or more are poor.
Of the fou provinces, NWFP stands out with the highest rural
(46.5 percent) and urban (31 percent) poverty incidence while

education, health, employment and other
productive assets, and justice. These gaps
present a stark picture of gender inequity.

Sindh has the lowest urbal
Sindh

poverty incidence (19 percent).

comes next with a higher rral poverty (37 percent)

followed by Punjab (34.7 percent) and Balochistan (24 percent).

3

Pakistan Country Assistance Strategy

After rapid growth during the 1980s that led to sharp reductions in poverty, lower and volatile
8.
growth in the 1990s has led to stagnation of poverty measured in consumption terms. Differences across
regions and provinces persisted or widened. While urban poverty fell between 1990-91 and 1998-99
(from 28 percent to 24 percent), rural poverty stayed at 36 percent (see Box 1). This shows a weak link
between rural growth and reduction of rural poverty due in part to a skewed land distribution and low
agricultural productivity (see Box 2). This is
of particular concem since more than two-

thirds of Pakistan's population live in rural

areas.
A Turbulent Political and Social History

Pakistan's turbulent political and
9.
social history has also contributed to limit its
This in turn has
growth potential.
constrained its ability to develop its human
capital. First, the country's wrenching social
change since its independence, vast influx of
refugees, and its increasing internal schisms
(result of a difficult economic situation
exacerbated by the impact of Afghanistan's
conflict) have contributed to social
fragmentation. Discord between its diverse
ethnic groups, sectarian and ethnic schisms,
and the continued political dominance of
large landowners (Box 2), have all
contributed to deteriorating law and order
and have kept much of Pakistan relatively
backward both socially and economically.

Inequity in land ownership also explains why overall agricultural
yields in Palcistan remiain below those of other countries with
similar resource endowments. The impact on productivity can
occur in various wvays. Fira, there is evidence from developing
countries, and Palistan, that as farm size increases, productivity
falls. One reason for this is high labor supervision costs that
encourage large farmers to reduce cropping intensity. Second,
while land rental markets increase access to land, the forn of tenure
on land can have a significant impact on productivity. the incomes
of tenants, and inmestmentincentives Sbaretenantsarelikelytobe

less productive than owner or fixed rent tenants, since any
productivity gains must be shared with the landlord. Also, the
pre%alence of share tenancy, especially in Sindb, reduces the
incentives to in%est inland improvernent and resource conservation,
DistributionofLandOwnershipi Pakistan,1990
FarmSize(acres) PercentofOvaters PercentofTotal
Farm Area
12.0
54.0
5 or less
39.0
39.0
5 - 25
15.0
5.0
2550
17.0
2.0
50- SOa
100.0
100.0
150
Source:

Government of Pakistan, Agnculural Census (1990).

Another factor which may have
10.
contributed to the social and political turmoil in recent years is the growing power of militant Madaris
(Muslim religion-based seminaries). The radicalization of some of these institutions started with their
politicization during the 1980s. With active support from the Zia regime (1977-1988), Madaris with
extremist administrations were established along the Pakistan-Afghan border. The objective was to form
a cadre of religiously motivated "Mujahideen" to fight in Afghanistan and provide political support to
Zia's regime. Madaris degrees were made equivalent to degrees obtained from formal universities. This
facilitated recruitment of Madaris students into the civil service, leading to the state's accommodation of
activities encouraging religious intolerance and sectarian divides.
The contribution of these "Mujahideen" to the Afghan victory, poverty, falling standards of
11.
public education, and weak governance, account for much of the success of the Madaris in the 1990s.
Since they provided free boarding and lodging, they became popular with the parents of poor children
and a steady stream of Afghans fleeing the factional fighting in Afghanistan. Marginalized, the graduates
from the non-mainstreamed Madaris (those which did not include the formal education curricula) with no
Successive
career-oriented education, resorted to violence to influence the country's policies.
governments did little to restrain them or bring them into the mainstream education system. It is
estimated that 15-20 percent of the Madaris are involved in military related teachings and training.

Pakistan Country Assistance Strategy

4

12.
Second, the continuing tensions in the region starve Pakistan of crucial resources (while reduced
from over 6 percent in the 1980s, defense spending still absorbs 4.7 percent of GDP) and reduce
opportunities for closer regional integration. While over the medium-term Pakistan's growth potential
may be enhanced by Afghanistan's reconstruction plan, in the short-run, the war in Afghanistan, and its
spillovers to Pakistan, and tensions along the border with India, are adding to the political turmoil and
raising the risk of doing business in Pakistan.
13.
Third, Pakistan's poor and deteriorating governance has accentuated the political and social
turmoil. Since 1990 four democratically elected governments have been dismissed, three of them on
corruption charges. The frequent changes of government over the 1990s and the ensuing unpredictability
of the policy stance undermined business confidence. At the core of the govemance problem is the abuse
of the state's institutions, widespread corruption, and disregard for the separation of powers and respect
for the rule of law.
Service Delivery in Crisis
14.
Pakistan is a federation of 4 provinces-Punjab, North West Frontier Province (NWFP),
Balochistan, and Sindh-seven tribal areas (excluding five tribal areas adjoining settled areas called as
Frontier regions); and the Northern Areas. Pakistan's 1973 constitution grants major responsibility to the
provinces for regulatory oversight, provision of infrastructure (including irrigation and agricultural
extension services) and social services. The provinces account for 80 percent of total government
spending on health, education, and irrigation. In contrast, and contrary to experience with other federal
countries, tax authority is concentrated at the federal level. The federal government revenue transfers
account for as much as 84 percent of provincial resources, weakening the accountability of provincial
governments to taxpayers, as expenditure and revenue decisions are made at two different levels of
government.
15.
As a result, and like the country as a whole, Pakistan's provinces have been facing a crisis of
public finances, public service delivery, and public institutions and governance. The provinces suffer
from large and worsening "deficits" (shortfalls of spending and service delivery relative to needs) in the
funding, delivery, and quality of social services (education, health, rural water supply and sanitation).
Similar provincial infrastructure deficits (roads, irrigation and drainage, and municipal services) increase
the cost of doing business and impose a heavy burden on the economy and the general public. Vital
irrigation water services are unreliable and controlled by antiquated, non-transparent and unresponsive
departments. The multiplicity of provincial regulatory agencies harass the private sector and discourage
entrepreneurship and economic activity. The police is widely perceived as ineffective and corrupt, while
the judicial services are subject to long delays and are also seen as sometimes corrupt and out of reach of
the average citizen, let alone the poor.
16.
There is a tremendous opportunity for the provinces to tum around the performance of their
public sector. The following factors are conducive to reform.
*

There is a reforming govemment at the federal level, which has put at the heart of its poverty
reduction strategy a program of reforms to foster growth and reduce poverty.

*

The provinces-particularly Sindh and NWFP-have already initiated a number of promising
reforms to restore good govemance, improve their public finances and public service delivery.

PakistanCountry Assistance Strategy

*

5

Pakistan's devolution plan represents a major opportunity to reverse decades of overcentralization of public sector management by creating more accountable elected local
governments, which would be responsible for the provision of local public services.

17.
The policy reform record of the military government which took over on October 12, 1999, has
gradually led to renewed optimism that these development challenges can be seriously tackled. This
optimism has been reconfirmed in the recently published Interim Poverty Reduction Strategy (I-PRSP).
There are also signs of an economic revival.
C.

Recent Economic Developments

18.
Prior to September 11, 2001, Pakistan was already reforming for nearly two years and showing
signs of an economic recovery. In 2000/01, despite a severe drought, total GDP at factor cost grew by
2.7 percent while CPI inflation remained low at 4.4 percent, notwithstanding large increases in fuel and
electricity prices and a significant depreciation of the rupee. Although the program's tax collection
targets were not achieved, the Central Bureau of Revenue (CBR) tax ratio increased by 0.4 percentage
points of GDP. The budget deficit was contained at 5.3 percent of GDP compared with 6.5 percent the
previous year (Table 2). Low inflation and successful reserves accumulation-US$3.5 billion by March
31, 2002, the highest level in a decade-reflected responsive monetary management supported by the
introduction of a floating exchange rate regime. The tightening of anti-money laundering measures in
US, Europe, and the Gulf countries has also triggered a large repatriation of holdings abroad by Pakistani
residents through the official banking channel since end-September.
Table 2: Paldstan: Macroecononmc Indicators, 1998/99 -2003/04

Output and Prices (annual changes In percent)
Real GDP at factor cost
Consumer Prices
Savings and Investment (percent of GDP)
Gross National Savings
Government
Non-Govemment*
Gross Capital Fonnation
Govermment
Non-Government*
Publk Finances (percent of GDP)
Budgetary Revenue
Budgetary Expenditure
Budgetary Balance
Primary Balance
Net Public Debt
Interest Payments
External Sector (percent of GDP)
Merchandise Exports
Merchandise Imports
Current Account Balance excluding official transfers
Current Account Balance including official transfers
Total External Debt (percent of current receipts)
Total Debt Service (percent of current receipts)
Gross Reserves (US$ million)
(in weeks ofnext year imports)
Financing Gap (US$ million)

Including Public Enterprises.
Sources: World Bank and IMF staff Estimates.

1998/99

1999/00

Estimate
2000/01

2001/02

Projections
2002/03

2003/04

4.2
5.7

3.9
3.6

2.7
4.4

3.3
3.0

4.7
3.9

5.2
4.0

11.9
-3.0
15.0
15.6
3.7
11.9

13.5
-3.6
17.2
15.6
3.2
12.4

12.8
-1.8
14.6
14.7
2.7
12.0

15.4
0.2
15.2
15.2
3.4
11.8

15.4
0.8
14.6
16.6
3.6
13.0

15.8
1.4
14.3
17.5
3.9
13.6

16.2
22.2
-6.0
1.3
93.6
7.3

16.5
23.0
-6.5
1.1
91.6
7.6

15.7
21.0
-5.3
1.5
100.9
6.8

16.9
22.7
-5.7
1.2
94.2
7.0

17.3
21.5
-4.2
2.1
90.5
6.3

17.3
20.6
-3.3
2.4
83.6
5.7

12.8
16.4
-4.6
-3.6
328.1
41.7

13.3
15.6
-3.6
-2.1
307.0
38.9

15.0
17.1
-3.3
-1.9
302.4
32.5

14.9
16.4
-2.3
0.2
294.1
33.9

15.4
16.9
-2.7
-1.2
280.5
30.4

15.8
17.1
-2.1
-1.7
259.1
26.8

1672.0
7.7

908.0
3.9

1681.0
7.5

2797.0
11.6

3677.0
14.4

4555.0
17.0

100.0

200.0

..

..

..

..

6

Pakistan CountryAssistance Strategy

19.
The recovery is now threatened as perceptions about security risks due to the war in Afghanistan,
tensions with India, together with the global economic slowdown, have worsened prospects for growth,
exports and FDI inflows. The external financing gap for fiscal year 2001/02 increased by at least US$1
billion (or 1.7 percent of GDP) after the September 11 shock.
20.
On September 26, 2001, the IMF's Board agreed that performance under the program supported
by a SDR 465 million Stand-By Arrangement (approved on November 29, 2000) established a good track
record of macroeconomic policy and structural reform implementation. This laid the ground for a threeyear support program under the Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility (PRGF), approved in November
2001. The first review of the PRGF program was successfully completed in end-March 2002.
21.
The international community's response post September 11 helped reduce the financing gap.
The US provided direct budgetary support of US$600 million to protect spending on health, education,
and anti-poverty programs and cover some of the cost due to the increased number of Afghan refugees.
Other donors (Japan, UK, EU, Canada and European countries) also contributed. The external financing
package which is supported by the IMF (PRGF-US$1.25 billion over FY02-04) includes US$3.3 billion
in debt relief from the Paris Club over the next three years. However, despite these favorable
developments, the extemal and domestic public debt are both quite large and hence there are still
concerns over the fragility of the extemal position and future growth prospects. The September 11 shock
has also increased the longer term risks to the balance of payment position by making more uncertain an
early resumption of long-term private capital inflows as well as increased access to international capital
markets.
HI. PAKISTAN'S POVERTY REDUCTION STRATEGY

22.
Soon after the military coup, the new government issued a seven-point agenda to revive the
economy, root out endemic corruption, depoliticize state institutions, devolve power to the grass-root
level, and improve checks and balances and democratic processes in society. In December 1999,
following broad national consultations, the government announced its development strategy which
focused on: (i) strengthening governance and the integrity of the civil service; (ii) creating opportunities
through accelerating growth of agriculture, small and medium scale industries, information technology,
and oil and gas sectors; and (iii) reducing poverty through revival of growth and re-orienting public
expenditure towards human development and poverty reduction. This reform agenda is now the
backbone of the government's Interim Poverty Reduction Strategy. Significant progress has been made
already in implementing this reform program particularly on macro economic stabilization, deregulation,
governance and devolution. The full PRSP is expected to be completed after October 2002 when the
newly elected government takes office (A Joint Staff Assessment (JSA) on the I-PRSP was discussed by
the Boards of the Bank and the IMF on December 4, and 6, 2001, respectively). A referendum was held
on April 30, 2002 in which President Musharraf sought voters confidence for a five-year presidential
mandate, arguing that this is the only way to ensure sustainability of the on-going reforms. National and
Provincial elections are to be held between October 1-11 with the transfer of power and formation of
federal and provincial governments to take place shortly after.
A.

Restoring Sustainable and Rapid Growth

23.
The government recognizes that the incidence of poverty and the vulnerability of the poor will
not be reduced without sustained, broad based economic growth. This growth can only be generated and
sustained by the private sector. For this to happen, a reasonable investment climate is required with a
policy framework that provides ample room for private firms, small and large, to invest and create jobs in

Pakistan CountryAssistance Strategy

7

agriculture, industry, and services. The govermment's main preoccupation has therefore been to improve
government effectiveness in creating the political, economic, and institutional setting for markets and
entrepreneurship to flourish. In particular, it focused on ensuring macroeconomic stability, good
governance-that promotes adequate property rights and security of contract-within a framework of
regulations underpinned by a functioning legal system and curtailment of corruption.
24.
Strengthening Macroeconomic Stability. The path of fiscal consolidation envisaged in the IPRSP is appropriately ambitious to increase domestic savings to finance new investment and curb
unfavorable public debt dynamics. This is essential as the I-PRSP is appropriately cautious on prospects
for higher private savings. The I-PRSP rightly stresses that these fiscal targets hinge upon the realization
of the government's projected revenue increase. Implementation of CBR reform, and measures to
broaden the tax base, including bringing agricultural income in the tax net, and eliminate tax exemptions,
are therefore crucial. The strategy also seeks to re-orient expenditures towards the social sectors by
reducing the costs of domestic debt, public enterprises, and defense spending (see graphs below).
A4ustment under the I-PRSP program
7 .0

Changing Compnaition of E*nditure In I-PRSP
,

I.014n5

6.05.0

-~~~~~~~

4.0 -

4.0

.0-

140
1

3.0 2.0

5

4.
.

.

.5

-13.0

2.0-

-2.0

-

0.0~

~

Ii

~

-1~~~~~~~~~~~0
.0
-12.0

.

1-Edulction,hthh and

Tay rvnue

+ Developnwt spendi'g

Fiscal decrit

-

population ptmming
e n
Defasoenditum
(withou pensios)

m

Other Pro-poor I-PRSP ceandhur

25.
Improving the Business Climate. In addition to macroeconomic stability and governance
improvement, reforms in this area focused on reducing the level of protection through de-regulation,
trade liberalization, tariffs reduction and rationalization, and policy reforms to raise productivity and
reduce the cost of doing business through privatization or more efficient public services.
26.
In power, the vision is to build a competitive electric power system consisting of autonomous,
financially viable, and efficiently operated entities governed by an independent regulatory authority.
Commercialization leading to privatization forms the cornerstone of the government's power sector
reforms, which requires credible pricing and regulatory frameworks to improve efficiency and attract
private investment.
27.
Despite the Government's commitment to this vision, progress in implementing it has been
painfully slow. The four year old National Electric Power Regulatory Authority (NEPRA) has not been
able to play its regulatory role effectively because of lack of capacity and weaknesses in the regulatory
framework regarding tariff setting policy. It has not been able to find a balance between the interests of
consumers and producers. Improvements in the operational performances of the Water and Power
Development Authority (WAPDA) and the Karachi Electricity Supply Corporation (KESC) also have
lagged. In fact, the government recognizes that the large losses of KESC may endanger some of its fiscal
achievements and poses therefore an important risk for macroeconomic balances. Adjustments in tariffs
have been largely inadequate to finance the viability of power suppliers.

8

Pakistan Country Assistance Strategy

Natural Gas. The natural gas sector has significant potential for growth, foreign exchange
28.
savings (estimated to be about US$500 million a year), efficiency gains as well as environmental
benefits. Its development has been stifled, however, by insufficient investment in exploration and
production, inadequate infrastructure, administered prices, heavy taxation and disproportionate crosssubsidies. The government strategy is to establish a credible, market-based pricing framework across the
production, transmission and distribution chain. The government also intends to privatize Pakistan
Petroleum Limited (PPL), the largest producer of gas and two Transmission and Distribution utilities.
The cornerstone of this reform is the implementation of a new gas tariff policy. For gas
29.
production, well-head gas prices will now be linked to international crude prices. The price of gas
applicable to PPL will be adjusted gradually twice a year. Similarly, retail tariffs will also be adjusted
biannually with a view to eliminating subsidies for households (except for a lifeline block targeted to the
poor). A major setback has been the Government's decision to continue to maintain abnormally low
tariffs for the existing units in the fertilizer industry.
Petroleum and Minerals. Implementation of reforms has continued at a rapid pace and extended
30.
to the petroleum downstream sector. Following market liberalization of furnace oil and LPG, the second
of the three governrent-owned LPG plants has been privatized. Markets have been further deregulated;
oil marketing companies and large consumers are now free to import all products. Petroleum products
prices are set on a fortnightly basis consistent with import parity levels. Pakistan is the first country in
South Asia to adopt automatic adjustment formulae for petroleum prices. Subsidies to the refineries are
now budgeted. Environmental standards have been strengthened but continue to suffer from poor
enforcement. Unleaded gasoline is now available across most of the country. There is, however, a need
to enhance competition throughout the distribution chain. Pakistan has considerable mineral resources
which, if properly developed, could contribute to job creation, econornic growth, and poverty reduction.
The federal government has formulated a new Mineral Development Policy which is now helping shape
activities in Provinces. The Sindh Coal Authority has been established and is now preparing a
developmental and promotional action plan.
Infrastructure. The government has developed a National Transport Policy to improve the
31.
quality of services and reduce their costs. It has refocused its priorities. For roads, there is a welcome
shift at the national level towards operations and maintenance, cost recovery (mobilizing additional
revenues through tolls earmarked for road maintenance), completion of existing projects, and scaling
back previously large projects. Provincial governments (notably Sindh and NWFP) are starting to
replicate some of these reforms. Last year's major effort to turnaround the railways department has
continued but the railways remain the largest public sector loss making enterprise. Privatization of the
railways or significant private sector participation is not an option in the National Transport Policy. The
implementation of the gradual contracting out to private sector of Pakistan's two ports has been stalled.
The development of the Information, Communications, and Technology (ICT) sector is one of
32.
the priorities in the I-PRSP because of its role in building competitive markets, facilitating private sector
development, and hence contributing to growth. A national ICT Policy was announced in August 2000,
setting in motion a program to increase access to information infrastructure and use ICT across sectors to
improve public service delivery. Implementation of this policy in 2001 resulted in the growth of service
providers. The government recognizes, however, that growth in the sector will come from introducing
competition in all market segments. Since Pakistan Telecommunication Limited's (PTCL) monopoly
over fixed line services expires at the end of 2002, the government is preparing for liberalization by
licensing operators in basic, long distance, and international service provision.

Pakistan Country Assistance Strategy

9

33.
FinancialSector Reforms have been accelerated. The government believes that the best way to
insulate the banking sector from political interference is to privatize all Nationalized Commercial Banks
(NCBs) and consolidate (restructure, merge, or liquidate) the Development Finance Corporations.
Accordingly, the strategy includes the privatization of two NCBs (Habib Bank Limited (HBL), and
United Bank Limited (UBL)) within the tenure of the current government and preparing a third bank
National Bank of Pakistan (NBP) for privatization.
34.
The three large nationalized commercial banks are being restructured to reduce their costs and
make them more attractive for privatization. More than 8,000 staff have opted for voluntary retirement
and 650 branches have been closed, mostly in urban areas. The National Finance Development
Corporation-the largest state-owned non-bank financial institution-has been merged with the National
Bank of Pakistan. The government has divested 6 percent of its shares in Muslim Commercial Bank, and
is committed to sell off the remaining 9 percent. For Allied Bank Limited, the Privatization Commission
has already advertised for a block sale of Government's 49 percent shareholding. The strengthening of
prudential regulations continues.
35.
The government is working on removing the uncertainty arising from the implication of the
application of the Shariah code to all financial transactions which has held potential investors at bay.
The government considers that Islamic banking should be viewed as an opportunity to diversify the
supply of financial products and deepen financial intermediation. The government is therefore seeking
Supreme Court approval for a dual approach where traditional and Islamic finance institutions would
coexist. The first Islamic bank (with 90 percent investment from a consortium which includes the
Islamic Development Bank and 10 percent from Societe Generale) has just been established. The State
Bank of Pakistan (SBP) intends also to rely on other countries' experiences of such a dual approach to
develop its capacity to regulate and monitor Islamic finance products and operators.

36.

Rural Development and Natural Resource Management. The I-PRSP rightly highlights the key

role that agricultural growth must play in poverty reduction. The government has made significant
progress in improving the incentives regime for agricultural growth. Agricultural trade and pricing
regimes have been substantially liberalized to the point that very few distortions remain. The
government recognizes the need to focus on expanding access to markets (land, credit) and improving
their functioning. And stresses that the most important reform for accelerating rural growth is the
improvement in the management of natural resources, particularly water. Given the on-going drought,
the I-PRSP focuses on expanding water storage, by building new dams. There is, however, a welcome
emphasis on a realistic pricing of water and better recovery of user charges, and improved water
conservation and management-particularly to address saline soils and water logging in the Indus Basin
irrigation system-to protect the long-term sustainability of agriculture in Pakistan. The strategy gives
increased emphasis also to investment in on-farm water management (OFWM), recognizing the costeffectiveness of this participatory approach at community level relative to other alternatives. A water
management strategy that analyzes access, distribution, and pricing is therefore crucially needed.
B.

Restoring the Integrity and Accountability of State Institutions

37.

Improving Government Effectiveness has been and remains the hallmark of this government's

reform program. The far reaching set of reforms to improve governance are all at an advanced stage of
implementation. These include: (i) reforms of some of the country's fundamental institutions of
economic and financial management: the Central Bank of Pakistan (SBP), the Central Board of Revenue
(CBR), the Auditor General and Controller General of Accounts, the police, the judicial system, and the
civil service; (ii) improved public financial management, accountability, and increased transparency and

10

Pakistan Country Assistance Strategy

information on government activities to facilitate public oversight; (iii) devolution; (iv) an anticorruption drive; and (v) privatization and deregulation to reduce incentives for rent-seeking behavior.
38.
After detailed analytical work, including widespread consultations, a strategy for the
fundamental reform of the Central Board of Revenue (CBR) was approved by the Cabinet in October
2001. The strategy was translated into an action plan using the recommendations of the Task Force for
the Reform of the Central Board of Revenue. A new CBR management has assumed the leadership for
its implementation.
39.
To improve publicfinancial management and accountability, the government has implemented
fundamental structural reforms to strengthen the audit and accounting functions. It has promulgated
ordinances establishing the autonomy, powers, and respective responsibilities of the Auditor General and
the Office of the Controller General of Accounts. Ad-hoc PublicAccounts Committees (PACs) have been
set up at both the Federal and Provincial levels to clear the backlog of Audit Reports not yet reviewed,
and take appropriate follow-up action. For the first time in more than a decade, the Federal Public
Accounts Committee is reviewing the accounts of a government in office. The proceedings of the Federal
PAC have been opened to the media and it is expected that the practice will be extended to the Provincial
PACs. The government is establishing a National Procurement Authority to lead the process of change
in this area.
40.
The Comptroller General of Accounts (CGA) has formulated a strategy to improve financial
management. In the short-term, the focus is on improving the existing system through training of district
level officials; and improving the coverage of reconciliation of accounts. In the medium term, the new
public chart of accounts and financial reporting requirements, announced by the President in December
2000, will be merged under a new computerized accounting system. The government is working on
extending the modernization of its accounting and auditing functions to the district governments and
below. As part of this program, during the next two years, Pakistan will: (i) improve its expenditure
management through the implementation of a medium-term budget framework; and (ii) publish the
government's quarterly fiscal accounts to enable public monitoring of budget implementation. In
addition, FiscalMonitoring Committees (FMCs) have been set up at the Federal and Provincial levels to
monitor the preparation of reconciled and accurate accounts. Civil service reforms now include an entry
and exit strategy, training, consolidation of functions, simpler procedures, and a phased program of pay
and pension reforms.
41.
The Government's far reaching Access to Justice Reform Program focuses on police and
judiciary reforms. The government is keen on creating an environment that respects the rule of law,
protects property, and offers its citizens, particularly the poor, access to an independent and professional
justice and police.
42.
Devolution. The government expects that the devolution of power to local governments will play
a major role in putting in place an institutional framework that would make the public sector more
accountable to the users and more efficient at delivering basic social services-basic education, primary
health care, rural water and sanitation, policing, justice, and other forms of community infrastructure.
Local government elections were completed as scheduled in August 2001. Building the administrative
capacity to govern and providing the financial resources to deliver these services are, however, yet to
come. Fiscal devolution to allow local govermments to fulfill the service delivery assignments is
hampered by the general scarcity of funds at all levels of government. The effective working of district
level governments and the building of the requisite institutional capacity are likely to be lengthy and
challenging processes.

PakistanCountry Assistance Strategy

11

43.
After the successful prosecution of a large number (see Table 3) of high government officials,
politicians, senior military officers and major tax and loan defaulters which brought in about US$1.5
billion to the treasury, the National Accountability Bureau (NAB), which has been mandated to
investigate

and

prosecute

cases

of

corruption, is working on institutionalizing
its anti-corruption strategy to prevent
corruption through improved governance.

Table 3: NAB Performance 2001-2002

Investigation
Authorized
Completed

1060
312

Prosecution
Cases Filed in Courts
Cases Decided

397
198

44.
Finally the government has On-going
668
Convicted
169
completed and issued key environmental
Closed
80
Acquitted
23
impact assessment regulation. It delegated
Cases in Progress
199
monitoring and enforcement responsibility
to provincial environmental agencies. It has made progress in the preparation of a modern resettlement
policy. These initiatives will need to be supported by adequate recurrent budgets, further strengthening
of human resources and information system capacity, and a clear system of accountability for
implementation and enforcement.
C.

Accelerating Human Development

45.
The government has now put in place a credible strategy to make progress towards achieving the
MDGs for education and health. Federal budget allocations for education and health programs were
almost doubled this fiscal year using the fiscal space created by external support after September 11. A
system to track expenditures on education and health is also being developed. There is now a strong
leadership for the education sector at both the Federal and all four provincial education ministries. While
education is a provincial subject, the Federal Education Minister has been successful in building a
partnership with provincial education ministers, in articulating reforms and strategies to implement them.
The partnership has been sealed with Memoranda of Understandings linking resource transfer to
improvement in education outcomes.
46.
The key components of the strategy to improve education outcomes include the following: (i) an
overall framework-Education Sector Reform (ESR), launched in 200 1-laying down the foundation for
the Education For All agenda; (ii) a major School Rehabilitation Program; (iii) a Teacher Training
Program; (iv) Learning Centers at the District Level which aim at universalizing access to primary
education, with a special focus on girls (covering the entire elementary stage of education for ages 6-14);
(v) Public/Private Partnerships; providing public funding for low cost private education through the
Education Foundations (the government has also taken the lead in restructuring the National Education
Foundation providing it with greater autonomy under the Societies Act); and (v) a National Education
Assessment System (NEAS) to measure outcomes by enabling stakeholders in the elementary education
system to understand how well the elementary education system in Pakistan is performing and to design
targeted interventions to improve the system to achieve desired learning outcomes. In addition, the ESR
encompasses new innovative programs in examination reform, video textbook libraries, a comprehensive
literacy program, early childhood education and an "adopt a school" program. The Federal Minister is
now in charge of donor coordination and is looking for assistance with the implementation of these
various components, including experience with school feeding programs and use of vouchers.
47.
The Islamabad Capital Territory has been used to test ideas and encourage reforms by piloting a
number of the initiatives included in the ESR. These include the recruitment of teachers on school
specific contracts, introducing training programs for head teachers and learning centers to improve
teachers' academnic knowledge, upgrading entry qualifications for teachers and introducing a teacher-

12

Pakistan Country Assistance Strategy

focused code of ethics to address chronic teacher absenteeism. Federal transfers are also being used to
encourage reform. In this context, federal funding has been rightly refocused on rehabilitating the
existing infrastructure-with funding targeted to rehabilitating those schools which are in worst
conditions. Federal funding is also being put where it is expected to have catalytic impact on
performance. The budget for the NEAS has been doubled and is linked to outcomes. A Human
Development Task Force is also working on a program to build district capacities for service delivery
through pilot initiatives referred to as "incubators". The latter are expected to serve as role models for
district staff and below to better deliver social services. A Human Development Commission has also
been set up to coordinate initiatives to further public private partnerships.
48.
In parallel with the federal government's ESR initiative, provincial governments are also
beginning to put in place measures that address some of the most fundamental problems of the system,
such as calling teachers to account through a re-certification process, linlcing pay with performance
(through monitoring attendance), hiring new teachers on school specific contracts, and exploring ways to
use under utilized school buildings. Each province has started to seriously monitor teacher attendance.
To improve facilities, the focus is on maintenance rather than new investment. Education departments
are undertaking inventories of unused schools and investigating options for their utilization, inter-alia,
through "contracting out" to the private sector.
49.
Learning from the experience of the Social Action Program (SAP), the Government's priority is
therefore to fix the social delivery system of its severe governance problems first, then address the
funding issue expecting that assistance from donors and the on-going reform program (through its impact
on growth) would generate the necessary resources to fund adequately the social sectors. Successful
experiences which have relieved the funding constraint are being scaled up or replicated. The Sindh
Government's "Adopt a School" program has been very successful in attracting corporate and other
funds to finance textbooks, schools uniforms, and other supplies as well as maintenance of buildings, and
is being replicated in different parts of the country.
50.
The government's medium term health strategy under the I-PRSP is rightly concentrating on
prevention and control programs, especially in the area of reproductive health, child health, nutrient
deficiencies and communicable diseases. Programs include adoption of updated strategies against TB
and malaria, introduction of Hepatitis B vaccination and plans of response to HIV/AIDS. The IPRSP
includes targets for 2003/04 for reducing child mortality, increasing the number of Lady Health Workers
(See Box 3), reducing the prevalence of malnutrition among pre-school children, and increasing
contraceptive prevalence rate, among others.
51.
Strengthening public-private sector partnerships features strongly in the Health Policy reform as
well as making more effective use of existing facilities and skills. It is proposed, for example, that every
medical college in the public and private sector be required to adopt at least one district hospital or
primary health facility in addition to the teaching hospital affiliated to it. Reforms of the regulatory
environment are also being considered.
52.
A start has been made already to improve personnel management. In the health sector, NWFP
and Punjab are increasingly resorting to contract employment in an effort to reduce absenteeism and fill
vacancies in remote rural areas. The provinces have also started to strengthen management for the
delivery of social services at district level. To this effect, they have redeployed staff from the provincial
to district level. Of the four provinces, NWFP is by far the most advanced in decentralizing staff from
the center to the district level facilities where they are most needed.

Pakistan Country Assistance Strategy

13

53.
Pakistan has ratified seven of the ILO core labor conventions. A major effort is on going to
address with support from ILO and the Bank child labor issues (see Annex HI). It has also been granted
more favorable treatment under the European Union's GSP, in view of its efforts to combat drug
production and trafficking. The government has also strengthened its track record regarding its
commitment to gender equity. Recognizing that women in Pakistan are highly vulnerable and the least
empowered,
the
govermTent issued soon
Box 3: The Lady Health Worker Program: Documented Suecess - Impressive
after it took over a 10Potential
point agenda to repeal the
The Lady Health Worker (LHW) program is a unique initiative of the Federal Govemment
laws
that
are
that began in 1994. Financed almost entirely from Government sources, the program hires
discriminatory to women.
village women and trains them to provide basic prwmary health care (PHC) and farily
A National Commission
planning services in their own commnities. LHWs are recruited according to clear
criteria (such as being at least 20 years old and having a grade 8 education) and given 3
for the Status of Women
months of full time training and 12 months of in-service training. Each LHW receives
(NCSW) was established
about $12 per month and is responsible for about 1,000 population. There are now about
to review the existing laws
60,000 LHWs across the country, including about 13,000 village based family welfre
with
a
view
to
workers who were originaUy recuited by the Ministry of Population & Welfare and have
recommending
reform
o
recommending reforms to now been incorporated into the LHW program

no

reduce
discrimination

gender
and

promote gender equity.
After
extensive
consultations
with
constitutional lawyers and
experts, a prominent NGO,
the Aurat Foundation, has
redrafted a number of
Muslim Laws to make
them gender sensitive.
These include the Family
Laws
Ordinance;
Nikahnama form (marriage
licence); Family Courts
Act;
Dissolution
of
Muslim Marriages Act;
and
Child
Marriage
Restraint Act.
The
government

has

already.

declared that all "honor
kiUings.
(see Annex I, Box
killings" (see Annex I, Box
4) will be treated as
murders.
54.
The Commission
is
focusing
on
recommending the repeal
most
Ofof one
one of
Of the
the most
discriminatory laws the
Hudood
Ordinances
(which
cover
rape,

A recent and rigorous evaluation of the LHW program indicates that it has had a
significant inpact on imnportant aspects of PHC and family planning. Results from
household surveys show that those villages with LHWs have better access to basic
services. The only exception is in the area of child immunization, where LiWs have not
been responsible for delivering the service.
Results of Household Surveys In Rural Areas Witb and Without LlWs
Indicators

LHW Areas

Control

_r%

Number of mothers who had at least one tetanus
51
30
toxoid injection during last pregnancy
Number of births attended by tained health worker
21
iS
Number of women 15-49 using contraception (CPR)
32
23
Number of children under 3 years ever weighed by a
33
9
health worker
Number of children withdiahea givenmore liquids
32
IS
to drink
Number of children 12-35monthsfMly immunized
47
45
teasons for Success: The LHW program has benefited from a focused and consistent
strategic vision and capable leadership. It has given great emphasis to supervision by
establishing a committed cadre of supervisors with access to vehicles and a standard
approach to supporting the LHWs they are responsible for.
Chaflenges:. While the LHW program has achieved impressive results in conparison to
control areas there is still much room for improving the quality and quantity of services.
Lack of contraceptive supplies, delayed payment of LHWs, and use of supervisory
vehicles by other health staff have interfered with program activities.
Opporwunies: The potential of the LHW program is impressive. While covering about 60
percent of the population, the program can obviously expand its geographic coverage. On
average, LHWs are worldng about 17 hours per week cornpared to the 25 hours the LHW
progran has set as a standard. Hence, there is an opportunity to expand the scope of the
services LHWs provide to include: (i) additional work on nutrition; (ii) providing
injectable
and immunizations;
(iii)
carrying out
healthas education
HIVlAIDS;contaeptives
and (iv) supervising
the treatment of
tuberculosis
patients
part of thearomund
DOTS
approach.

Pakistan Country Assistance Strategy

14

adultery and prostitution) and offenses related to Qazf (false accusation relating to women chastity).
Under the Hudood ordinances, the testimony of adult Muslim males is the only admissible evidence and
this has created many instances of egregious arbitrariness and discrimination against women. Besides the
Hudood ordinances, other discriminatory laws include the Qanoon-e-Shahadat (law of evidence), Qisas
(covers retribution) and Diyat (covers blood money).
55.
Beyond changes in the laws, the government is also seeking to improve women's voice and
access to resources by increasing their political representation and reducing their vulnerability to rule of
law violations. A third of local council seats have been reserved for women (resulting in a total of
36,007 women elected across all four provinces). On January 17, 2002, the government announced a
tripling in the number of seats reserved for women under the future National Assembly from 20 to 60.
Women's representation in the future provincial assemblies will also be increased. This is a clear break
from the past. The government is receiving a significant level of technical assistance from bilateral
donors and UN agencies to implement the reform agenda for gender equity in Pakistan.
56.
A number of targeted interventions, such as Pakistan Bait-ul-mal (BPM), the Pakistan Poverty
Alleviation Fund (PPAF), the Zakat Foundation, are used also to provide assistance to poor women and
children. These include the Food Support Program, direct financial and medical assistance, and
educational stipends. The government has also established the Khushali Bank (micro credit bank) to
improve women's access to productive assets.
57.
More generally, the I-PRSP argues the need for a comprehensive social protection strategy to
address both poverty and vulnerability. The government seeks to reduce the vulnerability of the poor by
expanding targeted income transfer programs and providing better access to assets through improved
access to credit, housing, and distribution of government-owned land. The government has also
embarked on a reform of the existing safety net programs by strengthening the institutions in charge of
their implementation and monitoring, increasing transfers, and extending the targeting to reach a further
1.5 million beneficiaries. For example, the government's Khushal PakistanProgram, as laid out in the IPRSP, attempts to improve targeting by incorporating active community participation. As district
govemments start functioning under the devolution program, the govemment expects Khushal Pakistan
to gain further importance and local ownership (See the Poverty Assessment and the DPR).
m. THE BANK GRoup's ASSISTANCE STRATEGY OVER FY03-05
A.

Overview of Bank Group Strategy

58.
The government of Pakistan is engaged in fundamental reform for a historical transition of the
country to modemity. These reforms cover a broad spectrum-politics, institutions, economic, gender,
and social. They provide a clear break with the past, especially regarding gender equity. The main goal
of the Bank Group's Assistance Strategy is to support these fundamental reforms for a transition to a
modem Islamic State through a program of analytical services, institutional capacity building, and
demand driven lending. The triggers underpinning the operationalization of the Bank Group's assistance
strategy will be based on measurable outcomes which have the MDGs as a frame of reference in
alignment with corporate priorities and global public goods.

15

PakistanCountry Assistance Strategy

MILLENNIUM DEVELOPMENT GOALS

Poverty Reduction
(rhe Overarching Objective)

PaWstan's

Cient

Business
amatmic

ndee

Political/Macro St

Corporate Priorities

thepnan Reform
GS i
a Gotev
Resulo
expressed*duringth
exltensi

k-PRSP
Strategy: Growth witi Equity

Is,ncleudng
i
aor,
*Powt2, Oil &Gas, ICT
consultationshe
Financial Services B
TInfrastructure Services

P

rt

r

reach

G

a

c
E

Health Reforin
Rural Development
GendalEquity
Social Protection

Mnfcuing & Services

World Bank Group Strategic Principles

B. Inputs taco Strabiliy Fomua

Ioncetv/euaoEuainR

Client "Pull" and Selectivit,v

Programmatic Approach

Partnerships and Outreach

Inputs to Strategy Formulation

B.

59.
The Bank Group CAS will also be shaped by: (i) the lessons leamt from the implementation of
the past Bank Group CAS in Pakistan, including IFC's and MIGA's experiences as investors and
advisors; (ii) the results of the 2000 Client Survey; and (iii) the concefs of Pakistani women and men
expressed during the extensive consultations held by the Bank Group all through 2000 (see Annex I).
There was no Country Assistance Evaluation by the Operations Evaluation Department.

Lessons from the On-Going Bank Group Country Assistance Strategy.

60.

Experience with

implementation of the on-going CAS has been positive and has taught a number of lessons.
*

The Bank's shift in emphasis towards knowledge transfer (to underpin policy advice) and
capacity building has paid off.

PakistanCountry Assistance Strategy

16

>

Significant policy reforms took place in a number of areas without financial assistance. This
was particularly successful in energy and transport, where no sector specific lending took
place over the past 10 years, yet the dialogue continued and reforms have progressed. And
financial sector reforms were deepened well before any financial assistance accrued. The
large and effective pro-poor public works program is another important example of a positive
outcome arising out of the dialogue with the Government.

> The partnership between the Bank Group and the Government of Pakistan has been
strengthened. The latter came to see the Bank Group as a committed development partner
and not solely a lending institution. This was true both at the federal as well as provincial
levels where the Bank became a more engaged partner in encouraging provinces to reform
and support their efforts through analytical services and policy dialogue.
*

The substantial progress in macroeconomic management at the federal level and weaker policy
and implementation performance at the provincial and sector levels (fiscal, power, agriculture,
irrigation, infrastructure, including water and sanitation, and human development) led the Bank
to refocus its assistance on the provincial reforms and on the cross-cutting governance
improvement issues-accountability (public sector financial management, transparency),
compliance (taxation, civil service reform, strengthening central bank's supervision and
regulation capacity), and support to devolution (provincial reforms and district capacity building)
to improve the investment climate and service delivery. For the future, Bank support for reforms
needs to give more attention to implementation capacity.

*

Weak governance and high incidence of corruption encouraged extensive rent-seeking by the
private sector, leading to market distortions which undermined IFC's support to building a
competitive environment for private sector development. In this environment, financially
attractive investments often have low economic value added, further limiting opportunities for
IFC's catalytic role for private investment in Pakistan.

*

The message from the experience of the Social Action Program (SAP) is to focus Bank's
support on helping the government improve the governance structures (systematically not
topically) that underpin service delivery and help achieve results in the MDGs areas of health
and education. The message from the implementation of the National Drainage Program is that
fundamental institutional reforms require high level political commitment and "champions" to
lead them. Sindh is showing the way in this respect and reforms are progressing well.

61.
Client Survey Results. The lessons from the client survey echo those from the implementation
of the CAS. They stress the need to (i) sharpen the Banks Group's assistance priorities; (ii) increase the
poverty focus across the spectrum of Bank Group's activities; (iii) increase the effectiveness of the
Bank's assistance through more consultation and participation of stakeholders; (iv) pay more attention to
implementation capacity in the country; (v) be flexible in adjusting to changing country circumstances;
and (vi) strengthen capacity of local training and research institutes. Clients view interactions with Bank
Group Staff as important and very useful and stressed the need for Bank Staff to increase their outreach
and interactions with clients and civil society.

Pakistan Country Assistance Strategy

17

62.
Consultations and Their Impact on Strategy Formulation. A series of very extensive
consultations were organized both on lessons learnt from past Bank Group Assistance and on priorities
for this CAS. The Bank Group country team (over 20 staff) in collaboration with WBI spent a total of
five weeks, one week in a district in each of the four provinces, and one week between the federal and
provincial capitals listening to over 5000 participants drawn from a broad range of backgrounds (see Box
4 & Annex 1). These consultations gave participants the opportunity to learn more about the Bank
Groups' mission in Pakistan and make suggestions for the future. Participants welcomed this opportunity
(for many it was the first time) to discuss directly with Bank Group staff their country's development
challenges, their concems, and hopes for the future. A small group of protesters linked to the antiglobalization movement boycotted the consultations in Karachi and Lahore. Most participants remained,
however, for the whole duration of the one day workshop and while they were also critical of a number
of the Bank Group's activities in Pakistan, they were more constructive in offering advice and
suggestions. They stressed the need to continue this dialogue with civil society on the Bank Groups'
assistance

strategy

to Pakistan

on a more

periodic basis.

Box 4: Consultations for the CAS

The consultations helped increase the
Bank Group's awareness of the impact of its
assistance in Pakistan and ground the main
pillars of its future strategy in the reality of
past implementation record. For example, the
consultations showed how high on everyone's
63.

agenda is the issue of quality and reliability of
water and education delivery services to both
the wealthy and the poor (see Annex 1). The
consultations

with

the

private

sector

highlighted the importance of "getting the

hghligheted
ftheimorance of "getingses the
government off the back of businesses" by
reducing the burden of taxes and regulations,
and the opportunities that their administration
offers for corruption. In contrast to the history
of lobbying govermment for interventions to
favor specific industries or companies, the
overarching theme was that what the private
sector most needed from government was to be
"left alone".
C.

Strategic Engagement Principles

64.
The Bank Group's support will be
guided by the following three strategic

engagement principles: (i) Strong "client pull"
engagement principles: .i Strong.. " i
pul
to reform and selectivity; (ii) a programmatic

approach focused on transfer of knowledge and
capacity building first; and resources second,
in a flexible pursuit of key development

outcomes; and (iii) Partnerships and Outreach.

A first round of extensive consultations together with

government officials at the district level, business conmmunity,
and
other stakeholders,
including villagers,
women,
tribalvarious
cofmmunities,
and various professional
associations,
was

carried out in October 2000 in two provinces-North West
Frontier and Sindh-and Punjab and Balochistan in February
2001. This first round of consultations was facilitated entirely
by
NGOs.representatives
A second round
of extensive
which
included
of major
politicalconsultations,
paTties, carried
out
-jointly with WBI and NGOs was held in May 2001 in the
provincial capitals and at the federal level.
IFC held
consultations in March 2001 with representatives of the private
sector.
Consultations were also held with Pakistan's
development partners. With thiese rounds of consultations, the
Bank Group has talked and listened to the main stakeholders
nationwide starting from the bottom-the poor people in the
villages. That the Bank Group can play an important role in
Pakistan over the coming decade is very much the view of the
participantsat these neetings.

Participants want the Bank to step up its role in supporting
and deepening reforms, particularly to improve governance,
create opportunities, and improve literacy. They wanted the
Bank to invest more in education, particularly girls education,
irrigation, water supply systems, roads, and health centers.
Women wanted the Bank to provide LPG connections given the
environmental degradation which make them travel longer
distances each day to collect wood in addition to fetching water
and perfonning their various other exacting duties. The Bank
was criticized for not speaking up strongly enough on
corruption, for ignoring the importance of law and order to
development,
......
and for not helping in altematives to poppy
cultivation. The business community wants the Bank to
support reforms to reduce the transactions costs that poor
governance, especially corruption and law and order problems,
exact from businesses and individuals.

18

Pakistan Country Assistance Strategy

Client "Pull"and Selectivity
65.
Underlying both the selection of the Bank Groups strategic priorities and their implementation is
the principle of "strong client pull" for reform and selectivity. Part of the strategic objective behind the
"demand pull" approach is to aim for capacity building through lending and non-lending support and to
learn together with the client. There is a need to focus, not just on what is important, but also on areas
with strong client commitment to carry out the necessary reforms. Bank Group financial support is
useful only among these. For example, the Bank's assistance strategy has already been reoriented to
focus first on those provinces-Sindh and NWFP-which have embarked on a comprehensive fiscal and
economic reform program and have sought Bank's assistance. Subsequently the Bank's dialogue will
also focus on those newly established district level governments which would be committed to reform.
IFC's investments and support will also depend on progress in establishing a competitive market
framework. For example, the extent of IFC's involvement in the gas sector depends on govermment's
action on regulatory and price reforms and privatization.
66.
Using this principle, the Bank Group's strategic priorities will be subdivided into three
categories: (i) Deep engagement; (ii) Low engagement; and (iii) Monitoring (see graph below).
67.
Business Areas for Deep
Instruments
Ownership
Engagement. The Bank Group will
engage fully with its full set of
services in areas where the
Reformed
fa
public goods
government has shown the strongest
* Guarantees
commitment to reform and has
SBP CGA
demonstrated such commitment
Pow,Au &
G I
*Cr
SACs
through measurable actions already
Reforming
FinAetor
* "how to" AAA
taken. While cooperating with other
w>, .
donors, the Bank Group will take the
ProRefos
lead on support to economic
Reform-shy
Rural Development'
*LIL
management
and
financial
. rrt
*"why" AAA
UrbwsDevelopmnent
governance, including technical and
financial assistance to the State
pUrF
*
monitoring
Bank of Pakistan (SBP), the
Comptroller General of Accounts
Low
CAS Relevance
High
(CGA), the Auditor General's Office
(AG), support for the reforms of the
Central Board of Revenue, the civil service, investment climate (including support to reform the
governance and regulatory environment for power, gas, oil, financial sector, pricing and tariffs reforms,
and privatization), provincial and district governments reforms, education, health, water management and
rural development, district services, and community infrastructure. The level of support at this stage of
the Bank Group engagement will include both non-lending and lending services as required.
68.
Business Areasfor Low Engagement. The Bank Group will keep a low level of engagement in
areas where the client is "reform-shy" such as for urban development and transport or where there have
been reversals of reforms or slow progress. The Bank Group will focus on analytical services and
leveraging the resources of WBI to play an advocacy role to encourage reforms.
69.
Business Areas With No-Lending Services. These are areas where the Bank would monitor
developments such as on areas where the IMF has comparative advantage (macroeconomic stabilization),

Pakistan Country Assistance Strategy

19

areas where the reforms are on-going (sometimes with other donors support) or need only IFC or
MIGA's engagement (capital markets, SMEs), and areas where the commitment to reform is very low.
Areas of business from which the Bank has disengaged completely will also figure in this category. This
include financing physical investments in railways, telecom and ports, oil and gas, public industries,
agricultural services, and tourism, where the private sector can invest with the support of IFC and MIGA
as required. No lending will take place at this level of engagement.
ProgrammaticApproach
70.
Pakistan's I-PRSP sets out the process underlying a sweeping and ambitious reform program
covering the political, institutional, economic, and social areas, including gender equity. These reforms
are inherently long term in nature as acknowledged by the government and can therefore be more
effectively supported by multi-year programs-both at the national, provincial, and district level-hence
the need for a programmatic approach for the Bank Group's assistance strategy. The system wide
reforms being envisaged for example for the tax administration (CBR), the institutions in charge of
financial management (the Comptroller General of Accounts, the Auditor General's Office), the civil
service, also require a programmatic approach.
71.
ProgrammaticInstruments. The instruments used under this CAS follow directly from the
strategy. The Bank will use (i) policy based fast disbursing lending to pursue the governance and
sectoral reform agenda (finance, power); (ii) programmatic sector and investment lending to support the
implementation of the reforms to improve the economic (TA to the Central Bank, CBR, CGA, and AG)
and social infrastructure and delivery systems for education and health, and community infrastructure
services (including water management) at all levels of governments; and (iii) analytical work and other
non-lending services to monitor developments in the areas of low engagement and encourage reforms.
The Bank Group will use its non-lending services (AAA, TA, and advisory services) to build a coherent
strategy for capacity building, fill the knowledge gaps in key areas of reforms to help the government
articulate its reform strategies and strengthen its implementation strategy (see Table 7).
72.
The core program of fiscal and governance reforms at both the provincial and district levels is an
area for which the Bank's programming approach is best suited; reforms take several years to yield
results, and support needs to be flexible and consistent to withstand the uncertainties inherent in such an
endeavor. Moving forward with reforms will also require assurance of a reasonable degree of financial
support over the medium-term. The Bank's planned use of a series of one tranche adjustment credits to
the federal and provincial governments will provide a predictable and performnance-based support to
enable both the reforming provinces to restore their financial equilibrium while undertaking the difficult
and politically controversial reforms. The approach will also help the Bank manage risks by pacing its
assistance with the future government's ability to pursue reforms, and to give assurance of "just in time"
support.
73.
A programmatic approach is also effective in community-based rural development projects which
involve sectoral policy changes as well as a high degree of experimentation and piloting. Adopting a
programmatic investment lending approach whereby individual projects are tailored to the particular
circumstances and needs of a province or district allow learning and restructuring to take place, while the
projects are implemented. With the devolution of social service delivery and rural infrastructure services
to the newly formed district governments (97 in total), the Bank will also seek to support building the
capacity of local governments for effective planning, management, and implementation of related
policies and district services programs. This support will initially be extended through a combination of
analytical work and technical assistance (through LILs for example) to transfer knowledge and expertise

20

Pakistan Country Assistance Strategy

as needed. Bank support may eventually be expanded to include outcome-based programmatic
investment lending to assist in building education and health district delivery systems. The Japanese
Government-funded PHRD grant technical assistance will continue to be a very useful instrument in
building local government capacity to implement reforms.
Partnershipsand Outreach
74.
The Bank has been instrumental-as it pursued the Comprehensive Development Framework
approach-in pulling along donors to build stronger partnerships in support of the government's reform
program and its I-PRSP. The Bank supported the government from its first days drawing on its expertise
to help it formulate its comprehensive reform program. The Bank Group will continue under this CAS to
base its financial assistance on a sector-wide programmatic approach. In this context, and using the
selectivity principle, the Bank Group will seek better donor coordination in the areas of Bank Group's
deep engagement. The Bank is leading the effort to mobilize technical expertise and financial assistance
to modernize the Central Board of Revenue; leveraging the support of the IMEF and DFID in the process.
In the financial sector area, the Bank will continue to support the banking sector governance reforms (and
privatization with EFC's support) while AsDB is focusing on supporting capital market development, the
restructuring of the Agricultural Development Bank of Pakistan (ADBP), micro-credit, and SMEs
development. EFC will complement the Bank's work on banking sector reforms and AsDB's on SMEs.
In education, the Bank will lead the effort to support the sector-wide reforms (through the Education
Sector Reform) and support pilot initiatives such as the planned LIL to the National Education
Assessment System (NEAS). AsDB and USALD will support basic education and health through project
lending. In health, the Bank will continue to cooperate with the relevant UN agencies, including WHO,
UNAIDS, UNICEF, and UNFPA on a range of common concerns such as HIV/AIDS. The Bank will
also maintain a continuous dialogue on health matters with the AsDB and other multilateral and bilateral
donors active in the sector (EU, DFID, the Japanese Government, and prospectively USAID).
Partnerships with the UN family in its focus area for Pakistan for devolution, gender equity, child labor
are also important. UNDP is leading the support to the implementation of the devolution. Increasingly
the Bank is working with NGOs and other members of civil society in designing and implementing its
projects (See Annex m for more details).
75.
Partnerships are also central to IFC's work, since it is always a minority investor. IFC will
continue to work closely with domestic and international investors in key industries such as gas and the
financial sector to facilitate new investment. EFC will also work closely with domestic financial
institutions to help mobilize long-term domestic financing, e.g. through partial guarantees of bank loans
or bonds. IFC and MIGA's activities will aim to crowd in private investment. The approach is through
investing in, and guaranteeing investments in, projects which have a strong catalytic impact in mobilizing
additional private investment, or which are pioneering new opportunities for private investment, or which
support new mechanisms for raising finance.
76.
Outreach. An important complement to partnership is the Bank Group's overall outreach.
Accordingly, the Bank has increased its interactions with the different levels of govemments, the
Pakistan media, civil society, and business community to establish partnerships based on a shared vision
for Pakistan's development. In this regard, the Bank Group's intensified its efforts to build the local
media's capacity to better understand and accurately report on important socio-economic issues and
govemance. The Bank routinely conducts training programs for business and economic reporters usually
through the WBI and in collaboration with local universities. In keeping with the Bank's goal of sharing
knowledge, increasing transparency, and enhancing accountability, the Bank Group has launched a web
site dealing specifically with its operations in Pakistan but providing worldwide best practices and links

PakistanCountry Assistance Strategy

21

to IFC and MIGAs' websites. The Bank Groups' outreach will expand further once Pakistan develops its
Distance Learning Center (DLC) as part of the Global Development Learning Network (GDLN), a global
network of interactive classrooms with full multimedia connectivity to other centers of knowledge
around the world. Joining the GDLN will greatly increase the Bank Group's outreach in Pakistan by
bringing WBI learning and capacity building activities to larger numbers of government officials, private
sector representatives, members of civil society, and other stakeholders. In addition, and in response to
the feedback received during the CAS consultations (see Annex I), a special effort will be made to extend
the Bank Group's outreach through more periodic dialogue with stakeholders. This will be done through
wider dissemination of the Bank Group's reports and disclosure of project documents (especially in local
languages), greater engagement with civil society organizations and opinion makers. The Bank will
continue also its highly effective consultative process in the preparation of specific projects.
Program Priorities

D.

The Bank Group's program priorities will be focused on the reforms to (i) strengthen
77.
macroeconomic stability and govemment effectiveness; (ii) improve the business environment for
growth; and (iii) improve equity through support for pro-poor and pro-gender equity policies.
Strengthening the Basis for Macroeconomic Stability and Government Effectiveness

Macroeconomic Stability. The Bank will support in partnership with the RMF the macro78.
economic stabilization program agenda to restore fiscal sustainability, reduce internal and external debt
burden to sustainable levels, and improve the competitiveness of the economy through supportive trade,
monetary, and exchange rate policies. The Bank Group's key contributions will be in improving public
expenditure management and supporting reforms of tax administration, safe and sound banking, efficient
public utilities, and structural fiscal and governance reforms. In particular, the Bank will continue to
carry out the annual reviews of the Government's Public Sector Development Program at the federal
level and will carry out a National Public Expenditure Review (to be completed in FY03).
79.
Governance Reforms. Improving government effectiveness at federal, provincial, and district
levels, will remain at the heart of the Bank's assistance strategy. The ongoing Project to Improve
Financial Reporting and Auditing (PIFRA) has enabled the Government to develop a New Accounting
Model which consists of revised forms, principles and methods of accounting and financial reporting
meeting the requirements of an Integrated Financial Management System in Pakistan. The PIFRA
project also provides for introduction of a double entry computerized General Ledger system for all
government financial transactions in a phased manner. Specifically, over the CAS period, the Bank will
support:
*

Furthering transparency and accountability through Freedom of Information, effective
functioning of the Public Accounts Committees, and the establishment of a lasting institutional
basis for the National Accountability Bureau;

*

The completion of the second part of the Pakistan Country Financial Accountability Assessment
(CFAA). The first part which was shared with the government reviewed four aspects of financial
accountability: (i) budgetary processes; (ii) accounting, financial reporting and internal control
systems; (iii) auditing; and (iv) legislative and public oversight. The second part of the CFAA
which is expected to be completed in FY03 would cover (i) financial accountability under
devolution; (ii) review of internal control practices within Government; (iii) accountability
framework to support transparency under future governments; (iv) financial accountability of

22

PakistanCountry Assistance Strategy

public enterprises/autonomous bodies and quasi-fiscal management; and (v) extending the
analysis to the private sector financial management and accountability framework. Based on the
findings and recommendations of the final CFAA, an action plan for strengthening financial
accountability in Pakistan would be agreed with the government.
*

The implementation of the FY01 CPAR recommendations, including the establishment of a
Public Procurement Authority and the promulgation of a Procurement Ordinance to foster
competition and transparency through a uniform set of procurement rules at the federal level and
across provinces and public agencies;

*

The extension of the modernization of the government's accounting and auditing functions to
district governments through a second PIFRA project which is currently under preparation;

*

The implementation of the first stage of CBR functional re-organization and support the
fundamental cultural change within the tax administration, through a PPF at first;

*

The development and implementation of medium-term fiscal frameworks at the federal and
provincial levels to improve accountability;

*

Policy advice and financial assistance to implement the necessary deregulation and other policy
reforns to reduce the incentives for corruption and improve the investment climate;

*

The completion of the corporate governance reforms in the financial sector; and

*

Civil service reform through analytical work and advisory services for the continued
implementation of the systems for better performance evaluation, merit-based promotions, and
training programs, as well as the implementation of the reforms of the pay and pension systems.

80.
The Bank's support to governance reform will also include the design of in-depth governance
and corruption diagnostic surveys which will include: (i) establishing a benchmark for the quality of
governance; (ii) providing inputs to a nationwide governance and anti-corruption action plan; (iii)
promoting coalition building and long-term partnership among key segments of government and civil
society; and (iv) building local capacity to monitor and assess government performance. The Bank will
also support institutional capacity building for oversight and monitoring through training in the areas of
public expenditure and financial accountability, media development, and the interaction between
parliament and the Auditor General, including support to strengthening legislative oversight once
parliament is reinstated.
81.
Devoludon. Initially, the Bank will continue to use analytical work, technical assistance, and
policy dialogue as more appropriate instruments to support the implementation of the devolution strategy,
particularly the strengthening of district level capacity to manage public service delivery. Since a
number of Pakistan's development partners are supporting also the implementation of the government's
devolution program, the Bank will focus on areas where it has a comparative advantage, in financial
management, planning and budgeting, and social service delivery. Specifically, the Bank will focus on
the implementation of the recommendations of the part I of the CFAA. The latter reviewed provincial
financial accountability issues, including the Local Government financial accountability framework.
This was possible because the fundamental financial rules governing federal and provincial governments
described in the Constitution are similar, and provinces mostly follow the federal government budgetary
rules, since financial accountability institutions are centralized. The federal government's Controller

Pakistan Country Assistance Strategy

23

General of Account's office, attached to the Federal Ministry of Finance, is responsible for the
preparation of the Civil Appropriation Accounts of all Governments, from the federal to the district level.
The Pakistan Auditor General's office is responsible for all audits except for those of the smallest tiers of
local Governments, which are audited by the Local Fund Board. The Bank has already made a start in
supporting the devolution agenda in the area of financial management through its dialogue on provincial
reforms. The support to Sindh's fiscal and structural reform program includes (i) improving public
accounts through improved reconciliation; (ii) strengthening accountability through setting up of an
effective Public Accounts Committee; (iii) improving budget implementation; and (iv) preparing a
medium termn financial management reform plan.
Strengtheningthe EnablingInvestment Climate
82.
Improving the Incentive and Regulatory Regime. The Bank Group needs to rebuild its
knowledge base on private sector development issues given the changes since the last private sector
assessment in 1995. In addition to an informal private sector assessment jointly prepared by the IFC and
the Bank, in FY02, and an SME policy note describing the key features of SMEs and their constraints
(emerging from a business survey conducted in FY01), the Bank Group plans to carry out a significant
program of analytical work over the next two years to underpin its advisory services in this area. These
include: (i) A Development Policy Review (completed in FY02) which provides the Bank's assessment
of the adequacy of the current development policy agenda to achieve rapid growth and poverty reduction;
and (ii) an Investment Climate and Economic Performance Study (to be completed in FY03). The latter
aims to relate key aspects of the investment climate (basic economic infrastructure, and regulatory and
governance frameworks) with the performance and productivity of private manufacturing firms, small
and large. To build domestic capacity for this analytical and monitoring work in the future, the study is
being carried out jointly with SMEDA-the Small and Medium Enterprises Development Agency. An
analysis of the trade regime will also be undertaken in FY04.
83.
The Bank will also continue to encourage the federal and provincial governments to pursue the
trade liberalization and modernization of industrial, business and labor regulations that are already under
way. In addition, the Bank Group has advocated the strengthening of the anti-trust authority. At the
federal level, the Bank will support the newly established deregulation committee. The latter will help
with the implementation of the deregulation agenda with special focus on SMEs. At the provincial level,
the Bank's dialogue and proposed assistance to Sindh and NWFP will also focus on reforms which fall
within the provinces' purview (such as labor and industrial regulations) to improve the investment
climate. On SMEs development, given the selectivity principle, the Bank's contribution will be on
knowledge, dissemination, and possible technical assistance given that the AsDB is taking the lead with
the preparation of a SME project. This project will support the first generation of reforms already
identified in the Bank's analytical work on the SMEs. IFC will continue to play a leading role in
supporting the development of private financial institutions serving SMEs.
84.
IFC and MIGA will seek opportunities to mobilize additional private investment in infrastructure
in the face of substantial political risk which has been a deterrent to investment. Within infrastructure,
the Bank Group will give strategic priority to the development of the natural gas sector. The Bank will
continue to focus its assistance on analytical work which has underpinned much of the regulatory,
pricing, and policy reforms undertaken in the gas and petroleum sectors over the past two years. An Oil
and Gas Sector Review will be completed in FY03 to assess progress and identify further opportunities
for growth. IFC and MIGA will aim to mobilize additional private investment through loans and
guarantees.

24

Pakistan Country Assistance Strategy

85.
In petroleum, the Bank Group will continue to support the government's reform guided by the
important program of analytical work carried out over the past two years. Over the next three years the
focus will be on supporting the implementation of the deregulatory reforms to strengthen competition in
the sector, and assisting with the privatization of the Oil and Gas Development Corporation Ltd and
Pakistan State Oil Ltd expected to take place by March 2003. Regarding mining, the Bank is well
positioned to respond to client "pull" from both central and provincial governments (such as the recent
demand from the Sindh Government), for assistance regarding reform of the legal/regulatory and fiscal
frameworks and development of institutional capacity to facilitate and promote environmentally and
socially responsible private sector mining development both for coal and for non-fuel minerals.
86.
The Bank Group will continue its deep engagement in the power sector reforms. The power
sector reforms will continue to be supported through policy dialogue and adjustment lending which, by
strengthening macroeconomic stability and reducing exposure risk, is expected to improve the investment
climate for private investment. In addition, the Bank Group will support through programmatic
investment lending the privatization of the distribution companies. In particular, IFC will aim to
mobilize private investment for the power sector, particularly for the privatized distribution companies.
IFC will also continue to act as adviser to the government on the privatization of Faisalabad Electric
Supply Company (FESCO).
87.
In line with the selectivity principle, the Bank Group support for transport, over the CAS, will be
limited to analytical and advisory services, given the lack of strong pull from the government, the
importance of private sector participation in the sector, and the extent of involvement of other donors in
the road sector. Accordingly, project lending will be limited to supporting the National Highway
Authority's (NHA) reforms, especially financial management, through the National Highway
Rehabilitation Project-currently under preparation but delayed for many years due to NHA's erratic
commitmnent to refornnprovided the NHA's new management shows strong commitrnent to reform with
measurable actions taken upfront. Financial support to policy reforms in provincial highway and
transport operations will be considered for Sindh and NWFP within their provincial fiscal and economic
reform programs.
88.
Since improved connectivity is essential for growth, including that of the IT industry, and for the
poor to benefit from technological change, the Bank Group will continue its dialogue with the
government on an adequate policy and regulatory framework to introduce competition against the
incumbent and attract private investment. In FY02, MIGA supported a software development project in
Karachi from Japanese investors. In addition, a telecom project was approved by the Board on April 30,
2002. IFC and MIGA will seek opportunities to support the growth of the IT industry.
89.
The Bank Group will continue its support to financial sector development, another major
component of the on-going CAS. In particular, over the CAS period, Bank Group support will continue
to focus on deepening banking sector governance reforms, support to bank privatization and to
strengthening the regulatory and supervisory capacity of the State Bank of Pakistan. This last outcome is
supported through a Technical Assistance for the Banking Sector (TABS) Project. The proposed TABS
is a follow-on to the ongoing Financial Sector Deepening and Intermediation Project (FSDIP). It will
support (i) the completion of the State Bank of Pakistan's restructuring program aimed at modernizing
the central bank and strengthening its capacity to regulate and supervise the banking sector; (ii) staff
development to re-align personnel management policies with international best practices; (iii) the
strengthening of the country's payment systems and credit information services for better disclosure
standards to all stakeholders; and (iv) strengthening the capacity of regulators and enforcers to control
money laundering and financial fraud.

Pakistan Country Assistance Strategy

25

90.
IFC will support the emergence of strong private commercial banks and Non-Bank Financial
Institutions through selective investments. IFC will also support the development of new products to
better meet the needs of the private sector (e.g., long-term finance for infrastructure), and expand access
to financial services to new clients (e.g., the bankable poor through micro-finance or leasing institutions),
and to the under-served small and medium enterprises sector.
91.
Creating the Conditionsfor Accelerated, Sustainable Rural Growth. Agricultural trade and
pricing regimes have been substantially liberalized to the point that few distortions remain at the
macroeconomic level. However, a significant agenda of second generation reforms remain to address the
unequal opportunity and capacity to access assets and markets-land, water, financial intermediation,
technology and output markets. The Bank will therefore focus its assistance over the next three years on:
(i) monitoring developments on agricultural policies to improve further the investment climate in
agriculture; (ii) filling the knowledge gap on the policies and institutional and regulatory frameworks
governing the functioning of rural markets as well as opportunities for off-farm employment; (iii) seeking
opportunities to improve access to financial services with IFC's support; and (iii) supporting
government's strategy to improve water management and irrigation. Accordingly,
*

A Rural Development Policy Review (RDPR) will be prepared in FY04 which would assess the
adequacy of policies to accelerate rural growth; this would include inter alia an analysis of land
and credit markets and the remaining second generation of reforms.

*

A Sector Report on Water Resource Management will be completed in FY04 to underpin Bank
Group's assistance for sustainable water and natural resource management and implementation
of an integrated forestry management and watershed development. In addition, the Bank will
support strengthening the capacity of local environmental and natural resource management
agencies in the areas of information systems, drought preparedness and management, and
monitoring and enforcement.

*

The Bank will continue its support for policy reforms and institutional capacity building for
irrigation and drainage under a restructured NDP. The provincial governments will be eventually
responsible for sector policy and regulatory oversight only.

*

EFC will support the development of private micro-finance institutions to extend their
geographical reach in rural as well as urban areas.

SupportingPro-Poorand Pro-Gender-EquityPolicies
92.
Promoting Education and Health for All. The Bank Group will support the I-PRSP's core
objective to empower people by creating greater opportunities for increasing real incomes by improving
access to education and health services, especially for girls, and to safety nets programs. The Bank's
support to these three areas-promoting education and health, supporting pro-poor rural development
and community infrastructure, as well as supporting targeted poverty alleviation programs (PPAF, CIP),
reflect their importance as well as the Bank's comparative advantage.
93.
Education Reforms. The World Bank Group's assistance strategy will be driven by support to
the implementation of the Education Sector Reform (ESR) Strategy. The Bank support will focus on
those interventions in the education sector that would help the goal of achieving universal primary
education, with particular focus on improving the quality of education provided, and giving priority to
the poor and disadvantaged, particularly girls and children in rural areas. In particular, increasing

26

PakistanCountryAssistance Strategy

children enrollment will be crucial to the fight against child labor. Accordingly the Bank will focus on:
(i) sector adjustmnent lending to support the National Education Sector Reform Strategy; (ii) support to
the National Education Assessment System through a LIL; (iii) a program of analytical work to underpin
the policy dialogue during the implementation of the ESR; and (iv) province-based support to
implementing the ESR within the fiscal and economic reforms of Sindh and NWFP to start with. Future
support will take the form of outcome-based programmatic support for district delivery of both education
and health services. The support could also include advice and technical assistance to reform higher
education along the lines of the Bank Group's global and Pakistani specific analytical work. IFC will
seek opportunities to invest in private education providers.
94.
The Bank Group assistance to health sector reforms, will support the government's priority of
strengthening the public health programs-immunization, communicable diseases such as malaria, TB,
HIV/AIDS; and maternal and child health and family planning. To this effect, the Bank will use multiple
instruments, including analytical work, technical assistance, policy dialogue, and adjustment and
investment lending as appropriate. IFC will seek opportunities to invest in private healthcare providers.
95.
Pro-Poor Rural Infrastructure and Services and Social Protection. Supporting the deepening
of the rural asset base through rural community-based infrastructure projects (particularly for water
supply and sanitation services) and the spread of micro-credit have been part of the Bank Group's
strategy to reduce and mitigate risks for Pakistan's poor. The Bank's efforts to support key investments
in rural infrastructure and support services are designed not only to promote more rapid and sustained
rural growth but also to directly attack rural poverty and support social protection. Since the 1998 CAS
progress report, the Bank has integrated social protection in its operational work through its support to
improving the delivery of basic infrastructure and access to micro-credit through community-driven
projects such as the NWFP Community Infrastructure and Services Project (CIP) and the Pakistan
Poverty Alleviation Fund (PPAF). The NGO-implemented infrastructure and micro-credit schemes
under the PPAF is a very successful scheme which will be scaled up during the coming CAS. The ongoing PPAF has already provided loans to over 60,000 borrowers, over two thirds of which are women.
Building on the experience of these community-based approaches, the Bank is currently preparing a
Community Infrastructure and Services Project (CIP). The Bank will continue, under this CAS, to pilot
new approaches, and also help scale up those which have proven effective such as the CIP and the PPAF.
A programmatic approach is key. This enables the government and the Bank to tailor projects to the
particular circumstances and needs of individual provinces and districts, learning and adjusting as they
go, and scaling up as successes are identified. A social risk assessment is also planned for FY03 which
will also help underpin the Bank Group's integration of social protection in the Bank's future operations.
96.
Pro-Gender-Equity Policies. Since Gender equity is an issue of development effectiveness, the
Bank Group plans to intensify its efforts to mainstream gender in the coming CAS. The most effective
policy through which to improve gender equity is better access to and quality of education and health,
particularly to women and children, girls especially. In this context, the Bank Group will assist the
government implement the component of the ESR focused on boosting incentives- through vouchers
system, food for school, and other targeted subsidies-4o increase girls enrollment. Sindh has already
moved in this direction with its successful food program (providing edible oil for girls who attend
schools) which has increased girls enrollment. Women's empowerment is a prominent component of the
Bank-supported education, health, CIP and PPAF.
97.
A significant program of analytical work is also planned over the CAS period to show the
opportunities that gender-responsive policies create for enhanced growth and poverty reduction. The
Bank, the government, and the other donors, including UNDP and DFID, have been working together to

Pakistan Country Assistance Strategy

27

strengthen the government's analytic capacity on gender sensitive policies. The Bank has a poverty
assessment underway, with a survey geared to capturing gender issues with a view of informing public
policy regarding the formulation of a gender strategy. A country gender assessment is planned for FY04,
which would provide the knowledge base for future Bank's policy dialogue and operational
interventions.
98.
A rural access and mobility pilot initiative-currently under preparation with JSDF support-is
expected to recommend ways of improving rural women's access to markets and social services. Support
to rural development strategies at the federal and provincial levels will highlight the need to ensure
property rights for women. The Japanese Government's funded JSDF program will continue to be used
for piloting innovative social programs designed and implemented by beneficiaries with high potential
for improving the living conditions of the poorest and most vulnerable groups.
IV. WORLD BANK PORTFOLIO AND ASSISTANCE PROGRAM

A.

IBRD/1DA Portfolio Management

99.
Portfolio Management Strategy.
The quality of the Pakistan portfolio has improved
considerably, although problems affecting two major projects remain (see para. 104). In FY98, with 41
projects, it was ranked among the 25 worst performers Bank-wide with more than 50 percent of projects
and commitments "at risk". Since then, there has been a dramatic change in performance regarding both
the size and the quality of the portfolio as well as the Bank's approach and strategy for portfolio
management.
100. Beginning in mid FY98, the Bank, together with the federal and provincial governments, initiated
an aggressive portfolio improvement strategy. The traditional project-based approach was supplemented
by a more systemic vision of portfolio management based on outcomes, ownership, and good
governance. Quarterly portfolio reviews with the Federal Finance Minister and periodic provincial
portfolio reviews are now the norm. Building on this portfolio strategy, two Portfolio Improvement Plans
were developed in FY99 and FY00. The number of projects in the Pakistan portfolio declined from 41 in
FY98 to 16 as of May 3, 2002, with outstanding commitments of US$1.5 billion (net of cancellation).
The decline in the number of projects was the result of two actions: (i) a 'no-extension' policy outside of
"force majeure"; leading to closure of 32 projects; (ii) few new entrants to the portfolio in FY00 and
FY01, relative to closings, as a result of enhanced selectivity and "quality at entry" criteria. This trend
has already been reversed starting from FY01 due to this government's strong track record in reform
implementation.
101.
The Bank is now engaged with the clients on key thematic issues affecting portfolio
performance. In this regard, the Bank has initiated thematic portfolio reviews-on impact/outcome
indicators and on social and environmental risk management-with senior policy makers as part of a
strategy to mainstream these development challenges within the Government's own monitoring and
evaluation framework. A workshop was held in March 2002 with key government staff to disseminate
best practice on "outcomes" measurement. Portfolio performance has been turned around to some extent
also with the help of field-based supervision teams working closely with the government and reducing
response time. Projects are now managed with increased participation of communities and beneficiaries.
The Bank has also strengthened its safeguards oversight by strengthening financial management and
internal controls and providing training to clients on Bank procurement guidelines. The Bank will
continue to aggressively pursue its objective of a lean and client driven portfolio over the CAS period.

28

Pakistan Country Assistance Strategy

102.
Recognizing that "good quality at entry" and strong client ownership are key factors behind
portfolio performance, the Bank weeded out from the portfolio all operations which were not driven by a
strong client pull or where developmental impactloutcomes were not clearly defined. As a result, the
Bank's "work-in-progress" has been reduced from over 30 projects in the pipeline to 12 projects in the
current lending pipeline with slightly over US$2 million "work-in-progress" budget.
103.
Using the lessons leamt from project implementation and taking into account the emerging client
needs led to the restructuring in FYOI of two major high risk projects, namely the Second Social Action
Program (SAPP2) and the National Drainage Program (NDP). The scope of the SAP was substantially
narrowed in light of government's changed human development strategy under the new devolution
system. The Bank has recommended downsizing the NDP to align it better with the new Federal and
Provincial governments priorities.
104. Portfolio Performance. As a result of the above measures, portfolio performance improved; the
number of "projects at risk" went down from 52 percent in FY98 to 6 percent in FY01, while
"commitments at risk" decreased from 54 percent in FY98 to 21 percent in FY01 (see Annex B2).
However, these gains were eroded in the first half of FY02, because of three large problem projectsSAPP2, NDP and Ghazi Barotha Hydropower Project (GBHP)-which account for 60 percent of the
remaining portfolio. While SAPP2 has been in "problem project" status for the past two years, the
remaining two (NDP, GBHP) have been downgraded to unsatisfactory performance in the last few
months. As a result, "commitments at risk" have increased again from 20 percent in FY01 to 60 percent
at end-December 2001. The specific factors behind the unsatisfactory ratings for these three projects and
actions taken to address them are:
*

The restructured SAPP2 is now being implemented satisfactorily but will be closed early in June
2002 with a U rating. The U rating for DO will not be removed because the time span since
restructuring is too short. The SAP2's restructured component accounts for about 15 percent of
total credit, the remaining balance has been fully disbursed. Efforts over the next few months
will be directed at ensuring satisfactory implementation of the restructured component.

*

Regarding NDP, the restructuring recommended by the FY01 mid-term review--reducing the
implementation to only one canal command in each province-has not yet been implemented.
Sindh has accepted the recommendation to focus on one canal command which has led to
improvement in the implementation of the project in that province. But since the institutional
reforms underpinning the project are not widely shared by all government departments, and
there are complex inter provincial issues, the other provinces are waiting for the
recommendations of a Government's commission which has been set up to examine options to
reach a consensus among all the stakeholders on the scope of restructuring. The commission has
just completed its work but it will take time for the main stakeholders to reach consensus.

*

Regarding the GBHP, major disputes on claims emerged during FY01 between WAPDA and the
main contractor, a consortium led by the Italian company Impregilo. The dispute developed into
a crisis following the contractor's evacuation of the site after the start of the Afghan war. The
dispute has since been resolved. As soon as the agreed upon financial settlement is honored and
the contractor resumes work, implementation progress is likely to pick up and ratings are
expected to be upgraded.

*

By early FY03, with the closure of SAPP2 and resolution of issues related to the other two large
projects (NDP, GBHP), the "commitments at risk" are expected to fall to a single digit.

Pakistan Country Assistance Strategy

29

105.
Outcomes from the last CAS. The last CAS was discussed by the Board in December 1995 and
the CAS Progress Report was reviewed in June 12, 2001. The volume of IBRD and IDA commitments
was linked to the strength of Pakistan's reform program, maintenance of macroeconomic stability, and to
progress in social sectors. In addition the level of IBRD's commitments was linked to improvements in
the country's creditworthiness. In early 1997, policy reforms had been slowed and Pakistan was in the
low base case. In fact, after lending US$420 million from IBRD in FY96; there was no IBRD lending in
FY97. Lending from IDA also fell during those years, averaging only US$80 million per year. With the
implementation of a comprehensive package of macroeconomic stabilization and structural reforms, in
FY98, Pakistan moved into the High Base Case scenario. In FY98, EBRD provided US$250 million for
the Banking Sector Adjustment Loan, and IDA provided a total of US$558 million (including for the
Social Action Program and National Drainage Program Projects).
106.
In FY99 and following deepening reform implementation in a number of key areas, particularly
in power, banking, and governance, Pakistan remained in the High Base Case lending scenario.
Accordingly in FY99, IBRD provided US$350 million for a Structural Adjustment loan while IDA
provided US$90 million for a Poverty Alleviation Fund. Sustained implementation of the comprehensive
reform program as envisaged in the 1999 CAS Progress Report was expected to lay the basis for lending
at High Case levels during FY00. That never happened. Reform implementation slowed down over
FY00, with a worsening of the investment climate as the Nawaz Sharif government engaged in a very
damaging dispute with Independent Power Producers, NGOs, and corruption became rampant. As a
result, the Bank stopped lending over FY00 and focused on non-lending services.
107.
The positive developments in Pakistan in FY01 provided the basis for a stronger operational
engagement by the Bank Group in FY01. Accordingly over FY01, the program of assistance included a
Structural Adjustment Credit for US$350 million and investment credits focused on supporting reforms
to improve the investment climate and the delivery of basic services. These included a Trade and
Transport Facilitation Project for US$3 million, a US$21.35 million project to support water resource
management in North West Frontier province, and a GEF. A Banking Sector Restructuring and
Privatization Project (US$300 million) was approved in October 2001. The assistance over FY01 and
the first half of FY02 was supported by IDA as outlined in the CAS Progress Report discussed by the
Board on June 12, 2001.

B.

Donor Coordination

108.
The Bank Group will continue to play its role of bridging partnerships between the Government
of Pakistan and the donor community. Over the past two years, the Bank Group has increased its focus
on donor coordination and continued to play an important role in intermediating information on the
government's reform program and implementation record to donors. It has also encouraged the
government to communicate with its domestic public opinion makers, and other major stakeholders about
the main objectives of the fundamental reforms being implemented and the track record todate to build
consensus around the reforms.
109.
The govermment is therefore taking the lead on donor coordination. A donors meeting was held
in Islamabad in March 2001-the first donor meeting after a three year-hiatus-to help disseminate
information about Pakistan's reform program and its implementation record and seek the support of the
donors community for its continued implementation. Holding the Pakistan Development Forum in
Islamabad was to allow the entire Federal Cabinet, provincial ministers, heads of key public agenciesthe "change leaders"-and businessmen-who were invited to attend and speak at the Forum-to
participate. The location was also to enable development partners to learn about Pakistan's Economic

30

Pakistan Country Assistance Strategy

Revival Program, in the local grass-roots context and see for themselves that the government is truly in
the "driver's seat" and that its program represents a "real break" from the past.
110.
Learning from this positive experience, the government invited its partners to a Human
Development Forum which was held in Islamabad in January 2002 to elicit donors feedback on the
government's human development strategy and seek donors support and stronger engagement in the
implementation of the strategy. Building upon these positive experiences, the provincial governments of
Sindh and NWFP are also seeking to engage the donor community in the implementation of their
provincial reform programs and poverty reduction strategies. A Sindh Development Forum was held in
February, 2002; another one is being planned for NWFP. The second Pakistan Development Forum
(PDF) was held in Paris on April 29-30, 2002. High level representation from 14 bilateral donors and 18
international agencies attended the Forum. For the first time NGOs (including Transparency
International) were also invited to attend the forum which was also open to the press both in Paris and
Pakistan. This was followed on May 2, 2002 by a Private Sector Investors' Forum and a discussion on
the Government's I-PRSP. Both events were attended by a large number of CEOs representing
international and Pakistani businesses, academics and members of influential think tanks.
111.
Facilitating partnerships and donor coordination will assume an even greater role over the CAS
period now that sanctions have been lifted and many bilateral donors are reviewing their assistance
strategy to Pakistan with a view of scaling it up. The Bank will continue to facilitate the annual donors
meetings as well as provincial and special topic forums on Pakistan's development. The Bank will also
continue to support other donors initiatives to organize thematic donors meeting.
C.

FY03-05 Lending Program and Implementation Challenges

112.
Despite the implementation of very tight macroeconomic policies, that have already led to
compression of imports and falling current account deficits, Pakistan's extemal capital requirements
remain large. Current balance of payments projections indicate that through 2003/05 Pakistan will need
over US$5.7 billion (US$1 billion for 2001/02 alone) to finance the reforms under the I-PRSP.
113.
Creditworthiness. Pakistan remains a heavily indebted country despite the recent Paris Club
rescheduling. Pakistan's total extemal public and publicly guaranteed debt stood at US$31.4 billion, or
53 percent of GDP at the end of June 2001, and is expected to rise to US$31.7 billion (45.8 percent of
GDP) by June 2005. Debt service as a share of foreign eamings is estimated to fall as a result of the debt
rescheduling from 29 percent in 2001 to under 22 percent in 2005. The present value of long- term
public and publicly guaranteed external debt to exports fell by 30 percentage points to around 230
percent in fiscal 2002, and will reach a level close to 210 percent in FY04-still above the indicative
level of sustainable debt (150 percent) for HIPC countries. The debt service to IBRD as ratio of exports
of goods and services at 3.5 percent in 2001 is below the 6 percent guideline recommended for IBRD
lending and is projected to fall significantly to 2.6 percent by 2005. The preferred creditor ratio (debt
service to preferred creditors as a ratio of total public debt service)-45.3 percent in 2001/02-is well
above that recommnended by IBRD exposure guidelines (see Table 4). This is the result of recent
bilateral debt reductions and past initial non-multilateral lending to Pakistan. At this level, Pakistan is
only marginally creditworthy for IBRD and the government has refrained from borrowing on IBRD terms
for FYOO-01 and is not expected to borrow at those terms in FY03.

Pakistan Country Assistance Strategy

31

Table 4: Debt Service Ratios

External Debt/FE Receipts
DS/FE Receipts
IBRD DS/total public DS
IBRD DS/exports of G&S
Share of IBRD portfolio
Preferred Creditor Ratio

2000/01
273.8
29.4
11.8
3.5
2.5
45.8

2001/02
255.7
29.4
10.5
3.1
2.3
45.3

2002/03
240.4
26.0
11.1
2.9
2.1
51.3

2003/04
225.9
23.4
11.7
2.7
1.9
54.9

2004/05
210.4
21.7
12.2
2.6
1.7
53.4

114. Given the strength of the Government's I-PRSP, its implementation record to date, poor
prospects for higher private capital flows particularly given the current regional tensions, the large
financing requirements, and high indebtedness and poverty incidence, the Government of Pakistan has
requested an increased access to IDA13 allocation to finance the comprehensive federal and provincial
reform program. The Bank's level of financial assistance over the next three years is a key element of
this CAS.
115.
IDA Allocation. Given these considerations, and the likelihood of an increase in demand for
Bank's assistance from the provinces, an SDR 1.0 billion (equivalent to US$400 million per year) IDA
allocation has been set for the base case and SDR 1.4 billion (equivalent to US$600 million a year) for
the high case over FY03-05. The Bank will resume IBRD lending only under the high case and starting
from FY04.
116.
Lending Scenarios. Three lending scenarios combining policy based lending and investment
lending are envisioned for FY03-05 (see Table 5). Following the completion of the full PRSP, a CAS
Progress Report will be prepared with will outline any adjustments to the assistance program and the
triggers that are considered necessary to fully align the Bank's program with the PRSP.
Table 5: Illustrative Lending Scenarios - FY03-05
(US$ '000)
FY03
FY04
Low CSEI

FY05

IDA
Investment
Total

200
200

200
200

200
200

150
250

200
200

200
200

400

400

400

IBRSE CASEI

IDA
Adjustment
Investment

Total

HIGH CASE
IDA
Adjustment
Investment

350
250

300
300

300
300

Sub Total

600

600

600

Adjustment
Investment
Sub Total

0
0
0
600

300
0
300
900

300
0
300
900

IBRD

Total

32

PakistanCountry Assistance Strategy

117.
Lending Triggersfor Bank Assistance. The lending scenarios will be guided by two sets of
triggers; (i) self-activating entry and exit triggers linked to provincial reforms; and (ii) global triggers
linked to each of the three pillars of the assistance strategy, macroeconomic stability and governance,
enabling environment for private investment, and human development (see Table 6). These triggers will
automatically shift the lending program to Pakistan between the low, base, and high case scenarios. In
addition, the SACII and following adjustment operations, include detailed short-and-medium-term
triggers for each of the three pillars of the assistance strategy, macroeconomic stability and governance,
enabling environment for private investment, and human development.
Table 6: Triggers for Bank Assistance Over FY03-05
Low Case

Base Case

IHigh

Case

MACRO STABLITY
* Off-track

*

On track-as demonstrated, for example, by
the fulfillment of the PRGF fiscal and
external perfornance indicators.

.

*

The functional reorganization of CBR has
been completed.
A Large Tax Payer Unit will have been
established in Karachi.

*

On track-as demonstrated, for exarnple, by meeting all
PRGF performance indicators and benchmarks in
substance

GOVERNANCE
Off-track

CBR will have completed its human resourced audit,
implemented its recommendation; new recruitment,
performance assessment, training, and promotion policies
established
A new performance-based pay-scale for CBR will have
been approved by govemment. Rightsizing of CBR
personnel based on skills needed will have started
* CBR perfornance indicators shared with the public on a
*

_______________
___________
_ __
regular basis
Financial Management
* Off-track

* PACs current in their review of past audits
* PACs current in their review of audits under
new government
* Regular and Accurate Audits
* National Procurement Ordinance
promulgated

.

Federal and provincial governments have agreed to a
time-bound program to assign public accounting and
treasury responsibilities among the federal, provincial,
and district govemments. A new human resource policy
for the federal and provincial Accounting and Auditing
cadre defined
* Extension of PIFRA reforms to Districts to strengthen
fiduciary framework
* Satisfactory Implementation of National Procurement
Ordinance

Civil Service Reform
* Off-track

*

*

Merit recruitment
Initiation of pay &pensions refortn

Implenent civil service training plan
* Follow-through on Pay &Pensions Reforms
*

* Improvement in professional/ACS ratio
* Satisfactory

EN,4 BLINVG ENWIRONMENT FOR PRI',A
. Improved Perfomiance of the Regulators (oil,
.
gas, power) and anti-trust bodies.
* Approval of telecommunications
liberalization policy
* Bring to point of sale
*
. NCBs--Habib, UBL
* KESC
.
*

FESCO

TE /IVESTMENT
Deregulation Committee will have amended laws to
reduce unnecessary regulations in the areas of: (i) labor
legislation; (ii) health, industrial, and environmental
regulations; and (iii) SROs
Competition Law Ordinance Issued to replace the
Monopoly and Restrictive Trade Practices Act of 1978
MOST to complete operating license documents for new
ICT entrants
* No new tax, duty exemptions, or special privileges for
income tax, custom duties, or GST. No new regulatory
duties. Phase out of time-bound regulatory import duties
* Bring to sale 2 Discos, PSO, OGDC, PPL, PTCL,
National Bank
*

Fertilizer Policy without gas subsidy for new investment.

PakistanCountryAssistance Strategy

33

Table 6: Triggers for Bank Assistance Over FY03-05
Low Case

Base Case

I

High Case

HUM4NDEYELOPMENT

Satisfactory

.

Budget allocations for human development
and pro-poor expenditures increased to 4.4
percent of GDP
The consolidated budget allocations of the
federal, provincial, and district govemment
budgets for education have increased to 2.0
percent of GDP
* The implementation of the National Health
Policy has been strengthened through the
launching of the enhanced Expanded
Immunization Program for children; the
strengthening of the Lady Health Workers
Program through the hiring of new workers,
the expansion of the Tuberculosis control
program; and the formulation of a national
strategic HIV/AIDS prevention program
* Proposals for implementation of the
Expanded Program of Immunization for
children approved by federal and provincial
govemments

.

.

.

.

.

Promulgation of Provincial Finance Awards (per
province) regulating transfer of resources from the
provinces to the districts
Share of human development and pro-poor expenditures
in the consolidated federal, provincial, and district
govemments budgets increased in fiscal year 2002/2003
to at least 4.6 percent of GDP and for fiscal year 2003/04
to at least 4.8 percent of GDP
Education, health, and population expenditures in
consolidated federal, provincial, and district governments
budgets increased in FY03 and FY04 in line with
recommendations from Public Expenditure Reviews and
full costing of reforms under the PRSP
The coverage of the Expanded Program of Immunization
for children will have increased by at least 5 percent from
50 percent in FY02 to 55 percent in FY03
The govemment will have hired 10,000 new Lady Health
Workers (LHW) for a total of 78,000 workers to achieve
the target of 100,00 LHW reaching 100 million women
and children by 2005

* The govemment will have launched the inmplementation
of the expanded HIV/AIDS prevention program.
* Programs of capacity building with a focus on budgeting
and financial management will have been implemented
* Continued monitoring of human development outcome
indicators
PORTFOLIO

* Commitment at risk
over 30%
* Disbursement ratio
less than 15%

Commitment at risk under 25%
* Disbursement ratio equal or over 15%
*

l
*

Commitment at risk equal or under 15%
Disbursement ratio over 18%

118.
Self Activating Entry and Exit Triggers for Bank Assistance to Provinces. Pakistan's
provinces face a fiscal crisis-itself the result of poor governance and economic management-which
has crippled their ability to deliver on their mandate. Since a significant volume of the Bank's lending
program is linked to structural reforms to improve the provinces' fiscal performance and strengthen their
capacity to deliver basic services, the Bank's lending program will take place only under the high case
scenario and will be regulated by the following entry criteria.
* There is a reforming government at the provincial level with committed "reform champions" at
the top and capable reform leaders within the administration.
* The provinces would have already initiated a number of reforms to restore good governance and
improve their public finances and public service delivery. This includes:
o

Fiscal discipline translated into reduced short-term borrowing for deficit financing

o

Improved Performance of Financial Management Committees and PACs.

Pakistan CountryAssistance Strategy

34

o

Initiation of civil service reform including pay & pensions adjustment, rightsizing by
eliminating positions as per skills requirements at the provincial and in autonomous and
semi-autonomous bodies.

o

Marked improvement in civil service delivery including enforcement of location-specific
teacher and health worker contracts, control of staff absenteeism; and implementation of
performance-based remuneration and teacher training programs.

Correspondingly, Bank lending to the provinces will be guided by the following exit criteria:

119.

* Reappearance of substantial short-term borrowing to finance the budget deficit.
* Expansion of public sector contingent liabilities (through off-budget financing of public
enterprises and other entities).
* Deterioration or reversal of reforms to improve social service and govemance improvements.
D.

Non Lending Services

120.
The Bank Group non-lending services will include the completion of a Poverty Assessment
Report (FY02), a Development Policy Review (FY02), a Financial Sector Assessment (FY03), CFAA
(FY03), a National Public Expenditure Review (FY03), Provincial Economic Reports (FY03-05), and a
Gender Assessment Review (FY04). Other important analytical work in FY03 will include a policy note
to launch the policy dialogue with the new government after October 2002, an Investment Climate
Review, an Oil and Gas Sector Report, a Rural Development Policy Review (FY03), and a Water
Resource Management study (FY04). Support to the implementation of the PRSP will also be part of the
Bank Group's non lending services (see Table 7). The analytical work will underpin the Bank Group's
support to capacity building and will be reinforced by a series of learning and knowledge dissemination
programs to be delivered by WBI, in collaboration with Pakistani think tanks and acadermic institutions.
Table 7: Components of Non-Lending Tasks and AAA for Pakdstan, FYO1-FYOS
3

Current CAS
FY01

FY02

____________________

________________

Core Diag,osdc Report

DPR
Poverty Assessnent

PER
CFAAII

CPARI
Punjab PER

I

Next CAS

FY05

FY3FY04
_

T

Poverty Assessment
DPR
D

CPARII

CFAAI

OMher DiaRnosdc Reports
Provincial Finance Review

Environmental
Strategy
HDF Paper
Poverty Monitoring

Inv. Climate Review
Oil &Gas Sector Report
Power Sector Report
Poverty Monitoring
FSAP
Social Risk Assessment

Poverty Monitoring
Trade Review
Gender Assessment
Rural Development
Policy Review

Private Sector Assessment
Poverty Monitoring

.

Cowstr Advisory Report7Polfy Diajgue
Punjab PER
Oil &Gas Sector Dialogue
Sindh Economic Reform

JSA
| Provincial Economic
Private Sector Strategy | Reports
Policy Note for New GOP
NWFP Eco. Reform

CAS Progress Report
Policy Note on SME
Development Forum Papers

CAS
Support for l-PRSP
Developffent Forums

,__

_

'Policy
_

Provincial Economic
Reports
Water Resource Mgmt.

Ni*s/OherSWProdudsICAS&RSP
CAS
CAS Progress Report
Support for PRSP
Support for PRSP
Developnment Forums
|Development Foruffs

Provincial Economic
Reports
Trade Policy Review

CAS Progress Report
Support for PRSP
Development Forums

Pakistan Country Assistance Strategy

E.

35

Monitoring and Evaluation

121.
For the programmatic approach to succeed, the Bank needs to significantly enhance its capacity
to monitor intermediate targets and final outcomes-be they policy reforms at the national, provincial,
district level, or of individual projects-and to incorporate the lessons leamt in future work. The Bank is
also working with the government on developing poverty and social monitoring systems to track changes
in key intermediate and outcome indicators, including access to public services as well as income and
non-income dimensions of poverty. This includes: (i) monitoring spending (disaggregated by economic
classification such as salary vs. non-salary) in important sub-sectors such as primary education, health
and safety net programs; (ii) adopting a national poverty line and updating it; (iii) selecting priority
indicators for monitoring poverty outcomes and related intermediate targets, incorporating gender
concerns; and (iv) building technical capacity, particularly in the provinces and districts, for effective
monitoring.
122.
The success of the Government's poverty reduction strategy as well as the effectiveness of Bank
Group support for that strategy can be judged ultimately by Pakistan's progress towards achieving the
Millennium Development Goals (MDGs). The Bank plans to support the Federal government to better
monitor these and related key development outcomes (see Annex IV).
V. IFC PORTFOLIO AND PROGRAM

123.
Over the past three years IFC has focused on restructuring its existing portfolio, while helping
clients to restructure and strengthen their companies. It is nearing completion of the restructuring of
investments in three cement and two textile companies. As a result, Pakistan now ranks as IFC's 9gh
largest exposure, down from 6h in 1999. IFC's disbursed own account portfolio is currently US$442.4
million in 48 companies including US$76 million in equity. The B Loan portfolio is currently US$229
million in 11 companies. The biggest exposure is in the power sector: 36 percent of the A loan portfolio
is in five IPP projects. All five IPPs are operational and four are current (Uch is currently being
restructured).
IFC's ability to do new business is constrained by its ability to provide competitive financing.
124.
IFC's equity and foreign currency loans are unattractive because of the high country risk premium. IFC
is therefore exploring providing local currency financing by means of partial credit guarantees.
125.
In FY02, IFC has committed a US$30 million A loan in support of the Bhit Gas Development
project, and will invest in two microfinance institutions. IFC sees good prospects for further investments
in gas and mining, where clients value IFC's political risk mitigation. IFC is also pursuing opportunities
to invest in financial services, manufacturing (especially garments and textiles), telecoms, health and
education, 11 and SMEs through partial guarantees. New investment is expected to be in the range of
US$150-250 million over the next three years which will keep IFC's exposure near existing levels.
VI. MIGA PORTFOLIO AND PROGRAM

As of March 31, 2002, MIGA has a gross exposure of US$92.3 million in Pakistan representing
126.
1.9 percent of the Agency's portfolio. The portfolio is diverse, covering 7 investments in the financial,
infrastructure, and manufacturing sectors.

36

Pakistan Country Assistance Strategy

VII. OPERATIONAL DECENTRALIZATION
127.
The South Asia Region initiated a fundamental shift in organization, culture and work processes
in July 1997 with the single objective of strengthening client effectiveness. The unique character of the
nations of South Asia created the opportunity for more strategic choices in where work was conducted:
in the country itself, in Washington, or in another location in the region. To that end, the Bank's South
Asia operations have been significantly decentralized to the field already. A powerful global team was
formed, co-located between Washington and the field, teaming global knowledge in Washington, and
proximity to the social, cultural, and political business context of development work in the field.
128.
The management support structure in South Asia, including for Pakistan, consists of Country
Directors (CD) in country offices and Sector Directors (SDs) in Washington, working as a global team.
SDs remain in Washington to work closely with network families and sector boards. For Pakistan,
experience has shown that having the Country Director (CD) in the Islamabad Office has huge benefits.
Some of the Sector Managers who complement the managerial role of Sector Directors will also be
located in country offices further strengthening technical capacity in these offices. Task leadership is
based on competencies, business needs and skills (not location). There has been a large increase in fieldbased leadership, for AAA as well as lending tasks including supervision. Recruitment strategy for
sector staff located in Country Offices, within the context of sector strategies, is to hire the best and
brightest South Asians (some living abroad and willing to return home).
For Pakistan, the
implementation of the shift to province and district-based CAS over the forthcoming three years will
necessitate a higher degree of operational decentralization and a consequent renewal of skills.
129.
SAR has no core service unit in Washington. In October 2000, the Regional Management Team
agreed a "hub" concept for regional services could strengthen client service and mitigate against the
World Bank taking responsibility for work that should be done by the borrower, while maintaining
fiduciary control.
Subsequently regional procurement and information management hubs were
established in India, to provide service to all Country Offices in the region, including Pakistan, resulting
in consolidation of some procurement and information management functions from both Washington and
other Country Offices. Financial Management and Resources Management functions are being
strengthened in Country Offices. There are Human Resources Officers in the three larger countries,
Pakistan, India, and Bangladesh.
Legal has just established a "hub" in India which will cover all
countries in the region. External Relations has been asked to consider ways to move work to Country
Offices.
130.
Feedback from governments is positive, the Bank Group is better understood, and responsiveness
and product cycle-time have improved. Quantifiable improvements are being seen in the quality of
portfolio, economic and sector work, and supervision.
VIII. RISK MANAGEMENT
131.
Pakistan's economy faces serious challenges and major risks emanating from a variety of internal
and external sources. The main risks associated with this CAS are highlighted below.
132.
With national elections scheduled to take place by October 2002 (as mandated by Pakistan's
Supreme Court), there is unavoidable uncertainty about the sustained implementation of the reform
agenda outlined in the I-PRSP post October 2002. Lack of continuity would threaten many of the
benefits expected from the program.

Pakistan Country Assistance Strategy

37

133.
The government has rightly decided not to complete the full PRSP until after the new
government is in office to ensure that it endorses it. While it is expected that the new government would
endorse the strategy to reduce poverty in Pakistan as outlined in the I-PRSP, there is inevitably some
uncertainty regarding what economic policies the new government would focus on and what their impact
on private investment will be. The best risk mitigation against reversal is the benefits the post 1999
reforms have on the people of Pakistan. The reforms to increase transparency and accountability within
the government, the Central Board of Revenue reforms, the human development strategy, the devolution
with elected officials now taking charge of public service delivery and accountable to the voters, are
bound to have major benefits which the people of Pakistan would not like to forego. Hence, continuity
and change issues will be discussed in a CAS Progress Report after the full PRSP is completed to
determine whether the main objectives of the CAS remain valid. In addition triggers have been designed
(see table 6) to help the Bank Group manage this political uncertainty.
134.
Another political risk is the opposition to the modernizing policies introduced by this
government; in particular the reform of the elementary education system, including the attempt to
regulate the Madaris (religious schools), and the pro-gender equity policies. Following the September 11
events, the government has been more aggressive in its communications strategy, stressing the need to
develop Pakistan into a modern Islamic state and stressing the important benefits Pakistan stands to gain
from integrating into the world economy. While the government is trying to manage this risk and there is
strong support for the President's stand against intolerance, the risks posed by these militant groups
cannot be underestimated.
135.
A risk of complacency may lessen the compulsion to improve the investment climate now that
international reserves are rising and seem likely to continue to rise due to the increasing capture of
workers' remittances by the banking system. The Paris Club debt restructuring and exceptional financing
by IDA and other donors may add to the complacency. This risk is mitigated by the sound debt reduction
strategy which has been under implementation for the past three years to rapidly restore creditworthiness
and reduce over-reliance on International Financial Institutions' financing.
136. There are also implementation risks stemming from the technical and institutional capacity
constraints especially for the reforms that involve governments at the provincial and district levels. To
manage this risk, the Bank and other donors are working together with the government to build capacity.
137.
Domestic public finance risk to poverty reduction outcomes. The low tax/GDP ratio may
prove difficult to raise significantly in the next three years. All levels of government are under-funded
for their basic assignments, with the lower tier the most under-funded when accounting for its
responsibilities for basic service delivery.
138.
A foreign concessional risk to poverty reduction outcomes. The September 11 shock has
increased the risks to the balance of payment position by making more uncertain an early resumption of
long-term private capital inflows as well as access to international capital markets. Inadequate extemal
financing will undermine the macroeconomic framework as it relies on significant exceptional financing
139.
Finally, exogenous shocks may require adjustment in fiscal and external policies beyond what is
being envisaged. In particular, growth may tum out to be less than anticipated in the current
macroeconomic program. Lower growth could be caused by the impact on exports of a longer than
expected global slowdown or protracted military operations in Afghanistan, or weather related shocks to
agricultural output. These shocks could be, in part, weathered by the floating exchange rate regime but
would have also to be met through a combination of additional adjustment measures and extemal

38

Pakistan Country Assistance Strategy

financing-none of which can be taken for granted. If concurrent with excessively timid debt relief,
exogenous shocks would also delay the return to external sustainability, which is a key condition to
achieving Pakistan's growth and poverty reduction objectives.
140.
The Bank Group support program is self-adjusting to mitigate the risk of reform derailment.
Substantial lending will continue only as long as Pakistan continues its implementation performance of
the past two years.
141.
Theportfolio risks are manageable in this CAS period. Credit worthiness indicators are moving
in the right direction (the preferred creditor ratio will continue to increase as debt rescheduling decreases
the share of bilateral debt in total debt). To manage this risk, however, IBRD lending is planned only
under the high case and starting in FY04 when the uncertainty regarding continuity of reform would have
been resolved. Given on-going repayments, this leads to negative net IBRD lending.

James D. Wolfensohn
President
By:
Shengman Zhang
Washington, D.C.

Peter Woicke

PakistanCountry Assistance Strategy

Annex I
Page I of 13

ANNEX I: CONSULTATIONS WITH PAKISTAN CITIZENS

1.
A series of very extensive consultations were organized both on lessons learnt from past Bank
Group Assistance and on priorities for this CAS. The Bank Group country team (over 20 staff) in
collaboration with four NGOS (see attached program) and WBI spent a total of four weeks, one week in a
district in each province, and another week in the federal and provincial capitals, listening to over 5000
participants drawn from a broad range of background.
Consulting the People of Pakistan
2.
No vibrant society speaks with a single voice, and Pakistan-among other things-is a vibrant
society. During extensive consultations that the Bank conducted in 2000 and 2001 in preparation for the
CAS, Pakistanis at all levels predictably spoke with feeling about a wide range of concerns, hopes and
fears. Extensive though the Bank's consultations were in time and area covered, they do not constitute a
scientific survey of public opinion in Pakistan. Their intent, instead, was to enable Bank Group staff to
hear directly from people, particularly those the Bank Group staff do not frequently meet in the ordinary
course of business-judges and police, students, journalists, tribal leaders, religious scholars, and women
and men locked up in jails. Nevertheless, in the hundreds of discussions that Bank Group staff held in
impoverished villages and bustling cities, four themes clearly dominated. They were:
*
*
*
*

A hunger for education, especially basic education for girls;
A thirst for water, particularly for clean, accessible drinking water;
A yeaming for justice, for the maintenance of law and order to curb violence, corruption and
abuse of political influence; and
A criticism of the World Bank's and IMF's policies and practices, particularly for their perceived
collaboration with corrupt, anti-poor governments.

3.
Not every group raised all these points. Many rural Pakistanis also highlighted the importance of
access to quality healthcare and the infrastructural deficiencies in roads and public transport as well as
power and water supply. Some small town entrepreneurs stressed the importance of access to credit along
with transparency in taxation and regulation. Notably, however, while some ordinary citizens could not
see the direct link between the improvement in their lives and the government's tax reform, devolution,
and privatization programs, they nonetheless saw a close link between the government's social and
infrastructure sectors reforms and their improved access to education, health, water, sanitation and means
of transportation. At the grassroots, the prospect of devolution was greeted as often as not with
skepticism shading into a cynical expectation that devolution will continue to enshrine the existing
political power structure. In more than one instance, devolution was tagged as a Bank imposition rather
than the government's own initiative.
Deficient Governance - Ruralparticipants blame it on the government while Urban participants Blame
It on the Bank
4.
The findings of the consultations produce indisputable evidence of a failure of govemance in
almost every area of daily life in Pakistan.
5.
Few of the Pakistanis who engaged in the consultative exercise used the word "governance" in
speaking of their lives and problems. The term is a specialized one that has not passed into ordinary
speech in Pakistan or elsewhere. The umbrella concept of top-to-bottom inefficiency and outright
corruption-in the delivery of social services, infrastructure and the preservation of the rule of lawdoes, however, go far to explain most of the disparate failings of development cited by citizens.

PakistanCountry Assistance Strategy

Annex I
Page 2 of 13

6.
Those include schools with neither furnishings nor qualified teachers, clinics without medicines
or skilled staff, villages without water or sanitation, unpaved and untended rural roads, inaccessible
veterinary services, unreliable public transport, backlogged courtrooms, bribe-taking tax and utility
inspectors, extortionist highway police and civil servants indifferent to all but political cronyism. The
Pakistanis who aired their grievances to Bank representatives were most articulate about situations they
knew first-hand. Collectively, though, they painted a portrait of a non-functioning system that impedes
development and poverty reduction and generates deep disillusionment.
7.
Pakistani women and men living in rural poverty, rarely blamed their plight on the World Bank.
They blamed their governments. They saw their problems as local ones, signs of wider, systemic failures,
but basically challenges that should normally have been or can be met by the district officers of one or
another government agency. Without significant exception, they listed education as an urgent need and a
sorely neglected one. Many said in plain and simple language: "if our leaders did not steal as much we
would not be leaving in these filthy conditions with animals and people using the same pond"; with
pregnant women dying on the way to hospitals" and with children dying of diarrheabecause the doctor
in the village health clinic has not showed upfor months ". For many of these rural poor, both elected and
government officials only know how to help themselves and forget the poor; many were critical of the
devolution, indicating they saw it all before, and did not expect much unless the elected district officials
are from their own village.
8.
In the workshops in the provincial capitals-Lahore, Karachi, Peshawar, and Quetta-many of
the urban elite and representatives of the middle class blamed the Bank and IM4F policies for "hurting
Pakistan and creatingpoverty." The Bank, urged one speaker, should "write off Pakistan'sdebt and
withdraw." "Facilitate but do not promote a western dominated policy agenda in the country",
recommended another participant in Peshawar. Bank policies should change, said another, 'from
dictatorial to friendly." Echoing an appeal to "please leave us alone," a third claimed to speak for
Pakistan's citizens when he said "This nation is fed up with the IMF and World Bank agenda". Some
thought 80 percent of Bank loans are in technical assistance payments to foreign firms and consultants.
Very few understood that Pakistan was a blend country eligible for both IBRD and IDA terms, most
quoted interest rates they thought the Bank charged that were far in excess of those actually charged and
almost none knew the IDA terns. Such criticism came in large measure from educated, articulate, urban
professionals. The perception among urban elites of the Bank as an accomplice in official sins of
omission and commission adds another challenge to the Bank's work in Pakistan. Surprisingly these
criticisms and anger were not echoed in the federal capital, Islamabad where the Bank office is situated.
9.
Other participants from this same gathering of urban professionals, instead praised the Bank's
assistance strategy to Pakistan and argued for increased assistance on concessional terms. Some said the
Bank should "give priorityto educationfor women, technicaleducation andfamilyplanning and health."
Repeatedly, the participants in the district-level consultations urged the Bank to connect more closely to
community-based and non-governmental organizations. A Peshawar participant, for instance, counseled
the Bank to work with "formnally organized" groups of the poor who "can best identify what will take
them out of poverty." In Peshawar, Karachi, and D.G Khan district, some speakers cited "religious
groups" as deserving "direct" Bank support and encouragement. "The best building in any village and the
cleanest," asserted a participant, "is the mosque, because the community manages it." Others in Kohat
(NWFP) praised the Bank's support using as example the Community Infrastructure and Services Project
(CIP)-being implemented in some villages there with community participation-where there was visible
impact of Bank's support in improved rural roads and rural water supply and sanitation schemes.
10.
A number of those consulted pressed the case for more attention to women's groups at all social
levels both as sources of advice and as "delivery mechanisms" for Bank-supported programs. The failure

Annex I
Page 3 of 13

Pakistan Country Assistance Strategy

to "recognize women as partners in development in Pakistan," in the view of a Karachi participant, "is a
major source of slow development." Recommended solutions: hire more female teachers-less than two
percent of all teachers in some 200 villages are female-and make a special push to bring "literacy
programs to adolescent girls, the primary group affected by maternal mortality." A parallel concern that
some political activists (but few others) raised was continued population growth in Pakistan. An
"illiterate population," said a discussant in Lahore, "does not practice family planning because large
families provide them with safety." Female illiteracy, she added, "is the most important reason for low
levels of contraceptive use, poor family health status, and empowerment.
11.
The consultations with politicians representing the major parties in Islamabad, Karachi, Lahore,
Peshawar, and Quetta, uniformly featured criticism of the Bank, some mild, some harsh. Somewhat more
charitably, many of the political
representatives of the major parties,

Box 1: The State of a School

tended to acknowledge Pakistan's
shortcomings in various areas as
primarily the work of Pakistanis
themselves. While some stuck to the
party line and praised their parties

In the 200-year-old fanning village of Allah Bux KhosoQasim Goth (Tehsil Lakhi), just 14 kilometers from the city of Shikarpur,
Sindh, the home of the Baloch Khosa Tribe, half the inhabitants are under
the age of 16, 338 boys and 259 girls. Sixty-one of them-all boys-are

other

enrolled in the single primary school, a one-room concrete building with a

parties' policies, many still blamed
the Bank for supporting past
governments, imposing ill-conceived
policies and project design, or not
speaking strongly enough against the
their
past
mismanagement
of
governments. Many asked the Bank
to share in the blame when discussing
past government failures.

cracked ceiling slab, an out-of-order toilet block and-when Bank staff
visited-only one of the two appointed teachers on duty, taidng all five
classes. A fiffh grader could not perform simple subtraction or
multiplication. A third grader who read aloud-perhaps from memorycould not answer easy questions about the lesson. Between 40 and 50
youngsters leave the village every day to attend Islamic schools in the
neighborhood.

achievements

while

deriding

scholars
and
12.
Religious
representatives of religious parties
who
attended the consultations
stressed that they were for education,
including of girls but only in
segregated schools.
While the
Jammat-I-Islami
representatives
accepted that girls could attend mixed

The boys' primary school in Toolanj Jadeed, Kohat, NWFP,
seems on first sight a reassuring contrast-a solidly built, four-room, brick
building commissioned in 1994, the only brick structure in the village,
staffed by three teachers and attended by 142 students, 37 of them girls-

only two of them in the fifth class. As in Sindh, however, this NFWP
school has no water, no toilet, no electricity, and no classroom fumiture.
Students squat on mats using their bags of textbooks as improvised desks
and memorizing many of their lessons. Perhaps because of motivated,
committed teachers, however, pupils showed considerable ability in
reading. The commitment may extend to parents who send about 60 of

schools for the elementary cycle but

their sons to private school in Gumbat - for monthly fees of Rs.100-Rs.

needed to attend proper girls schools

300 comnpared to the nomninal Rs. 14 that state schools charge-reflecting

thereafter, representatives of the more

their discontent even with the relatively impressive public facility in their

conservative party-Jamiat Ulema-evillage. But for the majority of the poor in this village, tradition and
Islam (JUI)-were more opposed to
cultural pressures stand in the way of girl's education beyond the first three
mixed schools in general and warned
grades. In Toolanj Jadeed all of the women whom Bank staff spoke to had
the Bank against pushing mixed
never set foot in a school yard either to study in their young age or visit
schools. They were also adamantly
their children's teacher.
opposed to all forms of social
mobilization and warned that they will fight hard all the NGOs which were trying-in their viewsthrough their social mobilization to impose a western way of life and inciting rural women to adopt
attitudes contrary to Islamic traditions.

Annex I
Page4 of 13

Pakistan Country Assistance Strategy

HungeringforEducation
Mehrab Khan is an extraordinary 19-year-old from an ordinary Sindh village-Nim Sharif about
13.
two hours outside Shikarpur. What makes him extraordinary is his determination to get a college degree,
a goal that involves commuting by bus three hours a day to a college in Rotadero and that requires his
father to devote half of the household's meager income (Rs. 30 a day) to Mehrab's expenses.
14.
Sixteen-year-old Rubina Khoso is even
more extraordinary. Where Mehrab is one of 8-10
boys from Nim Sharif seeking a B.Sc. degree,

Bos2; TheFishermanofSurBandar
In the dawn hours before the primary school
opens in Sur Bandar, a coastal fishing village in
Baluchistan, the head teacher can be found on the beach
haulin the net he cast into the shallows at low tide the
night before. For Master Ahsan Ali, the father of nine
children, the daily catch of fish is the difference between
snuvival and destitution for his family. His salary will not

Rubma and her sister, Aniina, are the only two girls
from their Shikarpur village, Qadir Bux Khosa, ever
to go to college. Her family's income is some three
times that of Mehrab's, and her bus commute is only
half as long, but as a woman she fears to make it
alone. As a result, one or two days a week -with
no companion to shield her from harassment-she i buy enough food for his wife and children so he
moonlights as a fisherman. In another Gwadar district
does not make the journey at all.
village, Chib Kalmnati Nagore, the lone primary school
teacher for 50 students works afternoons as a tailor and
Rubina, child of an enlightened and well-to15.
even gives Koranic instruction to supplement his income.
do family, hopes to follow the example of her sister,
now taking a masters degree in economics. Mehrab,
In the Sur Bandar school where he has taught
whose father operates a wheat-milling machine and
for 15 years, Aksan Ali has also had to imnprovise. When
has three other sons in school, does not know where
some of his pupils won scholarships worth a total of Rs.
he will find work once he gets his degree. Too
young to teach in the village school, he sees himself 2000, he, asked 'the beneficiaries if they would invest
of the money in improving facilities at the school,
specifically, installing a tap for drinking water. They
as too educated to become a mason or tailor-both a some
professions that are needed in the village-or a - agreed, and for Rs. 1500 the school now has piped water.
It aIso needs textbooks, but the head teacher judged water
welder or automechanic .
He will, at any rate, have an advanced
16.
education. His sisters will have none. Nim Sharif
has no school set aside just for girls, and Mehrab's
conservative parents would not consider sending

the grpater, necessity.

Without it, he asked, how can

children be expected to concentrate on their studies? in
the rest of the province, however, fewer than one
household in three had access to clean water in 1999.
____

their daughters to any other kind of institution. In
their village and others like it, in any case, girls not only have no place for education but little time for it.
Once they are married, usually between the ages of 13 and 15, they are committed to work dayscooking, cleaning, washing clothes, making dung cakes, collecting firewood, preparing animal fodder and
working either in the fields or at embroidery-that last 14-16 hours. As soon as they are old enough to
attend school, girls follow similar, grueling schedules. In some places, families need their school-age
daughters as babysitters for younger children while their mothers walk long distances carrying water for
the household. At least, Nim Sharif villagers have accessible water supplies.
In the arid stretches of the NFWP, the women of Toolanj Jadeed-a settlement of 500
17.
households-say they spend an average 25 hours a week fetching water from wells a kilometer or more
from the village center. In the summer, they must trek to a deeper well three kilometers away. In the
same season, their neighbors in Dohk Alwara must walk to the Indus River for water, taking ten hours a
week to provide a household necessity.

Annex 1
Page S of 13

Pakistan Country Assistance Strategy

Still, even the 70 or so men of the Toolanj Jadeed Community Organization who talked with
18.
Bank visitors in October 2000 recognized the need to educate their daughters. The village has no school
for girls, and parents are reluctant to send their daughters to an all-girls school more than two kilometers
away for many of the same reasons that keep Rubina Khoso from taking unescorted bus trips. Those
anxieties and the need for women's hands in household work also result in girls dropping out of the
village's five primary schools for boys after the third or fourth class. No girls attend the one secondary
Box 3: AModel Madras in Punjab?
school, and efforts to obtain at least one school just for
girls have failed. A building for them that was put up
Madrassa Jamia Islaniia in D.G Khan district,
some ten years ago on shamilati land (donated land) was
Punjab, is one of the few madaris which chose to
never occupied because title was not properly
offer a full time education for its students which
transferred. Parents, however, continue to seek
includes the public education curicula along with
educational opportunities for their daughters. They had
the religious one. Students come from all over
written the provincial education department about the
Pakistan and as far away as the UK, and
village's deprivation. Some had even written to the
Afghanistan. The school was built and is fully
a
response.
have
received
None
secretary of education.
Another O/ption - Islamic Education

managed with private donations. It provides free
board and lodging to students and their teachers who
have separate accommodations (with their families).

The school in Allah Bux Khoso is one of 120
19.
public schools open in the Shikarpur district. Ninetythree others are closed because no teachers can be
recruited to work at them. Responding to that shortage
and to religious convictions, many families send their
sons to Islamic schools, known as madaris. Pakistan had
3,000 such schools in 1978. It has more than 15,000
institutions for which the curriculum was designed by a
Mogul emperor three centuries ago. Their student body

Classrooms are used for teaching by day and as
dormitories at night. The school was imnaculately
a large
sports field,
showers,
clean,
to mosque,
students
catering
kitchen,
and acafetaria
bakery,with
a t
a tac heis alsotaught forhmater std
Students have to graduate from the offlcially
recognized high school cycle before being admitted
into the Masters degree on religious studies. Those
applying to the Masters degree from elsewhere also

is estimated to be close to a million.

A number of

participants indicated that lack of access to public
education and inability to pay for private schooling lead
parents to send their children to Madaris. Many said that
while they want their children to know about Islam, they
did not want them to become Islamic scholars. They
only want them to be educated (see Box 3).

need to show a high school diploma. The principal
proudly indicated that a school for girls will be built

soon along with a hospital and a mall on adjacent
land acquired recently, all catering to student and
staff to form a united community.

Water - Too Scarce and Too Unhealthy

Water availability and its quality have a direct bearing on educational and health outcomes,
20.
particularly in rural Pakistan. Watching the younger children while adult women fetch water is a
common duty that keeps girls, especially, out of school. Water-borne diseases keep school attendance
erratic and is a main contributor to the high infant mortality rate. And, at another remove, inadequate
water supplies that limit agricultural production even in fertile soil also keep the children of farming
families from schools since they are too important to household income to be spared for the classroom.
To one degree or another, the scarcity and low quality of water are serious development issues in
21.
every district that Bank staff visited in the course of the consultations. The Dera Ghazi Khan district of
Punjab is an extreme example, not just because of a four-year-long drought. As an elder in the Roongan
Tribal Area put the situation: "we are still living in the Stone Age." People and animals in the village of
thatched huts drink the same brackish water, but the drought has killed many cattle and forced half of
Roongan's people to migrate. Among those who remain, women and girls spend 5-8 hours a day carrying
water. Modest outlays to line the channels of natural springs in the area and build small dams on nearby

Pakistan Country Assistance Strategy

Annex I
Page 6 of 13

hill torrents would produce a reliable water supply, but the villagers have only their own unskilled labor
to invest in such projects. Children bring their own brackish water in bottles to school since the school
has no running water and no toilets. Of the five diseases that claimed the lives of 30 Roongan children in
2000, three are water-borne: diarrhea, typhoid and cholera.
22.
Far to the north in the NWFP village of Toolanj Jadeed, water is as high a priority as in Punjab
and Baluchistan, but its provision by the Public Health and Environment Department (PHED) has been
marked by so many false starts that the local inhabitants have lost faith in the government's promises. In
the 1980s, PHED did pipe water from mountain springs to small tanks in the village. Without a system to
pump the water onward from the tanks, however, the enterprise failed within a month. According to a
PHED representative, an agreement with ten members of the community in 1995/96 had established the
conditions for digging a tubewell some distance from the village and piping water from it to Toolanj.
None of the 70-odd village men who met with Bank staff recalled any such agreement. They did recall
that a well had been dug but had failed to produce water.
23.
A second well was being tested at the time of the October 2000 Bank visit and, if it proved
productive, water was to be piped to Toolanj at a monthly charge of Rs. 50 per household. The village
men said they would be willing to pay that bill but would only believe the reality of piped water when and
if it started to flow. Meanwhile their women and girls (before they reach the age of purdah) tramp to
shallower dug wells once or more a day, wasting time and strength and risking accidents each time they
haul heavy buckets up and over the large logs that cross the mouths of the wells.
Infrastructure - Roads and Power

24.
Maintenance and general investment problems are not confined to water supply. They mark the
state of Pakistan's roads and its delivery of electricity, not least for irrigation pumps, as well. In villages
and some cities, residents were quick to point out such deficiencies and their cost. The 1226 residents of
the Shikarpur District village of Allah Bux Khoso, mostly landless farmers, have to make their way along
two kilometers of unpaved road and across a narrow and rumbling concrete bridge to get to public
transport on a paved roadway. If the unpaved road, not repaired since it was built in 1996, were in decent
shape, said some of the villagers, the cost of getting their rice and wheat to market would be cut in half.
The dirt track connecting the NFWP village of Dohk Alwara to the main Kohat-Pindi road is seven
kilometers long, a ribbon of mud in the rainy season and an obstacle course at any time for the villagers
who need regular access to Kohat, 40 kilometers away, for health services and access to district
administration but must now depend on tractors or their legs to get them the first sixth of the way.
25.
Similar transportation problems-narrow, potholed highways like the one between Shikarpur and
Sukkur in Sindh province-are barriers transporters cite to the growth of private bus service between
cities and outlying villages and on the congested streets of Shikarpur itself. In Punjab, where the bridge
on the Multan-Karachi highway is so ill-maintained that traffic must creep across it. The impact of poor
infrastructure is direct and heavy on the poor and on the prospects for rural development. Pakistanis in the
Dera Ghazi Khan district, Punjab, for instance, tied the sorry state of the roads and, in consequence, of
public transport to high rates of teacher absenteeism, particularly among women teaching at the primary
school level, low rates of school enrollment generally and distressing rates of death in emergency cases
when transport is too slow or unavailable.
26.
Shortages of electricity are another impediment to poverty reduction. Again, in Allah Bux Khoso,
of two transformers supplied by WAPDA, only one finctions. The other has burned out, but villagers
have been unable to get the agency to send a repair crew. In Dohk Alwara, lack of electricity forces
villagers to use hand pumps-at a construction cost of about Rs. 25,000 each-to move water from

Pakistan Country Assistance Strategy

Annex I
Page 7 of 13

ponds to homes. In the sunmmer, however, the ponds dry up and, as noted above, the village women must
hike four kilometers to the Indus for water.
Health Care - Gone Missing
27.
The direct connection between potable water and good health is no secret to rural Pakistanis.
They understand that many of their illnesses and deaths, in particular, those of their children are
consequences of drinking impure water, if not of the accompanying lack of sanitation and drainage in
their communities. What many understand less well is why is the government so indifferent to their
plight? Why are doctors who do not report to work in the village health centers (BHU) or refuse to treat
them even when they are there? Why do these people remain unpunished were repeatedly asked
questions. The tribal areas are the worst hit by lack of infrastructure and health care. A female doctor,
wife of a powerful landlord and former politician, assigned to the tribal area of Dera Ghazi Khan,
acknowledged that she rarely visit the health clinic she was assigned to, indicating that her salary does not
cover for the price of gasoline for her to use her car and travel to the tribal health clinic. Still she
admitted she continues to draw her salary despite not reporting to work. Her husband found it normal that
she should draw her salary while not reporting to work. He went on a tirade against World Bank's
policies and foreign interference-he found it preferable to discussing his and his wife's accountability.
28.
In the Shikarpur District village of Nim Sharif, for instance, women listed a hospital-along with
a school and drainage-as their top priority. The village has no trained birth attendant or public medical
facility. The nearest hospital is an hour away, too far for one expectant mother in September 2000. She
and her unborn baby died en route. For the 1200 residents of another Shikarpur village-Allah Bux
Khoso-the nearest health facility is an hour away on foot. A self-styled 'hakim' (quack), however, lives
in Allah Bux Khoso.
29.
In the Baluchistan village of Chib Kalmati Nagore, in contrast, a dispenser, birth attendant and
two support staff run a basic health unit (BHU) that serves local inhabitants and those in neighboring
villages. A number of residents agreed that the Gwardar district had made progress in providing health
care and stimulating population planning. At the same time, they noted that the shortage of qualified
medical personnel extended from the absence of a pathologist to operate hospital equipment in Gwadar to
the distance-30 minutes by car-from Chib Kalmati Nagore to the nearest doctor. The villagers do not
have cars. The sick have to be carried either on the back of a donkey or on a litter, and the journey lasts
for hours.
30.
In Toolanj Jadeed, a doctor is supposed to be on duty at the BHU that serves two neighboring
villages. Residents said, however, that he does not come regularly even though, when he does visit from
Peshawar, he signs register entries indicating that he had been present for all the days he was absent.
Without him, the mini-clinic is staffed by two para-medical personnel. A Lady Health Worker assigned
to the village stayed only a few months. No midwife lives there, and no medicines are delivered. To get
them and their salaries, BHU staff have to go to Kohat, paying for the trip themselves.
31.
The most noticeable shortage in the health care field is that of medically trained women, a vital
element in delivering everything from immunizations to neonatal advice to other women. The reason that
there are too few midwives or Lady Health Workers or women doctors, however, does not lie in the
health field. It originates in the failure to educate girls, to give them the skills to take charge of their own
lives and help save the lives of others. Without that empowerment, many of the women with whom Bank
staff spoke mentioned health problems only in passing. The root of their greatest problems, they appeared
to indicate, lies elsewhere.

Pakistan Country Assistance Strategy

Annex I
Page 8 of 13

The CrippledArm of the Law
Box 4: Avenging Dhihonor, Victimizing Women
32.
Whether in rural or urban Pakistan,
the
weakness-even
absence-of law
enforcement summons protest from those who
see themselves as denied elementary justice.
Among the victims are Sindh villagers in Nim
Sharif (Shikarpur District) who complain of
frequent cattle theft and of the ransom they
must often pay to recover their livestock.
Since the police do not respond to such
incidents, the herders have stopped reporting
them. Instead, their wives said, they have
bought rifles to protect their livestock and
themselves. And women are put in jail to
protect them from being killed by relatives
when there is no government safe house for
women in the area.
33.
Not all the aggrieved, however, are
poor peasants. Members of the Bus Owners
Association in Shikarpur feel doubly
victimized by police misconduct. On one
hand, untrained policemen levy heavy fines on
their vehicles without due cause.
34.
One young police superintendent,
respected in the city the Bank staff visited for
his honesty and his impact since he took over,
judges that 95 percent of police officials he
oversees are corrupt. Misdeeds range from
bribe-taking at high levels to the 47 officers
found to be heroin addicts. The police force,
to
he*says,is
s crippled that beyondeffots
extortion, it can do little to prevent or punish
crime.

In rural districts around Shikarpur, Sindh, and across
the provincial border in Baluchistan, tribal traditions have long
allowed wronged husbands to avenge adultery by ldlling both the
wayward wife and her partner. Supposedly a crime of passion or
honor, the practice known as Karo-Kari still goes unpunished in
many places where customary law and societal attitudes favor the
aggrieved husband. Until recently, Sindh province-with 586
registered Karo-Kari cases in 1999, 100 of them in Shikarpur
district-was such a place. District authorities and NGOs,
however, are joining forces to raise awareness of andthe penalty
for Karo-Kari killings, a significant challenge to local power
structuresandvaluesystems
In recent practice, Karo-Kari plays out frequently as
extortion rather than murder. False charges brought against a
woman whose husband rmay actually be seeking a cost-free
pretext to divorce her can ofen be resolved by exacting ransom
("Iaawaan")payments from the alleged adulterer. In other cases
land acquisition is the real reason behind the accusation. If
someone wants somebody else's land and the latter does not want
to sell, the former kills a wonan from his side and accuses the
reluctant seller of having had an affair with the murdered woman.
The accused runs away fearing for his life, leaving his property
behind for grab.
In some cases a jirga (traditional tribunal) nominated
by the tribal chief (sardar)takes the case and tries to resolve the
dispute by imposing fines and keeping the accused women under
i protection until ajudgement is passed.
The practice of Karo-Kari, however, persists. The law
now calls it murder. Between the law and its enforcement,
tradition erects strong barriers behind which women still live as
captives.

35.
A parallel situation-including low-level bribery-has brought the courts into disrepute. In the
Kohat District of NWFP, the head of the bar association believes the main obstacle is a shortage of judges
so severe that each judge has a docket with 70 cases pending at any one time. The judges of the district,
while agreeing that their ranks were too thin, cited poor police work as a major problem in criminal cases
along with the inability of the police or courts to provide protection to witnesses. They also cited
language barriers. The 1973 constitution required that court proceedings be conducted in Urdu or
Pashtun, the languages most widely understood, but to this date, court proceedings are still in English
which few if any poor understand. In Shikarpur, several judges and their aides were suspended in

2000 on charges of stealing evidence (heroin) to sale. The Bar Association president listed illiteracy and
the distance that litigants have to travel as an impediment to justice, a concern voiced in Kohat as well.
The breakdown of law enforcement and the judicial system in many parts of Pakistan has severe
36.
consequences for the entire society, not least for small private entrepreneurs left unprotected against the

Annex I
Page 9 of 13

Pakistan Country Assistance Strategy

depredations of what is known as the "inspector raj." Its members are the legion of petty officials with
the authority to license businesses, read utility meters, inspect premises for health and labor regulations
violations, impose highway tolls and assess taxes. Many small businessmen told Bank staff one story of
harassment after another. A WAPDA official, for instance, burned one businessman's electricity meter
after being denied a bribe and then charged the trader with tampering with the apparatus. According to
members of the group, an "army of people" 15 strong typically descend on them to conduct the tax
assessment, usually sending an emissary ahead to intimidate and extort a bribe.
37.
The assessors include income tax, excise,
police, public health, labor, WAPDA and telephone
officials. In addition, in some areas, army members
have joined the gang of inspectors and bribe-takers.
One participant in the CAS consultation told of an
army wife who bought merchandise from him and
sought to exchange it after using it. His refusal
eamed him arrest and the closing of his shop for
three days. But in D.G Khan, the army monitoring
fr cbn g coutionon
praeedaysButis
unit there was praised for curbin corrunhon on
in
schemes
since
government poverty govemment
werein
schemespoverty
since they
they were
charge of overseeing their implementation.

Box 5: Justice Delayed = Justice Denied

Sometime late in the 1970s a Kohat District
land registry official, it is alleged, took a bribe and in

return gave a large landowner

a faise title to the

communal grazing land of the tiny (100 households)
settlement of Dhok Alwira. Before the land reform of the
1960s, the pastures had belonged to the landowner, but

they had been distributed to the villagers, who took their

claim for justice to the Session Court That was over 20
years ago. In the intervening period ofjudicial action and
inaction, the comrnunity has pooled its funeds at thie
current rate of Rs.50 per household per month to fight the'

civilian
case. It has spent Rs. 250,000-the annual income of an
breeds
lawlessness
38.
Official
average household over nearly a decaded mst of te
scofflaws. The small businessmen indicated they
plaintiffs now think they will be lucky to see the suit
would circumvent any attempt to document their
settled within one generation.
They recommended
income for tax purposes.
They are probably right With 5500 cases
returning the country to the self-assessment system
pending, the Kohat District court system has a 10-year
of taxation that they said worked two decades ago
backlog. While the villagers wait, their livestock graze on
and had the merit of making bribery unnecessary.
other land-land that could and should be put to more
Without a stable relationship between government
productive use.
and business, shaped by mutual respect for law, they
said they would not expand their investments even
into promising opportunities. One trader-the man whose meter was burned-said he was thinling of
joining relatives in the United States. Many others, he suggested, were ready to follow suit.
39.
With them and their energy and their capital would go one of Pakistan's prime hopes for
development and for the sustained creation ofjobs capable of reducing poverty.
But there is potential for a more vibrant private sector in all the districts visited. Many
40.
businessmen acknowledged that while more needs to be done to reduce harassment they saw a net
improvement in the investment climate over the past two years. This was more visible in Karachi and
Lahore but also in Gwadar district. The coastal strip on the Arabian sea holds a huge untapped potential
for both fisheries and tourism. According to various statistics, the area is capable of producing at least
70,000 more fish than it does currently on an annual basis. Bank staff visited two processing and
packaging plants (one foreign owned off-shore). There is potential for more we were told and the current
owners of the two processing plants had plans for capacity expansion. There are also plans for road and
port developments but reliable power supply was a serious constraint to this private sector development
potential.

Pakistan Country Assistance Strategy

Annex I
Page 10 of 13

Pakistan CAS Consultations2001 - Itinerary and Program
DistrictKohat, NWFP, consultationfacilitatedby the NationalRural SupportProgram (NRSP) NGO
October 21s ISLAMABAD

*

Meeting with Mr. Mueen Afzal, Secretary General, Finance, and Economic Affairs
DepartmentStaff, Ministry ofFinance, Govt. of Pakistan.

October 2 3 rd - 2
KOHAT- NWFP

*
*

Meeting with Divisional& DistrictAdministration
Combined meeting with districtofficials (Education, Health, Agriculture, Irrigation,
Forestry, WAPDA, C&W and others).
Meeting with major NGOs working in the Kohat District.
Meeting with members of chamber of commerce.

*
*
October24"

*

*
*
*
*
*
*
October 25'h
VILLAGE
TULANG

Walk through and meet with government officials in the Divisional Complex Kohat.
Walk through District Courts.
Meeting with lawyers.
Visit to the Center supported by the Poverty Alleviation Program.
Visit to Police Station and meeting with Police officials
Meeting with Revenue Departmentstaff
Meeting with Judges.

*
*

Meeting with communities (women and men), community organizations, women
groups, farmer groups,
Meetings with government officials of sub-districtlevel line departments, including
tehsildars,putwaris, extension workers, dispensaries, local health workers.
Walk through village.
Visit schools, rural health centers.

*

Meeting with district line departments officials.

*

Meeting with Ulemas (Religious scholars).
Briefing on the Tribal System by the DistrictAdministrator.
Meeting with Tribal areas journalists.
Meeting with Tribal elders.

*
*

October 2 6th
VILLAGE DHOKS
October 2?7'

*
*
*

District Shikarpur, Sindh, consultationfacilitatedby the StrengtheningParticipatoryOrganization
(SPO) NGO
October 30'

October 315

*

Briefing by Strengthening Participatory Organization (SPO) on Program.

*
*
e
*
*
*
*

Meeting with Divisional& DistrictAdministration
Meeting with District Officials.
Walk-about and meetpeople in District Courts.
Meeting with Lawyers in the Bar Room.
Visit to JudicialLock-up.
Meeting with Police Officials.
Meeting with local NGOs.

PakistanCountry Assistance Strategy

November 1

*

*
*
*
*
*
November 2nd

*

*
November 3 d

*

*
*

Annex I
Page 11 of 13

Visit to Village Nim Sharifand Village DarhiJhakhri (Tehsil Gorhi Yasin)
Meeting with communities, community organizations, women groups,farmer groups,
Meetings with government officials of sub-districtlevel line departments, including
tehsildars, putwaris, extension workers, dispensaries, localhealth workers.
Walk through village.
Visit schools, ruralhealth centers.
Meeting with religiousscholars
Visit Tehsildar office in Tehsil Lakhi.
Spend the day in Village Qasim Goth (Tehsil Lakhi)
Meeting with TransportAssociation.
Meeting with traders, BazaarAssociation.
Meeting with Growers 'Association.

DistrictD.G. Khan, Punjab, consultation facilitated by the National Rural Support Program (NRSP)
February1 2'h

*

*

February 13'h

Meeting with FederalGovernment Officials (FinanceMinistry, PlanningCommission).
Briefing by National Rural Support Program (NRSP) on the team'sprogram in the
surroundingvillages in D. G. Khan.

*
*
*
*

Meeting with Divisional & DistrictAdministration.
Walk through District Courts.
Meeting with district officials /Line Departments.
Meeting with Teachers, Doctors and Paramedics.
Meeting with local NGOs.

February14"'

.
*
*

Briefing and Visit to IRUDPIPAP Schemes.
Travel to Roongen - Tribal area of D. G. Khan & meeting with the tribals.
Meeting with community.

February15 'h

*

Meeting with Police Officials.

*
*
*
*

Visit to Local Prison.
Spend a day in the villages - Onefrom a rain-fed area, Onefrom canalirrigatedarea.
Meeting with Chamber of Commerce and Industry and Traders.
Meeting with the Army Monitoring Team.

.
*
*
*
*
*

Meeting with locally elected representatives.
Meeting with Journalists.
Visit to Madrassaand meeting with religious leaders.
Meeting with GrowersAssociation.
Meeting with Clerk's Association.
CulturalEvent hosted by the DivisionalAdministration.

February16'*

*

Pakistan Country Assistance Strategy

Annex I
Page 12 of 13

District Gwadar, Balochistan, consultationfacilitatedby the NationalRuralSupport Program
(NRSP)
February 2 0fh

*

Briefing by NRSP.

February 21s"

*

Meeting with Divisional & DistrictAdministration.
Meeting with JudicialMagistrateand Lawyers.
Visit to Qazi Court.
Visit JudicialLock-up.
Visit Police Station, Police Lock-up and meeting with Super-Intendantof Police (SP).
Meeting with Community Activists/NGOs.

*
*
*
*
*
February 22d

*

*
*
*
February 23d

*

*
*
*
February 24h

*

*
*

February 2 5 h

*

*

Meeting with Villagers of Village Chib Kalmati.
Meeting with Female Group, BHU andSchool/Meetings with Villagers..
Visit to Akra Dam.
Meeting with Women, Fisherman andMoneylenders in Surbandar Village.
Meeting with Local Businessmen.
Meeting with elected Nazims, Naib Nazims and Councilors.
Meeting with FisheriesDepartment0officials from Pasni.
Visit male andfemale groups in Gazarwan Ward, meetings with Villagers.
Visit School, Hospital, PowerHouse and Salt Making Plant.
Visit Son of Sea ProcessingPlant.
Meeting with Fishermen, ABC Fishery ProcessingPlant.
Visit Poverty Alleviation ProgramProjects.
Visit Women Handicrafts Center.
Pakistan CAS: Consultations with the Private Sector
May 15 - 23, 2001
Convened by IFC

March 12"'

*

March

*

I5Eh

Consultationswith the Private Sector in Islamabad(ForeignInvestors, Pakistani
Corporation,and Banks)
Consultationswith the PrivateSector in Karachi(ForeignInvestors, Pakistani
Corporations, and Banks)

Federaland ProvincialLevels Consultations
May 15- 23, 2001
WBI and Regional Staff managedthe discussion with the support of NGOs
May

1 5 th

*

CAS Workshop in Islamabadfacilitatedby the National Rural Support Program
(NRSP)facilitated

May

1 6 th

*

Meeting with representativesof main politicalparties.

May 17th

*

CAS Workshop in Karachifacilitatedby NGO Resource Center- Agha Khan
Foundation (NGORC-AKF)
Meeting with representativesof main politicalparties

*

Pakistan Country Assistance Strategy

May l9th

*

*
May 2 1 d

*

*
May

22

nd

*

*

Annex I
Page 13 of 13

CAS Workshop in Quettafacilitatedby the NGO Taraquee.
Meeting with representativesof main politicalparties.
CAS Workshop in Peshawarfacilitated by SarhadRural Support Corporation (SRSC).
Meeting with representativesof main politicalparties.
CAS Workshop in Lahore.
Meeting with representativesof main politicalparties.

Pakistan Counby Assistance Strategy

Annex 11
Page I of23

ANNEX II: PAKISTAN PRIVATE SECTOR STRATEGY

1.
The 1990s were a decade of lost opportunities for Palcistan. From independence to the late 1980s,
Pakistan outperformed the rest of South Asia. Then in the 1990s progress ground to a halt. Poverty
remained stuck at high levels, economic growth slowed, institutions functioned badly, and a serious
macroeconomic crisis erupted.
2.
What went wrong? To explain some of the trends of the last decade, this annex probes aspects of
the investment climate, viewed broadly to include the macroeconomic environment, political stability,
incentive regime, and infrastructure and regulatory framework.
3.
A key reason for the poor record of the l990s was the government's failure to maintain a
favorable investment climate for dynamic, competitive, and sustainable private sector growth. The effects
of the dual constraints of a misguided incentive regime and an inadequate regulatory framework for
infrastructure were exacerbated by an unstable and risky macroeconomic environment. But these failings
had been around for years. What was new was the way that an accelerating, corrosive deterioration in the
governance of public institutions weakened economic management and created an increasingly
unfavorable investment climate. Between 1990 and 2000, the country had eight different governments,
each averaging 16 months in office. Four democratically elected governments alternated with interim
regimes.
4.
This deteriorating governance aggravated the inadequacies and opacity of the incentive regime
and regulatory framework. It encouraged rent-seeking by the private sector and discouraged productivity
growth and international competitiveness. While other developing countries were increasingly integrating
into the global economy, their private sectors becoming more outward looking and less dependent on
government protection, Pakistan's private sector became increasingly inward-looking and dependent on
government interventions. Its weakening performance set the stage for the macroeconomic crisis of the
second-half of the 1990s.
5.
The current government of Pakistan is determined to turn the situation around. Its recent Interim
Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (I-PRSP) sets out a sweeping program of political, economic, and
institutional reforms that aim to establish the foundations of an open, modern, and prosperous nation
through revived broad-based growth. The World Bank Group's private sector strategy for Pakistan is
based on support for this program, particularly efforts to improve the investment climate by restoring
private sector confidence in the economy. Three areas will receive special attention: the government's
macroeconomic stabilization program; a growth-oriented structural reform agenda that encourages
productivity growth and more efficient resource allocation; and timely implementation of key structural
reforms of the incentive regime and the regulatory framework in infrastructure.
Pakistan's Private Sector: Unfulfilled Potential
6.
A clear consensus in Pakistan has emerged that private sector led growth is essential in order to
provide better economic opportunities and to reduce poverty faster. The shift in emphasis has been
characterized by the public sector's withdrawal from production activities through privatization, and by
the substantial advancement of the public sector's role as facilitator and regulator (Table 1).

Pakistan Country Assistance Strategy

Annex 11
Page2 of 23

It is only in key areas of infrastructure
services - power, oil, natural gas,

transport,

telecommunications,

Tablel: Units Privafized 1991 - 2001
Amount

and Sector

banking- that the public sector still
dominates.
With several landmark
privatization transactions in banking,
power, oil and gas underway, this is
expected to change by the end of this year
(Table 2).
7.
Agriculture, the largest sector of
the economy, contributes 25 percent of
GDP and employs more than half the labor
force. As the primary supplier of raw
material (cotton) for the main industry
(textiles), it eams most of the country's
foreign exchange (from cotton and its
derivatives). Growth has mainly come
from adoption of modem inputs,
combined with expansion of irrigated
water supplies. However, this strategy has
run its course, and future growth depends
on better management of existing levels of
resources and inputs, including expanded
access to land and credit. Agricultural trade
and pricing regimes have been substantially
liberalized, but policy reforms are needed
to improve the management of land and
water resources. Since the issues are
largely sector-specific, the agricultural
sector is not discussed further in this annex.

Number

Ao.1be
Bankmig
Banking
Cement Production

6
6

ll

6.6
6.6
8.2

Chemcl F
Energy
Engineering
Ghee Production

5
7
19

1.7
10.7
0.2
0.6

Roti Plants

15

0.1

2

30.6

2

0.1

Telecom
Textiles
Others

20

1.2

Total

108

61.2

Source: Privatization Commission Annual Report 2001.

Table 2: Privatization Program - Upcoming Transactions
Secor

Bidding Date

Banidng &Finance

United Bank Limited (UBL)

March/April 2002

Allied Bank Limited (ABL)

II Qtr. 2002

Bank Al Falah
Habib Bank Limited (HBL) - first tranche

II Qtr. 2002

Muslim Conmmercial Bank (MCB)
Habib Bank Limited (HBL) - second tranche

II Qtr. 2002

II Qtr. 2002
I Qtr. 2003

Industry &Real Estate
National Investment Trust (NIT)

8.
Manufacturing, which employs Pak Saudi Fertilizer Limited
about 11 percent of labor force, has Faletti's Hotel
stagnated, remaining at around 16 to 17 Investment Corporation of Pakistan (ICP)
percent of GDP since the 1970s. The latest
ii& Gas
Census of Manufacturing Industries (CMI, Working interest in 9 oil &gas fields
1995-96)
counted
4,474
private Attock Refinery Limited (ARL)
manufacturing entities and 42 public sector Pakistan Oilfields Limited (POL)
entities, which together employ under I Oil &Gas Development Corporation Limited (OGDCL)
percent of the 4.06 million people in the Pakistan State Oil (PSO)
manufacturing and mining sector. Textiles Pakistan Petroleum Limited (PPL)
Sui Northern Gas Pipelines Limited (SNGPL)
and clothing are the largest industries,
accounting for 79 percent of Pakistan's Sui Southern Gas Corporation Limited (SSGCL)
merchandise exports (in 1999), employing Power
over 40 percent of the sector's labor force National Power Construction Corporation (NPCC)
and contributing nearly 29 percent to Karachi Electnic Supply Corporation (KESC)
Faisalabad Electric Supply Corporation (FESCO)
manufacturing value added in 1995/96.
The food industry (including edible oils, Genco I (Jamshoro)
grain milling, sugar, beverages and relecom
tobacco) is the second largest. Iron and Pakistan Telecom Corporation Limrited (PTCL)
steel, chemicals, electrical equipment,
automotive, and pharmaceutical industries Source: Privatization Commission Annual Report 2001.

March 2002
March 2002
II Qtr. 2002
II Qtr. 2002
April 2002
II Qtr. 2002
II Qtr. 2002
III Qtr. 2002
III Qtr. 2002
I Qtr. 2003
I Qtr. 2003
I Qtr. 2003

Il Qtr. 2002
September 2002
IV Qtr. 2002
I Qtr. 2003
11Qtr. 2002

Pakistan Country Assistance Strategy

Annex II
Page 3 of 23

make up the rest of the sector. During the 1990s, most private investment went to capital-intensive
industries. The share of the "Big Four" capital-intensive industries-sugar, textiles (cotton yarn and gray
cloth), cement, and fertilizer-rose from 28 percent of total value-added in large-scale manufacturing to
more than 40 percent.
Dualistic Industrial Structure
9.
Large-scale activities dominates manufacturing output (70 percent of value-added) while small
and medium-size enterprises (SMEs) provide the bulk of employment. The most important areas of
activity for the SME sector are grain milling (16 percent), cotton weaving (13 percent), wood and
furniture (10 percent), metal products (7 percent), and other textiles (6 percent). The five largest
industries account for half of the SME sector, and cotton weaving and other textiles are their chief
exports. Although SMEs produce a quarter of manufacturing exports, most are low value-added products
that rely on traditional technologies.
10.
Over 90 percent of finns in
Pakistan are SMEs, most of which
operate in the informal sector.
According to the latest Small Household
Manufacturing
Industries
Survey
(SHMI, 1996), there are some 400,000
small-scale
manufacturing
units,
600,000 services units, and one million
retailers in the country. Together they
contribute about 11 percent to GDP and
employ roughly 80 percent of the
nonagricultural labor force. Most such
firms are engaged in nonagricultural,
low-productivity

service

activities

(household services, small-scale trade
and retail activities) that depend in large
measure on demand from other sectors
in the formal economy (Chart 1).

Chart 1: Sectoral Distribution of Non-Agricultural Labor In
Pakistan

Others
4%

Wholesale/
Retall/Hotels

-

-

-_

Construction

12%
Manufing

2fl

19%

TransporaU

Personal

Comm

Service
29%

10%

Private Sector on Sidelines in Infrastructure
11.
Until the 1990s the government discouraged private sector involvement in most infrastructure
services, from power, oil, and natural gas to transport and telecommunications. And even during the
1990s, despite considerable private investment in thermal power generation and natural gas, weaknesses
in the regulatory framework kept the public sector the dominant supplier in all key areas of infrastructure
services (Table 2).
12.
Pakistan faces an enormous challenge in meeting its energy needs. Costs in largely state-owned
enterprises are high and infrastructure is grossly inadequate. The power sector is largely government
controlled. The state-owned Water and Power Development Authority (WAPDA) and Karachi Electric
Supply Corporation (KESC) together control almost the whole electric distribution and transmission
market. WAPDA also accounts for 65 percent of generation; 21 independent power producers account
for the rest.
13.
State control also characterizes oil and gas. Both of the largest natural gas producers, accounting
for more than 80 percent of total production, and the country's two gas transmission and distribution
companies are state owned, as are extensive assets that include refineries, transport, and retail facilities.
The performance of public sector entities has been steadily declining, largely because of the rigidities of
public sector management and weak implementation of structural reforms. Demand for oil and gas has

Pakistan Country Assistance Strategy

Annex 11
Page 4 of 23

increased significantly in recent years, mainly from the independent power producers (Box 1). A
mounting consensus holds that substituting natural gas for fuel oil would bring considerable
macroeconomic gains, improved performance by power plants, and lower power tariffs.
14.
Pakistan's mining potential is
large. Although it could contribute as
much as 3 percent of GDP under
conservative
assumptions conservativs,
mining
m
g
presently contributes barely 0.4 percent.
The industry is dominated by federal
and
provincial
development
corporations,
with
little
foreign
investrrent.

mnvestment.
15.

Except

services,

in

road

govemment

transport

agencies

also

Box 1: The Independent Power Producers' Debacle of 1997

To meet the chronic shortfall in power generation by the public
sector,
government
of Pakistan
very Between
attractive 1995
tenmsand
to
private the
companies
to invest
in poweroffered
generation.
1997, the private sector invested some $5billion inpower generation.
A change of govemment in early 1997 led to a review of
agreements with independent power producers, and a unilateral
cancellation or suspension of the accords with sorne of the producers.
Acusations of corruption and kickbacks were rampant. The dispute
dealt a severe blow to foreign private sector confidence in Pakistan. The
issue was finally resolved amnicably in March 2001.

dominate the transport sector (railways,
airlines, port). Inefficiencies and high costs have seriously handicapped Pakistan's economic growth and
export competitiveness. According to World Bank estimates, some 6 percent of GDP is lost because of
inadequacies in the transport system. Despite partial divesture (12 percent of shares) of Pakistan Telecom
(PTCL) in the early 1990s, the government retains a monopoly. PTCL's exclusivity on all international
and domestic fixed line telephony services expires on December 31, 2002. Four mobile cellular
companies - including a subsidiary of PTCL - are now operating in the country. Preparatory steps for
PTCL privatization are under process and it is expected that the transaction will be brought to the point of
sale by June 2002.
Disappointing Economic Growth

16.
Slowing economic growth, poor export performance, and falling investments were the features of
the deteriorating perfonnance of Pakistan's economy during the 1990s, a lost decade in the fight against
poverty. Not only did the incidence of poverty remain unchanged between 1990/91 and 1998/99; but
more people were actually living in poverty in 1998/99 than 10 years earlier.
17.

GDP

growth

decelerated
considerably
during the decade, falling to
2.6 percent in 2000/01 after
averaging 5 percent over the

previous
four
decades
(Table 3). According to
recent analysis (Arby, SBP,

2001), the slowdown relates
the decline
in the trend
to the decline in the trend
GDP growth rate, starting as
early as the mid-1980s,
combined
with
the
recessionary phase of a
business cycle that began in
the early 1990s. Most of
the deceleration came from
the
halving
of
manufacturing's growth rate
to 3.7 percent during the
1990s from 8.2 percent in

Table 3: Growth Performance in the Pakistan Economy
195
1999/
1980s
1995
2000
2000
GDP growth rate
(%
FC, constant rupees)
Agnculture
Manufacturing
Large
Small and medium scale
Services

200/

2001

6.1
4.1

4.9
4.2

4.0
4.8

3.9
6.1

2.6
-2.5

8.2

4.8

3.2

1.4

7.1

8.2
6.6

4.7
8.4
5.1

2.4
6.5
4.0

-0.2
5.3
4.8

7.8
5.3
4.4

Total investment
(%of GDP)
Fixed
Public
Private
Total exports

18.6
16.8
9.1
7.8

19.5
18.0
8.6
9.4

17.0
15.2
6.4
8.8

15.6
14.0
5.8
8.2

14.7
13.1
5.6
7.5

(%,constant US$)

8.7

8.0

-3.8'

10. 1b

7.6 b

a: 1995 to 1999; b: in nominal terns; c: July-April

Source: Pakistan Economic Survey 2000-2001, World Bank.

Pakistan Country Assistance Strategy

Annex II
Page 5 of 23

the 1980s, and to a lesser extent from the weak performance of the service industry (Table 3). In contrast,
agriculture performed better during the 1990s, helping to sustain overall growth because of its large
contribution to GDP and employment.
18.
Within manufacturing, the decline in growth was uneven. It was more pronounced in large-scale
manufacturing, with a larger share in manufacturing value added, than in small and medium-size
enterprises (see Table 3), though there is some uncertainty in those figures since the quality of economic
information on small firms is poor. Among large finms, the decline was also more pronounced for exportoriented industries than for domesticoriented industries, which have a much
Chart 2: Growth inIndustries
larger share of manufacturing value
(index of physical output)
added (Chart 2).
r_'_ Domestic oriented
Dramatic Fall in Exports Reflects

15% -

Failureto Share in Global Production

1%ff

19.

After growing rapidly during

the 1970s and 1980s (7.1 percent or

more a year), export earnings (in real

US dollars) fell 1.9 percent a year

Export oriented

PrI

0% m

~
L
IL
CD> 0 a) C .
z 3 it

e

L
9

r NItI
iU
C

-

,

II

00 0a)
i

C

;

between 1992 and 1999, lagging behind
low- and middle-income countries and the South Asia region (Chart 3A). This poor export performance
reflects Pakistan's rising reliance on a few products (textiles and clothing accounted for 79 percent of
merchandise exports in 1999, up from an already high 64 percent in 1980) whose export unit values
stagnated (Chart 3B) and whose export prospects are dim relative to the exports from other, more
successful Asian countries (Table 4).
Chart 3: Pakistan Export Performance

A

B
Exports of Goods &Services Inconstart 1995 USS (index 1970
-

Padstm *Export UnR
Price Index

100)

(199= 100)

700040
600

120

500097

ioo

400

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~20

100

1970

1975

16-im M

60

380

G~~ __
__wg
Micl

1980

1985

1990

1996

1970

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

!,~~~~~~~~~~~6

PakistanCountry Assistance Strategy

Annex 11
Page 6 of 23

Table 4: Export Prospects, Pakistan and Competitors
Export growth
prospects
tbdex'

Major 1999 export products as share of total exports (percent)

Pakistan

1.6

Synthetic weaves (14 percent), Linens (11 percent), Cotton fibers (8 percent), Leather cloth
(5 percent), Cotton garnents (5 percent)

China

3.9

Toys (8 percent), Footwear (6 percent), Machinery Parts (3 percent), Handbags (3 percent),
Outwear knit (2 percent)

India

2.6

Diamonds (17 percent) Cotton yam (4 percent), Shell fish (3 percent) Precious jewelry (2.5
percent), cotton garmnents (2 percent)

Country

Outer garmnents (9 percent), Outwear knit (6 percent), Tea (5 percent), Blouses (5 percent),
Cotton garnents (4.5 percent)
a. The index reflects the influence of global demand growth, assumTing no change in the country's competitive position. The higher the
index, the higher the export market prospects. Countries with an index greater than unity have above average export market prospects.
Source: World Bank.
3.0

Sri Lanka

20.

Pakistan's deteriorating

export

performance seems to reflect an inability

Chart 4: Trade Openness - Pakistan Loses Ground

to integrate into the global economy and
participate in global production sharing
(specializing in different stages of the
production

chain),

as

many

of

50a

40 -

'/

its

30

competitors across Asia are doing. While
competing Asian economies were

u 20 -

increasingly integrating with the global

E

=

o

economy, Pakistan's trade opennesso
declined both in absolute terms and
relative to other Asian economies (Chart

10

_
1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000

Pakistan

4).

India _Indonesia

China

Sri

Lanka

This retreat - particularly dramatic in the textile and clothing industry-contrasts sharply with
21.
trends in Bangladesh, China, India, and Sri Lanka, where textile and clothing exports performed
significantly better than in Pakistan. These competitors capitalized on their comparative advantage in
labor-intensive clothing production by establishing zero-tariff schemes for imports of needed raw
materials such as cotton and blended yarns and fabrics. China's intra-industry trade index in textiles, for
example, increased from 34 percent to 54 percent during the last decade, enabling China to develop its
clothing industry and become the world's largest clothing exporter (Table 5).
Table 5: Global Production Sharing in Pakistan and Other Asian Economies
(Intra-Industr Tade Index, 1990 and 1999)
Paldstan

All goods

1990
9.6

t999
8.6

China
1990
29.0

1999
30.3

Indonesia
1990
14.2

1999
31.0

India
1990
34.4

1999
40.2

Sri Lanka
1990
16.6

1999
20.2

IL

1990 '
7.4

6.7

16.5
20.6
7.4
7.3
17.3
39.7
36.5
45.2
7.5
6.6
30.3
28.9
All manufactures
23.2
17.9
15.6
21.6
17.9
7.6
34.0
53.8
54.7
46.5
11.6
6.7
Textiles
10.2
2.2
67.1
6.0
2.2
10.2
63.4
2.9
44.3
1.2
1.2
63.2
Clothing
20.0
21.2
57.5
14. 1
15.7
28.9
65.1
39.4
4.7
41.4
65.1
4.2
Chemicals
1.8
5.2
40.1
9.6
19.8
7.6
53.7
24.3
5.8
49.6
53.7
2.6
Machinery and transport
6.4
40.8
41.8
7.8
26.4
19.5
26.4
54.7
61.8
14.2
15.9
24.7
Other manufactures
Note: The intra-industry trade index ranges between 0 and 100. The higher ratios indicate that gains from specialization in different products
are being exploited and that the participating country is increasing its integration into the global economy.

Source: World Bank.

Pakistan Country Assistance Strategy

Annex II
Page 7 of23

22.
Had Pakistan encouraged global production sharing in the textile industry by easing imports of
raw materials, its textile and clothing exports would probably both have performed significantly better.
Global integration would have enabled these industries to import the raw materials they needed to
diversify their export products, move to export products with higher value-added and more dynamic
(volume or price) market prospects, and take better advantage of the global relocation of the textile and
clothing industry that occurred during the 1990s. It would also have enabled those industries to soften the
impact of the poor domestic cotton crops of the 1990s, inoculating their export potential against the
vagaries of domestic cotton production.
FailingInvestments
23.
Investment fell as a share of GDP throughout the 1990s, reaching an all-time low in 2000/01.
The rapid decline in investment by government and public enterprises accounted for most of the drop
(Chart 5 A). Investment by the private sector was flat till the mid-1 990s, followed by a slight, short-lived
spike and then a sharp drop after the 1998 sanctions and ensuing macroeconomic crisis. Averaging less
than I percent of GDP, foreign direct investment (FDI) remained small in Pakistan throughout the 1990s,
with the exception of 1995-97. Between 1996 and 2001 (years for which disaggregated data are
available) most FDI was directed to domestic-oriented and highly capital-intensive industries, notably
power generation, oil and gas, and chemicals (fertilizer, synthetic fibers), but surprisingly little to exportoriented industries such as textiles (Chart 6). Investment in manufacturing has fallen steadily since
1993/94, especially for large manufacturers (Chart 5 B).
Chart 5: Capital Formation (constant 1980-81 prices)
B

A
Gross Capital Formation
(%of GDP)
20%1.

Gross Capital Formation In Manufacturing
(as %of GDP)

-

18%X
16% .
14% -

4%

...

.
3%

* Goemment

12%
0Public
10%.

2%
1%

Pri'te

8%

a

externalfinance
0)0

Uni
0

0

a ou0)t

g

ON a

_

_

24.
Another change in private investment
patterns in the 1990s was the increased reliance on
external finance.

"

0 0)

aAg,
t

s

foreign interest rates also expanded arbitrage
further

encouraging

borrowing

The State Bank of Pakistan facilitated

0)

0

0

ret
pTeAles

abroad (Chart 8 shows that the flow of private

external debt increased at the time when private
sector claims as a percentage of bank assets were
falling). Rising domestic interest rates relative to

;

SMEE

Until about 1996, domestic

&Cas,dr

abroad.

0) 0)

n

Chart 6: Distribution of FDI (1996-2001)

banks were reducing their exposure to the private
sector, encouraging the private sector to borrow

opportunities,

LSM

ChrrdrcaS

Cerent

FinarlaalseN
TrarsportStorage &
Commn

Power

Constecon

NOC

Annex IH
Page 8 of23

PakistanCountry Assistance Strategy

external commercial borrowing by private
investors through a Foreign Exchange Risk
Insurance Scheme, at least until 1995,
arbitrage
opportunities
making
such
extremely attractive.

Chart 7A: Which Private Sectors Gained or Lost in
Access to Domestic Bank Lending? (1985-2000)

,Agficulture
*Mining

E 40%

30% -



oManufactudng

- ......

-

CConstrucdion
*
*~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
Utilities

O

Policies behind the Incentive Regime of the
1990s and Deteriorating Governance

'

20%

g

10%

ECommerc

a.

25.
An unfriendly business climate X
0%
M
-10%
helps to explain the declining economic
performance and stagnating poverty of the
cm
1990s. Yet the incentive regime (the trade
a 20%
and investment regimes, industrial policies,
tax administration and regulations) of the 1990s did not look very different from that of the 1980s. If
anything, it should have been better. The government had initiated a series of structural reforms in the
1990s, notably reform of the financial sector, government withdrawal from manufacturing, and external
trade reforms.
unprecedented degree of
Chart 7B: Which Private Manufacturing Industry
The
26.
Gained or Lost inAccess to Domestic Bank
.
6.
Lendin ? (1985-2000)
political instability, however, undermmned
these advances with a rapid deterioration in
*Agribusiness
oTextile
the governance of public institutions and
E
25%
EClothing
domestic policies. The series of short-lived
E3Chemicals
l
_
20%
OCement
governments, each with its own priorities
and vested interests, exacerbated policy
2
DMachinery
DAutamolive
a' 15%
instability and the opacity of an incentive
regime that discriminated against exports
10%.0
and labor-intensive industries, discouraged
_
productivity growth, and bred large
X
0%
inefficiencies. The incentive regime relied
heavily on short-lived, mostly end-user
9
95-2004_
585based instruments that combined high tariff
-.%
protection
with
special
concessions
-10%
(exclusive
licenses,
franchises,
tax

3.,.

Chart 8: Sources of Private Sector Financing

concessions, preferential access to subsidized

credit).
The resultant uncertainties and
governance failings undermined the business
confidence of domestic and foreign investors
and became a major deterrent to private
sector confidence and investment.

% Private sector claims
1,200

P-r-Rivate Ext Debt (exci FCD)

,

1,000 2
800 E
600

Changes in the Trade Regime Are Not Yet
Biting

.9

Until 1997, an inward-looking trade

m

27.
regime

made

extensive

use

of directed

incentives, principally end-user based tariff
exemptions

or

concessions

(known

as

Statutory Rules Orders-SROs). The regime
provided

high

nominal

protection

and,

through cascading tariffs and exemptions,
even higher effective protection to import-

01
-

X

.

U)

400

*B

55%-20

0
0

E200

j
-2~~~~~~~~~~~~~~00

9

-40

50% -

*E

e

-800
6

-

C4 m

N

e,t

cMm

a

o

0 'n CD M

N

N

Pakistan Country Assistance Strategy

Annex II
Page 9 of 23

substituting and capital-intensive industries (fertilizer, cement, synthetic fibers, motor vehicles) while
discriminating heavily against exports by raising the cost of inputs and raw materials. Exports were hurt
fiurther by dysfunctional duty drawback schemes managed by the Central Board of Revenue. The bias
against export-oriented industries helps explain Pakistan's poor export performance during the 1990s.
28.
Policy shifts in 1997 began a move toward world prices. In April-May 1997, the maximum tariff
was lowered from 65 percent to 45 percent and the number of slabs from 11 to 5. By January 2003, the
number of tariff exemptions and concessions (SROs) is to be reduced; the maximum tariff is to be cut to
25 percent; and slabs are to drop to three.
29.
Although these changes look significant (chart 9), they do not tell the full story. While the
number of SROs has been cut, they still account for a 30 percent of the difference between potential duty
collections (had all imports paid the full statutory duty) and actual collections. Most of the remaining
exemptions are in the manufacturing
sector, particularly in automobile
Chart 9: Changes Indistribution of Statutory Rates:
1995/96 to 2000/01
assembly (imports of parts and
completed vehicles). And despite the
overall move toward lower and fewer

40

tariffs,

3

domestic

significant,
industries

though
continued

few
to

benefit from high tariff protection.
These exceptions are consistent with
observed
growth
rates
for
manufacturing for 2000/01, which
show high growth for importsubstituting industries such as auto

assembly (23 percent) and fertilizer
(8.5 percent), but slow growth in the
export-oriented textiles industry (2.7
percent).

;R

_

2000/01

1995196

30

20
e

5
0
0

10

20

30
Tariff Slabs (/Y

6

65+

30.
All this means that by 2002 the private sector is likely to be increasingly exposed to international
competition, but the anti-export bias and nontransparent trade regime remains. The tariff reductions and
rapid devaluation of the currency since 2000 are probably behind the improvements in export
performance in recent years. But the trade regime and prospective reforms need to be assessed carefully
for their effectiveness in correcting the anti-export bias and in improving the terms of trade to encourage
faster growth and a greater export orientation. International experience suggests that low, uniform tariffs
would do much to spur a more efficient allocation of resources in the economy, eliminating the antiexport bias and encouraging competitiveness and productivity growth.
IndustrialPoliciesHave Discouraged Productbity Growth and Contributed to Declining Openness
31.
Since the early 1990s, the government has gradually withdrawn from direct involvement in
manufacturing. It continues, however, to attempt to pick winners through its industrial policies despite
increasing evidence that these policies discourage productivity growth and restructuring in significant
manufacturing industries.
32.
Industrial policies are also likely to have played a key role in the decreasing openness of the
economy during the 1990s (see Chart 2) and the bias in resource allocation away from export-oriented
and labor-intensive small and medium-size enterprises and toward domestic market-oriented and capitalintensive industries (see Charts 6 and 7). Constraints on private investment tightened during the 1990s,
initially in domestic financing and later in external financing (see Chart 8) as reserves and
macroeconomic imbalances mounted. In this increasingly restrictive setting, the government's industrial
policy assumed greater importance by lowering perceived risks for private investors (by raising retums
both over and under the table). As Box 2 illustrates, this intensified the bias of private investment toward

Pakistan CountryAssistance Strategy

Annex 11
Page 10 of 23

inward-looking and capital-intensive industries where government can more easily "protect" returns on
capital than it can for export-oriented industries.

Box 2: How Sectoral Policies Encouraged Inward-Looking Strategies & Discouraged Productivity Growth
Fertilizer. The 1989 Fertilizer policy provided a subsidy on feedstock gas that guaranteed above-norm rates of return
to the domestic fertilizer industry. The subsidy, while prompting $1.2 billion worth of investments in urea production in the
1990s, also encouraged such gross inefficiency in production that on average, factories operate at least 25 percent below
international benchmarks. Along with similar waste in distribution due to the absence of product sharing, the subsidy also
inhibited productivity growth in agriculture-some 50 percent of urea applied by farmers was wasted-and by diverting scarce
fiscal resources from proven growth-enhancing public expenditures in education, irrigation and drainage, technology
development and dissemination, rural infrastructure.
The new fertilizer policy announced in August 2001, although an improvement over the 1989 policy, still sends the
wrong signals to investors by discouraging productivity gains. And by perpetuating nontransparent subsidies and direct
goveTnment intervention, it discourages potential investors. The new policy also has macroeconomic implications (addressed in a
later section). The polcC reaffirms the dual (feedstock-fuel) gas pricing regime, brings domestic feedstock gas prices in line with
Middle East price levels, phases out the feedstock subsidy by 2006 for old fertilizer plants and by 2008 (contract expirations) for
"new" plants, introduces a new feedstock subsidy (10 percent of the Middle East parity price) for future plants with a 10-year
lock-in price feature, dedicates an existing gas field for use by fertilizer plants, and reaffirms the deregulation of fertilizer prices.

textiles and clothing. Growth in textile and clothing exports rose about 13 percent a year (in US dollar termns)
between 1990 and 1995, then fell to -2 percent in 1995 before rising slightly to 3 percent in 1999. The industry's deteriorating
performance relative to that of key competitors was in large part a result of policies that led to linited product diversification.
Among them are complete dependence on cotton and heavy reliance on low value-added products with limited market prospects
(see Table 4) and on capital-intensi'.e (spinning and weaving) rather than labor-intensive products (clothing).
The high effective protection of the cotton-textile and synthetic fiber industries hurt the export competitiveness of the
clothing industry, compeUing it to rely on a narrow and low-quality range of yam and cloth and heavily protected synthetic fibers
produced- locally. The textile industry benefited from cheap cotton through the cotton export tax and export restrictionseventually relaxed during the 1990s-and from preferential access to subsidized credit and other special incentives. High import
tariffs (25-35 percent) or bans on imports of senii-manufiTtured textile inputs coupled with dysfunctional inport duty and saes
tax rebate schemes have discouraged diversification and been a major obstacle to inproved export performance by the clothing
industry. These policies have prevented the clothing and textile industry from taling advantage of global production sharing (see
Table 5).
Sugar. The lifting of exclusive rights for sugar mills to draw cane from specified areas (de-zoning) in 1987, coupled
with highly subsidized credit and other incentives, prornpted large investments in the industry. More than 40 percent of the 67
minlls operating in 1999/2000 entered the industry after 1987. Yet the industry suffers from poor technical, financial, and
economic performance, with productivity growth either at the field or mill level lagging behind other major sugar producing
countries (Chart 10). De-zoning that has encouraged new and larger sugar niills to compete with existing mills and divert cane
from them has carried a cost in falling capacity utilization, large capital investments, high unit costs of production, and low and
declining (relative to the world) cane and sugar yields (Chart 10). The absence of zoning discourages mills from in. esting in outgrower fields with higher cane and sucrose yields since they are no longer assured of sharing in the benefits of higher
productivity levels in the field or factory. De-zoning is the main reason for the poor productivity performance of the sugar
industry and the lack of consolidation and restructuring.
SteeL The steel industry also suffers from the effects of misguided policy. Tariff protection for state-owned Pakistan
Steel (PASMIC) has impeded the development of downstream engineering industries. PASMIC meets about a third of the
country's steel denmand but at prices some 25 percent higher than international prices. High tariffs penalize exporters of
engineering products, whose products are uncompetitive in the intemational market.

FinancialPolicies and Institutions Are Still Weak
33.
Until 1997, the banking system was dominated by public institutions and suffered from
inadequate prudential regulation and supervision and a weak legal and judicial environment. By the mid1990s, public sector banks were in severe distress, a consequence of poor governance in the banking
system and deteriorating governance in the incentive regime of the real sector. Development finance
institutions accumulated non-performing loans ranging from 30 to 70 percent of their portfolios and
accounting for about 80 percent of the bad loans of the banking system. The poor quality of banking

Annex fl
Page 11 of23

PakistanCountry Assistance Strategy

assets was especially acute in the fertilizer and sugar sectors; non-performing loans totaled 89 percent of
advances to the fertilizer industry and 60 percent to the sugar industry.
34.
The government introduced reforns in 1997 to strengthen governance and financial discipline in
the banking sector. The reforms upgraded prudential regulation and strengthened the authority of the
central bank to supervise banks and enforce regulations, improved legal and judicial processes for
enforcing financial contracts and facilitating foreclosures, and initiated corporate governance reforms in
the nationalized commercial banks.
Chart 10: Productivity Mndicators in the Sugar Industry

r.-

113

~~~~~~~~~~~a7(b)

(a)

Sug9ar Yielcis

'

_

India -

Indi zi
a-

Pakistan

Austr l.a

Australia

,

.

--

China

Thailand

Thailand
20

0

40

Go

To,lros per

80

1*1l

F

0

2

hoctare per year

sCiCa.i

_o

6
rCV;

10

a

11

} p,r h"oeaio -e. year

,a .o

_

_~~~~~~~~~~~~~-

Palkist- ,

Paki,i21ta":

China
rntiwan

,,

"';'

...-.....,.,.

4

T-r

1980/81to 1954185a 1995f9t toI1999/

''''"'''

.. .-

China

-

.

a

.

! -

r...

Thilanld

..

.,*:..,,.,,.
......
.,,-*

Thailalld
2,500

5,000

7,500

10,000

12,500

5

11

rTnnet cane per day

190/ap to 19811dS
a Ip9i9p6o a 1999100

rlaa

1960/61a l84MW/19//586 in 109/1/l

Source: LMC.

While details of the reforms are described in the Country Assistance Strategy (CAS), two points
35.
should be noted here. The first is that, despite progress in stemming the flow of non-performing loans
and in restructuring banks, non-performing loans and intermediation costs are still high enough to keep
lending rates high in nominal and real terms and to discourage investment.
36.
The second is that weaknesses in the legal and judicial system impede corporate restructuring and
asset restructuring by the financial system. The stronger than normal links between solvency and
performance in the corporate and financial sectors in Pakistan because of the heavy concentration and comingling of political and economic powers make it especially critical that corporate restructuring
accompany bank restructuring. Future growth depends as much on restructuring industries where
overcapacity or low productivity is rampant (such as cement, textiles, and chemicals) as on new
investments. And future growth requires a financial system that facilitates the reallocation of resources
from low to high efficiency sectors or firms. Thus the long-term success of financial sector reforms,
including bank privatization, hinges on strengthening the legal and judicial framework to facilitate the
exit of firms and the foreclosure or restructuring of distressed assets by financial institutions. While some
progress has been made (in bankruptcy law, for example), much more remains to be done.

PakistanCountry Assistance Strategy

Annex II
Page 12 of 23

In vestmeot Regzme StillNot Business Frieodly

37.

During the 1990s, the government tried to make the investment regime more attractive to

foreigners, especially in certain sectors of the economy. It established the Board of Investment as a "one-

stop shop" to facilitate and coordinate the needs of foreign (and domestic) investors. Notably, the new
investment policy announced in 1997 lifted the requirement that foreign investors get government
approval for projects. It also eliminated foreign exchange restrictions; allowed remittances of salaries,
profits, and dividends without restriction or approval of the State Bank; removed all controls on the
transfer of technology; and eliminated ceilings on the amount of royalties or technical fees a technology
buyer may pay.
38.
Yet the latest Foreign Investment Advisory Service study (FIAS 1999) found that, "Pakistan is an
inefficient investment location, with the country becoming less attractive relative to other investment
locations in the Region." Moreover, "whilst appropriate on paper, [the current foreign investment regime]
is simply not implemented at the ground level." The study noted that the investment policy was subject to
both inconsistent interpretation and arbitrary changes. FDI was encouraged through directed incentives
such as user-based import tariff concessions or exemptions (on raw material and other inputs), high tariff
protection on output, exemptions from income and sales taxes, exclusive licenses or franchises, and other
special treatment. Implementation of these measures failed to create a transparent and level playing field
for investors, instead encouraging rent-seeking at the expense of international competitiveness and
productivity growth.

Chart 11: World Business Survey 1999

39.
Lack of policy consistency
and predictability, uncertainty over the
implementation and timing of policy

ioo0-..

(%firms ranldn gobstacles as moderate to major)

90ota.

A-^.;
rjiC

l:

ISL iuir.ar.

,

.l

..'a

statements, and lack of accountability

and

transparency

remain

serious

70-

problems. Events of the late 1990s-

60

international political sanctions, the

50

military coup, a balance of payments
crisis, foreign exchange restrictions,

4

and the independent power producers
debacle (Box 1) further undernined
already low investor confidence in
Pakistan.

Thus

30 20-

10

substantial

impediments, uncertainty,continue
and
risks
0
invPolicy
to faceforeign
continue to face foreign investors,
imposing high transaction costs for
investing

and

doing business

in

Pakistan.
Policylnstability, Tax

Administration, andRegulatio

Raise the Cost of Doing Business
In the 1999 World Bank
World Business Environment Survey
(Chart 11) and CAS discussions with
40.

private sector in 2001 (Box 3), firms

Instability

Financing

Taxes &

regulations

Infrastructure

B

Inflation/Pnce

instablity

-

l

Box3: ConsultationwiththePrivateSector
Three main themes emerged from the Country Assistance Strategy
consultations with the private sector.
| Tax administration and the role of the Central Bureau of Revenue.
. Regulations.
* Weak infastructure.
All three raise the cost of doing business in Pakistan. The weakness in
regulatory environment is a consequence of policy reversals but also of
weak and nontransparent inplementation within the public sector. It is'
estimated tat senior management spends some 10-20 percent of its timne
dealing with the government. The regulatory burden is particularly serious
for small and medium-size enterprises.
It impedes their growth,
discourages new firms from entering the market, and encourage firma to
remain in the informal economy (See also Annex I).

identified policy instability as the
leading constraint on the operation I
and growth of private sector activity (91 percent of firms considered it a moderate or major obstacle to
business), followed by difficult access to financing (83 percent of firns), tax admiinistration and
regulation (80 percent of firms), and infrastructure. The business climate appears much less attractive in

PakistanCountry Assistance Strategy

Annex 11
Page 13 of 23

Pakistan than elsewhere in all its aspects. Policy instability and difficult access to financing (especially
high interest rates and high collateral requirements) stand out as particularly damaging to the business
climate (Chart 11). The policy instability reflects the unfolding macroeconomic crisis of the late 1990s,
policy slippages or reversals of successive governments throughout the 1990s, and the deteriorating
governance in public institutions and economic management that created a lack of transparency and
predictability in government policies. While tax administration is a critical constraint for the entire
private sector, regulation is more of a binding constraint for small and medium-size-enterprises (Box 3).
This perception is also reinforced by the results of a recent SME survey carried out in Pakistan in which
more than 80 percent of the respondents cited regulations as a major barrier in their smooth functioning
(Charts 12 A&B).
41.
Taxation and tax administration. After policy uncertainty and financing, firms rank taxes and
regulations as the biggest constraint to business in Pakistan (Table 6 and Charts 12 A&B). Across the
board-large firms and small, manufacturing firms and services-they cite high taxes as the chief tax and
regulatory constraint, a verdict consistent with the overall regional rankings in Chart 11.
Chart 12: Taxation & Regulatory Constraints for SMEs In Pakistan
A

B

Regulation and Other Govt. Related Issues
60 -

4:
20 -

670

60 -51

39

6-

4050

-5

10%0

16
10

Intensity of Problems

80Government:

~~~9

Note: MultUple response were allowd total may exced 100

20

4

-42

36

35

2

Note Multipbe responses wer allowed; totl may exced 100

Source: SME Policy Note, World Bank, June 2001.

42.
Tax administration is the second biggest regulatory constraint, especially for large firms. Smaller
firms are more likely to underreport income. Some 80 percent of firms estimate that "typical" firms avoid
some portion of taxes by underreporting income, with 22 percent reporting less than 50 percent of their
income, the highest portion in the South Asia region. The private sector is highly critical of the Central
Board of Revenue, which they consider to be corrupt and inefficient, with too much discretion.

2

Pakistan Country Assistance Strategy

Annex II
Page 14 of 23

Table 6: Taxation and Regulatory Constraints by Size and Sector in Pakistan, 1999
(percentage of firms ranking obstacle as moderate or major)
Constraint

Small

NMedium

Hligh taxes
86
74
Tax regulations
75
65
Customs regulations
72
65
Business regulations
64
58
Labor regulations
57
53
Environmental regulations
62
44
Foreign investment
46
48
Fire/safety regulations
43
46
Source: World Business Environment Survey, 1999.

Large

NManufacturing

Services

75
90
71
70
60
44
45
33

77
72
67
64
54
49
40
42

79
76
74
63
60
56
53
46

-E It

Sr-

79
74
69
63
56
50
46
43

43.
Recognizing these problems, the government set up a Task Force on the Reform of Tax
Administration. The radical reforms it recommended in an April 2001 report, endorsed in the 2001
budget, focus on reducing the number of taxes at federal and provincial levels as well as tax rates and
penalties. The program also calls for simplification of assessment and collection procedures, reform of
labor levies, greater efficiency in dispute resolution, broadening of the tax base, and honesty and
efficiency in administration.
44.
The business community welcomed the recommendations of the Tax Reform Task Force and its
subsequent endorsement at the highest level. The recent establishment of a tax reform wing under a new
Central Revenue Board chairman, charged with preparing a medium-term implementation strategy for the
reform program, is another move in the right direction. Timely implementation of proposed reforms will
be key to restoring private sector confidence.
45.
Regulation. Regulatory constraints include lack of predictability of laws and regulations related
to customs, business, labor, environment, and foreign investment, among others (see Table 6). The
World Bank Business Environment Survey of 1995 had already identified the constraints caused by
Pakistan's poor business climate (Private Sector Assessment 1996). Recent survey work suggests that
conditions have worsened. Most regulatory roadblocks place a bigger burden on small firms than large
ones, encouraging them to remain in the informal sector (see Table 6 and Charts 12 A&B). Because trade
regulations protect many domestic producers, it is not surprising that few firms consider the trade regime
to be especially burdensome.
46.
What many businesses object to in the regulatory framework is the uncertainty: regulations are
unpredictable, changing without advance notice or consultation, and interpretations are inconsistent. On
average businesses report being informed in advance about changes in policies that affect them "seldom"
or "sometimes," with 45 percent of enterprises reporting that they are "never" or "seldom" inforned in
advance. More than a third (37 percent) of the firms in the Pakistani sample agreed to some extent that
information on laws and regulations is not easy to obtain.
47.
To improve the regulatory environment for businesses, the government recently established a
Committee for Reforms in Regulatory, Legal and Policy Environment. Building on the government's
ongoing regulatory reforms, the committee is mapping out a comprehensive program of regulatory reformn
including the implementation steps needed to lower costs of doing business and enhancing international
competitiveness of industry in Pakistan. Because of the many sectors involved and the links between the
center and the provinces in regulatory affairs, coherent and effective reform will require significant
coordination among a wide range of government departments and ministries. And it will require strong
commitment over time.

PakistanCountry Assistance Strategy

Annex II
Page 15 of 23

Weak RegulatoryFrameworkiD Infrastructure
48.
Infrastructure services also suffer from a weak regulatory framework that hurts the investment
climate by inhibiting private investment in infrastructure, undermines the competitiveness of the
economy, and exacerbates macroeconomic vulnerabilities. Since the mid-1990s, the government has
pursued policies aimed at attracting private sector investment in infrastructure. However, progress has
been impeded by the risks stemming from a weak and unstable regulatory framework for the efficient
provision of infrastructure services.
49.
Although Pakistan was one of the first developing countries to open its power sector to private
investment in the mid-1990s and thereby eliminate much of the generation capacity shortage, its
mishandling of the independent power producers crisis of 1997 shattered private sector confidence,
particularly for foreign investors (see Box 1). Despite the new capacity, reliability and efficiency remain
poor, the sector's financial position has deteriorated, and only a little more than half the population (about
55 percent) has access to electricity.
50.
To reinvigorate the power sector reform program, the government, in a new policy statement in
1998, reiterated its commitment to the establishment within 5-10 years of a competitive power system
made up of autonomous, financially viable, and largely privately owned generation, transmission, and
distribution entities. An independent regulatory agency (NEPRA) would oversee the sector. The first
phase of the program, now under implementation, focuses on the financial restructuring and
corporatization of WAPDA and KESC. WAPDA's new management has taken steps to improve its
efficiency and financial performance through a focus on loss reduction, improved billing and collections,
and redress of WAPDA's financial difficulties. For KESC, after several years of trying to improve the
utility's operational and financial performance, the government has opted for fast-track privatization, with
the help of the Asian Development Bank.
51.
Even with these measures, many regulatory implementation issues remain. Tariff standards and
rules are vague, and clear policy guidelines from the government on future competitive market structure
are lacking. Private investors are unlikely to respond unless further progress is made on creating an
enabling regulatory environment in the sector by strengthening the independence of the regulatory agency
(NEPRA), reducing regulatory risks by moving toward formula-based and multiyear tariff setting
mechanisms, and establishing a legal framework for safeguarding foreign investments.
52.
In recent years, Pakistan's already weak extemal balances worsened, in part because the
government was unable to interest the private sector in investing in naturalgas production when demand
for imported oil and oil prices were rising. The bill for imported oil almost doubled, from $1.5 billion in
1999 to just under $3 billion in 2000, bringing home the macroeconomic importance of developing the
country's domestic natural gas resources to reduce vulnerability to external shocks. Uncertainty about
government policies has perpetuated the dominance of state enterprises in production, transmission, and
distribution at the cost of the sector's development.
53.
While gas exploration was encouraged by promises of remunerative well-head prices under the
1994 petroleum policy, production never materialized because the policy was not implemented. A weak
regulatory framework and contract disputes discouraged further investments by the private sector. The
main regulatory issues are low and administered prices at the retail level, involving heavy subsidies to
fertilizer and households; low and administered well-head prices for existing state-owned producers;
inability of new producers to enter into long-term contractual relationships with consumers because of the
administered gas allocation system. Additionally, pricing arrangements for the state-owned transmission
and distribution companies discourage efficiency and cost savings and are inconsistent with the gas
pricing regime. The institutional environment is also defective; the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural
Resources plays the conflicting roles of policymaker, regulator, and market participant.
54.
The government has taken steps to redress some of these inadequacies, appointing experienced
staff, for example, to the management and boards of state-owned companies. A new gas pricing
framework adopted in March 2001 uses international oil prices in setting well-head prices; phases in

Pakistan Country Assistance Strategy

Annex II
Page 16 of 23

adjustments in consumer prices that reflect cost of service; phases out subsidies over a three-year period,
except for existing fertilizer contractual obligations and for a lifeline rate for households; and establishes
a Gas Regulatory Authority. The new fertilizer policy, however, is inconsistent with the new gas pricing
framework in many respects. The latter continues a dual (feedstock and fuel) gas pricing regime that sets
domestic feedstock gas prices at parity with Middle East prices (around $0.77/mmbtu) when Pakistan's
opportunity cost of gas is considerably higher (around $1.76/mmbtu) and introduces a new feedstock
subsidy for future plants with a 10-year price lock-in feature.
The inefficient transportsystem is another drag on Pakistan's competitiveness. The World Bank
55.
estimates that transport weaknesses cause annual competitiveness-based losses of some Rs.220 billion, or
6 percent of GDP. Similarly, inefficient public sector utilities impose a heavy fiscal burden on the
economy at a time when more public investments in infrastructure and human development (health,
education) are badly needed.
56.
The current government is addressing some of the key transport problems. The National
Highway Authority, rather than focusing on constructing new roads, is emphasizing completing ongoing
projects, upgrading existing corridors, and mobilizing resources for maintenance through tolls. The new
management of Pakistan Railways cut losses in 2000 some 25 percent over the previous year by reducing
excess staff, rehabilitating assets, and shedding non-core operations. The freight business has huge
potential and could interest private sector investors if the right framework were in place, but Pakistan
Railways is reluctant to give up its freight business, which cross-subsidizes its passenger services.
Although Pakistan Railways had once indicated a willingness to consider letting private freight operators
run their own trains in exchange for a track access fee, the government's draft National Transport Policy
(March 2001) contains no mention of private- sector participation in any form. Furthermore,
implementation has stalled on a government decision to gradually phase in private operating concessions
at all ports. In aviation, the sale of shares of Pakistan International Airlines to strategic investors has been
proposed, but substantial pre-privatization technical and financial restructuring would be needed to attract
private sector interest.
Pakistan's rich and extensive mineral resources (zinc, copper, gold, iron ore, coal, marble, among
57.
others) could, under conservative assumptions, potentially contribute annual foreign exchange earnings of
$1.7 billion, or 3 percent of GDP and tax revenues to central and local governments of $200 million a
year. Development of mineral resources would also act as a powerful engine of growth for SMEs and
local community development in largely remote regions of the country, such as Balochistan. Today,
however, mineral exploitation contributes barely 0.4 percent of GDP despite government's interest in
developing the sector.
The mining industry is dominated by the public sector through federal and regional development
58.
corporations, with little foreign investor involvement. There is little or no modern exploration, and what
little development has occurred has been restricted to simple technologies and has been poorly planned
and managed, especially the environmental and social impacts. The main reasons for the missed
opportunities are the uncertainty created by the inadequacies of mining concession rules, which fail to
meet international standards; lack of supporting infrastructure (such as railway freight); and perceptions
of political and security risk associated with the geographic location of the bulk of mineral resources
(Balochistan).
The federal government recently issued its National Minerals Policy, which approaches
59.
international standards and provides a basis for improving the business environment. It has also created an
export processing zone arrangement for export-oriented mineral development (for example, Saindak
prospect). These recent developments are steps in the right direction, but they remain untested. And more
remains to be done to bring the mining regulatory structure up to international standards and make it
attractive to foreign investors. Modernization of the regulatory framework rests largely with provincial
governments but will also require further actions by the federal government (such as in foreign exchange
and trade regulations) to provide the right incentives to private investors and to provincial governments to
modernize.

Pakistan Country AssistanceStrategy

Annex 11
Page 17 of23

Growth Has Been Unsustainable

60.
The pattern of growth that unfolded during the 1990s proved so unsustainable that ushered in a
macroeconomic crisis late in the decade, culminating in the balance of payment crisis of 1998.
Ultimately, although quantitative analysis remains to be done, it appears that productivity growth fell
dramatically during the 1990s, making the pattern of growth unsustainable. As the previous discussion
illustrates, the deteriorating business climate of the 1990s failed to provide the appropriate incentives to
private investors or to public utilities to pursue productivity growth.
61.
Macroeconomic stabilization is the first priority for reducing poverty and improving the business
climate since it will reduce policy instability, the leading deterrent to business confidence. The
stabilization program (fiscal adjustment, flexible exchange rate regime, and tight monetary policies)
together with high indebtedness and limited extemal financing leave the central government with very
little maneuvering room for encouraging private sector-led growth. In particular, the stabilization
program imposes strict limits on the capacity to increase public (and private) investment in the economy.
62.
Especially under tight macroeconomic constraints, faster private sector-led growth and poverty
reduction hinge on higher productivity growth and more efficient allocation of investment and resources
through sustained structural reforms. This will mean improving the incentive regime overall and reducing
regulatory risks in the provision of infrastructure.
Summary

63.
To sum up, the diagnostic section elucidates that it is the government's failure to maintain a
favorable investment climate in the country that has constrained the growth of a dynamic, competitive and
sustainable private sector in the 1990s. To turn around the declining trend of investment and exports, the
following key areas of concern for private sector must be addressed:
e

An inadequate incentive regime resulting from a combination of unfinished trade policy reforms,
continuing reliance on sectoral industrial policies, an unfriendly investment regime, poor tax
administration, excessive regulatory burden, and a recurring pattern of policy instability.

*

Risky and weak regulatory framework in infrastructure, particularly, in the key growthsupporting sectors of gas, mining, power and telecom.

*

Weak financial policies and institutions that discourage availability of financing for private
investment.

*

Risky macroeconomic environment.

64.
The current government of Pakistan is determined to improve the investment climate in the
country. While the vision for private sector-led development is well-articulated, the country is still in the
process of formulating a strategy to realize the vision. Signs that some of the key investment climate
issues are beginning to be tackled are apparent.
The Government's Evolving Private Sector Strategy

In its recent Interim Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper(I-PRSP) - a document that reflects the
strategy papers prepared by the central govermment since October 1999 and the reforms implemented
since then - the government sets out a sweeping and ambitious program of political, economic, and
institutional reforms aimed at establishing the foundations of an open, modern, and prosperous society. It
seeks to revive broad-based economic growth and eliminate poverty and social inequities through three
key strategic initiatives: a program to improve macroeconomic stability and government effectiveness; a
reform agenda in key sectors to foster broad-based growth; and a social and human development agenda.
65.

66.
Getting the macroeconomic fundamentals right and improving government effectiveness through
governance reforms and devolution are the government's first priorities. Fiscal consolidation is

Pakistan CountryAssistance Strategy

Annex II
Page 18 of 23

considered vital for curbing unfavorable public debt dynamics and boosting national savings in order to
finance higher private investment. Fiscal targets hinge on realizing the government's projected revenue
increases-a key weakness in past fiscal adjustment efforts. hnplementation of the Central Board of
Revenue reforms and measures to broaden the tax base and eliminate exemptions is crucial. The
government's strategy also envisages rationalization of public expenditures to enable increased public
investments in education, health, and other priority areas such as infrastructure.
67.
"Sustained pro-poor economic growth, based on robust private sector activity and enhanced
investment, are the main elements of Pakistan's [I-PRSP]. Therefore, the essence of Pakistan's poverty
reduction strategy is to maintain an environrment conducive to trade and investment, including foreign
investment" (I-PRSP, p. 23). Promoting private sector-led growth in agriculture, services, and exportoriented manufacturing will therefore be critical for accelerating growth and poverty reduction and
reducing Pakistan's vulnerability to internal and external shocks.
68.
The paper acknowledges that the pattern of growth has not been conducive to employment
generation and has neglected external markets, productivity growth, and international competitiveness. It
attributes the slow pace and inappropriate pattern of growth to the long neglect of the agricultural sector
and misguided policies in manufacturing, as well as an inadequate macroeconomic environment,
insufficient investments in human capital, and weak infrastructure. Accordingly, recognizing the need to
spur greater export orientation and more labor-intensive growth, it envisions complementing trade and
financial sector reforms with reforms in keys sectors like agriculture, industry, infrastructure, and
information technology.
To revive private sector growth, sectoral committees will be constituted with all key stakeholders
69.
to develop recommendations for the textile, chemical, engineering goods, automobile, and edible oil
sectors. In manufactured exports, the prime concern is to encourage the production of value-added
products in Pakistan's textile exports, mainly garments. As these are labor intensive, they also have high
potential for employment generation. Within manufacturing, SMEs have been earmarked as holding the
greatest potential for generating employment and creating an export base in the country. The focus is on
programs for developing managerial, technical, and informational support for SMEs.
70.
In trade, the govemment intends to reduce maximum tariffs to 25 percent by 2003 and the
number of tariff slabs to three, to rationalize duty drawback and export-financing schemes for exporters,
and to comply with the WTO trade regime and standards.
71.
Recognizing the grave inefficiencies in transport infrastructure (railways, roads, and aviation)
and its role as a catalyst in economic growth, the government is reorienting infrastructure priorities. In
the energy sector, initiatives have focused on deregulation, liberalization, privatization, and greater use of
indigenous resources and on a shift from thermal and furnace oil to hydroelectric, gas, and coal.
Attracting foreign investment and entering into new alliances with intemational oil and gas companies are
important goals. The oil and gas sector has eamed priority because of its potential role in reducing
macroeconomic vulnerability by providing a dependable domestic source of energy to replace the high
foreign exchange cost of imported oil. A new investment policy for offshore oil and gas exploration was
announced in January 2001, and the govemment plans to attract foreign investments in both upstream and
downstream sectors. Marble and gem industries will be encouraged near the point of deposit, to add
value to currently low value-added products.
Although the I-PRSP provides an impressive vision for private sector development (PSD), the
72.
document falls short of clarifying a PSD strategy that translates this vision into a comprehensive and
cohesive road-map ahead.
The Bank has tried to assist the govemment in the process of formulating its private sector
73.
strategy. The process of working with the government in developing their PSD agenda has strengthened
in the past eighteen months.

PakistanCountry Assistance Strategy

Annex II
Page 19 of 23

The World Bank Group's Private Sector Assistance Strategy
74.
The World Bank Group (WBG) private sector strategy aims to support the Government of
Pakistan (GOP) in encouraging dynamic private sector-led growth that can reduce poverty more
effectively, while reducing macroeconomic vulnerabilities, and fostering productivity growth and
efficient resource allocation. Based on WBG's diagnostic work, this would be achieved by supporting the
government in pursuing the following outcomes:
*

Establishing a more neutral incentive regime that significantly reduces the apparent bias against
exports, labor-intensive industries and SMEs, and productivity growth in key industries; key
elements of this outcome include: further trade liberalization; policy adjustments to facilitate the
reallocation of resources from less to more efficient industries and firms, and restructuring of
large scale manufacturing industries.

*

creating an investment friendly regime that is attractive to foreign and domestic investors; key
elements include: transparent trade policy formulation, deregulation, tax administration reform
and policy stability.

*

Strengthening the financial sector to mobilize resources for private investment; key elements
include: commercial bank privatization, development of capital markets, and expansion of
commercial microfinance.

75.
While the outcomes being sought are clear, the Bank still needs to come to an agreement with the
government on a shared comprehensive PSD agenda. Already in the last eighteen months, the process of
working with the government, through continued dialogue and analytical work, has been enhanced. This
process has included:

* Analytical inputs: The Bank has provided inputs to policy-making through sectoral notes on
fertilizer and cement industries, an Investment Climate note by World Bank's Chief Economist,
and an SME Policy note based on a country-wide survey; IFC has provided advice on financial
market development, including reviews of insurance and housing finance.

*

Capacity building: Given that the government has been responsive to analytical inputs and
dialogue, the Bank has followed on its support through capacity building efforts. Amongst other
things, this has included: (i) an IDF grant to push forward the deregulation agenda through the
recently established Committee for Reforms in Regulatory and Legal Policy Environment; (ii) an
IDF grant to support the government's championing of tax administration reforms through the
establishment of a Task Force on Tax Administration Reforms in 2000. Based on the
recommendations of the Task Force, a program of reform was approved in November 2001 by the
President; the Bank is providing a Project Preparation Facility (PPF) to implement and prepare a
project for restructuring of tax administration, along the lines recommended by the Task Force;
and (iii) in response to a government request, a three-day WTO training workshop was organized
by the WBG, in joint sponsorship with the Ministry of Commerce. Aside from disseminating
information regarding WTO, its requirements and implications, it helped to build capacity within
the government.

*

Raising awareness: The Bank has initiated work to assist the government in determining priority
reforms areas -- the on-going Investment Climate Study (ICS) to help identify the key bottlenecks
in investment climate in Pakistan, is an example of one such initiative. The Bank is undertaking
this study in joint collaboration with the Small and Medium Enterprise Development Authority
(SMEDA) so as to help build capacity within the country to undertake this task on a regular basis.

*

Desk-based review services: In response to government's request, the Bank has provided timely
desk-based review of its new Competition Law which may soon replace the antiquated
Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices Ordinance, 1970. Recently, an informal review was
also provided for the proposed PharmaceuticalPolicy. In both cases, the Bank was able to draw
on expertise within the networks.

Pakistan CountryAssistance Strategy

Annex II
Page 20 of 23

76.
To provide continuing support to GOP for its evolving PSD strategy, the World Bank Group will
focus on four key areas, selected on the basis of WBG's diagnostic and their impact on growth and
poverty reduction, and of the Group's comparative advantage:
*

Supporting economy-wide policy and institutional reforms that improve the overall incentive
regime and investment climate, and catalyzing private investment in response to these
improvements;

*

Supporting the establishment of regulatoryframeworks in the key growth-supporting sectors of
gas, mnining, power and telecom, and catalyzing private investments under these new frameworks;

*

Building the knowledge base on constraints to private sector development; and

*

Supporting the further development of the financialsector to improve availability of financing for
private investment.

77.
In alignment to the outcomes being sought, support by the WBG will be provided in the form of
following instruments:
*

Policy dialogue and adjustment lending to support the implementation of macroeconomic and
sectoral reforms aimed at improving the investment climate and overall incentive regime;

*

Advisory work to support institutional and regulatory reform, including privatization;

*

Analytical work to improve understanding of constraints to private investment and productivity
growth, and identify institutional, policy and regulatory frameworks which will encourage private
investment and productivity growth;

*

Equity and loan investments and guarantees to mobilize private investmnent in reformed sectors

78.
The World Bank will take the lead in analytical and advisory work, drawing on the perspectives
of IFC and MIGA, and in supporting GOP reforms. IFC will invest equity and loan finance, and make
partial credit guarantees; MIGA will offer political risk insurance through its guarantee program. The
matrix below sumnmarizes the Private Sector Strategy and World Bank Group interventions in support of
them.
IFC

World Bank
Analysis &
Advisory

Policy
Dialogue &
Adj.

TA

Investment

MIGA
Advisory

G'tees

Lending_____

Economy-

Macro

wide
Key
growth

Micro
Gas & Mining
Power &

sectors

Telecoms

Financial

Banks

sector

NBFIs

.

_

Improving the Investment Climate
The World Bank will support economy-wide policy and regulatory reforms through balance of
79.
payment operations and technical assistance in areas such as tax administration by the Central Board of
Revenue and deregulation of industrial, business, and labor regulations. This dovetails with the World
Bank's program of support for strengthening govemment effectiveness. Strengthening public institutions

Pakistan Country Assistance Strategy

Annex II
Page 21 of 23

like the CBR both improves the accountability and efficiency of the public sector and improves the
investment climate for the public sector.
80.
Consistent with the Bank's earlier diagnostic, priority will be given to elements of the trade
regime that discourage export orientation and participation in global production sharing, productivity
growth, and intemational competitiveness. Actions would include timely implementation of scheduled
tariff reforms, the phasing out of regulatory duties that still provide protection well beyond the maximum
tariff rates, the elimination of SROs that distort resource allocation or undermine business confidence, and
reforms of the tax administration to eliminate the shortfalls of general sales tax refunds and duty
drawbacks to exporters. External trade reforms would need to be complemented by selected economywide (e.g., labor, business) or sector-specific regulatory reforms to relieve constraints that are holding
back private investment (domestic and foreign) and productivity growth.
81.
The Bank will continue to encourage the federal and provincial govemments to pursue the trade
liberalization and modemization of industrial, business and labor regulations that are already under way.
A Committee for Reforms in Regulatory and Legal Policy Environment was recently established (January
2002) to review commercial and labor regulations with a view to eliminate those that constrain
competition and/or impose unnecessary compliance costs. A World Bank team has started to support the
Committee and will work with the govemment in identifying policy measures in these areas that could be
supported by adjustment lending.
82.
At the provincial level, the Bank's dialogue and proposed assistance to Sindh and NWFP, which
sought Bank's assistance, will also focus on refomis that fall within the provinces' purview (such as labor
and industrial regulations) to improve the investment climate.
Key Growth Sectors

83.
The World Bank Group will be selective in terms of addressing specific sectoral policy and
regulatory issues, and promoting private investment. Priority will go to sectors with significant impact on
economic growth and the balance of payments, i.e. gas, mining, power and telecom sectors.
84.
Top priority will go to natural gas, which offers the largest potential for reducing macroeconomic
vulnerabilities, attracting FDI, restoring private sector confidence, and encouraging efficient substitution
of domestic resources for imports. Consistent with the govermnent's vision, the objective will be timely
and consistent implementation of regulatory reforms to create an environment for accelerated
development of gas reserves. The strategy will be to support implementation of the planned program of
retail and producer price adjustments, including bringing feedstock gas prices to the fertilizer industry in
line with prices to the rest of the industrial sector and reflecting any fertilizer subsidy in the budget. The
strategy includes privatization of PPL, restructuring of transmission and distribution companies, and
liberalization of transmission under a common carrier regime. These reforms will be supported by the
gradual dismantling of the administered gas allocation system and implementation of a new regulatory
regime for transmission that permits both contracting between large parties and the introduction of new
tariffs. The World Bank would concentrate on advice and financial support to expedite introduction of an
appropriate, fully operating regulatory framework. IFC would consider financing appropriate business
opportunities to increase the country's gas reserves by supporting early development of newly discovered
fields and improvement of the gas transmission infrastructure.
85.
In petroleum, the Bank Group will continue to support the government's reform guided by the
important program of analytical work carried out in FY01. Over the next three years the focus will be on
advancing the implementation of the deregulatory reforms to strengthen competition in the sector and
assisting with the privatization of the Oil and Gas Development Corporation Ltd and Pakistan State Oil
Ltd expected to take place by March 2003.

Pakistan Country Assistance Strategy

Annex 11
Page 22 of 23

The World Bank Group will accord greater priority than in the past to development of the mining
86.
sector, because of its potential importance in improving macroeconomic stability through external and
fiscal accounts and broadening access to growth and employment opportunities geographically and
socially. While the expected benefits will materialize beyond the planning horizon of this CAS, the
immediate objective of the World Bank Group will be to support establishment of a modem regulatory
environment for mining that enhances Pakistan's competitive position in attracting private investment and
encourages environmental and social sustainability. The strategy will focus on supporting the federal and
provincial governments in their elaboration and implementation of a modern regulatory framework and
improving their capacity to manage the instability of government revenues associated with extractive
industries. The Bank will respond to client "pull" from both central and provincial governments (such as
the recent demand from the Sindh Government), for assistance in reforming the legal/regulatory and fiscal
frameworks and developing institutional capacity to facilitate and promote environmentally and socially
responsible private sector mining development both for coal and for non-fuel minerals.
The Bank Group will continue its deep engagement in the power sector. The power sector
87.
reforms will continue to be supported through policy dialogue and adjustment lending which, by
strengthening macroeconomic stability and reducing exposure risk, is expected to improve the investment
climate for private investment, particularly for the privatization of the distribution companies. In
addition, the Bank Group will support financially through programmatic investment lending the
privatization of the distribution companies. In particular, IFC will aim to mobilize private investment for
the power sector, particularly for the privatized distribution companies. IFC will also continue to act as
adviser to the government on the privatization of Faisalabad Electric Supply Company (FESCO).
Since improved connectivity is essential for growth, including that of the IT industry, and for the
88.
poor to benefit from technological change, the Bank Group will continue its dialogue with the
government on an adequate regulatory framework to attract private investment. In FY02, MIGA
supported a software development project in Karachi by Japanese investors and is looking at a telecom
project in FY03. IFC and MIGA will seek opportunities to support the growth of the IT industry.
Building the Knowledge Base
In order to underpin this assistance strategy and the policy dialogue, the World Bank Group will
89.
need to build its knowledge base about the main impediments to an improved investment climate. While
the broad impediments have been identified --trade and investment regime, industrial policies, tax
administration, business and labor regulations-- the precise microeconomic distortions of the investment
climate and incentive regime and their relative impact on productivity growth, resource allocation, and
private investment need to be identified and quantified more precisely. For example, more needs to be
known about the impact of the current and prospective (2003) trade regime on private sector incentives in
order to judge the effectiveness of trade reforms in encouraging stronger and more export-oriented
growth.
In documenting these domestic constraints, priority will be given to industries with the potential
90.
to contribute significantly to macroeconomic stability, growth and employment. The textiles and clothing
industry is an obvious candidate. With close to 80 percent of merchandise export earnings, the industry
approaches the imminent phase-out of the Multi-Fiber Arrangement in need of crucial domestic reforms
that can put it back in competition after a decade of losing ground (see Table 3). Another candidate might
be the sugar industry. Current sugar policies that fuel the huge sugar cycles that destabilize
manufacturing and agricultural growth also retard productivity growth in the mills and on the farm and
discourage more efficient use of scarce water resources.
In addition to an informal private sector assessment jointly prepared by the EFC and the World
91.
Bank in FYOI, and an SME Policy Note describing the key features of SMEs and their constraints
(emerging from a business survey also conducted in FY01), the program of analytical work includes: (i) a

Pakistan Country Assistance Strategy

Annex fl
Page 23 of 23

Development Policy Review (to be completed in FY02) which will provide the Bank's assessment of the
adequacy of the current development policy agenda to achieve rapid growth and poverty reduction; (ii) a
Trade Policy note (to be completed in FY04); (iii) an FDI Administrative Barriers Reform study to be
conducted by FIAS; and (iv) an Investment Climate and Economic Performance Study (to be completed
in FY03). The latter aims to relate key aspects of the investment climate (basic economic infrastructure,
and regulatory and govemance frameworks) with the performance and productivity of private
manufacturing finms, small and large. To build domestic capacity for this analytical and monitoring work
in the future, the study is being carried out jointly with SMEDA.
Reforming the Banking and Financial System

92.
In response to the financial crisis of 1996, implementation of the govermment's banking and
financial sector strategy started in eamest in 1997 and is well advanced. There is broad agreement
between the government and the Bank on the vision for Paldstan's financial system - a market-oriented,
predominantly privately owned banking and financial system that operates under a strong regulatory
framework, is supported by an effective legal and judicial system, mobilizes the capital needed to finance
rapid private sector growth, and improves access to financial services by the poor. Consequently, the
Bank Group and ADB have been actively supporting implementation of the strategy with adjustment
lending, restructuring and privatization operations, technical assistance to strengthen the financial
infrastructure, including the payments systern, credit information and anti-money laundering, and
expanding the micro-finance sector. Much progress has been made in strengthening prudential
regulations and supervision for banks and the capital market, and this needs to be extended. Priorities
include adhering to the privatization schedule for the NCBs, closing most of the DFIs, improving the
legal and judicial system for financial contract dispute resolution, and achieving full market integration by
phasing out special credit programs and closing tax and regulatory arbitrage opportunities.
93.
IFC will support the emergence of strong private commercial banks and Non-Bank Financial
Institutions through selective investments. The IFC will also support the development of new financial
products to better meet the needs of the private sector (e.g., long-term finance for infrastructure, access to
finance in agriculture/agribusiness, guarantees for SME finance). Such products should also expand
access to financial services to new clients (e.g. the bankable poor through micro-finance institutions or
leasing institutions) and to under-served SMEs.

PakistanCountry Assistance Strategy

Annex IIn
Page I of I

ANNEX III: BANK PARTNERSHIPS WITH BILATERAL AND MULTILATERAL AGENCIES

Gender

The Interagency Gender and Development Group, comprising all major donors, is supporting
various activities to promote gender equity in Pakistan. The Bank, the government, and major
bilaterals and multilaterals, including all UN agencies, are also working together to strengthen
the government's analytic capacity on gender sensitive policies. Specific projects include:
"Women's Political Participation and Gender Sensitive Strategy", a UNDP- Gender Equality
Umbrella Project; "Family Protection" and "Gender Equality Project" by DFID; and "Gender
Reform" TA grant by AsDB.

Power
Reforms

Power Reforms are supported by the Bank and other donors, particularly AsDB and Japan. The
Ghazi Barotha Hydropower project is one such example which is supported by a number of
donors including the Bank, AsDB, JBIC, KfW, IDB, EIB. Also, there is greater selectivity
among various donors, with the Bank supporting WAPDA restructuring while AsDB taking on
KESC reforms.

Oil and Gas

The Bank, CIDA and AsDB are supporting policy reforms through TA and Grant funds.

Provincial
Reforms

The Bank is supporting the economic reform programs of the Sindh and NWFP provinces while
AsDB is assisting Punjab on public resource management.

Devolution

A number of development partners are supporting the Government's devolution program. The
UNDP is leading the effort while the Bank is focusing on areas where it has a comparative
advantage, such as, planning and budgeting, and social service delivery. An IDF grant has
already been provided to the National Reconstruction Bureau.

Child Labor

The Government of Pakistan has initiated over the past decade a major campaign to meet the
challenge of child labor, including enactment of key legislation prohibiting child labor in
hazardous occupations and bonded labor, joining the ILO Program for Elimination of Child
Labor (IPEC). The Bank is collaborating with ILO in building partnerships with the private
sector and NGOs in tackling the child labor issues.

Poverty
Reduction

The Bank, along with other major donors, particularly AsDB and DFID is supporting key aspects
of the government's Poverty Reduction Strategy (PRS). A Workshop was recently organized
with DFID and Bank support on developing indicators to measure the performance of social
services delivery within the PRSP framework.

Rural Water
Supply

The Water and Sanitation Program (WSP) is supported by 15 bilateral and multilateral donors,
including the Bank.

Agriculture and The Bank and other major donors, including AsDB and JBIC, have pooled resources to support
Irrigation
policy reforms and investments in irrigation and drainage under the Government's National
Drainage Program. The Bank and the Dutch government are supporting conmmunity irrigation
programs in Balochistan. The Bank is also working with the WWF on forestry and bio-diversity.
Human
Development

The Bank, in collaboration with other donors, including DFID, KfW, has provided support to
provincial education and health projects. Future support by the Bank will take the form of
programmatic support for district delivery of both education and health services.

Health

To combat HIV/AIDS, TB, we have collaborated with UNAIDS, UN Drug Control Program at
the policy and planning level.

PakistanCountry Assistance Strategy

Annex IV
Page I of 4

ANNEX IV: MILLENNIUM DEVELOPMENT GoALS (MDGs), TARGETS AND SELECT OUTPUT
INDICATORS FOR PAKISTAN

1.
This note summarizes the long term indicators consistent with the MDGs for Pakistan, the
baseline data issues, and the output indicators selected as part of the monitoring and evaluation exercise
for Pakistan's PRSP. The I-PRSP for Pakistan provides an elaborate M&E framework, outlining the
various issues surrounding the choice of indicators and the related sources of data and measurement (see
I-PRSP document, Annex 1, final version Dec 4b 2001). This note will also describe the progress made so
far on these technical issues as well as on the process of reaching a consensus on these and the
institutional accountabilities for this exercise.
Tracking Progress towards Millennium Development Goals
2.
Table I below summarizes the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs), and the long term
indicators that will be tracked at the national level, along with the sources for these indicators. The longterm indicators proposed to measure progress towards the MDGs are readily available from existing
databases. A few outstanding issues however remain, which require timely resolution.
> The challenge, however, is to reconcile the baselines in instances (e.g. gross enrollment rates)
where more than one source of information exist. The PRSP Implementation Committee under
the PRSP Secretariat (Ministry of Finance), in consultation with the relevant ministries and the
Federal Bureau of Statistics, would need to identify the source to be used for baseline and
tracking of such indicators. In the interim, we have recommended the Pakistan Integrated
Household Survey (PIHS 1998-99) as the preferred source, since it is a representative household
survey that is regularly fielded.' This will also ensure that capacity-building can be focused on
the agency currently accountable for the PIHS.
>

Pakistan does not have a national poverty line. The choice of a poverty line has been the source
of much debate over the years. Tracking progress towards the MDGs necessitates a decision on a
national poverty line that can be consistently updated over time to measure progress in reducing
poverty. A regional workshop sponsored by the World Bank in partnership with Pakistan
Institute of Development Economics has helped in building consensus which should result in the
selection of an official poverty line. The PRSP Implementation Committee is encouraged to play
a facilitating role in expediting this decision.

>

The indicators would also need to be disaggregated at the provincial level. Setting baselines for
provincial indicators, that are consistent with those of the national indicators, is straightforward
since the data sources for the most part can be disaggregated at the provincial level. However,
targets by province will need to be worked out with provincial governments. This process is
currently being initiated by the PRSP Secretariat. Ultimately these targets are endogenous to
implementation of the devolution plan. Devolution to the district level and below is currently
underway, for which the fiscal framework is yet to be full implemented. Therefore the exercise
of setting credible targets for individual provinces can only evolve when the devolution process
has been completed. In the interim, it would be best to focus on the national levels and arrive at a
resolution for the national indicators in Pakistan.

The PIHS closely follows the model of the Living Standards Measurement Surveys that are fielded regularly in a number of
developing countries.

PakistanCountry Assistance Strategy

Annex IV
Page2 of 4

3.
Given the issues raised above, particularly the ones outlined in the first two bullets, the targets
should be seen as indicative. Moreover, for some indicators that are monitorable (such as the ones in
Table 2), targets are not meaningful.
Tracking progress towards MDGs, which comprise of
internationally set goals, will be challenging, where the first step will be to assess how realistic such goals
are in the specific context of Pakistan. The Bank is facilitating this process in Pakistan, using SIMSIP (a
simulation software package developed by the Bank) to assess how realistic these targets are, in
conjunction with the exercise of costing the targets. The regional workshop made a beginning in this
direction, by conducting training sessions for representatives for all countries in the region, including
those from Pakistan.
Poverty Monitoring and Tracking of OutputIndicators

4.
In order to measure progress towards the MDGs, it will be necessary to track some output
indicators that change over short spans of time, are leading indicators for the goals, and provide feedback
to policymakers about the results of policy initiatives on the ground. Such indicators should be monitored
regularly - annually or semi-annually - so that the findings can inform policymakers on a continuous
basis. Table 2 provides a list of such output indicators for Pakistan. This list has evolved from the
monitoring framework provided by the I-PRSP, further refined at the workshop held by the PRSP
Secretariat to bring about consensus among provincial and district authorities on the selection of
indicators. Implementation of this monitoring mechanisms will require fnalization of the set of
indicators, setting up mechanisms to collect the information, and building capacity for rapid analysis of
the data gathered.
5.

The process outlined above entails the following steps in the context of Pakistan:
0 Evaluation of existing monitoring systems, like the management information systems for
education and health (NEMIS and HMIS), identifying bottlenecks and possible areas of
improvement. This is likely to be completed by May 1, 2002 with the help of DFID consultants.
>

Creating a database to measure the selected output indicators; this involves identifying new data
sources, as well as developing a survey-based tool that is easy to administer, implement, and
covers a large sample that is representative at the district level. Most importantly, the analysis of
the data must be completed with a quick turnaround time, to have maximum impact on policy
formulation.

>

In the context of Pakistan, given the criticality of improving service delivery, the survey tool
should collect information at the facility level, as well as the household level. This, when
triangulated with the expenditure tracking exercise (which is part of the proposed monitoring
framework), will provide a quick and effective diagnostic of progress in education, health and
targeting efficiency of the major poverty programs.

6.
We expect the full implementation of this monitoring exercise to be completed by the end of this
calendar year. A critical outstanding issue is to clarify the institutional arrangements and accountability
for implementing the monitoring exercise. Ongoing dialogue is expected to expedite this process. In the
context of Pakistan, institutional accountability and the roles and responsibilities of CIPRID and PRSP
Secretariat would need to be specified.

PakistanCountry Assistance Strategy

Annex IV
Page 3 of 4

Table 1: Tracking Progress Towards MDGs
MDGs
Economic well-being:
reducing the proportion of
poor living in extreme
poverty by at least half by
2015
Social development &
Empowerment of Women
Universal primary
education by 2015

>

>
>
>

>

>
>

Long Term Indicators
(Outcome)
Poverty headcount
Poverty gap ratio
Gini index of consumption
Percentage of rural population with
no ownership of agricultural land

Gross primary enrollment
Net primary enrollment
Literacy rate (15 and above)

Baseline (1998-99)2
32.6%
7.0
30.6
61.4%

> Targets to be determined

>
>
>

>

71%

>

80%

>

50.5% (urban: 66.5%,
rural: 45.2%)
42.5% (urban: 63%, urald:
34%)

>

59%
12% gap (Gross
enrollments:- Male: 87%,
female: 75%)
21% (Male: 70%, female:
49%)

>

>
Reduce gender disparity in
primary education by 2005

>
>

Medium-Term Targets (2004)

Difference in primary enrollments
(net and gross) between girls and
boys
Differences in literacy rates between
males and females

>

13.6 % (net enrollment);
18% (gross enrollment)

>

>

30.8% (male: 58%,
female: 27.2%)

>

Increase participation of
women in political
decision-making

>

Proportion of seats held by women
in national parliament

>

Available after national
elections in October, 2002

Reduce infant and child
(below age 5) mortality
rates by 2/3 of the 1990-91
rate, by 2015

>

Infant mortality rate

>

>

Reduce maternal mortality
by 3/4 between 1990 and
2015

65 per 1000 live births
To be determined

>

62%

>
>

Under-5 child mortality rate
Immunization rate (% of children
12-23 months old that are fully
immunized)

>
>

>

Births attended by skilled health
personnel (doctor/nurse/ Lady
Health Visitor)
Percentage of pregnant women
using prenatal care

>

19%

>

25%

>

31%

>

50%

>

39%

>

4.1

>

Provide access to
reproductive health services
through primary health care
system for all individuals of
appropriate ages by 2015

>

Contraceptive prevalence rate

>

28% (PRHFPS); 19.5%

Improvements in Other
Indicators

>

Population with access to safe
drinking water
Total fertility rate
Life expectancy at birth
% of TB cure rate

>

To be filled

>
>

4.5; 4.8 (PRHFPS)
To be filled

>

Unknown

>
>
>

2

>

90 per 1000 live births
(127 in 1991)
116 per 1000 live births
49%

Data source for all long-term indicators, unless otherwise specified, are from PIHS (1998-99). Other sources are: Pakistan
Reproductive Health and Family Planning Survey (PRHFPS) 2000-01.

Annex IV
Page 4 of 4

Pakistan Country Assistance Strategy

Table 2: Output Indicators for Poverty Monitoring (measured annually)
Access
>
>

Utilization Rates disaggregated by BHU/RHC and by curative and
preventive care; Source: HEMS
% of population covered by LHWs ; Source: LHW/MIS

Quality
% of FLCF (BHUs/RHCs) that were out of stock of 5 essential drugs,
or contraceptives for period of more than one month each in a given
year; Source: HMIS
> % of FLCF (BHUs/RHCs) with doctors and/or female paramedic
present; Source: Proposed Annual Facility Survey
> Number of female health providers trained in midwifery;
Source:Ministry/Departments of Health
>
Leading indicators to monitor
health outcomes

% of children aged 12-23 months fully immunized against DPT-3
Source: Annual Surveys conducted by independent agencies under the
GAVI initiative
Number of functional schools: facilities with physical infrastructure - at
least a building, toilet, drinking water
Source: NEMIS
Percentage of teachers with in-service training
Source: Proposed Annual Facility Survey; NEMIS
Leading indicators to monitor
education outcomes

Quality of schooling
>
>

Availability of textbooks, blackboard and chalk, student-teacher ratio;
Source: NEMIS
Teacher absenteeism: teacher present or not at the time of survey;
Source: Proposed Annual Facility Survey

Number of children of school age currently attending school; Source:
Proposed Annual Household Survey
Social Protection/SafetyNet Programs
>

Leain.idiatrsto monitor
Leadmig iedicators
anti-poverty programns

>
>
>
>

Employment generated through public works programs under Khushal
Pakistan Program; Source: Proposed Annual Household Survey
by type of assistance and province
Number of beneficiaries of Zakat
Number of borrowers and size of credit under PPAF and Khushali
Bank programs; Source: Proposed Annual Household Survey
Number and cornposition of small infrastructure projects and training
supported by microcredit
Number of beneficiaries by province (rural/urban) of the Food Support
Program; Source: Pakistan Bait-ul-Maal

Pakistan Country Assistance Strategy

Annex V
Page I of 6
ANNEX V: PAKISTAN COUNTRY PROGRAM MATRIX

Sirnit eic (O)bicties &
C'uliutntI()Iitconlie

Strartgics

(ou iint INrt'orio
l-a icce
inl(licalto-s Aghiost Sltrat*c>

Io(liicalors

(FYO3-05)
\I I(; Selll.vNaliuatioll

BG(Iistroilociits

Arluls

Majo RlZ tcla ctidvii ies
of ()tlile Io)Itori-s

Indicators

Maoeconomk StablGy
Despite good
* Targets from l-PRSP for
macroeconomic
fiscal consolidation,
management, the
domestic savings, debt
extemnal and
domestic public
debt are both quite
debtarebothquite
large and hence
there are still
concems over the
fragility of the
extemal position
and future growth
prospects. The
September 11
shock has also
increased the risks
to the balance of
payment position by
making more
uncertain an early
resumption of longterm private capital
infiows as well as
increased access to
intemational capital

* Ambitious fiscal

consolidation to
increase domestic
savings to finance new
investment and curb
unfavorable public debt
dynamics. This hinge
upon the
implementation of CBR
reform, and measures
to broaden the tax
base, induding
agricultural income, and
eliminate tax
exemptions. The
strategy also seeks to
re-orient expenditures
towards the social
sectbrs by reducing the
costs of domestic debt,
public enterprises, and
defense spending

* Improved CBR performance
* Higher Tax/GDP
*Reduced

Fiscal Deficit/GOP

* Sustainable current account

deficits
* Continued tight management
o xea omn
of extemal borrowing
* Sound financial position of
WAPDA

PRSP Progress
Report (FY04-05)
* SACs (FY03-05)
*

*

Macroeconomic
Stability
a Provinces fiscal
*

*

IMF lead role on support to
short-term macroeconomic
stabilization

Provincial
space restored
Adjustment
* Improved Public
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
Credits
~~~~~~~Reforms
sector management
(FYo3ec5)

* DPR (FY05)

Pove
Assessment
(FY05)
PbEet
* Public Expenditure
Review (FY03)
* Annual Public
Investment
Reviews (FY03-05)
* Trade Policy
Review (FY03)
.

markets
Restoring the Integrity and AccountabilityofStat insfftutons

* At the core of the
poor govemance
problem inPakistan
isthe leadership's
abuse of state
institutions,
widespread
iesregardfor t
disregard for the
separation of
powers and respect
for the rule of law

* Improvement in

* The Comptroller

govemment effectiveness
at federal, provincial, and
district levels
* Transparent budgetary
p e
processes
* Independent audinorg
* Improvement inoverall
quality of financial
management thru the

General of Accounts
(CGA) has formulated
an Action Plan to
improve financial
management
o eom fsm fte
country's fundamental
institutions of economic
and financial
management: the

MTBF

I_I_.__I_I

* Ad-hoc Public Accounts

Committees (PACs) have
deared at both the Federal and
Provincial levels the backlog of
Audit Reports not yet reviewed,
and take approprate follow-up
ato
* Furthering transparency and
accountability through
Freedom of Information,
effective functioning of the

* Country Financial

* Improved public

Accountability &
Assessment
(CFAA 11,
FY03)
* PIFRA 11
(FY04)

sector, accounting,
auditing, and
reporting capacity
* Improved public
sector financial
accountability
* Improved
procurement

PR1 F0)

* Statistical capacity building
* Accounting and auditing,

legal

Annex V
Page 2 of 6

Pakistan Country Assistance Strategy
es
St1artagicC Ohjcii%
D)ila";lstic

(outlan 01,tcome
indicator',

(oClnlowti'criorm)ance
I

strateAis

Central Bank of
Pakistan (SBP), the
Centrad Board of
Revenue (CBR), the
Auditor General and
Controller General of
Accounts, the police,
the judicial system,
and the civil service;
(ii)improved public
financial management,
accountability, and
increased
transparency and
information on
govemment activities
to facilitate public
Oversight; (iii)
devolution; (iv)an anticorruption drive; and (v)
prvatization and
deregulation to reduce
incentives for rentseeking behavior

* limited availability of
finitedancing
fromfweak
bility

financial secor

finan al sector
* SME sector
pariculadly
disadvantaged by

private investment

Icreased e ment

andkvaluceadded

disadovanaed byml-bsdanSPreforms,

N\1BG Self[\aIiation
Indictalors

\I;ajor ReIoted Acti\iIks
of, Olher D)ono,s

Public Accounts Committees,
agreement to and
actions on the outcomes of
the second phase of the
CFAA, and the establishment
of a lasting institutional basis
for the National Accountability
Bureau
* Proceedings of the Provincial

PACs opened to the media.
Promulgation of aProcurement
Ordinance National
Procurement Authority
established
* Better performance evaluation,
merit-based promotions, and
training programs, as well as
the implementation of the
reforms of the pay and pension
systems

* Lower compliance costs
reported inbusiness
Bureau, Central Board
environment surveys
of Revenue reform to
* Lower levels of effectve
reduce tax
administration and
protec6on
Higher FDI
Deruptioncost
Forerevion Task
Higher exDoolts
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~Force
to review and
*Hgeexotsuporting
simplify regulations
* Higher private investment

* Nabonal Accountability

* Phase out distortionary

frpoymen policies inautos,

and value added from
SMEs
* Greater private provision
of infrastructure

N\ 1W.; hitruillenits

~~~SvengIheding69EnbIng lnv.strnontCIInMa

______________

* Heavy burden of tax * Low tax and regulation
administration and
compliance costs
* Increased value added
regulation, and
from competitve
related corruption
* Unstable, distorted
industries
industrial policies
* Increased exports
* Increased availability of
* Anti-export policy
bias
bias
domestic financing for

WAlinst Slrateg\
Areas

atolic:AtS

chemicals, edible oils,
textile, sugar, fertilizer
and cement sectors
fIntroduce lower,

* Increase inoutput and

employment inSMES

* Sound financial positon of

WAPDA &KESC
contributing to
macrostability

* Trade Policy note
* Investment Climate

* Improvement in

provincial-level
adjustment lending
suTkporting relevant
relevant
cy

investment climate,
including regulatory
reforms to reduce
costs of doing
t b kibnng
sector
corporate
corporate
govemance,

investments

modemnization of the

study
* Na6onal and

*IFC

and MIGA

guarantees for

expogr-oented
manufacturing and
services
* FSAP

central bank's core

functions of pnce and
banking system
stability
* Banking sector

including

* Incentives framework
* Legal, judicial and

institutional frameworks
Finanal sector and
capital markets
Fin

Pakistan Country Assistance Strategy

Annex V
Page 3 of 6

Stiefi(ljectiN us &

Sti;alegius

I1ndic:lloi-S Age,
alsn
s S;110<ffi

liit'iraitol

* High regulatory and
policy rsks for
pnvate investment
inextractive
industnies and
infrastrudure
a

* Development of extractive
industr'es

\1(StliBGroil;c

(ouil

(oulill! ()Outcomie

D)i;wnostic

N\ IIG IllAll-tiilt'llts

A,
\rlls

multi-year tariffs setting
* Strengthen banking

*

Nh;jolrRel;lle(ld\AciNities

11;1:1ioll(I

o'tEl(IelCI Donllts

Iltli(ii lloiIS

* WAPDA corporatization

*

compieted
* Effective regulation thru
NEPRA

* IFC investments in

regulation, prudential
standards, supervision
Comme,cial bank
andommerclafank
KESC Privatized
financial and
operational
restructuring and
privatization

* Capital market
development
* Support development of
microfinance, SME
finance
* Strengthen regulatory
frameworks for
infrastructure and
extractive industries
* Allow private entry to
telecoms services
markets and privatize
PTCL
* Complete WAPDA's
corporatizabon
* Privatize FESCO and
KESC
* Privatize PPL, SSGC,
SNGC

l\

TA to SBP
private commercial
banks and NBFIs

* Bank Group

support for SME
financing

* Analytical work on

infrastructure and

*

*

*

*

extractive
industries,
regulatory and
pricing frameworks
PSAS privatization
advisory mandates
for FESCO
IFC/MIGA support
for private
infrastructure
Policy advice on
power sector
reform
IFC investments
and MIGA
guarantees in
extractive
industries

reduced costs,
reduced NPLs,
improved capital
adequacy, &
restructured balance
sheets
* Pivatizationof

banks, power &gas
utilities, and telecom

oEpne

cest

* Expanded access to

micro-credit
* Support to PRSP

.

Accelrat Rural Growth
* Skewed land
distibution and low
agricultural

* Higher Rural Growth
* Improved efficiency of

institutions inirrigation and

producrivity
drainage
* Weak link between
rural growth and
reduction of rural
poverty

* Policy dialogue
* Support to

decentralization

productivity
drainage

* Improved and expanded

irrigation and drainage
infrastructure
* Strengthened
community/farmer
organizalions

~ ~strategy
sWater Resource
Management Strategy

* Update knowledge on rural

* Rural DPR (FY03)

development
* Land and Water Rights Study

*'Water Sector
Report (FY04)

*

Devolufion and Delivery of
Rural Services

Provincial OnFarm Water
Management
Projects (Sindh,
NWFP)
* NDP supervision

* Full implementation

* The Water and Sanitation

of institutional and
physical rehabilitation

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
in I major
canal command

~ *~~~~~~~~~~reform
and multilateral donors
Agricultural policies, rural

(Nara Canal)
Improved land and
water markets
wat
ermarke
t y
* Reducedvulnerability

to drought

Program (WSP) is
supported by 15 bilateral
credit, irrigation and
draingage

Annex V
Page4 of 6

Pakistan Country Assistance Strategy
Silrategic Objecti%cs &

tintr I'ertorl ialic

(
Strat

(.oIIJltrx O1tcollime
Ild(icat ors

loldiclltors .kga,inlstStratcgv

ies

list
N. 13G( liit

IMajor
Relatedl Acli ities
ofO
Olier Dooiiors

\\VG Selll ;lilaitioll

eits

Ii1(livators

A reas

Educaoton
* Education service
delivery system in
crsis
* Low enrollment,
poor achievements,
poor quality of
education
* Very poor
govemance

* Implementation of Education

* Improved access to,

* Support for the

quality of, and equity in
primary education, moving
towards the MDG goal of
universal prmary
enrollment by 2015
* Closing of the gender gap
in pnmary and secondary
education by 2005

Education Sector
Reform (ESR) at
federal and provincial
levels
* Advisory services and
technical assistance for
the reforms of higher
education
Support to
decentralization
strategy

*

*
*

*

Reform Strategy
Strengthened and expanded
key public health programs,
including Lady Health Workers,
TB-Dots, EPI, polio
eradication, malaria, HIV/AIDS,
and family
planning/reproductive health
Improved govemance insocial
service delivery
Development of a reliable
monitoring system for HD
outcomes
Successful implementation of
district based delivery of health
and education services

* National Education

*

*

*

*
*

Assessment
(FY03, NEAS LIL)
Adjustment Credit
for Education
Sector Reform
(FY03-05)
Analytical work on
ESR and
monitodng of
MDGs
Support to
Provincial Reforms
(Sindh, NWFP,
FY03-05)
Support to SACs
Support to PRSP
(FY03-05)

* Implementation of

* Projectassistance(USAID,

Education Reform
Strategy
* Improved
govemance insocial
service delivery
* Development of a
reliable monitodng
system for HD
outcomes
* Successful
implementafion of
distridct based delivery
of education services

AsDB)

* Support for district
delivery of
education and
health services
_

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

* Low public
spending and poor
value for money
because of
govemance and

management
weaknesses
* Weak capacity in
the public sector for
policy formulation,
programming,
implementaflon,
and M&E
Poor qualit of

poortqualty f ar

. ,

_

._

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

* Reduce mortality and

morbidity with a focus on
women and children
* Reduce fertility
IC

Cuntt)y Outcomes inthe
I-PRSP,
to be achieved by
2003-04 include: to reduce
the IMR to 65/1000, to
reduce child mortality to
17/1000, to reduce the
TFR to 4.1 children per
woman, The l-PRSP also
sets targets interms of
water and sanitaion,

imperoved coverageofn

_

_

_

_

_

a

_

_

_

_

* Improving govemance

and the efficiency of
public expenditure
through devolution to
local govemrments and

other measure
,daou

,_ ,

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

distridct health systems
* Focusing on basic care
especially
communicable disease
control, child care and
reprodudive health

thth

.

-

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

Ongoing

* HIV/AIDS Prevention

attended by trained providers
to 25% by 2003-04
* Increase inthe %of fully
immunized children to 85% by

* Social Action

Project effective by
Q2 of FY03
* Lessons of SAPP II
adequately drawn in

* Increase inthe coverage of

prenatal care to 50% by 200304
* Increase inthe %of population
with access to LHWs to 90%
by 2003-04.
* Increase inthe CPR to 39% by

Dateveloping

O3-05)

* Increase inthe %of births

2003-04

* Developing effective

(FY

2003-04

Program Project II,
Northem Health
Education Project,

AAA/policy
dialogue
Planned
* HIV/AIDS
Prevention Project;
National and
Provincial-level
multisectoral
adjustment

operations with

the ICR
* HNP components in

adjustment
operations are
effective in
supporting major
reforms and
initiatives in line with
the government s

strategies and sought

. , ,

_

_

_

_

_

__.0

* ADB: Women's Health

Project, Reproductive
Health Project, technical
assistance for health
sector reform inNWFP

JJICA: program to eradicate
entlttns
neonatal tetanus.

* GAVI: assistance to the

immunization program
* WHO and other UN

agencies: various technical
assistance programs
andoer bile

agencies provide support

Pakistan CountryAssistance Strategy

l)ilgirgstic
ioII

services and

consumer abuse

Annex V
Page 5 of 6

SIralegic ()ObjectiNes &
(ort rtutcomille

I1lidtictors
%rles
education, and

( oriiiI
11ndical<or

Strategies
partnerships with the

consumption poverty

health and

on health and nutrition as a

improve the efficiency
of govemment-financed
health expenditure and
to improve the quality of
private health care
services
* Improving the
regulatory framework.
* Creating mass

households lacking

\\C; IWmsru-vlts

oIncrease in public expenditure

private sector both to

Important factors
outside the health
sector include
poverty, lack of
education
especially of
women,
environmental
factors, and many

I'Performance
.inst
Slira(t"!

education

percentage of GDP
* Increase in the share of non-

salary expenditures intotal
govemment health expenditure
* Increase inthe share of
govemment subsidy inhealth
services accruing to the poor
(Note: abaseline has to be

o Creafngmssinpbc

\\ 1( SellI:i; tioii
IiidIic:tl,ors

outcomes.

components; policy
dialogue; Public
Expenditure
Review (all
sedors)

\Iajm Rvlaicd \ctisities
(>it,Otlie- D)oIlors
for polio eradication
* EU: cofinancing of SAPPII

and free-standing technical
assistance program.

established first]

awareness inpublic
health matters
* Bridging nutibon gaps
in reproducive-age
women and young
children
* Promobing greater
gender equity
* Capacity building at the
Federal level and lower
levels

access to safe
water and sanitation

Pro-Poor Rural Infrastructureand Seflces and Social Protecthon
* Very poor rural
infrastructure and
social service
delivery systems
* High vulnerability of
rural poor to
idiosyncratic shocks

* Improved infrastructure

* Policy dialogue

quality, efficiency, and
growth
* Community driven

(Transport;
UrbanlWater)
* AM (Peshawar CDS;

development of local
service provision

Distict level needs and
capacity assessment
study)
* Implement Trade and
Transport Facilitation
program

* Rural asset base deepened

through rural community-based
infrastructure projects and
spread of micro-credit.

NWFP, FY03-05)
Infrastructure
(FY03)
HighwNHA

_

goverance and
improved delivery of
basic infrastrutdure

* Rural infrastructure, water

and sanitation, rural micro
credit

services at the local
level
* Rehabilitated
highways, improved
finamndal

Project (FY03)
* SupporttoLocal

strategy
_

* Strengthened

. ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~Rehabilitation
Higways
management

program

_

Adjustment
Programs (Sindht
* AJK Community

* Support to
decentralization
__ _ __ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _

* Support to PRSP
* Sub-national

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

~~~~~~~~~~~Gov.
Services
~~~~~~(FY04-05)_

_

_

_

_

_

Pakistan Country Assistance Strategy

Annex V
Page 6 of 6

StI-Ategic ObJecti%es &

Couintr.

I'ertoritiance

SeltfE\ahl:lutioll
licatoi-s

\[C

ID.i-ii-1ii.

Coininrv Ouitcome
Iu(licat ors

* Significant gender
gaps in both literary
and health status
* Institutional and
atIntitutdinnaland

* National Resettlement

* Indigenous peoples

* Changes inLaws to promote

* Support to PRSP

* National

Plan Policy
* National Gender Policy

policy gaps
* Dialogue on gender
* Support to
de tralizaoin

gender equity
* Resolution of outstanding
Resettlement cases

thru Social Risk
Assessment
(FY03)
* Country Program

Resettlement Plan
Policy
* National Gender
Policy

adistudinatlo

against women

Stnitegies

sbrategy

lIldicdors AgoAinist Stratleg\
Areiis
Pro-Gender-Equity Policies

\VBG Iistriumuenits

Rinfaiatosk
Management

(FY03-05)
* Country Gender
Assessment (CGA,

FY04)

. Resolution Of

outstandingof
Resettlement cases

\IajorRelatled A-eliilies

of OtlherIoiMors

* DFID: Women's Political

Participation and Gender
Sensitive Strategy, a
UNDP-Gender Equality
Umbrella Project; Family

Protection and Gender
Equality Project

* AsDB: Gender Reform TA

grant

Annex Bl
Page I of 2

PakistanCountry Assistance StrateV

Pakistan at a glance
POVERTY and SOCIAL
Pakistan

South
Asia

LowIncome

138.1
440
61.0

1,355
460
617

2,459
420
1,030

Population I(%)
Labor force (%)

2.4
3.0

1.9
2.4

1.9
2.4

Most recent estimate (latest year avallable, 199440)
Poverty (%of population below national poverty line)
Urban population (%of total population)
Life expectancy at birth (years)
Infant mortality (per 1,000 live births)
Child malnutrition (%of children under 5)
Access to an improved water source (%of population)
Illiteracy (%of population age 15+)
Gross prmary enrollment (%of school-age population)
Male
Female

33
37
63
90
38
88
54
69
77
60

28
63
74
47
87
45
100
110
90

32
59
77

2000
Population, mid-year (millions)
GNI per capita (Atlas method, US$)
GNI (Atlas method, US$ billions)

S15/02

Development diamond
Life expectancy

Average annual growth, 1994400

KEY ECONOMIC RATIOS and LONG-TERM TRENDS
1980

GDP (USS billions)
Gross domestic investmenVGDP
Exports of goods and services/GDP
GrossdomesticsavingstGDP
Gross national savings/GDP
Current account balance/GDP
Interest payments/GDP
Total debtGDP
Total debt service/exports
Present value of debUGDP
Present value of debVexports

Access to improved water source

..

1990

1999

2000

40.0
18.9
15.5
11.1
14.2

58.6
15.6
15.1
10.6
11.0

61.6
15.6
15.5
12.1
12.0

-4.8
1.0
41.9
18.3

-4.7
1.3
51.6
23.3

-4.6
1.6
57.8
29.4
42.5
249.0

-3.6
1.4
52.2
26.7

..
..

Gmss
primary
enrollment

76
38
96
102
86

23.7
18.5
12.5
6.9
13.7

..
..

GN
GNI
per
capita

Paldstan
Low-income group

Economic ratloe
Trade

Domestic
savings

Investment

Indebtedness
(average annual growth)
GDP
GDP per capita
Exports of goods and services

1980-90

199040

1999

2000

200044

6.3
3.5
8.4

3.7
1.2
1.7

3.7
1.2
-2.9

4.4
1.9
16.0

4.4
1.9
0.5

1980

1990

1999

2000

Growth of Investment and GDP (%)

29.5
24.9
15.9
45.6
83.1
10.0
24.1

26.0
25.2
17.4
48.8
73.8
15.1
23.4

27.0
23.7
15.5
49.2
79.0
10.4
20.0

26.3
22.8 _
15.1
50.9
76.9
11.0
19.1

10

1980-90

199040

1999

2000

4.3
7.3
7.7
6.8

4.4
3.9
3.5
4.4

1.9
4.9
4.1
5.0

4.3
10.3
5.8
2.1

4.9
0.7
1.8
2.5

7.5
-6.9
-9.2
-5.4

Pakistan
Low-income group

STRUCTURE of the ECONOMY

(%of GDP)
Agriculture
Industry
Manufacturing
Services
Private consumption
General govemment consumption
Imports of goods and services
(average annual growth)
Agriculture
Industry
Manufacturing
Services
Private consumption
General govemment consumption
Gross domestic investment
imports of goods and services

0

*

s

9a5

5o

-10

GDI

-- *--GDP

Growth of exports and Imports (%)

6.1
20
-0.1 ls
1.4
4.8
09
0.9
7.0
4.1

-2.3

10
-20

-Exprts

O Imports

_____

The diamonds show four key indicators in the country (in bold) compared with its Income-group average. If data are missing, the diamond will
be incomplete.
Note: 2000 data are preliminary estimates. The debt figures in this table are from the WB debt reporting system and may differ from those in
Annex 87 because they cover calendar years rather than Pakistan's fiscal years (July 1 -June 30).

AnnexB1

Pakrstan Country Assistance Strategy

Page 2 of2

Pakistan
PRICES and GOVERNMENT FINANCE

DomeStIc prices
(%change)
Consumer prices

Implicit GDP deflator
Government finance
(%of GDP, Indudes cun ent grants)
Current revenue
Current budget balance
Overall surplustdefict

1980

1999

2000

5.7

3.6

6.5

5.9

3.7

18.0
-1.0
-8.6

16.2
-3.0

16.6

*6.0

-6.3

1990
..

..

9.1

Inflation I%)
..
10

0
..
..
..

es

97

00

99

08

00

0 CPI

GDP deflator

-3.5

1

TRADE
millions)
(UJS$
Total exports (fbb)
Cotton
Rice
Manufactures

Total Imports (clt)

1980

1990

1999

2000

2,365

4,927
443
239
2,489

7,528
2

..

7,411

6,993

8,191
73
540
7,579

1,496

896

..
..

1.066
1,163
1,788

1,477
2,921

2,793
2,705

87

84

87
100

93
91

..
..

1,371

(ci-)
TrJFtCaoodmporl

Fuel and energy
Capital goods
iExport price index (1995=-100)

Import price Index (1995=100)
Terms of trade (1995=100)

..
..
..

102
..
..

533

9,613

Export ardiIport levels (US$millf.
10,00

10.00_

9,602

5.

nl

r

_

0
04

90

05

97
IJimports

oExpcrts

BALANCE of PAYMENTS

(USS Millions)
Exports of goods and services
Imports of goods and services
Resource balance
Net Income
Not current transfers

Current account balance
Rnancing items (net)
Changes In net reserves
Nemo:
Reserves Including gold (USS milions)
Conversion rate (DEC, local/USS)

1980

1990

1999

2000

2,958
5,709
-2,751

6,217
9,351
-3,134

8,842
11,737
-2,895

9,575
11,762
-2,187

-1,808

-2,018

-281

-986

1,895

2,210

2,005

1,997

-1,137

-1,890

-2,698

-2,208

1,890
0

3,952
-1,254

2,000
208

1,311
21.4

2,228
50.1

1,606
51.7

..
..

9.9

Cunent account bWance to GDP I%)
95

7

9

gs

-2
-4t

||
lI

EXTERNAL DEBT and RESOURCE FLOWS

1980

1990

1999

2000

9,931
330
821

20,663
1,816
2,106

33,888
3,315
3,905

32,182
3,093
3,828

Total debt service
IBRD
IDA

870
58
9

1,926
199
34

2,940
434
88

2,850
408
93

Composition of net resource flows
OfficIal grants
Official creditors
Private creditors
Foreign direct Investment
Portfolio equity

268
544
167
68
0

538
913
-63
200
87

573
876
-477
472
28

926
452
-361
471
74

185
90
29

972
494
92

808

61

402

345

39
22

141
261

237
108

0
301
291
10
210
-201

(USS millIons)
Total debt outstanding and disbursed
IBRD
IDA

World Bank program
Commitments
DIsbursements
Princlpal repayments
Net flors
Interest payments
Net transfers
Development Economics

Composition of 2000 debt (US$ mill.)
G: 1.519

A 3093
s:3,828

F 3954

c: 1.59

628
283

E: 11.659
_

|:

A -IBRD
B-IDA
C-IMF

D- Other rsilteomI

:.60

E -Blater
F -Prvate
G -Short4orm

|

'lo

5115/02

Note: 2000 data are prelimInary estimates. The debt figures In this table are from the WB debt reporting system and may differ from those In Annex
B7 because they cover calendar years rather than Pakistan's fiscal years (July 1 -June 30).

Annex B2
Page I of I

Pakistan Country Assistance Strategy

Selected Indicators* of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
As of 05/03/2002
Indicator
PortfolioAssessment

1999

2000

2001

2002

Number of Projects Under Implementation a
Average Implementation Period (years) b
Percent of Problem Projects by Number a, c
Percent of Problem Projects by Amount a, c
Percent of Projects at Risk by Number a, d
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount a, d
Disbursement Ratio (%) e

23
4.3
13
33.8
13
33.8
18.2

16
4
18.8
19.6
18.8
19.6
22.1

16
3.9
6.3
20.6
6.3
20.6
30.9

16
4
18.8
41
25
60.5
44.3

Yes
3,507
106

Yes
3,384
123

No
2,041
93

Yes4f
(est.) 1,306
(est.) 59

PortfolioManagement
CPPR during the year (yes/no)
Supervision Resources (total US$'000)
Average Supervision (US$'000/project)

Memorandum Item
Proj Eval by OED by Number
Proj Eval by OED by Amt (US$ millions)
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Number
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt

Since FY 80 Last Five FYs
29
121
8072.8
2894.7
24
24.1
31.3
28.9

As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY).
Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio.
Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) and/or implementation progress (IP).
As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program
Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the
beginning of the year: Investment projects only.
f. Includes quarterly and biannual portfolio reviews with federal and provincial governmnets.
* All indicators are for projects active in the Portfolio, with the exception of Disbursement Ratio,
which includes all active projects as well as projects which exited during the fiscal year.
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.

Palistan County Assistance StrateV

Annex B3
Page I of 2

Pakistan - Proposed IBRD/IDA Base-Case Lending Program
(As of May 15, 2002)

Fiscal
Year
2002

Project Name

USS(M)

Strategic
Rewards
(H/MEL) a!
M
H
H
M
H
H

Implementation
Risks
(HIM/L) a!
H
M
M
L
H
H

Project
Drought Emergency Recovery Assessment c/
BSRPP
AJK Community Infrastructure Services Project
TA for Banking Sector
SAC II
Sindh SAC
Result

IDA
130
300
20
27
500
100
947

2003

Highways Rehabilitation
HIV/AIDS Prevention Project
National Education Assessment System LIL
Education Reform SAC
Tax Admin. Reform
Eco Reform TA
Result

100
20
5
150
100
25
400

M
H
H
H
H
H

M
H
H
M
H
H

2004

PIFRA II
Sindh On Farm Water Management
Local Government Support
SAC III
Result

100
50
50
200
400

H
L
H
H

H
M
H
H

2005

Local Government Support
Water Sector Management
SAC IV
Result

100
100
200
400

H
H
H

H
M
H

b/
b/

Overall Result

2,147

a/ Indicates whether Strategic Rewards and implementafton Risks are expected to be High (H), Moderate (M), or Low (L).
b/ Operations already approved in FY02.
c/ $130 million of Drought Emergency Recovery Assessment Is a reallocation of existing commitments under SAPP-I1 and NDP.

Annex B3
Page 2 of2

Pakistan - Proposed IBRD/IDA High-Case Lending Program
(As of May 15, 2002)

Project Fiscal
Name ProjeaName

Fscal
Year
2002

b/
b/

2003

Project
Drought Emergency Recovery Assessment cl
BSRPP
AJK Community Infiastucture Services Project
TA for Banking Sector
SAC II
Sindh SAC
Result

2005

Overall Result

Implementation
Risks

lDA
130
300
20
27
500
100
947

(H/M/L) al
M
H
H
M
H
H

(H/M/L) a/
H
M
M
L
H
H

90
100
20
5
150
100
110

H
M
H
H
H
M
H

H
M
H
M
H
M
H

USS(AI)
IBRD

NWFP PSAC
Highways Rehabilitation
HIV/AIDS Prevention Project
National Education Assessment Systern LIL
Education Reform SAC
Tax Admin. Reform
Provincial Adjustment Credits (Sindh, NWFP)
Eco Reform TA

2004

~~~~~~~~Strategic
Rewards

UUM

25

Resuk

600

PIFRA II
Sindh On Farm Water Management
Provincial Adjustment Credits II
SAC III
Local Government Support
Result

H
L
H
H
H

H
M
H
H
H

300

100
50
250
50
150
600

H

M

300
300

100
100
100
250
50
600

H
H
H

H
H
H

600

2,747

Local Government Support
PIFRA III
Water Sector Management
Provincial Adjustment Credits III
SAC IV
Resulk

300

a/ Indicates whether Strategic Rewards and lmplementation Risks are expeced to be High (H), Moderate (M), or Low (L).
b/Operations already approved inFY02.
c/ $130 million of Drought Emergency Recovery Assessment is a reallocation of existing commitments under SAPP-Il and NDP.

Pakistan Country Assistance Strategy

Annex B3
Page3 of 3

Pakistan - IFC and MIGA Program, FY 1999-2002

IFC approvals (US$m)
Sector (%)
FINANCE & INSURANCE
NONMETALLIC MINERAL
OIL, GAS AND MINING
TEXTILES, APPAREL & LE
Total
Investment instrument(%)
Loans
Equity
Quasi-Equity
Other
Total
MIGA guarantees (US$m)

1999

2000

2001

2002

83.00

55.10

52.10

24.04

60
40

0

100

100
77
23
100

100

77
100

0

100
100

23
100

100

147.11

147.54

96.76

80.5

Pakistan CountryAssistance StrategY

Annex B4
Page I of I
Paidstan - Summary of Nonlending Services
As of May 3, 2002

Product

Cempletlon FY

Cost (US$000)

Audience a/

Objective bl

2001
2001
2001
2001
2001
2001
2001
2001
2001
2001
2001
2002
2002
2002
2002

190
87
12
110
120
43
181
90
219
333
115
206
43
188
92

B, G, P
B, G, P
B, G, P
B, G, P
B, G, P
B, G, P
B, G
B, G
B, G
B, G
B, G
B, G
B, G, P
B, G, P
B, G, P

K
K
K
K
K
K
K
K
K
K
K
K
K
K
K

2002
2002
2002
2002

124
122
582
150

B, G, P
B, G, P
B, G, P
B, G, P

K
K
K
K

2003
2003
2003
2003
2003
2003
2003
2003
2003
2003
2003
2003
2003
2003

100
100
100
100
100
100
150
150
100
150
130
100
100
100

B, G, P
B, G, P
B, G
B, G, P
B, G, P
B, G, P
B,G
B, G, P
B, G, P
B, G, P
B, G, P
B, G, P
B, G, P
B, G, P

K
K
K
K
K
K
K
K
K
K
K
K
K
K

Recent completions
Punjab Public Expenditure Review
Policy Note on SME
Note for Pakistan Dev. Forum
Financial Accountability Assessment
Oil and GasSector Policy Advice 11
CAS Progress Report
TA for EnegySector Dialogue &Policy Advice
TA for Provincial Health
TA for Immunization and HIV/AIDs
TA for Privatization
TA for Financial Setor Monitoring
TA for Subnational Economic Reform
Joint Staff Assessment -IPRSP
Development Policy Review
Private Sector Strategy
Underway
Environment Strategy
Transport Sector Strategy
Poverty Assessment
Country Assistance Strategy
Planned
Investment Climate
Provincial Economic Reform
Policy Note to New Government
JSA -PRSP
CFAA nI
CPAR 11
Oil&GasSectorReview
Financial Sector Assessment
CAS Progress Report
Public Expenditure Review
Rural Development Policy Review
Power Sector Review
Sindh Rural Development Policy Review
Social Risk Assessment
a/ Government (G), Bank (B), public dissenmination (P)
b/ Knowledge generation (K)

Pakistan Counny Assistance Strategy

Annex B5
Page I of)I

Pakistan Social Indicators
Latest single year

POPULATION
Total populaton, mid-year (millions)
Growth rate (%annual average for period)
Urban population (%of population)
Total fertlity rate (births per woman)
POVERTY
(%of population)
National headcount index
Urban headcount index
Rural headcount index
INCOME
GNI per capita (USS)
Consumer price index (1995=100)
Food price index (1995=100)
INCOMEICONSUMPTION DISTRIBUTION
Gini index
Lowest quintie (%of income or consumption)
Highest quintile (%of income or consumption)
SOCIAL INDICATORS
Public expenditure
Health (%of GDP)
Educaton (%of GNI)
Social security and welfare (%of GDP)
Gross prlmary school enrollment rate
(%of age group)
Total
Male
Female
Access to an Improved water source
(%of population)
Total
Urban
Rural
Immunization rate
(%under 12 months)
Measles
DPT
Child malnutition (%under 5 years)
Life expectancy at birth
(years)
Total
Male
Female
Mortalty
Infant (per thousand live births)
Under 5(perthousand live births)
Adult (15-59)
Male (per 1,000 population)
Female (per 1,000 population)
Matemal (per 100,000 live births)
Births attended by skilled health staff (%)

Same reglonlincome group

1970-75

1980-85

1994-00

South
Asia

LowIncome

71.0
3.2
26.4
7.0

94.8
2.7
29.8
6.5

138.1
2.4
37.0
4.8

1,354.7
1.9
28.4
3.4

2,458.7
1.9
31.9
3.7

460
136

420
142

..

..

..

..

..

..

150
20

..

8.0
41.8

..

2.2
0.3

32.6

330
42
39

440
146
134

..

*-

31.2
9.5
41.1

..

0.9

0.9

2.7

3.1

1.2
3.3

100
110
90

96
102
86

..

2.9

0.9

..

..

..

..

..

..

69
77
60

..

38
77
22

88
96
84

87
92
85

76
88
70

81
80
38

63
75
47

64
70

..

38
77
22

52
52
52

57
57
58

63
62
64

63
62
63

59
58
60

134
183

122
161

90
126

74
99

77
116

339
381

283
291

186
153
340

223
212

288
258

..
..

..
..

..
..

..

..

49

CAS Annex B5. This table was produced from the CMU LDB system.
Note: 0 or 0.0 means zero or less than half the unit shown. Net enrollment ratios exceeding 100 Indicate discrepancies
between the estimates of school-age population and reported enrollment data.

02/13/02

PakistanCountry Assistance Strategy

Annex B6
Page I of 2

Pakistan - Key Economic Indicators
Actual
Estimate
1999
2000
2001

2002

Projected
2003
2004

2005

100.0
27.0
23.7
49.2

100.0
26.3
22.8
50.9

100.0
25.2
23.5
51.3

100.0
25.1
23.7
51.2

100.0
25.3
23.8
50.9

100.0
25.1
24.0
50.9

100.0
24.9
24.4
50.7

Total Consumption
Gross domestic investment
Government investment
Private investment 1/

89.4
15.6
3.7
11.9

87.9
15.6
3.2
12.4

89.0
14.7
2.7
12.0

87.8
15.2
3.4
11.8

86.5
16.2
3.6
12.6

85.5
16.8
3.9
12.9

84.9
17.0
4.0
13.0

Exports (GNFS)b
Imports (GNFS)

15.1
20.0

15.5
19.1

17.2
21.0

17.3
20.2

17.4
20.5

18.3
21.3

18.5
21.1

Grossdomesticsavings
Gross national savingsC

10.6
11.0

12.1
12.0

11.0
13.3

12.2
15.8

13.5
17.0

14.5
18.3

15.1
18.8

58615

61623

59605

59783

63038

64368

69198

470

440

410

400

410

410

430

Real annual growth rates (%, calculated from 1981 prices)
Gross domestic product at market prices
3.7
4.4
Gross Domestic Income
3.0
3.0

3.4
3.1

3.4
3.8

5.2
6.1

5.5
5.8

5.5
5.8

Real annual per capita growth rates (%, calculated from 1981 prices)
Gross domestic product at market prices
1.2
1.9
0.9
Total consumption
3.1
-0.9
2.0
Private consumption
4.9
-1.5
2.5

0.9
0.3
0.1

2.7
2.6
2.9

3.0
2.5
3.0

3.0
2.9
2.6

Indicator
National accounts (as % of GDP)
Gross domestic product'
Agriculture
Industry
Services

Memorandum items
Gross domestic product
(US$ million at current prices)
GNP per capita (US$, Atlas method)

Balance of Payments (USS miMons)
Exports (GNFS)b
Merchandise FOB
Imports (GNFS)b
Merchandise FOB
Resource balance
Net current transfers
Current account balance
Net private foreign direct investment
Long-term loans (net)
Official
Private
Other capital (e, minc.erors & ommissions)
Change in reservesd
Memorandum items
Resource balance (% of GDP)
Real annual growth rates ( YR81 prices)
Merchandise exports (FOB)
Manufactures
Merchandise imports (CIF)

8842
7528
11737
9613
-2895
2005
-2698

9575
8191
11762
9602
-2187
1997
-2208

10269
8926
12492
10171
-2223
2429
-1946

10336
8914
12104
9780
-1768
2459
-1365

10991
9588
12951
10496
-1960
2345
-1659

11776
10351
13690
11187
-1914
2469
-1375

12783
11230
14631
12032
-1848
2543
-1261

472
591
876
-285
2889
-1254

471
-1452
452
-1904
2981
208

322
-655
-480
-175
2967
-688

200
-611
251
-862
2597
-822

400
-123
155
-278
2812
-1431

500
686
81
605
1362
-1173

500
1276
-824
2100
200
-714

-4.9

-3.5

-3.7

-3.0

-3.1

-3.0

-2.7

-6.6
-5.0
0.8

13.9
11.2
-6.5

6.8
6.1
-12.1

-4.1
-11.0
-6.2

0.9
-3.6
9.3

3.7
0.9
5.4

4.1
1.6
6.1

(Continued)

Annex B6
Page2 of 2

Pakistan Country Assistance Strategy

Paldstan - Key Economic Indicators

(Continued)
Indicator

1999

Public finance (as % of GDP at market prices)'
16.2
Current revenues
19.2
Current expenditures
-3.0
Current account surplus (+) or deficit (-)
3.0
Capital expenditure
Foreign financing
5.0
Monetary lndicators
M2/GDP
Growti of M2 (%)
Private sector credit growth /
total credit growth (%)
Price indkces( YR81 =100)
Merchandise export price index
Merchandiseiimportpriceindex
Merchandise terms of trade index
Real effective exchange rate (US$/LCU)f
Consumer price index (% change)
GDP deflator (% change)

a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.

2000

Estimate
2001

2002

Projected
2003
2004

2005

16.6
20.1
-3.5
2.8
2.2

15.7
18.9
-3.2
2.2
3.2

17.0
19.1
-2.1
3.6
2.4

17.2
17.8
-0.6
3.6
2.3

17.3
16.6
0.7
4.0
1.6

17.9
16.4
1.5
4.2
0.5

43.6
6.2
187.2

44.0
9.4
19.8

44.0
9.0
107.3

45.1
9.1
28.4

45.0
9.1
15.0

44.7
9.0
46.6

44.4
9,0
68.8

97.5
91.5
106.6
114.1

94.3
97.3
96.8
113.4

91.9
108.2
84.9
110.5

95.7
111.0
86.3
108.7

102.0
109.0
93.6
106.5

106.3
110.2
96.4
104.4

110.8
111.7
99.2
104.4

5.7
5.9

3.6
3.7

4.4
5.5

3.0
2.9

3.9
4.0

4.0
4.0

4.0
4.0

GDP at factor cost
"GNFS" denotes "goods and nonfactor services."
Includes net unrequited transfers excluding official capital grants.
Includes use of IMF resources.
Consolidated central government.
"LCU" denotes "local currency units." An increase in US$/LCU denotes depreciation.

PakistanCounty Assistance Strategy

Annex B7
Page I of I

Pakistan - Key Exposure Indicators

Indicator
Total debt outstanding and
disbursed (TDO) (US$m)a
Net disbursements (US$m) 2
Total debt service (TDS)
(US$m)a
Debt and debt service indicators
TDO/XGSb
TDO/GDP
TDS/XGS

2002

Projected
2003
2004

2005

29318

29757

31398

31099

31400

31523

31697

511

439

1641

-299

301

123

174

3726

3771

3369

3580

3400

3266

3200

267.2
50.0
34.0

278.8
48.3
35.3

273.8
52.7
29.4

255.7
52.0
29.4

240.4
49.8
26.0

225.9
49.0
23.4

210.4
45.8
21.2

10.9
45.7

11.2
39.1

11.8
45.8

10.5
45.3

11.1
51.3

11.7
54.9

12.2
53.4

3.7
3438
2.9
3733

4.0
3332
2.7
4123

3.5
3043
2.5
4024

3.1
2861
2.3
4809

2.9
2654
2.1
5232

2.7
2408
1.9
5586

2.6
2132
1.7
5897

396
110

347
108

0
0
95

0
2
22

147

143

97

81

(%)

IBRD exposure indicators (%)
IBRDDS/publicDS
Preferred creditor DS/public
DS (%)C
IBRD DS/XGS
IBRD TDO (US$m)d
Share of IBRD portfolio (%)
IDA TDO (US$m)d
IFC (US$m)
Loans
Equity and quasi-equity /e
Guarantee, Standby & Risk Management
MIGA
MIGA guarantees (US$m)

Actual
Estimate
1999
2000
2001

a. Includes public and publicly guaranteed debt, use of IMF credits, and net shortterm capital.
b. "XGS" denotes exports of goods and services, including workers' remittances.
c. Preferred creditors are defined as IBRD, IDA, the regional multilateral development banks, the IMF, and the
Bank for International Settlements.
d. Includes present value of guarantees.
e. Includes equity and quasi-equity types of both loan and equity instruments.

Annex B8
Page I of3

Pak/stan Country Assistance Strategy

Pakitan -Status of Bank Group Operations
As of May 3. 2002
IBRD/IDA
Total Disbursed (Active)
of which has been repaid
Total Disbursed (Closed)
of which has been repaid
Total Disbursed (Active + Closed)
of which has been Tepaid
Total Undisbursed (Active)
Total Undisbursd (Closed)
Total Undisbursed (Active +Closed)

Active Projects

Project ED Project Name
P010482
P055292
P075172
P010470
P035823
P039281
P036015
POIOSOO
P037834
P010478
P071092
P034301
P049791
P037835
P034101
P056213

Balochistan Commnig &Agri.
BSRPP
Drought Emerg Recovery Ait
FinSectorDeepening&lIntrmed
GEF-Protected Areas Mgmt
Ghazi Barotha lydrop
lmpr Fin Rep &Audit
NationalDrainageProject
Northen Education
NWFP Community Infns
NWFPOn-FarmnW Mgml
PhaseOutofODSPre
Poverty Alleviation Fund
SocialActionPrg.ll
TelecomReg. Private
Trade &TanspoutRT

803.1
15.96
9,975.90
3,708.30
10,778.99
3,724.29
571.09
6.91
578

Lat PSR
Supervison Rating
Development Implementation
Objective
Progeus
Fcl
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
U
S
S

S
S
S
S
S
U
S
U
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S

Difference Between
Expected and Actual
Disburements a

Orignal Amount In USS M
Year

1996
2002
2001
1995
2001
1996
1997
1998
1998
1996
2001
1997
1999
1998
1996
2001

Overall result

a Intended disbursements to date minus actual disbursements to date as projected at appaisaL

1BRD

IDA

GRANT

CanceL Undsb.

Orig. Frm Rev'd

3.1
207.6

26.7
300.0

-

188.0
-

216.0
350.0
28.8
284.8
22.8
21.5
21.3

0.2
0.1

13.0
90.0
250.0
13.1

35.0
3.0
601.0

1,048.9

13.0

201A

5.4
(95.5)

5.5

-

11.4

61.0
18.5
145.4
14.4
6.6
20.2
9.4
57.6
18A
4.9
1.9

199.4
59.5
20.5
107.0
15.6
10.1
(0.5)
(2.1)
(4.5)
(1.0)
18.1
0.3

580A

332.3

63.4

11.4

37.3

1.11

8.1

AnnexB8
Page2 of 3

Pakistan CountryAssistance Strategy
Paidstan
STAT'EMENT OF IFC's
Held and Disbursed Portfolio
As of March, 2002

(Amounts In US Doilar Millions)

IFC Data Warehouse

IFC Held

IFC Disbursed
Equity

Quasi

Partic

0.00

0.29

0.00

0.00

0.00

30.82

9.50

0.00

0.00

15.58

9.50

0.00

26.83

2.81

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

FY Approval

Company

Loan

Equity

Quasi

Partic

1995

AbamcO Mgmt

0.00

0.29

0.00

0.00

1995

AES Lal Pir

30.82

9.50

0.00

1996

AES Pak Gen

15.58

9.50

0.00

26.83

1996

Atlas Inv Bank

2.81

0.00

0.00

0.00

Loan

1994

Atlas Lease

2.40

0.36

0.00

0.00

2.40

0.36

1998

BRRIL

0.00

0.24

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.24

0.00

0.00

1991/94/95

BRRIM

0.00

0.76

15.00

0.00

0.00

0.76

15.00

0.00

1995

BSJS Fund

0.00

0.50

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.50

0.00

0.00

1993

CDCPL

0.00

0.16

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.16

0.00

0.00

5.61

5.10

0.00

2.50

1993/97/01

Crescent Greenwd

5.71

5.10

0.00

2.50

1996

Crescent IBank

6.75

0.00

0.00

0.00

6.75

0.00

0.00

0.00

1994/95/96/00

D.G. Khan

10.82

5.49

0.00

30.61

10.82

5.49

0.00

30.61

0.00

6.86

0.00

0.00

0.00

5.14

3.90

0.00

3.75

1998

Engro Asahi

6.86

0.00

0.00

1991/95/97

Engro Chemical

5.14

3.90

0.00

3.75

1996

EngroVopak

7.13

0.00

0.00

2.97

7.13

0.00

0.00

2.97

1993/94

Fauji Cement

22.40

5.00

0.00

0.00

22.40

5.00

0.00

0.00

1990/92/96

FIIB

1.54

1.50

0.00

0.00

1.54

1.50

0.00

0.00

1995

First Crescent

0.00

0.00

5.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

5.00

0.00

1994/96

First Leasing

1.25

1.69

0.00

0.00

1.25

1.69

0.00

0.00
0.00

0.00

0.00

10.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

10.00

18.90

4.10

0.00

20.61

18.90

4.10

0.00

20.61

Hala Spinning

3.27

0.00

0.00

0.00

3.27

0.00

0.00

0.00

1991/95

IHFL

1.30

0.87

0.00

0.00

1.30

0.87

0.00

0.00

1992/96

JSCL

1995

First UDL

1996

Gul Ahmed

1988

0.00

1.11

0.00

0.00

0.00

1.11

0.00

0.00

6.30

0.00

18.30

16.25

6.30

0.00

18.30

1995

Kohinoor

16.25

1994/95/97/00

Maple Leaf

27.19

5.72

0.00

31.25

27.19

5.72

0.00

31.25

0.00

0.00

0.00

1.41

0.00

0.00

0.00

1.25

0.00

0.00

2.81

1.25

0.00

0.00
0.00

1993/01

Muslim Comm Bai

1.41

1984/94

NDLC

2.81

1994/96

Orix Finance

0.00

0.58

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.58

0.00

1994/98

Orix Leasing

2.81

1.25

0.00

0.00

2.81

1.25

0.00

0.00

195/180/82t87/91/
94/95
1994

Packages

2.25

3.46

0.00

0.00

2.25

3.46

0.00

0.00

PACRA

0.00

0.10

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.10

0.00

0.00

1993

Pakistan Service

1.25

3.00

0.00

0.00

1.25

3.00

0.00

0.00

1.48

0.00

0.00

1995

Pakistan UnitTr

0.00

1.48

0.00

0.00

0.00

1994

PI&CL

1.25

0.00

0.00

0.00

1.25

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

1991/94/95

PILCO

1983/84/94/95

PPL

1991

Prudential

2.50

1.04

0.00

0.00

2.50

1.04

-0.00

1.56

0.00

0.00

0.00

1.56

0.00

0.00

0.40

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.40

0.00

Note: Values do not reflect off.bdance sheet items such as guarantee amd risk mnagment products
Run Date: May 06. 2002
Lat Data Update: March 31, 2002

0.00

0.00

Page:1 of2

Pakistan Country Assistance Strategy

Annex B8
Page 3 of 3

Pakistan
STATEMENT OF IFC's
Held and Disbursed Portfolio
As of Marb, 2002

IFC Data Warehouse

(Amounts In US Dollar Millions)
IFC Held

-

IFC Disbursed

-

FY Approval

Company

Loan

Equity

Quasi

Partic

Loan

Equity

Quasi

Partic

1994

Regent Knitwear

6.00

0.00

0.00

2.80

6.00

0.00

0.00

2.80

1995

Rupafab

3.67

0.00

0.00

0.00

3.67

0.00

0.00

0.00

1993/96/01

Sarah Textiles

1.28

0.00

0.00

0.00

1.28

0.00

0.00

0.00

1996

Uch Power

38.05

0.00

0.00

71.24

33.09

0.00

0.00

56.20

249.40
76.22
30.00 210.86
1Approvals Pending Commitment

244.34

76.22

30.00

195.83

Total Portfolio:
FY Approval

Project Name

2001

Lasmo Pakistan

2002

Microbank
Total Pending:

Loan

Equity

Quasi

Partic

40.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

1.64

0.00

0.00

40.00

1.64

0.00

0.00

Note: Values do no reflect offbalance sheet items such as 5uaaintee and risk nimpmat producs.
Las Data Update: March31.2002
Run Date: May 06. 2002

Page:2 of 2

