Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized

Document of
The World Bank
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Report No. 24189-ALB

MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENT
OF THE
INTERNAT'IONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION

Public Disclosure Authorized

TO THE
EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS
ON A
COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
OF THE WORLD BANK GROUP
FOR

Public Disclosure Authorized

ALBANIA
May 28, 2002

South East Europe Country Unit
ECCO4
Europe and Central Asia Region

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the
performance of their official duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without World
Bank authorization

Last CAS Progress Report: March 2000 (Report No. IDA/R2000-20)
Currency Equivalents
(Exchange Rate Effective April 30, 2002)
Currency Unit

= Lek

I Lek = US$0.007
US$1.00 = 147 Leks

Government Fiscal Year
January I - December 31

Abbreviations and Acronyms
AAA
ACP
CAE
CAS
CDD
CEM
CFAA
CG
CGA
CPAR
DFID
EBRD
EIB
ESW
EU
FEFAD
FIAS
FoA
FSAC
FY
GDP
GPRS
IBRD
IDA
IFC
IMF
INSIG

Analytical and Advisory Activities
Anti-Corruption Plan
Country Assistance Evaluation
Country Assistance Strategy
Community-Driven Development
Country Economic Memorandum
Country Financial Accountability Assessment
Consultative Group
Country Gender Assessment
Country Portfolio Performance Review
Department for International Development (UK)
European Bank for Reconstruction and Development
European Investment Bank
Economic and Sector Work
European Union
Foundation for Enterprise Financing and Development
Foreign Investnent Advisory Group
Friends of Albania
Financial Sector Adjustment Credit
Fiscal Year
Gross Domestic Product
Growth and Poverty Reduction Strategy
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development
International Development Association
International Finance Corporation
International Monetary Fund
Insurance Institute of Albania

Vice President:
Country Director:
Team Leader:

I-PRSP
JSA
KESH
LSMS
M&E
MIGA
MDGs
MOES
MP
MTEF
NGO
OED
OSCE
PIU
PRGF
PRSC
PRSP
SAA
SAP
SEED
SME
UNDP
USAID
VAT

Interim Poverty Reduction Strategy
Joint Staff Assessment
Korporata Energjitike Shqipetare
(Albanian Energy Corporation)
Living Standards Measurement Survey
Monitoring and Evaluation
Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency
Millennium Development Goals
Ministry of Education and Science
Member of Parliament
Mediur-Term Expenditure Framework
Nongovernmental Organization
Operations Evaluation Department
Organization for Security and Co-Operation
in Europe
Project Implementation Unit
Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility
Poverty Reduction Support Credit
Poverty Reduction Strategy
Stabilization and Association Agreement
Stabilization and Association Process
Southeast Europe Enterprise Development
Small and Medium Enterprise
United National Development Program
United States Agency for International
Development
Value Added Tax

Johannes Linn
Christiaan J. Poortmnan
Kathryn Funk

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
ALBANIA

Table of Contents

1I
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY ...............................................................................
INTRODUCTION ................................................................................ 1
1
..............................................................
I. COUNTRY CONTEXT
1
....................................................................
Developments
and
Economic
A. Political
2
B. Regional Context ................................................................................
C. Macroeconomic Performance, Prospects, and Risks ............................................... 3
D. Albania's Development Agenda: The Growth and Poverty Reduction Strategy .... 5
7
II. BANK GROUP COUNTRY ikSSISTANCE STRATEGY ...................................................................
................................... 7
A. Progress under Last CAS and Lessons Learned ...................
B. Country Assistarice Program for FY03-FY05 ........................................................ 11
Improve Governance and Strengthen Institutions .......................................... 13
Promote Sustainable Private Sector Growth .................................................. 16
Foster Hum;n Development .......................................................................... 23
Role of IFC and MIGA ............................................................................... 24
25
C. Lending and Nortlending Scenarios .......................................................................
27
Nonlending Services ...............................................................................
28
D. Portfolio Management ...............................................................................
29
IH. IMPLEMENTING THE CAS ..............................................................
29
A. Partnerships ...............................................................................
31
B. Monitoring of Ouitcomes ...............................................................................
33
C. Risks ...............................................................................
35
.............................
..................
STAKEHOLDERS
WITH
1:
CAS
CONSULTATIONS
ATTACHMENT
................................... 41
ATTACHMENT 2: GENDER ISSUES ............................................
ATTACHMENT 3: PARTNERSHIP MATRIX ............................................................................... 43
ATTACHMENT 4: CORE LABOR STANDARDS ............................................................................ 44
45
ATTACHMENT 5: FINDINGS OF FIDUCIARY ASSESSMENTS ........................................................
46
6: FUND RELALTIONS NOTE ...............................................................................
A
TTACHMENT
ATTACHMENT 7: DATA ON AIILLENNruM DEVELOPMENT GOALS AND RELATED INDICATORS.. 49

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the
performance of their official duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without
World Bank authorization.

COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
ALBANIA
Table of Contents, continued

BOXES:
Box 1: Power Outages: A Symbol of Albania's Development Challenges ................................................. 2
Box 2: Poverty in Albania .............................................................
6
7
Box 3: OED Country Assistance Evaluation ..............................................................
8
Box 4: Client Feedback Survey .............................................................
................... 10
Box 5: Lessons Learned from the Institutional and Governance Reform Program ...............
Box 6: Voice and Transparency at the Local Level: The Tirana Transparency Project ............
............... 16
17
Box 7: Foreign Direct Investment Diagnostic Study .............................................................
20
Box 8: Albania's Rural Strategy .............................................................
30
Box 9: Building Capacity in Parliament .............................................................
Box 10: Albania's Progress Towards the Millennium Development Goals ............................................. 32
TABLES:
Table 1: Lending and Nonlending Program .............................................................
Table 2: Triggers to Stay in the Base Case .............................................................
Table 3: Core Diagnostic Economic and Sector Work .............................................................
Table 4: Core CAS Monitoring Benchmarks .............................................................

ANNEXES:
Annex A2: Albania at a Glance
Annex B2: Selected Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
Annex B3: Bank Group Program Summary
IDA Lending Program
IFC & MIGA Program
Annex B4: Albania-Summary of Nonlending Services
Annex B5: Albania Social Indicators
Annex B6: Albania-Key Econornic hidicators
Annex B7: Albania-Key Exposure Indicators
Annex B8: IDA Credits in the Operations Portfolio
Statement of IFC's Held and Disbursed Portfolio
Annex B9: Country Partner Strategy Matrix
Annex B10: Summary of Development Priorities

MAP OF ALBANIA: IBRD 284672

26
27
28
31

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

i.
Background. Albania has achieved macroeconomic stability and high growth, albeit from a
low base, during almost every year since its transition from a centrally-planned to a market-based
economy, despite periodic bouts of domestic and regional instability that required the country to focus
on its immediate problems. Yet Albania remains one of the poorest countries in Europe: based on most
recent data, about one out of three Albanians is poor, and even more lack access to basic services.
Albania's initial reform program enabled strong private sector activities, especially agriculture, which
have been the engine of growth. High levels of external financing and workers' remittances have also
benefited Albania. In the face of declining access to concessional financing, Albania needs to move
aggressively toward establishing creditworthiness and eventually gaining access to international
financial markets. To achieve this goal by mid-decade, Albania must address macroeconomic
imbalances; move quickly to complete the reform agenda, especially to underpin improvements in the
business environment; and improve debt management.
ii.
The remaining reform agenda is challenging, because it requires tackling the root development
problems, especially weak governance and institutions, tenuous rule of law, and enormous
infrastructure deficiencies, including those in the power sector. The prospect of closer ties to European
structures-through the negotiation of a Stabilization and Association Agreement, which is expected to
begin in 2002-is a powerful incentive for reform, creating a national consensus on a long-term vision.
This Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) is being presented at a time when Albania has an opportunity
to move from short-term crisis management to a long-term vision of sustainable development. Over the
next three years, if Albania maintains stability and consensus, it can implement far-reaching structural
reforms and achieve sustainable growth that benefits the entire population.
iii.
The Government's Program. In this context, the preparation of Albania's Poverty Reduction
Strategy Paper, known in Albania as the Growth and Poverty Reduction Strategy (GPRS) was
important, enabling Albania to clevelop its first national development strategy that explicitly addresses
poverty-outlining medium-term actions to reach long-term goals. The GPRS, which was completed in
November 2001, rests on two pillars: governance and strong economic growth. It also emphasizes
policy interventions to improve education, healthcare, and infrastructure. It further calls for stronger
public accountability and increased public participation in decision making to empower the poor. The
GPRS creates a better enviromnent for advancing reforms and reducing poverty, by strengthening
country ownership of the reform program; reinforcing a long-term vision; focusing on results; and
encouraging partnerships.
iv.
Objectives. The overarching objective of the CAS is to reduce poverty by supporting Albania's
GPRS. To this end, specific CASS objectives are to support the government to:
(a)

Improve governance and strengthen institutions: build efficient and inclusive public

institutions; increase transparency and accountability at all levels; strengthen
monitoring and evaluation; and use community-based approaches that build institutions
from the bottom up;
(b)

Promote sustainableprivate sector growth: maintain macroeconomic stability; improve

the investment environment; continue to reform the financial sector, and complete
-1i-

enterprise privatization; sustain agricultural growth and foster broad-based rural
growth; improve infrastructure, especially through community or private sector
participation; and promote environmental sustainability and sustainable use of natural
resources; and
(c)

Foster human development: improve access to and quality of education and healthcare
in both urban and rural areas, with sector-specific reforms coordinated with the
country's public sector and decentralization reformn programs; strengthen the
sustainability and equity of the social insurance system; and improve targeting and
efficacy of social assistance and community social services.

v.
The GPRS creates conditions conducive to strengthening transparency and accountability;
increasing the contestability of the policy formulation process; and improving policy monitoring and
evaluation. These are important themes of the CAS. Institution building is a cross-cutting CAS theme
and will be imbedded in all operations..The CAS increases Bank support for infrastructure-especially
institution building to ensure sustainability-because infrastructure deficiencies constrain private
investment and limit opportunities for the rural poor. The CAS continues the Bank's strong support for
developing rural areas, where poverty is highest. Under the CAS, the Bank will also build on previous
successes with community-based approaches that build institutions from the bottom up.
vi.
The GPRS also affects how the Bank does business. There will be an increased focus on
government ownership and more emphasis on partnerships, allowing greater Bank selectivity.
Nonlending services will-more than ever-be undertaken jointly with government and stakeholders.
And there will also be greater attention to outcomes, assessing the success of the CAS using both
intermediate and final indicators specified in the GPRS.
vii.
Lending Program. The FY03-05 base-case lending scenario provides for up to US$131
million in lending, consisting of about four projects per year to support the GPRS, leverage the
remaining reform agenda, and move Albania toward financial sustainability necessary for
creditworthiness. A series of Poverty Reduction and Support Credits (PRSCs) would anchor the Bank's
lending program, maintain GPRS momentum, and support key reforms, especially cross-cutting
reforms best addressed through programmatic adjustment lending. The PRSCs will not displace
investment lending, which has proven effective in building capacity and pioneering innovative
community-based approaches.
viii.
A low-case scenario, not to exceed US$70 million, would be triggered by poor macroeconomic
performance, failure to implement the GPRS, or a sustained decline in portfolio performance.
Alternatively, Albania could be eligible for a higher IDA allocation (up to 30 percent more than the
base case) in the second half of the CAS period in the event of an outstanding track record in meeting
GPRS targets and measurable improvements in areas such as governance, rule of law, and access to
social services. A move to a higher IDA allocation would be detailed in a CAS Progress Report.
ix.
Nonlending Program. Analytical and advisory activities will strengthen the GPRS,
analytically underpin Bank operations, and provide important policy advice. The Bank has completed
the set of core diagnostic economic and sector work, including a Country Procurement Assessment
Report (FY01), Public Expenditure Institutional Review (FY01), and a Country Financial
Accountability Review (FY02). The Bank will systematically address fiduciary issues, incorporating
them into the PRSCs and other operations.

x.
CAS Risks. CAS implementation faces three main risks: (i) domestic or regional instability;
(ii) chronic power shortages; and (iii) unsound governance and weak institutional capacity. As
described in the CAS, the Bank mitigates these risks by supporting the GPRS reform program,
focusing on transparency and accountability, playing a major role in backing power sector reforms,
embedding institution building in all Bank operations, and using a mix of adjustment and investment
lending to both support reforms and build administrative capacity.
xi.

The following issues are suggested for Board discussion:
*

Poverty reduction measures: Do the proposed Bank actions best support the goals of the
GPRS? Is the cross-cutting focus on institution building-especially through increasing
transparency and accountability-appropriate?

*

Instrument mix: Is there an appropriate balance between adjustment and investment
lending? Is the role of the PRSCs-which complement but do not displace investment
operations-appropriate?

*

Business environment: Given the centrality of private investment, especially foreign direct
investment, to sustainable growth and future creditworthiness, are the proposed actions for
improving the investment climate (including strengthening governance, addressing
administrative barrie-rs, and improving infrastructure) appropriate?

-

111

-

MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENT OF THIE
INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION
TO THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS
ON A COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
OF THE WORLD BANK GROUP FOR
ALBANIA
INTRODUCTION
1.
Albania's Interim Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (I-PRSP) was endorsed by the
International Development Association (IDA) Board of Directors in June 2000. The I-PRSP laid out a
road map for a full PRSP, known in Albania as the Growth and Poverty Reduction Strategy (GPRS). 1
In November 2001, the goverrnment finalized and launched its GPRS, following a broad participatory
process that included central ancl local government, civil society, private sector, and donors. The GPRS
and the IDA-International Monetary Fund (IMF) Joint Staff Assessment (JSA) will be presented to the
Boards of the Bank and the IMF in June 2002.
2.
This CAS is designed as the Bank's business plan for FY03-05 to support Albania's GPRS.
This is Albania's third full CAS. The 1993 CAS responded to Albania's emergency situation during its
early transition years. The second full CAS was discussed by the Board in July 1998 (18161-ALB),
following Albania's civil crisis of 1997. A CAS Progress Report was discussed by the Board in March
2000 (IDA/R2000-20), following the Kosovo crisis in 1999. This CAS is presented to the Board at a
time when Albania has an opiportunity to move from short-term crisis management to a longterm vision of sustainable development, as articulated in Albania's GPRS.

I. COUNTRY CONTEXT
A. Political and Economic Developments
Albania has made substantial political and economic progress since the period of near3.
anarchy in 1997. Albania has restored and maintained macroeconomic stability, increased public
order, and furthered structural and institutional reforms. In particular, Albania has achieved high
growth while containing inflation, privatized strategic enterprises (including the state-owned National
Commercial Bank), initiated conmprehensive civil service reform, and, most recently, taken bold steps
to increase the sustainability of the pension system. Even during the 1999 Kosovo crisis, Albania
handled over 450,000 temporary refugees while maintaining macroeconomic stability and a
commitment to reforms. Political stability is also increasing: local government elections in October
2000 and parliamentary elections in Summer 2001-resulting in a victory for the ruling Socialist
Partly-were generally calm and orderly, although the results were still challenged by the Democratic
Party.
4.
Yet Albania's domestic politics remain relatively divisive and confrontational, both
between and within the Socialist Party and the opposition Democratic Party. Divisions within the
Socialist Party surfaced shortly alter the 2001 elections, resulting in the resignation of four ministers in

The Growth and Poverty Reduction Strategy was publicly launched in Albania in November 2001 under the title
National Strategy for Socio-Economic Development (GPRS).
-1I-

Box 1
Power Outages: A Symbol of Albania's Development Challenges
Since the second half of 2000, Albania-once a net exporter of electricity-has faced frequent and prolonged loadshedding (power outages). Last winter, power outages reached 7 hours a day in Tirana, 9 hours in other cities, and 13
hours in rural areas. The main cause is the impact of drought on the largely hydropower-based system, combined with
excessive demand due to a decade of failure to curb illegal electricity use and non-payment of bills. KESH, Albania's
power company, has resorted to emergency electricity imports, but they are limited by the dilapidated transmission
network. Recognizing the magnitude of the crisis and its potential repercussions, the government has demonstrated
intent-for the first time-to address the underlying problems. In December 2000, the government adopted a two-year
Action Plan (revised in January 2002 to cover 2002-2003) to reverse the deterioration in sector performance. So far the
government has exceeded all quarterly targets for collections and controlling losses. Nevertheless, the precarious power
situation remains the major threat to continued macroeconomic stability, sustained growth, and poverty reduction. The
situation, if unimproved, could even lead to political and social instability, because power outages are a daily reminder
of the government's inability to deliver basic services. The government needs to stay committed to difficult actionsdisconnecting illegal connections, enforcing payment of bills, and eliminating corruption in KESH. The underlying
issues are weak governance, feeble institutions, and tenuous rule of law-the same issues faced in other sectors. The
power crisis is emblematic of both Albania's past short-term outlook and current development challenges.

December 2001 followed by the resignation of the Prime Minister in late January 2002. The political
infighting diverted attention from the reform process, temporarily slowing its momentum. However,
political disputes have been worked out within the Constitution, and a new government was formed in
late February 2002. Tensions have somewhat calmed: the Democratic Party ended its boycott of
Parliament, Socialist Party factions agreed to suspend internal feuding, and a bipartisan parliamentary
commission was formed to implement international recommendations for electoral reform. However,
the presidential election in June 2002 could resume frictions between and within political parties.
Albania will need to maintain the stability and consensus necessary to focus on its main challenge: to
consolidate the gains made in recent years and to resolve its most serious problems, including weak
governance, institutions, and rule of law; organized crime and trafficking; an unattractive investment
climate; and enormous infrastructure deficiencies, especially in the power sector (see Box 1).
B. Regional Context
5.
The regional environment presents both opportunities and risks. The 1999 Kosovo crisis
spurred a coordinated international effort to bring peace, prosperity, and stability to Southeastern
Europe, giving rise to the Stability Pact and, most importantly, to the prospect of closer ties between
Southeast European countries and European structures through Stabilization and Association
Agreements (SAAs) between the European Union (EU) and countries in the region. The Stabilization
and Association Process (SAP) is a major incentive for political consolidation and reform in Albania
and other Southeast European countries. However, the 2001 outbreak of ethnic conflict in the Former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia-the first Southeast European country to complete the negotiation of
an SAA-underscores the lingering power of ethnic nationalism and the region's continued political
fragility. Albania can benefit substantially from the external "pull" of closer ties to the EU, and so far
Albania's constructive role in the region has moved it closer to Western Europe. But renewed ethnic
strife on Albania's borders remains a destabilizing possibility.
6.
Turning toward Europe - or toward renewed instability? The European Commission and
the Government of Albania are expected to start negotiating an SAA in 2002. The GPRS and SAP are
complementary: the GPRS outlines a comprehensive and country-owned medium-term program that
moves Albania towards its long-term vision of EU association. Yet Albania remains vulnerable to both
internal and external shocks. If Albania can maintain stability and successfully tackle its most pressing
-2-

problems, especially in the energy sector, the next three years-corresponding to the period covered by
this CAS-present an opportunity to implement far-reaching structural reforms and achieve growth
that benefits the entire population.

C. Macroeconomic Performance, Prospects, and Risks
7.
Since the 1997 crisis, Albania has achieved strong growth with low inflation. Albeit from a
low base, real GDP growth exceeded 7 percent per year from 1998-2000; inflation was kept at low
levels of 2 to 4 percent; and external reserves remained at the comfortable level of 4 to 5 months of
imports. Overall financing was secured through high levels of external assistance, workers' remittances
(amounting to 10-12 percent of GDP), and strong private sector activity fueled by Albania's initial set
of structural reforms. Agriculture, stimulated by rapid privatization of land and complete price and
trade liberalization, continued to account for about half of GDP. Construction and services have also
contributed to high GDP growth. GDP growth in 2001 decelerated to about 6.5 percent because of the
deteriorating electricity situation and weak agricultural growth, both affected by adverse weather,
although construction and private sector manufacturing remained strong. Despite continuing electricity
shortages, economic performance during the first quarter of 2002 was mostly favorable, although
inflation inched upward.

8.
But there is an urgent need to reduce macroeconomic imbalances and structural
weaknesses. Albania has large fiscal and external imbalances that will need to be reduced to underpin
sustainable growth as the volume of concessional financing and other non-debt creating flows declines
over the medium term. This will require strong measures to reduce structural weaknesses. The quality
of growth needs improvement to generate employment for higher skilled, better paid workers, and to
curb emigration of the most educated Albanians. Despite progress in financial sector reform, enterprise
privatization, and public administration reform, there is limited financial intermediation, a narrow
export base, a relatively poor investment climate, and weak governance and administrative capacity.
From 1992 to 1999, Albania'; foreign direct investment was among the lowest in the region,
amounting to merely US$51 million in 1999. In 2000 and 2001, large-scale privatizations boosted the
level of foreign direct investment to US$143 million and US$204 million, respectively. Sustaining a
high level of foreign direct investment depends on keeping privatization on track in the short term and
improving the investment climate over the medium term.
9.
Albania's medium-termn prospects indicate continued growth and macroeconomic
stability, provided that aggressive policy reform leads to increased private investment. External

assistance will decline from its high post-Kosovo conflict level. Therefore, increased private
investment-especially foreign investment-and continued high levels of workers' remittances will be

essential for sustaining high GI)P growth of 6 to 7 percent per year and bringing about financial
sustainability. Inflation is expected to remain in the 2 to 4 percent target range, assuming prudent
fiscal and monetary policies under a flexible exchange rate regime. The current account deficit, which
may worsen in 2002 due to increased electricity imports, is expected to decline to about 5.4 percent of
GDP by 2005. To support the medium-term framework, the government has agreed with the IMF on a
three-year Poverty Reduction and! Growth Facility (PRGF) arrangement.
10.

High growth depends on increasing exports and private sector activity. Export growth is

expected to strengthen following the transfer of remaining key enterprises to strategic foreign investors.
Industrial growth is expected to increase, and growth is expected to remain high in the construction,
services, and transport sectors. Agricultural growth will also remain high, but will require concerted
efforts to complete land registration to create a functioning land market. Energy sector reforms to
-3 -

reduce demand and supply imbalances and to prepare the sector for privatization are also critical for
growth performance.
Further fiscal consolidation will keep a sustainable debt burden and provide adequate
11.
budgetary resources for priority areas. Maintaining fiscal sustainability and reducing poverty at the
same time requires fiscal consolidation to reduce the level of domestic debt, and to restructure
expenditures to reach the poor more efficiently. Budget revenues-which are significantly below
potential-are expected to increase by over 3 percentage points of GDP from 2001 to 2005 as a result
of continued efforts to improve tax and customs administration. Also informal businesses need to be
progressively integrated into the formal economy to widen the tax base. Reduced interest expenditures
will provide increased resources for priority areas without increasing overall expenditures. On balance,
therefore, the fiscal deficit is projected to decline from 8.5 percent in 2001 to 6 percent in 2005 (see
Annex B6). This will allow a significant reduction in the reliance on domestic borrowing to under 2
percent of GDP, which will reduce the domestic debt burden from 41 percent of GDP at end-2001 to
35 percent of GDP by end-2005. Extenial borrowing (mainly on concessional terms) is expected to
remain the major source for financing high-return public investment.
12.
Despite the favorable economic outlook, medium-term prospects-and future
creditworthiness-are fragile, subject to external shocks, and depend on further reforms.
Although Albania's per capita income has recently surpassed the IDA threshold, Albania relies heavily
on concessional borrowing due to its structural fragilities. Projections indicate that Albania could
become creditworthy by mid-decade, enabling it to gradually take on commercial borrowing. However,
to become creditworthy by mid-decade, Albania must address macroeconomic imbalances; move
quickly to complete the reform agenda outlined in the GPRS, especially to underpin improvements in
the business environment; and improve debt management. Failure to aggressively tackle these three
areas would delay Albania's access to international capital markets. The high-growth and sustainability
scenario is also susceptible to shocks from elements over which Albania has less control: including
reduced export demand from a slowing global economy; a regional post-conflict environment that
discourages investment; weather-related electricity shortages; and potentially volatile workers'
remittances.

13.
Maintaining external debt sustainability in the near term depends on continued access to
concessional funds, in addition to attracting other non-debt flows, such as foreign direct investment.
Given the fragility of Albania's external accounts, premature borrowing on commercial terms could
cause a deterioration in debt servicing indicators, pushing them to critical thresholds. Under the PRGF,
the government will observe ceilings on medium-and long-term nonconcessional borrowing. In the
absence of external shocks, if Albania moves decisively to address macroeconomic imbalances,
complete structural reforms, and improve debt management, Albania could start limited borrowing

from the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) during the last year of this
CAS period (FY05), but more likely during the next CAS period (IDA 14). During this CAS period,
Albania will be subject to hardened IDA terms (20 years rather then 40 years maturity), because
Albania's per capita GDP exceeds the operational cut-off for IDA. During preparation of the next CAS,
the Bank will reassess Albania's creditworthiness, outline an appropriate path for IDA graduation, and
suggest timing for blending IDA and IBRD resources.

- 4-

D. Albania's Development Agenda: The Growth and Poverty Reduction Strategy
14.
The GPRS rests on two pillars-improving governance and sustaining high economic
growth-and emphasizes education, health care, and infrastructure as priority areas for policy
intervention. The GPRS identifies Albania's main development challenges: weak law enforcement;
corruption; an unattractive invesiment climate; low quality and inaccessible social services, especially
education and health; poor infrastructure; and a shortage of basic necessities, including electricity,
water, sanitation, and heating. The GPRS recognizes that weak govemance and institutions are at the
root of Albania's developmental problems. It also acknowledges that economic growth will be the
main instrument to reduce poverty in Albania. Maintaining macroeconomic stability and adequate
social protection are cited as preconditions for implementing the strategy. The GPRS builds on the
govemment's ongoing structural reform program, placing increased emphasis on improving social
services and infrastructure to reduce poverty and achieve growth. The GPRS also emphasizes stronger
public accountability and increased public participation in decision making to empower the poor.
15.
The GPRS has five main goals for the three-year period: (i) achieve real GDP growth of 18
to 21 percent; (ii) reduce the number of poor (people with income less than US$2 per day) by 19
percent (from 47 percent in 1998 to 38 percent); (iii) make tangible improvements in infrastructure and
related services, such as electric power, potable water supply, and sewerage, increasing the poor's
access to these services; (iv) reduce the infant mortality rate by 15 percent, the maternal mortality rate
by 25 percent, and the incidence of infectious diseases; and (v) increase the elementary school
enrollment rate by 4 percent, the secondary school enrollment rate by 25 percent, and the average
schooling period by 5 percent. (GPRS intermediate and final indicators and targets are shown in Annex
B9.)
16.
The GPRS process enabled the country to articulate-for the flrst time-a medium- and
long-term development vision that explicitly addresses poverty. The GPRS proved timely: it
reinforced the shift from a short-term outlook to a longer-term vision of development. It also sparked
increased press coverage and public discussion of poverty and set a precedent for civil society
participation in formulating policy. The Government of Albania and its civil society partners put
considerable work into producing the GPRS, which represents a significant improvement over the IPRSP. Although the strategy has areas to,be improved-as outlined in the JSA and summarized below
(para. 18) the GPRS represents a successful first attempt to formulate a comprehensive national
development strategy.
17.
The GPRS is based on a poverty diagnosis that highlights the multidimensional nature of
poverty (see Box 2). Albania drew upon recent household surveys and a qualitative poverty
assessment to improve the reliability of its poverty profile. Income poverty has a high incidence and
depth, is more pervasive in rural areas, disproportionally affects families with three or more children,
and is strongly correlated with low education. Remittances play a key role in alleviating poverty,
especially for female-headed houlseholds. The GPRS also emphasizes the importance of nonincome
dimensions of poverty: many families lack access to basic services-including water, sanitation,
education, health care, and electricity-and weak infrastructure limits the opportunities of the poor. In
remote rural areas, especially mountainous areas such as northeastern Albania, there is sense of
isolation and abandonment. There are also indications of large and growing income inequality, which
could further weaken Albania's social cohesion. Given the absence of a regular and nationally
representative household survey, the quantitative data have serious limitations and poverty trends
cannot yet be identified. For this reason, the government has developed a comprehensive plan to
strengthen policy monitoring and evaluation, including the completion of a national census in 2001 that
-5 -

Box 2
Poverty in Albania
The GPRS poverty diagnosis is based on an array of quantitative and qualitative data, which, although incomplete, yield a
multifaceted picture of poverty.* In the last decade, Albania has undergone an acute political and economic transition
punctuated by periodic domestic and regional crises and accompanied by high levels of internal and external migration,
both seasonal and permanent. While rural inhabitants, large families, the poorly educated, and vulnerable groups have
found it most difficult to cope, the impact on the entire population has been profound. Many of those with median income
also lack access to important basic services.
*

Income poverty in Albania is high in incidence and depth. Almost one out of three Albanians is poor, with over
500,000 Albanians falling into extreme poverty (e.g. living on less than $1/day).

*

Four out of five poor live in rural areas, and there are significant regional variations in income levels.

*

Income inequality is quite high (0.43 Gini) by regional standards.

*

Income poverty is higher in those households where the head of household has a low level of education-the
probability of being poor for a household where the head has a secondary education is reduced by half, and drops
to 5 percent for households with a head with higher education.

*

Children are disproportionately effected by poverty-almost 40 percent of households with three or more children
are poor compared to 25 percent of total households.

*

Remittances from abroad provide an important informal safety net, reaching one out of every five households
nationally (one of three in rural areas), and are especially helpful to female-headed households.

*

Overall, poverty does not appear to depend on whether the head of household is male or female (perhaps due to
female-headed households receiving income from husbands working abroad). However, some female-headed
households-widows with children and women living alone-have a higher incidence of poverty, and
unemployment is higher among women. (See Attachment 2)

*

Income poverty is compounded by weak, deteriorating, or absent infrastructure and services throughout the
country. Forty percent of households lack access to two or more necessities such as basic education, water,
sanitation, and heating.

*

Health services are of low quality, with access for the poor limited by high formal and informal payments. The
health status of children in particular is worrisome: 31.7 percent of children under age 5 are moderately stunted, a
measure of chronic malnutrition (11.1 percent under age five are moderately wasted, a measure of acute
malnutrition). The infant mortality rate is a high 28 per thousand, and the under-five mortality rate is 33 per
thousand.

The country strategy focuses accordingly on measures to sustain high growth, while strengthening the capacity of the
public sector to develop, administer, monitor, and evaluate pfiority refonns in the social sectors.
* The GPRS poverty diagnosis draws upon: a Living Conditions Survey (1998); Multiple Indicators Cluster Survey
(2000); Qualitative Poverty Assessment (2001); pilot administrative data mapping (2001); and a number of standalone studies. The quantitative data are not fully representative. However, the 1998 Living Conditions Survey
confirms levels of poverty similar to those derived from the 1996 Household Budget Survey.

sets the stage for fully representative household surveys to be conducted on a regular basis, starting
with a Living Standards Measurement Survey (LSMS) in 2002.
18.
Although the GPRS is an impressive effort, there are elements that need improvement. As
described above, the government needs to address the poor quality of data by establishing regular
household surveys. The poverty diagnosis needs to be updated when new data are available, and GPRS
goals and actions need to be reassessed and better linked to the updated poverty diagnosis. Costing and
prioritization of public actions need improvement. Future GPRS updates would benefit from a better
analysis of the sources of future growth and the relationship between growth and poverty reduction.
Cross-sectoral linkages-such as rural development and environment-will need strengthening during
- 6-

GPRS implementation. The government needs to establish a system of monitoring and evaluation and
refine indicators and targets, taking into consideration the Millennium Development Goals. The
govemment needs to strengthen its capacity for aid coordination on the basis of the GPRS. Lastly, the
participatory process needs to be deepened and institutionalized to sustain the good efforts to involve
civil society in GPRS preparation.
II. BANK GROUP COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
A. Progress under Last CAS and Lessons Learned

The Bank's assistance sltrategy has evolved based on experience, especially the lessons
19.
learned from the 1997 civil crisis. The 1993 CAS addressed the emergency situation during Albania's
first years of transition, supportinj critical imports and physical rehabilitation of infrastructure. From
1993 to 1996, Albania achieved macroeconomic stability, attained high growth, and initiated important
reforms, eaming praise as a "success story" in Central and Eastem Europe. However, the eruption of
near anarchy in 1997, sparked by the collapse of fraudulent pyramid schemes, exposed the fragility of
Albania's institutions and the hollowness of many reforms. The crisis pointed to critical lessons for the
Bank's future assistance strategy: (i) the overriding importance of govemance and institution building;
(ii) the need to shift focus from adopting appropriate laws and regulations to implementing and
enforcing them; and (iii) the effectiveness of community-based approaches, which continued to
perform well during the 1997 crisis.
The 1998 CAS incorporated the recommendations of a Country Assistance Evaluation
20.
(CAE) by the Operations Evaluation Department (OED) (see Box 3). The 1998 CAS, prepared in
the wake of 1997's civil unrest, emphasized the need for a strong state, effective public institutions,
and policy reforms. It presented an assistance program that focused on three strategic priorities: (i)
govemance and institution buildling; (ii) promoting sustainable private sector growth; and (iii)
promoting human development. The influx of Kosovar refugees in 1999 strained Albania's
administrative capacity but did not derail reformns. Domestic and regional stability improved by 2000,
when the government prepared an I-PRSP, committing itself to a full and participatory PRSP. In
response to the more favorable environment for poverty reduction, a 2000 CAS Progress Report

deepened the Bank's cross-sectoral focus on poverty alleviation, with special attention to strengthening
Box 3
OED Country Assistance Evaluation
The Findings. A 1998 Country Assistalice Evaluation (CAE) by OED assessed IDA's assistance to Albania from 1992
to 1997. The CAE concluded that IDA's assistance was largely effective, especially in supporting agricultural growth,

small- and medium-scale enterprise privatization, tax reform, and price and trade liberalization. However, the CAE
found weaknesses in IDA's prioritization of assistance efforts and the depth and focus of assistance to some sectors,
most notably the financial sector. The CAE observed some progress in rehabilitating health and education facilities, but
noted the limited success in transforming the overall framework of these sectors. Furthermore, the CAE found only
marginal improvements in the quality of infrastructure and the delivery of services because of the inability to strengthen
the public-sector institutions involved.
A Retrospective Look at the CAE's Impact; In April 2002, OED carried out a "tracer study" on 15 countries to assess

the extent to which CAE recommendalions have been incorporated into CASs and reflected in the assistance actually
delivered to the country. The study found high consistency between the Albania CAE and the 1998 CAS, and noted that
consistency has further increased as a result of the GPRS process, which has created conditions conducive to
implementing CAE recommendation regarding consultation, participation, donor coordination, country ownership, and
poverty monitoring.
-7-

social cohesion and building inclusive institutions.
21.
Albania has made progress towards the objectives of the previous CAS. From 1998 to
2002, Albania demonstrated a strong commitment to reforms, meeting all high-case lending triggers in
the 1998 CAS and the 2000 CAS Progress Report. There were notable achievements toward all three
CAS objectives. Under the previous CAS, the Bank supported Albania's efforts to improve public
expenditure management-by introducing a medium-term expenditure framework (MTEF)-and laid
the foundation for reforming the judiciary and the public administration, including initiating civil
service reform (See Box 5 for lessons learned in institutional and governance reform). Support by IDA
and the International Finance Corporation (IFC) for financial sector reform-an area criticized by the
CAE (see Box 3)-was particularly successful, resulting in the privatization of the National
Commercial Bank and the preparation of the Savings Bank for privatization. In the area of human
development, the Bank helped develop policy frameworks and introduce community-based
mechanisms to deliver social services to vulnerable groups.
22.

What worked well:

*

Community-driven development. Projects that use participatory techniques to enhance
accountability have succeeded in Albania, as vividly demonstrated in 1997 when
community-based organizations continued to perform well despite difficult conditions. The
Bank built on its early successes with community-driven development (CDD) by expanding
successful pilot projects; introducing CDD in new sectors, such as social service delivery;
and taking steps to build sustainability, such as converting village credit funds to
sustainable savings and credit associations.

*

Financial sector technical assistance operations. The Recovery Program Technical

Assistance Project (which will close at the end of FY02) and the ongoing Financial Sector
Institution Building Technical Assistance Project were well timed and designed to address
the most crucial elements of financial sector reform. They were highly effective in
contributing to Albania's noteworthy achievements in this area.
* Filling knowledge gaps through nonlending services. The previous CAS emphasized
analytical and advisory services (AAA) to underpin lending and provide key policy advice
to the government. Although there is still room for improvement in this area, AAA has
increased understanding of sectoral issues, improved project design, and helped broaden
Box 4
Client Feedback Survey
In spring 2001, a client survey-the first such survey in Albania-was sent to individuals knowledgeable about the
Bank's program: central and local Government officials, NGOs, private sector representatives, and donors. It was
completed by 168 people, one third of whom work for the Govemment. The survey asked respondents to rate-on a
scale of I to 5-areas of activity (for example, development of the private sector) both in terms of importance and the
Bank's effectiveness. Ratings were above average for all items. The category of questions that scored the highest in
effectiveness was "Interaction with World Bank officials," reflecting good and productive professional relations
between Banks staff and their counterparts. Issues ranked as important, but ranked lower than other issues in terms of
Bank effectiveness were: "Giving appropriate priority to poverty reduction," "Responding quickly to submissions and
requests during project implementation," "Incorporating the knowledge and expertise available in Albania in Bank
studies," "Helping to bring about economic growth," and "Providing practical recommendations in Bank Studies."
(However, these ratings were still above average.) The client survey suggests a need to (i) work more closely with
stakeholders, especially in the context of studies; and (ii) establish and publicize intermediate and final targets to
objectively measure progress toward development goals.
-8 -

the reform agenda (see also Box 5). Most recently, AAA has supported preparation of the
GPRS.
Flexibility in CAS implementation. The Bank responded quickly to the government's needs
during the Kosovo crisis in 1999 when it processed and disbursed within 30 days a Public
Expenditure Support Credit and tailored a number of projects to address post-conflict
needs. More recently, the Bank has adjusted its lending program to be more responsive to
the GPRS, especially by postponing the planned Structural Adjustment Credit II and Social
Protection Adjustment Credit and substituting a proposed Poverty Reduction Support
Credit (FY02), which will be presented to the Board with this CAS.
23.

What worked less well:
*

Education and healthcare outcomes are still lagging. This is despite the previous CAS's
emphasis on social sector policy frameworks. A comprehensive education sector study
underpinned the ongoing Education Reform Project, but there has been weak ownership of
the reform program, partly due to high turnover of top ministerial staff. In the health sector,
in retrospect, the Bank: undertook insufficient sector work to underpin reforms supported by
the ongoing Health Recovery Project. The Bank put renewed focus on these issues as a part
of its dialogue on the GPRS, MTEF, and Poverty Reduction Support Credit program, and
the government has tLken some recent measures that suggest increasing commitment to
education and healthcare reforms.

*

Donor coordination needs improvement. Sector donor meetings-the main instrument for
coordination at the technical level-were interrupted during the Kosovo crisis. Efforts to
resume sector donor rneetings in May 2000 were only partially successful. Overall, sector
donor meetings were not held as frequently as warranted. The Bank will work to improve
donor coordination during this CAS period (see para. 74 and 75 on donor coordination).

* Addressingfiduciary issues requires a systematic approach. The previous CAS focused on
project-specific fiduciary controls. Although such controls can be effective in minimizing
fiduciary abuses in Bank-financed projects, they fail to address the broad fiduciary issues
that undermine sustainable development. The Bank has started taking-and will continue
to take under this CAS-a more comprehensive approach to fiduciary safeguards, in
addition to project-specific fiduciary controls (see para. 66 on core diagnostic economic
and sector work).
* Monitoring of outconmes can be strengthened. Monitoring of project-specific inputs and
outputs has improved in recent years due to a greater emphasis on log-frame. Some projects
have helped install computerized management information systems linked to monitoring
indicators. Still, there is much room for fur-ther improvement. The government needs to
establish indicators and targets that will objectively assess progress toward development
goals (see also "What worked less well" in Box 5). The Bank needs to better link projectspecific monitoring to development outcomes and systematically measure the Bank's
contribution to Albania's development goals (see also Box 4, Client Feedback Survey). In
this CAS, the Bank emphasizes support to Albania for monitoring and evaluation (see
paras. 35 and 36) and also seeks to improve monitoring the effectiveness of the Bank's
program (see para. 79) .

-9-

Box 5
Lessons Learned from the Institutional and Governance Reform Program
Following Albania's civil crisis of 1997, the World Bank and other donors have helped the govemment formulate and implement a broad
institutional and govemance reform program. Over the past five years, the govemment has made progress in a number of key areas.
*

Anti-Corruption. The govemment adopted and revised a comprehensive Anti-Corruption Plan (ACP), appointed a Minister of State
to oversee ACP implementation, and created an inter-ministerial Anti-Corruption Monitoring Unit. Albania's civil society
organizations, media, and private sector formed the Albanian Coalition Against Corruption in early 2001 to build public pressure for
reducing corruption. Most recently, the issue of corruption has galvanized an unprecedented multipartisan effort to prepare a Law on
the Declaration and Audit of Assets and Financial Obligations of Elected Officials.

*

Public Administration. The Department of Public Administration completed the legal framework for a stable and professional civil
service and began implementing the legislation. There is a General Secretary in every ministry. The govemment established a new
Public Administration Institute and the Civil Service Commission, an independent review body, although the Civil Service
Commission is not functioning effectively at this time. In early 2002, the govemment adopted a new salary structure for public
servants, doubling civil service salaries on average. The govemment introduced a medium-term expenditure framework budget
process.

*

Tax and Customs. The government is now using a performance evaluation system for customs' officials and staff. Registration of
tax payers is accelerating, and VAT collections are computerized in six offices. A new fiscal procedures law has simplified the
appeals process.

*

Legal and JudicialSystem. The Constitution of November 1998 and its subsequent organic laws for all key legal institutions provide
a strong foundation for a more professional and independent judicial system. A Magistrate School, established in 1998, is
functioning well. The State Publication Office is issuing a National Gazette on a regular basis, publishing all laws and key legal
decisions. Quality and enforcement of judicial decisions is improving.

Overall, Albania has laid the foundation for improved governance, although capacity remains weak. An assessment of the Bank's support
over the last five years points to a number of lessons.
What worked well
*

Using analytical work to underpin and broaden the reform program. A continuous flow of analytical work helped reinforce the
ongoing reform efforts and, most importantly, continually expanded the range of issues to be addressed. Most recently, a Country
Financial Accountability Assessment raised awareness of financial accountability issues, which are now being incorporated in the
PRSCs. The Bank will continue to broaden and deepen the institutional and govemance reform program through additional
analytical work during this CAS period, including a Fiscal Decentralization Study in FY03, Country Economic Memorandum in
FY04, and Public Expenditure Review in FY05.

*

Using complementary adjustment and investment operations to advance reforms. The availability of both adjustment and investment
operations provided flexibility and leverage to help Albania overcome points of resistance. For example, the Public Administration
Reform Project helped Albania establish a legal framework for a depoliticized civil service, but Structural Adjustment Credit
conditionality, backed by the Prime Minister, was instrumental in overcoming the reluctance of line ministries to implement the new
legislation. The Bank's FY03-05 program continues to emphasize mutually reinforcing adjustment (PRSC) and investment
operations.

What worked less well
*

Demonstrating visible results. Notwithstanding the successes in Albania's broad institutional and governance reform program,
improving governance is a complex and lengthy process, and Albanians continue to rank corruption as the country's most important
problem. Reforms need to be carefully prioritized, and intermediate indicators should be identified to demonstrate early progress.
The Bank has helped the Government develop detailed indicators to monitor the impact of the Public Administration Reform
Project. The GPRS process increased the Government's receptiveness to monitoring. During FY03-05, the Bank will further increase
its emphasis on monitoring and publicizing indicators that measure progress in governance reforms.

*

Complementing center-led reforms with capacity building of line ministries and local governments. To yield results, public
administration reforms need to be accompanied by capacity building. The government has made some effort to build line ministry
capacity, especially in the Ministry of Education and Science, but without much success so far. During FY03-05, the Bank will
better integrate institutional reforms and capacity building into its sector-specific investment projects.
- 10-

B. Country Assistance Program for FY03-FY05

24.
This CAS is designed to support Albania in implementing its GPRS. The GPRS confirms
the validity of the broad objectives of the 1998 CAS and the 2000 CAS Progress Report. Therefore, the
objectives of the FY03-05 CAS are largely the same as those of the previous CAS. These are to support
the government to:
(a)

Improve goverivance and strengthen institutions: build efficient and inclusive public
institutions; increase transparency and accountability at all levels; strengthen
monitoring and evaluation; and use community-based approaches that build institutions
from the bottom up;

(b)

Promote sustasinable private sector growth: maintain macroeconomic stability;
improve the environment for private investment; continue to reform the financial
sector, and complete enterprise privatization; sustain agricultural growth and foster
broad-based rural growth; improve infrastructure and create institutional environments
conducive to infrastructure sustainability, especially through community or private
sector participation; and promote environmental sustainability and sustainable use of
natural resources; and

(c)

Foster human development: improve access to and quality of education and healthcare
in both urban and rural areas, with sector-specific reforms coordinated with the
country's public sector and decentralization reform programs; strengthen the
sustainability and equity of the social insurance system; and improve targeting and
efficacy of social assistance and community social services.

Poverty reduction is the overarching objective of the Bank's assistance strategy. The Bank will
continue the efforts started in 1998 to deepen the cross-sectoral focus on poverty alleviationconsistent with the GPRS.
25.
The Bank will increase its emphasis on areas where there are new opportunities for
making progress. As a result of the GPRS process, the government has now a stronger commitment to
strengthen transparency and accountability; improve policy monitoring and evaluation; and increase
the contestability of the policy, formnulation process. The GPRS also affects the way the Bank does
business and assesses outconnes. Investment projects will be-more than ever-designed and
implemented within a broader strategic framework. Analytical and advisory services (AAA) will be
undertaken jointly to the exteni possible with the government and other stakeholders, including other
donors active in the sector, to ensure ownership. There will be more attention to external partnerships,
using the GPRS as a common framework. The Bank will give more attention to outcomes, assessing
the success of Bank support by using both intermediate indicators and outcome indicators specified in
the GPRS. Most importantly, the GPRS creates a better environment for advancing reforms and
reducing poverty by strengthening country ownership of the reform program; reinforcing a long-term
vision; focusing on results; and encouraging partnerships.
26.
A mix of adjustment and investment lending will best support the GPRS. A series of three
Poverty Reduction Support Credits (PRSCs), the first of which will be presented to the Board with this
CAS, will keep GPRS momentum on track by supporting multisectoral policy reforms essential for
implementing the GPRS and best addressed through programmatic adjustment lending. The PRSCs
-

II

-

will provide a strong core for the Bank lending program and will complement-but not displaceinvestment lending, which has proven effective in building institutional capacity, pioneering innovative
community-based programs, and improving Albania's infrastructure. Discrete sectoral policy reforms
will be supported by specific investment operations that will "drill down" to address needs of particular
sectors. The proposed PRSCs and the investment operations will be mutually reinforcing: the PRSCs
will support reforms crucial for line operations, while line operations will help build the capacity
needed to implement and sustain the reforms. The PRSCs will amount to 15-20 percent of the lending
program.
27.
PRSC components address four key cross-cutting issues of the GPRS. The components are:
(i) promote sustainable growth and support private sector development (e.g. increase the equity and
financial sustainability of the public pension system, improve the business environment, and improve
the enabling environment for rural development); (ii) strengthen capacity to monitor and evaluate the

policy agenda (e.g., establish systems for regular quantitative and qualitative surveys, and strengthen
analytical capacity and institutional arrangements to feed information into policy decision-making);
(iii) improve service delivery and social safety net effectiveness (e.g. address chronic underfunding of

education and healthcare, improve quality of expenditures, and ensure funding of GPRS priorities such
as immunization programs; and (iv) improve core public sector functions and institutional

arrangements (e.g. improve policy formulation, strengthen human resource development, improve
public sector accountability, and improve intergovernmental fiscal relations). The first PRSC (FY02)
focuses on setting up systems for policy monitoring and evaluation, measures to increase transparency
and accountability of the public sector, and a first round of reforms to the pension system. Subsequent
PRSCs are expected to place greater emphasis, in line with the GPRS, on improving the environment,
for private sector activities, broad-based rural development, and fiscal decentralization. During the
midpoint of the CAS period, the Bank will assess progress in implementing the GPRS and the Bank's
program, and would consider the possibility of a fourth PRSC in FY05.
28.
The GPRS enables greater Bank selectivity through enhanced partnerships. The CAS
takes into account the Bank's comparative advantage, views of the country (see Attachment I on CAS
consultations), and division of labor with other donors. The Bank's comparative advantage is to
provide analytical assistance and support key policy, institutional, and structural reforms necessary for
achieving the GPRS objectives. The Bank will continue to work in a range of sectors, because Bank
involvement helps ensure that different parts of the reform agenda come together and are mutually
reinforcing, and because many operations build on the Bank's earlier work. The CAS reflects greater
selectivity across sectors: the Bank will increase financing for infrastructure, which will receive less
support from other donors. Under the CAS, new investment lending is not foreseen for public
administration and the judiciary because ongoing Bank-financed projects will continue to cover the
CAS period, and because the EU, in the context of the SAP, will be taking a greater role in those areas.
Nor is new IDA lending foreseen for the financial sector, because the proposed Financial Sector
Adjustment Credit (FY02) and an ongoing technical assistance project cover the CAS period, and
because the most important financial sector reforms are nearly completed. The main areas of emphasis
of the govermment, Bank, and other donors are summarized in a Partnership Matrix in Attachment 3.
More detailed information about the work of the Bank and other donors in the framework of the GPRS
is shown in Annex B9, the Country Partner Strategy Matrix.
The CAS emphasizes the principle of selectivity within sectors, carefully complementing
29.
the work of others. In the area of governance, the Bank will intervene selectively-and especially in

- 12 -

close coordination with the EU--within the broad governance program defined and supported by the
Friends of Albania.2 The IFC, European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD), and a
number of bilateral donors play key roles in private sector development. (The IFC's activities are
described in detail in para. 59.) IDA will complement their activities by supporting, through proposed
PRSCs, key reforms to improve the environment for private investment. In the financial sector, IDA
and the IFC will support reforms and privatization of the remaining state-owned bank and the stateowned insurance company. In in:frastructure, the Bank will focus on policy reforms and strengthening
institutions necessary for infrastnrcture delivery and sustainability, using community-based approaches
and private sector participation when appropriate. The Bank will continue to take the lead in helping
the government address the power crisis, which, if unchecked, poses a principal risk for both growth
and stability. In the social sectors, the Bank will concentrate on strengthening policies and institutions.
Better donor coordination will ensure clear divisions of labor in the framework of the GPRS (see para.
74).

30.
Bank lending operations reflect a cross-sectoral emphasis on reducing poverty-and on
strengthening institutions and increasing transparency and accountability. These are the dominant
themes of the CAS. A Poverty Assessment (FY03) will draw on the 2002 LSMS and other data to

develop a more reliable poverty profile, outline the impediments to poverty reduction, and make
recommendations to strengthen the government's poverty reduction strategy. The Poverty Assessment

will include a Country Gender Assessment to improve understanding of gender issues (see Attachment
2). The Poverty Assessment will be an important input for updating the GPRS and for subsequent Bank
lending operations. An assessment of the Roma, one of the poorest groups in Albania according to the
GPRS, will be undertaken in FY04 to identify interventions that can be supported by other donors.
Planned education (FY04) and health (FY05) investment projects that build on the Bank's previous
operations and proposed PRSCs '[I and III will strengthen the quality, accessibility, and accountability
of the education and healthcare systems. Policy reforms to create a more sustainable and equitable
pension system-and to reduce pension subsidies, freeing resources needed for poverty reducing
expenditures-will be supported by the PRSCs. The PRSCs will also help further improve public
expenditure management, increasing the participation of civil society in the policy formulation and
budget process, and ensuring that public resources are used more efficiently and allocated toward
alleviating poverty. In infrastructure, the Bank will emphasize building transparency and accountability
in the use of public funds, through public disclosure of planned infrastructure investments and through
participatory monitoring exercises. Given the GPRS focus on rural poverty, the Bank will make greater
efforts to address rural development as a cross-cutting theme. A number of planned operations will
directly address the rural econonmy. In addition, PRSCs II and III will support key reforms for rural
development, and the social sector investment operations will give special attention to the accessibility
and quality of rural education and healthcare.

Improve Governance and Strengthen Institutions
31.
Strengthening governance and' building inclusive institutions are the centerpiece of the
FY03-05 CAS. Since the virtual collapse of the Albanian state in 1997, the Bank-in close
coordination with other donors-has focused on building critical central capacities, including public
administration and the civil service, public expenditure management, and legal and judicial
institutions. (Albania's progress in institutional and governance reform and lessons learned from the

2

The Friends of Albania is an informal group established in October 1998 by a wide range of multilateral
organizations and bilateral donors.
- 13 -

Bank's support are summarized in Box 5). Although the foundations for reform are now in place, poor
governance, weak institutions, and insufficient rule of law remain major deterrents to Albania's
economic development, as recognized by the GPRS. Under the CAS, the Bank will extend institution
building efforts to selected priority sectors-education, health, power, water, and transport-through
sector-specific operations, which will emphasize capacity building to complement center-led public
administration reform (see "What worked less well" in Box 5). Bank operations will also be designed
with flexibility to support Albania's decentralization process, and to build capacity at local levels. As
mentioned earlier, institution building will be a central, cross-cutting objective embedded in all FY0305 operations.
Fighting corruption-both a symptom of and a contributor to weak institutions-remains
32.
an integral part of the Bank's strategy. Since 1998, as part of a broad govemance and anticorruption
agenda defined and supported by the Friends of Albania, the Bank has helped the government develop
and implement its Anti-Corruption Plan (ACP), which includes 150 specific actions affecting
economic policy, rule of law, public administration, public finance, customs administration,
procurement, audit, and public awareness. The government is in the process of updating its ACP,
which is reinforced by the Stability's Pact's Anti Corruption Initiative, launched in early 2000. After
four years of ACP implementation, results are mixed. There are signs of reduced corruption in some
areas-for example, revenues increased by about 3 percentage points of GDP from 1998 to 2001indicating that the government, when determined, can achieve results. Yet, overall, corruption remains
substantial and complex, requiring long-term efforts. An April 2002 report produced under the
auspices of the Southeast European Legal Development Initiative indicates once again that Albanians
rank corruption as the country's top problem. Public perception of persistent and extensive corruption
underscores the importance of prioritizing anti-corruption actions, achieving visible results in key areas
while also pursuing systemic reform, and tracking progress using neutral monitoring indicators (see
"What worked less well" in Box 5). Under this CAS, the Bank intends to continue supporting
anticorruption efforts through a number of operations (including the proposed PRSCs II and III) and
nonlending activities (Anticorruption Technical Assistance). In particular, building on the GPRS
process, the Bank's FY03-05 operations will focus on increasing transparency and accountability as a
means to strengthen institutions and reduce corruption.
33.
The foundations are in place for strengthening key state institutions-public
administration and the judiciary-and the Bank will build on them. Adjustment operations-the
PRSCs nI and m-will support policy reforms, complemented by the ongoing Public Administration
Reform and Legal and Judicial Reform projects, which provide goods, works, training, and technical
assistance to implement reforms. Both investment projects are carefully coordinated with other donors,
especially the EU and Council of Europe. The foundations for public administration reform,
particularly human resource reform, are in place, following the adoption of the Civil Service Law in
November 1999 after some difficulty.. The Bank can be effective in helping overcome points of
resistance in implementing the law, by using mutually reinforcing adjustment and investment
operations (see "What worked well" in Box 5). Together with the UK Department for International
Development (DFID), the Bank is supporting better public expenditure management-a cornerstone of
poverty reduction. The government is improving budget formulation by implementing a medium-term
expenditure framework (MTEF)-now in its third iteration-which injects a strategic focus into the
budget process. The Bank is also supporting improved budget execution and financial accountability
by strengthening treasury, accounting, and intemal audit, and working with the Supreme Audit
Institution and Parliamentary committees, incorporating the recommendations of the Country Financial
and Accounting Assessment (FY02) into the PRSC and other operations, and coordinating with other
donors. The PRSCs and the Public Administration Reform Project will help strengthen procurement
- 14

-

capacity, in line with the recommendations of the Country Procurement Assessment Report (FY01).
(See para. 66 and Attachment 5.)
34.
The foundations for legal andjudicial reform are also in place: the Constitution of November
1998 provides for judicial independence, strengthened through the 1998 Law on Judicial Organization,
amended in 1999. However, there is a need for continued institutional strengthening as well as clear
procedures to implement the 1993 Constitution, as indicated by recent political clashes regarding the
Prosecutor General, President, and Constitutional Court. There are some modest signs of improvement
in the judiciary-in the high courts, the quality of decisions has improved and decisions are published.
Also, the first graduates from the Magistrate School-established with the help of the Council of
Europe and other donors, including the Bank-are starting to improve the quality of decisions in lower
courts. Still, there is slow progress in law enforcement, including enforcement of property rights.
Corruption and incompetence in the judiciary remain serious problems and a major impediment to
economic growth.
35.
The Bank will help improve monitoring and evaluation to increase the effectiveness,
transparency, and accountability of public policies-thereby strengthening Albania's institutions and
addressing a main weakness of the GPRS (see para. 18). The GPRS recognizes the need for reliable
data and monitoring and evaluation (M&E) systems to increase the effectiveness of public expenditures
and assess progress towards the country's development objectives. The CAS builds on the GPRS to
support major improvements in data collection and M&E over the next three years. The government
completed a census in 2001, and a representative LSMS will be completed in summer 2002, part of a
five-year program to build capacity for regular household surveys, supported by DFID and the Bank
(the ongoing Social Service Delivery Project). There is a parallel initiative to undertake qualitative
poverty studies to complement quantitative data. These efforts will result in reliable baseline data, and
will enable the government to monitor the impact of policies on desired outcomes over time.
36.
The government, supported by PRSC I, has prepared a preliminary M&E plan that lays
out a roadmap for a more perfonnance-oriented public administration. The PRSCs, which include a
specific component on M&E, will also help improve GPRS indicators and strengthen their linkage to
the Millennium Development Goals (see Box 10). The planned PRSCs II and m will help the
government meet key benchmarlks in implementing the M&E plan, complementing sector-specific

investment operations that will build performance management capacity throughout the public sector.
The ongoing Public Administration Reform Project will help launch M&E capacity building efforts in
key line ministries, while the MTEF process will reinforce this by ensuring that budget deliberations
give greater consideration to past and promised performance. This should lead to better prioritized
goals, especially in the health, education, social protection, and rural sectors-the pilot ministries in
the M&E plan. Improving prioritization will address a current weakness of the GPRS (see para. 18). In
addition, the Bank will help the government test ways to increase transparency and involve the public
in M&E, by introducing participatory M&E in the health sector and by piloting a municipal
information center and citizens' report card in Tirana (see Box 6).
37.
Albania has taken major strides in establishing a basic legal framework for
decentralization, using a particijpatory process, assisted by USAID and local institutes. However,
Albania has a long way to go to complete the basic regulatory framework and efficiently implement
fiscal decentralization, taking into account an appropriate balance between central government
oversight and local fiscal autonomy and the limited administrative and technical capacities for service
delivery at the local government level. A planned Fiscal Decentralization Study (FY03) will analyze
Albania's intergovernmental fiscal relations and identify institutional and capacity building needs. It
- 15 -

Box 6
Voice and Accountability at the Local Level: The Tirana Transparency Project
When Mayor Edi Ramna entered office in 2000, he pledged to build transparency and accountability in Albania's
capital. The Mayor approached the Bank's public sector group with a proposal to improve public service delivery by
providing the citizens of Tirana with a municipal information center where they could lodge complaints and seek
answers to questions.
The Bank's public sector group took up the challenge as part of its anticorruption work and as a pilot for monitoring
and evaluating the GPRS. They obtained funding for the project through a US$614,000 grant from the Government of
the Netherlands and a consultant trust fund (US$25,000) from the Government of Norway. Conditions in Tirana make
this project particularly necessary. Tirana's population has grown threefold in the past eleven years, mushrooming
from 250,000 to approximately 750,000. The city's infrastructure has not been able to meet the increased demand for
water, sanitation, roads, business licenses, and building permits. The city also lacks basic facilities-there is not even a
waiting area for people seeking services and permits. As a result, Tirana residents do not know where to go for basic
needs.
The two-year Tirana Transparency Project, modeled on similar approaches used successfully in India, the Philippines,
and the Ukraine, has two components for addressing these issues. The first component is to establish a municipal
information center where citizens can go for information on public services, pick up standardized forms (which are
currently being developed), and lodge complaints. They can also make payments for public services and get a receipt,
thereby combating petty corruption.
The second component is a citizens' report card, a monitoring mechanism that will allow the city to track which
services are effectively delivered, which are not, and why. The city can use the report card to make changes necessary
to improve performance, and citizens can use it to monitor municipal progress and influence the process by providing
feedback.
Project implementation started in January 2002 and is proceeding well. If this approach proves effective in improving
public service delivery and increasing the transparency and accountability of Tirana's government, Albania could
extend it to other municipalities and communes and link it to activities to monitor the GPRS.

will help the government implement its decentralization strategy and provide important input for the
design of Bank-financed projects.
The Bank will continue to support community-based activities that build institutions from
38.
the bottom up. About one third of the existing Bank portfolio and planned FY03-05 operations are
based on community-driven development (CDD). Guided by past success in this area (see para. 22),
the Bank will scale up successful experiences of CDD and focus on the sustainability of community
institutions through ongoing irrigation and microcredit operations and the planned Natural Resources
Project (FY05). The Bank will continue to introduce CDD to new sectors, such as rural water. The
Bank will also explore how to "institutionalize" CDD-by using CDD to increase the effectiveness and
accountability of local governments. The Bank will also introduce a community-based approach in a
cross-sectoral post-conflict grant for northeastern Albania, which will improve vulnerable children's
access to early care and also raise awareness of nonviolent conflict resolution.

Promote Sustainable Private Sector Growth
The GPRS recognizes the private sector as the driving force behind growth. Relative
39.
political stability and commitment to reforms since 1998 have led to robust growth in private sector
activity. However, to sustain private sector growth leading to poverty reduction, it is necessary to
improve the business environment; complete the structural reform agenda (especially enterprise and
financial sector privatization); maintain agricultural growth and pursue broad-based rural development;
- 16-

Box 7

Foreign Direct Investment Diagnostic Study
At Government request, the Foreign Investment Advisory Service (FIAS) reviewed the environment for foreign direct
investment (FDI) in Albania. The reviemw is based on a May 2000 field study that included interviews with 40 investorsacross many sectors-who had investments in Albania or had considered investing in Albania.
The diagnostic study points out that Albania offers foreign investors proximity to the EU market and access to the
Mediterranean Sea, low-cost and well-educated workers, and rich natural resources and minerals. The study concludes
that Albania has the potential to increase the level of FDI by several times, excluding extraordinary income from
large privatizations, provided that key Issues in the Investment climate are addressed. According to the study, the
overarching problem deterring FDI is poor governance. Investors cited the following obstacles:
*
*
*
*
*
*
*

Lack of consistent and transparent implementation of law, the single most important obstacle to higher FDI.
Corruption, which raises the ccst of doing business.
Poor enforcement of laws and contracts, resulting from unreliability of the judicial system.
Inconsistent application of tax laws and customs procedures, and ineffective tax and duty reimbursement
mechanisms.
Deficient infrastructure, especially lack of sufficient and reliable power, water, and transport, causing higher
cost structures.
Difficult access to land and cortstruction permits.
Lengthy procedures to comply with business regulations.

Based on the study, FIAS recommends improving the investment climate before dedicating large amounts of resources to
promoting FDI. To this end, FIAS is further assisting the Government by undertaking-with cofinancing from the Soros
Foundation-an Administrative Barrier; to Investment Study, leading to a workshop and formulation of an "action
agenda."

improve infrastructure, including reforms for private sector participation; and ensure sustainable
environmental and natural resource management. The Bank Group-IDA, the IFC, and the Multilateral
Investment Guarantee Agency (MdIGA) will work together to help Albania further improve the
conditions for sustainable private sector-led growth. A Country Economic Memorandum (CEM),
planned for FY04, will increase urtderstanding of sources of future growth and strengthen future GPRS
updates (see para. 18).
Improve the Business Environmejit
40.
Improving Albania's diflicult business climate is a key requirement for sustaining high
growth. Accordingly, the Bank Group will sharpen its focus on the investment climate, and especially
on facilitating, in the spirit of the GPRS, a more productive dialogue between the government and
private sector. The IFC, Foreign Investment Advisory Service (FIAS), and Southeast Europe Enterprise
Development (SEED) 3 are working with the government and business community to formulate a
comprehensive action plan to improve the investment environment. A FIAS study identified poor
governance and weak institutions as the overarching problem deterring investment (see Box 7),
underscoring the importance of the CAS's cross-cutting focus on creating more accountable and
transparent institutions. The Bank Group will support the government's efforts to improve the
institutional and legal frameworl: by assessing administrative barriers to investment (FIAS) and
subsequently streamlining administrative procedures (PRSC II, FY03); improving the legal framework

3 SEED is a new, multi-donor initiative managed by IFC to strengthen small and medium enterprises in the region. The

program was originally known as the Balkan Enterprise Facility.
- 17

-

for bankruptcy, resolution of debt, and commercial disputes (Financial Sector Adjustment Credit,
FY02; PRSCs I and II in FY02 and FY03, respectively); and establishing with the assistance of MIGA
an investment promotion agency. Microenterprises and small enterprises dominate Albania's economy.
A number of donor initiatives, including SEED, are specifically working to assist micro, small, and
medium enterprises. The need for a sound business climate extends to rural areas, where many of
Albania's poor live, highlighting the need for a sound rural strategy (Box 8). Improving infrastructure,
especially in rural areas, is also essential for an enabling business environment (para. 49).

Complete FinancialSector Reforms and Enterprise Privatization
41.
Albania continues to make tangible progress in financial sector reforms, especially
privatization. Since 1997, the government has liquidated the insolvent state-owned Rural Commercial
Bank, privatized the National Commercial Bank to an investor consortium that included the IFC and
EBRD, and put the Savings Bank-the last remaining state-owned bank and Albania's largest bankunder a governance contract in preparation for its privatization, which is well advanced at this point.
Two IDA credits, the Recovery Program Technical Assistance Project (to be closed in FY02) and the
ongoing Financial Sector Institution Building Technical Assistance Project, have provided substantial
support for these actions. Close IDA-IFC cooperation has been instrumental in helping Albania move
forward with financial sector privatization. The IFC is taking a lead role in helping the government
market the Savings Bank and plans to invest in the Savings Bank, continuing its role as a catalyst in
key privatizations. The ongoing Financial Sector Institution Building Technical Assistance Project and
the proposed Financial Sector Adjustment Credit (FSAC, FY02), which will be presented to the Board
with this CAS, will also support the government in privatizing the Savings Bank, as well as INSIG, the
state-owned insurance company, marking the final exit of the state from any major ownership role in
the financial sector. The IFC and EBRD have agreed in principle to make a pre-privatization equity
investment in INSIG.
42.
The Bank will continue to support improvements in financial sector infrastructure. The
FSAC will help develop a deposit insurance system, establish an automated real-time gross settlements
system, strengthen the bankruptcy framework and collateral enforcement, and improve accounting and
auditing practices. It will also strengthen both bank and insurance regulation and supervision which
will also assist the govemment's anti-money laundering efforts. An anti-money laundering law,
prepared with IMF assistance, was passed in 2001, and the US Treasury is providing anti-money
laundering assistance to the Ministry of Finance. The Bank has helped the Bank of Albania prepare
anti-money laundering regulations and, together with the IMF, will build capacity to implement it. The
government has pledged to further improve its anti-money laundering legislation in 2002 and
strengthen its implementation.
43.
Financial intermediation and service quality are improving, especially for small and
medium enterprises. Since 1998, financial intermediation to the private sector has increased, although
from a low base. Private banks are expanding their retail banking activities, opening new branches in
key cities and providing better services, including e-banking. Still, financial intermediation remains
low, because it will take time for the above-mentioned reforms-in combination with an improved
judicial system-to produce a fully functional banking system. In parallel to structural reforms, the
Bank Group has directly supported improved access to credit, .focusing on microenterprises and small
and medium enterprises (SMEs). The lFC has invested in FEFAD bank, which targets microenterprises
and SMEs, and is using its partial credit guarantee product to help the American Bank of Albania
increase its SME portfolio. Since 1993, IDA has helped pilot and scale up urban and rural
microfinance programs that are among the most successful in the region. The ongoing Microcredit
- 18 -

Project helps develop rural savings and credit associations, expand Albania's first local private
microfinance institution, and establish an appropriate regulatory and supervisory framework for
microfinance.
44.
Enterprise privatizatioiu is advancing. The first phase-SME privatization--is completed.
The second phase-strategic sector privatization-included the successful privatization of the mobile
telecommunications company in July 2000 and the award of a second license in May 2001, both of
which were competitive and transparent. The government also established the legal framework for
privatizing Albania's chrome mining company, and restructured Albania's petroleum company into
three companies-exploitation and production; marketing; and services-each with a different path for
privatization. The government and its financial advisors are now focused on privatizing AlbTelecom,
the fixed-line telecommunications company, although the privatization schedule has been postponed
due to a weak fixed-line international market. The Bank, which administers Italian finding for the
financial advisers, will continue to monitor the privatization program-especially to ensure its
continued transparency.
Sustain Agricultural Growth and'Promote Rural Development

45.
The GPRS emphasizes development of rural areas, where four out of five poor Albanians
live. Increased productivity and employment opportunities in rural areas, along with improved access
to markets and social and financial services, are necessary for poverty reduction. A large number of
Bank operations already contribute to rural development. The ongoing Irrigation Rehabilitation and
Drainage Project and Agricultural Services Project finance investments to improve agricultural
productivity, market linkages, arid land registration. The ongoing Forestry Project improves forest
management and includes a successful pilot component for community forest and pasture management.
A Pilot Fisheries Development Project, approved in FY02, will introduce fishery associations to better
manage marine resources. In addition, the ongoing Rural Roads Project and Community Works Project
address rural infrastructure deficiencies; and the ongoing Microcredit Project is developing a
sustainable rural savings and credit association system. Most of the Bank's rural operations use
community-based approaches, which have proven highly effective in building local ownership and
accountability (see para. 22, "What worked well").
46.
During FY03-05, the Bank will give greater attention to rural development as a crosscutting objective. About one third of FY03-05 operations will focus exclusively on rural areas, and
nearly all other operations will include important rural elements. The planned PRSCs II and III (FY03
and FY04, respectively) will address issues raised in the FY02 Rural Strategy (see Box 8), and will
also support a review of the govemment's proposals to reform the rural pension system. A Road
Maintenance Project (FY02), which will be presented to the Board with this CAS, will improve rural
roads and introduce more efficient methods for road maintenance. An additional Transport Project
(FY04) will finance-subject to the results of a feasibility study-part of the Durres-Morine Road,
which is expected to bring considerable benefits to remote northem Albania (see para. 53).
Community-driven development will continue to be a dominant theme of Bank investment operations
in rural areas. The Bank plans to continue supporting small-scale infrastructure improvements in rural
areas through a Community Works II project (FY04). A Rural Development/Water Project (FY05) will
build on the experience of pilot community-based rural water schemes. The rural savings and credit
association system may require fwuther support in FY05 or FY06. An Agriculture/Irrigation III Project
(FY05) will ensure the sustainability of water user associations, complete the restructuring of water
enterprises, and support other GPRS priorities such as facilitating cultivation of fruit trees and
vineyards. The Forestry Project's successful community forest and pasture management component
- 19

-

Box 8
Albania's Rural Strategy
Recognizing the importance of the rural economy to both economic growth and poverty reduction, the Bank-with
Government and key stakeholders-undertook a Rural Strategy in FY02 as an input to both the GPRS and the CAS. The
study identifies seven pillars of a rural strategy:
(i) Improve the environment for private investment. Complete the necessary legislative framework-particularly the
Law on Bankruptcy-and then shift focus to ensuring consistent application and enforcement of laws and regulations. In
particular, strengthen the judiciary.
(ii) Develop the land market. Complete first time registration of private farm land, develop effective and convenient
land registration services, and review transaction fees and transfer taxes to ensure they do not inhibit land transactions or
drive them underground.
(iii) Strengthen rural services. Restructure and streamline agriculture research to make it more cost effective and
responsive to the needs of smallholder farmers. Continue to develop multi-faceted advisory services. End direct
Government involvement in seed production. Improve seed certification services to support the development of private
seed producers.
(iv) Encourage financial services in rural areas. Finalize regulations for savings and credit associations, improve
regulations for non-bank financial institutions, and strengthen regulation and supervision capacity. Encourage a
manageable expansion of microfinance services, but resist urging aggressive expansion that would threaten financial
sustainability.
(v) Rehabilitate and improve management of rural infrastructure, including rural roads, irrigation and drainage,
rural water supply, and rural energy. In particular, use community participation to develop institutional environments that
ensure cost recovery and maintenance.
(vi) Develop the non-farm economy. Most importantly, improve the enabling environment, including better
infrastructure and access to financial services (see i, iv, and v above). Use demand driven and community based
approaches for small targeted interventions.
(vii) Ensure sustainable resource management. Use community participation to improve forest, pasture, and
watershed management; strengthen coimmunity planning and management capacity. Reforest degraded and bare lands in
watershed areas and rehabilitate so-called "refused" lands.
A Rural Human Capital Development Study (FY04) will build on the Rural Strategy to better understand the human
capital dimensions of poverty reduction in rural Albania and to identify ways to improve the accessibility and quality of
key social services.

will be scaled up under a planned Natural Resources Project (FY05). A Rural Human Capital
Development study will focus on ways to improve accessibility, quality, and sustainability of social
services and will inform the Education III (FY04) and Health III (FY05) projects.
Ensure Sustainable Environmental and Natural Resource Management
A growing concern for the environment-an area badly neglected in past years-is
47.
another sign of a new focus on long-term outcomes. During the transition, there has been severe
environmental degradation which, if unchecked, could undermine the country's tourism potential and
increase poverty. There is recent evidence of increasing public support for environmental protection,
including the removal of illegal buildings to restore public parks and waterways in Tirana. The
government made an effort to highlight environmental-poverty linkages in the GPRS, which
emphasizes the need to reverse environmental degradation, rehabilitate heavily polluted areas that
jeopardize health, and ensure the sustainable use of natural resources (see below). The National
- 20 -

Environmental Agency was upgraded in August 2001 to a Ministry of Environment, and an updated
National Environmental Action Plan was approved by the government in January 2002. Within this
context, there is an opportunity to strengthen the government's regulatory capacity, help the
government demonstrate its commitment to the environment through visible actions, and further
increase public environmental awareness. These areas will be addressed by a planned Enviromnent
Project (FY03), which will also serve as a catalyst for additional donor funding.
48.

As the GPRS points out, natural resource degradation threatens rural development and

poverty alleviation. Since the transition, total forest cover has decreased by an estimated 15 percent
and about one million hectares of pastures have been degraded from overgrazing. Soil erosion from
deforestation affects an estimaled 60 percent of agricultural land. The ongoing Forestry Project,

financed by the Bank, Italy, and Switzerland, developed a successful new approach, centered on
community forest and pasture management. A planned Natural Resources Project (FY05) would build
on this experience, supporting sustainable productive activities to both reduce poverty and pressure on
environmentally sensitive areas.
Improve Infrastructure

49.
The CAS increases the iBank's emphasis on infrastructure, which is a major bottleneck for
private sector growth and also identified by the poor-especially in rural areas-as one of their main
constraints. The EU, a major financier of infrastructure in previous years, is shifting resources from
infrastructure to other areas. Given emphasis on infrastructure in the GPRS and the financing needs,
the CAS provides major support for infrastructure-accounting for over 50 percent of FY03-05
lending. Policy and institutional reforms necessary for improved sector performance, privatization, and
sustainability will be a central component of all infrastructure projects. The Bank will design
operations to include public participation and disclosure activities that instill transparency and
accountability in the use of public funds, providing opportunities for citizens to increasingly hold their
government and representatives accountable for using public funds effectively. The Bank also proposes
to continue support for small-scale community infrastructure through a Community Works II Project
(FY04), which will be reoriented to further improve transparency and sustainability. The Bank is
supporting infrastructure improvements in informal urban settlements through the ongoing Urban Land
Management Project.

50.
Power. Despite past failure to address the fundamental issues affecting the sector, the
government is now making a determined effort to reverse the deterioration in sector performance. To
this end, the government adopted in December 2000 a two-year Action Plan (revised in January 2002
to cover 2002-2003) outlining measures to improve sector performance. So far KESH, Albania's
electric company, has met all quarterly targets for collections and reductions in losses. Despite this
encouraging start, the sector's problems are so deep-rooted that sustained efforts will be needed for a
considerable period of time, supported by critically needed investments. The government has also
adopted a Power Sector Policy Statement-providing a clear and well-developed road map for power
sector reform. It will take time to Limplement the legislative and regulatory framework needed to attract
private investment to the sector. Consequently, donor assistance will be required for several years,
subject to continued good perfoimance in meeting Action Plan targets and implementing reforms
outlined in the Policy Statement.
51.
The Bank has so far taken the lead role in the sector, and is well placed to continue this role. A
Power Transmission and Distribution Project was approved in 1996, but suspended in 1997, mainly
because the government failed to reduce illegal electricity use and improve collection of electricity
bills. The Bank lifted the suspension of disbursements in June 2001, after the government and KESH
- 21 -

met the first quarter 2001 Action Plan targets. At the same time, the Bank decided to prepare a new
operation to support the government's efforts to resolve the crisis. The proposed Power Sector
Rehabilitation and Restructuring Project, which will be presented to the Board at the same time as this
CAS, will support technical assistance, procurement and installation of meter boxes, and rehabilitation
of priority components of the transmission and distribution networks in the Durres, Elbasan, and
Kucova regions. At government request, the Bank will also support efforts to add critically-needed
thermal generation capacity. The CAS includes a planned Thermal Power Project (FY03), which will
finance part of the construction cost of a new 100 MW thermal power station. The Bank will help the
government raise additional financing from other donors for the construction of the new thermal power
plant and will continue to play a key role in sector dialogue.
Water. Albania's water sector is plagued by many of the same problems facing the power
52.
sector: high consumption, wastage and misuse, illegal connections, below-cost tariffs, inadequate
revenue collection, and insufficient investment in physical infrastructure. Consequently, despite
Albania's abundant water resources, water supply in urban areas is intermittent and less than half of the
rural population has access to piped water. The lack of reliable water supply hampers private
investment and endangers public health, especially that of the poor. Without sector reform and
investment in physical infrastructure, the ongoing deterioration will lead to crisis situations in many
urban and rural areas. The Bank, in close cooperation with other donors, is taking the lead in helping
the government tackle policy reforms, focusing on cost recovery and private sector and community
participation. The government is preparing, with Bank assistance, a Water Supply Action Plan and a
comprehensive Water Supply and Sanitation Strategy (FY03). The Municipal Water and Wastewater
Project (FY03) will test private sector participation in water supply and sanitation through a
management contract for four cities-Durres, Fier, Lezhe, and Saranda. The management contract will
contain specific provisions to improve water supply to the poor, who are receiving less than two hours
of water per day. The project will include a rural water component to pilot the government's Rural
Water Supply and Sanitation Strategy, which is based on community participation. If the pilot is
successful, a planned Rural Development/Water Project (FY05) will scale it up. Also, a Global
Environmental Facility-financed Integrated Water and Ecosystem Management Project, in close
association with the Municipal Water and Wastewater Project, will improve wastewater management
to protect biodiversity in coastal areas. Bank support to Albania's water sector incorporates the lessons
learned from the Durres Water Project, an unsatisfactory project that closed in 2000, by emphasizing
sector reform and private sector participation.
53.
Transport Despite visible progress in improving parts of Albania's road network, major
deficiencies remain. A proposed Road Maintenance Project (FY02), which will be presented to the
Board with this CAS, will support improved maintenance of national and rural roads through gradual
contracting of routine road maintenance, also ensuring adequate policies for financing road
maintenance. Roads will be selected on the basis of access to essential services (such as hospitals) in
addition to economic criteria. The project will aim to instill transparency and accountability in the use
of public funds through participatory monitoring exercises and public local disclosure of allocated
funds. The CAS includes an additional Transport Project (FY04), which would support part of the
improvement of the Durres-Morine road, subject to the results of a feasibility study, including
economic analysis. The Durres-Morine road, which was emphasized in the GPRS, is widely perceived
in Albania as a critical investment to open the impoverished northeastern Albania to economic growth
(see Attachment 1 on CAS Consultations). In addition to road improvements, the Bank is also
supporting the port sector through the ongoing Durres Port Project. The ongoing Trade and Transport
Facilitation in Southeast Europe Project-part of a regional program joining eight Balkan countriesaims to reduce non-tariff costs of trade and transport and reduce corruption and smuggling at border
- 22 -

crossings. A planned Transport Strategy (FY05) will take stock of overall transport sector issues and
needs, especially in the context of Albania's alignment with EU structures.
Foster Human Development
54.
The Bank will continue strong support for the government's efforts to improve education,
healthcare, and social protection. Recognizing the links between poverty, low education, and the
poor health of children, the GF'RS and the govemnment's MTEF increase budgetary allocations for
education and healthcare and outline a program for improving access and quality of education and
healthcare and for increasing the effectiveness of social protection. The Bank will continue to support
the government's efforts by employing complementary and mutually-reinforcing instruments: through
nonlending services that improve understanding of key reform issues, specific investment projects
(including education and health projects that build on the Bank's previous investment operations), and
adjustment lending (PRSCs in FY02, FY03, FY04). The PRSCs support pension system reformis and
include a component to support improved social service delivery and social safety net effectiveness.
The PRSCs will support cross-cutting reforms crucial for line operations (such as the development of
the institutional prerequisites for the Education Reform Project to proceed with envisaged investments
in textbooks), while the investment projects will build capacity to implement the reforms.
55.
In the education sector, the Bank will continue to focus on improving management and
accountability. Education trends are alarming: since the transition, gross enrollment rates for basic and
secondary education have declined. Reversing these trends depends on improving management and
accountability. Bank interventions in the education sector are grounded in a comprehensive education
sector review: Albania's Education Sector: Problems and Promises (FY00). The ongoing Education
Reform Project aims to improve tie capacity of the Ministry of Education and Science (MOES) to plan
and manage the delivery of education services. The MOES is a pilot ministry for civil service reform,
supported by the ongoing Public Administration Reform Project. Crucial reforms for improving
planning and management and inc:reasing the access of the poor to quality education are also supported
by the PRSC program (FY02 through FY04). Consistent with the sector work and the government's
education objectives expressed in the GPRS, an Education III Project (FY04) will build on
strengthened MOES management capacity to further improve the quality of education and the
accountability of schools to parents. The project will focus on four key inputs to improve education
quality: curriculum, textbooks, teacher training, and learning assessments. The project will place
special emphasis on rural areas-vhere poverty is higher and educational demand appears lower-and
on activities at the community level to increase school accountability, building on Soros Foundationfunded activities to establish parent-teacher associations. In advance of preparing the Education III
Project, the government needs to update-together with key stakeholders-its sector strategy to
incorporate new data, including LSMS data and GPRS/MTEF monitoring feedback.
56.
The Bank will help the government translate its health goals into actions that protect the
basic health needs of the most vuilnerable population. Although Albania entered the transition with
a relatively healthy population, liFe expectancy has since fallen and infant and under-five mortality
rates remain relatively high, especially in rural areas. The country also faces emerging health issues,
including road accidents, a higher incidence of chronic diseases, and HIV/AIDS, which-although
currently uncommon (72 reported cases, 20 new cases in 2002)-could rapidly spread. Albania is only
now taking the first steps towardl comprehensive health care reform. The Ministry of Health has
prepared, with the assistance of the World Health Organization, a ten-year strategy that articulates
overall objectives and identifies major constraints, but work is needed to translate the broad goals into
specific actions. The GPRS and MTEF initiated a process of narrowing the priorities. With the support
-

23 -

of the PRSCs, the Ministry of Health will undertake key studies and prepare detailed implementation
plans to operationalize the strategy. The ongoing Health System Recovery and Development Project,
approved in FY98 to focus on the secondary and tertiary health care system, is being adjusted during
implementation to better align the project with GPRS priorities-for example, by including health
services and resources mapping exercises to improve access to and quality of health services. A Health
m Project (FY05) will-in line with the GPRS-support the government to: (i) establish a
performance-based remuneration system to retain qualified staff, especially in rural areas; (ii)
rationalize the decentralized health delivery system at the regional level, with emphasis on providing
quality services to the under-served population, including rural and peri-urban populations; and (iii)
improve monitoring and evaluation of public health programs. The government will undertake a health
sector assessment in the context of Health III project preparation.
57.
The Bank will support the government's efforts to create a fiscally sustainable social
protection system that effectively targets the poor and vulnerable. The government's
comprehensive pension reform program aims to create an affordable and equitable pension system
while reducing reliance on budget subsidies-currently about 1 percent of GDP, and unduly absorbing
scarce resources needed for other critical social services. The PRSCs will support the implementation
of Albania's pension reform package, as well as improved targeting of cash economic assistance
(ndhime ekonomike). A planned Social Safety Net Review (FY03) will assess the impact of ndhime
ekonomike and pension programs for employees, rural self-employed workers, and urban selfemployed workers, and will improve understanding of the extent to which the pension programs
function as social assistance for retirees. Where appropriate, the PRSCs will also support the
government's development of a sustainable framework for community-based social services, which are
primarily being developed under the ongoing Social Service Delivery Project. Attention will be paid to
the need for consistency between policies on social safety nets and decentralization.
58.
Labor market issues are not well understood. Informal labor markets play an important role
in Albania's economy, but the underlying information that will allow us to develop a comprehensive
picture of the labor market is only now becoming available (see paras. 35 and 36). A planned Labor
Market Assessment (FY05) will deepen understanding of labor market issues. It will also assess the
status of core labor standards and recommend actions to improve their enforcement (see Attachment
4).
Role of IFC and MIGA
59.
The IFC has substantially increased its portfolio in Albania. From 1998 to 2001, the IFC
approved seven projects amounting to about US$90 million: a loan to a cement bagging company near
the port of Durres; an equity commitment and loan to the Patos Marinza Project for enhanced oil
recovery; and equity investment in FEFAD Bank, which lends to microenterprises and SMEs; an
equity investment in the National Commercial Bank, where the IFC is a key participant in the investor
consortium that purchased the bank; a loan to the Elbasan Cement Factory, Albania's only operating
cement plant; and a partial guarantee facility to the American Bank of Albania to expand its SME
portfolio. The IFC will continue to focus on strengthening the financial sector and supporting SME
development. In particular, the IFC will continue its highly effective collaboration with IDA to
advance banking privatization, acting as a catalyst in key privatizations. The IFC is currently assisting
the government, in cooperation with IDA and the IMF, to privatize the Savings Bank, Albania's largest
financial institution, and INSIG, Albania's largest insurance company. The IFC also invested in the
Southeast Europe Enterprise Development (SEED), formerly the Balkans Enterprise Facility, which
provides technical assistance to SMEs and works to improve the SME business environment. SEED
- 24 -

recently opened an office in lirana and is building a pipeline of technical assistance and institution
building projects. SEED operal:es on a commercial basis, with the aim to spin off its services to local
businesses within five years. The activities of SEED are complemented by the Trans-Balkan Fund,
established by the IFC and other development finance institutions, to make equity and quasi-equity
investments in private SMEs in the region. The IFC is also looking for opportunities to invest in power
and telecommunications.
60.
In the past two years, AMIGA issued its first two guarantees for projects in Albania. The first
guarantee-US$1.6 million issued in February 2000-covers an Italian investment in a tourism
project: a marina on Albania's Adriatic coast. The second guarantee-US$7 million issued in June
2001-covers the Commercial iBank of Greece for its investmnent in the Intercommercial Bank. As of
the end of February 2002, MIGA's total exposure for projects in Albania was $8.6 million. While
MIGA is not currently underwriting any projects in Albania, it stands ready to provide coverage for
investments in private sector projects, particularly in supporting the process of privatization. MIGA is
also assisting Albania though its Investment Marketing Service. MIGA expects to provide capacity
building for an investment proraotion agency, once Albania's parliament passes the law to establish
the new agency. Possible areas for MIGA assistance to the new agency include: strategy
development, staff capacity building/training, information technology and Internet strategy
development, and development: of promotional materials (including Web presence) and outreach
capacity.
C. Lending and Nonlending Scenarios
Albania's strong performance in FY99-02 placed it in the high-case scenario of the 1998
61.
CAS and 2000 CAS Progress Iteport. The FY03-05 CAS presents two lending scenarios: low case
and base case (the status quo). (See Table 1.) The base-case IDA allocation for FY03-05 is US$131
million. In the event of exceptioiial country performance, the Bank would consider an increase in the
IDA allocation in FY05 (see para. 64).
Base-case lending would consist of about four projects per year-two adjustment credits and
62.
ten investment operations-to support GPRS policy reforms and priority actions to reduce poverty. The
base-case scenario is designed to maintain the momentum of the GPRS, leverage the implementation
of the remaining policy reform agenda, and move toward medium-term financial sustainability. To stay
in the base case, Albania must meet the triggers shown in Table 2. The base-case triggers comprise
three categories: (i) maintain macroeconomic stability and a path toward creditworthiness (barring
external shocks); (ii) make satisfactory progress in implementing the GPRS reform agenda, including
the specific measures indicated iiQ Table 2; and (iii) maintain satisfactory portfolio performance. In
addition, the base-case lending program is self regulating: if reform progress in key sectors is not
satisfactory, corresponding operations will be dropped.
Low-case lending would not exceed US$70 million, consisting of two to three investment
63.
operations per year that would hellp strengthen institutions and reduce poverty despite an unfavorable
macro or policy environment. Given that nonlending services are designed to support the GPRS, there
is little variation between the base-case and low-case scenarios. A low-case scenario would be
triggered by Albania's failure to meet the base-case triggers shown in Table 2, barring external shocks.

- 25

-

Table 1
Lending and Nonlending Program
Low Case

Base Case

Lending:

Lending:

2-3 investment projects per year, comprising lower-risk
projects that can directly impact poverty.

4 projects per year, comprising low-case lending plus
investment and adjustment operations that support reform
efforts in key areas.

Total lending up to US$70 million.

Total lending up to US$131 million

FY03:

FY03:

Thermal Power I (US$20 million)
Environment (US$5 million)

Thermal Power I (US$20 million)
Environment (US$5 million)
Municipal Water/Wastewater (US$15 million)
PRSC (US$10 million)

n

FY04:

FY04:

Education III (US$8 million)
Community Works II (US$ 10 million)

Education ID (US$8 million)
Community Works II (US$ 10 million)
Transport (US$20 million)
PRSC III (US$10 million)

FY05:
Rural Dev./Water (US$8.0 million)
Health III (US$10 million)
Agriculture/Irrigation III (US$8.0 million)

FY05:
Rural Dev./Water (US$8.0 million)
Health III (US$10 million)
Agriculture/Irrigation III (US$8.0 million)
Natural Resources (US$7 million)

Nonlending Services:
Poverty Assessment; Social Safety Net Review,
National Water Strategy;, Roma Study; Rural Human
Capital Development; Labor Market Assessment; PER;
Anti-corruption TA. (See Annex B4)

Nonlending Services:
Same as low case plus Fiscal Decentralization Study and
CEM: Competitiveness and Sources of Growth

64.
Albania could be eligible for a higher IDA allocation in the second half of the CAS period (up
to 30 percent more than the base case allocation) in the event that Albania demonstrates a strong track
record in implementing the GPRS and moving toward creditworthiness, as evidenced, for example, by
measurable improvements in all of these areas: (i) transparency, accountability and corruption in the
public sector; (ii) rule of law (including property rights); (iii) quality of public administration; (iv)
access to better quality social services; and (v) monitoring and analyzing poverty outcomes and
impacts. In the event of exceptionally strong performance in FY03 and FY04 that justifies a higher
IDA allocation in FY05, the Bank would prepare a CAS Progress Report that would discuss Albania's
performance and the possible incremental lending operations. These could consist of a Thermal Power
II Project to address Albania's growing power needs in a scenario of high growth; and/or an adjustment
operation to support additional policy reforms for more intensive efforts to reduce poverty.

-26 -

Table 2
Triggers to Stay in the Base Case
Macroeconomic Sustainability and
Movement toward Creditworthiness

* Satisfactory macroeconomic framework (barring extemal shocks), as

Growth and Poverty Reduction

* GPRS updated annually.

Strategy

* Satisfactory progress in implementing the GPRS refonn agenda, including
the following:

evidenced, for example, by implementation of the IMF PRGF program.

Investment climate

*

Agreement on a plan and timetable for addressing key findings of
the Administrative Barriers to Investment Study, followed by
satisfactory implementation of the plan.

Govemnance/Anti-Corruption

*

Satisfactory implementation of the "good govemance" agenda of
the Anti-Corruption Plan.

Efficiency, transparency, and
accountability of public
expenditures

*

Satisfactory efforts to seek stakeholder views and incorporate them into
sector strategies that underlie MTEF budgetary proposals.
Agreement on a plan and timetable to improve M&E, and satisfactory

*

implementation of the plan, including completion of a 2002 LSMS.
Access to better quality social
services
Portfolio performance

*

Operational budgets increased for education and healthcare as a %
of GDP, consistent with the MTEF.

* No more than 20% of projects (by number) with unsatisfactory IP or DO

ratings and disbursement ratio at least 15%.

Nonlending Services
65.
The Bank's nonlending program aims to strengthen the GPRS, underpin lending
operations, and provide important policy advice. The Bank's most recent economic and sector work
(ES W)-the Qualitative Poverty Assessment and the Rural Strategy-directly supported the
government's GPRS. Planned ESW is discussed in Section II.B and all analytical and advisory services
are shown in Annex B4. In addition to formal ESW, some sector studies-such as health, natural
resources, and urban developmenl-will be undertaken by the government in the context of project
preparation or implementation.
66.
The Bank has recently completed the set of core diagnostic economic and sector work. It
includes a Poverty Assessment (FY97), CEM (FY99), Public Expenditure Institutional Review (FYO1),
CPAR (FYO1), and CFAA (FY02). The CPAR and CFAA indicate that Albania has made progress in
establishing a legal and institutional base for a sound financial accountability environment. However,
the studies also point out the need for some further legal steps and, most importantly, for continued
capacity building (the findings of the CPAR and CFAA are summarized in Attachment 5). The Bank
will address fiduciary issues systematically, by more effectively integrating the recommendations of
the fiduciary work into the lending program (see para. 23: "What worked less well"). Fiduciary
recommendations have been incorporated into the PRSC I, which has a component for improving core
public sector functions and institutional arrangements. Also, the ongoing Public Administration
Reform Project supports capacity building for fiduciary improvements (see para. 33). Following the
recent completion of the CFAA, there are currently no gaps in core diagnostic ESW. To keep the
Bank's knowledge in the core areas up to date, the CAS plans updates in several areas: a Poverty
Assessment in FY03, CEM in FYC4, and PER in FY05 (see Table 3). So far, the Bank has undertaken
diagnostic work in consultation with-but not full partnership with-other development agencies.
- 27 -

During the CAS period, the Bank will explore ways to strengthen partnerships, given the interest
among donors to support the Government's efforts to strengthen the financial accountability
framework.
Table 3
Core Diagnostic Economic and Sector Work
Most Recent

Next Planned

Completion Date

Completion Date

Poverty Assessment*

FY97

FY03

Country Economic Memorandum

FY99

FY04

Public Expenditure Review

FYOI

FY05

Country Procurement Assessment Report

FYOI

FY06

Country Financial Accountability Assessment

FY02

FY07

Type

* The

Government, with the support of the Bank, prepared poverty updates in FY00 and FY01.

D. Portfolio Management
67.
The Bank has lent US$554 million to Albania over the last decade, of which US$412
million (72 percent) were disbursed as of April 30, 2002. Seven IFC operations and 43 IDA credits
have been approved since FY92. Of the 43 IDA credits, 38 have been investment projects and 5 have

been fast-disbursing adjustment or emergency operations that amount to about 24 percent of total
lending. The current IDA portfolio comprises 21 projects totaling US$265 million, of which US$107
million were disbursed as of April 30, 2002. The number of active operations and the amount of the
active portfolio have been generally constant since FY98, and the portfolio is expected to remain stable
at the current level over the next few years. Three IDA credits are expected to close by the end of
FY02. Since the March 2000 CAS Progress Report, IDA has delivered 8 lending operations for a total
of US$70 million, of which five were FY00 deliveries, and three were FY01 deliveries. IDA intends to
present five additional operations to the Board in FY02, including four operations that will be
considered by the Board with this CAS.
Overall, IDA-financed operations have performed well, owing to careful project supervision
68.
and use of conmmunity-based approaches that foster ownership and accountability. Portfolio quality
continues to improve, although slow disbursements have been a persistent issue. Annual Country
Performance Portfolio Reviews (CPPRs) have reduced implementation bottlenecks, resulting in higher
disbursements, and they are likely to further improve as the portfolio matures. Through CPPRs, the
Bank is also working closely with the donor community in Tirana to share experiences and find joint
solutions to common project implementation problems. The Bank has also been proactive in either
restructuring unsatisfactory projects or closing them on schedule. Currently, only one project (5 percent
of the portfolio) is rated as unsatisfactory and at risk, reflecting a 100-percent realism index. OED data
show a steady improvement in project outcomes and sustainability, and the government has steadily
strengthened its capacity to prepare and implement projects.
69.

Despite steady gains in recent years, portfolio performance needs careful monitoring. The

seventh annual CPPR, completed in April 2002 found the portfolio to be in good standing, but noted
continued low capacity for procurement and delays in project start-up and timely project closing. The
- 28 -

CPPR reviewed issues facing Project Implementation Units (PIUs), with a view toward gradually
reintegrating PIUs into the public administration on a case-by-case basis. The CPPR focused especially
on transparency, and the issue ol corruption was fully discussed with all line ministries implementing
Bank-funded projects.
III. IMPLEMENTING THE CAS

A. Partnerships
70.
The Bank will work to strengthen internal and external partnerships, which have already
grown stronger as a result of the GPRS. Building on the GPRS participatory process, the Bank
undertook CAS consultations with government, civil society, the private sector, parliament, and donors
(see Attachment 1). More than ever, the Bank will prepare and implement lending and nonlending
operations in close collaboration with stakeholders.
71.
It will be particularly essential to work with the EU to ensure continued complementarity
and consistency between the CAS and the Stabilization and Association Process. The EU CARDS
Multi-Annual Indicative Program for Albania foresees an allocation of EUR 143.9 million for 20022004, with five areas of support: (i) justice and home affairs, including judicial reform, police and the
fight against organized crime, integrated border management, and asylum and migration issues (EUR
71 million); (ii) administrative capacity building, including public procurement, competition and state
aids, customs, taxation and statistics (EUR 16 million); (iii) economic and social development,
including trade, local community development, and education (EUR 53.9 million); (iv) environment
and natural resources (EUR 11 million); and (v) democratic stabilization (through NGOs) (EUR 3
million). Italy is the largest bilaiteral donor, with an envisaged 2002-2004 assistance program of
US$150 million.
72.
There has been close Bank-IMF collaboration, especially during the GPRS process. The
proposed PRSC I (FY02) was prepared in parallel with the IMF's PRGF-the two staffs coordinated
closely at headquarters and in the field to ensure consistency and coordinate contents. The PRGF will
be presented to the IMF Board in June 2002. (See Attachment 6, Fund Relations Note.)
73.
Donor coordination in Albania takes place at various levels. Overall coordination at a
political level takes place mainly in the framework of the Friends of Albania (FoA), an informal group
of multilateral organizations and bilateral donors. The FoA meets on an ad hoc basis under the
chairmanship of the Presidency of the European Union and the Presidency of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE). The FoA meets about once a year at the intemational
level-in Vienna or another European capital-to evaluate Albania's progress toward reform. Most
recently, a FoA meeting was held in Vienna in mid-April 2002. The Government of Albania and
donors are currently discussing whether it would be more appropriate at this stage to bring Albania
squarely under the Consultative Group (CG) framework. The FoA also meets frequently in Tirana to
discuss political developments and to coordinate various areas of reforms.
74.
Sectoral donor meetings in Tirana are the main instrument for technical cooperation.
Sectoral donor meetings, chaired by the Bank, the EU, and key bilateral donors, functioned well in
1997 and 1998, but were interrupted for one year during the Kosovo crisis. An attempt was made in
May 2000 to revive sectoral donor meetings, but meetings have often been delayed and sporadic.
During this CAS period, the Bank and the EU intend to work together to improve coordination at the
technical level and to help the government gradually assume a leading role.
-

29 -

Box 9
Building Capacity in Parliament
The Parliament was only marginally involved in the preparation of the first GPRS, mainly because the Parliament was
dissolved during the most important stage of GPRS formulation. Moreover, although the Parliament has proven effective
at timely adoption of legislation, it has limited capacity to formulate policies, analyze the national budget, and monitor
public expenditures. The Parliament has no permanent technical staff. It has also been mired in both personal and
political feuding, including frequent boycotts by the opposition party. The Democratic Party ended its most recent
boycott of Parliament in January 2002.
During the start of the GPRS process, the Bank initiated discussions with parliamentary leaders on how to build the
Parliament's capacity to engage more constructively in national policy and the budget process. Following these
discussions, the Government of the Netherlands approved a grant to be implemented by OSCE to (i) provide long-term
training to Members of Parliament (MPs) on issues of governance, economic development, and public resource
management; (ii) create a permanent research and advisory unit for MPs and parliamentary commissions; and (iii)
support outreach activities to inform the electorate, get feedback, and strengthen the a&countability of MPs towards their
constituents. This project-Modernizing the Capacity of the Assembly of the Republic of Albania-will start in mid2002. In addition, a multipartisan group of MPs and senior Government officials participated in a PRSP workshop in
May 2002 organized by the World Bank Institute in partnership with the Parliament of Finland.
The project will foster links between Albania's national assembly and parliaments in Europe. The project is expected to
build the Parliament's capacity to amend and approve increasingly complex legislation. The project will also help the
Parliament play an active role in monitoring and updating the GPRS. It will deepen the GPRS participatory process and
help the country reach a broader consensus on development priorities and strategies.

75.
Recognizing that sustainable development must be an Albanian-led effort, the Bank will
support an increasingly stronger Albanian role in donor coordination, possibly beginning with a
CG meeting to take place in Tirana in the second half of 2002 or the first half of 2003. This would be
the third CG meeting for Albania, following the 1999 Emergency Joint G24/CG meeting for budgetary
and balance of payments support after the Kosovo crisis, and the March 2001 CG chaired jointly by the
Bank and the EU. Future CG meetings will be particularly useful to better align donors' support with
the GPRS. The government will also be encouraged to take a leading role in sectoral donor meetings.
76.
Additional donor coordination initiatives take place as need arises on specific issues.
Effective cooperation with multilateral institutions, bilateral donors, and NGOs has also been
established in the context of specific lending and nonlending operations. Successful partnerships at the
project level are demonstrated by a high number of cofinancing arrangements. So far, the Bank has
worked with 14 different cofinanciers.
77.
The Bank will build on the GPRS process to strengthen partnerships with civil society. A
number of ongoing Bank operations already involve NGOs or community groups. In the spirit of the
GPRS, the Bank is now more systematically involving stakeholders in project design and
implementation.
The Bank is reaching out to keep Parliament better informed of the Bank's work. Bank
78.
teams visiting Albania are providing regular briefs to relevant parliamentary commissions on sector
issues. Also, Parliament was included in the CAS consultations (see Attachment 1). Although
Parliament was not extensively involved in preparing the first GPRS due to elections, the GPRS
process is expected to strengthen Albania's democratic institutions by encouraging open policy debate
and increasing transparency. The OSCE is implementing a project that specifically aims to build
Parliament's capacity to better participate in policy formulation and the budget process (see Box 9).
- 30 -

B. Monitoring of Outcomes
79.
The Bank places increased emphasis on monitoring, consistent with the GPRS process, the
lessons learned from the previc,us CAS (para. 23), and client feedback (Box 3 and Attachment 1).
Under the CAS, the Bank will help the government strengthen monitoring and evaluation of the GPRS
and public expenditures (see para. 35). A broad range of performance indicators and targets are shown

in the Country Partner Strategy Matrix (Annex B9), which is based on Albania's GPRS matrix. The
Matrix includes GPRS final indicators/targets (in bold) and intermediate indicators/targets (in italics).
According to the GPRS, indicators will be disaggregated by region, socioeconomic group, and gender,
where possible. GPRS priorities are broadly consistent with the Millennium Development Goals
(MDGs). (See Box 10 for Albanzia's progress toward meeting the MDGs.) Under the PRSC program,
the Bank is helping Albania improve indicators and targets, and better link them to the MDGs.
80.
Under the CAS, monitoring the Bank's effectiveness will take place at two levels: (i) at the
project level, the Bank will continue to strengthen project M&E frameworks to better evaluate the
effectiveness of specific operations in achieving desired outcomes; (ii) at the level of the overall
assistance program, the Bank will monitor how successfully the CAS supports GPRS objectives, using
the Country Partner Strategy Matrix, and especially the core CAS benchmarks shown in Table 4. At
the midpoint of the CAS period--in FY04-the Bank will review the indicators and targets to assess
progress in implementing the assistance program; adjust the Bank's strategy if necessary; and improve
indicators and targets where better data is available.
Table 4
Core CAS Monitoring Benchmarks
GPRS/CAS Objective

CAS Progress Benchmark

1. Improve Govemance and
Strengthen Institutions

* Continue to implement the Civil Service Reform Law, demonstrated by improving

11. Promote Sustainable Private
Sector Growth

* Conclude the sale of the Savings Bank and INSIG.
* Implement a plan to address the findings of the Administrative Barriers to

ratios of performance indicators (Part I of Country Partner Strategy Matrix).
* UJpdate the GPRS on a regular basis, using a participatory process.
* Continue to use the MTEF to allocate the budget, progressively widening its
coverage and strengthening its linkage to the GPRS.

Investment Study.
* Complete first-time registration of agricultural land.
* Meet quarterly targets in Power Sector Action Plan. Implement the first phase of
the Power Sector Reform Program.
III. Foster Human
Development

* Increase expenditures annually for education and healthcare, in conformity with the

MTEF.
* Develop and implement a detailed plan to reach education enrollment targets,
based on empirical analyses of supply of and demand for education in rural and
urban areas.
* Develop and implement a detailed plan to reach public health targets.
* Submit to Parliament an acceptable pension policy package to address long-term
problems of coverage, affordability, and equity, including changes in parameters
such as indexation, early retirement, and urban-rural differentials. Reduce pension
deficit as a percent of GDP.

- 31 -

Box 10
Albania's Progress Towards the Millennium Development Goals
The Millennium Development Goals (MDGs)-formally endorsed by 189 United Nations member countries in
September 2000-aim to increase access to education and healthcare; preserve the environment; and halve, from 1990 to
2015, the proportion of people in extreme poverty worldwide. There are 8 goals and 48 indicators to measure country
progress toward the goals. Although the MDGs are formulated for all signatory countries, it is recognized that MDGs
need to be adapted to country-specific circumstances. In the case of Albania, there are efforts to: (i) verify the
availability and quality of MDG-related data; (ii) set appropriate intermediate and final targets for indicators most
relevant for Albania; and (iii) assess how well the Govemment's GPRS and supporting external aid are positioned to
help Albania meet the broad MDGs. Supported by the PRSCs, the Government has started to align its monitoring
priorities with the MDGs. In parallel, the Bank team has compiled an inventory of data related to MDGs, which will be
used to establish baselines and identify data gaps to be addressed by the PRSC monitoring program (see Attachment 7).
Albania boasted relatively good performance on a number of social indicators when the transition began. However,
economic, social, and political upheavals during the last decade of economic transition have impacted the population's
welfare. The country inherited social and physical infrastructure that it cannot afford to maintain, especially in regions
with high levels of outmigration. Setting baselines at 1990 can therefore be misleading, because that year roughly
corresponds to the beginning of Albania's economic transition, when the population's welfare started to decline.
Furthermore, Albania's current status vis-a-vis some MDGs needs to take into account underlying trends. For example,
although the reported incidence of HIV/AIDS is low, there is a rapid increase in risky behaviors such as drug use and
prostitution, compounded by the deterioration of the public health system, which could lead to a rapid spread of the
disease. Preventing HIV/AIDS is therefore a healthcare priority.
The following represent a preliminary analysis of Albania's progress toward the MDG's, which will be further assessed
as the country's monitoring program progresses:
Income poverty: The MDG target of halving the proportion of people whose income is less than one dollar a
day will be measured beginning in 2002, when the LSMS yields the first reliable data of this kind. Albania will
also monitor the number of people with incomes less than two dollars per day, estimated at almost one-half of
the population in a 1998 Living Conditions Survey (which was not fully representative).
Social Sectors: Albania is currently moving away from the MDG target of full primary education for all boys
and girls. Net primary enrollment rates have dropped to 81 percent. As a result, the CAS supports-through the
PRSCs and education reform programs-the Government's efforts to improve sector management. Under the
GPRS and MTEF, the Government is conmmitted increase resources to the education and health sectors.
Although Albania has made progress toward the MDG target to reduce the under-five mortality rate, there are
wide regional disparities that could undermine further progress. The MDG target to reduce maternal mortality
by 75 percent would unrealistically decrease Albania's ratio to near that of industrialized countries, and is also
complicated by the poor state of the public health system. As with HIV, both child and maternal mortality are
healthcare priorities.
Gender: The MDG target to eliminate gender disparity in education does not appear to be a major concem for
Albania at present. However, there may be a problem of boys leaving school early, which the LSMS will verify.
The CAS's response to broader gender issues is described in Attachment 2.
Environmental Sustainability:The rural water strategy is likely to improve access to safe water, but the MDG
is ambitious and may be difficult to achieve. There is still much to be done to improve access to water and
sanitation especially in rural areas. Deforestation and land degradation are concems, and environmental
management institutions remain weak.
Global Partnership:Albania has made progress toward developing an open, rule-based, predictable, and nondiscriminatory trading and financial system and is committed to good governance and poverty reduction.

-32 -

C. Risks
The CAS is subject tto largely the same risks as the GPRS, which are outlined in the JSA.
81.
CAS implementation faces three main risks: (i) domestic or regional instability; (ii) chronic power
shortages; and (iii) unsound goverhance and weak institutional capacity.
Albania remains vullnerable to domestic or regional instability that could delay-or
82.
derail-reforms. Albania's political stability and domestic security have improved since 1997, and
there are signs that parliamentary democracy is gaining a hold. But Albania's political culture remains
mired in personal feuding, and the presidential election in June 2002 could rekindle friction. Renewed
civil unrest-such as that which occurred in 1997-is unlikely given the more mature political
environment. A more possible scenario is political feuding or temporary periods of instability,
diverting attention from the reform program. Continued commitment to reforms is reinforced,
however, by the odds at stake: the prospect of alignment with European structures through the
Stabilization and Association P'rocess. The GPRS also helps establish a broad consensus for reforms.
The Bank will help build social. cohesion by supporting the GPRS, focusing especially on transparency
and accountability and increased civil society participation in public policy formulation and finance
management. Regional instabil:ity also remains a destabilizing possibility. The Stabilily Pact for South
East Europe and the Stabilization and Association Process create incentives for resolving conflicts
peacefully and maintaining stability, but ethnic nationalism lingers.
The electricity crisis l)oses a major risk to growth and stability. The crisis has multiple
83.
adverse impacts. The government's subsidy for electricity imports (US$31.5 million in 2001) diverts
funds from other critical neecls and could undertnine further fiscal consolidation and sustainable
growth. Extensive power outages harm businesses and decrease the quality of life and health,
especially of the poor. Failure to stay the course of power sector reform could even contribute to social
unrest and political instability. For these reasons, the CAS places great emphasis on helping the
govermment reverse the situation in the power sector, through the proposed Power Sector
Rehabilitation and Restructuririg Project (FY02) and a planned Thermal Power Project (FY03). A
second Thermal Power Project would be considered under a high-case lending scenario. The Bank will
also mitigate power sector risks by playing a leading role in sector dialogue and donor coordination.
84.
Failure to improve governance, curb corruption, and strengthen institutions would
undermine the implementatioi of the GPRS and CAS. Criminality has been on the rise since the
transition from socialism, and became particularly entrenched during the power vacuum that prevailed
during the 1997 civil crisis. Although law and order has greatly improved since 1997, organized crime
and human trafficking remain serious concerns. There is also public concern about the rise of
"monopolies." Vested interests are likely to impede progress towards good governance. Continued
international support-especially by the EU in the context of the Stabilization and Association
Process-will mitigate the risk of insufficient progress toward sound governance. The Bank will work
with the international communiity to support Albania's anti-corruption efforts. Most importantly, the
Bank will try to mitigate this riskc by placing cross-cutting emphasis on institution building, which will
be embedded in all lending operations. Increasing transparency will create more accountable-and
therefore stronger-institutions. The Bank will employ complementary adjustment and investment
lending to both support key policy reforms and build capacity to implement reforms. Lending
operations will also be designed with flexibility to support Albania's decentralization process and to
build capacity at local levels. Given Albania's limited institutional capacity, it will need substantial and
well-coordinated external support to meet the challenge of implementing and monitoring the GPRS.
- 33 -

The Bank will work to improve donor coordination, encouraging use of the GPRS as a common
framework, and helping the government gradually assume a leading role.

James D. Wolfensohn
President
by Shengman Zhang

Washington D.C.

- 34 -

ATTACHMENT 1:

CAS CONSULTATIONS WITH STAKEHOLDERS

1.
Background and process. The Government of Albania welcomed the opening of the CAS
consultation process to all stakeholders, including the government, the Parliament, the civil society, the
private sector, and external paxtners. Indeed, the government considered this approach as being fully
consistent with the participatory nature of Albania's Growth and Poverty Reduction Strategy (GPRS),
which underpins the CAS. The consultations took place during the period of March 15 to April 15,
2002. They were based on the Final GPRS launched by the government in November 2001, as well as
on a CAS Discussion Note which introduced the Bank's program and role in Albania, explained the
CAS process, and summarized the proposed assistance strategy for FY03-05. Consultations with the
civil society were facilitated by The Carter Center, which had also facilitated the participation of civil
society in GPRS preparation.
2.
CAS consultations were held primarily in Tirana, as well as in Shokdra, the most important city
of Northern Albania, a region with the highest incidence of poverty in Albania. The consultations took
mainly the form of round tables with the Inter-ministerial Committee for Economic Policies (chaired
by the Prime Minister, and including most of the Cabinet); the leadership of the Parliament, including
the Speaker, the Parliamentary B3ureau, the leaders of all parliamentary groups, and the chairpersons of
key commissions in charge of economic and social affairs; the leaders of the two main political parties;
private sector representatives, including key organizations and associations in industry, construction,
and banking; several groups representing the civil society, including the GPRS National Civil Society
Advisory Group and rural development, economic growth, and anti-corruption groups. All these groups
included representatives of academia, think-tanks, media, professional associations, the business
community, and non-governmental organizations active in the field of economic and social
development. Field consultations took place with farmers and members of farmers' associations. The
CAS was also discussed with Albania's key external development partners.
3.
In addition to the rounct tables, the consultations built on extensive exchanges with various
group of stakeholders on the GCPRS (including hospitals, schools, water users' associations, microcredit associations, and others), on feedback received from beneficiaries on Bank-financed projects, on
the discussion of the ECA report on Transition in Eastern Europe and the Former Soviet Union, as
well as on feedback provided by stakeholders through a special Albania CAS website. The CAS
website was set up in Albanian and English. It posted GPRS documentation, the CAS Discussion Note,
minutes of consultations, detailled informnation on Bank activities in Albania, and comments and
proposals from participants. The consultations were well covered by the national media. The most
important newspapers and radio and TV stations covered the meetings with stakeholders. The CAS
Discussion Note was published in full in the most important economic publication. And the Bank's
assistance program, current and proposed, was discussed in numerous articles and TV presentations.
4.
The CAS consultations rnarked a premiere in Albania's relations with the Bank, and for that
matter, with external development partners. The participants to consultations expressed high
appreciation for the transparency of the process, and compared it favorably to the interface with other
partners. The civil society representatives expressed particular satisfaction with the opportunity to
have their voice heard by the government, and they encouraged the Bank to continue facilitating such
debates within cross-cutting segnients of Albania's society.
5.
The consultations provided an important validation of the primary goals of the GPRS-and, by
implication, the CAS. The sheer mass of requests and proposals advanced by participants highlighted
the value attached by all stakeholders to the Bank's contribution to Albania's development. Many
-35 -

participants stressed the fact that it is not necessarily the Bank resources they are looking for, but rather
the objectivity and quality brought in by Bank-financed projects or policy advice. By the same token,
the needs expressed by stakeholders exposed the limitations of the Bank assistance program, and the
importance of streamlining the GPRS into the assistance programs financed by other donors. At the
same time, the consultations exposed the limited capacity of the Albanian stakeholders to participate
more effectively in the dialogue, the gap remaining between the perceptions of the public and private
sectors, and the need for more consensus building within different groups of the civil society.
General comments. Most if not all participants to consultations highlighted a number of
6.
general themes, stressing the need to:
*

carry out an overall evaluation of the impact of Bank assistance to Albania over the past ten
years, with special emphasis on poverty reduction and govemance objectives;

*

strengthen monitoring and evaluation mechanisms for Bank-financed projects, to associate
NGOs and beneficiaries in providing information on the impact of projects, and to provide
public information to the civil society;

*

improve the sustainability of Bank-financed projects, including emphasis on strengthening
institutions and capacities, especially at local level, and/or representing directly the
beneficiaries;

*

broaden consultations to other partners, such as, for example, the trade unions, especially as
concems policies affecting employment, retirement, professional education and training, as
well as conceming the social cost of reforms in general;

*

focus more Bank operations in areas with the highest incidence of poverty, especially Northem
Albania. In this context, all participants attached great importance to the involvement of the
Bank in the rehabilitation of the Durres-Morine road;

*

support the rehabilitation of infrastructure, especially in the light of the reorientation of other
donors' assistance towards institution building. Most participants stressed the importance of
adding new thermal power generation capacities, helping rehabilitate water supply and
sanitation facilities, continuing the program for road rehabilitation and maintenance, and
assisting with urban renewal and management;

*

strengthen aid coordination, with a view to improving the balance between financing of
infrastructure and capacities, avoiding overlaps, and ensuring proper sequencing of
investments; and

*

coordinate GPRS implementation (and the associated assistance strategies, the World Bank
CAS included) with the strategy for association and eventual integration in the European
Union.

7.
The government discussed the draft CAS in the Inter-ministerial Committee for Economic
Policies, which is chaired by the Prime Minister, and includes all sector departments responsible
for economic and social development, as well as cross-cutting departments such as Finance,
Economy, Justice, and local government. The initial discussion of the CAS was followed by the
creation of a working group chaired by the Minister of Finance (and Bank governor), which
reviewed in detail with each department the proposed CAS, and presented to the Council of
Ministers a consolidated feedback, for its approval. The consultations were completed through a
second series of meetings with key ministers and the Prime Minister.
- 36 -

8.
The consultations with the government highlighted both the importance of the World Bank
as main lender to Albania, and the high regard of the Albanian Authorities for the quality of the
projects and policy advice provided by the Bank. The consultations confirmed the general
consistency of the proposed assistance program for lending and non-lending services with the
GPRS, and suggested a numbeT of specific changes aimed at targeting poverty alleviation. The
single most important request was to include a Bank contribution towards the rehabilitation of the
Durres-Morine road, and take the lead in mobilizing other donors' assistance. The government also
expressed the wish to accelerate the proposed thermal power generation project, and supported a
new community works project, as well as an environmental protection project.
9.
The discussion of the CAS with the government offered the opportunity of high-level
dialogue on numerous policy issues. They included privatization of strategic sectors (banking,
telecommunications), reforms in health, education, and social protection (e.g., privatization of
some health services, reform of the health insurance system, decentralization of health and
education, outsourcing of technology introduction in schools to private enterprises, reform of the
pension system). The consultations emphasized the need to strengthen monitoring and evaluation,
with a view to assessing the impact of sector policies and actions on poverty reduction.
10.
Consultations with the Parliament were hosted by the Speaker, and well-attended by the
leaders of all parliamentary groups, the Bureau of the Parliament, and the chairpersons of the key
commissions in the field of development. The two rounds of consultations with the legislature were
very much appreciated by participants, and marks a first in the Parliament's exposure to
development issues. Traditionally, the members of the parliament find out about policy decisions
and assistance programs only when the Executive submits pertinent legislation. The
parliamentarians feel that upstream information on evolving policy discussions and assistance
programs will help them play a more constructive role in advancing Albania's development in the
context of a poverty reduction strategy. They encouraged the Bank to continue informing the
Parliament regularly about Bank-financed activities and projects, and expressed their wish to play a
more active role in overseeing the implementation of public expenditure programs and enforcement
of legislation enacted by legislature.
11.
The Parliament stressed the importance of upgrading Albania's infrastructure, in particular
electrical energy generation, tran,smission and distribution, and roads. The participants emphasized
the need to favor rural development, to stem rural migration, to make a more intense use of
capacities in the Parliament, the academia and national research institutions, to help speed up the
privatization of strategic sectors such as banking and electricity, and to help improve governance,
especially support for anti-conuption efforts, and for implementation of property restitution
legislation. They highlighted the importance of the Bank's policy advice, and expressed a number
of concerns, including the need to assess better the impact of Bank-financed projects on growth and
poverty reduction, and take into account the social impact of reforms supported by the Bank.
Finally, they expressed conceni with the proposed reduction in IDA resources and with the
difficulty of graduating to IBRD bofrowing.
12.
The consultations with political leaders demonstrated strong bi-partisan support for both
the GPRS, and the CAS. The chairmen of the Socialist and Democratic parties shared their belief in
a strong medium- to long-term poverty reduction strategy, the need to focus efforts on developing
the poorer Northern Albania, the emphasis to be put on upgrading infrastructure, the pursuit of
- 37 -

further liberalization of the economy, and the need to improve governance in general, and fight
corruption in particular. They expressed their wish to cooperate in the Parliament on adopting
legislation needed for development, and the fight against poverty.
13.
The consultations with the private sector pointed to the need for a more proactive
response of the business community, and a better dialogue with the government and with
international partners. The participants, who included leaders of key trade associations, think tanks,
consulting firms, as well as prominent businesspersons, asked the Bank to take the lead in a
dialogue with the government on removing bottlenecks for private investors, including legislative
action on property, bankruptcy, and commercial law, better implementation of fiscal legislation to
eliminate abuses and discretionary actions, development of capital markets, enforcement of
competition, and increased participation of local business in the privatization process, and in public
procurement activities. The participants advised the Bank to emphasize improvement of
infrastructure, especially roads and electricity.
14.
The participants to consultations expressed their determination to work towards articulating
a common position of the private sector on the key barriers to investment, and take the initiative in
organizing a national conference on private sector development in Albania. They are counting on
the advice of the Bank (including IFC, FIAS and SEED), and on leveraging a reform agenda for
private sector development through further policy-based Bank lending. They encouraged the Bank
to disseminate information on best practice concerning business legislation and administrative
procedures, help strengthen the capacity of public administration, especially fiscal administration,
and help build managerial skills in the private sector, as well as in public administration. One
specific suggestion was to establish a Public Administration Institute. Such an Institute has actually
been created with the support of the Bank-financed Public Administration Reform Project, and is
already operational. Finally, they advised the Bank to ensure that public investment in general, and
Bank-financed investment in particular, is considered only when the possibilities for private
investment were exhausted.
15.
Consultations with a mixed group representing the business community as well as the civil
society addressed the specific topic of promoting Albania's economic growth. In addition to the
issues mentioned above, the participants stressed the need to alter the government's anti-business
perception, which stems from the widespread suspicion of corrupt business practices. They
proposed to improve the transparency of business transactions by introducing internationallyacceptable standard accounting norms, and by reviewing discretionary transactions such as
licensing, VAT reimbursement and other administrative procedures. The participants proposed the
establishment of a business watchdog group, dedicated in particular to monitoring public
procurement. They advised the Bank to make more efforts to consult local authorities on decisionmaking about investment in areas which will increasingly be of the competence of local
government, e.g., water supply and sanitation. While supporting further Bank investment in the
energy sector, the participants advised the Bank to support the privatization of the national power
company (KESH), or at least its co-management with private partners. Like all other stakeholders,
the private sector representatives strongly supported Bank assistance for the rehabilitation of the
Durres-Morine road, as a means to fostering economic opportunities in Northern Albania, and
regional integration.

-38 -

16.
The consultations witlh the civil society were the most intensive. They included several
rounds of discussions with the GPRS National Civil Society Advisory Group, organizations and
associations active in rural development, academia, media, professional associations, trade unions,
think tanks, foundations, NGDs, businesspeople, organizations and personalities dedicated to
fighting corruption, and local representatives of the civil society and farmers in Northern Albania.
The discussions with these groups were uniformly open, animated, and constructive. Without
exception, the participants welcomed the opportunity of conveying their views and needs to the
Bank, and this additional possibility of indirect dialogue with the government. The consultations
demonstrated the strides in the assertiveness and capacity of the civil society to participate in the
dialogue on development and poverty reduction. Given Albania's little or no history of civil society
participation, and its very recent democratic institutions, the participation of the civil society to the
GPRS and CAS processes has been remarkable.
17.
The feedback provided by the civil society ranged from specific advice on the content,
design and implementation of the Bank's assistance program, to advice on policy issues to be
raised by the Bank in its dialogue with the government, and to suggestions on how to enhance the
participatory process and the role of the civil society in strategy formulation and program
implementation.
18.
Concerning the content, design and implementation of the Bank program, the participants
suggested that the Bank should:
*

ensure the needed "breathing space" for the private sector, by considering public projects
only when private financing is not available;

*

continue permanent consultations with the civil society and beneficiaries on the content and
design of proposed operations, starting with the very initial stages of project preparation;

*

emphasize the role of private investment in general, and small and medium enterprises in
particular, in creating the jobs and incomes essential for effective and sustainable poverty
reduction;

*

give a higher priority to rural development and to stemming rural migration;

*

favor community-based projects;

*

factor in the needs of most vulnerable/marginalized groups (including youth), and involve
them in the design of future operations;

*

build more synergy among projects, and with the projects financed by the government or
other donors;

*

focus more its assistance on high poverty areas, especially Northem Albania, and consider
in particular participating in the rehabilitation of the Durres-Morine road as a means to
opening the North to investment and trade with the rest of Albania, and to Kosovo and
beyond;

*

set up a monitoring and evaluation system to assess the impact of Bank-financed projects
on poverty reduction, by evaluating access to and quality of services provided to Albanians
through these projects, and associate the civil society, local authorities, and beneficiaries, to
the M&E process; and
- 39 -

*

act more as a development institution, rather than as a Bank. This comment was meant to
convey the need to focus Bank funds primarily to visible achievements in rural
development, education, health, infrastructure, energy, etc., rather than provide untied
budget support.

19.
The participants highlighted several policy issues they consider critical for the success of
the GPRS, and which they hope the Bank could pursue in its dialogue with the government:
*

systematic
trade and
resolution
investment

elimination of the obstacles to private sector development, including business,
fiscal legislation, property, bankruptcy and accountancy laws, improved
of commercial disputes, removal of administrative barriers, and increased
in critical infrastructure, especially energy and roads;

*

more aggressive anti-corruption efforts, including speeding up actions intended to increase
transparency of public procurement and public expenditure in general, improving the
functioning of the judiciary, accelerating the reform of public administration, strengthening
the capacity and credibility of the investigative media, and introducing a monitoring and
evaluation system to assess the results of anti-corruption efforts and make them available to
the civil society. A common theme was the need to combine systemic reform with
immediate actions which could yield visible results, and build up broader support in
fighting corruption; and

*

increased attention to enhancing competition and eliminating de facto monopolies in the
Albanian economy. The participants highlighted the "State-capture" aspect of this issue,
characterized by monopolistic arrangements intertwining politics, business, and media
control.

20.
The participants were unanimous in voicing the wish to further strengthen the participation
of the civil society in economic policy formulation, the articulation of a national strategy for
poverty reduction, and the implementation of programs and projects in the context of this strategy.
There were no specific suggestions on how to accomplish these objectives. It is expected that The
Carter Center will continue its mission of helping build a more cohesive response of the various
segments of the civil society, and facilitating its dialogue with the government and external
partners.
21.
The consultations with the key external partners included the main donors active in
Albania, and in particular a donors' core group monitoring the GPRS under the aegis of the Friends
of Albania. It should be noted that the CAS consultations built on regular meetings of the core
group, which provided an opportunity for more in-depth discussions of the GPRS, donors' role in
supporting its implementation, and modalities for strengthening donor coordination in this regard.
The donors voiced strong support for the GPRS approach, and stated that they will seek to
gradually align their respective strategies to the GPRS, according to their specific cycle of country
strategy formulation. Some donors indicated that they would support capacity building for
implermentation, and M&E of the GPRS, including support for both the GPRS secretariat, and for
the policy and programming units in sector departments.
22.
The consultations confirmed the generally stable or declining trend in projected external
assistance, and the increased emphasis to be put on some major donors, and in particular the EU,
on institutional development. The participants stressed the need to coordinate closer and avoid
-40 -

duplications or gaps in externally-financed programs. Many of them supported a greater role of the
EU in donor coordination, in line with the stabilization and association process. There was
substantial interest in the idea of promoting a more operational structure for senior-level policy
analysis and recommendations within the government, and eventually mirroring this structure with
a similar donors' group carrying out a more regular policy dialogue with the Authorities. The need
for a joint M&E system was emphasized by many participants.
23.
The discussion of proposed assistance programs indicated that by and large they match the
priorities of the GPRS. Substantial financing will be provided for institutional development and
capacity building in public administration and the judiciary, including support for e-govemment
(Albania is one of four pilot coumtries to be eligible for special financing under the e-government
program sponsored by Italy and other donors). Financing of infrastructure, including energy and roads,
and of education and health, would be primarily provided by Italy, EBRD, EIB, and the World Bank.
The participants stressed the need to increase support for environmental protection, but there were no
specific pledges.

-41 -

ATTACHMENT 2: GENDER ISSUES

Albania social, economic, and political transformation over the last decade has had important
effects on both males and females. Although quantitative and qualitative data are still limited (see para.
17 and Box 2), the 2002 Living Standards Measurement Survey (LSMS), the Poverty Assessment
(FY03), and other planned analytical work will show how both genders are faring under the transition.
Gender inequality can affect both economic growth and poverty by reducing labor productivity;
for example, employers pay inefficiently high wages to men, and women under-invest in the
acquisition of skills and spend an inefficiently high proportion of their time doing household
activities.' Reliance on a partner's income can also lead to economic vulnerability. The Bank's PRSC
program and social sector investment operations aim to address sector-specific gender related issues,
such as ensuring access to high-quality social services for both genders. The Poverty Assessment will
include a Country Gender Assessment (CGA) for Albania, which will use the LSMS, the 2001
Qualitative Poverty Assessment, and other data to shed light on concerns relating to gender, including
issues that cut across sectors. The CGA will also provide recommendations on how the country's
reform program and the Bank's portfolio might better address gender-related issues.
The following information on the current situation in Albania is drawn from the limited
information available, to be further elaborated in the CGA:
* Labor market. In Albania, compared to countries with a similar GDP, women enjoy a
relatively high labor force participation rate, although they are disproportionately represented
in secondary professions. This is partly the legacy of the state-run labor market. Activity rates
remained roughly constant from 1990 to 1996 (latest available data), at about 90 percent for
men and 73 percent for women. In 1998, women represented about 42 percent of the labor
force. The 2001 Qualitative Poverty Assessment suggests that many women experience
increased responsibilities when men leave the household to migrate abroad. 2 Little is
understood about the informal labor market, and a proposed Labor Market Assessment (FY05)
will address the gender dimensions of labor market issues.
* Other income dimensions. Households headed by single parents and elderly women are more
likely than other social groups to be poor. In Albania, women benefit disproportionately from
non-labor income such as pensions (where women are entitled to retire five years earlier than

men, despite their longer life expectancy). They can also qualify for other benefits, such as a
full year of maternity leave at 50 to 80 percent of their salary. Female-headed households also
disproportionately receive remittances from abroad, which play a major role in poverty
alleviation. There is little data available on access to credit by gender.
* Education. Overall basic education enrollments declined from over 90 percent prior to the
transition to 88 percent in 1997. Secondary enrollment rates in 1989 were 79 percent, and they
fell to roughly 40 percent by 1997. However, female/male ratios increased from 1990 to 1997:
(i) in secondary education from 0.89 to 1.01; and (ii) in higher education from 1.14 to 1.39.
'See Paci, Pierella, "Regional Gender Study: Europe and Central Asia," [World Bank, draft], February 20, 2002.
2 See De Soto et. al., "A Qualitative Assessment of Poverty in 10 Areas of Albania," World Bank, June 30, 2001.
-42 -

The policy dialogue will accordingly need to focus on why boys are staying out of school at
higher rates than girls.
* Health Status. In 1999 the gap in life expectancy between women and men was 4.7 years,
down from 6.1 in 1990 Maternal and infant mortality rate trends remain to be assessed. There
is an increase in risky behaviors that could contribute to a higher prevalence of sexually
transmitted diseases and HIV/AIDS. Albania's fertility rate dropped from 3.4 in 1982 to 2.1 in
1999.

* Violence Against Wonmen and Human Trafficking. Although quantitative data is limited,
violence against women is a serious concern. The United Nations Interregional Crime and
Justice Research Institute (1998) included questions on sexual violence in its 1995-1996 Crime
Victimization Surveys, iinding that about 6 percent of women in Tirana reported being raped.
The ongoing Social Seivices Delivery Project includes support to programs for women and
children at risk. Albania also suffers from a major human trafficking problem. Girls and
women are the primary rictims, but some boys and young men are also affected. This issue has
become a major component of the European Commission's dialogue with Albania.

-43 -

ATTACHMENT

Development
Challenges

3: PARTNERSHIP MATRIX

Govemnance and Institution Building

Macro
Stability

Sustainable Private Sector Growth

Human Development

0~~~~~~~~~

_

Partner/Activity

!>

_
0

OtherMulUlaterals
E
-

G~~~ovenete>;~.........

IMF-

U

co
.~~0

.0-a

-

-

-

r-

_.
.9~~~

~~~
k

~~~~~

I
0

-

Ii

'

-~~
cn~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~.

L

': i

C

,

E

2

8

, ,.
:

|

r-

-,

-,l...

Gavemment

IDA
Othe~~~~~~~r

>l j:W

Biaerl

IFC
EU
htaly_
Other Multilaterals

_

_

____

Other B|laterals

7

Little or No Focus

1~Some

F

L~~'JSignificant Focus

Focus

- 44 -

High Focus

0

ATTACHMENT 4: CoRE LABOR STANDARDS

The four core labor standards are: elimination of all forms of forced or compulsory labor;

effective abolition of child labor; elimination of discrimination in employment; and freedom of
association and the right to collective bargaining.
*

Forced Labor. The Law on Major Constitutional Provisions and the Labor Code prohibit
forced or compulsory labor in general, and forced or bonded labor by children in particular.
However trafficking in women and children for sexual exploitation, and trafficking in children
for begging, are serious problems. Albania is both a country of origin and a transit country.
Legislation in January 2,001 made trafficking in persons a criminal offense.

*

Effective Abolition of C'hild Labor. The Labor Code sets the minimum age of employment at
16 years and limits the amount of work that can be performed by children under 16 years.
There were no reports, however, of related enforcement through the courts.

*

Elimination of Discrimination in Employment. Albanian law prohibits discrimination based
on sex, race, ethnicity, language, or religion. Regarding discrimination in employment, women
are not excluded from any occupation or profession by law, and the Labor Code mandates that
women receive equal pay for equal work.

*

Freedom of Associatioii and the Right to Collective Bargaining. Workers exercise their
right to form independent trade unions. Many unions belong to one of two main federations of
unions. Almost all employees have the right to strike, although, by law, political strikes are
forbidden. Collective bargaining is legal but it is often ineffective because of high
unemployment.

-45 -

ATTACHMENT 5: FINDINGS OF FIDucIARY ASSESSMENTS

A Country Procurement Assessment Report was completed in FY01, and a Country Financial
Accountability Assessment (CFAA) was completed in FY02. The key findings of these studies are
summarized below.
Country Procurement Assessment Report (CPAR). Albania has made significant advances
in the development of its public procurement system, including a Law on Public Procurement, which is
close to intemational best practice. The Law on Public Procurement establishes a Public Procurement
Agency, reporting to the Council of Ministers. However, the effectiveness of the Public Procurement
Agency has been limited by its weakness, caused by underfunding, high staff turnover, and
susceptibility to political influence. The CPAR recommended the following: (i) a comprehensive
amendment to the Law on Public Procurement to strengthen the position of Open Tendering as the
basic method of public procurement, clarify the conditions for using restrictive procurement methods,
increase the use of the Request for Proposals method, and more effectively control the current overuse
of the Direct Procurement method; (ii) improve transparency and access to information, using intemet
technology, regular publication of the Public Procurement Bulletin, and other measures; (iii) increase
competition by abolishing the arbitrary differentiation between domestic and intemational Open
Tendering and lengthening the periods for bid preparation; (iv) improve procurement procedures and
practices through selected procedural changes and promulgation of good practices; (v) combat
corruption and strengthen enforcement; and (vi) build capacity of the Public Procurement Agency and
procurement staff.
The Country Financial Accountability Assessment (CFAA). The CFAA identified the
following issues: (i) weak capacity in several institutions; (ii) weak internal controls including
inadequate cash management and weak intemal audit function; and (iii) absence of a solid legal basis
for internal audit in the public sector. In the area of private sector accounting and auditing, the CFAA
identified: (i) the need to differentiate between the banks, insurance companies, listed companies, nonlisted companies, and other entities for determining applicable accounting standards; and (ii) weak
audit capacity and lack of experience in implementing intemational standards of accounting.
As discussed in the CAS, the Bank is addressing and will continue to address these fiduciary
recommendations through the ongoing Public Administration Reform Project and the proposed PRSC I
(FY02), PRSC II (FY03), and PRSC Im (FY04) (see para. 33 and 66). In addition, the Bank will work
closely with other donors who are providing related support.

-46 -

ATTACHMENT 6: F uND RELATIONS NOTE

International Monetary Fund
700 1 9th Street, NW
Washington, D. C. 20431 USA

Public Information Notice (PIN) No. 01/ 74
July 27, 2001

Albania: Public Information Notice

On July 13, 2001, the Executive Board of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) concluded the Article IV
consultation with Albania.'
Background
Sound macroeconomic management, supported by structural reform, has characterized Albania's
performance under the current PRGF arrangement, although poverty and emigration remain pervasive.
Policies have resulted in a significant easing of inflationary pressures and sizable reductions in the overall
and domestically financed fiscal deficits. Strong economic activity continued in 2000, with GDP growth
estimated at 73/4 percent. However, electricity shortages disrupted activity during the winter of 2000-01 and
continue to threaten growth prospects. The external position strengthened further during 2000, reflected in
higher official exchange reserves, as a worsening of the trade balance was offset by strong inflows of
remittances. The effective exchange rate, which appreciated against the euro during most of 2000, has been
stable in recent months
Fiscal policy remains on track, tlanks mainly to a strong revenue performance. The overall deficit
(excluding grants) declined to 9.1 percent in 2000 and targets for the domestically financed deficit-at 3.2
percent of GDP-and for total tax revenues were met. Fiscal performance so far in 2001 has been in line
with the budget. Improved revenue collection has largely reflected the implementation of measures agreed
under the program, with reductions in corruption and smuggling. Despite the fiscal efforts of the past three
years, the domestic component of public debt remains relatively high, although overall debt is below the
average for developing countries.
Monetary policy has eased considerably since the beginning of 2000, as T-bilt rates have fallen by 6-7
percentage points since the beginning of 2000. Inflation has edged up since mid-2000, mainly on account of
rising energy and housing costs, but it is within the authorities' 2-4 percent target range. In mid-2000, the
Bank of Albania switched to indireci. instruments of monetary policy, with weekly repo auctions.

Under Article IV of the IMF's Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with members, usually
every year. A staff team visits the country, collects economic and financial information, and discusses with
officials the country's economic developments and policies. On return to headquarters, the staff prepares a report,
which forms the basis for discussion by the Executive Board. At the conclusion of the discussion, the Managing
Director, as Chairman of the Board, sunmnarizes the views of Executive Directors, and this summary is

transmitted to the country's authorities. This PrN summarizes the views of the Executive Board as expressed
during the July 13, 2001 Executive Board discussion based on the staff report.
-47 -

Significant progress has been made in privatization of state-owned enterprises; and much-needed reforms in
the electricity sector have been initiated. T'he tender for privatization of the Savings Bank was announced
on June 29. Privatization is moving forward in the telecommunication sector and has largely been
completed in the mining sector. In agriculture, the end-December 2000 target for land registration was met.
The Law on Executive Offices has been implemented and a registry for collateral property started operating
in January 2001. On the other hand, delays have occurred in the submission of the revised Bankruptcy Law
and the establishment of a mediation center.
Executive Board Assessment
Directors commended the authorities' sound macroeconomic management and structural reforms that have
supported continued strong growth and financial stability. Directors stressed, however, the need to build on
these considerable achievements with further structural reforms and improvements in govemance, in order
to sustain rapid growth and alleviate poverty.
Directors supported the fiscal policy framework for the remainder of 2001. They welcomed the ongoing
improvements in revenue collection, supported by the authorities' efforts to strengthen tax and customs
administration. They emphasized the need to broaden the tax base. Directors also underscored the need for
spending restraint, especially if revenues do not meet expectations. For the medium term, Directors
considered that raising revenues would continue to be a key objective of fiscal policy so as to permit the
needed expansion in social expenditures, while keeping the public debt within prudent limits.
Directors commended the authorities' monetary policy. Interest rates have been significantly lowered while
inflation has remained low, the exchange rate has stabilized, and official reserves have risen to a
comfortable level. However, with inflation having edged up since mid-2000, Directors considered that
further monetary easing was not warranted. They recommended swift action in case inflationary pressures
intensified. Directors also noted that the exchange rate had appreciated in real terms in recent years and
advised the authorities to monitor developments closely to forestall any adverse effects on competitiveness.
Directors observed that, although progress had been made, financial integration remains low and
dollarization high. The effects of reintermediation would need to be taken into account in any eventual shift
to an inflation-targeting framework for monetary policy.
Directors emphasized the importance of financial sector reform. They encouraged the authorities to give the
highest priority to the successful and timely privatization of the Savings Bank and welcomed the recent
announcement of a tender. They also encouraged further efforts to promote financial sector competition, to
develop the banking sector in all parts of the country, to strengthen bank supervision, and to speed up
implementation of the Anti-Money Laundering Law. They encouraged the authorities to implement the
recommendations of the Phase One Safeguards Assessment.
Directors were concerned by problems in the energy sector, which are a potential constraint on growth and
which, because of the resultant need for subsidies, are a drain on the budget. They considered the rise this
year in subsidies for electricity imports only a temporary expedient, pending urgently needed and more
fundamental reforms in the energy sector, including measures to revise tariffs and improve collections.
Regarding other structural reforms, Directors encouraged the authorities to persevere with their program of
legal and institutional reforms to improve governance and the climate for business and investment.
Enterprise privatization should be completed, including in the telecommunications and energy sectors. The
legal framework for the provision of credit to the private sector should be strengthened, and a bankruptcy
law adopted. Directors commended the authorities for maintaining an open trade regime and for their
participation in recent initiatives toward regional free trade.
-48 -

Directors welcomed progress in preparing the authorities' Growth and Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper
(GPRS) through a broad-based parlicipatory process. They observed that, despite recent progress, Albania
still faces severe institutional and infrastructural weaknesses, requiring a bold reform agenda for the
coming years to secure rapid growth and to reduce poverty, which is especially prevalent in rural areas.
Directors noted the role, that suppoiti from the international community could play in this regard.
Directors encouraged further improvements in economic data, including national accounts and price
indices, and in the accuracy and timneliness of data on foreign-financed capital expenditures, which affect
the monitoring of the fiscal position. They supported technical assistance in these areas.
Directors noted the progress Albania has made in regularizing relations with its creditors and encouraged
all parties to work to resolve outstanding issues as soon as possible. They urged the authorities to promptly
eliminate remaining exchange restrictions subject to Article XIV of the Fund's Articles of Agreement, and
looked forward to Albania's intended move to Article VIII status.
Directors stressed the importance of a well-designed GPRS that identifies key expenditure priorities within
the authorities Medium-Term Expenditure Framework (MTEF).
Directors looked forward to discussing a successor arrangement after the Annual Meetings and emphasized
the need for close coordination with the World Bank in this regard. They generally considered that, in view
of Albania's economic progress, and subject to discussion with the authorities, a blend of concessional and
nonconcessional resources could be appropriate under a successor arrangement.

Contact: Mr. S. Hossein Samiei, l)eputy Division Chief, Southeastern II, European I Department, IMF,
ext. 36356

-49 -

Attachment 7: Data on Millennium Development Goals and Related Indicators

1990 1991 1992 1993
328 328 3.23 318
.
300 320
3.0
.. 2.8
72.3 72.3 7,1.3 71 3
1901901 1992 1993
I PoPtdationbehm$1 a day

Popudatlont.tOta
(mll)
GNP per capita. Atlas method (csTent US$)
FaMtity ratetoatEd(blrlhsper womn)
Ut0mWeanyya
t birth, tt(yeasr)

LCS 1998Si per capita per day
LCS 199 S2per capita per day
.
2 Poveity gap atSla day
3 %share of Incomeor consumpton heldby po
4 Prev of underweightctildren (5 5 yrs old)
MICS2000
Poverdy
Rate anren Wartly 1 65 ym8i Wfage
.
LCS 199
.
Poreil Rate aemnounemplyoyd
LCS 1998
Poverty Rate anren chilren
14of children dap,ve of parentalewe
TMD(8)
I
6 Net plttmaryerestament ratio
TWO
lGrossrlte (b)
102
GrossWB200l(Stato1fAJb&UNICEF) 102.3
UNDPHOts(mostrecant fron 95-97)
.
WDIt2001
GDF &WDI (Grmss)
100.2
EWS1998(5 of 7-14yr (Adchildren)
Grons WB 2000 (b)
102.1
MOES -GfostErwotment raem
.
6 Youth literacy rate(age15.24)
95 3
9 Ratioof giftsto bopIn1 ryand 2ryeoducatlon
..
Glnt6oy ratio of 1ry CornpRates (Gr 4)
.
Gh4;Boy rettofIry ComlpRates (Gr 8)
.
ivy Con#eitlon rates GradeS (UISdate fromI..
fiy Coraptfeon rates Grade 8 (UISdate firn A 99
Adult lllllsracy Rats (Edatata)
1990
Literacyrml% aduff total (16oIpeople 15+)
77 4
LEics 2000
Privexpendon ivyedvc as oftotelsduc S
Studenteacher ratfo
GOF &WDI
Stats COlfoAlbanfa
229
Edstets
191
Performance Inintematalonal
teat
School Aftndar,ce..
MlAGS2000(a)
16ofchitldren withoutaconasto texftooks
1990
13 Under 5MortaltyRate(perl1.O00tivebtlnt
4165
TMD
41.9
UNICEFMICS210D
UNDPHOts
UNICEF
14 InfantMortality Pate (perl1.00Otlvebhifti)
28 3
ThID
28 3
UNICEFMICS2000
UNDPHODe
s
EUIPHIN
MICS2000
Altartia MOH
15 Propnof 1-yr-oldsimmund againistmeasles
GDF &WOI
TMDfor under 28.
UNDPNOls(mostreomnIfram 97-99)
EUPHIN (age nfl speatied)
85
PFtSP(GPRS)
..
UNICEFMICS2000
Plopn of 1-yr-old chitiier kmmt with OP73
WI-fO/INICEF esimate (c) (s12 mr7ths)
04
18 Maten-almfortality
(Sunbbthfts.adjusted)
38
ThID
37 7
EUPJ`HN
31
UNICEFoteldnfo

1994
3 19
390
27
72.5
1994

1995
3.23
660
26
71 3
1995

1996
327
840
26
71 7
1990

.

.8.1

1997 1999 199 2000 2001
Comments
3 30 3.34 3 38
3.09' * PrsllmrLnarydata
from the 2001 census
760 820
870
2 significant reductionInpopulation
25
..
2.4
.and as Such the poputationdata forthe
71.7
.72
1
.
.
st decade are unlikely tobe renable
1997 1998 1990 2000 2001
Continents
too fewdata to commernt
on
17 4
b ands The 200 LSMSmlaylead to
46.6 .
.
a major revIs ioIn theeittimates of
...
populatiolninpoverty astiwil be the
.
..first nationally representativ survey
.
.
In many years
.
14

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~Currenly

20.6

.

50.8

~~~~~~~~~42.9

~~~1990
1901 1I9
97 9
97.8

94 5
94.2

..

90.3

97.3

99 6

90 0

45.5 44.9 45.8
40
1993 1994 190 1998'1997 1908
91
95.3 98.6 98 8 98.1 9486 9286
95 2 9696 99 898 92.1 92 1
.
100
..
.
102
19002104,5 107.2
.- 89.69
99A '100.4 100.3 99.5 97.1 93.9
91.0 90.0 89.0 87.0
96.3 99,8 96.9 97 I 97 4 97.6
94.9 93 4
.
986

1999 208002001
Conmments
68
81 Ounesonatide
datareiSlIIkty
90

85.0
97.8
986e

81
88

.1040Q

.

.112

0
91

.100
.

.

1991 1992 1993 1894 1995 1996 1997 1998 119119
2000 2001
Commnents
78 2 79 0 799 80.7 81 4 82.1 82.7 83.5 84.0
Quesetlcabe datarellabltity
88

19 1
22

.214 21 4

18 7
22 5

17 8 178
22.4 22 8
178
.

ratio appears
relatively conetant But qtuestioneble data
retWiabty given high Intemfaland
.extemal mirto

,Student/teacher

23
.

22.7
1768

.

.

.

90

First PISA asticipated in 2003

1991 1992 1993 1994 1996 1998 1997 1999 1999 2000 2001
Commemnts
44.5 46.9 497 44.7
37 30.8
44 5 40 9 49 7 44.7
37 30 6
.
33
35.0
...
31 0
32.9 30 9 33.2 35 7
34 25.8 258e
24 3
.
. 1at(othw than EUPHIN) suggest dnat
32 9 30 9 33.2 35.7
34 25.8 22 5 20.4
IMRs are reducargonlysftghtly
..
28
29.0
33.8 32 9 252 23 3 20 2 158 147
.
.
21
.
22 2
15 12 2 12.1
ImmunIzato ratesfor both measses
80
87
78
90
91
92
95
89
85
and OPT3are shoeirngslight Increses
805
67 78 2 812
91 91,7 951
89
...
5
80
87
76
90
91
92
95
89
91 92
.
.
90
.
.
97
..
6
el
78
94
96
90
97
98
90
96
30
25
Is
41
.
29 7 25.2 18 2 40 2 33,3 27.8 27 5 2186
22 5 20 5
18 125 117
81
15
..
31____________

-50-

97

97

199C 1991 199

1993 1994 1998 1999 1997 1999 1999 2000 2001

Commients

MICS 2000
.
.
20
AlbanifaMON
.27.5
21.9 14 7 21.9
19 Prevalence ofHlV.female (age 15.24)
.
ECEM AIDS (New dlgnosed casesJyr).a
12
7
3
5
4
10 20
23 lncAlenoeofT78 per 100,000pecP1e).
794D
20 19.5 167
20
17 203 21 4 19.9
UJNOPHDis.22
EUPHIIN
19.9 19.3 16.6 20.1 22.1 20.4 21.5 19.7 20.7 21.7
29 Access to improved water source I% of popn,.76UNICEPchdbt/o (Warbm4uraI.9/9GM.
99/95
EV&S1996 (a).all91
30 Peops ofpoople ws4laccess toIsrpevad sanA
.
UNICEFch/ditol (urbarftraO
9gm
.
..
99/8
GOP/& IN5I
EWS 1996(16ofhFEa it access to0.us44
25
Males
AdLdtMorla4Ry
rate (Oa /000W
acfduls)
GDF &IWDI175
Out ofpocketpaymeantsasalliof oeaa
Hteam coarut/Irz/Ion Mftefor those mpreuot/g..
1990 199 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001
Comments
11Shareof Wonmen
Inwage ernployt/eein nsonsCOnsitU4Of
to WOi*ts agePOPcdac,at/O.The
2001censwuaridthe2002 LSMS
Pt/meat of men arid woetenabowe65years.
.
.
.
will yIed further informatIonon most
I/WnS1996.
..
of these variables
Useffpkoymsent
rate
WB200- caowby adnlbn datea(d)
10
9
27
22
168 12 9 12.7 13.9
7940
10
9
27
22
198 12 9 12.7 13 9 17 8
WB 2001(Stats Ofte Albania)
9.5
9.1
.
4.5 5.4 7 6
891 67
/IWS 1996
27.39
Labour,fboceparl/c/patisn rate
Fem .FAcvtyRafe (GDF N /).
29.4 29.7
40 40.3 40.6 409 41.2 41 4 41.7 41.9 42 2
Ma/etFAciJfy Ratea(GDPWDI)
55 7 5568 56 56 1 56.3 56 5 56 6 566 56.9 57.1 57.2
Fem LFPairftRato -WB 2000 (d)
64.6 64 5 63.4 63.3 65 6 66.9 6685 697
Male LPParsn Rate -WS 2000 (d)
8995 85 8 85 7
86 99 6 6968 893 996
.
EWE 1986
72.0
Perosit of powrdhfld,amr
gettki woof ass
ews i9O
54 76
Paern of th poor raC&k*fosocial sit
.
.
....
.
_
_
_
_
_
_
_
_
Source. UNESCO,WHO, National statatca cilice DECaG.
7TMD
= T,ansMONEE Database
T54D(a) =Children inse, cre(Ae per 1O00000-1?jr oAts)- isctucfs oratyabilniti hfshomes
a
ard orphanages
UWDPHD)ts UNDPk*asn DeveA,pren bieattors
UNICEFMICE2000 UNICEFAnIRil IndIcatr ua atSwrvy: Altoan 2000(quoedbyT794)
(b) 7-14year-okts. PopulatIon998-09. IRCest/rate based onnsathanitdata by -year agegroups
WS 2000 - country adinin data (d) = thalaniclriPrtction aridOpportunity - A abt/sag for sociatProtectIo Is Translllo Cocabites(pg 58)
WHO/UJNICEF
estimate (c) = WHO/UNICEF
Rrevie at Natonal lImmunlTtion Coverage
EWS 1996- Atasila EinrUoymenet
arid Wettwer
Swrveysdaeset
EWS 1990(a) = 1601HHs thai descrIbe their maln5source of water as sillier pipedpublic, ownsystems,
pump oewwot
LCS 1998 s 1998 ivIngCondition Survey
MICS2000= Multple indicator Cluster Survey conductid by INSTATwithUNICEFSupportMICS2000(a) - tor school age dhlkdrerattnding conm
xutsOy euatin
EdStals = WorldBhanki
Education Staftisic Database
WB 2000 (b) = Albania's Educatin Sector. Problems ritdPremise
MOES=Alb/asian Ministry of Educallon anidScIeces
PRSP (GPRS) Poverty ReductIn St/stgy Paper (GrowthPovertyPeduction Sbtratgy)

-51 -

Annex A2
Page I of 2

Albania at a glance
Europe &
Central
Albania
Asia

POVERTY and SOCIAL
2001
Populatlon, mid-year (mdllons)
GNI per capita (Atas method, USS)
GNI (Alas method, US$ billions)

LowermiddleIncome

3.4
1.230
4.2

475
2,010
956

2,046
1,140
2,327

0.9
1.3

0.1
0.6

1.0
1.3

S14/02

Development diamrndd
Lie expectancy

Average annual growth, 1995-O1
Population (%)
Labor tore (6)
Most recent estimate (latest year available, 1995401)
Poverty (%of populatfon bteow natonal poverty line)
Urban population (%of total populaton)
Life expectancy at birth (yeats)
Infant mortality (per 1,000 live births)
Child malnutrition (%of chDdren under 5)
Access to an improved water source (%of population)
Illiteracy (%ofpopulation age 15+)
Gross primary enrollment (%of school-age Population)
Male
Female

40
74
20
8

67
69
21

15
110
109
110

90
3
100
101
99

42
69
32
1
80
15
114
116
114

1991

2000

2001

1.1
7.3
7.2
-13.0
-14.2

3.8
18.6
18.9
-2.9
11.6

4.1
19.4
20.4
-3.7
13.1

-21.6
0.2
44.9
3.9

-7.2
0.2
20.9
2.1
12.9
38.5

-6.3
0.3
23.0
2.7

GN
GNI
per
capH

Gross
primary
enrollment

,

,
.

Access to Improved water source

Lower-mniddle-Income group

KEY ECONOMIC RATIOS and LONG-TERM TRENDS
1981

GDP (USS bilions)
Gross domestic Investment/GDP

..

35 1
23.0
38 6

Exports of goods and services/GDP
Gross domestic savings/GDP
Gross national savingstGDP
Current account balance/GDP
Interest payments/GDP
Total debt/GDP
Total debt service/exports
Present value of debtVGDP
Present value of debVexports
(average annual growth)
GDP
GDP per capita
Exports of goods and services

Economic ratios'
Trade

Domestic
si

Investment

Indebtedness

198141

199141

2000

2001

200145

-0.5
-2.4

5.4
4.6
11.7

78
6.9
5.8

6.5
5.6
24.8

6.7
63
5.5

10s1

1901

2000

2001

32.4
43.0
24.6

39.3
42.7
38,5
18.0

51.0
26.3
11.6
22.7

49.1
27.33
116
23.6

54.9
8.5
21.5

90.9
22.1
27.6

92.0
10.9
40.4

90.9
12.9
43.5

-10

2000

2001

Growth of exports and Imports (%)

-Albania
Lower-middle-Income group

STRUCTURE of the ECONOMY
(%of GOP)
Agricuiture
Industry
Manufacturing
ServIces

..

Growth of Investment and GDP (%)
20
o
0
9

Private consumption
General govemment consumption
Imports of goods and services

GDI

198141

190141

1.0

6.1

4.0

1.4

6

-0.5

5.0
-0.8
5.1

11.4
5.0
13.3

10.7
6.5
13.6

40

5.4
3.1
20.1
11.0

28
7.4
17 9
6.5

6.7
12.0
11 1
23.5

-20
0

00

01

--*-GDP

(average annual growth)

Agriculture
Industry
Manufacturing
Services
Private consumption
General govemment consumption
Gross domestic investment
Imports of goods and services

..

-3.0

-1.0

20

a

o

se

f

9

e

EN vfts

0o
-

Im

s

Note: 2001 data are preliminary estimates.
The diamonds show four key indicators in the country (in bold) compared with Its Income-group average. If data are missing, the diamond will
be Incomplete.

Annex A2
Page 2 of 2

Albania
PRICES and GOVERNMENT FINANCE
Domesdc prices
(%change)
Consumer prices
Implicit GDP deflator

1981

1991

2000

2001

.

49.4
34.5

0.1
-1.2

3.1
2.8

-2.2

Government finance
(%of GOP. includes current grants)
Current revenue
Current budget balance
Overall surplustdeflcit

Inflation (%)

30*
20.

10
0*
34.3
-21.7
-27.8

22.4
-2.4
-9.1

23.0
-1.2
-8.5

1981

1991

2000

2001

419

101

256

305

..
..
..

S
93

-1o.

97
90
GDP deflator

99

00

01

CPI

TRADE
(US$ mrillions)
Total exports (fbb)
Commodity 1
Commodity 2
Manufactures
Total imports (ciM
Food
Fuel and energy
Captal goods

..
..
..

384

Export price index (1995=100)
Import price index (1995=100)
Terms of trade (1995=100)

..
..
..

409

.

..

..
..

..
..

..
..
..

..

28
14
218
1,070
217
71
230

..

1,332
.

Export and Import levels (USS mill.)
IAoo
120

'50

0

250

a
95

95

97

59

Expo.t

..

00

go

01

a Imports

BALANCE of PAYMENTS
(US$ millions)
Exports of goods and services
Imports of goods and services
Resource balance
Net income
Net current transfers

1981

1991

2000

2001

431
403
28

8
31
-232

705
1,520
-815

840
1,791
-951

11

-22
8

108
439

148
543

..

Current account balance to GDP (%)
MN'

Current account balance

45

-248

-270

-260

-*

Financing hems (net)
Changes in net reserves

-19
-26

24
221

381
-111

391
-131

15.

..

14.4

638
143.7

767
143.5

1991

2000

2001

..

512
0
0

784
0
346

945
0
405

..

4

27

41

0

0

0

0

2

3

Memo:
Reserves Including gold (US$ rnfmions)
Conversion rate (DEC, locat/US$)

..
..

EXTERNAL DEBT and RESOURCE FLOWS
1981
(USS milions)
Total debt outstanding and disbursed
IBRD
IDA
Total debt service
IBRD
IDA
Composition of net resource flows
Ofricial grants
Official creditors
Private credtors
Foreign direct investment
Portfolio equity
World Bank program
Commitments
Disbursements
Principal repayments
Net flows
Interest payments
Net transfers
Development Economics

Composition of 2000 debt (US$ mill.)
..

**
..

37
37

346
218

..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..
..

320
20
28
0
0

161
93
-1
143
0

..
..
..

0
0
0
0
0
0

54
64
0
64
2
62

20
34
0
34
3
31

f

Be
A- IBRD
B -IDA

C-IMF

D -Other rrbluateral

E -Bilteral
F - Pnvate

G -Short-term

5/14/02

Annex B2

Page 1 of 1

Albania
Selected Indicators* of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
As of Date 04/15/2002
Indicator
Pbrffoio Asseswiint
Number of Prects Lkcder Irren

1999
ntation a

AVerge Irnplerentajon Peliod (ws)
Pement of Problem Prcects by N
Pecent of Prsem Prqects by AEnou

b

ac

ac

Pert of Prcects at Risk by IhiXrrber a d
Per
of prjeCtS at Risk byAM a.d
EisbursentRatio(%)0
PorfdlioMaogwtmt
CPPR dinrng theyer (es/no)
Supervision Resources (toWt,US$000)
Averge Supervision (US$000/project)
M oradun Item
Proj Evdl byOEDbyNutber
Proj EvS by OED by Amt (US$ rillions)
% of OED Projects Rated Uor HU by Nunber
%ofOED Proects Rted Uor HU byAnt

2000

21

21

2.8
9.5
13.4
9.5
13.4
21.4

22
9.5
13.2
9.5
13.2
19.4

Yes
1,359.90
65

Yes
1,866.20
89

2001
20

2.3
10.0
18.3
15.0
23.6
22.4
Yes
1,807.90
90

2002
21

3.0
4.8
9.6
4.8
9.6
15.5
Yes
1,723.90
82

Since FY 80 Last Five FYs
21
19
316
272
14.3
15.8
0
0

a. As shown in te Annual Peport on Porffalio Pefonanoe (except for curent FY).
b. Average age of prqects in the BanWs oxnty portfolio.
c. Perent of prqects rated Uor HU on developTrent objectives (DO) ard/or irrmepientaton progress (IP).
d. As defined under the Portfolio Inrr fvweent Progan
e. Ratio of disbsemt during the year to the undshzused balance of the BartWs porafolio at the
beginning of the yew Investrrent projects only.
* All indicators are for projeds active in the PortFdio, wmth the exception of Disbursement Ratio,
which indudes al active projects as well as prcects whidh eadted dning the fiscal year.

Annex B3
Page I of 2

Albaniia - Bank Group Program Summary

Actual aiid Proposed FY02 IDA Lending Program
and Proposed FY03-05 IDA Lending Program

Strategic Rewards a/
(Hl"M.)

Implementation a/
Risks (H4)

Fiscal year

Proj ID

2002

Pilot Fishery Development (Actual)
Road Maintenance
Financial Sector Adjustment Credit
Power Sector Rehab. & Restructuring
Poverty Reduction StLpport Credit i
Total FY02

5.6
30.0
15.0
29.9
20.0
94.9

M
M
H
H
H

L
M
M
M
M

2003

Municipal Water/Wastewater
Environment
Thermal Power r
Poverty Reduction Support Credit II
Subtotal FY03

15.0
5.0
20.0
10.0
50.0

H
M
H
H

H
M
H
M

2004

Transport
Community Works II*
Educaton i
Poverty Reduction Support Credit IlIl
Subtotal FY04

20.0
10.0
8.0
10.0
48.0

H
M
H
H

M
L
M
M

2005

Health lII
Rural Development/Water
Agrtculture/lrrigation 111Natural Resources

H
H
M
M

M
M
L
L

Subtotal FY05

10.0
8.0
8.0
7.0
33.0

Total FY03-05

131.0

US$("

'Would remain In a lowcase scenario.
a/ For each project, indicate whether the strategkc rewards and Implementation risks are expected to be high (H), moderate (M), or low (L)

Annex B3
Page 2 of 2

Albania - IFC and MIGA Program, FY 1999-2002

IFC approvals (US$m)
Sector (%)
AGRICULTURE & FORESTRY
CHEMICALS
OIL, GAS & MINING
EDUCATION SERVICES
FINANCE & INSURANCE
FOOD & BEVERAGES
INDUSTRIAL & CONS PROD
NONMETALLIC MINERAL
PRIMARY METALS
PULP & PAPER
TEXTILES, APPAREL & LE
PLASTICS & RUBBER

Total

1999

2000

2001

2002*

2.33

2.5

27.5

0.00

37
48

100

8

55

52

100

100

52
48

100

100

Investment instrument (%)
Loans
Equity
Quasi-Equity
Other (Guarantee)

Total
MIGA guarantees (US$m)

91

9

100

100

100

0.00

1.5

8.5

8.5

* Savings Bank (US$20M) currently in low probability is expected to be approved by June 20/2002.

Annex B4
Page I of 1

Albania -Summary of Nonlending Services
Product
Recent completions
Anticorruption TA
Refugee Impacts/Prospects
Country Portfolio Performance Review

Education Sector Review
Country Procurement Assessment
Antlcorruption TA
Qualitative Poverty Assessment
Public Expenditure Institutional Review
Govemance Anticorruption Report
Country Portfolio Performance Review
Country Financial Accountability
Assessment
Financial Sustainability Note
Underway
Rural Strategy
Poverty Assessment
Fiscal Decentralization Study
Planned
National Water Strategy
Privatization TA
PCF Early Childhood Development TA
Anticorruption TA
Social Safety Net Review
CEM - Competitiveness and Sources
of Growth
Rural Human Capital Development
Privatization TA
Roma Assessment Note
PCF Early Childhood Development TA
Anicorruption TA
Labor Market Assessment
Transport Study
Anticorruption TA
Public Expenditure Review

Completion FY

Cost (US$000)

Audience a

Objective b

00
00
00

50
25
25

Gov/IDA/Don
Gov/IDA/Don
Gov/IDA/Don

KG/PS
KG/PS
KG/PS

00
01
01
01
01
01
01

162
50
62
300
90
30

Gov/IDA/Pub/Don
Gov/IDA/Pub/Don
Gov/IDA/Don
Gov/IDA/Don
Gov/IDA/Don
Gov/IDA/Pub
Gov/lDA/Don

KG/PS/PD
KG/PD
KG/PD/PS
KG/PS
KG/PS
PS/PD
KG/PS

02
02

30
138

Gov/IDA/Don
Gov/IDA

KG/PS
KG/PS

02
03
03

145
150
132

Gov/IDA
Gov/IDA/Don
Gov/lDA/Don

KG/PD/PS
KG/PS/PD
KG/PS

03
03
03
03
03

92
30
30
50
75

Gov/IDA/Don
Gov/IDAlDon
Gov/IDA
Gov/IDAlDon
Gov/lDAlDon

KG/PD/PS
KG/PS
KG/PS
KG/PD/PS
KG/PS

04
04
04
04
04
04
05
05
05
05

207
75
30
60
30
50
120
85
50
200

Gov/IDA/Don
Gov/lDADon
Gov/IDA/Don
Gov/lDA/Don
Gov/IDA/Don
Gov/IDA/Don
Gov/lDA/Don
Gov/IDAlDon
Gov/IDA/Don
Gov/IDA/Don

KG/PD/PS
KG/PS
KG/PS
KG/PD/PS
KG/PD/PS
KG/PD/PS
KG/PD
KG/PD/PS
KG/PD/PS
KG/PS

a. Govemment, donor, Bank, public dissemination.
b. Knowledge generation, public debate, problem-solving.

Annex B5
Page I of I

Albania Social Indicators

Latest single year

Same regionrincome group
Europe &
Central

Lowermiddle-

1970-75

1980-85

1994-00

AsIa

income

2.4
2.3
32.8
4.4

3.0
2.0
34.8
3.2

3.4
0.9
39.1
2.1

474.7
0.1
66.8
1.6

2,046.0
1.0
42.4
21

2,010
192

1,140
149

2.7
4.7

POPULATION
Total population, mid-year (millions)
Growth rate (%annual average for period)
Urban population (%of population)
Total fertility rate (births per woman)
POVERTY

(%of population)
National headcount index
Urban headcount index
Rural headcount Index

INCOME
GNI per capita (US$)
Consumer prce index (1995=100)
Food price index (1995=100)
INCOMEICONSUMPTION DISTRIBUTION
Gini index
Lowest quintile (%6of income or consumption)
Highest quintile (%of income or consumption)
SOCIAL INDICATORS
Public expenditure
Health (%of GDP)
Education (%of GNI)
Social security and welfare (%of GDP)
Net primary school enrollment rate

..

..

..

..
..

..

..

..

..

..

..

.

.

15.0
28.9

1,120
182

..

..

..

..

3.1

4.3
5.1

..

6.0

8.8

..

..

..

..

..

..

102
100
103

92
93
92

99
100
99

..

..

90
95
82

80
95
69

..

(%of age group)
Total
Male
Female

Access to an Improved water source

(%of population)
Total
Urban
Rural

..
..

..

..

..

Immunization rate

(%under 12 months)
Measles
DPT
Child malnutrition (%under 5 years)

96
96

85
97

97
97

87
87

.

..

8

..

11

68
66
70

71
68
74

74
72
76

69
64
73

69
67
72

53
82

35
57

20
31

21
26

32
40

190
113

..

171
86

289
127

192
133

Life expectancy at birth

(years)
Total
Male
Female
Mortality
Infant (per thousand live births)
Under 5 (per thousand live births)
Adult (15-59)
Male (per 1,000 population)
Female (per 1,000 population)

*

31

Matemal (per 100,000 live births)
Births attended by skilled health staff ()

..

99

CAS Annex B5. This table was produced from the CMU LDB system.
Note: 0 or 0.0 means zero or less than half the unit shown. Net enrollment ratios exceeding 100 indicate discrepancies
between the estimates of school-age population and reported enrollment data.

05/29/02

Annex B6
Page 1 of 2

Albania - Key Economic Indicators

Indicator
National accounts (as % of GDP)
Grossdonesticproduct
Agriculture
Industry
Services

Estinnte
2000

1999

2001

2002

Projected
2003

2004

2005

100
53
25
22

100
51
26
23

100
49
27
24

100
47
28
25

100
46
29
26

100
44
29
27

100
43
30
28

106
17
6
11

103
19
7
12

104
19
7
12

101
21
8
13

98
23
8
14

96
23
8
15

95
24
8
15

Exorts (GNFS)
Inports (GNFS)

16
39

19
40

20
44

20
42

20
40

20
39

20
38

Grossdonesticsavings
Grossnationalsavings

-6
9

-3
12

-4
13

-1
13

2
15

4
17

5
18

3676

3752

4114

4540

5013

5541

6097

Real amual growth rates (0/4 calculated from 1993 prices)
Gross donrstic product at nrket prices
7.3
7.8

6.5

6.0

7.0

7.0

6.5

Real arnual per capita growth rates (%, calculated firn 1993 prices)
Gross donmestic product at nmrket prices
6.6
6.9
6.0

5.5

6.5

6.5

6.0

Total Consunption
Gross dornestic fixed investnent
Governiwnt investmnnt
Private investmnnt

Memorandun items
Gross donestic product
(US$ million at current prices)

Balance of Payments (US$ nillions)
Exorts (GNFS)b
Merchandise F'OB
hnports(GNFS)b
Merchandise FOB
Resource balance
Net current transfers
Current account balance

594
275
1437
1121
-843
510
-270

705
255
1520
1076
-815
439
-270

840
305
1791
1332
-951
543
-260

892
342
1893
1414
-1001
510
-374

980
391
2009
1507
-1029
554
-355

1087
454
2165
1634
-1078
598
-344

1208
529
2317
1758
-1109
643
-327

Netprivateforeigndirectinvestnent
Long-termloans (net)
Official
Private
Otier capital (net)
Cange in reservesd

51
72
73
-2
229
-83

143
70
70
0
168
-111

204
165
162
3
22
-131

153
241
236
5
6
-26

215
193
188
5
34
-87

205
200
196
4
42
-103

172
212
208
4
1
-58

-7.3

-7.2

-6.3

-8.2

-7.1

-6.2

-5.4

Memorandum items

Current account balance (% of GDP)

(Continued)

Annex B6
Page 2 of 2

Albania - Key Economic Indicators
Estle

Indictr

1999

2000

P

2001

2002

cd

2003

2004

2005

Natical accads (as %of CD"

Gmd stic
iv ixt
AgricuLt
hdIr y
Savice

100
53
25
22

100
51
26
23

100
49
27
24

100
47
28
25

100
46
29
26

100
44
29
27

100
43
30
28

Total 1Ca
on
(i hdstic fixedinwstin
G
tinm
tinwsnit
Piivate iwestnf

106
17
6
11

103
19
7
12

104
19
7
12

101
21
8
13

98
23
8
14

96
23
8
15

95
24
8
15

Eps

((NE;)

16

19

20

20

20

20

20

hpits(GNFS)

39

40

44

42

40

39

38

Grmdsticavrw
Gormtina
vawv

-6
9

-3
12

-4
13

-1
13

2
15

4
17

5
18

Akmwdhon tem
Grcpd
dsichxpduct

3676

3752

4114

4540

5013

5541

6097

7.8

6.5

6.0

7.0

7.0

6.5

(IM ni ion at cwunics)
Rel aUm gdiiateS (D/(,cailtd

fn

G Edmr pct at r} pnce

1993 pnce)

7.3

Real arW per capita gothrates (C/%caloulated fx 1993 pxce)

G
lime

ds

c

tatnmdpices

6.6

6.9

6.0

5.5

6.5

6.5

6.0

594
275

705
255

840
305

892
342

980
391

1087
454

1208
529

ofhPms (L$ nilEa)

Expcxls (GNF;)
N
BrdmniseFO

Annex B7
Page I of I

Albania - Key Exposure Indicators

Indicator

Estimate
2000

1999

2001

Projected
2003

2002

2004

2005

Total debt outstanding and
disbursed (TDO) (US$m)a

707

784

945

1182

1378

1579

1789

Net disbursements (US$m)a

133

112

163

228

185

192

205

23

27

41

65

65

67

74

71.0
19.2
2.3

62.2
20.9
2.2

61.2
23.0
2.6

76.5
26.0
4.2

82.1
27.5
3.9

85.4
28.5
3.6

88.3
29.4
3.7

0.0
49.7

0.0
59.8

0.0
72.0

0.0
68.1 .

0.0
64.0

0.0
66.3

0.0
54.4

0.0
0

0.0
0

0.0
0

0.0
0

0.0
0

0.0
0

0.0
0

296

346

405

489

565

634

694

Total debt service (TDS)
(US$m)a
Debt and debt service indicators
(0/-)

TDO/XGSb
TDO/GDP
TDS/XGS
IBRD exposure indicators (%)
IBRD DS/public DS
Preferred creditor DS/public
DS (%)c
IBRD DS/XGS
IBRDTDO(US$m)d
Of which present value of
guarantees (US$m)
Share of IBRD portfolio (%)
IDA TDO (US$m)d

a. Includes public and publicly gnLranteed debt, private nonguaranteed, use of EMF credits and net shortterm capital.
b. "XGS" denotes exports of goods and services, including workers' remittances.
c. Preferred creditors are defined as IBRD, IDA, the regional multilateral development banks, the IMF, and the
Bank for International Settlements.
d. Includes present value of guarantees.
e. Includes equity and quasi-equity types of both loan and equity instruments.

Annex B8
Page I of 2

Albania -Status of Bank Group Operations (Operations Portfolio)
Total Disbursed (Active)
of which has been repaid
Total Disbursed (Closed)
of which has been
dpai
Total Disbursed (Acive +Closed)
of wNcti has been repaid

107
0
305
0
412
0

Total Undisbursed (Active)
Total Undlsbutsed (Closed)
Total Undlsbursed (Active +Closed)

137
0
137

Adivbct

s

Diffterence Between

ELast
PSRExpected

and Actual

Supervision Rating
Project ID

Project Name

P054736
P051309
P040818
P069120
P068853
P069079
P069479
P008271
P045312
P043178
P040975
P057182
P051310
P036060
P034491
P051602
P069939
P054354
P055363
P070078
P066491
Overall result

AG SERVICES
S
COMMUNITY WORKS
S
DURRES PORT
S
EDUC REF
S
EMG ROAD REPAIR
S
FIN SEC IBTA
S
FISHERY DEVT
FORESTRY
S
HEALTH RECOVERY
S
IRRIG &DRAIN 11
S
LAND DEVT
S
LEG/JUD REF
S
MICROCREDIT
S
NATL ROADS
S
U
POWERTRNSM &DIST
PRIV IND REC
S
PUB ADM REF
S
RCVRY PROG TA
S
SOC SERV DEVT
S
TRADE &TRANS FACIL INSE EUR S
WS URG REHAB
S

Doloomnt

lm

oon
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S

Original Amount In USS Millions
Fiscal Year
2001
1999
1998
2000
2000
2000
2002
1996
1998
1999
1998
2000
1999
1996
1996
1998
2000
1998
2001
2001
2000
Result

IBRD

IDA
9.9
14
17
12
1365
6.5
5.6
8
17
24
10
9
12
25
29.5
10.25
8.5
5
10
8.1
10
265

Plsburs4nts

GRANT Cancel.

4.5

4.5

Undisb.
9.3
0.6
8.7
10 3
6.6
4.6
5.5
2.3
12.0
9.3
6.5
7.6
5.0
0.7
11.4
5.3
7.4
0.5
9.5
67
74
137.2

Orig.
-0.1
-5.3
8.4
-0.2
4.9
17
3
13.2
-1
5.7
3.5
-0.9
23
20.1
5.9
2.2
0.5
-0.2
23
3.7
69.6

Frm Revd

2.8

0.1

0.5

3.5

Annex B8
Page 2 of 2

Albania
Statement of IFC's
Held and Disbursed Porfololio
As of February 2002

(Amounts in US Dollar Millions)

IFC Data Warehouse
IFC Held
FY Approval
1998/01
2000
2001
1999
1999

Company
AAP
NCBank
Seament
SEF Eurotech
SEF FEFAD Bank

Total Portfolio:

IFC Disbursed

Loan
0.00
0.00
15.00
0.90
0.00

Equity
28.50
2.00
0.00
0.00
0.98

Quasi
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

Partic
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

Loan
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.90
0.00

Equity
9.15
2.00
0.00
0.00
0.98

Quasi
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

Partic
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

15.90

31.48

0.00

0.00

0.90

12.13

0.00

0.00

Approvals Pending Commitment
FY Approval

Project Name

Loan

Equity

Quasi

Partic

1998

Patos Marinza

30.00

0

0

50.00

2001

Pastos Marinza In

10.00

0

0

0

40.00

0

0

50.00

Total Pending:

Annex B9
Page I of 27
ALBANIA: COUNTRY PARTNER STRATEGY MATRIX
Diagnosis and Development
Objectives of the GPRS
I
1. Strengthen the Public
Administration and
Professionalize the Civil
Service.

Government Strategy/Actions

(FYO3-05)'

Selected Bank and Government
Performance Indicators/Targets
A. Governance and Institution Building
* Draft Law on Organization and Functioning of the

(i) Strengthen policymaking and interinstitutional coordination.

Council of Ministers reviewed by Govemment and
resubmitted to Parliament. (PRSC condition)
* Percentage of policy proposals approved by the
Council of Ministers which the Ministry of Finance
formally reviewed and offered a formal opinion on
the projected fiscal impacts of the policy proposal.
(Percentage should approach I00V over time.)
* Percentage of proposals reviewed by the Ministry of
Finance which the ministry assessed to have
satisfactorily projected likely fiscal impacts.
(Percentage should approach 100% over tine.)

* Develop a coherent and sustainable

mechanism for policy coordination for the
European integration process.
* Improve the operation of the Council of
Ministers, and enhance its capability to
provide strategic and analytical advice.
* Initiate periodic meetings of the General
Secretaries.
* Improve monitoring of policies and
programs.

* Percentage of ministries whose structure is in

(ii) Improve structure of public
administration,

compliance with the standard. (Percentage should
approach 100% over time.)

Bank Group Instruments
and Timing
|
Public Administration
Reform Project (ongoing);
PRSC (FY02, 03, 04)

SIGMA (advising)
OSCE (advising)
UNDP (TA)

Public Administration
Reform Project (ongoing)

SIGMA
EU Phare/CARDS

* Undertake a geneal study on Public
Administration structure
* Compile a "Methodology for approval of
structure."
* Approve a standard structure.
* Percentage of open civil service positions advertised

(iii) Improve civil service managenent
* Complete job assessment process for civil
service employees and training of direct
superiors in the process of assessing
individual work results.
* Complete the process of civil enployee
confirmation.
* Improve recruitnment procedures in
accordance with best practice.
* Monitor and analyze the law enforcement
process.
* Establish and develop a coherent control
system of personnel policies.

*

*

*

*

*
I

(Percentage should approach I000/o over time.)
Percentage of civil service openings filled through
competitive procedures. (Increase from 2001
incidence of 52%.)
Percentage of civil service positions filled by
"contract" enployees. (Reduction from 2001
baseline of 16.2%.)
Percentage of civil servants for whom formal
performance evaluations were performed. (Baseline
to be established in 2002. Percentage should
approach 100% thereafter.)
Percentage of civil servants' performance
evaluations falling in highest rating category
(Baseline to be established in 2002. Incidence
should stay below 15%.)
Quarterly tumover rates for civil servants do not
spike during quarter of or immediately following
quarter after a change in political leadership.

'This matrix is based on the GPRS matrix. GPRS final indicators are shown in bold, and GPRS intermediate indicators are shown in italics.

Activities of Other
Donors

Public Administration
Reform Project (ongoing)

Country Partner Strategy Matrix (FY03-05)

Diagnosis and Development
Objectives of the GPRS
1. Strengthen the Public
Admninistration and
Professionalize the Civil
Service (continued)

Annex B9
Page 2 of 27

Government Strategy/Actions
|
(iv) Strengthen institutions involved in
reform imnplementation.
* Strengthen the capabilities of the Civil

Selected Bank and Government
Performance Indicators/Targets
* Fraction of appeals of Civil Service Commission
decisions to the courts, in which the CSC decision
was overtumed. (Baseline to be established in 2002.
Fraction should be lower than 0%o.)

Bank Group Instruments
and Timing
Public Administration
Reform Project (ongoing)

Activities of Other
Donors
SIGMA
EU Phare/CARDS

* Average number of applicants for civil service

Public Administration
Reform Project (ongoing)

UNDP
EU Phare/CARDS (likely)

* Law on Ethics in Public Administration completed.
* Percentage of public administration positions
subject to recruitment, selection and dismissal
procedures comparable to those required for the
civil service.

Public Administration
Reforrn Project (ongoing);
PRSC (FY02, 03, 04)

SIGMA (likely)

* Ratio between average central govemnment wages

Public Administration
Reform Project (ongoing);
Education Reforn Project;
PRSC (FY02, 03,04)

SIGMA (likely)

Service Commnission., Public
Administration Department, human
resource managcneent units in the
ministries, and the role of the General
Secretmies.
(v) Increase the professionalism of public
administration.

positions who meet minimum advertised
qualifications. (Establish baseline in 2002. Number

* Prepare a Public Administmtion Trminingi
Strategy.
* Consolidate the Public Administration
Training Institute.
* Prepare and implement training programs.
(vi) Improve the legal framework.
* Prepare the law on Ethics in Public
Administration.
* Improve the legal framework on the basis
of experience in law enforcement process.
* Adjust sector processes to Administrative
Procedure Code.
(vii) Improve the wage system.
* Approve wage structure for civil
employees.
* Improve wage structure for emnployees of
the education and healthcare system.
* Implement the new wage system in the
entire public administration.

and average enterprise wages. (1999 = 1.93; Ratio
should increase slowly over time.)
* Ratio between average salary of Department
Director and average salary of executive position in
private sector manufacturing. (2000 = 0.57; ratio
should approach 0.75 over time)
* Ratio between average salary of chief of sector and
average salary of middle level manager in private
sector manufacturing. (2000 = 0.41; ratio should
approach 0.75 over tinme)
* Ratio between average salary of specialist and
average salary of non-financial management
specialist. (2000 = 0.62; ratio should approach 0.75
over time)
* Vertical pay compression ratios within subsets of
the public administration (increase slowly over time)

Country Partner Strategy Matrix (FY03-05)

Diagnosis and Development
Objectives of the GPRS
1. Strengthen the Public
Administration and
Professionalize the Civil
Service (continued)

Government Strategy/Actions
(viii) Develop information technology.
* Implement the Strategy for Infomiation

Technology Development.
* Complete data base of public
administration employees.

Annex B9
Page 3 of 27
Selected Bank and Government
_ Performance Indicators/Targets
* ndicators of the coverage and liability of
information in the public administration employees
database. (Establish baseline in 2002; increase
coverage and reliability indicators over time)

Bank Group Instruments
and Timing
Public Administration
Reform Project (ongoing)

(ix) Strengthen rule of law in local
govemment.

Activities of Other
Donors
EU Phare/CARDS

SIGMA (likely)

* Strengthen cooperation with local
govemment units.
* Organize roundtable meetings with local
govemment units.
* Train elected local government officials.
(x) Strengthen public relations.

SIGMA (likely)

* Improve system of public access to official
documents.
* Introduce idea that effective public service
is a prionty.
* Erect public infomiation stands in all
public administration institutions.
II. Reform the Judiciary
System

(i) Improve the quality of the legislative
process; increase publications and
dissemination of legal acts, court decisions,
and other infomiation.

* State Pubbcation Center fully operational and

electronic data base completed.

Legal and Judicial Reformn
Project (ongoing)

* Full operation of the state Publication
Center and the installation of modem
systems for information dissemination.
* Improve quality of legal nomis.
* Improve legislative process and its
unification, keeping in mind the role of the
Justice Ministry.
* Assess effects from adjustment of
legislation.
(ii) Increase transparency in public actions
and access to legal norms. Ensure that effects
produced by laws are related to objectives.

* improved implementation of the Freedom of

Information Law and the Administrative Procedures
Code.

Council of Europe/EU
DANIDA
USAID: Amencan Bar
Association (ABA)CEELI; East-West
Management Institute
Soros Foundation

Country Partner Strategy Matrix (FY03-05)

Diagnosis and Development
Objectives of the GPRS
11.Reform the Judiciary
System (continued)

Annex B9
Page 4 of 27

Government Strategy/Actions

Selected Bank and Government
P
Performance
Indicators/Targets
Comprehensive training program completed for
existing judges and prosecutors.
Permanent training program established for court
administrators.
Bar association assumed role as self-regulating body
to ensure quality of the bar.
Ministry of Justice capacity for coordinated policy
making and legal drafting improved.
Percentage ofjudicial decisions in civil cases
effectively enforced increased to over 60 percent.
Judicial Inspection function fully operational, biannual judicial performance assessments produced
and asses declaration system for judges and

(iii) Increase capacity of institutions and
professionals responsible for implementing
reforms to increase effectiveness ofjudicial
system and ensure adequate application of
legal procedures.

*

 Increase qualification of judges and
prosecutors responsible for control over
implementing legal normrs.
. Complete training for chancellors and
court administration.
* Implement training in community law.
* Develop Judiciary Conference Status.
* xeh crn%_t
fBa.
Associations.
* Implement reorganization of Ministry of
Justice according to new law.
* Strengthen High Council of Justice,
including judicial inspectorate function.
* Develop new court mfanagement and
administration System.
* Strengthen the operation of the Public
Prosecutor Offices.
* Strengthen the operation of the judiciary
police.
* Establish an independent Altemative
Dispute Resolution Center for commercial
disputes.

*

(iv) increase quality of legal education.

* Comprehensive reform program fully implemented,

A

.

* Implement comprehensive reform program
for Faculty of Law, including
improvements in faculty, curriculum,
organizational, and administrational
structure.

*

*

*
*

Bank Group Instruments
and Timing
Legal and Judicial Reform
Project (ongoing)

Activities of Other
Donors
Council of Europe/EU
EU/CARDS
DANIDA
USAID: East-West
Management Institute;
ABA-CEELI
Soros Foundation

paUbMuLUM
,,
vCUiUiuonali..
* New and transparent court administration system

implemented in courts of all levels and modem,
automated case management system in place
* Increased efficiency of functioning and operation of
the bailiff service, develop training program and
draft a handbook for police officers, to be widely
disseminated among the judicial police.
a Operational ADR Center for Commercial Disputes
in place

supported by twinning arrangement between the
Faculty of Law and a similar foreign law institution.
* Surveys indicate higher qualification of graduates
from Faculty of Law.

Legal and Judicial Reform
Project (ongoing)

(v) Develop knowledge about laws in
European Community.

EU CARDS and Council
of Europe

(vi) Ensure effective operation of legal,
judicial, and human right protection
institutions.
* Promote human nghts and good
governance, by increase effectiveness and
public awareness of the Ombudsman. and
the Govemment Agent's Office

DANIDA
COE EC
OSCE

Country Partner Strategy Matrix (FY03-05)

Diagnosis and Development
Objectives of the GPRS
11.Reform the Judiciary
System (continued)

III. Strengthen Local
Institutions

Government Strategy/Actions

Annex B9
Page 5 of 27
Selected Bank and Government
Performance IndicatorsiTargets

Bank Group Instruments
and Timing

(vii) Increase effectiveness of combating
crime, including ant-trafficking measures, in
full compliance with implementation of
human rights.
(i) Enhance and consolidate local autonomy.

* Basic laws and regulations on local government

PRSCs (FY03, FY04)

Activities of Other
Donors
ITALY
OSCE
USAID

USAID: Urban Institute.

administration and fiscal autonomy passed.
* Complete and implemnent the basic
legislation on territorial administration.
* Identify sources of revenues for local
govemrnments and identify lines of
responsibility on common and shared
functions.
 Transfer state properties to local
govemments.

Fiscal Decentralization
Study (FY03)

(ii) Improve governance at the local level.
* Application of a series of measures to
improve local government's govemance
standards and practices, institutional
relations of structures and capacities.
(iii) Increase capacity, transparency,
accountability, and participation of
communities in local government.
* Identify capacity needs for implementation
of the decentralization strategy.
* Apply a series of measures and activities
focused on increasing public interest in
local government.
B. Promote Sustainable Growth
I. Maintain Macroeconomic
Stability

(i) Maintain high growth rate.
* Deepen structural and institutional
reforms.
* Facilitate increased domestic and foreign
private investments through: (i)
facilitating increased credit; (ii) narrowing
the difference between interest rates on
deposits and loans; (iii) privatizing
remaining strategic enterprises.
* Promote increase of public investments to
improve infrastructure and human capital.

* GDP increased by 18-21% in real terms over
three yearsm (GPRS final indicator)

CEM - Competitiveness
and Sources of Growth
(FY04)

IMF - PRGF

Country Partner Strategy Matrix (FY03-05)

Diagnosis and Development
Objectives of the GPRS
I. Maintain Macroeconomic
Stability (continued)

Government Strategy/Actions
(ii) Deepen macroeconomic stability.
* Adhere to quantitative objectives of the
Bank of Albania.
* Maintain currency exchange stability.
* Keep budget deficit under control.
* Improve market instruments in monetary
policy.
(iii) Deepen fiscal consolidation.

Annex B9
Page 6 of 27
Selected Bank and Government
Performance Indicators/Targets
* Macroeconomic stability maintained, with IMF
PRGF targets met (maintain inflation at 2-4%
annually).

Bank Group Instruments
and Timing

* Budget deficit reduced from 9.1 % of GDP in 2000

Activities of Other
Donors
IMF: PRGF

IMF: PRGF

to 6.5% of GDP in 2004 (GPRS target).
* Improve fiscal admninistration and expand
tax base, thereby increasing revenues
faster than expenditures.
(iv) Improve public expenditure
management.

* Improve accuracy of revenue projections: %

* Consistently plan revenues and
expenditures.
* Ensure effective use of expenditures.

*

*

*

*

(v) Increase openness and improve external
position of the economy.
* improve trade balance by considering
appropriate policies and instrument for
substitution of a part of imports and by
creating conditions for export promotion.
* Progress towards bilateral and multilateral

free trade agreements in the region and
further afield.

deviation of actual from projected revenues (2000 =
-2.4%; target: no more than  5 %)
Maintain modest policy volatility: Average %
change from previous year's budget across functions
(broad policy areas) (2000 = 1.4%; target s2%)
Functional expenditure predictability: Average %
deviation (in absolute value terms) of actual
functional expenditures from budgeted (Establish
baseline for 2000; maintain that deviation or less in
future years)
Budget unit expenditure predictability: Average %
deviation (in absolute value terms) of actual budget
units' expenditures from budgeted (Establish
baseline for 2000; maintain that deviation or less in
future years)
Financial accountability: Number of days delay in
tabling audit of public finances with Parliament
(2000 = 272 days; reduce this delay each year)

* Current account deficit reduced from 7.2% of GDP

in 2000 to 6.2% of GDP in 2004, with a rise in the
intervening years (GPRS target).
* Level of currency reserves increased to 4.7 months
of imports in 2004 (GPRS target).

Public Administration
Reform Project (ongoing)

DFID: Support for public
expenditure managemnent;
Support for tax
administration reforn

IMF: PRGF
EU

Country Partner Strategy Matrix (FY03-05)

Diagnosis and Development
Objectives of the GPRS
I. Improve Financial
Intermediation

Annex B9
Page 7 of 27

Government Strategy/Actions
(i) Restructure and strengthen the financial
market.

*
*

* Improve legislation on operation of a
capital market.
* Privatize Savings Bank and state-owned
insurance company INSIG.
* Develop deposit guarantee scheme.
* Strengthen capacity to supervise the
financial system.

*
*

Selected Bank and Government
Performance Indicators/Targets
Sale of Savings Bank and INSIG concluded.
Deposit Insurance Fund established and operating
satisfactorily.
Supervisory development plan satisfactorily
implemented by the Bank of Albania.
Satisfactory banking regulation adopted by Bank of
Albania.

Bank Group Instruments
and Timing
Financial Institution
Building TA Project
(ongoing); Financial Sector
Adjustment Credit (FY02)
iFC: SvB marketing and
potential equity investment;
potential pre-privatization
equity investnent in INSIG

Activities of Other
Donors
IMF MAE (TA for bank
supervision, deposit
insurance law,
modernizing the payment
system, anti-money
laundering law)
US (TA for bank
supervision, support to
MoF for anti-money
laundering)
EBRD: potential equity
investmet in SvB;
potential pre-privatizatioyn
equity investment in
INSIG

(ii) Support improved banking services.
* Promote competition among banks.
* Prepare and imnplement real time gross
settiement system (RTGS).
* Stimulate diversification of products and
banking and financial services.

1mI.Facilitate Private Sector
Development

(i) Promote free enterprise.
* Facilitate procedures for business access.
Reform institution issuing licenses and
permits. Increase transparency of the tax
and customs administration authorities by
publicizing orders and instructions; and
installing telephone lines for registering
complaints.
* Establish a public information office in
each ministry.
* Improve conditions for credit. Establish a
Credit Information Bureau; improve
transparency and market information by
improving legislation on accounting and
auditing and the control and auditing of
institutions. Improve enforcement of
bankruptcy and collateral legislation.
Law.

* Volume ofcredit increasedon average by 30%

annually during the next threeyears. (GPRS
intermediateindicator)

Financial Institution
Building TA Project
(ongoing); Financial Sector
Adjustment Credit (FY02)

US: American-Albanian
Bank

* Interest rate spreads decreased.
* Outsourcing of budgetary and fiscal functions

tirough open auctions.
* RTGS system initiated.
* Unemployment reducedfrom 14% in 2001 to 12%
in 2004. (GPRS intermediate indicator)
* Total investments increasedfrom 1901/ of GDP in
2000 to 21-22% of GDP in 2004; ofwhich public
investment increasedfrom 7% of GDP in 2000 to
8% of GDP in 2004. (GPRS intermediateindicator)
* Study undertaken on administrative barriers to

investors' entry. Steps taken to streamline
administrative procedures to investors' entry (PRSC
condition).
* Legal framework for resolution of debt and
commercial disputes completed (PRSC condition).
* Financial reporting improved (FSAC condition).
* Satisfactory accounting law enacted and
amendments to relevant legislation (FSAC
condition).
* Progress in implementation of institutional
development program for bankruptcy enforcement
and secured financing (FSAC condition).

Private Sector Strategy
Update (FY04);
Financial Sector Adjustment
Credit (FY02)

GTZ (TA for insolvency
law)

FIAS (Administrative
Barriers Study)

Soros Foundation
(cofinancing
Administrative Barriers
Study)

USAID

IMF: conditionality related
to administrative barriers
study

Country Partner Strategy Matrix (FY03-05)

Diagnosis and Development
Objectives of the GPRS
m. Facilitate Private Sector
Development (continued)

Government Strategy/Acdons

Annex B9
Page 8 of 27
Selected Bank and Government
Performance Indicators/Targets

Bank Group Instruments
and Timing

(ii) Strengthen the institutionalization and
formalization of the market.

Activities of Other
Donors
EU

* Improve the institutional and legal
environment for free competition in the
market. Strengthen the Competition
Departmnent and Competition Commission
and adopt the necessary legal framework.
Strengthen Regulatory Bodies.
* Improve relation of business with tax and
customs administration. Improve tax
reimbursement procedures. Computerize
local tax offices. Train tax and customs
administration. Establish independent
commission for taxpayers' conplaints.
* Increase land security and access.
Complete chartering of remaining
cadastral zones.
(iii) Support the development of SMEs.
* Improve the legal framework for
developing and strengthening the activity
of microfinance schemes.
* Promote business incubators.

* Regulations for Savings and Credit Associations

finalized and implemented.
a Regulations for Non-Bank Financial Institutions
improved.

Microcredit Project
(ongoing)

GTZ
EBRD: Albanian
Reconstruction Equity
Fund; SME Recovery
Credit Une
EIm: indirect lending to
SMEs through a Global
Loan Facility

(iv) Promote foreign direct investment.
* Establish a Foreign Investment Promotion
Agency as "one-stop service shop" for
providing services to foreign investors.
* Develop free zones and industrial parks.
* Establish and operate a database to
facilitate decision making for foreign
investors.

* Investment Promotion Agency established.

MIGA: TA for Investment
Promotion Agency
Private Industry Recovery
Project (ongoing)

IMF: conditionality related
to Investment Promotion
Agency

Country Partner Strategy Matrix (FY03-05)

Diagnosis and Development
Objectives of the GPRS
III. Facilitate Private Sector
Development (continued)

IV. Improve Infrastructure

Government Strategy/Actions

Annex B9
Page 9 of 27
Selected Bank and Government
Performance Indicators/Targets

(v) Export promotion.
. Revise and improve legislation to
encourage exports.
* Develop functions to guarantee export
transactions though Albanian Guarantee
Agency.
* Promote the development of product
quality control mechanisms.
Power
(i) Improve the management and
performance of the power sector.
* Amend the law on the regulation of the
electricity sector to eliminate the
Government's role in setting prices.
* Enhance the competencies and the
financial resources of the Energy
Regulatory Body.
* Approve a new cost-based tariff electricity
structure and mechanism for future
changes by the Energy Regulatory Entity.
 Adopt mechanisms for protecting
consumers with low incomes against the
rise in electricity price.
* Adopt and implement a policy document
describing in detail the strategy to
restructure and strengthen the legislative
and regulatory framework.
* Improve collection of electricity bills from
all consumers, especially households, and
budgetary and non-budgetary institutions.
* Reduce technical and non-technical losses
in the electricity transmission and
distribution systems.
* Implement measures to reduce demand for
electricity by promoting conservation and
the use of altemative energy sources for
space heating and cooking.

* Load shedding reduced in accordance with the

updated Action Plan.
* Power losses reduced to 42% in 2002 and to the
levels in the updated Action Plan for 2003 and
2004.
* Bill collection increased to 90% in2002 to the
levels agreed in the updated Action Plan for 2003
and 2004.
* The government import subsidy reduced in
accordance with the agreed levels in the updated
Action Plan for 2003 and 2004.
* The first phase of the power sector reform program
implemented.
* The number of consumers without meters reduced in
accordance with the levels in the updated Action
Plan for 2003 and 2004.

Bank Group Instruments
and Timing
Private Industry Recovery
Project (ongoing)

Power Transmission and
Distribution Project
(ongoing)
Power Sector Rehabilitation
and Restructuring Project
(FY02)

Activities of Other
Donors

Austria: Cofinancing Drin
River Cascade
Rehabilitation Project.
EBRD: Drin River
Cascade Rehabilitation;
Cofinancing Power
Transmission and
Distribution Project;
possible loan for thermal
power plant in Vlore,
subject to feasibility study
EIB: Transmission and
distribution system
strengthening in Vlore,
Elbasan and Shkoder;
Supply of meters
Germany (iW): System
strning in stem
strengthening in southem
Japan: Cofinancing Power
Transmission and
Distribution Project and
Drin River Cascade
Rehabilitation Project
Norway: Substations and
materials; Supply of
meters
Switzerland: Cofinancing
Power Transmission and
Distribution Project and
Drin River Cascade
Rehabilitation Project
US: TA for power sector
reform and investment
evaluation

Country Partner Strategy Matrix (FY03-05)

Diagnosis and Development
Objectives of the GPRS
IV. Improve Infrastructure
(continued)

Annex B9
Page 10 of 27

Government Strategy/Actions

Selected Bank and Government
Performance Indicators/Targets

(ii) Expand capacity to import and generate
electricity, and imnprve integration of the
systern with the Balkan and European
networks.
Prepare and irmplement least-costs
investment program for rehabilitation of
existing electricity generation facilities,

Bank Group Instruments
and Timing
Themial Power Project
(FY03)

Activities of Other
Donors
Sec above.

Ei-=r*gC%cy Road Project

EU

the construction ofnew facilities, and the
strengthening of the electricity

transmission and distribution systems.
Strengthen the electricity transmission
network with the regional countries and
the European network.

Transort

;-

(i) Rehabilitate existing transpoit
infrastructure network.
* Complete the first stage of the
rehabilitation and construction of road
transport corridors.
* Increase financing for maintenance and
the reorganization of maintenance services
by contracting out routine mnaintenance.
* Undertake detailed studies and projects for
construcbon of economically-feasible
roads, including Durres-Kukes-Morine
and Tirana-Klos-Peshkopi-Billate roads.
* Modemize mnanagemnnt and complete
work in the ports of Durres and Vlore and
in the secondary ports of Shenguin and
Sarande.
* Realize the concessionary contract for the
construction of a new passenger terminal
in Rinas airport and the building of a new
location site for the airplanes.

r

ur i . npri
u and

communication increasedfrom244% of GDP in
2001 to 3.1% in 2004. (GPRS intermediate
indicator)
* Increased community participation in the
maintenance of communal road network.
* National Road Administration (General Roads
Directorate) restructured.
* Pavement managenment system operational.

(ongoing); Trade and
Transport Facilitation in
Southeast Eumpe Project
(ongoing); Road
Maintenance Project
(FY02); Transport Project
(FY04); Dutes Port Project
(ongoing).

EBRD: Road
Rehabilitation Project; air
traffic control at Tirana
Airport
EIB: Road Rehabilitation;
Air traffic control at Tirana
Airport; feny terminal at
Durres Port.
Italy
Kuwait Fund
Italy (Secondary ports)

Country Partner Strategy Matrix (FY03-05)

Diagnosis and Development
Objectives of the GPRS
IV. Improve Infrastructure
(continued)

V. Facilitate Rural
Development

Government Strategy/Actions

Annex B9
Page II of 27
Selected Bank and Government
Performance IndicatorsTargets

(ii) Comnmercialize transport services and
privatize state services.
* Imnprove the regulatory and institutional
framework.
* Establish the Albanian Naval Authority for
the management of port infrastructure.
* Improve the information and management
systems.
* Update the inventory of the passenger
carriages.
Irmplemnent the master plan on air traffic
control system.
* Undertake a feasibility study and prepare
the Master Plan to develop air transport.
Improve Rural Infrastructure
(i) Improve access to and quality of potable
water and sewage systems.
* Approve the strategy for potable water
supply and sewerages in rural areas.
* Establish the Sanitary and Potable Water
Agency in rural areas.
* Construct water supply lines and
sewerages in the most critical rural areas.
* Encourage community participation in
water supply and sewerage projects.
(ii) Rehabilitate and improve main road axes,
electricity supply systems, and
telecommunication.
* Rehabilitate main roads linking
municipalities and villages.
* Reorganize and improve maintenance of
secondary and tertiary road network.
* Imnprove electricity supply for rural
population, mainly by improving the
general condition of the supply network.
* Increase penetration of telephone service
by introducing private operators.

* Incomes in rural areas increased.
* Strategy for potable water supply and sewerage in

rural areas approved.
. Sanitary and Potable Water Agency in rural areas
established.

* Rehabilitate 1.800 /om of rural roads. (GPRS

intermediateindicator)

Bank Group Instruments
and Timing
Durres Port Project
(ongoing)

National Water Strategy
(FY03);
Rural Development/Water
Project (FY05)

Community Works Project
(ongoing);
Road Maintenance (FY02);
Community Works 11
(FY04)

Activities of Other
Donors

ECHO (what project?);
OPEC (what project?);
Islamic Development Bank
(what project?)

Country Partner Strategy Matrix (FY03-05)

Diagnosis and Development
Objectives of the GPRS
V. Facilitate Rural
Development (continued)

Annex B9
Page 12 of 27

Government Strategy/Actions
l

Selected Bank and Government
Performance Indicators/Targets
Agricultural growth rate of 5% maintained.
Immovable property registration offices fully
functional in all disticts.
First registration of land completed. (PRSC Ill
condition)
Business plan for immovable property registration
system and for title security finalized and
implementation started.
Law on private property passed.
Land consolidation activites are piloted in four
districts.
Fees for land registration reduced by 50%.
Time to register land transactions decreased by 50%
- to one day.

Facilitate Agricultural Growth
(i) Create functioning and secure land
markets and conditions for consolidation of
property.

*
*

. Improve functioning of immovable
property registration offices in all districts.
* Complete first registration of land, forests,
and pastures.
. Prepare law on private property and review
and improve legislaton on agricultural
land.
* Settle problem of ownership and
cvZlXMs....
sa-.fOlasuD.
* Develop a system of decentralized
(community-based) leasing of public
forest and pasture land.

*

(ii) Rehabilitate and restructure irnigation
and drainage.

* Agricultural land with functioning irrigation and

* Expend rehabilitation activities in lowland
and mountainous areas.
* Restructure water enterprises and convert
into irrigation and drainage boards.
* Support establishment of Water User
Associations and Federations.
* Train managers of WUAs and Federations
in management and organization.
* Transfer irrigation works to WUAs.

*

.
X

*
*

*
*

*
*

*

drainage systems increased to 50% and 70%
respectively of land requiring rehabilitation.(GPRS
intermediate indicator)
Irrigation facilities covering 60,000 hectares
rehabilitated and upgraded.
Drainage and flood protection facilities covering
50,000 hectares rehabilitated.
Management of rehabilitated irrigation facilities
transferred to Water User Associations.
Water enterprises for Kavaje and Lushnje
restructured (intermediate target), additional ten
district water enterpnses restructured (final target).
500 WUA representatives trained.
I

Bank Group Instruments
and Timing
Agricultural Services
Project (ongoing); PRSC 11,
HI (FY03, FY04)

Activities of Other
Donors
USAID: Immovable
Property Registration
Project

Second Irrigation and
Drainage Rehabilitation
Project (ongoing);
AgriculturelhTrigation Ill
(FY05)

IFAD: Small-Scale
Irrigation Rehabilitation
Project

Country Partner Strategy Matrix (FY03-05)

Diagnosis and Development
Objectives of the GPRS
V. Facilitate Rural
Development (continued)

Government Strategy/Actions
___

(iii) Improve access to and quality of services
in agriculture and livestock production.
* Strengthen advisory services and extend to
all areas of the country.
* Support the development of an effective
pnvate extension service in areas with the
highest production potential in the
country.
* Restructure research agncultural
institutions.
* Establish the National Center of
Agricultural Researches and Agricultural
Extension Services.
* Develop cost-recovery practices in
agricultural research sector.
* Restructure and strengthen institutions of
control and certificatiorn of seeds and
saplings.
* Continue expansion of projects to improve
veterinary prophylaxis and animal health.
* Consolidate the phytosanitary and crop
protection services - Limit public sector
role to quality control and safe use.
(iv) Facilitate access to financial services.
* Establish conditions for expanding savings
and credit associations, village credit
funds, and other financial intermediaries
in rural areas.

Annex B9
Page 13 of 27
Selected Bank and Government
Performance Indicators/Targets
* Competitive Grant Scheme implemented.
* Agricultural research institutions restructured to
transfer applied technology to small holder famis.
* Certification process for seeds established.
* Seed regulations adjusted to international standards.
* Production of breeder seeds and multiplication of
basic seeds by seed research stations increased by
10% to 44 tons per research station.
* Seed multiplication and trade fully private sector
based.
* Extension service demand driven and adapted to
small holder needs.

Bank Group Instruments
and Timing
Agriculturai Services
Project (ongoing); PRSC II,
Ill (FY03, FY04)

Activities of Other
Donors
Netherlands: Albania
National Extension Project
[FAD Mountain Areas
Development Project
Italy: Integrated Livestock
Project; Production,
Preservation and Use of
Certified Saplings in
Albania
USAID: Support of Dairy
and Livestock
Associations (Land
O'Lakes); Assistance to
Albanian Agricultural
Trade Associations

* Access to credit improved through increased

coverage of SCAs and increased bank lending to
rural areas.

Microcredit Project
(ongoing)

Switzerland (Microcredit
Project cofinancing)
[FAD Mountain Areas
Development Project
Ireland
USAID: Opportunity
Intemational; Introduction
of Small Business Credit
and Assistance Program.

Country Partner Strategy Matrix (FY03-05)

Diagnosis and Development
Objectives of the GPRS
V. Facilitate Rural
Development (continued)

Government Strategy/Actions
(v) Improve fishery resource management
and increase aquaculture activities.
* Prepare a new Fishery Law.
* Formulate and implement specific policies
to support the fishery sector and improve
access to inputs.
* Support the resumption of fish production
activity in available reservoirs.
* Establish high-value pilot aquaculture
schemes in fresh waters.
* Assess feasibility of high-value
aquaculture in seawaters.
-

Annex B9
Page 14 of 27
Selected Bank and Government
Performance Indicators/Targets
* 6 community-based Fishery Management
Organizations (FMOs) established.
*Major fishing ports and landing sites rehabilitated
* Freshwater aquaculture restarted in 50 irrigation
reservoirs.
* Hatchery for Lake Ohrid Trout rehabilitated and its
staff trained.
* Pilot Facilities for high value marine species
developed and operational.

Bank Group Instruments
and Timing
Pilot Fishery Development
Project (ongoing)

* Impediments for FDI reduced as measured by

Agricultural Services
(ongoing)

Activities of Other
Donors

L.otauLIis. t.s'.ah..y *VIII5anaIer-Lr

Organization to co-manage fishing ports
and fishing resources with the
government.
* Rehabilitate fishing ports to improve
hygiene and standards for navigation and
fishery.
(vi) Increase the level of processing of
agricultural, livestock, and fishery products.
* Support training in food safety and quality
control, including laboratory services to
certify quality and safety standards.
* Promote foreign direct investment in agroprocessing industry.

number of certifications needed.
* FDI increased by 25%.

EU CARDS; Japan KR2

Country Partner Strategy Matrix (FY03-05)

Diagnosis and Development
Objectives of the GPRS
V. Facilitate Rural
Development (continued)

Annex B9
Page 15 of 27

Government Strategy/Actions
(vii) Improve conditions for trading
agricultural products in domestic and foreign
markets.

*

* Establish wholesale markets in Lushnje
and Vlore (and possibly in a second phase
Shkoder, Korce, and Tirana)
* Improve the structures of information,
marketing, and export promotion.
* Improve the organization of product
markets and the inclusion of the
beneficiaries in their management.
* Establish structures for collecting and
disseminating information about markets
to fannmers.
* Promote the creation and strengthening of
agricultural marketing agencies in nural
areas.
* Carry out studies on the possibilities to
increase competitiveness of domestic
products on domestic and foreign markets.
* Improve legislation and administrative
procedures related to exports.

*

(ix) Improve standards and control of
product quality.
* Harmonize the legislation on foodstuff
products with that of the EU.
* Complete legislation on quality, expiration
dates, and conditions for trading products.
* Strengthen the border veterinary control
points.

*

*

Selected Bank and Government
Performance IndicatorslTargets
Lushnje and Vlore markets fully functioning. Plans
for second phase markets finalized.
Municipal market revenues increased by 500/%to
US$30,000 per market per year.
Markets used ad infornation points for traders and
farmers.
Farmers' revenue from sales through markets
increased.

Bank Group Instruments
and Timing
Agricultural Services
(ongoing)

Activities of Other
Donors
GTZ: Advice to
Agricultural Policies;
Promotion of Self-Help
Organizations in Private
Agriculture; Feasibility
Study for Tirana
Wholesale Market.
Swedish International
Developmnent Agency:
Rural Market Development
Project, Korea District.
USAID: Agribusiness and
Trade Association
Development; Introduction
of Small Business Credit
and Assistance Program;
Private FoTestry
Development Project

USAID: Private Forestry
Project; Dairy and
Livestock Development
(Land o'Lakes)

Country Partner Strategy Matrix (FY03-05)

Diagnosis and Development
Objeclives of the GPRS
V. Facilitate Rural
Development (continued)

Government Strategy/Actions
Improve the Management of Natural
Resources
(i) Support the transfer of ownership or user
rights to local communities.

Annex B9
Page 16 of 27
Selected Bank and Government
Performance Indicators/Targets
* Illegal logging reduced.
* GDFP revenue increased by 100/6.
* Six Fisheries Management Organizations
established and their codes of conduct (statutes)
operational.

Bank Group Instruments
and Timing
Forestry Project (ongoing);
Pilot Fishery Development
Project (ongoing);
Natural Resources Project
(FY05)

Activities of Other
Donors
Italy

Forestry Project (ongoing);
Fishery Development
Project (ongoing)

Italy (cofinancing Forestry
Project).

* Strengthen structures of environmental
management at a national and local level.
* Comnplete legislation on long-term leasing
of natural resources, such as pastures.
* Continue transfer of forest and pasture use
or ownership rights to municipalities and
rural communities.
* Introduce practices ofjoint management of
sea resources by rural communities though
Fribhry Management Organizations.
(ii) Improve capacity to manage natural
resources.
* Improve management structures and
control of forests and pastures
exploitation.
* Restructure forestry services to facilitate
the sustainable use of forests and pastures.
* Create legal and institutional framework
for managenent and use of fishing water
resources.
* Protect land from erosion though
forestation and construction of
mountainous dams.
* Rehabilitate drainage to eliminate floods
in the country's northwestem areas.
Facilitate Non-Farm Development
Promote non-farm activities in rural areas to
increase employment and incomes.
* Support the extension of microfinance
schemes-including SCAs-and advisory
services.
* Carry out community works programs.
* Broaden advisory services to non-farn
development.
* Development of niche markets, such as
agricultural tourism, environmentally
sustainable collection and processing of
medicinal herbs, handicrafts, etc.

USAID

* Increase of nonfarm activities in rural areas,

measured by increased share in total income.
* Framework developed for protection of natural
resources and cultivation of medicinal herbs.

Microcredit Project
(ongoing); Commnunity
Works Project (ongoing);
Community Works 11
(FY04)

IFAD Mountain Areas
Development Project
DFID: Cofinancing for
Mountain Areas
Development Project
ireiand
USAID: Opportunity
International.; Pnvate
Forestry Project

Country Partner Strategy Matrix (FY03-05)

Diagnosis and Development
Objectives of the GPRS
V. Facilitate Rural
Developmnent (continued)

Annex B9
Page 17 of27

Government Strategy/Acdons

Selected Bank and Government
Performance Indicators/Targets
* Incentives established for teachers and doctors to
work in rural areas.
* Decrease in tumover of teachers and doctors in rural
areas.

Promote Rural Human Development
(i) Increase access to and improve quality of
services of education, health, and social
protection in rural areas.

Bank Group Instruments
and Timing
TA: Early Child
Development and Social
Cohesion Post-Conflict
Grant

* Rehabilitate school buildings and
equipment.
* Continue implementation of programs for
teacher training and retraining in rural
areas, mainly for teachers who do not
teach in their subjects.
* Establish training and vocational training
schools for qualification and restraining of
free workforce.
* Establish new health centers and
ambulance clinics in rural areas.
 Improve access to emergency service and
dental and pharmaceutical service in rural
areas.
* Improve mother and child care in rural
areas.
* Improve targeting of social support and
economic assistance systems.
* Extend social and health insuranec
schemes to all rural areas.
* Inplement the project for use of school
buses to transport pupils to school.

Rural Human Development
Study (FY04)

(ii) Strengthen scif-govemance.

Fiscal Decentralization
Study (FY03)

* Implement decentralization plan as
scheduled.
* Strengthen local government capacities
though training in preparation of regional
development policies and in delivery of
public services.
* Encourage community participation in
I
self-govemance.

I

Actvites of Other
Donors
UNICEF (Early Child
Development and Social
Cohesion Post-Conflict
Grant)

USAID

s aIu.IsI .Juav.,
vI,

naLIAVA

1V-V.q
n

fIICA.

DY

Page 18 of 27
Diagnosis and Development
Government Strategy/Actions
Objectives of the GPRS
|
VI. Promote Sustainable
(i) Strengthen environmental institutions and
Environmental
legal framework.
Development
* Restructure MoE, strengthen branches and
inspectorate.
* Define authority and responsibilities of
local govemment units in the field of
environment
* Define the role of line ministries,
institutions for implementing policies, and
the legal framework for environmental
protection and monitoring of indicators.
Establish environmental structure in
central institutions.
* Increase nublic aware nes* onf ,nd
participation in environmental protection.
(ii) Prepare and adopt long-term policy
documents, strategic environmental
assessments, and environmental policy
instruments.
* Prepare 2001 National Action Plan for
Environment
* Prepare, approve, and implement law on
Carbon Tax and Packaging Tax.
* Prepare norms on environmental
discharges from stationary and mobile
sources; norns on environmental quality
(air, water, land).

Selected Bank and Government
Performance Indlcators/Targets
* Enforcement of environmental regulations
improved.
* Concrete decentralization of environmental services
to local govemment - quantified.
* Integration of environmental considerations in
sectoral policies - number of environmental units
established.

Bank Group Instruments
and Timing
Environment Project (FY03)

Activities of Other
Donors
DFID (increasing capacity
of inspectorate and
improving monitoring)
EU: Regional Strategy for
Treating Dangerous Waste
Norway: Impiementing the
regional Re-construction
Program on Environment
CIDA: policy advisor to
the Ministry of
Environment

* Long-term policy documents prepared.

Country Partner Strategy Matrix (FY03-05)

Diagnosis and Development
Objectives of the GPRS
VI. Promote Sustainable
Environmental Development
(continued)

Annex B9
Page 19 of 27

Government Strategy/Actions
_

(iii) Reduce pollution from existing
resources.
* Rehabilitate two of the five "hotspots."
* Undertake a feasibility study for three
"hot spots."
* Finalize the construction of two sewerage
treatment facilities.
* Improve the environmental management
of urban waste and establish two sanitary
landfills.
* Implement five pilot projects for reducing
industrial discharges.
* Regulate the activities of the construction
sector and road maintenance in four cities
with high levels of dust in the air.
* Eiminate i,800 tons of arsenic solution in
Fier Nitrogen Plant.
(iv) Undertake measures to improve
sustainable use of resources.

Selected Bank and Government
Performance Indicators/Targets
* Two "hotspot" sites meet prescribed standards.
* "Hotspot" feasibility studies completed and
accepted by Govemment.
* Construction of sewerage facilities completed.
* Enterprises selected and audits completed resulting
in integrated permits issued.
* Plans for regulation of construction and road
maintenance prepared and approved by
Govemment.
* Amount of arsenic eliminated at Fier Nitrogen Plant.

Bank Group Instruments
and Timing
Environnant Project (FY03)

* Improved surface area.
* Increase protected areas surface in 3 years, from 6%

Butrint Park Management IDF (ongoing); Natural
Resources Project (FY05)

to 15%.
* Implement three pilot projects applying
combined measure against soil erosion.
* Increase protected areas
* Designate Shkoder Lake ecosystem and
VIore Bay as Protected Areas.
* Rehabilitate forests damaged by fires or
economic activity (in coastal areas, KuneVaini lagoon system, Lura)
* Implement management plan for Dajti
National Park.
* Implement measures for transfer of nghts
of ownership or use of natural resources to
municipalities/local communities.
* Implement six pilot community projects
for sustainable use of local natural
I resources.

* Forest areas rehabilitated, amount of fines collected,

number of fires.
* Number of visitors to Dajti National Park increased.
* Amount of forest transferred to communities,
number of communes involved, population
impacted.
* Pilot community projects for sustainable local
natural resources implemented.

Activities of Other
Donors
UNEP: Feasibility studies
for Hot Spots
SIDA: Sharra Waste Dump
Feasibility Study
EU: Regional Strategy for
Treating Dangerous Waste
DFID: Support to Ministry
of Environment to
strengthen capacity to
implement and enforce
environrnental legislation

IFAD

Country Partner Strategy Matrix (FY03-05)

Diagnosis and Development
Objectives of the GPRS
VIl. Promote Urban
Development

Government Strategy/Actions
(i) Improve access to urban infrastructure.
* Increase access to infrastructure and basic
services (e.g., potable water and sewerage)
in areas with shortages and neglected

conmnunities.
* Adopt appropriate/affordable standards for
the poor in relation to access in
infrastructure.
* Increase the use of conmmunity-based
approaches.
* Increase the effectiveness of investment to
build infrastructure in areas with new
construction.
e Fo.,.u!satc stteg.c devek,pjinmi pians to
establish more direct links between
trends/land development models,
economic activities, especially in areas
with rapid growth, such as Tirana-Durres
corridor and the areas of Kanze
municipality.
* Commercialize the water/sewage
enterprises to improve operation and
maintenance and cost recovery.

Annex B9
Page 20 of 27
Selected Bank and Government
Performance Indicators/Targets
* Public expendituresfor public works (water,
sewerage) increasedfrom 1.2% of GDP in 2000 to
2% of GDP in 2004. (GPRS intermediate indicator)
* Share of urban and suburbanpopulation with
access to potable water supply, sewage system, and

Bank Group Instruments
and Timing
Municipal Water and
Wastewater Project (FY03);
Urban Land Management
Project (ongoing);
National Water Strategy

electricpower increased.(GPRS intermediate

(FY03);

indicator)

Durres Port Project
(ongoing);
Conununity Works Project
(ongoing);
Community Works II
(FY04)

* Access to essential urban infrastructure provided in

20 neglected and/or under-serviced urban areas
(subprojects), affecting approximately 20,000
families.
* Develop an Infrastructure Management Plan for
Greater Tirana.
. Prepare a national Urban Development Strategy.

Activities of Other
Donors
KfW
EU
Italy

Country Partner Strategy Matrix (FY03-05)

Diagnosis and Development,
Objectives of the GPRS
VIL. Promote Urban
Development (continued)

Annex B9
Page 21 of 27

Government Strategy/Actions
.
(ii) Guarantee land ownership rights.
* Complete land property restitution and
adopt compensation measures.
. Amend law on property restitution to
fulfill government's legal obligations to
property restitution claims and adopt
applicable measure for compensation of
property restitution.
* Complete registration of innmovable
properties.
* Legalize areas with infornal construction.
* Explore practical models for regulation of
informnal settlements.
* Collect accurate information on land
property status.
* Fulfill legal requirenents to formalize
informal settlements.
* Local application of paynent for
development of land for infrastructure in
informal settlements, based on the Urban
Land Managemnent Project.
* Adopt a new policy on public property.
* Identify measure to give municipalities
legal ownership rights over public land
and other municipal assets.
* Identify measures allowing municipal
management and use of lands and other
assets.

Selected Bank and Government
Performance Indlcators/Targe*s
* Preliminary registration carried out for about 1,000
families in informal settlements in Bathore and
Lapraka on a pilot basis
* Urban development strategy completed setting out
actions to regularizelegal informal settlements and
further improve supporting legal framework

Number of homeless reduced. (GPRS intennediate

(iii) Develop the housing market and
increase the access of the poor to housing.

*

* Undertake extended surveys on urban
poverty and development of data and
information systems to assess future needs
for investments and policies.
* Mobilize resources for adoption of
indicators for urban development and
poverty reduction at the municipal level.

* Urban development strategy completed.

indicator)

Bank Group Instruments
and Timing
Urban Land Management
(ongoing)

Urban Land Managenent
(ongoing)

Activities of Other
Donors
USAID

Countiry Partner Strategy Matrix (FY03-05)

Diagnosis and Development
Objectives of the GPRS
ViII. Improve
Telecommunications

Government Strategy/Actions
|
(i) Continue liberalization of the
telecommunications sector.

_______________________________

!.
Safety Net

*..an

Annex B9
Page 22 of 27

^ 7 9 uuuic
su
Assistance
(i) Increase coverage of the poor.

MDG Goal 1: Eradicate
Extreme Poverty and Hunger
(Target: Halve, between 1990
and 2015, the proportion of
people whose income is less
than one dollar a day)

* Identify economic and social indicators

*

*

*
*
*
*
*

that can be used to assess the economic
and social situation of the country's
regions.
Allocate block grants from the central
budget on the basis of the economic and
social indicators.
Determine how to monitor and meet
national objectives for poverty reduction
while framing and implementing effective
policies for the decentralization of the
social safety net scheme.
Review the policy and legal framework for
effective safety nets.
Carry out training of employees.
Establish a database on the economic and
social situation of social groups.
Harmonize economic assistance with other
forms of social protection.
Gradually target the system at a minimum
living standard.

Selected Bank and Government
Performance Indicators/Targets
* Liberalize the fixed telephone services.
* Improve the structure of service tariffs.
* Privatize Albtelekom telephone service company.
* Increase the level of telephone penetration to urban
and rural areas.
* Improve quality of service.
* Consolidate the Teleconmmunications Regulatory
Body.
* Extend intemnet service to educational and training
institutions to help businesses.

C. Promote Humian Developnment

Share of population In poverty according to the
absolute poverty line (under S2 per capita per
day) reduced from 46.6% in 1998 to 38% in 2004
(GPRS final Indicator).
* Share of population in extreme poverty (under

SI per capita per day) reduced from 17.4% In
1998 to 14% In 2004 (GPRS flnal Indicator).
* %of ndihme ekonomike beneficiaries who were

poor and %of poor (including children) receiving
social assistance.
* Proportion of ndhime ekonomike funds allocated to
families meeting national criteria for eligibility.
* Recomnendations implemented on the design and
operation of social assistance programs resulting
from the social safety net study.

Bank Group Instruments
and Timing
Privatization TA (FY03,
FY04)

Activities of Other
Donors
Italy trust fund for
privatization advisors

-

Social Services Delivery
Project (ongoing);
Social Safety Net Review
(FY03);
PRSC (FY02, FY03, FY04);
Poverty Assessment (FY03)

DFID: Support for Livings
Standards Measurement
Survey

Country Partner Strategy Matrix (FY03-05)

Diagnosis and Development
Objectives of the GPRS
1. Strengthen the Social Safety
Net. (continued)

Government Strategy/Actions
Social Care
(i) Extend social services coverage to the
whole county in accordance with the
quantitative and qualitative needs of
vulnerable social categories or social
categories at risk. Inmprove the delivery and
quality of social services.
* Prepare social service strategy.
. Improve legislation for full

Annex B9
Page 23 of 27
Selected Bank and Government
Performance Indicators/Targets
* Satisfactory policy implemented to make the
financing of conmunity-based services sustainable
(PRSC II)
* Satisfactory Govemrnment strategy adopted for
reducing and ameliorating poverty that specifies
how the roles for conumunity-based social services,
pension programs, and cash economic assistance
policies will be coordinated within an environment
of increasing decentralization. (PRSC III)

Bank Group Instruments
and Timing
Social Services Delivery
Project (ongoing); PRSC
(FY02, FY03, FY04)

* Contributor-benefsciary ratio in social insurance

PRSC 1,11, Ill (FY02, FY03,
FY04)

decentralization of services.
* Training service-providing staff and
administrators.
* Cooperate with NGOs.
* Harmonize with economic assistance

scheme.
* Establish daily local centers to care for
categories with specific needs.
Sodal Insurance
(i) Increase the number of contributors and
reduce the budget subsidy.
* Include the rural population in social
insurance contribution,
* Review structure of pension differences.
* Improve legislation.
. Explore scope for merging urban and rural
schemes.
* Improve control and monitoring.
* Introduce social security number.
* Review current work processes and
computerize required information system.

system increased. (GPRS intermediary indicator)
* Initial package of recommendations implemented
from the social safety net study. (PRSC 111)
. Pension policy package submitted to Parlianent to
address overall, longer-term projected problems of
coverage, affordability, equity, and adequacy in the
pension system, including a schedule of specific
changes in such parmeters as indexation,
contribution rates, and contribution ceilings. (PRSC
11)
* Satisfactory implementation of agreed scheduled
parametric changes in the pension system, including
at a minimum a phased increase in retirement age
and appropriate indexation arrangements. (PRSC

iI
* 3-year work and investment program prepared for
improving the ongoing perfomiance and
administrative efficiency of the Social Insurance
Institute. (PRSC 111)

Activities of Other
Donors
DFID: Social policy
adviser to the Ministry of
Labor and Social Affairs
for establishing standards
for social care services and
monitoring

Country Partner Strategy Matrix (FY03-05)

Diagnosis and Development
Government Strategy/Actions
Objectives of the GPRS
|
11. Improve the Quality of
(i) Increase the effectiveness and financial
Education
efficiency of public education.
MDG Goal 2: Achieve
universalprimary educaton
(Target: Ensure tli, by
2015, children everywhere,
boys and girls alike, wIll be
able to compkte afuil
course ofprimary
schoolIng).
MDG Goal 3: Promote
geder equalty d
cp.,,..cr

,vamcn (Target:

EUminate gender dispary i
primary and secondary
educadion by 2005 and to aU
lewes of educaion no later
thn 2015).

* Prepare an administrative and financial
reform strategy: streamline the function of
the sector at the central, local, and school
level; establish or consolidate new
stnuctures in MoES engaged in planning,
policy analysis, human resource, and
financial managemnent; establish a GPRS
monitoring unit; gradually imnplement
administrative and financial reform
starting with pilot projects.
* Prepare and implement a training procram
for managing staff at central, local, and
school levels with the aim of increasing
the ability of the employees to carry out
their new functional responsibilities.
(ii) Increase attendance of basic education.
* Analyze factors affecting demand for basic
education by sub-groups of families
inclined to abandon school.
* Pilot programs aimned to increase school
attendance by these sub-groups.
* Implement pilot program on the use of
school buses in 5 areas accessible for this
service.
* Prepare and implement legal package for
financial support to children of poor
families.
* Continue rehabilitation of schools in urban
areas and establishment of new schools in
suburban areas.

Annex B9
Page 24 of 27
Selected Bank and Government
Performance Indicators/Targets
* Education expenditures as a %of GDP increased
from 3.4% in 2001 to 3.7% in 2004 (movement
toward OECD average of 5.5%). (GPRS
intermediate indicator)
* Number of pupils per teaching personneldeclines.
(GPRS intermediate indicator)
. Full staffing and budget consistent with approved
organizational functions of: (i) policy analysis,
planning, and monitoring; (ii) financial
management; (iii) humnan resources management.
(PRSC condition)
* First Annual Education Perfonnance Report
published by Policy analysis unit. (PRSC condition)

Bank Group Instruments
and Timing
Education Refonn Project
(ongoing); Education
Reform Project 11(FY04);
PRSC 1,11, III (FY02, 03,
04)

* Enrollment In 8 year education Increased from

Education Reform Project
(ongoing); Education
Reform Project 11(FY04);
PRSC 1,11, In (FY02, 03,
04)

90% In 2000 to 94% In 2004. (GPRS flnal
Indicator)
* Secondary education increased from 40% in
2000 to 50% In 2004. (GPRS flnal Indicator)
* Average schooling period Increased from 9.5
years in 199 to 10 years In 2004. (GPRS final
Indicator)
* MOES publishes data showing progress in meeting

targets for gross enrollment rates (PRSC condition)
* Free textbooks to low income households provided

under accepted subsidy scheme. (PRSC condition)
* Information on schools rehabilitated in the pervious

year published in Albanian newspapers. (PRSC
condition)

Activities of Other
Donors
University of Boccone,
Italy

Country Partner Strategy Matrix (FY03-05)

Diagnosis and Development
Objectives of the GPRS

Government Strategy/Actions
(iii) Increase quality of teaching personnel.

Annex B9
Page 25 of 27
Selected Bank and Government
Performance Indicators/Targets
* Share of teachers in K-8 and secondary schools

without adequate education declines. (GPRS

11.Improve the Quality of
F.ducation (continued)

Bank Group Instruments
and Timing
Education Reform Project

Activities of Other
Donors
Italian Cooperation

(ongoing); Education

Program and OPEC Fund

* Increase and restructure wages of teaching
personnel by 12% a year.
* Increase of financial compensation for
teachers working in disadvantageous
areas. Preliminary analysis of factors to
attract good teachers to rural areas or
difficult suburban areas.
* Prepare and test training program for
teachers without adequate education.
* Identify teachers to be trained, training
planning, and implementation.

internediate indicator)
* 2003 salary increase based on a human resources
management plan. (PRSC condition)
* Strategy and implementation plan to attract and
retain qualified teachers prepared by Human
Resources Management Unit. (PRSC condition)

Reform Project 11(FY04)

for Intemational
Development

(iv) Increase enrollment at secondary
vocational schools and improve their market
orienration.

* Secondary vocational education and training (VET)

PRSC (FY02, 03, 04)

* Decentralize vocational education
cumcula.
* Prepare legislative framework for
establishment of vocational schools on
basis of regional planning of labor market
demand.
* Publish teaching and leaming matenal
supporting new curricula.
* Restructure or establish 5 vocational
educational and training boarding schools
for the benefit of the rural and suburban
areas.
* Prepare, pilot, and implement retraining
for vocational school teachers.

created or restructured in selected pilot sites, based
on a strateg and implementation plan to pilot
modem VET programs that reflect regional labor
market needs. (PRSC condition)

OSI AEDP

GTZ
Swiss Agency for
Development and
Cooperation
AEDP

Country Partner Strategy Matrix (FY03-05)

Diagnosis and Development
Objectives of the GPRS
Ill. Develop an Effective
and Sustainable Health
System

MDG Goal4: Reduce child

mOrtaly(warget:Reduce by
213, between 1990 and 2015,
the under-five mortality
rate).

MDG Goal 5: Improve
maternal health (Target:
Reduce by 3/4, between 1990
and 2015, the maternal
mortality ratio),

Annex B9
Page 26 of 27

Government Strategy/Actions

Selected Bank and Government
Performance Indicators/Targets

(i) Improve the effectiveness and efficiency
of use of resources.

- Health expenditures as %of GDP increasedfrom
3% in 2001 to 3.2% in 2004. (GPRS intermediate

* Train personnel to be engaged in the
planning process.
* Undertake studies to more accurately
assess the needs in the most important
areas of the system.
* Prepare two regional master plans.
* Inmprove the methodology for funding the
system, primarily focusing on
strenghening the HIS.
* Continue decentralizing authority.
E :is,a
nwisv
i in the iMinistry
of Health.
* Prepare and implement a conruption
reduction plan.

* Corruption reduced. (GPRS)
* Process of planning, resource distribution, and

indicator)

*

*

*

*

Bank Group Instruments
and Tining
Health System Recovery
and Development Project
(ongoing);
Health 111
(FY05)
PRSC (FY02, FY03, FY04)

monitoring improved at central and local levels.
(GPRS)
Health budget targeted towards priority needs within
Government's health strategy.
Government decree issued to institutionalize the
upgraded budget tracking and reporting system,
including the System of Health Accounts.
Medium-term strategy issued that identifies priority
policy retorns and programs to improve the
institutional capacity of the health insurance system.
Government budget allocation for child vaccination
and female IT and Rubella coverage increased to
compensate for reduction in donor contributions.

Activities of Other
Donors
DFID: Technical Support
to Policy and Planning
Unit, Assistance to Health
Insurance Institute.
WHO: Support to the
Health Care Reform
Process and
Reorganization of MOH.
CIDA: Advisor to Health
Policy and Planning Unit.

(PRSC 11)

MDG Goal 6: Combat
HIV/AIDS, malariaand
other diseases (Target: Have
halved, by 2015, andbegun
to reverse the spreadof
HIVIAIDS, and the

incidence of other major
diseases).

(ii) Improve access to and quality of health
services.

* Number of doctor, nurses, pharrnacists,and

* Construct and rehabilitate about 80 health
centers and about 400 outpatient clinics,
supply them with necessary equipment,
and train their personnel.
* Transform 5 major hospitals into regional
hospitals.
* Motivate personnel employed in rural and
remote areas to slow their transfer to large
cities.

* Achieve coverage of 100% of territory with health
centers and 50% of the territory with outpatient
clinics. (GPRS)
* National Standards and Guidelines on health
services prepared as the basis for health planning
and rationalization strategy.
* Health service rationalization plan developed for
one region to improve quality of and access to
health services, and local capacity developed to
replicate planning to other regions.
* Revised contract approved between the Health
Insurance Institute and the Tirana Regional Health
Authority that introduces elements of performancebased remuneration system. (PRSC 111)

hospitalbeds per 1,000 inhabitantsincreased,
(GPRS intermediateindicator)

Health System Recovery
and Development Project

(ongoing);
Health III (FY05)
PRSC (FY02, FY03, FY04)

French Cooperation:
Masterplan of 10 Regional
Hospitals in Albania
SIDA: Strengthening
Management and
Maintenance System for
the Albanian Health
Services.
USAID: Strengthening
Primary Care Services at
District Level, Nursing
Initiative.
SADC. Training of
Albania nurses, midwives;
Medical Equipment in
Shkodra.
ECHO: Vanous health
service rehabilitation
programs.
DFID: Support to the
Albanian Order of
Physicians.

Country Partner Strategy Matrix (FY03-05)

Diagnosis and Development
Objectives of the GPRS

Government Strategy/Actions
(iii) Improve health indicators though
specific interventions.
* Aim for 1000/o vaccination coverage of
children under 2. Extension to other age
groups and gradual inclusion of new EIP
vaccines. Gradual involvement of MoH in
program funding.
* Implement programs to reduce/prevent
TBC, HIV-AIDS, STD, etc.
* Implement programs to reduce demand for
drugs, alcohol, and tobacco.
* Reduce diarrheal cases and epidemics by
improving a regional surveillance system
to control quality of potable water and
foodstuffs.
. Prepare strategy on mental health. Extend
SHO project to four additional districts.
c Implement information system for public
health programs and indicators.

Annex B9
Page 27 of 27
Selected Bank and Government
Performance Indicators/Targets
* Infant mortality reduced by 15% from 21 per
1000 live births in 2000 to 17 in 2004. (GPRS
flnal indicator)
* Maternal mortality reduced by 25% from 20 per
100,000 live births In 2000 to 15 in 2004. (GPRS
final indicator)
* Incidence of dlarrheal cases reduced by 50%
from 1200 per 100,000 inhabitants In 2000 to 600
per 100,000 Inhabitants in 2004. (GPRS flnal
indicator)
* Child immunization rate above 90%; female TT

coverage rate over 90%, and Rubella coverage rate
for women 15-35 years over 60%.
* Tracking of HTV/AIDS and TB cases reported
through expanded surveillance system among highrisk population.
* Priority health promotion programs identified in the
National Action Plan implemented. (PRSC III)

Bank Group Instruments
and Timing
Health System Recovery
and Development Project
(ongoing);
Health IIl (FY05)
PRSC (FY02, FY03, FY04)

Activities of Other
Donors
USAID: National
Reproductive Health
Survey, MCH Technical
Assistance.
UNICEF: MCH, Matemal
and Child Nutntion,
Immunization.
UNFPA: STDs/HIV/AIDS
Prevention Program,
Reproductive Health
Programs and Survey
WHO: TB DOTS Program,
Disease Surveillance
System, Community
Mental Health System
UNDP: HIV/AIDS
Prevention.
CIDA: HIV/AIDS
prevention, Reproductive
Health, Elderly Health
Care.

Annex BIO
Page 1 of 1

Albania
Summary of Development Priorities

Network area

Country
performance'

Major issue 

Country
priorityc

Bank
priority'

Poverty Reduction & Economic
Management
Poverty reduction
Economic policy
Public sector
Gender

Fair
Good
Fair
Fair

Rural poverty

Human Development Department
Education
Health, nutrition & population
Social protection

Fair
Fair
Fair

Enrollment

Environmentally & Socially
Sustainable Dovelopment
Rural development
Environment
Social development

Fair
Fair
Fair

Land market

Moderate Moderate
Moderate Moderate
Moderate Moderate

Environment

Moderate Moderate

Finance, Private Sector & Infrastructure
Financial sector
Good
Fair
Private sector
Energy & mining
Poor
Fair
infrastructure

Trafficking

Targeting

High
High
High
Moderate

Reconciliation
of country and
Bank priorities d

High
Moderate IMF has leading role.
Moderate EU has large role.
Moderate

High
High
High
High
Moderate Moderate

High
Power outages High
Sustainability
Hign

High
High
Moderate Other donors active in some sectors.

a. Use 'excellent," 'good," 'fair," or'poor."
b. Indicate principal country-specific problems (e.g., for poverty reduction, 'rural poverty;" for education, 'female secondary completion;" for environment, 'urban air pollution').
c. To indicate pnority, use 'low," 'moderate,' or'high."
d Give explanation, if pnorities do not agree; for example, another MDB may have the lead on the issue, or there may be ongoing dialogue.

MAP SECTION

IBRD 28A67R
18030'

*

,

19600.

19-30'

20"00'

.

-. ,,

FED.

CROATIA I
rk
T

__

O

SELECTED
CITIES-/~.'

*

DISTRICT
CENTERS

6

NATIONAL CAPITAL

RAILROADS-

+-4-

-

/

MO TENEGRO)

OJE

l

6

.')

MIRDITEt
Kurbnehi

.

J~.

-a

r

'

*

-

DISTRICT BOUNDARIES

...

rrel

INTERNATIONAL BOUNDARIES

-

;

;

)

,-)

* l

4130

d

tXor;ijd

1200
1200
200

rl;.ANE
T

W0
-

Se

A100'

a

of '
-

1hWaUt '

sKafarti

4 '00

a

Balsh

KILOMETERS

c

b-d-,

-Ibm

KE
e

~

~

\t

\

t *_'L)s'Knt''G
rh

.

J~

U

.

KoR

3 ,

B

,

LOATND
IA

-

N

KrRUSSIAN\~

FE

i<-}IC

Pra...pos

d

>GEC

>~~~.J ~~~~~PELN
~ ~
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
~~

I~~~I

LL

K
ec

I
5o AO

(

.~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~or

V

UKRAINE

AU

18<30

N

RA
- M SH
- " 0 - RA
* romshi
'.

-6-,~~~~~N

.

S7WEDE
N N'1

REP

\

. - d

r-

copdoro /IToWdYRE

7 ( f

MACEDONIA

-

~erj ELBASANS

I

,

>,'t'

\'.r-!V-'

N-

*s o,'

p

-

DRRRES.

ELEVATIONS IN METERS.

FZ.

'ft
E \i~~~~~~Kruie: )*Bolie

'RUJE

41-30'

'7

YUGOSLAVIA

NATIONAL ROADS$

-

.

(SERBIA

0

s

2100

REP.

,
MALE~SI

_ip

2

1

r 0
~~~~~~~~~~~~0~~~2VA
HUNGARY'

7

rREC

,~~~~~~~~*

5

e

-

901,,

ERK

4RRY00'

,

t

.

L

T\~

h

2

Ek,

203'10'

I

son~IRE

I

0~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~1]
S'T'Y

ROMANiA~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~JL

2OLDO20A
199I

IMAGING

Report No.
Type:

24189
CAS

ALB

