Public Disclosure Authorized

Document of
The World Bank

Public Disclosure Authorized

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Report No. 23610-LV

MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENT
OF THE
INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT

Public Disclosure Authorized

AND THE
INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION
TO THE
EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS
ON A
COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
FOR

Public Disclosure Authorized

THE REPUBLIC OF LATVIA

April 2, 2002

This document has a restricted distribution and mnay be used by recipients only in tle
performance of their official duties. Its contents may not otherwise-be disclosed without World
Bank authorization.

The last Country Assistance Strategy for Latvia was discussed by the Executive Directors
in April 1998 (Report No. 17706-LV)

CURRENCY EQUIVALENT
(Exchange rate as of February 1, 2002)
Currency Unit = Lats (LVL)
US$I = LVL 0.645
LVL I = US$ 1.55

GOVERNMENT' S FISCAL YEAR
January I to December 31

ABBREVIATIONS & ACRONYMS
APL
CPC
CEM
CIS
ECA
EIB
ESW
EU
FDI
FIAS
FSAP
GDP
HIV/AIDS
IDF
IFC
IMF
ISPA
.
KE
LIL
NDP
NGO
NIB
PER
PSAL
SAPARD
SBA
SOE
WTO

Adaptable Program Loan
Corruption Prevention Council
Country Economic Memorandum
Commonwealth of Independent States
Europe and Central Asia
European Investment Bank
Economic and sector work
European Union
Foreign Direct Investment
Foreign Investment Advisory Services
Financial Sector Assessment Program
Gross Domestic Product
Human Immunodeficiency Virus/Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome
Institutional Development Fund
Intemational Finance Corporation
Intemational Monetary Fund
Instrument for Structural Policies for Pre-accession
Knowledge Economy
Learning and Innovation Loan
National Development Plan
Non-Governmental Organization
Nordic Investment Bank
Public Expenditure Review
Programmatic Structural Adjustment Loan
Special Assistance Program for Agricultural and Rural Development
Stand-by Arrangement
State-owned Enterprise
World Trade Organization

The World Bank Group Te m Responsible for this CAS

IFC

IBRD
Vice President:
Country Director:
CAS Team Leader:
CAS Team Members:

Johannes F. Linn
Michael F. Carter
Inguna Dobraja
Latvia Country Team

Vice President:
Director:
Country Manager:

Assad Jabre
Edward A.Nassim
Laurence Carter

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

THE REPUBLIC OF LATVIA

COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY

TABLE OF CONTENTS

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY ................................................................

i

I. INTRODUCTION ................................................................

1

II. POLITICAL, ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL CONTEXT ................................................ 1
III. ECONOMIC PROSPECTS AND FINANCING REQUIREMENTS .......................... 6
IV. THE GOVERNMENT'S PROGRAM ................................................................

8

V. THE WORLD BANK GROUP'S ASSISTANCE STRATEGY ..................................... 9
ENCOURAGING MACROECONOMIC STABILITY FOR GROWTH, ENTRY OF NEW ENTERPRISES,
AND JOB CREATION .............................................................
11
STRENGTHENING GOVERNANCE- PUBLIC SECTOR REFORM AND ANTI-CORRUPTION ....... 14
BALANCED AND SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT OUTSIDE RIGA .......................................... 18
SOCIAL SECTOR SERVICES AND THEIR DELIVERY ............................................................. 20

VI. COORDINATION WITH OTHER PARTNERS .

.......................................................
23

VII. THE WORLD BANK GROUP'S ASSISTANCE PROGRAM
VIII. CONCLUSION ...............................................................

..

23
26

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the
performance of their official duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without
World Bank authorization.

TEXT TABLES
Table 1: Economic Outcomes - 1994-2001 ...................................................
Table 2: Economic Projections ...................................................
Table 3: IBRD Lending Program, FY02-05 ..................................................

4
7
24

TEXT BOXES
Box 1:
Box 2:
Box 3:
Box 4:
Box 5:

.........
Portfolio Performance and Lessons Learned .........................................
FIAS in Latvia ..................................................
Latvia - Programmatic Structural Adjustment Loan Program ...................................
NGOs are Monitoring the Privatization Process ..................................................
Municipal Infrastructure Investments ..................................................

ANNEXES
Annex
Annex
Annex
Annex
Annex
Annex
Annex
Annex
Annex
Annex
Annex
Annex
Annex
Annex
Annex

Map

A2:
B2:
B3:
B3:
B4:
B5:
B6:
B7:
B8:
B8:
B9:
BI 0:
B1 1:
B12:
B13:

Latvia at a Glance
Selected Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
Bank Group Program Summary
IFC & MIGA Program
Summary of Non Lending Services
Key Social Indicators
Key Economic Indicators
Key Exposure Indicators
Operations Portfolio
Statement of IFC's Held and Disbursed Portfolio
Country Program Matrix (FY02-05)
CAS Summary of Development Priorities
Latvia CAS Consultations with Civil Society
Relations between Latvia and the European Union
Comprehensive Assistance Framework

IBRD 30692

10
13
15
17
19

MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE
INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT
AND THE INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION
TO THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS ON A
COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY OF THE WORLD BANK GROUP
FOR THE REPUBLIC OF LATVIA
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
i.
One of Latvia's guiding goals is to accede in the coming years to the European Union
(EU). Yet Latvia has an agenda that is broader than meeting the European Union's (EU's)
acquis communautaire in order for all Latvians to have the opportunity to benefit and to
thrive once accession is accomplished.
ii.
Latvia has reached the final stages of completing its transition to a market economy.
Most markets have been liberalized, privatization is close to completion, and the economy
averaged real Gross Domestic Product (GDP) growth of 5 percent per annum during 19992001. Macroeconomic management has generally been successful, and is meeting most
macro criteria for economic and monetary union with the EU. Monetary policy remains
consistent to maintain a stable price level; inflation was 3.2 percent in 2001. Reflecting the
consequences of the Russia crisis, from a small surplus in 1997 the fiscal deficit rose to 3.9
percent of GDP in 1999 and was 3.3 percent in 2000. While strong progress was made to
reduce it to 1.4 percent of GDP in 2001, the 2002 fiscal deficit is programmed at 2.4 percent.
As the high current account deficit (7 percent of GDP in 2000 and 2001, mostly financed by
Foreign Director Investment (FDI)) remains one of the potential areas of macroeconomic
vulnerability, improving macro balances in particular through additional increases in public
sector savings would help to reduce the current account deficit. The Intemational Monetary
Fund (IMF) is continuing the discussions on the Latvia Stand-by Agreement (SBA) which is
set to expire in December 2002. The authorities are hopeful of reaching agreement with the
IMF on 2002 targets before mid-year.
iii.
Notwithstanding Latvia's impressive economic growth performance in the past years,
unemployment - an important correlate of Latvia's poverty - is hovering at about 13 percent
and is especially significant in rural areas. For growth, enterprise entry and job creation, and
for poverty reduction, Latvia needs to take steps beyond maintaining macro stability,
including implementing vigorously the remaining structural agenda. In the public sector,
early efforts by the Government at reform have started to improve efficiency and
accountability.
More is needed in strengthening public administration, expenditure
management, and anti-corruption. Latvia's administrative corruption index is the second
lowest of all ECA transition countries, yet state capture is deemed significant. Structural
reforms are also needed in labor markets, in the social sector, and in regional development.
iv.
Latvia's economic and development objectives are currently driven by the EU
accession process, which will guide economic policymaking for the coming years. In
December 2001, the Government approved a National Development Plan (NDP) for the
period 2003-2006. The NDP - consistent with the EU accession programs and this Country
Assistance Strategy (CAS) - identifies three primary medium term strategic goals: (i)
promotion of sustainable economic development and competitiveness; (ii) development of
human resources and promotion of employment; and (iii) balanced and sustainable
development throughout Latvia.

v.
Latvia is requesting the World Bank Group to take a lead role in key areas not
explicitly covered by the acquis communautaire. The World Bank Group's CAS for the next
three years focuses on assisting all segments of the population to benefit from Latvia's
admirable economic growth performance by helping to:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)

create a policy environment that encourages new enterprise entry and job creation;
support crucial public sector reforms to make Government more efficient;
achieve more balanced and sustainable development outside Riga, thus promoting
poverty reduction in those areas; and
make available more effective and better quality social sector programs and services
throughout the country.

vi.
The CAS was prepared based on extensive discussions with Government and with
civil society. The assistance strategy described here reflects a declining demand by Latvia
for Bank lending and an increased demand for the Bank's analytic and advisory assistance.
Specifically, over FY02-FY05 lending of US$110-120 million would be for public sector
management and governance strengthening, health, education, and housing. Economic and
sector work (ESW) is planned inter alia in the areas of labor market reforms, a Country
Economic Memorandum (CEM) on prospects for growth and evaluating public sector
reforms implemented to date, and on the Knowledge Economy (KE). International Finance
Corporation (IFC) activities are expected to continue the focus on accelerating growth and
job creation.
vii.
To monitor and evaluate Latvia's progress in key areas supported by the Bank over
the CAS period, the following indicators will be used: (i) labor market reforms identified and
begun to be implemented; (ii) KE strategy identified and initial implementation begun; (iii)
the Programmatic Structural Adjustment Loan (PSAL) agenda on track, including adequate
implementation of the anti-corruption strategy; (iv) privatization of commercial state-owned
companies has been completed; (v) Government decisions taken and implementation begun
on municipality consolidation and other regional reforms that would foster more equitable
development; and (vi) satisfactory progress in improving efficiency in education and health.
viii. The CAS is predicated on the assumption that Latvia in the not-too-distant future will
become a member of the EU. While an operational relationship with the World Bank Group
need not come to an end upon accession, it is possible that, as Latvia moves closer to its goal
of entry into the EU and as financing from the EU and other institutions becomes more
available, the country may voluntarily limit its future borrowing and technical assistance.
Given the uncertainties over a longer timeframe, the World Bank Group plans to prepare a
CAS Progress Report in about two years to update the Board on Latvia's advancement
toward its goals and outline the Bank Group's program in Latvia from that point forward.
ix.

The following questions are suggested for Board discussion:
1. does the Board concur with the diagnosis of the economy and the current state
of issues as described in this CAS?
2. does the Board concur on the strategy, in particular the increasingly selective
approach to lending given the role of other extemal partners and in light of the
Framework for World Bank Group Support to European Union (EU)
Accession Countries of Central and Eastern Europe (SecM2001-0564,
October 10, 2001)?

MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE
INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT
AND THE INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION
TO THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS ON A
COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY OF THE WORLD BANK GROUP
FOR THE REPUBLIC OF LATVIA
I. INTRODUCTION
1.
Despite having nine Governments during the last decade since regaining
independence from the USSR in 1991, Latvia has not changed its main political goals, nor the
economic reform process. Latvia, a country of 2.35 million people (more than a third of
whom live in Riga), situated on the Baltic coast between Estonia and Lithuania and bordering
to the east on Russia and Belarus, aims to become a member of the EU and North Atlantic
Treaty Organization, goals which are supported by a broad political consensus. The focus on
EU integration has had a strong positive effect on domestic policy by serving as a unifying
force supporting political, economic and social reforms across a broad spectrum, in large part
serving as Latvia's comprehensive development framework. Latvia began EU accession
negotiations in February 2000, and in less than two years has made substantial progress. To
date 29 chapters have been opened for negotiations with 23 chapters provisionally closed.'
Latvia is making a strong effort to complete negotiations by late 2002 and to gain entry into
the EU in 2004.
II. POLITICAL, ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL CONTEXT
2.
The last elections to the single-chamber parliament, the Saeima, were held in October
1998, and since that time there have been three different Governments. The current center
coalition under Prime Minister Andris Berzins has stayed in power since May 2000, the
longest run by any Government since independence. The three coalition parties enjoy 30
percent support from the electorate and likely will remain in office until the next
parliamentary election in October 2002. The pre-election campaign has started, political
parties are competing for position, and the outcome of the fall 2002 parliamentary elections is
difficult to foresee.
3.
Latvia has gone a long way toward building the institutions needed for its
development of a market economy. For example, prices, trade and other markets have been
liberalized, and needed legal reform, institutional development, and social safety net
improvements are being implemented. In recognition of the opportunities arising from its
successful economic policy regime, its geographic position and its human resources, Latvia
continues to receive substantial direct foreign investment and has grown at a rate of 4.2
percent per annum since 1995. Yet while economic outcomes have been substantial, and
while Latvia's main political goals have remained the same and commitment to reform has
not diminished, the often-changing political leadership has resulted in an unstable domestic
political environment, which itself has lowered public confidence in state institutions and
those for Free Movement of Goods, Free Movement of Persons, Free Movement of Services, Free
Movement of Capital, Company Law, Competition Policy, Fisheries, Transport Policy, Economic and Monetary
Union, Statistics, Social Policy and Employment, Energy, Industrial Policy, Small and Medium Sized
Enterprises, Science and Research, Education and Training, Culture and Audio-visual Policy, Environment,
Consumers and Health Protection, Customs Union, External Relations, Common Foreign and Security Policy,
and Financial Control.
X including

-2 political parties. In addition, governing is burdened by a customary intermingling of politics
and business interests. The case of the national electricity utility, Latvenergo, indeed showed
the lack of credibility of some Govermnent actions and the fragility of support to marketoriented reforms in some portions of the population. When privatization of Latvenergo was
prepared and about to be launched in mid-2000, non-governmental organizations with the
support of the political opposition mobilized society for a nationwide public vote, which
effectively stopped the privatization of this company for the time being.
4.
Assessment of Governance Environment. Early efforts by the Government in
public sector reform and anticorruption have improved public sector efficiency and
accountability. However, while Latvia's administrativecorruption index is second lowest of
all ECA transition countries, state capture2 is deemed significant in this country where the
economy is concentrated, political parties are closely aligned with business interests, and its
geographic position on east-west trade and energy transit routes exposes it to corruption
pressures. The balance of interests in the succession of short-lived coalition governments has
relied on rewards available through the distribution of ministerial posts and appointments to
agencies and State-owned Enterprise (SOE) boards. Assessment of the five main dimensions
of the governance environment (political institutions, institutions of restraint, competitiveness
of the private sector, civil society, and public administration) reveals a mixed picture.
Parliamentary debate is frank but problems of transparency and conflict of interest remain.
The mass media occasionally reports on decisions taken in a non-transparent manner, which
dent the public's trust. Media comment is lively but not necessarily independent of the
political interests. The concentration of the economy puts a premium on strong and
independent regulators, yet while the financial supervision system is well-established, it is
taking time to achieve the independence of other regulators.
Non-Governmental
Organizations (NGOs) and other forms of civil society have emerged rapidly from a situation
of suppression prior to independence, and are now exercising some ability to scrutinize
decisions and services delivered by the administration and, for instance, to participate in the
consideration of this CAS. While overall administrative corruption is generally less marked,
corruption in service delivery and in the application of licensing and inspection requirements
does exist.
5.
Considerable efforts have been made to tackle the sources of corruption, beginning
with Parliament's adoption of a conflict of interest law in 1995. Furthermore, the Corruption
Prevention Council was established in 1997 and has elaborated a broad anticorruption
program. An Anticorruption Strategy which Government adopted in May 2001 identifies
measures to increase transparency and accountability of public officials. Among these
measures are ones that aim to facilitate access of private citizens and organizations to public
sector information, to provide citizens and organizations with administrative recourse through
Government and judicial appeals mechanisms, and to improve transparency in the courts and
strengthen the capacity of the state to detect and punish corrupt officials.
6.
Early Years of Transition. Upon regaining independence in 1991, the Latvian
economy experienced a sharp decline as the transition to a market economy began and
economic links with the former USSR were lost. Real GDP during these years fell by 50
percent. The Government quickly realized that a comprehensive program was needed and
See the Bank's study, Anticorruption in Transition, which was based on a firm-level survey. That study
defined state capture as the perception that actions of individuals, groups, or firms both in public and private
sectors influence the formation of laws, decrees and other Government policies to their own advantage as a
result of the illicit and non-transparent provision of private benefits to public officials.
2

began by introducing not only fiscal discipline on itself but by limiting subsidies to
enterprises. The reform program also involved important steps toward liberalization and
creating a competitive and open economic environment. As a result in 1999 Latvia was the
second country from the former Soviet Union to join the World Trade Organization (WTO).
Price liberalization took place in most of the markets early in the transition process, and
restrictions on foreign exchange transactions have been very limited. Privatization of state
owned enterprises began and has attracted significant FDI.
Latvia has completed
privatization of small and medium-sized enterprises and some larger companies (e.g., gas).
In addition to railways and post, companies still under public ownership are larger SOEs
including for power, shipping, telecommunications and the oil pipeline, where the
privatization progress has been slower than planned (see para. 44).
7.
Recent Economic Developments. As reforms began to take hold after the banking
crisis in 1995, economic recovery began in 1996. With the support of the World Bank Group
and the IMF, Latvia began to regain macro stability, expedite privatization, and promote
financial discipline in banks and enterprises. After dropping in 1994 and 1995, real GDP has
grown on average by 5.1 percent annually. Growth has been broad-based, with especially
strong gains in forestry, business services, financial intermediation and manufacturing. The
key factors in building the growth momentum were the acceleration of domestic private and
public demand. Domestic consumer and investment demand were supported by growing real
incomes and tax revenues, and reinforced by improving consumer and investor confidence
and projections of rising real income in the medium-term. Low capital intensive and fastmaturing FDI contributed to an increase in productive capacity and competitiveness of
Latvia's manufacturing base. The economic expansion was easily financed with relatively
inexpensive domestic credit provided by foreign direct portfolio investment inflows and a
competitive financial system.
8.
Growing demand for Latvia's exports in both the traditional Commonwealth of
Independent States (CIS) and new EU markets and sound trade policy also contributed to
growth momentum in Latvia over the past three years. During its first decade as an
independent country, Latvia needed to retain established economic links to its eastern
neighbors as well as to develop trade with new western partners. In 1997 and 1998, exports
equaled 51 percent of GDP but after the sharp depreciation of the ruble in 1998 and default
on Russia's sovereign debt, exports fell to 44 percent. The real effective exchange rate
appreciated by about 25 percent compared to its pre-crisis level, and the trade balance
deteriorated to 19 percent in 1998 (from 15 percent in 1997).
9.
The Russia crisis sparked a process of adjustment in Latvia's external trade.
Although the ratio of exports to GDP did not change significantly, the composition of trade
flows has changed substantially, reflecting first a shift toward Western European markets.
Prior to the crisis, EU and CIS markets represented 49 and 30 percent of the country's
exports, respectively. In 2001, 61 percent of Latvia's exports were directed toward EU
countries and only 10 percent to the CIS. In spite of the appreciation of the real effective
exchange rate in 1997-2001 and the recent slowdown of the world economy, Latvia has
managed to maintain strong growth in exports. This reflects improved productivity in key
sectors, and the resilience and sound fundamentals of the economy.
10.
Monetary policy has been consistently tight as the Central Bank concentrates on
maintaining price stability in the country. Since its inception in 1994 Latvia's fixed exchange
rate regime, tied to the SDR, has served the country well. After reaching 109 percent in

-4 -

1993, CPI inflation has been at single digit levels since 1997. In 2001 the CPI grew by 3.2
percent. Interest rates have come down significantly since the 1998 Russian crisis that
affected the banking system. The annualized yield on a 3-month Treasury bill, which was 7.4
percent at the beginning of January 1999, was 5.8 percent in December 2001.
11.
Fiscal policy has been conservative from the outset of the transition process with a
few notable exceptions caused by internal or external shocks. Due to generally good fiscal
discipline, Latvia has low levels of public debt, and its credit ratings have improved, giving
Latvia easier and less expensive access to international capital markets. However the fiscal
situation in 1999 and even in 2000 showed the consequences of the Russia crisis. From a
surplus of 0.1 percent of GDP in 1997, the fiscal deficit rose to 3.9 percent of GDP in 1999
and remained relatively high in 2000 at 3.3 percent, above the target agreed with the IMF.
While strong progress was made in 2001, by reducing the fiscal deficit to 1.4 percent of GDP,
the budget for 2002 shows an increase of the fiscal deficit to 2.4 percent, significantly higher
than the target of 1.5 percent. The IMF is continuing the discussions on the Latvia SBA
which is set to expire in December 2002. The authorities are hopeful of reaching agreement
with the IMF on 2002 targets before mid-year.
12.
Following several years of small external current account deficits that were entirely
financed by FDI, Latvia's current account deficit (including official transfers) rose from 6.1
percent of GDP in 1997 to 9.6 percent in 1999, with only half financed by FDI - a
deterioration largely initiated by the Russian crisis. But there have been some improvements
over the past two years, and the curfent account deficit was brought to just under 7 percent of
GDP in 2000 and 2001, despite appreciation of the Lat against the Euro and the rise in oil
prices during the period. Further, the share of this deficit financed by FDI rose noticeably
from just over half in 1999 to about 75 percent in 2000. Over recent years market sentiment
towards Latvia has been favorable. In August 2001, ratings agencies upgraded their outlook
on Latvian long-term sovereign currency debt, and the Government was able to successfully
place a second Eurobond in NovembeT 2001.
Table 1: Economic Outcomes
1994

1995

1996

1997

-

1994-2001

1998

1999

2000

2001
(estimate)

Real GDP growth
rate, % per annum
Industrial prod.

0.6

-0.8

3.3

8.6

3.9

1.1

6.6

7.0

-9.5

-6.3

1.4

6.1

2

-8.8

3.2

8.5

26.3

23.1

13.1

7

2.8

3.2

1.8

3.2

-4

-3.9

-1.7

0.1

-0.8

-3.9

-3.3

-1.4

128

170

179

207

226

241

244

260

..

..

19.4

14.8

14.0

13.5

13.2

13.1

1020

1367

1488

1838

2011

1889

2058

2162

1321

1947

2286

2686

3141

2916

3116

3157

-5.5

-6.1

-10.6

-9.6

-6.8

-6.8

% growth

Inflation, %

growth, end-year
Government fiscal
deficit, %GDP
Gross wage, USD,
period average

Unemployment, %
(LFS data)

Merchandise
Exports, US$ mil.

Merchandise
Imports, US$ mil.
Current account
balance, %GDP

I

-0.2

-0.4

I_II_II_

Sources: Central Statistical Bureau of Latvia, Bank of Latvia, IMF

13.
Growth, Unemployment and Poverty Linkages. While Latvia's ranking on the
Human Development Index climbed from 72 nd in 1997 to 63rd in 2000, and negative trends in
life expectancy and mortality have stopped, Latvia still has significant challenges in reducing
poverty. For one, it appears that the benefits of the rapid economic recovery since the
Russian crisis have not been shared equally among the population of Latvia: the gini
coefficient increased from 0.30 in 1996 to 0.34 in 2000. The 2000 Poverty Assessment found
that 19.4 percent of the population was in poverty in that year.3 As in other countries in the
region, such as Lithuania and Poland, and as was the case in Latvia in the mid- 1990s, poverty
is higher in rural as compared to urban areas. In Riga city, where most new investment has
focused and where economic growth has created most new opportunities, 10.8 percent of the
population live in poverty while rural poverty stands at 28.5 percent. This also reflects
marked regional differences in poverty - with Riga region (encompassing Riga city and rural
areas near the city) having a poverty rate of 12.6 percent; the Latgale region of eastem Latvia,
along the border with Russia, is the poorest region, having a poverty headcount of 30 percent.
Latvia's poverty is moderately deep, with poverty depth - the average shortfall of
income/consumption (as a percentage of the poverty line) - at 28.4 percent, slightly higher
than Eastem European countries (which average 25 percent) but not as deep as Russia and
Ukraine (where depth is about 40 percent). Large households with children, especially those
headed by women, are poorer and have higher risk of poverty; older people, especially older
women, are very much at risk of poverty; the poverty rates of households whose head is
unemployed is 38.5 percent or twice the national average; and there are strong retums to
higher education - the poverty rate for a person with higher education was 4.6 percent
compared with 23.3 percent for a person with primary education. Latvia is thus a country
where, in addition to economic growth, providing opportunity, services and infrastructure to
the rural population, who are most in need, and to the urban poor could make substantial
impact on poverty. In addition, with the poverty gap at about 5.5 percent, which is relatively
small, targeted social assistance including the guaranteed minimum income system which is
about to be implemented, should have a positive impact.
14.
Notwithstanding Latvia's impressive economic growth performance in the past years,
unemployment - an important correlate of poverty and to some extent mirroring regional
variations in the latter - stands at 13 percent (down from 14.4 percent at the height of the
Russia crisis), which raises questions about the ability of the labor market to generate the
appropriate matching between jobs and skills requirements. Throughout the first decade of
transition, inflows of FDI have been concentrated mainly in Riga. Unemployment is
especially significant in rural areas, and the marked disparities in regional unemployment
rates are not changing. The regional differences in employment and hence income levels are
striking and pose the threat that the long-term unemployed may become progressively less
capable of meeting the requirements of the labor market due to outdated skills and limited
access to education services.
15.
Gender and Poverty. The UN Common Country Assessment 2000 for Latvia notes
that while Latvia has very good gender indicators for education, life expectancy, and labor
force participation, there is need for increased awareness of the gender dimension of
development, especially on issues related to women's position in the labor market and
poverty. Women are discriminated against while job seeking: surveys of small-and-medium3
As there is no official poverty line in Latvia, the report used a poverty line estimate of 28 Lats per month,
which is equal to /2 of the official Minimum Crisis Basket - a social minimum line defined by the Government.

-6sized entrepreneurs by the Ministry of Economy verified that employers prefer to hire men
over women, although the main reason given - the need for certain skills - does not match
educational profiles, as women are in fact better educated than men. Once in the labor
market, women are paid on average 25 percent less than men and are clustered in lower wage
professions such as teaching, health, and social care. The Poverty Assessment data revealed
that poverty rates are higher in female-headed households, and increase with family size. The
highest poverty rates (51 percent) are in households where the female head is between 15 and
34 years old. More than half (58 percent) of the unemployed are women.
The Environment Chapter of EU accession negotiations was
16.
Environment.
concluded in 2001 with Latvia now implementing the acquis communautaire with targets for
full compliance between now and 2012. This reflects the Government's efforts (i) to
harmonize environmental legislation with EU, (ii) to continue ongoing programs to improve
water and wastewater services in nearly 500 municipalities and waste management
countrywide through programs involving and closing more than 800 dumpsites as well as
creating a hazardous waste collection system and final disposal facility, and (iii) to monitor
improving air quality. Nevertheless environmental protection issues remain - for instance
waste management services are still available to only 20 percent of the population of the
countryside, and wastewater collection and treatment services are available to only 77 percent
of the total population. In addition, while much of water-borne pollution has been curbed,
non-point source pollution remains an issue, and Latvia is planning to participate in a
regional Baltic Sea Project to be supported by the Global Environment Facility.
III. ECONOMIC PROSPECTS AND FINANCING REQUIREMENTS
17.
Challenges Ahead. Latvia's economic performance has so far remained unaffected
by the economic slowdown in Europe despite the large amount of exports going to EU
markets, and Latvia was not significantly affected by the aftermath of the events of
September 11, 2001. Indeed the economy continues on a rapid growth path, with the
prospect that real GDP growth can remain high in the medium-term if Latvia follows the
right set of economic policies. The economy has grown quite strongly with low inflation and
attracted substantial FDI. However, the high private investment needed to sustain growth and
the public investment necessary to meet the demands of the EU's acquis communautaire
require fiscal policy to be tighter than it has been. This will help keep the current account
deficit - expected to be just below 7 percent of GDP in 2002 - at levels that can be largely
financed by non-debt creating flows. Given that revenues as a proportion of GDP are roughly
around 37 percent of GDP, and the possibility that this might fall were taxation of labor
income to be lowered, notwithstanding ongoing efforts to improve tax and customs
administration, this fiscal adjustment will need to occur mainly on the expenditure side. This
highlights the importance of pension reform, civil service reform and reform of the
institutional apparatus of budget management as being critical to maintenance of a
sustainable medium-term fiscal framework.
18.
In addition to sound macroeconomic management, Latvia will need to implement
vigorously the remaining structural reforms including those to encourage new enterprise
entry, to increase the flexibility of labor markets, to strengthen public administration and
expenditure management, to promote regional development, and to raise the quality of social
services. If there is some weakening in macroeconomic management (notably through
further slippage in fiscal discipline), and Latvia moves more slowly toward completing its
structural reform agenda, economic growth could slow substantially. Projections for the

economy in these two alternative scenarios ("Reform" and "Slow Reform") are shown in
Table 2.
Table 2: Economic Projections

_

2001

2002 1 2003

2004

2005

2001

l_____ Reform Scenario (Base)
Real GDP growth
rate (%per annum)
Growth of GNFS
Exports (% per
annum)
Growth of GNFS
Imports (% per
annum)
Government Fiscal
Deficit
(%ofGDP)
CA Balance

,%ofGDP)

Gross Domestic
Investment (% of
GDP)
Private Investment
(%of GDP)
Public Investinent
(%ofGDP)
Gross National
Savings (%ofGDP)
Private Savings
(%ofGDP)
Public Savings
(%ofGDP)
Total Public Debt
(%ofGDP)

2002 1 2003 1 2004

2005

Slow Reform Scenario

7.0

5.0

6.0

6.0

6.0

7.0

4.5

3.0

3.0

2.0

6.5

6.1

6.1

6.0

6.0

6.5

3.4

3.1

3.1

3.1

6.1

6.0

5.2

5.2

4.5

6.1

3.6

2.6

2.5

1.4

-1.4

-2.4

-0.8

-0.8

-0.5

-1.4

-2.5

-1.7

-1.4

-1.1

-6.8

-6.7

-6.3

-6.1

-5.6

-6.8

-6.3

-6.2

-6.1

-5.6

27.7

27.9

28.2

29.1

29.6

27.7

26.5

25.9

25.1

24.0

24.2

24.0

24.3

24.2

24.4

24.2

22.6

22.0

20.7

19.1

3.5

3.9

3.9

4.9

5.2

3.5

3.9

3.9

4.4

4.9

20.9

21.2

21.9

23.0

24.0

20.9

20.1

19.7

19.0

18.4

19.0

18.6

18.8

18.9

19.1

19.0

18.7

17.4

16.0

14.6

1.8

2.5

3.1

4.1

4.9

1.8

1.4

2.2

3.0

3.8

14.9

16.6

17.4

18.0

18.4

14.9

16.8

17.8

18.7

19.4

19.
Reform Scenario (Base Case). On the basis of the assumptions in Annex B6, under
the reform scenario, real GDP could average 6 percent per annum over the period 2001-05,
while the inflation rate will stabilize below 3 percent on average. Under this reform scenario,
with further improvements in post-privatization governance and a lowering of the costs and
barriers to investment, private investment is projected to range from 24.2 percent currently to
24.4 percent in 2005. Public investment is projected to increase from 3.5 percent for 2001 to
around 5.2 percent of GDP by 2005, mostly driven by EU accession investment requirements.
An improved business environment would encourage the private sector to invest, to create
new business ventures and jobs. Gross national savings will continue to increase (from 20.9
percent of GDP in 2001 to 24 percent in 2005) and the current account deficit will decline
gradually to 5.6 percent of GDP.
20.
Slow Reform Scenario. If Latvia slows the pace of reduction of the fiscal deficit,
and of implementation of structural reforms and privatization, simulation results indicate that
real GDP growth would slow to 3.9 percent on average during the period 2001-05. Private
investment would fall to 19.1 percent of GDP in 2005, and national savings would also fall
substantially. Export growth would be lower (declining from 6.5 percent in 2001 to about 3
percent a year starting in 2003). While the current account deficit could be contained at 6.2

- 8percent of GDP on average due to much lower imports, Latvia's total public debt would
increase, reaching 19.4 percent of GDP in 2005.
21.
Financing Requirements. Latvia's foreign public debt remains low by international
standards (8 percent of GDP at the end of 2000). Net international reserves of the Central
Bank have continued to increase gradually since the Russia crisis. Scheduled external debt
service payments in the nearest future are small (except in 2004 when the 1999 Eurobond
issue of EUR 225 million comes due). In the reform scenario, gross external financing needs
during the 2002-2004 period are estimated at about US$2.6 billion. These resources are
necessary to finance US$1.8 billion in current account deficits, about US$270 million in
increases in international reserves and the remainder to fulfill debt repayment obligations.
Direct foreign investment is expected to finance about 44 percent of these needs, driven by
privatization of the remaining large enterprises to strategic foreign investors, the
improvement of the investment climate through business deregulation, and a stable regulatory
framework. Official resoutces will finance 12 percent of these financial needs; as the
Government is expecting to reduce the fiscal deficit in the medium term, and is likely to
benefit from increasing transfers from the EU, this reflects a reduction in foreign borrowing,
particularly that from multilateral donors. The remaining 44 percent will need to come from
portfolio investment and loans directed towards the private sector in Latvia.
IV. THE GOVERNMENT'S PROGRAM
22.
Latvia's economic and development objectives are currently driven by the EU
accession process, which will guide economic policymaking for the coming years. In July
2001 Latvia adopted The Latvian National Programmefor Integration into the EU setting the
commitments of the Government until 2003 to prepare for EU accession. The program
reflects the Copenhagen-Madrid criteria for accession with the following priorities:
(i) preparing Latvian society for membership; (ii) preparing the economy for membership;
(iii) preparing to meet the obligations of membership; and (iv) preparing the administration
for membership. It provides a mechanism for managing and co-ordinating the legal,
institutional and organizational changes fundamental to the accession preparations. As the
legal and institutional barriers to membership are removed, the main emphasis will transfer to
the (NDP). As the EU and Latvia place priority on social and economic cohesion, the NDP
should become one of the primary instruments for European integration.
23.
In December 2001, the Government approved the NDP for the period from 2003 until
2006. The NDP will place much greater emphasis on sustainable economic and social
development priorities and after membership will become the basis for negotiation with the
European Commission for Structural Funds support. The NDP - consistent with the EU
accession programs and with this CAS - identifies Latvia's three primary medium term
strategic goals:
(i) Promotion of sustainable economic development and competitiveness. Recognizing
that competitiveness is key to Latvia's future, the NDP sets out goals of creating and
maintaining a favorable business environment (including taxation, capital markets), providing
effective physical infrastructure and environmental policies, and ensuring information
transfer and e-services. Implementation of this goal accounts for 73 percent of total NDP
expenditures, with improving road transport, environmental infrastructure, and oil transit as
the most investment-intensive sectors. Latvia is also planning development of business
incubators, innovation centers and industrial development zones.

-9-

(ii) Development of human resources and promotion of employment. Recognizing the
need to provide economic opportunity to all Latvians, and to equip the work force with
needed abilities, the NDP focuses on availability and quality of social services - particularly
an education system that meets the needs of the economy; a health system that improves
health status and addresses addiction problems and Human Immunodeficiency
Virus/Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome (HIV/AIDS); and active labor market
policies, access to housing, and social safety nets, including for agricultural workers.
Implementation of this goal accounts for 9 percent of NDP expenditures including investment
in education and health programs and facilities, improving retraining programs for the
unemployed, and development of a housing finance guarantee mechanism.
(iii) Balanced and sustainable development throughout Latvia. Toward this objective,
the NDP focuses on sustainable use of natural resources (e.g., forestry), balanced
development of cities and countryside by promoting both farm and non-farm rural
development, location of industries in the regions, and promotion of further development of
the most-disadvantaged regions in the country. Budgeted for 18 percent of NDP resources,
programs to achieve this goal are being developed.
24.
The Govemment has developed several strategies which are linked to the PSAL (see
para. 26) and to other aspects of the Bank's program in Latvia. In addition to the
Anticorruption Strategy discussed above (paras. 4-5), in 2000 the Govemment adopted the
Strategy for Reduction of Poverty, which sets the specific goal of halving the number of poor
in Latvia to 10 percent of the population by the year 2015 and developing an official poverty
line. The strategy sets out a picture of policy actions, service and infrastructure investment
needs, and social assistance programs needed to work toward poverty reduction. It also
foresees the development of monitoring instruments and institutions to assess poverty trends.
The Govemment has set up a working group to prepare a national plan of action to implement
the strategy, for instance through coordination of poverty reduction activities of ministries,
agencies and other partners and better linkage of poverty reduction measures with the budget
and investment policies. In addition, in 2001 the Govemment adopted a Public
Administration Reform Strategy 2001-2006, which sets the medium-term goals of:
(i) ensuring unified, responsive public administration; (ii) ensuring stable and effective public
expenditure management; (iii) achieving the trust and participation of society in public
administration; (iv) improving the quality of public services and their delivery; and
(v) ensuring that public administration employs highly motivated, qualified and honest
people.
V. THE WORLD BANK GROUP'S ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
25.
The 1998 CAS. As set out in the last CAS, the central thrust of the Bank Group's
assistance strategy since 1998 has been:
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)
(v)

to support Latvia's efforts towards macroeconomic and financial stability;
to promote public sector reforms;
to help Latvia's private sector development;
to help Latvia build sub-national govemment capacity; and
to help Latvia design and begin implementation of human development reform
programs and institution-building.

- 10-

To support these objectives, the high/base program envisioned financing up to US$150
million over FY99-01 and a substantial amount of non-lending activities. Anticipating the
possibility of an external shock, so long as macroeconomic and structural policies and
implementation remained firm, the Bank also stood ready to provide an additional
US$75 million in adjustment financing over three years.
Box 1: Portfolio Performance and Lessons Learned
Since FY91, the Bank has financed 17 operations, committing US$393 million of which US$28.6 million
are undisbursed. These included projects in education, health, municipal infrastructure and services,
agriculture finance and rural development, district heating, solid waste management, tax systems
strengthening, and structural adjustment.
Over the past five years the Operations Evaluation Department (OED) has completed six evaluations of
projects in Latvia, all of which received satisfactory ratings. These reviews noted substantial institutional
development and capacity building impact of Bank financed programs. Lessons learned include:
(i) Govemment commitment was essential; (ii) Government strategy and intersectoral expenditure
allocation needed greater consistency; (iii) forecasts for demand for municipal infrastructure projects have
been too optimistic; (iv) there is need to raise institutional and regulatory capacity at the municipal level, in
particular the ability to handle corporatization and privatization; (v) the Bank should be careful to focus on
areas not financed from other sources; and (vi) project-related legal, regulatory and institutional issues
should be better resolved before approval stages.
While crediting the first Programmatic Structural
Adjustment Loan (PSAL) with strengthening public sector capabilities and credibility and rationalizing the
public/private relationship - hence rating it satisfactory - OED felt strongly that it was very, if not overly
ambitious, that actions were too front-loaded, and that these lessons should be incorporated into the later
tranches of the PSAL program.
At times projects have been rated unsatisfactory during implementation. Such rating has generally been
associated with: (i) implementation capacity, (ii) counterpart funding, (iii) project design problems, and
(iv) procurement. Currently, of the eight ongoing operations, none has an unsatisfactory rating. The Riga
District Heating project, approved by the Board in August 2000, was never signed as the Government
decided not to issue a sovereign guarantee given a changed assessment by Government (which the Bank
disagreed with) of the long-run viability of district heating vis-a-vis direct conmections to gas. This project
has been canceled. Finally, it should be noted that the evaluation of the completed Jelgava District Heating
project has been divisive - the project fully met its technical objectives, but it failed to achieve financial
sustainability due to delays in the corporatization process of the enterprise and an inadequate regulatory
framework.
The Bank has completed two fiduciary assessments in Latvia: a Country Financial Accountability
Assessment in 1997 and a Country Procurement Assessment in 2001. The CFAA assessed accounting and
auditing in Latvia to determine compatibility with Intemational Accounting Standards and with EU
accession and devised an action plan of recommended steps. This work was followed with technical
assistance funded by EU PHARE, and at this stage Latvia has made substantial progress toward meeting
EU directives pertaining to accounting standards and toward IAS. In drafting its new procurement law
which was enacted in July 2001 and to identify further procurement process reform, the Government drew
heavily on the CPAR and on further conunents from Bank staff. Further actions to adopt standard bidding
documents and to promote greater transparency and reliability of procurement processes will be important
for Latvia to consider.
While in the early stages of the Bank's work in Latvia, knowledge transfer in the essential aspects of
project implementation was alnost exclusively done by foreign consultants, the recent projects have drawn
on local project staff. The Riga Office is promoting the establishment of an informal network among
Project Implementation Unit staff and has established an internet chat-page, where project staff can
exchange experiences, ask questions, and receive the most recent Bank information on procurement and
financial management issues and training possibilities.

- I1 -

26.
Implementation has progressed well since the last CAS was discussed by the Board.
During FY99-FYOI investment lending totaled US$97 million in six operations, and the
Bank provided one PSAL for US$40 million. The investment loans were in support of
education, health, environment (solid waste management), rural development, and district
heating (however the latter project was never signed and has been cancelled; see Box 1).
Major non-lending services included a Poverty Assessment, a report on Fiscal
Decentralization, a Financial Sector Assessment, a Country Procurement Assessment Report,
and a Public Expenditure Review. Additionally, the Bank provided three Institutional
Development Fund (IDF) grants for regulatory systems development, public sector reform
capacity building and implementing open disclosure. A large core of support was provided
through the preparation assistance for the PSAL. Under this program two Policy and Human
Resources Development Fund grants financed technical assistance for detailed planning of
institutional reforms. The IFC has been active in Latvia and played a role in promoting
growth and job creation through investments in financial markets, telecommunications,
forestry and urban development projects. Foreign Investment Advisory Services (FIAS) has
continued its work on the investment climate and carried out a study of administrative
barriers to investment in Latvia 1999. MIGA has no guarantees outstanding in Latvia.
27.
The FY02-FY05 Period. For the period FY02-FY05, Latvia has requested World
Bank Group financing and non-lending assistance in:
i.

creating a policy environment that encourages macroeconomic stability for growth,
entry of new enterprises and job creation;
ii. supporting crucial public sector reforms to make Government more efficient;
iii. helping to achieve a more balanced and sustainable development outside Riga, thus
promoting poverty reduction in those areas; and
iv. key social sector programs to make available more effective and better quality
services throughout the country.
Focus in these areas accords with the selective approach set out in the Frameworkfor World
Bank Group Support to EU Accession Countries of Central and Eastern Europe, and the
comparative advantage of other external agencies and of the World Bank in Latvia. The
following sections provide greater detail on these four primary components of the FY02FY05 assistance strategy and Bank's programs.
Encouraging Macroeconomic Stability For Growth, Entry of New Enterprises,
and Job Creation
28.
Maintaining macroeconomic stability will be key for Latvia to continue its growth
record. Yet to maintain stability Latvia must swiftly implement its structural and public
sector reform agenda, and at this stage of the transition Latvia needs to focus on nextgeneration measures to allow the benefits of growth to be widely shared. For instance,
reform of labor markets and ensuring a policy environment that encourages new enterprise
entry and job creation will be crucial if Latvia is going to succeed in avoiding greater levels
of unemployment. The Bank Group will continue to work with the Government through
dialogue andpolicy-based lending to support reforms in macroeconomic andfiscal areas, the
financialsector, and the investment climate.
29.
Under the proposed PSAL 2 currently under preparation, the Bank is supporting the
establishment and maintenance of an appropriate macroeconomic framework including

- 12

-

appropriate public expenditure management. The return to the prudent fiscal policy stance of
before 1999 is particularly necessary in light of the still large current account deficit and the
fixed exchange rate regime. Hence even though all substantive structural reform actions for
PSAL 2 have been taken, the Bank has delayed submission of this loan to the Board due to
macroeconomic, primarily fiscal, concerns. In coordination with the IMF, PSAL-2 envisages
a deficit of 1.5 percent of GDP for 2002 while the Government's budget is aiming for a
deficit target of 2.4 percent (see para. 11). When Latvia has reestablisheda sound macro
framework includingan appropriatefiscal deficit, likely to be reflected in agreement with the
IMF on 2002 targets, and so long as the structural reforms stay on track, PSAL 2 will be
submittedfor considerationby the Board.
30.
An important aspect of fiscal adjustment is to reform the public expenditure
framework to better link public expenditures to policy priorities. At the Government's
request, the Bank prepared and discussed a Public Expenditure Review (PER) that covered
bottlenecks to implementing a medium term expenditure framework aimed at reducing the
fiscal deficit and better translating strategic priorities into budget allocations - i.e., finance
public goods that promote investment and growth. The PER found that while many basic
requirements of improved accounting and fiscal management practices have been put into
place, Latvia still has too many unfunded mandates and off-budget funds, and that too much
reliance is placed on adjustments to budgets during the year. Latvia is also finding that
investments for EU accession are adding further pressures to the budget. The PSAL program
is supporting the implementation of the medium term expenditureframework and otherfollow
up to the PER.
31.
Of major importance for longer-term growth, Latvia's financial sector is gaining
strength after the negative impact of the Russia crisis. The Macro-Financial Vulnerability
Study (1998) indicated potential vulnerabilities including high exposure to CIS-related assets
and an inadequate supervisory framework of the non-bank financial institutions. To help the
authorities strengthen and better coordinate supervision of financial institutions, a unified
regulatory agency (the Financial and Capital Market Commission) was established in 2001.
A joint World Bank/IMF Financial Sector Assessment Program (FSAP) was carried out in
2001. It pointed out several significant improvements in the area of consolidation of the
banking sector as well as entry of foreign investors. It concluded that the financial sector has
recovered from the Russia crisis and has created a solid basis for further development. The
FSAP also concentrated on the properfunctioning of the new financialsupervisory agency
whose activities will be crucial in ensuringstability of thefinancialsystem.
32.
The IFC is active in Latvia and is playing a role in promoting growth and job
creation. Currently, it has an outstanding portfolio of US$18 million in two projects with this
value expected to nearly double shortly when a recently approved urban development project
is committed.
In the future, IFC will particularly focus on assistance to complex
privatizations, to very large projects, and to small and medium enterprises through possible
investments in financial intermediaries. Since Latvia joined IFC in 1992, IFC has invested in
financial markets, telecommunications, forestry and urban development projects, and in
addition has undertaken advisory projects in several of these sectors. As Latvia moves closer
to joining the EU and the availability of private sector financing increases, IFC will focus its
investment and advisory work in areas which are expected to yield a high development
impact, significant social benefits, institutional development, or where projects are too large
and/or too complex for the private sector to finance. MIGA is providing assistance to help
Latvia develop investment marketing services. It has been working with the Latvian

- 13

-

Development Agency to include it in MIGA's on-line investment marketing services, and more
specifically in the Foreign Direct Investmnent Exchange.
33.
For new and restructured enterprises to serve as dynamic engines of growth and job
creation, Latvia needs to ensure that Government regulation of product and factor markets
does not inhibit exit, entry and growth. In addition to the work that FIAS has done on
administrative barriers to entry (see Box 2), given Latvia's unemployment rate of 13 percent
the Government has requested Bank Group assistance in reviewing the labor market and the
problem of unemployment. Looking first at where new jobs are being created, and what is
driving labor market restructuring, an FY03 Labor Market Study will review regional
differences in unemployment, ways to establish more flexible labor market policies and how
to deal with the consequences of high unemployment. The study is planned to review the
extent of barriers in the transition from old to new jobs, how binding the minimum wage is,
the implications of taxes on labor income, limitations imposed by the labor code, limitations
on wage adjustments, and the incentive effects of social benefits.
Box 2: FIAS in Latvia

FIAS prepared a study of administrative barriers to investment in Latvia in early 1999. The
recommendations of the report were considered by a Working Group set up by the Prime Minister,
composed of public sector and business representatives. An Action Plan for improving the investment
climate was prepared and approved by the Cabinet. The Government asked FIAS to provide
implementation assistance, including advice on streamlining the construction approval process and
increasing accountability and client-orientation in the various Inspectorates which regulate business
activity. The FIAS work contributed to the development of reforms to liberalize immigration
procedures and access to land for foreign investment, and new govermment regulations clarifying the
rights and responsibilities of most Inspectorates. The Govemment also requested that actions from the
Action Plan be included in the conditionality for the PSAL.
Since Latvia has been one of the strongest of FIAS' clients in removal of administrative
barriers to investment, FIAS chose Latvia as the site for a new pilot initiative to develop selfassessment tools for administrative barriers. The self-assessment tools can be used by Latvia both for
purposes of monitoring the impact and progress of reforms, and for assessing municipalities
throughout the country.

34.
An FY04 CEM is planned which will take stock of Latvia 's reform achievements and
examine the prospectsfor and sustainability of longer-term economic growth in Latvia. In
recent years the service sector has grown faster than the rest of the economy, and in 2001 its
share stood at about 71 percent of GDP, up from 62 percent in 1997. This sector,
concentrated mainly in Riga, has been receiving the lion's share of FDI inflows, which has
been key to its rapid increases in productivity. Industrial production was hit hard by the
Russia crisis due to its high exposure to CIS markets. As a result the share of industrial
production in GDP has fallen from 32 percent in 1997 to 26 percent in 2001, and the sector is
gradually reorienting itself toward trading with the EU. The study would concentrate on the
sources of future growth, analyze future prospects and potential problems of the key Latvian
industries (e.g., forestry, transportation services and others). The agricultural sector has been
downsizing - from about 6 percent of GDP and 19 percent of employment in 1997 to 4
percent of GDP and 14 percent of employment in 2001. In 1998, the first stage of an
Adaptable Program Loan (APL) for rural development was approved with the objective of

- 14strengthening rural policy capacities and providing credit to small-scale borrowers, but due to
availability of resources from other partners, the 2 nd phase of the APL was not requested.
Given the particular problems of low productivity and low incomes for people still in
agriculture, which prevents many of them from developing economically and from improving
their education, the Bank plans an ESW task as an input into the CEM which will focus on
enhancing productivity and competitiveness of the rural sector. The CEM will also assess the
outcome of the reform process in Latvia to date, review the record of governance
strengthening, and evaluate how Government policies and programs could assist with
improvingLatvia's competitiveness in the medium- to long-term.
35.
The Bank also plans work on KE issues, which is an important area in the context of
improving the productivity of the economy. Following conferences and other technical
assistance beginning in February 2002, the Bank will assist Latvia to develop a KE strategy.
Specific follow-up work will be identified once Latvia's strategy has been developed.
Strengthening Governance - Public Sector Reform and Anti-Corruption
Public sector reform continues to be among the top priorities for the Latvian
36.
Government, particularly in the context of EU accession. The transparency and the
institutional structure of public administration are important building blocks for a wellfunctioning public sector that serves people and meets the demands of a modern market
economy. Effective public administration at all levels (central, local) is critical for the
implementation of the Latvia's development agenda. Even though public sector reform is
one of the stated priorities of the Government, complete transformation of public
administration has been lagging. For example, EU progress reports repeatedly stress the need
to strengthen administrative and audit capacity of the public sector. Implementation of those
reforms is a condition for EU membership.
37.
The World Bank first began working with Latvia on reforms in public sector resource
management and strengthening capacities following the 1995 banking crisis. As initial
reforms were put in place it became evident that the structure and functions of ministries still
reflected to a great extent Latvia's Soviet legacy of an encompassing state: market regulation
was excessive and inefficient, accountability of the public sector was weak, and delivery of
most services was inefficient and vulnerable to corruption. To address these issues, the
Govenmment began to implement a two-pronged strategy. The first prong consists of public
administration reforms which aim at improving the structure, functions, and efficient
management of the public sector and the incentives of public officials. The second prong
consists of anticorruption reforms, which aim to increase the transparency of public-sector
decision-making and accountability of officials.
38.
During the period 1995 to 1999, the Govemment asked the Bank to support the design
and initial implementation of this strategy primarily with technical assistance. In 1996,
because of its own objective to improve public sector accountability and fight corruption,
Latvia became the World Bank Group's first member country to respond to the Bank's offer
to assist with the development of anticorruption programs. The Bank helped the Govemment
establish the Corruption Prevention Council (CPC) and to develop the Corruption Prevention

- 15 -

Box 3: Latvia - Programmatic Structural Adjustment Loan Program

The 1998-99 financial turmoil in Russia and internationally drarnatically changed Latvia's
macroeconomic situation and exposed a series of weaknesses in Latvia's public sector management,
threatening to derail its transition accomplishments. To prevent this the Govemment requested an IMF
program which focused primarily on supporting macroeconomic stabilization efforts, and requested the
Bank to support a reform program to improve the credibility, efficiency, and effectiveness of the public
sector, including addressing structural issues underlying the fiscal deficit.
Latvia's reform program is one of building up the Government's institutional capacity to effectively
support and interact with the private sector as well as finalizing the transition agenda.
The PSAL program therefore focuses on step-by-step capacity building and institutional reform in four
distinct but overlapping areas, with the overall aim to return to sustainable growth. These are (i)
retuming to a macroeconomic framework conducive to robust growth; (ii) strengthening the credibility
of the public sector; (iii) strengthening the public sector institutional capacity; and (iv) rationalizing the
interaction between the public and private sector.
Reform Areas

Priorities

Fiscal and monetary
policy

* Correcting the macro-imbalances that re-emerged

Pension Reform

* Ensuring financial viability of the pension system

*

Anti-Corruption

* Reducing opportunities for corruption

*

Govemment
Accountability and
Transparency
Administrative
Efficiency

* Strengthening transparency and reporting

*

* Streamlining the structure ofthe public sector
* Increasing public sector efficiency and

*

Human Resource
Management
Public Expenditure
Management

*

after the Russian crisis

transparency
* Improving incentives for recruitment/retention of
staff

*

Cabinet has adopted concept of broad-banded,
transparent uniform pay.

*

All accounts of budget-financed operations have been
brought into the budget..
All state-budgeted institutions are to supply annual
audit statements. Intemal audit capacities in ministries
have been significantly strengthened.
Govemment has adopted decision; implementation is
being assisted by the recently completed PER. Policy
coordination at center of govemment strengthened.
Implementation is being assisted by the PER.
Work has begun on developing integrated financial
and reporting procedures for local Govemments.
Pilot of standard social assistance benefit has been
introduced. Govemment has taken decision to
introduce guaranteed minimum income.
Process has been brought to intemational standards
with reputed investment banks/advisers brought in to
assist on remaining transactions; divested gas
company but full objective of privatization has not
been fulfilled.

* Developing transparent and unified public
accounts
* Strengthening accountability for the use of
resources

*

* Developing performance oriented-budgets in line
ministries

*

* Developing a medium-term budget
* Enhancing local accountability

*

*
Social Assistance
Privatization and
Regulation

Financial
Supervision

* Preventing negative consequences to households
ofpoverty
*

*

*
Business Regulation

Moving most of the significant remaining
commercial state firms to the private sector
while fostering the development ofstable
govemance structures
Achieving a uniform approach to supervision of
finance and capital markets and strengthening of
financial supervision system with particular
emphasis on non-bank financial institutions
Strengthening of the legal and regulatory
process

Achievements to Date under the
PSAL Program
Economy recovered well after the Russia crisis, after
implementation ofmeasures supported by the IMF.
However fiscal deficit, after falling, widened in 2002.
Latvia now has a full 3-pillar system to prevent
demographic trends from destabilizing the macro
situation.
Monitoring has been institutionalized, judges are now
randomly selected for cases and decisions are
published electronically.
Legislation adopted to make public sector agencies
accountable. Two other laws passed, on access to
public information and administrative procedures.
Time bound action plan for implementation of a
public sector reform program adopted, to align tasks
with administrative structures.

*

*

*

A single supervision agency has been established and
is in operation..

*

Adopted methodology for standard legal and
regulatory impact analysis to be undertaken by
Govemment on new laws and regulations; Ministry of
Finance reviews multi-year fiscal costing of all new
proposals.

- 16

-

Program which reflected the three themes of education, prevention and enforcement. The
Bank also assisted the CPC in conducting in-depth surveys of businesses, households and
public officials which revealed the top priority areas to be tackled by later reforms. In 1997,
the Government approved its first Public Administration Reform Strategy, implementation of
which was supported by an IDF grant. Also in 1997, the Government requested a Banksupported assessment of vulnerability to corruption in the tax and customs administration,
which led to the Bank-financed State Revenue Service Modernization project now under
implementation.
39.
Latvia became the second member country of the Bank to initiate a PSAL program to
support its governance agenda, which was approved in March 2000. This CAS envisages that
implementation of this agenda will continue to be supported by further PSALs over the
coming years. Specifically, PSAL 2 and preparation of a third PSAL will provide policy
advice and programmatic planning support for these purposes, and will reflect agreement on
specific actions that Latvia will take toward these objectives. A PSAL structure for the
provision of this support was chosen, and continues to be considered as the appropriate
choice, as it is allowing sustained engagement between the Government and the Bank over an
extended period of time; as it provides a means for continuing dialogue on the range of public
sector, regulatory and ownership reform issues; and as it ties lending decisions to
Government commitment to and actual implementation of reforms. The PSAL instrument is
preferred to a regular SAL as operations directed at improving governance and public sector
management typically span a multiplicity of actions across many fronts, require institutional
reforms which ordinarily take a long time to achieve, and allow recalibration of the loan
conditionality as the program evolves.
40.
The Bank will continue to assist Government's implementation of its Public
Administration Reform and Anticorruption Strategies by helping with preparation and
conditioningfuture PSAL loans and technical assistance on achievements in devising and
implementing public sector reforms. One key area of assistance in public administration
reform will be strengthening policy coordination, the strategic planning process, and the
capacities for each. The second key area will be pay reform, where Government aims to
establish a transparent pay-scale that would attract and retain qualified and honest people.
The Cabinet of Ministers has adopted the concept of pay reform; pay-scale and performance
evaluation criteria have been developed, and a phasing-in mechanism has to be designed. A
third key area is in public sector agency reform, focusing on the implementation of a new law
that aims to strengthen the efficiency and accountability of agencies and integrate their
finances into a comprehensive budget.
41.
In anticorruption, the Bank will concentrate more of its assistance towards helping
Latvia address the issue of state capture, which reflects the learning from the Anticorruption
in Transition report. Planned support will include assistance to Latvia's efforts to strengthen
institutions to combat corruption, including strategic and capacity building support to the
permanent Corruption Prevention Bureau, which will be established formally in May 2002,
and to support Government's implementation of the revised Corruption Prevention Law. The
Bank's technical assistance will aim at helping Government devise actions to address conflict
of interest and illicit enrichment and to introduce greater transparency into political party
financing. The public sector program that Latvia has in place - with its emphasis on
strengthening policymaking capacity and the accountability of policymakers - coupled with
measures to create an effective regulatory framework for a competitive private sector (see
para. 43) and the growing involvement of civil society in monitoring the Government's

- 17-

actions (see Box 4) - are seen as necessary initial steps to help Latvia resolve the issue of
state capture over the medium term.
42.
EU PHARE has provided support for the reform of the court system through twinning
assistance for preparation of draft laws, improvement of judicial cooperation, and
investments for computerization of regional and district courts. In an effort to promote
transparency and accountability in the public sector, the Bank will assist the Government in
implementing two new laws, one promoting greater access to public sector information and
the second providing guidelines for administrative decision-making and appeals, through the
provision of IDF grantfinancing which has been approved recently. Finally, in an effort to
strengthen the accountability of the judiciary, the Bank will provide technical assistance to
Latvia'splanning of measures to increase the transparencyofjudicial decision-making, such
as reforms of the procedures used to monitor courts' andjudges 'performance.
Box 4: NGOs are Monitoring the Privatization Process
NGOs are increasingly participating in anti-coiTuption activities. Their involvement has changed
from advising on the legal provisions and content of Corruption Prevention Program to participating
in the Corruption Prevention Council (a strategic, consultative body comprising wide representation
of ministries, agencies and the legal system) anid monitoring of thle privatization process in Latvia.
In tenis of the latter, the most notable is involvemeent of Delna, a local chapter of Transparency
International, in monitoring the privatization process of the biggest state-owned company -- Latvia
Shipping. The Latvian Privatization Agency and Delna signied a memorandum outlining the rights
and responsibilities of the NGO in the monitorinig process. The organization had full access to all
infonnation pertaining to the privatization and the bidding process with rights to participate in
meetings, including Cabinet of Ministers sessions.
Members of Delna had to follow the
confidentiality rule and had no riglhts to interfere in the decision-making process. The monitoring
process was widely reflected in iiiass media and set an unprecedented occasion of NGOs'
involvement in monitoring Govermment decision-making process.
43.

The Government's objective is to establish a transparent and stable regulatory

framework for infrastructure utilities to protect the public interest, to encourage competition
and to increase efficiency of regulated sectors. A law on Public Utility Regulators has been
passed and puts in place the basic legal framework. Regulatory reform is being implemented
on central and municipal levels through introduction of a multi-sectoral regulatory

institutions. A central Public Utility Commission has started to operate, while at the
municipal level the structure of the regulatory framework is linked to the incomplete regional
and municipal reform and is still unclear. Political interference in the decision making
process, the powerfulness of infrastructure monopolies, lack of experienced and adequately
trained staff in regulatory institutions can easily lead to "regulatory capture," where
regulatory decisions reflect more the interests of utilities than those of the general public. At
the same time the regulator should avoid a tendency to "over-regulate" the services with free
market elements. Therefore the Bank will continue dialogue on implementation of regulatory
reform through preparatory and implementation assistance under the PSAL program,
seeking donor supportfor trainingof regulatoryinstitutions'staff.
44.
As part of its PSAL agenda, the Government is privatizing the remaining stateowned- enterprises to the private sector to increase efficiency, promote industrial growth and
foster development of stable governance structures. Restructuring and privatization of state

- 18 -

enterprises have basically been completed with the notable exceptions of several large
companies - Latvenergo (power), Lattelekom (communications), Ventspils Nafta (oil
pipeline company), and Latvia Shipping (the sale of a 3 percent stake in Latvijas Gaze (gas)
was completed in February 2002). Slower-than-planned progress in privatization and
completion of divestiture of mostly privatized companies reflects that gaining consensus in
Government over the timing and ways of privatization is difficult and time-consuming.
Reflecting the slower progress, the scope of the proposed PSAL 2 has been adjusted and the
size of the loan reduced to US$20 million. Restructuring, commercialization and eventual
privatization of municipal enterprises are in very initial stages. Following the Government's
request, the Bank will continue to provide technical advice on privatization of infrastructure
companies in the context of the PSAL-supportedprogram.
45.
The Government aims to increase the efficiency of infrastructure services by
liberalizing of the telecommunication sector and implementing reform programs in the power
and gas sectors as stipulated by WTO agreement, EU Directives and the PSAL agenda. The
objective of the reform program in power sector is to create a market structure consistent with
Baltic integration and promoting competition. In gas, reform should include introduction of
third party access and gradual opening of the market. In telecommunications the market
opening should include establishment of non-discriminatory access to telecommunications
facilities, and transparency in the terms and conditions of interconnection between operators.
The Bank plans to continue policy dialogue regardingprerequisitesfor liberalizationof the
telecommunications, power and gas sectors in theframework of PSAL program.
Balanced and Sustainable Development Outside Riga
46.
The benefits of economic restructuring since independence have not been equally
distributed throughout Latvia.
Economic activity including that driven by FDI is
concentrated in Riga city and region, and accounts for more than 50 percent of the country's
GDP, 40 percent of tax revenues, and 37 percent of the population. As the Poverty
Assessment reported, about half of Latvia's poor live in rural areas, about one third live in
smaller cities other than Riga, while the remainder live in Riga. The average per capita
income in the Latgale region of eastern Latvia is less than one quarter of an employed person
in Riga.
47.
The Government recognizes that regional policy needs to be developed and that
programs, services and human capacities in the regions need strengthening to keep new
investments from focusing only on Riga. The National Development Plan sets balanced and
sustainable development of regions as one of the national priorities. At present, planning and
administration is carried out on three levels - national, regional and local (including two local and district - sub-levels). This high vertical planning hierarchy combined with
substantial horizontal territorial fragmentation - in a country with population of 2.35 million
there are 552 local govermnents, united into 26 district governments, which have voluntarily
formed five planning regions - is confusing, makes planning and coordination difficult, and
leads to expensive duplication of administration and service delivery. Amalgamation and
rationalization of local governments to achieve economies of scale and to reduce
administrative costs are prerequisites for greater efficiency of resource use and for setting the
stage for economic growth outside Riga.
48.
The Government has taken some initial steps toward such reform. A law on
Municipal Reform envisions amalgamation of the local governments on a voluntary basis

- 19-

until end-2003, after which amalgamation may be mandated until November 2004;
Government is also considering a regional reform which would result in creation of five or
nine regions instead of the 26 districts. Up to now, however, incentives have been
insufficient to promote voluntary amalgamation, and there has not been enough political
support to introduce mandatory amalgamation earlier than planned. The Government's
current proposal is to specify that rationalization would result in 102 municipalities, which
while still a large number would be a step toward bigger units; however, distribution of
functions between national and sub-national levels, the details of merging responsibilities for
programs and services, and ensuring adequate funding have not been worked out. While
implementation of local government and regional reforms remains unlikely in the immediate
future, given the lack of consensus evident in these discussions, the Bank will undertake a
study in FY03 based on the existing proposal of 102 local governments to analyze the
following: (i) the functions and responsibilitiesof the proposed size of local governments;
(ii) the possible delegation offunctions to/from regional and national levels; and (iii) the
reallocationoffinancial resources accordingto newfunctions.
49.
To help Latvian cities build capacities so that they can make effective use of the
resources they are receiving from EU PHARE and elsewhere, the joint World BankBertelsmann Foundation Cities of Change program includes two cities in Latvia - Liepaja
and Rezekne. This program is helping these cities apply tools of strategic city management,
and the Bank will continue to support this program in Latvia, helping these cities disseminate
the lessons learned to other areas. The Bank will aim to assist Latvian cities through the
Cities Alliance program (a foundation supported by the Bank, UN and several bilateral
donors) focusing on nationwide urban upgradingand City Development Strategy. Through
an application process, assistance might be given to five to seven cities to produce action
plans for equitable growth, employment generation, physical upgrading, participation and
capacity building.
Box 5: Municipal Infrastructure Investments

Municipal infrastructure is generally well-developed in Latvia, however significant investments are
still needed, especially in the environment sector.
Water related environmental development has been one of the key cooperation sectors between Latvia
and the Bank. The Liepaja Environment Project was completed in 1999, and the Daugavpils water
component of the Municipal Services loan closed at end-2001 after having met the economic
sustainability objectives and exceeding the physical rehabilitation objectives. The IBRD is also
financing two ongoing solid waste management projects - in Riga and in the Liepaja Region, the
latter of which represents a novel financing scheme including an Instrument for Structural Policies for
Pre-accession (ISPA) grant and sale of greenhouse gas reductions.
The resources available through ISPA provide notable support to the environmental programs in the
range of E25 million annually, and will be increased through structural funds when Latvia joins the
EU. However, lack of experienced project preparation and implementation capacity at local level is
negatively affecting the optimal use of resources. Therefore, the Bank's further contribution to this
sector will be capacity building assistance through the ongoing projects and the Cities Alliance and
Cities of Change programs.

- 20 -

50.
Investments in physical infrastructure (see Box 5) are needed to increase the
efficiency of local service delivery and improve the environment for enterprise entry. The
Bank had planned to finance a new program providing resources for investments in local
infrastructure, especially in smaller, poorer towns. However, the Government halted
preparation of this due to availability of financing sources from the EU, Nordic Investment
Bank (NIB) and European Investment Bank (EIB). In the longer run, municipalities will
need to reduce the call on their financing for infrastructure investments by increasing private
participation, and restructuring, commercialization and privatization of municipal enterprises
will help increase enterprise efficiency. For this to take place, an effective regulatory
framework and capacities for municipal utilities and infrastructure will be required. The
Bank plans to continue dialogue on these matters.
Social Sector Services and Their Delivery
51.
To address social and poverty problems Latvia has launched several important
reforms. The pension reform (completed in 2001) created a three-tier pension system, which
is one of the most advanced systems among the transition countries. Mechanisms for better
targeting of social assistance are being implemented. The reform of the health-care system
has also begun in Latvia with assistance of an adaptable program loan from the World Bank,
and these efforts will need to be continued into the medium term. Reforms with our support
are also underway in education; the sector still faces critical challenges in optimizing the
school network, rationalizing the financing system, and raising the quality of education.
52.
Several factors complicate the efficient delivery of the social services in Latvia: (i)
the over-fragmented municipal structure; (ii) unfavorable demographics - the declining and
aging population puts pressure on health and social insurance costs; and (iii) an over-capacity
of health and education infrastructure. As discussed in the previous section, while municipal
reform is not likely to be fully implemented during this CAS period, the Bank proposes to
proceed with lending for social sectors so long as project objectives are achievable. Lending
for social sectors would finance expenditures essential to improve the effectiveness and
efficiency of service delivery and would be geared to promote the local government
rationalization and optimization objectives being sought.
53.
Health. Relative to other countries in the Baltic region, Latvia has generally poor
health status and an inefficient expenditure pattem. Life expectancy fell in the early years of
transition, though did begin to improve in 1996. Tuberculosis rates have increased by 50
percent since 1987, and at over 80 cases per 100,000, Latvia has one of the highest
prevalence rates in the region. In 1999, Latvia was estimated by UNAIDS to have the fifth
highest prevalence rate for HIV/AIDS in the Europe and Central Asia Region at 0.11 percent
of the population aged 15-49, after Ukraine, Belarus, Moldova and Russia. Thereafter,
between 1999 and 2000, the number of new HIV/AIDS cases almost doubled, from 264 to
491, indicating an increasing problem.
54.
In the past five years, health expenditure in Latvia has accounted for almost 6 percent
of GDP. About two-thirds of this amount is public expenditure, which is lower than the
average of the EU countries and at the lower end of the average in Central and Eastern
Europe countries. Private expenditure on health, at about 2 percent of GDP is higher among
higher income people and urban populations, in line with patterns seen in middle and upper
income countries. Pharmaceuticals account for over half of private health expenditure; hence
inability to afford pharmaceuticals is likely a barrier to access to effective primary care for

- 21 the poor, particularly for the elderly poor. The inefficiency in healthcare provision and the
lack of transparency and accountability of health services is also a serious problem, especially
in the hospital sector. There has been some progress since the beginning of the transition in
rationalizing excess hospital capacity (down from 14.1 to 9.5 beds per 1000 population since
1990) and improving some indicators of efficiency such as average length of stay (down from
17.3 to 12.5 days since 1990), but the pace of progress has been slow relative to more
efficient EU and OECD countries.
55.
To address the problems, Latvia has embarked on a wide-ranging reform program to
develop a balanced and financially sound health care system based on primary health care
and prevention. While planning for reforms has taken place, the benefits of these mediumterm reforms will only begin to emerge in the next few years when further steps are taken
toward hospital network consolidation, aligning the budget process to medium term strategy,
addressing policy and mechanisms for financing capital expenditures, and safeguarding
access for the poor. These issues have been part of the Bank's policy dialogue with Latvia,
and resulted in the FY99 Health APL currently under implementation. This project supports
several policy interventions: (i) health financing reforms by consolidating public health
funding, developing provider payment methodologies; (ii) health system restructuring by
developing master plans for rationalization of hospital network and establishing a general
practitioner-based primary health system; and (iii) public health reform by establishing
national public health priorities and improving monitoring of the population's health status
and major risks. In the coming CAS period, the 2nd phase of the APL will continue these
initiatives and, after the master-planning exercise now ongoing, will finance hospital
upgrading and rationalization. The project will also support specific public health
interventions, including the prevention and treatment of tuberculosis and HIV/AIDS. An
assessment of the social impact of health reforms and the Bank's assistance will be
undertaken as part of thepreparationof the 2nd phase.
56.
Education. Latvia has a strong general education base, with the adult literacy rate at
98 percent. Yet over the last ten years, Latvian society has experienced demographic and
economic transformations that affected the enrollment pattem. This has led to generous
average pupil-teacher ratios of 12 to I in urban cities and 10 to I in rural areas and a
proliferation of small schools. As this situation is not financially efficient or sustainable,
Latvia needs a serious optimization effort of its education institutions. A second area in need
of efficiency improvement is related to expenditures on heating and electricity. Latvia spends
more than twice as much per student for the heating and lighting of schools as Western
systems in similar climates. As a consequence of these inefficiencies, education quality
suffers. Another challenge of the Latvian education reform is to change how students are
taught and how they leam, to be prepared for the labor market, for participation in civil
society, or for life-long learning. While progress has been made by changing the curricula
and with the introduction of new subjects and teaching methods, further success depends on
significant investment in teacher training and on a radical reform of the teacher career.
57.
Latvia's higher education system suffers from the same problems of efficiency, poor
management and lack of quality and relevance of the program of studies. This level of
education is fragmented, with a relative large number of isolated, narrowly focused and
highly specialized institutions. The fragmentation is responsible in part for the serious underresourcing, especially of leaming support services such as libraries and Information and
Communication Technology facilities for students. These structural problems interact with
institution-specific issues such as aging of staff; low academic salaries not attracting young

- 22 -

staff; inadequate financing of research; lack of innovative leadership; weak internal
govemance structures; no strategic planning; and insufficient information management
systems. Latvia needs to revise its higher education resource allocation and financing system
to give institutions more flexibility to respond to changing program demands. It also needs to
systematize the experience gained with the introduction of students fees and the program for
student loans and stipends.
58.
A second education project will build on the experience of the ongoing project by
expanding thefinancingfor energy efficiency improvements and supportingeducation quality
improvements. A study will be undertaken on higher education as a means of helping
Government prepare a policy framework and national dialogue to address issues of
institutionalfragmentation, financing and education quality at that level; this work could
lead to afurther educationproject.
59.
Housing. Latvia's process of privatizing its housing stock has been relatively slow;
the extension of validity of privatization vouchers until end 2002 will further delay its
completion. By the end of 2000, while 71 percent of apartments were privately owned, only
in 10 percent of the cases was privatization of the whole building completed. In addition,
slow registration of real estate coupled with controls on rents has delayed introduction of a
market-based housing maintenance system, resulting in a rapidly deteriorating and
contracting housing stock, as well as a sector that has potential for a much larger share of
private participation. The Government's housing strategy aims at improving the legal,
institutional and regulatory environment and also increasing the availability of housing
finance. The Government also intends to improve and better target housing related social
assistance policy so that this encourages greater private sector participation thus allowing the
public sector to reduce its decision-making role and resource requirements. To assist this
effort, the Bank is supporting improvements to the legal, institutional and regulatory
framework and the development of more efficient housingfinanceand better targeted housing
subsidies through a Housing Learning and Innovation Loan (LIL) and subsequent policy
dialogue.
60.
Social Assistance. Latvia is embarking on developing a functioning, affordable
safety net, with strong incentives to participate in the economy and society, which effectively
assists the poor and which supports and contributes to economic growth. Through policy
advice and other assistance under the PSAL, the World Bank has been helping the Ministry
of Welfare to develop a guaranteed minimum income program which would set a national
standard for poverty reduction benefits - presently municipalities have a free hand to assess
needs and set benefits. Under the Govermnent's PSAL agenda the goal is to reach a social
assistance system that is cost effective, prevents poverty, supports inclusion of vulnerable
groups. At this point the relevant changes in legislation have been approved by the Cabinet
and submitted to parliament, and Government has a time bound action plan for
implementation and monitoring. The PSAL agenda has also included development of familybased and inclusive social care services, which are more effective in meeting social needs.
The PSAL program will continue to provide advisory assistance toward implementation of
the national means tested social assistance and the development of cost-effective alternative
social care services.

-

23 -

VI. COORDINATION WITH OTHER PARTNERS
61.
The Government's overall reform program has been designed to take place within a
framework for macro-economic stability consistent with the Government's Second SBA with
the IMF. In February 2001; the Govemrnent and the IMF agreed on a 20-month SBA to
Latvia for the amount of SDR33 million, which was approved by the IMF board on April 20,
2001. The measures supported by the PSAL and SBA are mutually reinforcing, with the IMF
program focusing primarily on fiscal outcomes and the Bank's program supporting
improvements to public sector management structures and processes. As noted above, the
IMF did not complete its review of the SBA in November 2001 due to concerns about fiscal
policies, and discussions are continuing.
62.
EU institutions are increasing their support to Latvia (see Annex B12). During the
period 1992-1999 the EU allocated about 248 million through the EU PHARE program to
address issues including anti-corruption, judiciary reform, public administration reform, and
public expenditure management. The Bank closely coordinates with the EU on the ongoing
PSAL program to ensure that the reforms supported by the PSAL are consistent with and
complement the necessary reforms to implement the acquis communautaire. Coordination
meetings with EU are organized on a case-by-case basis to discuss Bank projects under
implementation or preparation.
63.
EU pre-accession aid for 2000-2006 will consist of aid from EU PHARE and will also
include investment support and technical assistance for agricultural and rural development
through the Special Assistance Program for Agricultural and Rural Development (SAPARD)
and for the environment and transport sectors through the pre-structural instrument ISPA.
During 2000-2002 total EU financial assistance will amount to 90 million for EU PHARE,
E66,6 million for SAPARD and between 109.2 to E171.6 for ISPA. Multilateral banks
including EIB, European Bank for Reconstruction and Development, the NIB, and the Nordic
Environment Finance Corporation provide cofinancing for the EU pre-structural instruments.
Several bilateral donors are also very active in Latvia (see Annex B 13). The Bank team is in
regular contact with those donors who in a number of cases have provided cofinancing and
other support for Bank-financed projects. The Bank has also organized donor coordination
meetings for example in the context of PSAL preparation.
VII. THE WORLD BANK GROUP'S ASSISTANCE PROGRAM
64.
The assistance program to Latvia reflects the World Bank Group's agreement with the
Govemment on Latvia's priorities at this stage of its transition and a joint assessment of the
Bank's comparative advantage in providing assistance to Latvia. It also reflects the
consultation process undertaken more broadly in Latvia (see Annex B 11). Taking account of
the Framework for World Bank Group Support to European Union (EU) Accession
Candidate Countries of Centraland Eastern Europe (SecM2001-0564, October 10, 2001),
the choices also reflect the substantial assistance Latvia is receiving from its other partners.
The program for the Bank covers four main areas: (i) encouraging macro stability for
growth, new enterprise entry and job creation; (ii) strengthening govemance through public
sector reform and anti-corruption; (iii) balanced and sustainable growth outside Riga; and
(iv) social sector services and delivery. The IBRD lending program is discussed below; the
non-lending assistance activities include inter alia economic and sector work on labor market
reforms, a CEM on prospects for growth and evaluating public sector reforms implemented to

- 24 -

date, and work on the KE (Annex B4 summarizes the non-lending program). IFC support
will be based on the principles set out in para. 32 above.
Table 3: IBRD Lending Program, FY02-05
(US$ millions)
FY02
Housing LIL

FY03
2

PSAL 2
20
Health APL 2 20

FY04
PSAL-3

FY05
40

Education 2

30

65.
Lending Scenario and Triggers. This CAS suggests one lending scenario in the
coming years, which is appropriate for Latvia given its stage of transition and stage of
relationship with the Bank, its likely accession to the EU, the limited number of operations,
and that the maximum lending is below what the Bank could lend on creditworthiness
grounds. In this base range scenario, as the project-specific triggers set out below are met
and as the projects are fully prepared and agreed, the IBRD would plan to lend up to about
US$110-120 million during FY02-05. This would encompass financing of the remaining
PSAL operations (totaling US$60 million), two or three investment operations (for health and
one or two education loans -- of US$20-30 million each), and one LIL for housing. This
considerably smaller lending volume than possible given Latvia's risk indicators reflects the
limits Government has determined for itself on the total borrowing to undertake.
66.
Each of the operations will be linked to reform in their respective areas as well as to
the institutional changes needed for the projects to be implemented successfully and
outcomes to be achieved and to be sustainable. As it will be possible that the conditions for
some operations will be met while others could be delayed, the CAS in this sense is selfcorrecting for reform performance, and actual total lending may be smaller than the estimate
above. The specific triggers for the program would be:
*

*

*

PSAL: Satisfactory progress in implementing the actions agreed under the first PSAL
as triggering subsequent PSAL operations, including those related to implementing an
adequate macroeconomic policy framework.
Health APL 2: Readiness for hospital upgrading as indicated by a functioning
consolidated financing mechanism and regional health services master plans
developed for 5 regions.
Education: The project for general education would be predicated on adoption of a
comprehensive plan for improving quality of teaching and management in all Latvian
schools and for achieving a more efficient utilization of education resources through
school network rationalization. A possible higher education project would be
triggered by an agreed program for improving resource allocation and financing of
higher education institutions and initial implementation of a program for enhancing
the quality and relevance of their program of studies.

67.
Country Program Performance Indicators. To monitor and evaluate Latvia's
progress in key areas supported by the Bank over the CAS period, the following qualitative
indicators will be used (with quantitative measures that would aid the evaluation of progress
shown in the box):

- 25 -

a. labor market reforms identified and begun to
be implemented;
b. KE strategy identified and initial
implementation begun;
c. implementation of the PSAL agenda is on
track, including assessment that the anticorruption strategy is being implemented
appropriately;
d. privatization of commercial state-owned

Quantitative Measures

o per capita growth nationally and in each
o
o

o

~the o
o
e. Government decisions taken on municipality
been completed;
has
been completed;
companies hascompanies

consolidation and other regional reforms to
foster more efficient and equitable
development, and implementation begun;
and
f. satisfactory progress made in improving
efficiency in education and health.

o

region
reduction in poverty level nationally and
in each region
unemployment rate nationally and in
each region over the CAS period
number of enterprises in state hands and
degree of public ownership in each
reduction
innumber of municipalities
increase in primary/secondary
pupiUteacher ratios
reduction in number of hospital beds per

capita
See Annex B9 for baseline figures.

68.
Risks. Latvia and the Bank Group's assistance program for Latvia face three primary
risks: two internal to the country and one external. The first internal risk relates to Latvia's
political economy and the implementation of reforms. Although in the past the country's
changing coalitions have maintained an overall commitment to reforms, future governments
may find it expedient to slow the implementation of planned actions based on insufficient
political support or a desire to maintain political balances. Parliamentary elections will be
held in October 2002, thus introducing an element of political uncertainty. State capture
could also affect key reforms by causing resolve to falter. Mitigating this risk is the
importance of EU accession to Latvia, and the consequent impetus for the Government to
maintain resolve in this process. Further, the Bank has been working with Government and
other stakeholders to develop a consensus on the programs to be supported, including on anticorruption, and also to gain an understanding of the triggers in the PSAL agenda and for
investment lending. The second internal risk is that weakening of reforms could lead to
worsening of macroeconomic balances, particularly a large fiscal deficit. While unlikely
given Latvia's track record, this risk is dealt with through the PSAL's requirement of an
appropriate macroeconomic framework; the Bank will continue to work closely with the IMF
on this as well. So long as project-specific triggers for the investment lending are met, the
World Bank plans to go forward with that lending, particularly as these should contribute to
more effective public expenditures.
69.
Latvia's external risk is that the current worldwide economic slowdown or other
external shocks could lead to a worsening of macroeconomic conditions. Indeed the Russia
crisis of the late 1990s demonstrated that the Latvian economy of that time was vulnerable to
extemal shock, though since then it has successfully diversified its production and external
markets. While to date Latvia is not experiencing difficulty from the worldwide slowdown,
this could change and external growth slowdown may spill over to Latvia. This possibility
underlines the importance of maintaining a reform track, in particular the need for fiscal
prudence as a crucial element for economic policy. In the event of materialization of this
risk, the Bank's role would be to provide analytic and advisory services on corrective policy
actions and financial support if requested by the Government.

-

26 -

VIII. CONCLUSION
70.
The foregoing CAS is predicated on the assumption that Latvia in the not-too-distant
future will become a member of the EU. While an operational relationship with the Bank
need not come to an end upon accession (see Frameworkfor World Bank Group Support to
European Union (EU) Accession Candidate Countries of Central and Eastern Europe
(SecM2001-0564, October 10, 2001)), it is anticipated that, as Latvia moves closer to its goal
of entry into the EU and as financing from the EU and other institutions becomes more
available, the country may voluntarily limit its future borrowing and technical assistance only
to the activities in this CAS. At the present time, Latvia values a selective operational
relationship with the Bank, particularly in areas not directly related to the acquis
communautaire but where attention to structural reforms are critical to the quality and
success of its transition: human development, poverty, social protection, labor market, and
aspects of governance and public administration. Given the uncertainties over a longer
timeframe, the World Bank plans to prepare a CAS Progress Report in two years as a means
of updating the Board on Latvia's advancement toward its goals and determining the
evolution of the Bank's program in Latvia from that point forward.
James D. Wolfensohn
President

By:
Shengman Zhang
Washington, DC
April 2, 2002

Peter Woicke

Annex A2

-A

Page 1 of 2

Latvia at a glance
Europe &

Lower-

Central

mIddle-

Latvia

Asia

Income

2.4
2,870
6.9

475
2,010
958

2,046
1,140
2,327

Population (%

-0.9

0.1

1.0

Labor force (%)

-0.8

0.6

1.3

19
69
70
14

67
69
21

POVERTY and SOCIAL
2000
Population, mid-year (millions)
GNI per capita (Atlas method, US$)
GNI (Atlas method, US$ billions)

1/31/02

Development diamond'
Life expectancy

Average annual growth, 1994-00

Most recent estimate (latest year available, 1994400)
Poverty (%of population below national poverty line)
Urban population (%of total population)
Life expectancy at birth (years)
Infant mortality (per 1,000 live births)
Child malnutrition (%of children under 5)
Access to an improved water source (%of population)
Illiteracy (%of population age 15+)
Gross primary enrollment (%of school-age population)
Male
Female

80
0
96
98
93

90
3
100
101
99

42
69
32
11
80
15
114
116
114

1990

1999

2000

12.5
40.1
47.7
38.8

6.7
25.1
43.8
16.7
17.4

7.2
24.6
45.8
18.6
20.3

-9.6
1.5
40.4
9.2
13.1
28.4

-6.8
1.1
44.6
7.5
13.2
26.5

..

..

GNI
per
capita

Gmoss
primary
enrollment

,'

Access to improved water source

-

Latvia
Lower-middle-income group

_

KEY ECONOMIC RATIOS and LONG-TERM TRENDS
1980
GDP (US$ billions)
Gross domestic investmentVGDP
Exports of goods and services/GDP
Gross domestic savings/GDP
Gross natonal savings/GDP

..

25.6
..

32.7
..

Current account balance/GDP
Interest payments/GDP
Total debtGDP
Total debt service/exports
Present value of debt/GDP
Present value of debtVexports

..
.

..
..

0.0
0.0

1980-90

199040

1999

2000

2000.04

5.8
5.2

-3.4
-2.4
1.4

1.1
1.8
-6.4

6.6
7.2
12.8

5.9
6.7
6.2

1980

1990

1999

2000

11.8
50.9
46.0
37.2

21.9
46.2
34.5
31.9

4.5
27.0
15.3
68.5

4.5
25.3
14.5
70.2

59.4
7.9

52.7
8.6
49.0

62.8
20.5
54.1

62.5
18.9
54.3

(average annual growth)
GDP
GDP per capita
Exports of goods and services

..

Economic ratios'
Trade

Domestic

savings

Investment

Indebtedness

Latvia
Lower-middle-income group

STRUCTURE of the ECONOMY
(%of GDP)
Agriculture
Industry
Manufacturing
Services
Private consumption
General govemment consumption
Imports of goods and services
(average annual growth)

Growth of Investment and GDP (%)
50

..

1980-90

1990400

1999

2000

Agriculture
Industry
Manufacturing
Services

4.2
6.5
6.7
5.1

-7.0
-8.4
-7.8
2.5

-7.3
-8.8
-5.9

9.2
3.2
5.7

Private consumption
General govemment consumption
Gross domestic investment
Imports of goods and services

5.4
5.0
3.4

-4.8
7.8
-1.9
2.4

5.1
0.0
-8.7
-5.2

..

..

..

5.6
-2.9
-1.3
4.8

430
0
,
20

106
.

60

-20

-

e-GDP

GDI

Growth of exports and Imports (%)
40
30
20

10
o
-10

95
-

Exports

-*-rrports
_

Note: 2000 data are preliminary estimates.
'The diamonds show four key indicators in the country (in bold) compared with its income-group average. If data are missing, the diamond will
be incomplete.

Annex A2
Page 2 of 2

Latvia
PRICES and GOVERNMENT FINANCE
1980
Domesffc prices
(%change)
Consumer prices

Implicit GDP deflator

1990

1999

2000
Inflation (%)

..

0.5

..

-27.8

2.4

2.6

so

7.4

4.3

40

3020 -

Government finance
(%of GDP, includes current grants)

*o

Current revenue

..

Current budget balance
Overall surplus/defict

.,

..

..

40.8

37.5

.

0.9
-3.9

1.3
-3.3

o-

9s

99
97
GDP deflator

99

99
CPI

00

TRADE
1980

1990

(USS millions)
Total exports (fob)

,.

..

Commodity 1

..

..

Commodity 2

..

..

Manufactures
Total imports (cif)
Food

,.

.
..

..
..

..

Fuel and energy

..

..

Capital goods

..

..

1999

2000

1,889

2,058

..
..

Epr n motlvT U$ml.
Export and Import levea 1US$mill.)
3,50D
3.000

.,
.,

1,582
2,916
256
129
538

1,711
3,116
285

104

102

2.500
9_+
2Z5000
1,00- r
*

135

521

Export price index (1995=100)

..

Import price index (1995=100)

..

..

100

107

Terms of trade (1995=100)

..

..

104

98

1990

1999

2000

..

.

..

.

2,914
3,605
-691

3.271
3,876
-606

.

..

-48
93

25
96

Current account balance

..

..

-646

-485

Financing iems (net)
Changes in net reserves

..

..

811
-165

513

1,124
0.6

1,092
0.6

E

E
K

*

E

_

.

E

E*

1.000

soo
w

5

99

97

t3Expofts

9s

99

DO

KImports

BALANCE of PAYMENTS
1980

(US$ millions)
Exports of goods and services
Imports of goods and services
Resource balance
Net Income
Net current transfers

Memo:
Reserves including gold (US$ millions)
Conversion rate (DEC, local/US$)

Current account balance to GDP I%)
o
FM
-

-28
.tz

..
..

..

,.

EXTERNAL DEBT and RESOURCE FLOWS
(USS

1980

1990

1999

2000

0
0

0
0

2,692
200

3,186
242

millions)

Total debt outstanding and disbursed
IBRD

0

0

0

Total debt service
IBRD
IDA

0
0
0

0
0
0

283
17
0

Composition of net resource flows
Official grants

..

..

23

32

0
0

0
0

..
..

..
..

49
267
366
273

-7
-233
399
-321

0
0
0

0
0
0

36
28
4

72
63
9

Net lows

0

0

24

54

Interest payments
Net transfers

0
0

0
0

13
11

12
42

IDA

Official creditors
Private creditors
Foreign direct investment
Portfolio equity
World Bank program
Commitments
Disbursements
Principal repayments

Development Economics

Composition of 2000 dobt (USSmill.)

0

265
21D:2
0

A: 242C 35

G:1270

E:55

F: 1252

A - IBRD
8 - IDA
c-IMF

D -Other multilatefal

E - 8ilateral
F - Private
G - Short-term

1/31/02

Annex B2
Page I of I
Latvia
Selected Indicators* of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
(as of April 1, 2002)

Indicator
Portfolio Assessment
Number of Projects Under Implementation a
Average Implementation Period (years) b
Percent of Problem Projects by Number a, c, f
Percent of Problem Projects by Amount a, c, f
Percent ofProjects at RiskbyNumber a, d,f
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount a, d,f
Disbursement Ratio (%) e
Portfolio Management
CPPR during the year (yes/no)
Supervision Resources (total US$ '000)
Average Supervision (US$/project '000)

Memorandum Item
Proj Eval by OED by Number
Proj Eval by OED by Amt (US$ millions)
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Number
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt

a.
b.
c.
d.
e.

1999

2000

2001

2002

10.0
2.0
0.0
0.0
10.0
20.7
45.7

8.0
2.4
12.5
9.1
12.5
9.1
20.7

9.0
3.2
11.1
23.3
11.1
23.3
35.2

7.0
3.7
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
21.9

No
695
$70

No
763
$95

No
838
$93

No
554
$69

Since FY 80 Last Five FYs
7
6
200.4
158.5
0
0
0
0

As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY).
Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio.
Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) and/or implementation progress (IP).
As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the
beginning of the year: Investment projects only.
f. The Riga District Heat project ($21.6 and E15.7 loans) were rated Unsatisfactory in 2001.
* All indicators are for projects active in the Portfolio, with the exception of Disbursement Ratio,
which includes all active projects as well as projects which exited during the fiscal year.

Annex B3
Page I of 2
Latvia
Bank Group Program Summary
(as of April 1,2002)
Proposed IBRD/IDA Base-Case Lending Program'
Fiscalyear

Fiscalyear
ID
ProjectlD

Project

US$(M)
US$(M)

StrategicRewards Implementation b
b (HIMIL)
Risks (HIMIL)

2002

Housing LIL (Phase 1)
Total FY02

2.0
2.0

M

M

2003

Health 2 (APL #2)
PSAL-2
Total FY03

20.0
20.0
40.0

M
H

M/L
M

2004

PSAL-3
Total FY04

40.0
40.0

H

H

2005

Education 2
Total FY05

30.0
30.0

H

M

Total FY02-05

112.0

a. This table presents the proposed program for the next four fiscal years.
b. For each project, indicate whether the strategic rewards and implementation risks are expected
to be high (H), 'moderate (M), or low (L).

Annex B3
Page 2 of 2

Latvia
IFC and MIGA Program, FY 1999-2002
1999 2000 2001 2002
IFC approvals (US$m)
Sector (%)
WHOLES. & RETAIL TRADE
Total
Investment instrument (%)
Loans
Equity
Quasi-Equity
Other
Total
MIGA guarantees (US$m)

25

0

0

100
100

0

68

0

0

32
0
100
0.00

0

Annex B4
Page I of 2

Latvia
Summary of Nonlending Services
(as of April 1, 2002)
Product

Completion FY

Cost (US$000)

Audiencea

Objectiveb

Recent Completions
Poverty Assessment
Strengthening Fiscal Decentralization
IDF for Regulatory Development
Country Procurement Assessment Report
(CPAR)
Financial Sector Assessment Program
(FSAP)
IDF for Public Sector Reform and Capacity
Building
Client Survey
Underway and Planned
Improved Productivity and Growth
Labor Market Study
Knowledge Economy
CEM
Financial Management Assessmt
Public Sector Reform
Public Expenditure Review
Public Sector Reform Review
Development Outside Riga
Regional Policy, Inst. and Capacities
Enhancing Rural Productivity
Cities of Change
Cities of Alliance
Social Sector
Housing Study
Higher Education - Dialogue
a. Government, donor, Bank, public dissemination.
b. Knowledge generation, public debate, problem-solving.

00
00
00

174
87
50

G
G
G

K
PS
PS

01

53

G/B

PD

01

139

G/B

K

02
02

29
15

G
G/B

PS
PD

03
03
04
04

100
44
145
57

G
G
G
B

PD
K
PD
K

02
05

222
130

G
G

PS
PD

03
04
02-04
02-04

10
35
25
30

G
G
G
G

PS
K
PS
PS

03
03-05

44
113

G
G

K
PD

Annex B4
Page 2 of 2

Latvia
Summary of Nonlending Services
Name
|Comments
Improved Productivity and Growth
Labor Market Study (FY03)
The study would address institutional issues with regard to the
functioning of the labor market and suggest possible ways to
address the problem of regional differences in unemployment rates.
Knowledge Economy (FY03)

We propose to follow-up the FY02 assistance to the government in
developing its Knowledge Economy strategy. The follow-up work
would be defined once the strategy is decided.

Country Economic
Memorandum: Sustainability,
including review of growth and
competitiveness in key sectors
of the economy (FY04)
Financial Management
Assessment (FY04)

In addition to reviewing the situation and prospects of the economy
and the status of the overall reform program, this study would
examine the sustainability of growth in key sectors of the economy,
which are key to Latvia's successful development.

Public Sector Reform
Public Expenditure Review
(FY02)
Public Sector Reform Review
(FY05)

To review the Latvia's regulatory framework for financial
management.
The study outlined the characteristics of the MTEF and advised
how to deal with the implementation problems.
After the planned completion date for the PSAL-2, the Bank would
undertake a review of the status of public sector reforms
undertaken to that time and set out an agenda for remaining
actions.

Development Outside Riga
Regional Policy, Institutions
and Capacities (FY03)

Enhancing Rural Productivity
(FY04)
Social Sector
Housing Study (FY03)

Higher Education - Dialogue
(FY03-05)

This study will be based on existing 102 local governments'
proposal to assist the Government in analyzing: (i) functions and
responsibilities of proposed size of local governments; (ii) possible
delegation of functions to/from regional and national levels and
(iii) reallocation of financial resources according to new functions.
The note would provide an update on the latest developments and
policy/institutional development needs, including in the context of
EU accession.
Critical policy dialogue on the legal, institutional and regulatory
framework and the development of more efficient housing finance
as a follow up on the Housing LIL.
Prior to any new lending operation (i.e., Education 2), the Bank
would undertake a study on the priorities of the education sector
reform and issues of institutional fragmentation, financing and
education quality.

Annex B5
Page I of I

Latvia
Key Social Indicators
Same region/income group

Latest single year

1980-85

1970-75
POPULATION
Total population, mid-year (millions)
Growth rate (%annual average)
Urban population (%ofpopulation)
Total fertilityrate (birthsperwoman)

2.4
0.7
65
2

1994-99

Europe &

Lower-middle-

Central Asia

income

2.6
0.6
70
2.1

2.5
-1.4
69
1.1

474.4
0.6
67
1.6

2093.0
1.4
43
2.1

2430

2160

1200

POVERTY
(%of population)
National headcount index
Urban headcount index
Rural headcount index

.

INCOME
GNPpercapita(USS)
Consumer price Index (1990=100)

..

..

..

..

Food price index (1990=100)

..

..

..

..

..

..

32.4
7.6

..

..

40.3

6.7

..

..

INCOME/CONSUMPTION DISTRIBUTION
Gini index
Lowest quintile (%of income or consumption)
Highest quintile (%of income or consumption)
SOCIAL INDICATORS

Public expenditure
,

,,

..

..

..

..

..

..

96

100

120

Measles

..

..

97

97

87

DPT

..

..

95

97

87

..

..

69

Health (%ofGDP)
Education (%of GDP)
Social security and welfare (%/ of GDP)

Net primary school enrollment rate
(%of age group)
Total

Male
Female
Access to safe water
(%of population)
Total
Urban
Rural
Immunization rate
(%under 12 months)

Child malnutrition (%under 5 years)
Life expectancy at birth
(years)
Total
Male
Female

70
65
75

70
66
75

70
65
76

69

21

18

Mortality

14

21

32

Under 5 (per thousand live births)
Adult (15-59)
Male (per 1,000 population)
Female (per 1,000 population)

..

..

18

26

40

..

..

..

..

297
98

289
127

199
135

Matemal (per 100,000 live births)

..

..

45

Infant (perthousand live births)

World Development Indicators, 2001

Annex B6
Page I of 2
Latviaa

Key Economic Indicators

at ona accounts (as %o
Gross domestic product'
Agriculture
Industry
Services

D)
100
6
32
62

100
4
30
65

100
5
27
68

100
4
25
70

100
4
26
71

100
5
26
69

100
5
27
69

100
5
27
68

100
5
27
68

Total Consumption
Gross domestic fixed investment
Govemment investment
Private investment
(includes increase in stocks)
Exports (GNFS)'
Inports (GNFS)

86
19
2
20

86
27
4
24

83
25
4.6
22

81
25
4.2
23

81
25
3.5
24

80
25
3.9
24

80
26
3.9
24

78
27
4.9
24

77
27
5.2
24

51
59

51
65

44
54

46
54

45
54

46
54

46
54

46
54

46
53

Grossdomesticsavings
Gross national savingse

14
17

14
17

17
17

19
20

19
21

20
21

20
22

22
23

23
24

5638

6084

6662

7150

7783

8417

9190

10034

10955

2300

2390

2500

3040

3390

3550

3890

4270

4690

8.6
4.7

3.9
6.6

1.1
3.2

6.6
4.6

7.0
6.6

5.0
5.5

6.0
6.0

6.0
6.0

6.0
6.0

Real annual per capita growth rates (%, calculated from 1995 prices)
Gross domestic product at market prices
9.5
Total consumption
4.7
Private consumption
5.9

4.8
7.1
7.2

1.8
4.6
5.8

7.2
4.2
6.2

7.7
6.8
-4.1

5.7
5.5
4.8

6.8
5.8
5.4

6.8
5.4
4.7

6.9
5.3
4.6

Memorandum items
Gross domestic product
(US$ million at current prices)
GNP per capita (US$, Atlas method)
Real annual growth rates (%, calculated from 1995 prices)
Gross domestic product at market prices
Gross Domestic Income

Balance of Payments (US$ millions)
Exports (GNFS)'
MerchandiseFOB
Imports(GNFS)
MerchandiseFOB
Resource balance
Net current transfers
Current account balance

2871
1838
3348
2686
477
77
-331

3119
2011
3947
3141
-828
124
-636

2914
1889
3605
2916
-691
93
-646

3271
2058
3876
3116
-606
96
485

3537
2162
4211
3157
-674
17
-512

3893
2368
4585
3521
-691
19
-547

4253
2561
4962
3805
-709
21
-562

4641
2767
5372
4120
-731
23
-593

5066
2991
5780
4418
-714
21
-615

Net private foreign direct investment
Long-term loans (net)
Official
Private
Other capital (net, inl. errors &ommissions)
Change in reserves'

515
-219
63
-282
138
-102

303
85
95
-10
311
-63

366
156
49
107
276
-165

399
-208
-7
-201
300
-28

400
7
39
-32
125
-20

375
110
69
41
150
-88

375
125
-16
141
150
-88

375
135
-239
374
175
-92

325
202
-38
240
175
-87

-8.5

-13.6

-10.4

-8.5

-8.7

-8.2

-7.7

-7.3

-6.5

14.0

8.6

-1.3

9.9

14.5

5.1

5.1

5.0

5.0

14.9
15.4

5.3
19.5

0.9
-2.1

9.6
1.5

4.7
6.1

3.7
6.0

5.0
4.9

5.0
5.1

5.0
4.1

Memorandum items
Resource balance (%of GDP)
Real annual growth rates ( YR95 prices)
Merchandise exports (FOB)
Primary
Manufactures
Merchandise imports (CIF)

(Continued)

Annex B6
Page 2 of 2

Latvia
Key Economic Indicators
(Continued)

Public finance (as %of GDP at market prices)
Currentrevenues

39.9

43.9

40.8

37.5

39.3

39.6

40.0

40.6

41.2

Current expenditures

35.6

39.3

39.9

36.2

37.3

36.9

36.7

36.5

36.3

Current account surplus (+) or deficit(-)

4.3

4.6

0.9

1.3

2.0

2.7

3.2

4.1

4.9

Capital expenditure
Foreign financing

2.7

4.1

4.9

4.0

3.7

4.1

4.1

5.1

5.4

0.9

0.4

3.3

-0.3

0.2

2.3

-0.2

-2.4

-0.3

M2/GDP

26.6

25.7

25.6

29.4

26.3

26.3

26.3

26.3

26.3

Growth of M2 (%)

38.7

5.9

8.0

27.9

-2.1

8.2

9.2

9.2

9.2

Monetary indicators

Private sector credit growth I

..

..

..

..

..

..

total credit growth (%)
Price indices (YR95 =100)
Merchandiseexporlpriceindex

100.0

99.8

96.2

95.0

95.9

99.9

102.8

105.7

108.8

Merchandiseimport priceindex

100.0

98.0

92.8

99.0

101.5

104.5

107.7

110.9

114.3

Merchandise termsoftrade index

100.0

101.8

103.7

95.9

94.5

95.5

95.4

95.3

95.2

130.1

163.1

174.2

175.1

177.3

177.3

177.3

177.3

177.3

Consumerpriceindex (%change)

7.0

2.8

3.2

1.8

3.2

2.4

3.0

3.0

3.0

GDP deflator (%change)

6.6

5.5

7.4

4.3

2.4

3.0

3.0

3.0

3.0

5

Real exchange rate (US$/LCU)

a. The refoTm scenario (base case) described here and in para. 19 of the CAS is based on the following key assumptions:
real GDP growth of 5% in 2002 and 6% thereafter, public investment increasing from 3.9% to 5.2% of GDP in 2005 and real export
growth of 5% for 2002-2005.
b. GDP at factor cost
c. "GNFS" denotes "goods and nonfactor services."
d. Includes net unrequited transfers excluding official capital grants.
e. Includes use of IMF resources.
f. Consolidated central govemment.
g. "LCU" denotes "local currency units." An increase in US$/LCU denotes appreciation.

Annex B7
Page 1 of I

Latvia
Key Exposure Indicators

Actual
Indicator
Total debt outstanding and
disbursed (TDO) (US$m)a

1997W

198

1999

Estei-ae
2001-

Z0o0

Pr
20022003X

te4
004

2005

1932

2397

2692

3186

2623

2780

2705

2410

2323

59

30

328

-250

-4

100

116

130

201

132

79

283

265

183

192

200

423

199

TDO/XGSb

63.3

72.0

TDO/GDP
TDS/XGS
Concessional/TDO

34.3
4.3

39.4
2.4

87.6
40.4
9.2

89.8
44.6
7.5

67.1
33.7
4.7

65.0
33.0
4.5

58.0
29.4
4.3

47.5
24.0
8.3

42.0
21.2
3.6

4.3
60.6

19.8
76.9

21.7
58.6

13.5
68.0

29.8
71.0

31.1
70.7

33.2
75.1

11.4
83.4

29.9
51.0

0.2
120

0.4
187

0.6
200

0.6
242

0.8
266

0.8
309

0.9
290

0.8
269

0.7
247

0.1
0

0.2
0

0.2
0

0.2
0

0.1
0

0.2
0

0.2
0

0.2
0

0.2
0

Net disbursements (US$m)a
Total debt service (TDS)
(US$m)a
Debt and debt service indicators

(%)

IBRD exposure indicators (%)
IBRDDS/publicDS
Preferred creditor DS/public
DS (%)'
IBRD DS/XGS
IBRD TDO (US$m)d
Of which present value of
guarantees (USSm)
Share of IBRD portfolio (%)
IDA TDO (US$m)d
IFC (US$m)
Loans
Equity and quasi-equity /c

15
9

17
8

MIGA
MIGA guarantees (US$m)
a. Includes public and publicly guaranteed debt, private nonguaranteed, use of IMF credits and net shortterm capital.
b. "XGS" denotes exports of goods and services, including workers' remittances.
c. Preferred creditors are defined as IBRD, IDA, the regional multilateral development banks, the IMF, and the
Bank for Intemational Settlements.
d. Includes present value of guarantees.
e. Includes equity and quasi-equity types of both loan and equity instruments.

. ;..

o 9

gg!

00.

t0Sm

'c

<Cu~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~C

.C
c~~~~r
w
9
a 2
o

99
cn
Enw

CD 0

C~~~~~~~~~~
Cu~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

a-~~~~~~~i

,>bO

S~~~~~~~o
s

~

o

C

~
0

~

t

~

~

0000. 0b
^_

0N

~ ~

.

v
S

co co

e"
o r

o.

00
e.

_

E^

C-C-

~

b _
0d0

N
.

>

_

Q

o

3Qs=

O O @O 'G,=;;

~
*

e 3 3 X~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

U

<

a

>

O

SO ^

-

-

Q E g eh m tm t0 e - w g~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
_

X

X

X

Pz

X

C;

X

X

o~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

C-n'iQ*

Annex B8
Page 2 of 2
Latvia

Statement of IFC's
Held and Disbursed Portfolio
as of January 31, 2002
(In US Dollars Millions)

Held
FY Approval Company
1996 VikaWood
Total Portfolio:

Disbursed

Loan Equity Quasi Partic
0.8
0
0
0
0.8

0

0

0

Approvals Pending Commitment
Loan Equity Quasi Partic
2001 Linstow Retail
17
0
8 35
Total Pending Conmmitment:

17

0

8

35

Loan Equity Quasi Partic
0.8
0
0
0
0.8

0

0

0

CD

o

.

CL~~f

e

o

t

>SE

8

-E

,

9

.

C

<g

E

;

8u8

C n3

.-

=op

c



~~~Cd
*l
~~~~~ o

C:O

i

U~~ ~~~ E:,.

C*

S

07

eo~~~~~~~
itgEu~E=
P~~~~~~
o

i

teEE -0

m>

C'

-9
D

E

cu5

e@0
D*

B EQEg~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~c

0)
M
x

d) 04
C

0

0
0

cn
z

0

0
a

>

.0
c

Ln

0.

co
p

= 1-0
Q.
0

"M o

0
U

cqs
00

Ca

:3

0
0. -=
u
-S

El

cu

0

o

>
u

Ca,
0
u

cts

== A t

0.

-0

:

-lu

u

4)

8.

0

z

0

0

cts

0,

0

4.)

S

9

co

-m

"
.0
=9;

CJ 42

0" 8

Ca
w

Ca .K

.2
"t
cts

4

0
v

"O 42

15

415

t)

-Z
0
t

0

.0

Oo
m

0

.49

0

0

CO

a)U

C3
C)
>

0
%=

0

=6
-0

'Z

go

O

8 C, 2

>

CL

72

oo
,2

0

Z

0

Ca
.4

to

m

laV t)A
W)0
U) , E ,
4)

0
-

L4

C.i xs -o .5
0

-0 ":J2

Cd

P.

12

0

0

eq

CD

0>

41

4.

0

2

c0

m

0

75 Do

0

0 0 0

co
4.

Cd

o

u

0

96,

0

I=
'd

I=
Cd

0.
.

0

0
0

40.

-02
Ei

0

0.

00

v

C's

gL)

C>
El) -4

L
Ca

N

-Z

a)
100

P
4.

O"

0

0

L)

'O

4 O
L

u

e -2
M

, , 'O
,

10
lu

co

z

0

0

A

'4.

-=

0

cts

0

10

VI
Cd

rn

-tV

00 OW
Id

bo

-O

40.

o

EL

IL)

0

0

0

A

C
0

_O

C

0_ -_

< CD~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
0

,.

0

"o~~~~~~~~~~0

;:

E

E

U,~~~~~~~~~~~~~~(

U ', S

a

'S

s

ma

g E

4*.

0

X

;Y

d~~C

4)0
td_M.u

_.S

~~

,4,2

2SCu E

X1

t
-

0
0

Eto

7***0

0

~~ ..0

v~~~~~~~~~~~~~U,*

2

C0

;;

=

_

0

b

0

-

0
0

0

E

0~~

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ ~~~M.2

W

C.

-6b
C

0

00

'o 0
Cd

m

41

lo

-0 0
0

0

4

4.

to g

P.

I=

On

0
.,?,4
0 M

00

72

-0

(U

00

AP

W
0

0

93
0
0

04,

t

r. g

0 , -S

I

-V

t

04

o 00

43
MU
0

E-4

0

(L)

0 r/I 1 .4

cts

0

4)

00

C..

4)

0

M

10:1MR:

-1:4 eq --lo

0 '"m

o
o

K

= -

0

ti 0. 1

>0

-0

ou
COCSO

W

o ou
0
-zo
Ei
4g ! 0
-0

0

= 4)
4)
0 co

uu
'1 -

1-4

00
U0
In

W
bp
OD

Ca
0

5

to,

=s
0 W

I>D
0 0

4.

C,

0-=

0

cn
cn

0

=

u

0-~~~~~~T

0

4)

t

0~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~E0

to

a

-z~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~-

a~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~N
E4

Eo

r

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~m-

44

4.040

40

0

00

400000

Z0

-a~0

I

o~~~ 00

0

0
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

~ 0~~~~~
0a

115

ZO~~~~~~~~~~~)4

E
-

a~~~~~~~~~~~a

~ ~ ~

on

a0

96'W
0

0

U

S
CL

a~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~C
a

-a

-

E

CA

lu

44

5~~~~~

-~~~~~~~~~~~C

Al~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~-

a

5
.2 a

4)

'4

4)

45

03

0.-

.

4)

44~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

0

a.4

a

.44
4)~~~

a

a~~~~~~~~~~~o

44~~~~~~~~~~
44~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

o.ce

Annex B 11
Page 1 of 1
Latvia CAS Consultations with Civil Society
In the course of preparing the CAS, regular consultations took place with govemment and
civil society representatives of Latvia. Aimed at engaging a wide spectrum of interested parties,
views and feedback were sought from NGOs, professional and business associations, think-tanks
and academic research institutions, trade unions and others.
This dialogue was a useful source of information for civil society, the govemment and
the Bank. A diverse set of instruments was used to collect feedback, including (i) the quantitative
research of a Client Survey which was carried out in June 2001, (ii) a more focused web survey
launched from the Riga Office's web page in September, and (iii) a set of discussions with civil
society which started in July and continued through November. In the Client Survey respondents
viewed their experience with the Bank staff as most effective, including staffs honesty in
dealings with the client; knowledge about intemational best practices in their field and technical
competence; provision of explanations and assistance with Bank procedures and reliability in
delivering on commitments. The survey also indicated that the Bank is considered least effective
in developing effective management systems, building capacity at the community level, and
promoting private involvement in effective delivery of public services. The result of the first
consultation was a listing of problems and solutions, which served as a basis for the first draft of
the CAS. This process continued in other meetings until end-November generating the following
comments made by civil society representatives:
(i)
Enforcement of the Information Openness Law was requested by the NGO Center,
(ii)
Bank survey on knowledge development needs; industrial sector study and study on
development of GDP structure was suggested by the Institute of Economy;
(iii)
A project on the formation of further development / excellence or doctoral study
centers at five leading universities of Latvia was suggested by Chair of Rectors
Council ofLatvian Universities,
(iv)
Need to rely more on the services of the local experts and domestic studies in the
Bank projects was required by the NationalDoctorsAssociation,
(v)
Survey on corruption of political elite was suggested by the local TI chapter Delna,
which also requested Bank's assistance in assessment of legislative process, law
development and supervision of enforcement, public information on prevention of
corruption and development of ethical code of politicians;
(vi)
BankWatch local chapter (EnvironmentalProtectionClub & Green Freedom) asked
for assessment of the SAL '97 and PSAL effects on the social sectors;
(vii)
Trade Unions asked for a study on elimination of shadow economy related to pay
system reform, introducing minimum wage reporting and accounting mechanism;
(viii) Bank study on development of labor market in the context of overall economic
development projections was suggested by the Education Workers Trade Union;
(ix)
Save the Children brought to attention children's rights issues suggesting a complex
system for implementation of the UN recommendations;
(x)
Green party asked the Bank to continue with work in the area of housing policy,
while Federationof Pensioners suggested to conduct a survey among the pensioners
on financing for housing through pension mortgaging under the Housing Project;
(xi)
Study of education expenditure structure was suggested by the Highest Education
Counciland Business High School etc.
In addition to government officials' participation in preparatory meetings, the Cabinet
discussed drafts of the CAS twice, and changes that it proposed are reflected in the final CAS.
Previous versions of the CAS have been publicly available on the Riga Office's web page, and it
is intended that the final CAS will be shared with the general public in the country.

Annex B12
Page I of 2
Relations between Latvia and the European Union
Negotiations
The Europe Agreement provides an effective framework for Latvia to prepare for EU
membership. Following the Helsinki European Council decision of December 1999, official
accession negotiations with Latvia started in February 2000. To date 29 chapters have been
opened for negotiations, and 23 chapters have been provisionally closed.
Community Aid
The Accession Partnership continues to provide the single framework through which the priority
areas for further work are identified regarding 'progress to be made by Latvia towards
membership of the European Union, the fnancial means available to implement these priorities
and the conditions which will apply to that assistance. The financial assistance to Latvia is
provided through three main instruments: Phare, ISPA and SAPARD.
Management of EU Funds
On November 6, 2001 the Cabinet of Ministers agreed to merge the Secretariat for Minister for
Special Assignment for Cooperation with Intemational Financial Agencies and institutions
currently dealing with regional policy issues with the structure of the Ministry of Finance. This
organizational change, effective on January 1, 2002, will strengthen the govemment's capacity in
dealing with regional policy issues. Until accession the Ministry of Finance will be responsible
for the management of EU pre-structural funds as well as other foreign assistance. After EU
accession the Ministry of Finance will have the managing authority for the EU Structural Funds.
A. Phare
Phare remains the main instrument providing financial assistance to the implementation of
Latvia's pre-accession strategy. The Phare 2000 program implementation started recently after
the signing of the Financial Memorandum in December 2000. Under this program an amount of
EURO 34.76 million was committed to assist Latvia in its efforts to address the following short
and medium-term Accession Partnership priorities: Promotion of integration of society, National
Quality Assurance Project, Strengthening Fishery administration to meet the requirements of the
Common Fisheries Policy, Development of Integrate Border Management and Infrastructure,
Development and Implementation of drug control and drug prevention master plan, Public
Expenditure Management Project; Upgrade the Latvian Statistical System in accordance with EU
requirements. Under Economic and Social Cohesion: Development of Institutional and
Administrative Capacity for Regional Development in Latvia. Target regions are Latgale and
Zemgale.
As for Phare 2001 Latvia's allocation is EURO 31.4 million. The submitted projects cover the
areas of social integration, tax and customs administration, agriculture, prevention and combating
of organized crime, asylum and migration system management, maritime safety, strengthening bipartite social dialogue, development of civil society, development of customs and sanitary order
inspection infrastructure in seaports and on railroad, as well as investment in economic and social
cohesion. The Financial Memorandum for Phare 2001 was signed in November 2001.
Programming capacities have been strengthened through the strategic leadership of working
group composed by Ministry of Finance, Secretariat of Minister for Special Assignment of Cooperation with Intemational Financial Agencies, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, European
Integration Bureau in preparation of Phare 2001. More attention is paid to the identification of
priorities and definition of measures to be implemented under priorities. Evaluation of the project

Annex B12
Page 2 of 2
proposals submitted form line ministries has improved. The approach of strategic identification
of program priorities will be followed also during Phare 2002 preparation.
B. ISPA
The Memorandum of understanding on the implementation of ISPA was signed between the
European Commission and Latvia in December 2000. The memorandum enables Latvia to enter
into agreements and launch the implementation of investment and technical assistance projects,
with the co-financing of ISPA, in the environment and transport sectors. The ISPA allocation for
Latvia is between EURO 36.4 and 57.2 million per year to be equally shared by the transport and
the environment sectors. The European Commission has so far approved seven environment
projects (e.g. Riga - Development of the Water Services; Jelgava, Development of the Water
Services; Ventspils - Development of the Water Supply) and five transport infrastructure projects
(e.g. Via Baltica Road: Guaja-Lilaste, Access Road to Riga Airport, Rezekne Rail reception yard,
Replacement of track tumnouts East-West links) to which EURO 81 million have been extended
from ISPA funds, while Latvia's co-financing for the projects will be EURO 44.9 million. In
order to implement the projects, a financial memorandum has been agreed for each project. The
projects have to be pre-financed by Latvian authorities or companies and will be repaid from 47
to 75 percent by ISPA. The implementation of the first project in Latvia, which involves the
improvement of the Via Baltica highway, got under way in May 2001, and was completed in
November 2001, being, the first accomplished ISPA project in the EU candidate countries.
C. SAPARD
Latvia Rural Development Plan got a favorable opinion in the STAR Committee (EC
Management Committee on agricultural structures and rural development) in September 2000.
The Commission approved the plan in October 2000. The plan is based on three priorities,
namely the development of sustainable agriculture, integrated rural development, and
improvement of the environment. The average annual expenditure will amount to EURO 54.8
million during the period 2000 to 2006. The annual SAPARD contribution is EURO 22.2 million
(at 2000 prices)
The SAPARD Multi-annual Financing Agreement between the European Commission and Latvia
was signed in Brussels in January 2001. The Annual Financing Agreement was signed in March
2001. The Saeima adopted the law "On the Multi-annual Financial Agreement between the
Republic of Latvia and the Commission of the European Community of behalf of the European
Community" in March 2001. The Rural Support Service is in place to administrate SAPARD
financial Aid. The first SAPARD project was submitted for evaluation in December 2001 and the
first contract was signed in January 2002.
Co-financing with IFIs
SME Finance Facility, a Phare multi-country program with the EBRD and the Council of Europe
and KfW provides financial means to commercial banks for on-lending to SMEs. At present, two
projects are operational in Latvia. For ISPA, all the environmental projects approved in 2000 are
co-financed with IFIs: 2 projects with EIB (Riga and Ventspils Water), 2 projects with NEFCO
(Jelgava and Ventspils Water), I project with EBRD (Riga Water) and 1 project with NIB
(Jelgava Water). In the transport sector, EIB and EBRD finance parallel projects.

ZoJ

gulsnOH

SuO!su*d

J
m .8 r,

H H

zz4,
U o 70
r 'E -4 I if

<

78 OOU1nS!SSV
[BROS

2
-o

A4

o

T

r

J
V

uopompEl

00

0
J.

t< 1

tglvaH

.2S

CO,

.0

All

10
J Z

0

e
0, EZ .8 O
v :3

jUaLUMIAUg

-4

Z

7g

I?
airLlarLqs"til

>

"

I

9."i

=

I

.

JA
<

LU
I 11

0

d

M

P.
Z.2

..Iv
1-dolOAOG jun'd

8,

X3

juaudoloAaa
juuo!8Mvdt

10,

il

di

ri A

0

t
i Z

'Q,

a

'2
11

X-1

u

I

I

<

A

:5 S

to

I

Q
XiodouoLu
ioi

in .2

Rug
aond-- puv

Z
.0

K1

co

-o"

.4

2c
c
awoJaS imbaS *!Iqnd

43
IL .2

-8

.51
I

ulmsAs mo-um

J

L I

Q

.2
<

d

j

r

to

C-F,
gulpniou!)
3POJ '92M
/MBLUIID
jUaUX2AUj

J
J.

X4

I?

O"gw
1-uodLuoo -uoa

S

cn

dn-0 31-El pliotA

(rsaa/ai3AcrsVdVS
'-4d)
flg

'ViSl

&,(uoajaDo

IBRD 30692

z

A

-j

5

-

'

0 C

'

0

i~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

co4

? 7~~~~~~~~Z
0

X~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ X
Q,~~~~~~~~~~ANAY20

~~E;;;Er
;

i

v

00 ; wS

; C

o)

r

k~~~~JALARY200

