Public Disclosure Authorized

Document of

The World Bank
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Public Disclosure Authorized

Report No.: 23675 UZ

MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENT
OF
THE INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND
DEVELOPMENT
THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION

Public Disclosure Authorized

AND
THE INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION
TO
THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS
ONA
COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY

Public Disclosure Authorized

FOR
THE REPUBLIC OF UZBEKISTAN
February 22, 2002
Central Asia Country Unit
Europe and Central Asia Region

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the
performance of their official duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without World
Bank authorization.

Last CAS Discussion: March 10, 1998
[SD98-14(IFC/SD98-7)]
Currency Equivalent
(Exchange Rate effective February 1, 2002)
Currency Unit = Sum

US$1.00 = Sum 693.12 (official exchange rate)
US$ 1.00 = Sum 695.55 (commercial bank rate)
US$1.00 = Sum 1,550.00 (curb market rate)
Weights and Measures
Metric system
Fiscal Year
January 1 - December 31

IBRD
Vice President: Johannes F. Linn
Country Director: Dennis de Tray
Task Team: Ritu Anand
Kazuko Ogawa
David Pearce

'Report No 17376-UZ.

IFC
Assaad J. Jabre
Khosrow Zamani
Gorton de Mond
Eriko Ishikawa

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS
AsDB
ASBP
CAS
CIS
COM
CPI
EBRD
ECA
EU
EU-TACIS
ESW
FBS
FSU
GDP
GEF
GNFS
GS
GOU
GNI
GTZ
IBRD
-ICWC
IDA
IFC
IFI
ILO
IMF
JBIC
JICA
KfW
LSA
MIGA
NEAP
ODA
PRSP
UNDP
USAID
WEMP

Asian Development Bank
Aral Sea Basin Program
Country Assistance Strategy
Commonwealth of Independent States
Cabinet of Ministers
Consumer Price Index
European Bank for Reconstruction and Development
Europe and Central Asia
European Union
European Union - Technical Assistance for the
Commonwealth of Independent States
Economic and Sector Work
Family Budget Survey
Former Soviet Union
Gross Domestic Product
Global Environment Fund
Goods and Non-factor Services
Goods and Services
Government of Uzbekistan
Gross National Income
Gesellschaft fur Technische Zusammenarbeit
International Bank for Reconstruction and
Development
Interstate Commission for Water Coordination
International Development Association
International Finance Corporation
International Financial Institution
International Labor Organization
Intemational Monetary Fund
Japan Bank for International Cooperation
Japan International Cooperation Agency
Kreditanstalt fur Wiederaufbau
Living Standards Assessment
Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency
National Environmental Action Plan
Official Development Assistance
Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper
United Nations Development Programme
United States Agency for International Development
Water and Environmental Management Project

This CAS was produced by a team that included: Kiyoshi Kodera, Dennis de Tray, Samuel Otoo, Kadir T.
Yurukoglu, Ritu Anand, Kazuko Ogawa, Andriy Storozhuk, and David Pearce; and, in addition, Tunc
Uyanik, Gerhard Botha, Mark Lundell, Janis Bernstein, Motoo Konishi, Ede Ijjasz-Vasquez, Raghuveer
Sharma, Mansoora Rashid, John Langenbrunner, Jean-Charles Crochet, Masood Ahmad, Reema Nayar, and
from IFC, Gorton de Mond and Eriko Ishikawa. Other members of the Bank Group-wide Uzbekistan
Country Team also made valuable contributions throughout the process.

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the
perforrnance of their official duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without
World Bank authorization.

REPUBLIC OF UZBEKISTAN
COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
TABLE OF CONTENTS

I

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY ............................
Recent Economic Developments .........................................
Lessons from Past Experience .........................................

i
ii

FY02-04 Country Assistance Program ............................
Risks ....................................

iii
. iv

for Board Discussion ......................................

iv

Issues

I.

COUNTRY CONTEXT ...............

1

A.

INTRODUCTION .......................................

B.

KEY ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENTS .......................................
POVERTY AND SOCIAL OUTCOMES .......................................
ENVIRONMENT AND WATER RESOURCES ......................................
GOVERNANCE ......................................
MACROECONOMIC PROSPECTS ......................................

C.

D.
E.

F.

1

2
9
14
16
18

II.

DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY AND PROGRAM ........................ 21

III.

LESSONS FROM PAST EXPERIENCE ......................................... 26

IV.

FY02-04 COUNTRY ASSISTANCE PROGRAM

V.

CR.EDITWORTHINESS AND RISKS

VI.

CAS PARTICIPATORY AND CONSULTATION PROCESS ..... 39

..
.........

. 29
37

LIST OF TABLES
Table 1:
Table 2:
Table 3:
Table 4:
Table 5:

Key Indicators
Low Case Macroeconomic Scenario
Base Case Macroeconomic Scenario
Low Case Lending and Non-lending Program, FY02-04
Performance Indicators

LIST OF BOXES
Box
Box
Box
Box
Box
Box
Box

1:
2:
3:
4:
5:
6:
7:

Gender in Uzbekistan
HIV/AIDS in Uzbekistan
Labor Standards in Uzbekistan
Environmental Costs of Inadequate Water Management
Data Availability and Transparency in Uzbekistan
Triggers for Low Case Lending Program
Triggers for Base Case Lending Program

LIST OF ANNEXES
Annex
Annex
Annex
Annex
Annex
Annex
Annex
Annex
Annex
Annex
Annex
Annex
Annex

1 (A2):
2 (B2):
3 (B3):
4 (B3):
5 (B4):
6 (B5):
7 (B6):
8 (B7):
9 (B8):
10 (B8):
11 (B9):
12 (B 10):
13:

Annex 14:
Annex 15:

Country at a Glance
Selected Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
IBRD/IDA Program Summary
IFC and MIGA Program Summary
Summary of Non-lending Services
Social Development Indicators
Key Economic Indicators
Key Exposure Indicators
Operations Portfolio - IBRD/IDA and Grants
Statement of IFC's Held and Disbursed Portfolio
Country Program Matrix
Summary of Development Priorities
Aral Sea Basin Program; and Water and Environment Management
Project
Improving Portfolio Performance: Country Portfolio Performance
Reviews
Improving the Environment for Private Sector Development

ATTACHMENT
Map of Uzbekistan (IBRD 28006R2)

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
1.
The FY02-04 CAS seeks to reconcile several difficult strategic, policy, and
operational considerations. These include:
* Uzbekistan's current unsatisfactory overall macroeconomic framework and its
uneven structural reform performance since end- 1996;
* the recent deterioration in its creditworthiness;
* the still uncertain outlook for decisive policy change in the near term, despite
recently improved prospects for a program of financial cooperation with the IMF;
* the lessons learned from experience with the last CAS, whose operational results
were uneven and policy impact less than fully satisfactory;
* the country's large population and economy, its strategic location, and its economic
importance regionally within Central Asia; and
* the government's interest in expanding cooperation with the World Bank Group.
Recent Economic Developments
2.
Following the dissolution of the Soviet Union, Uzbekistan had the smallest decline
in output of all the CIS countries according to official data owing, in part, to successful
reorientation of its main exports (cotton and gold) directly to international markets,
achievement of energy and food-grain self-sufficiency, and an initially low level of
industrialization. Two years after embarking upon a comprehensive macroeconomic
stabilization and structural reform program in late 1994, progress in liberalizing the foreign
exchange and trade regime was reversed when, in early 1997, a system of multiple
exchange rates and restrictions on current account transactions was introduced, with the
aim of promoting import-substituting industries and conserving foreign exchange reserves.
3.
While recent changes in the foreign exchange regime may presage a welcome shift
in these policies, substantial liberalization of access to foreign exchange is still required to
achieve current account convertibility. Significant distortions in foreign exchange
allocation remain, reflected in a reduced but still large difference between the official and
curb market exchange rates. Structural reforms have also been limited, despite several
government resolutions, and failed to address adequately fundamental distortions in the
incentive structure and resource allocation rigidities, especially in agriculture. With formal
private sector activities unable to flourish in this environment and international standards
of governance yet to take firm hold, business development in general and foreign direct
investment in particular remain significantly below their potential, given Uzbekistan's
human and natural resource base and its prospects as a regional economic hub.
4.
The uneven economic performance has led to a deteriorating social outcome and
considerable geographic disparity in income and well-being. Preliminary evidence
suggests that Uzbekistan may be facing a significant poverty problem. Using an absolute
poverty line, the general poverty headcount is estimated at around 31 percent of the
population. Moreover, the levels and deteriorating trends of some health and education

Page ii

Uzbekistan Country Assistance Strategy

indicators are of concern. There is also considerable regional variation in poverty and
social indicators: rural areas, especially in western regions at the tail-end of irrigation
command areas with insufficient or unreliable access to water, are much worse off and
more vulnerable than those elsewhere in the country. The government is committed to
fight poverty and has undertaken to formulate its approach in a Poverty Reduction Strategy
Paper (PRSP).
5.
In 2001, exogenous factors such as the worldwide economic slowdown and
Uzbekistan's proximity to recent events in Afghanistan have negatively affected its
economic performance and outlook. The worldwide economic slowdown has dampened
demand for Uzbekistan's exports and depressed international commodity prices, with the
price of cotton fiber, accounting for a third of Uzbekistan's merchandise export earnings
over the past three years, having declined about 35 percent. The government needs to
strengthen, broaden, and accelerate its reform program to counter these shocks and to
realize its economic growth potential. The recent agreement with the IMF on a six-month
Staff Monitored Program (SMP), which provides inter alia for the tightening of fiscal and
monetary policies, the achievement of current account convertibility later this year, and the
gradual reform of the agricultural state order system, is a welcome step in this direction.
Lessonsfrom PastExperience
6.
The 1998 CAS, addressing four key policy challenges where the government's
reform agenda and the Bank's development priorities appeared to converge, proposed a
Base Case lending program comprising ten operations totaling US$300-350 million and a
modest program of non-lending activities, including three formal studies. The results, in
terms of lending, non-lending activities and portfolio perfor-mance, were uneven and the
outcome, in terms of policy impact, was less than fully satisfactory. Five loans totaling
US$136 million were approved; two formal studies completed; and, portfolio performance
was problematic, with three investment projects rated unsatisfactory at various points
during the period. Several important lessons emerged from this experience, which have
been factored into the design of the FY02-04 CAS. They include: (a) to select only
projects for which there is genuine, broad-based ownership, empowered by the political
will required to implement the proposed reforms; (b) to acknowledge explicitly that the
amount of policy reform achievable within the scope or timetable of a single project may
be limited; (c) to recognize that building the understanding needed to implement even
limited reforms may take a long time; and (d), to accept that government decision making
may take longer than in other countries, given complex internal institutional procedures
and relationships.
7.
As for IFC, the 1998 CAS assumed an improving private sector business
environment and thus an increase in demand for IFC lending and investment.
Unfortunately, neither assumption materialized and IFC's total investment portfolio totals
only US$36 million, of which US$14.2 million has been disbursed. Most of the
undisbursed portfolio comprises credit lines to local banks for on-lending to SMEs.
Projects under implementation are generally performing well, although delays in accessing
foreign exchange created problems in at least one project. IFC has devoted substantial
resources to trying to help develop the private sector and to technical assistance for project

Page iii

Uzbekistan Country Assistance Strategy

identification as well as capacity building in the financial sector. Despite these efforts, it
has been difficult to identify bankable projects and attract foreign investors.

FY02-04 Country Assistance Program
8.
Against this background, and overall goal of improving living standards and
alleviating poverty in Uzbekistan, the key objectives of the FY02-04 CAS are: (a) to
improve the policy framework for liberalization of the foreign exchange and trade regime,
improved governance and transparency; (b) to strengthen the environment for private
sector development, including foreign direct investment; (c) to enhance the efficiency of
resource allocation and use in social infrastructure and services; and (d) to improve the
maintenance and effectiveness of the country's extensive irrigation and drainage
infrastructure. It envisages two lending scenarios: a Low Case, which assumes continued
gradual implementation of structural reforms and no further deterioration in the
macroeconomic framework; and a Base Case, which assumes, and would be triggered by,
accelerated and decisive macroeconomic and structural reforms in five key areas.
9.
The Low Case, totaling US$150 million, comprises five operations with crucial
environmental, social, and disaster mitigation and/or prevention goals, whose effectiveness
and impact are not dependent on the currently unsatisfactory foreign exchange and trade
regime. Lending will be complemented by non-lending activities centered around selected
fiduciary economic and sector studies (e.g. Country Procurement Assessment, Public
Financial Accountability, Anti-corruption Diagnosis), completion of the ongoing Living
Standards Assessment, and a Country Economic Memorandum and Energy Sector Review.
Progress during FY02-03 would be evaluated against specific monitoring indicators, with
triggers for continued lending in FY04 and beyond to be confirmed by mid-CY03.
10.
If the government were to adopt an accelerated program of macroeconomic and
structural reforms, including decisive liberalization of the current highly distorted foreign
exchange, trade, and agricultural policy regimes, this could trigger a larger program of
financial and technical assistance: a Base Case totaling US$300-350 million. Policy
actions in five key areas (foreign exchange regime, private and financial sector
development, agriculture, poverty alleviation including initial preparation of a PRSP, and
public governance and transparency) would be required to achieve Base Case lending - in
addition to the establishment and maintenance of a sound macroeconomic framework; and,
continued Base Case lending would be subject to maintenance of a sound macroeconomic
framework, satisfactory implementation of measures in the five areas noted above, and an
overall judgment about the pace, depth and scope of the program of structural reforms.
Although the government has requested budgetary and balance of payments financing in
support of its latest plan to achieve current account convertibility by mid-2002, agreed in
the SMP recently agreed with the IMF, the Base Case as now defined does not provide for
adjustment lending. If the need arises and if the government establishes a program and
track record of credible macroeconomic and structural reforms supported by an IMF
financial arrangement, management would return to Executive Directors with a CAS
Update outlining the government's new program and a recommended strategic response.

Page iv

Uzbekistan Country Assistance Strategy

11.
IFC's program would complement Bank activities to help improve the policy
framework for private sector investment and trade through targeted technical assistance,
including through an SME survey now underway under the new Swiss-financed Central
Asia Private Enterprise Partnership (PEP) program. IFC will also continue its capacitybuilding support for the financial sector. If the business environment improves and if the
privatization of banks, infrastructure, and large state enterprises accelerates, it would
expect to provide both technical and financial support. IFC will also continue to target
lending to SMEs and micro-enterprises through local banks, as well as possible direct
lending to larger projects that may be viable under prevailing business conditions.
12.
IDA Eligibility. Owing both to its per capita GNI level - below the IDA
operational cut-off level for several years - and deteriorated creditworthiness, Uzbekistan,
hitherto an IBRD-only borrower, is eligible to access IDA resources. An IDA Eligibility
Paper for Uzbekistan was distributed to Executive Directors on November 20, 2001.
Accordingly, planned FY02-04 lending will be financed equally from IBRD and IDA
resources. Meanwhile, the authorities will soon start preparing an interim Poverty
Reduction Strategy Paper (I-PRSP), for presentation by December 2002, with a full PRSP
to follow during 2003-04.
Risks
13.
Despite relatively comfortable foreign exchange reserves, Uzbekistan faces
important short- and medium-term risks. These include: its external vulnerability to world
commodity price fluctuations, especially cotton and gold, and interest rates, owing to its
recent dependence on commercial bank borrowing; the potential fiscal impact of stateowned enterprise defaults on government guaranteed loans; and, the credibility of its
reform program, as perceived by foreign investors. These risks would be mitigated, as far
as the Bank and the FY02-04 CAS are concerned, by limiting new lending to US$150
million in the Low Case and US$300-350 million in the Base Case, financed equally by
IBRD and IDA.
Issues for Board Discussion:
14.

Executive Directors may wish to address the following questions:
*

Are the strategic priorities outlined in the CAS appropriate?

*

Is the design of the CAS, including the recommended Low and Base Case
triggers and planned evaluation of performance in mid-CY03, appropriate?

*

Are the size and content of the proposed lending and non-lending programs
proportionate to the country's structural reform performance and prospects, and
with the need for Bank/IDA financing?

*

Is IFC's current emphasis on SME and micro-enterprise projects and technical
assistance to develop the private sector, in preparation for full economic
transformation, the appropriate strategy?

MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENT
OF
THE INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND
DEVELOPMENT
THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION
AND THE INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION
TO THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS ON A
COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
FOR THE REPUBLIC OF UZBEKISTAN

I.
A.

COUNTRY CONTEXT

Introduction

1.
This is the World Bank's third Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) for Uzbekistan.
The first (Report No. 14019-UZ, dated March 3, 1995), covering FY96-98, was discussed
by Executive Directors in March, 1995, and the second (Report No. 17376-UZ dated
February 17, 1998), covering FY98-00, in March 1998. An outline of this CAS was
discussed with the government in July and October, 2000; and, the draft CAS itself was
discussed in mid-January, mid-March, July and September, 2001. Consultation with civil
society groups took place in April, 2001.
2.
Background. Of the 15 newly independent states that emerged from the breakup
of the Soviet Union in 1991, Uzbekistan is the third largest in terms of population (about
25 million people) and the fourth largest in land area (447,000 square kilometers).
Strategically located in Central Asia, at the crossroads of the ancient Silk Road between
China and Europe, the area that is now Uzbekistan was for centuries one of the cradles of
world civilization. Uzbekistan is rich in natural resources such as coal, copper, gold,
natural gas, oil, silver, and uranium, and, with an educated population and a young and
growing labor force, it has significant economic potential. Before and especially during
the Soviet period, Uzbekistan was developed as a leading center for cotton production,
exploiting the resources of the Amu Darya and Syr Darya rivers for irrigation. Primary
commodities, including cotton fiber, still account for about 90 percent of merchandise
exports, with cotton alone accounting for 30 percent. Despite the difficult terrain (60
percent is desert, steppe, or semi-arid land and only 10 percent is cultivated), agriculture
accounts for about 30 percent of GDP and employs about 40 percent of the labor force.
Uzbekistan's 2000 GNI per capita (World Bank Atlas method) is estimated at US$620,
placing it among low-income economies.
3.
Social Outcomes. This per capita figure masks a deteriorating social outcome and
considerable geographic disparity in income and well-being. Initial evidence from an
ongoing Living Standards Assessment (LSA) suggests that Uzbekistan may face a

Page 2

Uzbekistan Country Assistance Strategy

significant poverty problem. Using an absolute poverty line, the general poverty
headcount is estimated at around 31 percent of the population 2 . Moreover, the levels and
deteriorating trends of some health and education indicators are of concern. There is also
considerable regional variation in poverty and social indicators. For example, rural areas,
especially in western regions such as Karakalpakstan and Khorezm at the tail-end of
irrigation command areas with insufficient or unreliable access to water, are much worse
off and more vulnerable than those elsewhere in the country. These regions also suffer
from serious environmental degradation, the most visible manifestation of which is the
Aral Sea environmental disaster. Severe water and soil salinity and serious deterioration
in the irrigation and drainage infrastructure built during the Soviet period afflict the
agriculture sector.
4.
Political Context. Islam Karimov, the country's president since independence in
1991, was re-elected for another five-year term in January 2000 with 92 percent of the
votes. Four political parties are represented in the unicameral parliament, but the
legislature is still relatively weak. A very recent national referendum endorsed two
proposed amendments to the constitution: to establish a bicameral legislature following
the next general election due in 2004; and, to extend the presidential term to seven years.
The authorities attach the highest priority to maintaining economic, social and political
stability, based on their view that such stability is a necessary condition for full
employment, economic growth, and, in turn, poverty alleviation. This is the principal
stated reason for their gradual, step-by-step approach to structural reforms. The
govemment has become concemed, especially since 1999, about threats to the country's
stability posed by armed opposition groups. These concems have led to tightened
security, including physical barriers to the movement of commodities and people among
otherwise integrated economies of the region.
B.

Key Economic Developments

5.
Macroeconomic Developments. Following the dissolution of the Soviet Union,
Uzbekistan had the smallest output decline of all the CIS countries according to official
data owing, in part, to successful reorientation of its main exports (cotton and gold)
directly to intemational markets, to the achievement of energy self-sufficiency, and its
initially low level of industrialization. Like other Central Asian countries, Uzbekistan
faced a fiscal shock at independence with the loss of Union transfers, and inadequate
fiscal adjustment resulted in large budget deficits and hyperinflation during 1992-94. In
late 1994, the government embarked upon a comprehensive macroeconomic stabilization
and structural reform program, supported by the IMF and the Bank. Inflation was
brought down sharply and growth resumed in 1996 for the first time since independence.
6.
However, during the last quarter of 1996, responding to emerging balance of
payment pressures and a poor cotton harvest, progress made in liberalizing the exchange
and trade regime was reversed, fiscal and monetary policies were relaxed, and the IMF
program was suspended. In early 1997, a system of multiple exchange rates, together
When household consumption is adjusted for economies of scale, the estimated headcount ratio is about
24 percent.
2

Page 3

Uzbekistan Country Assistance Strategy

with restrictions on current account transactions, was formally introduced with the aim of
promoting import substituting industries, protecting foreign exchange reserves, restricting
"low quality" consumer goods, and subsidizing basic food imports; and, in subsequent
years, import substitution policies, combined with exchange and trade restrictions, were
intensified. An increasingly overvalued official exchange rate, combined with higher
foreign exchange surrender requirements, placed a rising tax on exports in order to
subsidize imports of capital and priority consumer goods. Tight administrative
restrictions on imports and access to foreign exchange were maintained in order to
protect the domestic industrial sector from external competition. Financial policies have
also been used to promote priority industries. While the general government budget
deficit has been kept under control, credit policy has been relatively expansive, with
negative real interest rates prevailing and directed credit going to selected enterprises.
7.
The import-substituting industrialization strategy initially permitted Uzbekistan to
achieve modest economic growth and employment generation while keeping inflation at
moderate levels (see Table 1)3. However, by 2000, the unsustainability of such a policy
course and the misallocation costs associated with it were becoming increasingly clear.
Table 1: Key Indicators
(in US$ million, unless indicated otherwise)
Item

1996

1997

1998

1999

2000

2001
est.
2,755
2,479
276
-33
-113
76
423
682
1,078
27
3.8
11,204
7,338
540
320

Merchandise exports
3,534
3,695
3,048
2,790
2,935
Merchandise imports
4,240
3,767
2,938
2,587
2,441
494
Merchandise trade balance
-706
-72
110
203
Current account balance
-980
-584
-103
-164
184
Increase in reserves (gross)
33
-480
1
74
31
Foreign direct investment (net)
90
167
140
121
75
Official exchange rate (average) sums/US$
40
66
95
125
237
..
74
107
160
450
Commercial exchange rate (average) sums/US$
Curb market exchange rate (average) sums/US$
59
147
216
516
767
Inflation (percent) CPI end period a'
64
50
26
26
28
4.0
1.7
2.5
4.3
4.4
GDP growth (percent)Wa
13,949
14,745
14,989
17,079
13,502
GDP (at the official exchange rate)
GDP (at the indicative exchange rate)
13,949
10,706
10,716
8,669
7,666
Atlas GNI per capita (US$)i
1,010
1,010
870
720
620
Atlas GNI per capita (US$, at the indicative
620
490
480
410
360
exchange rate) cJ
Debt outstanding and disbursed d'
2,389
2,778
3,221
4,737
4,344
4,533
Debt/GDP (percent, at the official exchange rate)
17
19
21
28
32
41
Debt/GDP (percent, at the indicative exchange
17
26
30
55
57
62
rate)
Debt/Exports GS (percent) d
61
69
94
151
127
140
Debt service/Exports GS (percent) e'
8
13
10
18
26
29
27
30
48
73
73
80
Debt service due next year/End-period gross
international reserves (percent)
Source: Uzbek authorities, and Bank and Fund staff estimates.
' Based on official statistics.
bv From 1996 to 1999 a synthetic conversion factor is used, and in 2000 the official exchange rate is used.
" The indicative exchange rate is defined as a weighted average of the official (60 percent), commercial (10 percent), and curb market rate
(30 percent) rates.
dJ US$0.5 billion of debt to Russia, which is in dispute, and short-term debt, which at the end of 2000 stood at around US$0.3 billion, are
included in all debt ratios.
d GS

- Goods and services. includine income receints and workers' remittances.

3

growth.

However, there is evidence to suggest that official statistics underestimate inflation and overstate

Page 4

Uzbekistan Country Assistance Strategy

Despite large investments in industry and infrastructure, financed in large part by foreign
borrowing, industrial growth averaged only 1.3 percent during 1997-2000, consistently
behind the overall official GDP growth averaging 3.8 percent over the same period.
Underlying external and internal macro imbalances accumulated. The curb market
premium over the official exchange rate soared from around 120 percent in early 1997 to
480 percent by the end of 1999. By 2000, the value of merchandise exports had declined
25 percent compared to 1996/97, highlighting fundamental international competitiveness
and incentive problems facing Uzbek producers because of the distorted exchange rate
policies and lagging structural reforms. Imports were compressed even more severely
(by over 40 percent over the same period) through the use of a mix of foreign exchange
and trade restrictions to reduce the current account deficits. Capital outflows of over
US$300 million annually since 1997 clearly indicated sizable capital flight. As a result
of significant commercial borrowing, partly to finance the industrialization strategy,
external debt almost doubled during end-1996 and end-1999 and debt and debt service
indicators declined sharply.
8.
In early 2000, the government announced its intention to move forward with
ambitious reforms in a number of areas, including current account convertibility. In May
2000, it took a first step towards unification of the official and commercial bank
exchange rates, by devaluing the official exchange rate by about 55 percent in nominal
terms. In July 2000, a new over-the-counter rate closer to the curb market rate was
introduced and, over the next year and a half, gradually given more importance as a
larger share of transactions was shifted to it. The official exchange rate was devalued by
a further 200 percent until being unified with the over-the-counter rate in November
2001. In parallel, more transparent foreign exchange trading procedures were introduced,
some obstacles to access to foreign exchange for consumer goods importers were
eliminated, and limits on cash sales to individuals for foreign travel were increased. The
elimination of mandatory foreign exchange surrender requirements for exports of
manufactures by small and medium enterprises (SME), together with other SMEpromoting measures (see paragraph 16), have also improved the environment for small
businesses. Together with structural reforms in other sectors (see paragraphs 13-20),
these changes in the foreign exchange regime may presage a welcome shift in policy
priorities, from inward-looking industrialization towards export-oriented production.
9.
However, the scope of the reforms must be dramatically increased to address the
numerous remaining economic distortions and to achieve a sustainable macroeconomic
framework. The unified exchange rate has not been allowed to float and there remain
two legal exchange rates, with cash transactions by individuals taking place at a rate
significantly more depreciated than the unified exchange rate. While the curb market
premium over the official exchange rate fell from 380 percent in April 2000, when the
exchange rate unification process was being launched, to about 124 percent in February
2002, it still remains very high. Substantial liberalization of access to the foreign
exchange market is still required to achieve current account convertibility. Moreover, the
economic adjustment to these devaluations has been incomplete, with some officially
determined prices not yet reflecting the depreciated rate and some new price controls
introduced. For example, the cotton procurement price for the 2001 harvest set in late
2000 was not increased following the 2001 devaluations, leading to a further widening of

Page 5

Uzbekistan Country Assistance Strategy

the gap between the world market price of cotton and prices paid to farmers. The
weighted average price of electricity in dollar terms, despite several increases during
2000-01, also declined between 1997 and 2001, from 2.5 to 1.1 cents per kwh at the
official exchange rate and to 0.5 cents at the curb market rate, exacerbating financial
difficulties in the energy sector. Overall, the government's economic strategy still relies
on the implicit taxation of cotton and gold; and quasi-fiscal transfers, particularly through
energy pricing and subsidized directed credit, remain extensive.
10.
The overall business environment, despite some improvement for small and
export-oriented enterprises, is riddled with exemptions and ad hoc preferences and
remains difficult. The foreign trade regime, despite low weighted average tariffs, is also
constraining, with export bans on some commodities preserving relative price distortions
on the one hand, and burdensome import registration and certification procedures on the
other hand. As a result, foreign direct investment inflows have been steadily declining.
In 2000, they were less than a half their already low 1997 levels and amongst the lowest
in per capita terms of all transition economies. Privatization revenues, at 0.1 percent of
GDP during 1998-2001, are also well below potential.
11.
Uzbekistan's external debt, after doubling between 1996-1999, is now significant
(US$4.5 billion at end-2001) and repayment capacity has been adversely affected by the
policies pursued as well as external shocks. Given the high share of commercial
borrowing, the degree of concessionality is low, with the present value close to its face
value. Debt service has also increased, almost tripling (to US$0.9 billion) in 2001
compared to 1996. After some improvement in 2.000 due to a temporary export recovery,
the external debt-to-exports and external debt service ratios are estimated to have
increased again in 2001 (to 140 and 29 percent, respectively), as a result of a decline in
export value due to the fall in world market cotton prices and increased borrowing from
bilateral and commercial creditors. Nevertheless, gross international reserves which have
been maintained at a comfortable US$1.2-1.3 billion in recent years (around five months
of recorded imports of goods and services), have so far allowed timely debt servicing.
The fiscal burden of debt is also potentially high, with the ratio of public and publicly
guaranteed debt service to consolidated government revenues at almost 40 percent. Since
a large part of total debt has been incurred by state enterprises guaranteed by the
government, some of which may not be financially viable, there is a distinct possibility of
the debt service falling on the budget. The general government budget deficit, under
control in 1998-2001, may thus be masking an important source of vulnerability.
12.
In 2001, unfavorable exogenous factors such as the worldwide economic
slowdown and Uzbekistan's proximity to recent events in Afghanistan have had a
negative impact on its economic performance and outlook. The economic slowdown has
dampened demand for Uzbekistan's exports and pushed commodity prices down in world
markets. In particular, a sharp fall (around 35 percent since end-2000) in the world
market price of cotton fiber, which has accounted for a third of Uzbekistan's merchandise
export earnings over the past three years, is causing substantial losses - only partially
offset by a modest increase in the world market price of gold, the country's second
largest export. The government needs to strengthen, broaden, and accelerate its reform
program to counter these shocks and to realize its economic growth potential. The recent

Page 6

Uzbekistan Country Assistance Strategy

agreement with the IMF on a six-month Staff Monitored Program (SMP), which provides
for the tightening of fiscal and monetary policies, the introduction of current account
convertibility later this year, the gradual reform of the agricultural state order system,
further trade and price liberalization, the strengthening of the banking system, and
improved transparency and quality of statistics, is a welcome step in this direction.
13.
Sectoral Developments. Despite the large potential of Uzbekistan's agriculture,
the current policy framework is severely constraining. Through the state order system for
cotton and grain, the government continues to dictate cropping patterns in great detail,
down through the oblasts (provinces) and rayons (districts) to individual farming units.
The state also determines the prices to be paid for these crops, which are below
international levels. These practices, in conjunction with the use of the overvalued
official exchange rate to convert the export price of cotton into local currency, impose a
huge implicit tax on the subsector and result in a large net transfer of resources from
agriculture to the rest of the economy (estimated at 10 percent of GDP in 20004). This
transfer of resources is a major cause of rural poverty in Uzbekistan, and, in addition,
severely constrains general economic growth in the rural areas and hinders the
introduction of adequate irrigation and utility charges. The government has undertaken a
program of institutional change in the sector, reorganizing the former sovkhozes and
kolkhozes into new forms of collective farms (shirkats), with subdivisions farmed by
extended families. It has also permitted the development of private farms (averaging 20
hectares in 2000) and, by expanding the former household plots of farm laborers, created
a new class of smaller peasant (dekhan) farms (averaging 0.13 hectares in 2000), the
latter being the main source of dynamism in the sector thus far. But even private farmers
are subject to many of the same mandates, orders, and constraints as the shirkats. In
2000, the government exempted the exports of fruits and vegetables from foreign
exchange surrender requirements, which markedly boosted export earnings. However,
more comprehensive reforms are needed to address the serious incentive problems caused
by the current agricultural pricing policy, input and output marketing arrangements
(including export and import controls), state ownership of agricultural processing
enterprises like cotton ginneries, and the non-tradability of land rights.
14.
Since independence, self-sufficiency in energy has been a key government
development objective. While its strategy so far has been to increase oil and gas
production through public investments, an April 2000 presidential decree launched a new
policy to attract foreign direct investment for the exploration and development of oil and
gas deposits, with concessions of up to 25 years and various tax exemptions.
Negotiations are at a fairly advanced stage with international oil companies for three
prospecting blocks. More recently, the government announced plans to offer shares of
eight oil and gas companies, including the national holding company, UzbekNefteGaz,
and has hired an international investment bank to prepare the privatization of
UzbekNefteGaz and four of its companies. In late 2000 and early 2001, the government
also issued a series of decrees and resolutions to restructure and privatize the electric
power sector. The Ministry of Energy has been split up into: (a) a joint-stock company,
Uzbekenergo, responsible for the operation of power and coal facilities;
4

This estimated transfer is reduced to 5 percent if periodic debt write-offs are taken into account.

Page 7

Uzbekistan Country Assistance Strategy

(b) UzEnergoNadzor, the regulatory body; and (c) the Ministry of Energy and Fuels
responsible for overall policy. Accelerated privatization of Uzbekenergo's social
infrastructure facilities and other non-core services is envisaged as well as four thermal
power plants. While these first steps towards reforming the electric power sector are
important, additional measures need to be taken. There remain serious flaws in the
industry's structure; the price of electricity is extremely low relative to costs of operation
and future investment needs; the regulatory framework needs strengthening; and,
privatization apparently envisages continued majority ownership by the government.
Furthermore, electric power and gas sector reforms need to be coordinated. Progress
towards comprehensive restructuring of oil, gas and power will be a key test of the
government's intentions in reforming the energy sector.
15.
The government's overall reform strategy for public utilities includes: (a)
decentralization of responsibilities to local authorities; (b) instituting new pricing and
cost-recovery mechanisms; (c) encouraging private sector participation in developing
infrastructure; and (d) phased elimination of subsidies, partially compensated by meanstested allocations. Several programs are now being implemented, including improved
metering of water supply, natural gas, and district heating consumption. In December
2000, the Ministry of Public Utilities was restructured into an Agency of Public Utilities,
with the goal of commercializing municipal and rural service providers. In the water
supply and sewerage sector, the approach to decentralization and private sector
participation is systematic and may be the best in Central Asia. The government has
decentralized the management of urban water utilities to the municipalities and outlined
principles of water tariff-setting policies. Some municipalities have started implementing
these measures by completing Corporate Development Plans and introducing new tariff
policies, with sharp hikes in residential tariffs (four- to five-fold since early 1999)
reducing cross-subsidies and improving collection rates.
16.
hnproving the business environment remains a major challenge for the
government. Enterprise restructuring is lagging due to currency restrictions, distorted
relative prices, and state associations' dominance in marketing, procurement of input, and
corporate governance. Although explicit budget subsidies to state enterprises have been
largely eliminated, implicit subsidies are large, including commercial bank credit at
negative real interest rates, administered allocation of foreign exchange to selected
enterprises for priority imports at the overvalued exchange rate, and provision of energy
at well below true market prices. Recent Bank and AsDB reports confirm important
weaknesses in relation to corporate governance 5 and inadequate accounting and audit
standards; 6 and, while there have been some improvements in the overall legal
framework, such as the Law on Joint Stock Companies and Protection of Shareholder
Interests, implementation remains inconsistent. Although small- and medium-sized
enterprise (SME) development has for several years been a key priority for creating jobs
and growth, the number of SMEs actually fell during 1997-99, owing to the weak
5
Draft report on Review of Corporate Governance in the Central Asian Republics, World Bank,
Washington DC, 2001.
6
A recent report highlights numerous additional deficiencies in the accounting and auditing
arrangements and practices in Uzbekistan: FinancialManagement and Governance Issues in Uzbekistan,
Asian Development Bank, Manila, 2000.

Page 8

Uzbekistan Country Assistance Strategy

enabling environment, including limited access to foreign exchange, discretionary
governnent intervention, and distorted relative prices and other incentives. Since 2000,
however, a concerted government effort has been made to reduce bureaucratic
impediments to SME operations by reducing reporting requirements and the number of
overseeing authorities and inspections, as well as simplifying taxes and eliminating
foreign exchange surrender requirements. In addition, a large increase in subsidized
credit has also been directed towards SMEs, and some restrictions on cash withdrawals
from bank accounts (see paragraph 19) have been lifted for micro-enterprises. These
measures have resulted in an increase in the number of SMEs registered in 2000, albeit
from a low base and with unclear sustainability.
17.
The privatization of medium- and large-sized enterprises is proceeding with
mixed results, largely on account of the unfavorable macroeconomic environment and
uncertain political will. While the government has ambitious plans for divesting its
stakes in large, strategic enterprises (including the largest associations), it has made little
progress to date. Foreign direct investment, ranging from US$3-$7 per capita per year
and declining, is well below Uzbekistan's potential. In March 2001, the government
announced some changes in its privatization strategy (COM Resolution No. 119),
including: (a) the sale of up to 70 percent of Uzbektelecom's shares; (b) the sale of
residual state shares in over 600 enterprises; (c) a decision to privatize parts of the
electric power, cotton ginning, and railways sectors; and (d) the offering of a new, larger
list of medium-sized enterprises for sale to Privatization Investment Funds (PIFs). On the
other hand, a majority stake is offered in only seven of thirty eight large state-owned
enterprises to which the government hopes to attract foreign investors. Thus, pending
improvements in the overall macroeconomic and investment environment, and also in the
strategy for privatizing the largest enterprises, it is doubtful whether the March 2001
changes will themselves suffice to attract significant foreign investment.
18.
The development and modernization of the transport sector has also been a
government priority, given the urban population's high dependence on public transport
and the importance of domestic and international trade for the economy. In urban
transport, the government has enacted a number of important reforms, including:
separation of regulatory and operational responsibilities in the provision of services;
introduction of competition through a program of bus route franchising and development
of an appropriate regulatory framework; and, creation of an enabling environment for
private sector participation in the provision of transport services. Restructuring of the
railway, Uztemiryollari (UTY), has been proceeding and involves spinning off unrelated
businesses, laying off redundant workers, and rationalizing tariffs. The process of
corporatization of UTY companies has also begun. In the road and air transport
subsectors, the government has focused on investments, including the modernization and
rehabilitation of air traffic control and airline equipment and airport facilities, the
rehabilitation of several trunk roads, and the construction of a key road link between the
Fergana valley, Tashkent and, thus, the rest of the country. Except for urban transport,
however, the transport sector is still dominated by state-owned enterprises and there is no
appropriate financial, regulatory, and institutional framework for competitive provision
of transport services. Also, given the absence of a Ministry of Transport, sector
management and accountability for performance are weak.

Page 9

Uzbekistan Country Assistance Strategy

19.
Recent progress in the financial sector includes lifting the restriction that limited
each legal entity to just one bank account, implementation of a computerized inter-bank
payments system, adoption of international accounting standards by banks, and audits by
international firms of an increasing number of banks' annual financial statements. The
government is also following a set timetable to phase out bank cross-shareholdings,
reduce limits of shareholdings by enterprises in banks, and increase minimum capital
requirements. While some new banks (mostly foreign joint ventures) have entered the
market, bank privatization is being initiated only now, with proposals for divestiture of
significant state shares in the two largest banks, National Bank of Uzbekistan and Asaka
Bank. However, banks remain the primary conduits for government-directed credit to
enterprises at negative real interest rates. The large portfolio of government guaranteed
loans poses a serious fiscal and commercial risk, given the financial distress and
unprofitability of many state enterprises, and is an obstacle to bank privatization. At the
same time, the separation of cash and non-cash transactions through restrictions on cash
withdrawals from enterprise bank accounts severely constrains the intermediation of
financial flows and inhibits development of the sector. It encourages informal
transactions outside the banking system, undermines confidence in banks, tightens further
foreign exchange restrictions, and imposes on banks an administrative burden of
compliance monitoring. It is also a specific obstacle for SMEs' activities. Meanwhile,
capital market development is still at a very early stage.
20.
Recent reforms in fiscal management include a rolling three-year Public
Investment Program, introduced in 1999, a new budget classification system, introduced
with the budget of 2000, and greater consultation with parliament in the preparation of
the annual budget. A Budget System Law has been passed and the government is seeking
international technical assistance in introducing a treasury as a key step toward improving
public cash management. Institutional arrangements with respect to budget preparation
and execution, public disclosure and dissemination, and ex post independent audits
remain weak or non-existent. Revenue reforms have focused on reducing marginal tax
rates, unification of agricultural taxes into a unified land tax, introduction of a taxpayer
identification number system for enterprises, and establishment of private pre-shipment
customs inspections. However, progress remains slow in other areas such as setting up
rules-based multi-year tax sharing arrangements with the regions, extending taxpayer
identification numbers to individuals, developing compliance and audit tools, and
upgrading the infrastructure of the tax and customs administration.
C.

Poverty and Social Outcomes

21.
Uzbekistan was one of the poorest republics in the Soviet Union, with the
distribution of poverty showing a strong rural bias. Poverty increased significantly
between 1989 and 1993, although the rise in poverty and inequality was less sharp in
Uzbekistan than in the other Central Asian Republics. 7 Initial results from the on-going
7

Milanovic, B,. 1998, Income, Inequality, and Poverty during the Transitionfrom Plannedto Market

Economy, World Bank. This is the only study which provides a trend based on comparable data, but these
data from the Soviet Family Budget Survey have serious limitations.

Page 10

Uzbekistan Country Assistance Strategy

first nationally representative LSA suggest that around 31 percent of the population could
be considered poor in 2000-2001 with consumption below an absolute poverty line. The
relatively high poverty rate appears to be a combined result of low per capita incomes
and a large inequality in distribution 8 .
22.
Rural poverty continues to be significant. Poverty in rural areas is at least 10
percentage points higher than in urban areas, and more than two thirds of the poor live in
rural areas. Trends in average wages by sector also indicate a gap between the average
agricultural wage and the average wage in every other sector. While in 1991-92 there
was relatively little sectoral wage differentiation, by 1995 the average industrial wage
was double the agricultural wage and is now five times the agricultural wage. Indeed,
based on official data, the real average agricultural wage has fallen to 60 percent of its
1991 level, whereas the real wage in all other sectors has increased. Although wage data
may not reflect incomes, various factors constrain agricultural incomes.
23.
The most important of these factors is current agricultural policies, which result in
large net resource transfers out of the agricultural sector, reducing rural incomes (see
paragraph 13). State wheat and cotton procurement prices have consistently been below
world market levels. For instance, the state procurement price in 2001 was about 65
percent of the world price at the official exchange rate and just 40 percent at the
commercial bank rate, resulting in losses for agricultural producers and necessitating a
major farm debt write-off by the government. Not only is there a transfer of resources
through this implicit taxation of the agricultural sector, but there is also a loss in
increased productivity that would come from price incentives. Available data indicate
that the output value per hectare - and therefore potential incomes - of dekhan (peasant)
farmers, who are not subjected to the onerous requirements on mandated areas under
strategic crops (cotton and wheat) for state orders, are several times higher than that of
cooperatives (shirkats).
24.
In addition to rural-urban differences, there are considerable regional disparities.
Households in Kashkadarya and Namangan oblasts as well as in Karakalpakstan have
significantly lower standards of living than those in Syrdaya and Bukhara oblasts and in
Tashkent city. Moreover, health outcomes are also often worse in the lower income
areas, particularly in Karakalpakstan and Khorezm. There has been a sharp rise in
tuberculosis incidence, most seriously in Karakalpakstan.
25.
Profile of the Poor. The LSA provides the preliminary characteristics of poor
households. Large households with children are more likely to be poor and three quarters
of all poor individuals live in households with more than two children. However, the
8

Deficiencies in non-food consumption data in the Family Budget Survey which is used in the LSA

have necessitated the use of a somewhat unorthodox methodology to estimate the poverty. While this
methodology gives the most reliable estimates of poverty given the limitations of Uzbekistan's Family
Budget Survey, it complicates international comparisons. Moreover it does not allow the calculation of the
depth of poverty nor measures of inequality in consumption. According to an earlier, pilot household
survey carried out in 1999 in the Fergana oblast (a region with above average income and socioeconomic
indicators representing about 11 percent of the country's population), the poverty headcount based on the
international poverty line of US$PPP2.15 was about 22 percent and the Gini coefficient of consumption
was estimated at 0.4.

Page 11

Uzbekistan Country Assistance Strategy

number of pension-aged persons in the household is associated with higher levels of
welfare. Somewhat surprisingly, the poverty rate is highest among households headed by
individuals with completed secondary education, which in absolute terms constitute the
majority. Employment status is also an important determinant of poverty. Households
with an unemployed head are more likely to be poor, but the working population
constitutes a substantial proportion of the poor.
26.
Although comparable data over time are limited, there is increasing evidence of
deterioration in the quality of life, especially among the poor. Medical services, as well
as secondary and higher education, have declined in quality and become more expensive.
The use of informal payments is thought to be widespread and increasing and has
particularly impacted access by the poor to social services.
27.
Education enrollments have dropped significantly at non-compulsory levels since
the start of transition 9 and the rural-urban disparity in schooling level has increased. The
almost complete absence of resources for educational materials and school maintenance
has led to progressive deterioration of education quality and education infrastructure.
Education financing has given priority to maintaining existing teaching positions,
although teachers' salaries have declined sharply in real terms. While government
expenditure on education has been rising since 1997 and reached over 8 percent of GDP
in 1999, it has been used mainly to pay teacher salaries and to construct new secondary
educational institutions, to the neglect of other recurrent expenditure needs. Growing
concern about rising unemployment among school leavers led to the adoption in 1997 of
an education reform program, the National Personnel Training Program, aimed at
reorienting the education system towards the needs of a market economy. The program
includes some very positive changes, including an increase in the duration of compulsory
education to twelve years, renewed efforts in in-service teacher training, and other actions
to develop a more active and student-oriented form of pedagogy. But it does not address
some of the fundamental needs of the education system - including the underprovisioning of basic education and the lack of incentives for efficient management of
education programs. It also includes the introduction of a costly new form of secondary
vocational education which is fiscally unsustainable and may not provide the flexibility
that will be needed as the economy liberalizes and participates more fully in the global
economy.
28.
Health. The health status of the population is characterized by a mixture of
long-standing problems: high prevalence of chronic non-infectious diseases,
characteristic of developed countries, in parallel with communicable diseases,
malnutrition, and reproductive health problems associated with developing countries. As
in many other CIS countries, the rate of non-communicable diseases in older population
cohorts has risen sharply. Unlike these other countries, however, overall life expectancy
has not worsened markedly. Infant and maternal mortality have been of concern for the
Kindergarten enrollments dropped from 37 percent in 1990 to 16 percent in 1999 (and as low as 9.5
percent in rural areas). The share of the age cohort attending upper secondary education fell from 73
percent in 1993 to 55 percent in 1996, until it became compulsory in 1997. There was a dramatic decline in
the share of 19 year-olds in full time education (from 31 percent in 1992 to 19 percent in 1999); and
enrollment rates in higher education fell from 18 percent to 8 percent between 1993 and 1999.
9

Page 12

Uzbekistan Country Assistance Strategy

last few decades, and infant mortality is among the highest - together with other Central
Asian countries - in the CIS . However, there are improvements in some matemal and
infant health indicators (see Box 1), though data definitions vary and data reliability is
unclear. On the other hand, there are still major challenges due to the lack of medical
skills, particularly in rural areas, shortages of drugs, and failures in evidence-based
diagnosis and treatment. Communicable diseases remain a major problem despite
improving vaccination coverage, suggesting systemic weaknesses in the public health
delivery system. Uzbekistan has experienced several outbreaks of infectious diseases,
including tuberculosis, diphtheria, and viral hepatitis. The high prevalence of infectious
diseases can be attributed to limited access to sources of safe water and the decline in
water and sanitation services (which affects the poor the most), as well as poor
environmental and sanitation practices. At the same time, new inequities have emerged,
in part attributable to the drop in GDP since independence and the declining share of
government health expenditure, falling from around 6 percent of GDP in the mid-1980s
to 3 percent in 1999. As a result, out-of-pocket expenditures for health services and
drugs have risen substantially, disadvantaging those on subsistence incomes.
Box 1: Gender in Uzbekistan
Like other CIS countries, Uzbekistan fares relatively well on gender indicators. Economic and
political changes during the past decade, though, have had an impact on gender roles and women's
status.
Socio-Political and Economic Status. Independence has brought a renewed interest in religion
and traditional relations between the sexes. While women taken an increasingly active part in the
activities of local communities (e.g., mahallas, kishlaks), these remain headed mainly by men. In 1998,
there were 23 women in the Oliy Majlis, Uzbekistan's legislature (9 percent of the total); and the
proportion of women in high administrative and management positions (e.g. Deputy Ministers) was
about 18 percent. There is a trend toward increased female employment in the lower-wage social
sectors. In 1997, women's average wages were 80 percent of men's, and 60-70 percent of the national
average in fields where female employment predominates.
Health and Education. Anemia affects 60 percent of women, although the majority are only
mildly anemic (45%). The contributing factors are inadequate nutrition, frequent births, and poor
environmental conditions and potable water quality -some of which have worsened during the transition.
The government has recently assigned special priority to protecting the health of mothers and children,
as a result of which there are signs of improvements in some factors affecting maternal and infant health,
notably: a marked rise in contraceptive use, resulting in fewer births; longer spacing between births; a
lower birth rate among women over 35; declining abortion rates, and improved reproductive health
services. These have probably led to reportedly declining rates of maternal, infant and child mortality
and morbidity. While girls have equal access to both basic and higher education, actual enrollments
show increasing inequality, especially at the higher levels of education. In 1999, for example, the share
of female students at higher education establishments was only 37 percent.
Gender Policy. The government has undertaken numerous measures addressing gender policy: a
1995 Presidential Decree "On Enhancing Women's Role in Social and Government Development in
Uzbekistan"; the appointment of a Deputy Prime Minister responsible for Women's Issues, similar
appointments at the local government level (Deputy Khokims responsible for Women's Issues), and
women's councils within mahalla committees. At the President's initiative, 1999 was declared the Year
of Women and 2001 the year of Woman and Child. Within the framework of these initiatives, the
government has adopted specific measures to protect women's health, including holding regular
conferences of women's NGOs.
Sources:

Center for Social Research "EXPERT," Uzbekistan Gender Study in Transition, October 1998; Center for Social

Research "EXPERT," Consultations with the Poor, National Synthesis Report, 1999; UNDP, Report on the Status of Women in
Uzbekistan, 1999.

Page 13

Uzbekistan Country Assistance Strategy

29.
A number of reforms have been launched in the last few years, including
improved quality of primary care health services, early steps in the decentralization of
health services management, and selective privatization of health service delivery.
Efficiency gains thus far have been marginal, with a still fragmented system and
consequent service overlaps. In the mid- to late 1990s, there was a reduction in hospital
beds, with less expensive primary and outpatient care substituting for these services.
Training and curricula for medical graduates have also been reoriented towards general
practice, though the inherited input mix is still skewed towards hospital-based
specialization. More recently, the government's reform priorities in primary, maternal,
and child health care are being crowded out by another announced priority for emergency
hospital services, which will serve the better-off urban populations. Privatization of
health services and emerging private medical practice in a largely unregulated
environment also generate some concern with regard to access, equity, and quality of
services.
Box 2: HIV/AIDS in Uzbekistan
Until recently, Eastem Europe and Central Asia (ECA) had escaped the worst ravages of
HIV/AIDS, but the situation has changed dramatically in recent years. At end-2000, an estimated
700,000 persons were infected with HIV in the ECA region, compared to an estimated 30,000 in 1995.
Against this background, recorded HIV infection rates in Uzbekistan (estimated at 779 at end2001, up from 230 at end-2000) remain very low, although, as elsewhere in the region, there are
worrisome signs of the potential for very rapid growth: for example, expanding use of drugs, especially
in urban areas, against a backdrop of increasing joblessness and changing social and family norms.
Moreover, international experience suggests that the actual number of people infected may be 5-10 times
higher than officially recorded rates. The main sources of HIV infection and transmission in Uzbekistan
to date are the use of injectable drugs, the cause of at least two recent localized outbreaks, followed more
recently by sexually transmnitted diseases. UNDP/UNAIDS and USAID are currently financing several
small demonstration projects aimed at injectable drug users, including in prisons, at preventive activities
among population groups most at risk, and at increased public awareness. In addition, the govermnent,
with technical assistance from UNAIDS, is currently preparing a draft National Strategy for Prevention
of HIV/AIDS, which will be discussed at a national multi-sectoral forun in March/April 2002.

30.
Social Protection. The lower poverty rates among pensioners suggest that, as in
other countries, pensions succeed to some extent in reducing old age poverty. But the
cost of this safety net is high. Pension spending is around 7 percent of GDP and tax rates
to finance pensions represent almost 40 percent of payroll, with the result that the pension
system is caught in a low compliance-high contribution rate trap. The government has
recently embarked on a plan to improve administration of the pension system and is
considering some changes in the pay-as-you-go pension system that would help improve
its financial solvency. Without these improvements, the burden on working classes may
grow, and poverty among pensioners may well increase in the future. In contrast to
pensions, unemployment benefits, social assistance, and child allowances represented 2.4
percent of GDP in 1999. The government has adopted an innovative approach to target
social assistance and child allowances through the use of mahalla (neighborhood)
associations, a traditional Uzbek (pre-Soviet) social institution.
This has kept
administrative costs low, and broadly succeeded in targeting child allowances and social

Uzbekistan Country Assistance Strategy

Page 14

assistance to the poor, although the low level of financing allocated, including the share
of social assistance in total social expenditures, is low and declining.
Box 3: Labor Standards in Uzbekistan
Uzbekistan has signed a number of International Labor Organization conventions covering labor
rights and standards, including those related to freedom of association and collective bargaining,
abolition of forced and compulsory labor, and elimination of discrimination in terms of employment and
occupation. Uzbekistan's constitution and laws recognize the right to voluntarily form trade unions.
Union membership is optional and all trade unions are nominally independent of the state's
administrative bodies. A law creating a legal framework for the establishment of non-governmental
organizations (NGOs) was adopted in April 1999. While its laws prohibit forced and compulsory labor,
including child labor, Uzbekistan continues the practice - widely used in many republics during the
Soviet era - of mobilizing students and schoolchildren to help with the annual cotton harvest. The "Save
the Children" Fund is currently carrying out a study on child labor.

D.

Environment and Water Resources

31.

Agriculture, a key sector of the economy in terms of both employment and growth

potential, is almost totally dependent on irrigation, partly due to Uzbekistan's arid,
essentially desert climate, and partly due to its erstwhile role as principal supplier of
water-intensive crops (raw cotton and rice) to the entire Soviet Union. Since the 1950s,
in particular, Uzbekistan's cotton sub-sector was expanded with little or no concern for
cost, for the environmental effects of pumping water over extremely long distances from
the Amu Darya and Syr Darya rivers to irrigated areas, or for the need to dispose of
irrigated water through proper drainage systems. Natural and man-made calamities, such
as the last two years' localized drought in Khorezm and Karakalpakstan, have highlighted
the fragility of the overall enviromnental situation, the urgent need to improve water
management within Uzbekistan and coordination between Uzbekistan and its neighbors,
and the absolute necessity to reduce waste and increase the efficiency of water use for all
purposes.
Against this background, Uzbekistan faces three key water resource
management challenges during the next few years: (a) salinity; (b) decaying irrigation
and drainage systems; and (c) the competing demands of Uzbekistan's upstream
neighbors for water that originates mainly in their territories (Kyrgyz Republic and
Tajikistan).
32.
In recent years, the increasing salinity of surface and ground water, due to
improper drainage from irrigated fields, has significantly reduced the supply of clean
water for both irrigation and human consumption, resulting in a progression of serious
environmental problems exemplified by the desiccation of the Aral Sea (see Box 4). Due
to their proximity to the Aral Sea and their location at the tail-end of major irrigation
command areas, the populations of Karakalpakstan and Khorezm are the most severely
affected both in terms of agricultural yields and health. In addition to salinity, large areas
of arable land throughout the country are subject to serious erosion, pesticide and
fertilizer contamination, and periodic water logging.

Page 15

Uzbekistan Country Assistance Strategy

Box 4: Environmental Costs of Inadequate Water Management
Between 1960-90, annual water consumption, mostly for irrigation in the Aral Sea Basin, almost
doubled, resulting in a large reduction in the flow of water to the Aral Sea. As a result, its level dropped
by about 17 meters and surface area decreased by more than half. The virtual doubling of irrigated area
during this period, mainly for cotton production, has created serious environmental problems, the most
important and visible of which is increasing salinity of both land and water. The latter results from the
inadequate design, construction and management of the irrigation and drainage systems, rising saline
groundwater levels, and the discharge of saline drainage water into the canal and river system. About
one-third of all irrigated land in Uzbekistan is estimated to be already saline, with yields decreased by
about one-third. Potable drinking water is also in short supply in the lower reaches of the Amu Darya
and Syr Darya rivers as a result of increased salinity. Crop losses and other damage due to salinity and
the effects of the Aral Sea disaster are estimated at around US$0.5 billion equivalent annually. These
environmental problems are most acute in delta areas where, in addition, desertification is severely
affecting human and animal life and biodiversity.

33.
The efficient use of water resources is also threatened by the very serious
deterioration - leading to possible breakdowns - in the massive irrigation and drainage
infrastructure built during the Soviet period, due to inadequate budget allocations and the
weakening of management, operation and maintenance systems. Indeed, there is an
increasingly serious risk that critical facilities, such as lift-pumping stations in Karshi and
Bukhara, could suffer a catastrophic failure that would affect not only agricultural
production but also the lives and welfare of several million people in these two regions.
34.
The irrigation systems of the Aral Sea Basin were developed during the Soviet
period without regard to the boundaries between what were then Soviet republics but are
now five independent countries. Thus, several important water intake, storage, and
distribution facilities for irrigation are located outside Uzbekistan. Conversely, some
reservoirs and main canals in Uzbekistan supply water for irrigated land in adjacent
states. More importantly, the two upstream countries, Kyrgyz Republic and Tajikistan,
now use their water mainly for (hydroelectric) power generation in winter, owing to the
now uncertain supply of coal and natural gas from Kazakhstan and Uzbekistan, which in
2000-01 resulted indirectly in insufficient water being available for irrigation downstream
in Uzbekistan. Due to the lack of an agreed regional approach for the development of
equitable, more efficient water allocation and management arrangements, these issues are
currently being handled either on a costly, ad-hoc, case-by-case bilateral basis, or they
remain unresolved, thereby disrupting agricultural production.
35.
While macroeconomic and sectoral policy issues are a serious constraint to
environmental improvement, the government has been making some progress with
respect to Aral Sea Basin issues and has endorsed the National Environmental Action
Plan (NEAP). Steps are being taken to implement NEAP recommendations to improve
the quality of safe drinking water, reduce salinity and degradation of land, address the
problems of municipal waste, and strengthen environmental management institutions.
The elaboration of an agreed long-term and sustainable strategy for regional, basin-wide
water allocation and management among the five Central Asian states is a key component
of the GEF-financed Water and Environmental Management Project approved in mid1998 (see Annex 13). However, key challenges remain, including the lack of
coordination between environmental and sectoral agencies, as well as weak

Page 16

Uzbekistan Country Assistance Strategy

implementation and enforcement capacity. Local droughts affecting Khorezm and
Karakalpakstan in particular in 2000 and 2001 highlighted the fragility of the
environment and the importance of adequate water management, including improved
trans-boundary coordination and cooperation.
E.

Governance

In a number of areas, especially transparency, accountability and institutional
36.
restraints on bureaucratic discretion, Uzbekistan's governance record, as evidenced by
range of indicators, is weak. A 1999 Business Environment and Enterprise Performance
Survey cornmissioned jointly by the World Bank and EBRD indicated that, although
Uzbekistan rated fairly well on law and order, the extent of administrative corruption was
significant. Specific problems identified by this and other surveys include: (a) the
unpredictability of rules, regulations and policies that affect private business (e.g. firms'
inability to anticipate changes in laws and/or policies, or not being consulted during the
decision making process); (b) the fragmentation and inconsistency of rules governing
economic activity in numerous separate laws, Presidential Decrees, and Cabinet of
Ministers' resolutions; and (c) the paucity of relevant information and resultant difficulty
in understanding what laws are pertinent. Many firms indicated that they were not
confident that the government would protect their persons and property. The unreliability
of the judiciary was also cited as a major problem. Finally, regulatory and policy
obstacles were rated higher in Uzbekistan than in other comparable countries. These
covered a wide variety of problems and included foreign exchange and trade rules,
inflation, the uncertain costs of regulations, financing problems, and price controls.
While the perceptions resulting from such surveys are necessarily subjective, they may be
as important as objective indicators in determining economic outcomes because a
country's investment climate is essentially determined by the perceptions of
businessmen. Recent evidence cited in the Bank's Anti-Corruption in Transitionl' also
confirms this view.
The key institutional weakness that accounts for Uzbekistan's poor governance
37.
record to date is the lack of public accountability. Public accountability is diluted by a
political and economic system that is characterized by little or no oversight of public
finances, a general lack of transparency in policy decision making and implementation,
and a poorly developed civil society. One of the first steps towards improving
accountability and transparency would be for the government to provide timely, reliable,
and publicly available information on its financial position and overall economic
performance (see Box 5). At present, fiscal transparency is limited to periodic budget
reports to parliament; for example, public accounts are not subject to independent audit.
Transparent and responsive institutions that encourage citizen participation should also be
promoted.

10

2000.

Anti-Corruption in Transition: A Contribution to the Policy Debate, World Bank, Washington, DC,

Uzbekistan Country Assistance Strategy

Page 17

Box 5: Data Availability and Transparency in Uzbekistan
The overall lack of, and uneven quality of limited statistical data available in Uzbekistan are a
serious constraint to analyzing the country's macroeconomic and structural reform performance.
Statistical information in Uzbekistan is currently subdivided into three types: (i) public information; (ii)
information for "official use"; and (iii) confidential information. Public information is very limited and
is contained mainly in annual publications. The only official, regular publication is a quarterly Report
on Socio-Economic Development of Uzbekistan, prepared by the Department of Statistics, Ministry of
Macroeconomics, the governm.ent's economic planning agency. This publication contains a limited set
of national accounts and industrial output aggregates, some relative measures of foreign trade (e.g.,
directions of foreign trade in percentages to total exports/imports), and social development indicators.
Data on exports and imports, balance of payments, external debt, and fiscal and monetary accounts are
classified as "for official use" or confidential, and access to such data is allowed only after clearance by
the Cabinet of Ministers. Uzbekistan is also one of the few countries that does not have a country page

in the IMF's InternationalFinancial Statistics, Government Finance Statistics, and other widely used
statistical publications.
The unavailability of- or continued restrictions on access to - statistical data is unfortunate, given
the large amount of technical assistance extended by international donors to improve the quality of
Uzbekistan's statistical methodology and to equip statistical authorities. This technical assistance has
been provided inter alia by: the Bank (through an IDF-financed capacity building project to re-estimate
national accounts, recommend new data collection methods, and improve data storage and processing
systems); numerous IMF missions and resident advisers (related to balance of payments, monetary
statistics, consumer and producer price indices); Japanese International Cooperation Agency (JICA)
(input/output balances); German GTZ (family budget surveys); and EU-TACIS (sectoral statistics).
Improvement in the public availability and quality of statistical information is a key prerequisite
for successful implementation of this CAS and for more effective cooperation with the international
financial institutions in general.

38.
Uzbekistan's public sector administration remains weak and therefore susceptible
to petty corruption. Recognizing this, the government reduced the size of the civil
service by 20-25 percent in late 1998 in order to finance improved compensation for a
smaller number of officials. It also adopted measures to reduce the frequency of some
regulatory interventions by government agencies, e.g., in the small and medium
enterprise sector. However, recruitment to and promotion within public service is still
neither fully competitive nor based on merit; the state's regulatory and economic
functions often overlap, and transparency in the accounting, reporting, and auditing of
public resources needs substantial improvement.
39.
The result has been extensive opportunities for rent-seeking provided by the
current policy regime, the most egregious of which include: foreign exchange and trade
controls; entry barriers for private industry; directed credit; state intervention in
enterprise business decisions; and the still limited use of competitive public procurement
and contracting. Uzbekistan needs to address its governance issues urgently in order to
eliminate major barriers to business development, growth, and improvement in living
standards.

Page 18

F.

Uzbekistan Country Assistance Strategy

Macroeconomic Prospects

40.
Uzbekistan's medium-term prospects and creditworthiness depend crucially on
actions to reduce its macroeconomic imbalances and limit the growth of external debt, as
well as reforms to liberalize the economy and create conditions for accelerated private
sector development and export growth. The recent agreement between the authorities and
the IMF on a six-month Staff Monitored Program (SMP) may signify a shift from the
previous overly cautious reform paradigm. However, the actual pace of future reform is
unclear at this time. If the current slow pace continues, then the economy will likely
stagnate as shown in the Low Case macroeconomic scenario. If, on the other hand, the
pace is accelerated and the scope of reforms broadened, the economy is expected to
achieve a sustainable growth path as illustrated in the Base Case scenario.
41.
Low Case. The Low Case macroeconomic scenario for 2002-2005 assumes that
the government gradually proceeds with minimal reforms in the two key areas - the
foreign exchange and trade regime and agriculture. In particular, the government is
assumed to gradually liberalize access to foreign exchange for enterprises and
individuals, reducing the curb market premium over the official exchange rate and
improving incentives for exporters, as well as to eliminate the state order system, to
reduce mandatory state procurement of cotton and wheat, and to raise procurement prices
to world market levels, thereby reducing the implicit taxation of agricultural producers.
Progress in other areas of structural reforms is expected to be slower, however, and quasifiscal operations in some sectors may remain large (see paragraph 9). The Low Case
scenario assumes that the goverrinent will be reluctant to abandon quickly all of the
administrative controls over foreign trade and prices, eliminate directed credits and
restrictions on cash circulation, raise energy prices to cost-recovery levels, float the
exchange rate, and increase transparency and governance. The main features of this
scenario are summarized in Table 2.
Table 2: Low Case Macroeconomic Scenario
Actual
2000

Estimate
2001

2002

Projection
2003
2004

Real GDP growth (percent)
Inflation (GDP deflator, percent change)
Export GNFS volume growth (percent) a
Import GNFS volume growth (percent) i
Current account balance/GDP (percent) b"
Total external debt (US$ billion)
Total external debt/GDP (percent) b'
Total external debt/Exports GS (percent)'J
Total external debt service (US$ million)
Total external debt service/Exports GS (percent)

4.0
44.3
6.3
-3.8
2.4
4.3
56.7
127.3
904
26.5

3.8
42.8
1.5
8.6
-0.5
4.5
61.8
139.7
929
28.6

2.0
30.3
2.2
1.0
-0.9
4.5
66.1
133.9
924
27.3

2.0
30.0
3.0
1.4
0.2
4.5
61.1
124.3
897
24.7

2.0
25.0
2.5
1.7
0.9
4.5
58.0
118.6
871
22.8

Gross international reserves (months of imports

4.7

4.2

3.7

3.6

3.4

73.0

79.6

83.7

80.4

80.7

GS)

a/

Total debt service due next year/Gross
international reserves (percent)
GNFS - Goods and non-factor services.
buAt the indicative exchange rate.

" GS - Goods and services, including income receipts and workers' remittances.

2005
2.0
22.0
1.7
1.5
1.2
4.5
53.8
113.6
876
22.0
3.3

Page 19

Uzbekistan Country Assistance Strategy

42.
Implementation of the foreign exchange and agricultural reform measures is
expected to allow Uzbekistan to achieve modest export growth. Cotton farming, which is
depressed by state interference and low state procurement prices, will have improved
price incentives to increase productivity and exports. A projected gradual recovery in the
world market price of cotton fiber from the 2001 lows is also expected to improve the
foreign exchange earnings of Uzbekistan's agricultural exporters. A less overvalued,
unified exchange rate is expected to stimulate the export-oriented industries whose
international competitiveness will improve. Smaller enterprises, no longer subject to
export surrender requirements at an overvalued exchange rate, will particularly benefit
from such measures. The Low Case scenario also assumes some decline in capital
outflows as credible actions are taken to liberalize access to foreign exchange reduce
distortions.
43.
Such limited reforms, however, cannot increase exports sufficiently to improve
Uzbekistan's debt carrying capacity. Given the heavy external debt service payments
(averaging around US$ 0.9 billion annually during 2002-2005) and only modest export
growth in the absence of full current account convertibility, the government will need to
pursue a conservative borrowing policy. The external debt stock during 2002-2005 is
expected to be stabilized at its estimated end-2001 level of about US$4.5 billion. This
will permit the debt service to exports ratio, which jumped to an estimated 29 percent in
2001, to decline somewhat, although it will remain at over 20 percent of export earnings.
The ratio of total external debt to exports of goods and services, which peaked at over
150 percent in 1999, is also expected to decline. Overall, provided external borrowing is
prudently limited, Uzbekistan does not face an immediate solvency problem, and its
creditworthiness, deteriorated in recent years, is expected to stabilize under the Low Case
scenario, although international liquidity is likely to remain tight.
44.
While minimal foreign exchange and agricultural reform reforms would prevent
further deterioration in creditworthiness, they are not sufficient to put the economy on a
sustainable growth path. Numerous obstacles to productivity growth and efficient
resource allocation as well as the external financing constraint and import compression
would have a depressing effect on economic growth. As a result, GDP growth, projected
at around 2 percent in the Low Case, will remain below potential. In per capita terms, it
will essentially stagnate, which in the longer term could put a stress on social stability.
Controlling inflation under these circumstances is also likely to be problematic, and
inflation as measured by the GDP deflator is assumed to remain above 20 percent per
annum. The economy will also remain vulnerable to external shocks.
45.
Base Case. If the SMP agreed with the IMF is successfully implemented and its
reform momentum is maintained, and if the authorities adopt a comprehensive program
of accelerated structural reforms, Uzbekistan can enjoy higher growth, better living
standards and improving creditworthiness. The Base Case macroeconomic scenario
assumes that such a comprehensive program of accelerated reforms is undertaken.
Outlines of the Base Case scenario are summarized in Table 3.

Page 20

Uzbekistan CountryAssistance Strategy

Table 3: Base Case Macroeconomic Scenario
2002

Projection
2003
2004

2005

3.8
42.8
1.5
8.6
-0.5
4.5
61.8
139.6
929
28.6

2.2
30.3
2.2
1.7
-1.1
4.7
61.9
139.8
903
26.7

3.0
20.0
3.2
3.8
-1.1
5.0
58.8
135.9
896
24.6

4.0
15.0
3.6
5.9
-1.7
5.2
57.2
133.0
886
22.8

5.0
10.0
3.7
5.1
-1.9
5.4
55.5
129.5
898
21.6

4.7
4.2
Gross international reserves (months of imports
GS) a'
73.0
77.9
Total debt service due next year/Gross
intemational reserves (percent)
' GNFS - Goods and non-factor services.
bv At the indicative exchange rate.
d'GS - Goods and services, including income receipts and workers' remittances.

3.7

3.6

3.4

3.2

83.0

79.3

78.9

80.3

Real GDP growth (percent)
Inflation (GDP deflator, percent change)
Export GNFS volume growth (percent) '
Import GNFS volume growth (percent) '
Current account balance/GDP (percent) w
Total external debt (US$ billion)
Total extemal debt/GDP (percent) '
Total external debtlExports GS (percent) C
Total extemal debt service (US$ million)
Total external debt service/Exports GS (percent)

Actual
2000

Estimate
2001

4.0
44.3
6.3
-3.8
2.4
4.3
56.7
127.3
904
26.5

46.
The Base Case will require the establishment and maintenance of a sound
macroeconomic framework. This would include a tightened monetary policy consistent
with bringing consumer and producer price inflation down to low double digits and a
stable market-determined exchange rate, and a sustainable fiscal stance as indicated by
limited consolidated budget deficits, sharply declining volume of quasifiscal transactions,
and prudent public borrowing policies with external debt and debt service ratios
improving compared to their current levels. In addition, the program would also further
address macroeconomic and structural distortions stemming from the exchange
restrictions, trade barriers, directed credit, state interference in production and marketing,
quasi-fiscal operations in the energy sector, remaining barriers to private sector
development, market monopolization, financial sector weaknesses, and inadequate
governance and transparency.
47.
The implementation of a credible reform package and financial support from
multilateral and bilateral sources will improve business conditions for domestic private
sector and make Uzbekistan a more attractive place for foreign investors. Foreign direct
investment is projected to more than double by 2005 under the Base Case. Higher levels
of private investment would lead to employment creation, productivity growth and strong
exports. Increasing exports would generate foreign exchange earnings to maintain
exchange rate stability via market instruments, expand essential imports and increase
external borrowing to modernize the economy without jeopardizing the country's
creditworthiness. The full benefits of these reforms would be seen in the medium-to-long
run, but noticeable gains, notably in the agriculture sector, among SMEs and exporters,
could be visible within a year. Annual economic growth under the Base Case is projected
to gradually increase from 2 percent during the adjustment in 2002, to 5 percent per
annum by 2005.

Uzbekistan Country Assistance Strategy

Page 21

48.
Downside Scenario. On the other hand, if the SMP fails and there is no further
progress toward liberalization of the exchange rate and reduction of the implicit heavy
agricultural taxation through state orders and low farm procurement prices, both output
growth and exports are likely to be below those projected in Table 2. In this case, export
volume will stagnate or continue to decline as during the past few years. This would
require even further compression of imports and hence lower output growth. The
maintenance of the exchange rate restrictions will discourage entry of new firms and
private sector growth, adversely affecting employment. Under these circumstances, the
decline in the living standards will continue and Uzbekistan's creditworthiness is likely to
deteriorate further.

II.

DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY AND PROGRAM

49.
The government's development objective is to establish an economy that
"combines fully the features of a market economy and a social economy, in order to
merge the efficiency of economic advancement with social guarantees and justice."'"I
The strategic objectives announced soon after independence included diversifying the
economy from the cotton mono-culture to a more industrialized economy, expanding
employment opportunities, and achieving energy and food security to protect the
economy and population from major external shocks. The government has adopted a
gradual, evolutionary approach to reforms, with an emphasis on first creating the legal
and institutional foundations for economic reforms, gradually changing the ownership
structure to lay the basis for a mixed economy, maintaining a strong role for the state as
'regulator' of the economy, and ensuring a strong social policy.' 2 In line with the stated
objectives of the government, the country achieved self-sufficiency in energy by 1995
and in wheat by 1998.
50.
In early 2000, the government acknowledged that economic growth was at risk if
reforms were not intensified.' 3 It identified the main tasks ahead as liberalization of the
economy and integration of Uzbekistan into the world economy. The priorities of further
liberalization and deepening of economic reforms included reducing the state's functions
and limiting its interference in enterprise economic activity, establishing the legislative
framework and conditions conducive to rapid SME development and employment
creation, deepening agricultural reforms, advancing financial system reforms,
implementing structural transformation, and developing export potential to shift the
economy from raw material exports towards finished goods exports. In line with this

"
Karimov, I., 1993, Building the Future: Uzbekistan - Its Own Model for Transition to a Market
Economy, Uzbekistan Publishers, Tashkent, p. 41.
12
In addition to Karimov (1993), the Government's overall development strategy and five principles

of economic reform are also elaborated in Karimov, I., 1995, Uzbekistan - Along the Road of Deepening
Economic Reform, Uzbekistan Publishers, Tashkent, especially pp. 10-11; as well as Karimov, I., 1998,
Uzbekistan on the Threshold of the Twenty-First Century, St. Martin's Press, New York.
13
President Karimov's speech addressing Inter-ministerial Coordination Council on Reforms and
Investments on February 1, 2000.

Page 22

Uzbekistan Country Assistance Strategy

wide range of priorities, a number of decrees and resolutions were adopted during
2000-2001 that reflect the government's intention to proceed with economic reform.14
51.
More recently, given Uzbekistan's IDA eligibility, the government has indicated
its commitment to prepare a Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (PRSP). As initial steps
toward this goal, it sent delegations to participate in PRSP training workshops and
seminars to learn about the process, its requirements, tools for formulating an effective
and monitorable strategy, and the experiences of other countries. A working group
comprising members of key ministries is expected to be formally established soon, which
will outline the work program for the PRSP, including a timetable and consultative
activities. The working group will also start compiling the national poverty profile,
designing sectoral strategies, and conducting focus group sessions with stakeholder
groups. The authorities' preparation of the PRSP will be supported by the findings of the
ongoing LSA being prepared by the Bank, and by substantial technical assistance grant
recently approved by the Asian Development Bank (AsDB). It is expected that an IPRSP will be finalized in the fall and presented to the Boards of the IMF and Bank by
December 2002, with a full PRSP to follow during 2004.
52.
Meanwhile, the most recent statement of the government's strategic goals and its
program covering 2001-03 is contained in the Cabinet of Ministers' Resolution No. 517,
December 2000. 5 This builds on the president's speech to parliament earlier in the year
and the "Program on liberalization and deepening of reforms in political, economic and
spiritual spheres of the society, provision of national security" approved by the
Presidential Decree of June 2, 2000. The priorities are:
*

Macroeconomic stability and balanced economic growth. The government
seeks to reduce inflation through tight fiscal and monetary policies. Fiscal
reforms include improved budget and tax policies (shifting gradually to

14
For example, on banking sector reform - Cabinet of Ministers' (COM) resolution of Feb. 19,
2000, "On the implementation of privatization of banks of the Republic of Uzbekistan under the World
Bank's FIBL project," Presidential Decree No. UP 2564 of March 21, 2000 "On further liberalization and
reform of the banking system." On privatization - COM resolution dated March 9, 2001, "On further
denationalization and privatization of enterprises with participation of foreign investors in 2001-2002." On
foreign trade - COM Resolution No. 261 of July 8, 2000 "On measures to increase decentralized exports of
fresh fruits and vegetables in the year 2000." On the foreign exchange regime - COM Resolution of April
28, 2000, "On streamlining accounting and recording procedures related to foreign exchange and exportimport operations," COM Resolution of June 22, 2001, "On measures to further liberalize the foreign
exchange market," COM resolution of July 10, 2001 "On measures to organize the operation of the overthe-counter currency market," COM resolution of July 18, 2001 "On additional measures for liberalization
of the OTC market," COM resolution of October 25, 2001 "On measures for unification of the exchange
rates at the internal foreign exchange market". On the fiscal system - the Parliament's Resolution of
Dec. 14, 2000, "On enforcing a Law of the Republic of Uzbekistan on budget system" (effective Jan. 1,
2001). On the energy sector - Presidential Decree No. UP-2812 of Feb., 22, 2001 "On furthering economic
reforms in the energy sector".
15
More details on the government's development program are contained in (i) Decree No. 296 of the
Cabinet of Ministers of the Republic of Uzbekistan dated 10 June 1999 "On Measures to Implement
Priority Directions of Deepening the Reforms and Transformations in the Society in the First Years of the
21s' Century"; (ii) Public Investment Program 2000-2002; (iii) National Strategy of Sustainable
Development of the Republic of Uzbekistan, approved by the National Commission of the Republic of
Uzbekistan on Sustainable Development on October 30, 1999.

Page 23

Uzbekistan Country Assistance Strategy

consumption-based taxes, expanding the tax base, simplifying taxes, rationalizing
custom duty rates) and improving inter-government fiscal relations by increasing
the role of local budgets. Sustainable, balanced growth is to be achieved by
developing priority sectors through various policies such as improving the public
investment allocation system, and providing the sectors with special tax and
interest rates and other benefits. The government also envisages increasing the
role of banks as intermediaries in priority sector investments.
*

Structural changes in the economy, including sustainable operation and
development of the fuel-energy complex and deepening agricultural reforms. The
programs to achieve the structural changes envisage developing and modernizing
selected priority industries/sectors for import-substitution and export-oriented
production ("localization") through public investments and foreign resources.
Another objective is to increase the processing of domestic mineral and
agricultural raw materials. Comprehensive state planning is given a critical role
in the govermnent's industrial policies: in addition to preparing a medium-term
investment program, the government has set a goal of putting together detailed
development programs for key sectors of the economy as well as preparation of
short- and medium-term material balances for main raw materials and
manufactured products. Strong emphasis is also laid on the socio-economic
development of the country's regions and on ensuring a stable inflow of foreign
investment to the regions. In the energy sector, the program aims to attract
foreign investment, develop energy-saving technologies, and promote alternative
sources of energy. In the agricultural sector, the focus for the years to come is on
developing and implementing the extension of the "Program for Strengthening
Economic Reforms in Agriculture during 1998-2000." The basic outline of the
new program envisages strengthening the autonomy of family/brigade units
within agricultural cooperatives. The government also intends to encourage
further the emergence of new private and dekhan farmers by distributing land of
bankrupt collective farms and cooperatives, and improving farmers' access to
rural credit, agricultural inputs, and equipment, with particular emphasis on the
creation of alternative (non-state) sources of supply of agricultural machinery and
inputs.

*

Formation of a mixed economy. Better conditions for accelerated SME growth,
particularly in export-oriented and import-substituting industries, is envisaged
through the provision of incentives and state support to attract domestic and
external financing, ensure non-discriminatory access to inputs and sales markets,
and provide adequate legal protection. Plans to promote a competitive business
environment include strengthening the regulation of natural monopolies and
preventing their abuse of dominant market position, enforcement of sanctions
against enterprises involved in unfair competition, and protection of consumer
rights. Measures to encourage development of the market infrastructure,
including market institutions and regulatory frameworks, are also being
elaborated. In particular, in the banking sector, the goals are to increase
capitalization and encourage entry by private and foreign banks. To expand
commercial banks' resource base and increase lending, especially to priority

Page 24

Uzbekistan Country Assistance Strategy

sectors, the government is considering reforms to promote deposits through the
introduction of a deposit insurance scheme and other incentives for private
savings.
*

Liberalization of external economic activities and stage-by-stage
liberalization of the hard currency market. The government recognizes that
liberalization of the foreign exchange regime is one of the most important
conditions for stimulating exports. It plans to proceed towards current account
convertibility in a phased manner.

*

Creation of a modern integrated infrastructure. In the transport sector, the
government intends to continue implementing its current program with the goal of
developing domestic transportation routes that bypass neighboring countries,
maintaining Uzbekistan's role as a regional transportation hub and ensuring
reliable access to alternative seaports in Europe and Asia via trans-national
transport corridors. The ongoing restructuring in the telecommunications sector
will continue with the expected privatization of Uzbektelecom monopoly and the
encouragement of competition in mobile phone and internet service provision
markets to ensure Uzbekistan's access to world knowledge.

*

Sustaining improvement in living standards and strengthening social
protection. The government aims to achieve a steady rise in incomes through
sustainable economic growth, regional employment/job creation programs,
incentives for self-employment, micro-credits, and training programs. Social
protection policies seek to improve the targeting of social protection through such
measures as strengthening the use of local self-government bodies (mahallas),
improving social assistance to vulnerable groups, and developing social
infrastructure (in particular, medical service delivery for mothers and children,
drinking water, and gas in the rural areas). The government also plans to
encourage development of non-government pension funds.

53.
Assessment of the government program. The government's overall goals, as
outlined at independence and subsequently, are laudable. At issue, however, is the
inconsistency between the vision for the country's overall development and the policies
and programs being pursued, as well as the pace of reform implementation. The
government's program essentially reflects a continuation of policies that have been
pursued in the last four years, geared towards an industrialization strategy that relies on
restriction of imports through a variety of exchange and trade controls, a large public
investment program financed to a significant extent by foreign credit16 (mainly export
credits and official aid), and heavy implicit taxation of agriculture.
54.
While the industrialization drive is understandable as a reaction to the narrow
specialization (mono-culture, raw material orientation) of the Soviet era, international
Public and publicly guaranteed foreign loans became an important source of financing of the annual
investment program in recent years. Their share in total investments funded by centralized sources (state
budget, public and publicly guaranteed foreign loans, extra-budgetary funds) increased from 5 percent in
1993 to 45 percent in 1999.
16

Page 25

Uzbekistan Country Assistance Strategy

experience has shown that state-sponsored protectionist policies may provide short-term
gains in growth and employment but that they ultimately can be very costly. Many
countries that pursued import-substitution policies ended up with large unutilized
capacity and an industrial structure that could not be supported. Moreover, these policies
have an inherent bias against exports, reflected in the large currency overvaluation in
Uzbekistan. This provides incentives to drive economic activity underground and to
under-report exports. That is the more worrisome since it reduces the debt-servicing
capacity of the country and makes the significant external borrowing that has
accompanied industrialization less sustainable. Moreover, the industrialization is also
financed through taxing agriculture via the state order system (as well as the foreign
exchange surrender system for cotton exports). Raising of farm gate prices would be the
most important step in poverty alleviation.
55.
In addition, a general policy framework - as opposed to selective state support that permits private sector development and the creation of new enterprises and new jobs
is particularly important to absorb Uzbekistan's young, rapidly growing population.
Several resolutions adopted over the last year reflect the government's intention to
develop the SMEs sector, but sustainable SME development would be ensured only with
economic liberalization and a competitive environment.
56.
Another area of concern is continued government intervention in programming
production decisions and extensive use of administrative controls, rather than reliance on
economic incentives (such as prices and taxes) to influence the economy. Apart from
their cost and inefficiency, direct controls imply a high degree of bureaucratic discretion
and thus breed corruption.
57.
The government's emphasis on creating the institutional foundation of a market
economy is well-justified, but the gains from institutional changes will remain limited
without fundamental reforms in the macroeconomic and structural policies that provide
market-based relative price signals to economic agents, impose financial discipline on
existing enterprises, and encourage the growth of new employment-generating
enterprises.

58.
The government, in discussions with the Bank Group and other development
partners, continues to reaffirm its commitment to continuing structural reforms and
gradual liberalization of the economy. In its opinion, many controls are still needed to
prevent the criminalization of the economy in the face of weak or nascent market
institutions, to ensure the availability of basic foodstuffs at affordable prices to maintain
social stability, and to develop and promote the comparative advantage of Uzbek
industry. The authorities emphasize that their difference of view with some development
partners concerns not the ultimate objectives of its developmental agenda, but the pace
and sequencing of the measures needed. While the pace and sequencing of reforms may
indeed vary in some aspects, it is nevertheless important that their direction and a road
map be clearly laid out and that the internal inconsistencies and constraints to
implementation are removed as soon as possible. As a matter of priority, the government
urgently needs to reassess its current policies and intensify implementation of those
policy decisions that support the functioning of market mechanisms.

Page 26

Uzbekistan Country Assistance Strategy

III. LESSONS FROM PAST EXPERIENCE
59.

Background.

The last CAS identified four key policy challenges where the

government's reform agenda and the Bank's institutional priorities appeared to converge:
(a) to liberalize the foreign exchange and trade regimes, thereby promoting inter alia
financial sector development; (b) to strengthen the policy framework and incentives for
private sector investment and trade, especially in agriculture; (c) to increase the
efficiency of resource use in urban and rural infrastructure and services, including the
social sectors; and (d) to address key national and, indirectly, regional environmental
problems, especially in the Aral Sea Basin. It envisaged Base Case lending comprising
ten operations totaling US$300-350 million. Given the government's gradual approach to
structural reforms, some investment projects incorporated a pilot approach whereby
reforms would be undertaken initially in a limited geographic area so that their benefits
could be demonstrated first before their replication more broadly. For the same reason,
three technical assistance projects were chosen for their expected contribution to longerterm institution building and development. The last CAS also included a modest program
of non-lending activities, including three formal studies. IFC's activities to date and
proposed strategy are summarized at paragraphs 64 and 82 below, and Annex 15.
60.
Results. In terms of lending, five loans totaling US$136 million were approved
during FY98-00 and are now being implemented. Three loans totaling US$83 million,
were for investment projects (Tashkent Solid Waste Management, Health, and Urban
Transport) and two totaling US$53 million were for technical assistance (Enterprise
Institution Building and Financial Institution Building).17 Thus, only half the number of
operations and less than half the planned volume of lending actually materialized. Of the
remaining five operations proposed: the Rural Enterprise Support Project was approved
in December, 2001; the Bukhara and Samarkand Water Supply Project is presented with
this CAS; the Karshi Pumping Stations Rehabilitation Project is due for negotiations very
shortly; the Drainage project is under preparation; and one was dropped (Small
Investment & Microcredit). Although the reasons for delay were mainly project-specific,
several common issues emerged, including: insufficient political will for key reforms
proposed; inadequate ownership of project content and/or design; unduly complex project
design or overly ambitious policy framework; lengthy internal decision making; and,
overall weak project preparation, coordination, and management. With the benefit of
hindsight, it is also now apparent that the pilot approach advocated by the Bank was not
always fully consistent with the government's cautious, incremental approach to
structural reform; and that, given Uzbekistan's size, natural features, and almost total
dependence on large-scale irrigation, the pilot approach to agricultural reform may not be
practicable.
61.
These delays have obviously been costly, both to Uzbekistan in terms of project
benefits foregone and development effectiveness, and to the Bank in terms of the
opportunity cost to its administrative budget. Moreover, the modest results achieved,
17
A US$75 million loan, for Rural Water Supply, Sanitation and Health, was approved in early FY98,
but covered in the previous CAS.

Page 27

Uzbekistan CountryAssistance Strategy

including the limited resource transfer implied, fell short of what was foreseen. They
were also not proportionate either to the size of Uzbekistan's economy and population or
its regional significance within Central Asia.
62.
The outcome for non-lending activities was somewhat more satisfactory. A
retrospective Social and Structural Policy Review, undertaken jointly with the
government, was completed during FY99 as planned and well received both within and
outside Uzbekistan. Similarly, Uzbekistan's National Environmental Action Plan
(NEAP), financed partly with Swiss bilateral assistance, was completed in FY99,
disseminated widely throughout the country during FY00, and is now the operational
framework for several ongoing externally-financed investment and technical assistance
activities. In addition, a working paper on anti-monopoly and competition policy and an
informal policy note on social costs of foreign exchange liberalization were completed
during FY00. However, delays in launching the revised Family Budget Survey (FBS) the object of significant German(GTZ)- and Bank-financed technical assistance - held up
the Living Standards Assessment (LSA) planned for completion in FY00, and thus an
update of Uzbekistan's poverty profile. Both are now well underway and the LSA is
expected to be completed by early FY03. Finally, in addition to the three IDF grants
originally foreseen, three additional grants were approved: for Pension Reform, jointly
with an AsDB technical assistance grant; for Anti-Monopoly and Competition Policy
Development; and for Environmental Management.
Portfolio Performance. Despite its modest size, portfolio performance has been
63.
problematic, with execution of the two largest investment projects (Cotton Subsector
Improvement and Rural Water Supply, Sanitation and Health) and one technical
assistance loan (Enterprise Institution Building) rated unsatisfactory during FY00. As a
result, Uzbekistan's portfolio was slated for special attention under the Portfolio
Improvement Program during FY01. Disbursements have also lagged: excluding the fully
disbursed Rehabilitation Loan, cumulative disbursements totaled only US$136 million, or
43 percent of the US$313 million active portfolio, as of December 31, 2001; and, net
transfers for the three years FY99-01 reached only US$12.2 million, US$13.3 million and
US$16.2 million respectively. The main reasons for implementation delays are similar to
those cited above for project preparation. There was also backtracking and/or insufficient
progress in the overall policy environment; and, the development impact of at least two
projects (Cotton Subsector Improvement and Enterprise Institution Building) is unlikely
to be fully effective. Unfamiliarity with Bank procedures and the incompatibility of
some government and Bank policies and procedures were also factors. Several actions
have now been undertaken to improve portfolio performance. These include: (a)
commencing FY00, annual Country Portfolio Performance Reviews (CPPRs); (b) an
action plan for the entire portfolio as well as for individual projects; (c) enhanced
implementation support by Country Office operational staff; and (d) for projects in
problem status 12 months or more, a more aggressive approach to their restructuring
and/or cancellation. (Annex 14 summarizes the results of the FY00 and FY01 CPPRs).
64.
IFC. The 1998 CAS assumed an improving private sector business environment
and thus an increase in demand for IFC lending. In the event, neither materialized and
IFC's investment portfolio - totaling about US$36 million, of which US$14.2 million has

Page 28

Uzbekistan Country Assistance Strategy

been disbursed - remains very modest. During the period, two new investments totaling
US$2 million to support the development of SMEs were approved; two previous
commitments totaling US$15.4 million to support manufacturing and leasing of
agricultural machinery were cancelled; and two approved projects in the financial and
manufacturing sectors totaling US$18.7 million were dropped. Most of the undisbursed
portfolio comprises credit lines to local banks for small and medium-sized enterprises
(SMEs). Given the relatively young and small portfolio, firm conclusions about
performance may be premature. However, all IFC loans are current, except for one
which experienced difficulties obtaining access to foreign exchange, although the project
itself has generated the necessary local currency. On the other hand, despite substantial
IFC technical assistance for project identification and capacity building in the financial
sector, it has been difficult to identify bankable projects and to attract foreign investors.
65.
MIGA's role to date and exposure in Uzbekistan has been constrained, like that of
IFC, by the overall unfavorable climate for foreign direct investment (FDI). Its only
transaction - a contract in the mining sector, with a US$10 million gross and net
exposure - was recently cancelled.
66.
Summary. The results of the last CAS, whether measured in terms of lending,
non-lending, or portfolio performance, were uneven, and, compared to the admittedly
ambitious policy goals, its impact was less than fully satisfactory. Until recently, little or
no progress had been made with respect to foreign trade and currency liberalization or
private sector development, and only limited gains recorded in terms of. improved
resource use in urban and rural infrastructure and services. On the other hand, there was
some progress - inter alia through the GEF-financed regional Water and Environmental
Management Project (WEMP) - in addressing key national (and increasingly urgent
regional) environmental problems, especially water and energy in the Aral Sea Basin.
The Urban Transport Project promoted and is reinforcing significant reforms in the urban
passenger transport sector, which has experienced rapid growth in the number of small
private operators. Similarly, the Tashkent Solid Waste Management Project is supporting
improved waste collection performance and sanitary conditions in the city's residential
areas, as well as important institutional development, enterprise management and tariff
reforms.
67.
Several important lessons have emerged from the Bank's experience to date in
Uzbekistan, especially during the last CAS. These have been shared with the government
authorities concerned and other stakeholders and have been factored into this third CAS.
The most important are: to select only projects for which there is genuine, broad-based
ownership, empowered by the political will required to implement the proposed reforms;
to acknowledge explicitly that the amount of policy reform achievable within the scope
or timetable of a single project may be limited; to recognize that building the consensus
and understanding needed to implement even limited reforms may take a long time; and
to accept that government decision making may take more time than in other countries,
given complex internal procedures and institutional relationships.

Page 29

Uzbekistan Country Assistance Strategy

IV. FY02-04 COUNTRY ASSISTANCE PROGRAM
Overview. The FY02-04 CAS seeks to reconcile several difficult strategic,
68.
policy, and operational considerations. These include, on the one hand, Uzbekistan's
continued unsatisfactory overall macroeconomic framework, its uneven structural reform
performance since end- 1996, the recent deterioration in its creditworthiness, and, despite
new, apparently improved prospects for a program of financial cooperation with the IMF
during 2002, the still uncertain prospects for decisive policy change in the near term; and,
on the other hand, the country's large population and economy, its strategic location, and
its economic importance within Central Asia. Against this background, and overall goal
of improving living standards and reducing poverty in Uzbekistan, the key objectives of
the FY02-04 CAS are four-fold:
(a) to help prepare the analytical, policy and institutional framework for
liberalization of the foreign exchange and trade regime, including related
macroeconomic and structural policy measures, improved governance, and
transparency of public finances;
(b) to continue to help improve the policy framework and business
environment for private sector investment and trade;
(c) to continue to help improve the efficiency of resource use in social and
municipal infrastructure and services, including the social sectors; and
(d) to help maintain and improve the efficiency of the country's extensive
irrigation and drainage infrastructure, thereby preventing further environmental
degradation and, in Karshi, reducing the risk of a potential humanitarian disaster
with possible regional ramifications.
The CAS envisages two lending scenarios: (a) a Low Case, which assumes continued
gradual implementation of structural reforms and no further deterioration in the
macroeconomic framework; and (b) a Base Case, which assumes, and would be triggered
by, accelerated and decisive macroeconomic and structural reforms in key areas.
69.
The Low Case, totaling US$150 million during FY02-04, comprises five
operations, including three carried over from the last CAS with crucial environmental,
social and disaster prevention goals, whose effectiveness and impact will not depend
directly on reform of the unsatisfactory foreign exchange and trade regime. This level of
financing is only slightly more than was actually committed during FY98-00. Lending
will be complemented by an enhanced package of non-lending activities centering around
selected fiduciary and other economic and sector studies aimed at strengthening the
analytical underpinnings of, and reinforcing government support for an accelerated pace
of economic reform.
70.
Low Case Triggers. As noted above, implementation of the Low Case lending
program assumes continued gradual implementation of structural reforms and no further
deterioration in the macroeconomic environment. Box 6 describes the monitoring
indicators that will be used to evaluate progress during FY02-03 and the triggers for
continued lending in FY04 and beyond. In practice, this implies that only three of the

Page 30

Uzbekistan Country Assistance Strategy

five operations proposed - Bukhara and Samarkand Water Supply and Karshi Pumping
Stations Rehabilitation and Public Finance Management Reform planned for FY03 would be negotiated and presented to the Board by mid-CY03. Appraisal, negotiations
and presentation of the remaining two operations - Drainage and Health II - would be
subject to confirmation of compliance with the triggers for continued lending.
Box 6: Triggers for Low Case Lending Program

Monitoring indicators for lending during FY02-03 include:
* the stock of total external debt would not exceed the level of about US$4.8 billion;*
* foreign currency reserves would be maintained at a level sufficient to cover at least 100 percent of
estimated annual debt service payments falling due during the following twelve months;
* portfolio performance would remain generally satisfactory, with at least 80 percent of projects
rated fully satisfactory; and
* macroeconomic and financial data would be provided to the World Bank on a regular, timely basis.
Triggers for continued lending in FY04, to be confirmed by July 1, 2003, include:
* progress towards unification of multiple exchange rates and liberalized access to foreign exchange
by enterprises and individuals as indicated inter alia by:
(a) sustained reduction in the curb market premium over the official exchange rate to less than
50 percent;
(b) increase in the share of foreign exchange transacted through the inter-bank market; and
(c) reduction in CBU's administrative control over the inter-bank exchange market;
* progress on key structural reforms, including a reduction in the scope of the state order system for
cotton and wheat and liberalization of fruit and vegetable exports, as indicated by the following
measures:
(a) replacement of the state order system for cotton (mandatory cropping patterns, targets, and
prices) by a state procurement system, under which mandatory sales to the state will not
exceed 50 percent of the historical average of actual raw cotton production over the previous
3 years;
(b) introduction of state procurement pricing for raw cotton at the level of 33 percent of the
Liverpool Cotlook A Index price per ton of fiber, less costs to cover ginning and transport to
final markets, currently estimated at US$300 per ton of fiber (excluding VAT). The farm
gate price will be fixed in sums on the basis of the official exchange rate at the time the next
season's price is announced;
(c) extension of export permission on demand to any private purchaser of cotton and setting of
foreign exchange surrender requirements for such exports at the level of decentralized
exports, but no more than 50 percent; and
(d) abolition of the requirement for commercial bank registration of fruit and vegetable export
contracts and lifting of the foreign exchange surrender requirement for such exports for all
farmers, traders, and other entities.
* The total extemal debt and debt service for the purposes of the trigger are defined in line with standard World Bank practice,
i.e. external medium- and long-tern public and publicly guaranteed debt, including debt in dispute, extemal private
non-guaranteed debt, IMF credit outstanding, and short-term debt.

Base Case. If the government were to adopt an accelerated program of
71.
macroeconomic and structural reforms, including decisive liberalization of the current
highly distorted foreign exchange, trade, and agricultural policy regimes, this would
trigger a larger program of financial and technical assistance, namely a Base Case
totaling US$300-350 million during FY02-04. Box 7 describes the additional policy
actions that would be required to achieve Base Case lending - in addition to the
establishment and maintenance of a sound macroeconomic framework (as defined in
paragraph 46 above). Continued Base Case lending would be subject to maintenance of a

Page 31

Uzbekistan Country Assistance Strategy

sound macroeconomic framework, to satisfactory implementation of the measures listed
in Box 7, and to an overall judgment about the pace, depth and scope of the program of
structural reforms. Examples of the latter would include: (a) adopting and publishing an
action program to address key remaining administrative barriers to private business,
based on independent survey results and monitored through periodic follow-up surveys;
(b) reducing mandatory state procurement of raw cotton and wheat to no more than 30
percent of actual production, and permitting any private purchaser of wheat or cotton the
unfettered right to export, using decentralized export procedures; and (c) continuing the
ongoing energy sector reform program by improving the sector's structure, regulatory
framework and privatization strategy and by implementing price increases for natural gas,
electricity and petroleum in order to achieve cost recovery levels.
Box 7: Triggers for Base Case Lending Program
In addition to establishment and maintenance of a sound macroeconomic framework acceptable to

the Bank, and compliance with the monitoring indicators for portfolio performance and provision of
macroeconomic and financial data described in Box 6, eligibility for Base Case lending would require the
following additional actions:
* achieve further progress towards a market-determrined exchange rate by:
(a) unifying the official and over-the-counter (OTC) exchange rates;
(b) eliminating all quantitative restrictions on access to foreign exchange for enterprises and
individuals;
(c) eliminating the foreign exchange surrender requirement for decentralized exports; and
(d) reducing the curb market premium over the unified exchange rate to less than 15 percent;
* promote growth of private business, including SMEs and the financial sector, by:
(a) eliminating restrictions on cash withdrawals and circulation; and

*

*

*

(b) elirninating directed credits;
liberalize production, processing and sales of key agricultural crops by:
(a) continuing to price state procurement of raw cotton at the world market level using the formula
in Box 6 except that the farm gate price will be set in US dollars and paid at the OTC
exchange rate prevailing at the time of the harvest;
(b) introducing state procurement pricing of wheat at the world market level (as observed at the
regional commodity exchanges), plus transportation costs;
(c) adopting and publishing a program to increase private sector participation in cotton ginning,
including through privatization of majority stakes in cotton gins, and confirming that such gins
will be subject to decentralized export procedures;
(d) adopting measures to increase user charges for supply of irrigation water to at least operation
and maintenance costs of secondary and tertiary canal systems, based on actual consumption;
strengthen the policy focus on poverty alleviation by:
(a) adopting an official poverty line and establishing systematic monitoring of living standards
through the regular collection and analysis of data on income/consumption and non-income
dimensions of poverty; and
(b) initiating preparation of a PRSP process, including a work plan, staffing and a timetable;
improve public governance and transparency by:
(a) publishing detailed budget documents, and monetary survey, foreign trade, balance of
payments and external debt statistics at least quarterly;
(b) agreeing to an anticorruption diagnostic surveys by an independent organization and to public
dissemination of their results; and
(c) undertaking public financial accountability and procurement assessments in consultation with
Bank staff.

72.
Besides the five operations included in the Low Case, Base Case lending would
comprise 3-4 additional investment operations proposed by the government, including

Page32

Uzbekistan Country Assistance Strategy

possible reinstatement of the Small Investment and Microcredit Fund project, a second
rural enterprise support project, a possible electric power restructuring project, and a
possible human resources/regional poverty alleviation project, totaling up to US$100-150
million in FY04, or later. Although the government has requested the Bank to consider
budgetary financing in support of its most recent plan to achieve current account
convertibility by mid-2002 (as recorded in the SMP agreed with the IMF), the Base Case
as now defined does not provide for adjustment lending. If the need arises and if the
government establishes a program and track record of credible macroeconomic and
structural reforms supported by an IMF financial arrangement during FY02-03,
management would return to Executive Directors with a CAS Update outlining the
government's new program and a recommended strategic response.
73.
Financing. Owing both to its GNI per capita - below the IDA operational
threshold already for several years - and its deteriorated creditworthiness, Uzbekistan,
hitherto an IBRD-only borrower, is eligible to access IDA resources. An IDA Eligibility
Paper was distributed to Executive Directors on November 20, 2001. Accordingly,
planned FY02-04 lending will be financed equally from IBRD and IDA sources.
74.
Detailed Description of Low Case Program. The CAS' first objective (cf. para.
68 above) would be supported mainly through analytical work, supplemented by a
proposed US$10 million technical assistance loan. Its third and fourth objectives would
be supported by four investment projects totaling US$140 million, buttressed by an
analytical program centering around fiduciary economic and sector work (cf. Table 4
below). The size of the lending envelope is deliberately modest because, in the current
policy environment, the number of investment projects that can be achieve full
development impact is limited. Accordingly, the four investment projects proposed are
justified principally on environmental, poverty alleviation, social, and disaster mitigation
and/or prevention grounds, and their effectiveness and impact are not dependent on the
Table 4. Low Case Lending and Non-lending Program, FY02 - 04

FY02
- Bukhara
/Samarkand Water
Supply

US$
m
40

Of which
IBRD IDA
20

20

Lending Program
FY03
US$
Of which
m
IBRD IDA
- Karshi Pumping
Stations Rehab.
55
30
25
Public Finance
Mgt. Reform
-

Subtotal

40

20

20

10

10

0

65

40

25

FY04
- Drainage

US$
m
20

- Health II
_

Total FY02-04:
Of which IBRD
IDA

FY02
- Living Standards Assessment (FY02-03)
- Country Procurement Assessment
- Country Economic Memorandum
(FY02-03)
- Demand-driven Policy Notes

Non-Lending Program
FY03
- Country Financial Accountability
Assessment
- Energy Sector Review (FY03-04)
- Public Expenditure Review (FY03-04)
- Demand-Driven Policy Notes

Of which
IBRD IDA

1l0

10

25

5

20

45

15

30
150
75
75

FY04
- Anti-Corruption Diagnostic Survey
- Demand-Driven Policy Notes

Page 33

Uzbekistan Country Assistance Strategy

current unsatisfactory foreign exchange and trade regime. At the same time, they will
enable the Bank to remain engaged as a credible developmental partner at an important
stage in Uzbekistan's transition. IFC's program would complement Bank activities in
private sector development under (b) above, with targeted technical assistance aimed at
identifying and overcoming impediments to private sector development and building
local capacity. In this context, a new IFC activity is the Swiss-financed Central
Asia/Private Enterprise Partnership (PEP) program, whose first project last September
was to provide financial analysis training in Ukraine to selected staff of
UzbeklnvestProject, designed to strengthen its capacity in investment project evaluation.
More recently, PEP began a six-month field survey of Uzbekistan's SME sub sector,
specifically impediments to growth and policy measures required to overcome them, the
results of which are expected to be available by mid-2002.
75.
Liberalization of Foreign Exchange and Trade Regime, Improved
Governance and Transparency. Pending actual progress towards real foreign exchange
and trade liberalization, Bank involvement in this key area would be entirely analytical,
guided by the authorities' interest and commitment, including their willingness to make
available the data required. Against this background, preparation of a Country Economic
Memorandum is planned to start later in FY02, for completion in FY03. Second, a
proposed Public Finance Management Reform Project (FY03) is designed to improve
fiscal discipline and transparency, strategic resource allocation, and efficiency of resource
use. This would be complemented by a Public Expenditure Review to be started in FY03
and completed in FY04. Third, a Country ProcurementAssessment (FY02), a Country
FinancialManagement Assessment (FY03), and an Anti-Corruption Diagnostic Survey
(FY04) would be undertaken and completed. Thesefiduciary studies would contribute to
improved governance and transparency and deepen the Bank's understanding in these
areas.
76.
Private Sector Investment and Trade. Until there is significant change in the
macroeconomic policy environment, Bank involvement in this area would be through
supervision of two ongoing technical assistance/institutional development projects
(EnterpriseInstitution Building Loan, FinancialInstitution Building Loan). The recently
approved Rural Enterprise Support Project will also be a test of the private, rural sector's
response to a liberalized agricultural production, marketing, and trading environment. At
the same time, IFC would continue its focus on micro enterprise and SME development
and financial sector capacity building to help create true financial intermediation through
the development of local financial institutions. This support will be provided by
strengthening existing financial institutions through training and investment as well as
through the creation of new intermediaries which will provide investment capital to micro
enterprises, as well as non-banking financial services. The development of leasing,
particularly micro-leasing, will be a key focus of IFC's PEP program. Direct lending to
larger projects that may be economically viable under prevailing business conditions will
also be considered. If the business climate improves and if privatization of banks,
infrastructure, and major state enterprises accelerates, IFC would expect to provide both
technical and financial support. The scope of IFC lending will ultimately depend on the
pace of reform and the development of a more conducive private sector business
environment.

Page 34

Uzbekistan Country Assistance Strategy

77.
Reform in Infrastructure and Energy. The proposed Bukhara and Samarkand
Water Supply Project will help introduce international best practice public utility reforms
(inter alia through a service contract executed by a private foreign utility operator) in two
of Uzbekistan's largest cities, with expected demonstration benefits elsewhere in the
country. It will also improve the level and quality of services in these two cities,
especially in the poorest neighborhoods. In the energy sector, reform is expected to
follow a two-step process: first, restructuring, which would include diagnosis of the
sector, analysis of policy options, and implementation; followed by privatization,
comprising valuation, tendering, negotiations, and transaction closure. The Enterprise
Institution Building Loan will finance preparation for privatization of several energy
sector-related enterprises included in the new COM Resolution No. 119 on privatization,
including the necessary technical assistance and advisory services. As privatization of
the sector is undertaken and strategic investors identified, IFC would work with investors
and the government to structure the investments and provide the required investment
capital. In addition, to understand medium- and long-term options, an Energy Sector
Review would be initiated in FY03 and completed by FY04.
78.
Efficiency of Social Services. The long-delayed Living Standards Assessment
(LSA) would update the government, the Bank and the international donor community
about recent trends in living standards in Uzbekistan, including its poverty profile and the
causes and distribution of poverty. As the first-ever nationwide survey of living
standards, it will help the government review its social protection/poverty reduction
policies and programs which, to date, have tended to emphasize general price subsidies at
the expense of more targeted assistance to those most in need. Analysis will be
disaggregated by gender to the extent possible. The LSA will also provide valuable input
into the preparation of Uzbekistan's PRSP. Second, a proposed Health II Project (FY04)
is expected to continue support of the primary health care and financing reforms now
underway under Health I, the main purpose of which is gradually to shift resource
allocation from expensive inpatient care to more cost-effective outpatient services. IFC
is already involved in a small private sector investment for the manufacture of medical
supplies and pharmaceuticals and it plans to coordinate closely with the Bank in seeking
similar future opportunities.
79.
Maintenance of Irrigation and Drainage Infrastructure. To address the most
urgent rural infrastructure problems - which, if unattended, could lead to humanitarian
disaster and further environmental degradation - the Low Case includes an irrigation
infrastructure rehabilitation project and a drainage project. The proposed Karshi
Pumping Stations Rehabilitation Project (FY03) comprises rehabilitation of several lift
pumping stations which, owing to inadequate maintenance since the early 1990s, require
urgent remedial action. It would benefit the rural population in Kashkadarya Oblast,
where more than 2 million people, many of them poor, depend entirely on water pumped
from the Amu Darya River and delivered along the Karshi cascade for agriculture,
drinking, and industrial use. It would also reduce the risks of failure of the cascade and
thus of a possible social catastrophe involving the potential involuntary resettlement of
over a million people in a country with little unused irrigable land. The project would
also address environmental damage caused by excessive soil salinity. The proposed

Page 35

Uzbekistan Country Assistance Strategy

DrainageProject (FY04), part of the Aral Sea Basin Program, would minimize further

soil and water salinity of the Uzbekistan (right bank) side of the Amu Darya River
through urgent infrastructure rehabilitation and reconstruction to improve disposal of
drainage water; and also capacity building in operation and maintenance activities. The
project's main beneficiaries would be over 300,000 people in the southern districts of
Karakalpakstan, one of the poorest regions in the country, whose employment and
incomes are threatened by increased water logging and salinity caused by inefficient
operation and maintenance of existing drainage facilities. The project's environmental
benefits would include improved water quality in the Amu Darya, reduced soil salinity,
and enhanced biodiversity in two wetland areas/drainage lakes.
80.
Other Areas of Intervention. In addition to these country-specific activities and
operations, two global programs, the Global Environmental Facility (GEF) and Global
Development Learning Network, and several regional economic and sector studies on
issues common to Central Asia countries (for example, energy and water, transport and
trade, community-driven development), will complement the Uzbekistan program.
81.
World Bank Institute (WBI). WBI is undertaking a number of capacity
building programs in Central Asia, including Uzbekistan, designed to improve knowledge
and enhance capacity of major development stakeholders and also to support the PRSP
process. Relying on its established wide network of local partners and in close
collaboration with the ECA NGO Steering Committee, WBI plans to expand its civil
society outreach program through national training courses and a regional workshop. It
also plans to launch an "Attacking Poverty Program" involving two activities: a core
course in Poverty Analysis for Policymaking and Development Debates. Governance
and public sector reform issues will be addressed by WBI's Decentralization and
Evaluation Capacity Building Programs. Finally, as part of its human development
priority, core courses on pension reform and national seminars under the umbrella of
Social Policy Reform in Transition Countries will be offered. An internet-based distance
learning program is also planned.
82.
IFC. While recent government decrees and initiatives to improve the business
environment are encouraging, new direct IFC investments will continued to be limited
until there is significant overall policy change. Meanwhile, IFC will continue its
dialogue with the government to improve the business environment while, at the same
time, implementing a strategy that focuses primarily on: (a) supporting SMEs, including
micro enterprises through lines of credit to commercial banks; (b) capacity building in the
financial sector through financial, including non-banking, intermediaries; (c) selected
investments in sectors with significant export potential, such as natural resources, or
which support the privatization process; and (d) providing technical assistance leading to
new private sector investment, especially through the PEP initiative. (Details of IFC's
existing and proposed FY02-04 strategy are contained in Annex 15). MIGA will
continue to facilitate foreign investments in the country.
In the past two years, more than 500 participants from central and local governments, academia and
civil society attended WBI training programs in the thematic areas of labor market, social sector, health
sector reform, basics of market economy, intergovernmental fiscal relations, macroeconomic management,
trade policy and WTO accession, corporate governance, and distance learning.
18

Page 36

Uzbekistan Country Assistance Strategy

83.
Performance Indicators. The Bank Group has agreed with the government on a
set of country performance indicators designed to monitor progress toward meeting the
four key objectives of the CAS (Table 5 below). For its own portfolio, the Bank will
continue the practice of annual CPPRs and semi-annual mini-CPPRs.
It will also
continue regular consultations with other donors and members of civil society, and
incorporate feedback from these parties, as well as from the government, in updating the
strategy as circumstances dictate.

Table 5. PERFORMANCE INDICATORS
Government benchmarks
Poverty
Macro and Governance

Social Sectors

Rural/Agriculture

Infrastructure

Private Sector
Development

.________
_

Environment

Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper. Poverty
monitoring system in place.
* Reduction of tax burden and improvement of tax
incentives through the shift of taxation from production
to consumption and simplification of tax and custom
tariff system.
*
Reduction of inflation through reduction in the
Central Bank's budget financing to no more than 0.5%
of GDP, and an increase in the Central Bank's
refinancing rate to the positive level in real terms.
*
Continued timely servicing of external debt with
zero arrears accumulation.
*
Capacity building in 3 regions for replication of
health sector restructuring in remaining
rayons/subregions
*
Implementation of new medical education
curricula for General Practice physicians and universal
nurses
*
Health sector rationalization plans developed and
implemented in each region annually
* Replacement of the state order system for cotton
and wheat by a state procurement system, under which
obligatory sales to the state will not exceed 50 percent of
actual production.
*

Bank benchmarks
*

Poverty Assessment completed.

Increase in transparency, quality, and public
availability of economic data.
*
Improvement in public expenditure as stipulated in
the Public Finance Management Reform Project.
*
Gradual liberalization of access to foreign exchange
for enterprises and individuals.
*
Completion of "fiduciary ESWs"
*

Increase numbers of pregnant women receiving
tetanus immunization
*
Increase coverage of infants receiving hepatitis B
vaccine
*
Capitation (I line payment) fully implemented in
pilot rayons for SVPs (primary health care facilities)
*
Placement of trained physicians and nurses in rural
SVPs.
*
Preparation of a draft enactment regarding
subrogation with respect to land use rights pledged as
collateral.
*
Increase average quote for Uzbek cotton exported by
5% in value terms (relative to the average of the quotes for
the other cotton traded by other major cotton-exporting
countries traded on intemational exchanges).
* Vodokanals of Bukhara, Samarkand, Urgench, and * Improve quality and access of water supply services
Nukus to increase revenue collection to cover operation
to 1.1 million people living in urban areas (12% of urban
and maintenance costs.
population) and I million people living in rural areas (6.5%
*
Involvement of private sector in the management
of rural population).
and operation of vodokanals as stipulated in the Bukhara *
Improvement of the decentralization and financial
and Samarkand Water Supply Project
policies in the municipal water sector as stipulated in the
__ __ __ _ _ __________
Bukhara and Samarkand Water Supply Project.
. Increase competition between commercial banks
*
Successful implementation of 15 enterprise plans and
and boost efficiency and innovation of banking system
sale of 5 large scale firms to strategic investors.
by reduced market concentration; decreased sectoral
*
Preparation/restructuring of two selected Uzbek
segmentation of existing banks.
banks for privatization.
*
Improve prudential regulations and strengthen the
supervision capacity of the Central Bank of Uzbekistan
(CBU), including strengthened reporting capacity of the
commercial banks and improved skills and organization
*

of the Supervision Department of the CBU.

.

New procedures and guidance for reviewing
environmental assessments and complying with
environmental assessment and pollution control laws
and regulations

Preparation and adoption of revised policies,
regulations, procedures, and/or guidance for improved
compliance with environmental laws.
*
Increased public participation in environmental
*

decision making

Implementation

*
Improved disbursement ratios; development
objectives met for all projects.

Uzbekistan Country Assistance Strategy

Page 3 7

84.
Aid Coordination and Development Partners. External aid and foreign direct
investment is coordinated by the Cabinet of Ministers' Department for Coordination of
External Economic Activity (DCEEA). The principal multilateral institutions involved in
Uzbekistan are: AsDB, EBRD, EU-TACIS, and several UN Agencies (UNDP,
UNDCCP, UNFPA, UNHCR, UNICEF, and WHO) (see also Annex 11). The main
bilateral donors include: France, Germany (GTZ and KfW), Japan (JBIC and JICA),
Kuwait (KFAED), Korea, Switzerland, and the United States. Except for Germany
(KfW), Japan (JBIC), Kuwait (KFAED) and Korea, who all provide modest capital aid,
most donor financing consists of technical assistance only. The key international NGOs
active in Uzbekistan include: Counterpart Consortium, Eurasia Foundation, ICRC, Joint
Development Associates (JDA), Mercy Corps, Open Society/Soros Foundation, NOVIB,
and World Concern. The Bank enjoys close working relations with all these donors,
mainly through their representatives in Tashkent. Bank coordination with the IMF,
AsDB, and EBRD has been particularly close.
85.
There has been no meeting of the Consultative Group for Uzbekistan since 1994,
but formal and informal donor meetings for coordination and information sharing are
frequent in-country. Theme meetings in Tashkent, whereby each donor coordinates a
subject area or sector reflecting its comparative advantage, provide another forum for
coordination. The Bank coordinates groups for the environment and financial sectors,
and chairs the UN/UNAIDS Theme Group for HIV/AIDS.

V.

CREDITWORTHINESS AND RISKS

86.
With external debt doubling, debt service almost tripling and exports significantly
lower since 1996, Uzbekistan's creditworthiness has weakened recently, affecting its
ability to attract external financing from commercial sources on favorable terms. This
also reflects uneven macroeconomic policy performance and the slow, uncertain pace of
structural reforms, particularly the liberalization of the foreign exchange regime. In
addition, the economy has become more susceptible to exogenous shocks such as
droughts and commodity price declines. However, Uzbekistan's currently comfortable
foreign exchange reserves (US$1.2 billion at end-2001) have so far helped it offset
transitory shocks. It also has a large export potential, and a number of its products gold, cotton, energy, and minerals - are highly valued in the international markets.
Recognizing that the costs of maintaining status quo are rising with time and
creditworthiness is suffering as a result, the authorities have recently tightened external
borrowing and agreed on an SMP with the IMF. If the SMP is successfully implemented
and a comprehensive program of accelerated reform follows, Uzbekistan's debt carrying
capacity and creditworthiness are expected to improve. If, on the other hand, reforms lag,
the government will be expected to limit new external borrowing so as to ensure no
further deterioration in creditworthiness.
87.

Nevertheless, Uzbekistan faces important short- and medium-term risks:
*

Credibility of reforms and inadequate adjustment. For political reasons or
otherwise, the government has not always followed through on announced
reform, thereby compromising its credibility. A track record of consistent,

Uzbekistan Country Assistance Strategy

Page 38

comprehensive reforms will be essential if investors' perceptions are to be
changed and if the full benefits of reforms envisioned under the SMP and
beyond realized.
Partial reform implementation and incomplete
macroeconomic adjustment would pose a particular risk in the Base Case.
For example, with the lifting of administrative restrictions on foreign trade,
a failure to let the exchange rate adjust to market fundamentals may result
in imports surge and an unsustainable increase in external financing needs.
*

External vulnerability. Uzbekistan's economy remains poorly diversified,
with primary commodities accounting for about 90 percent of exports.
Thus, world commodity price fluctuations, especially of cotton and gold,
affect export earnings. Uzbekistan is also vulnerable to an increase in
international interest rates, given its recent dependence on external
commercial borrowing.

*

Fiscal and governance. While the budget has been kept in reasonable
balance, it relies to a large extent on taxing state enterprises while providing
off-budget subsidies to selected enterprises. There are at least three
emergent risks: (a) that liabilities would fall on the budget once enterprise
distress is translated into inability to service publicly guaranteed external
and domestic debt; (b) that, with a deepening of enterprise reform and
hardening of budget constraints, state enterprises may not be able to provide
the current level of tax revenues; and (c) that an increase in balance of
payments pressures could prompt further rationing of foreign exchange,
leading to increased rent-seeking and government corruption.

*

Financial sector vulnerability. As a result of pervasive state intervention
and slow progress in restructuring and privatization, potentially serious
problems exist in terms of the management, asset quality, financial
soundness, and viability of Uzbekistan's banks. Moreover, the banking
system is highly exposed to shocks, including the possible adverse impact
of exchange rate unification. Given the high level of on-lending by
commercial banks, widespread enterprise defaults could trigger a collapse
of the financial system.

88.
At December 2001, Uzbekistan's obligation to IBRD was US$237 million, about
0.2 percent of the total IBRD portfolio. However, as noted above, Uzbekistan's
creditworthiness has recently weakened, and its Atlas GNI per capita has been below the
IDA operational threshold for several years. In 2000, Atlas GNI per capita is estimated at
US$620 and is expected to decline in dollar terms for the next few years. Based on
income and creditworthiness considerations, the current CAS will limit the Bank Group's
additional exposure to Uzbekistan during FY02-04 to US$150 million in the Low Case
and to US$300-350 million in the Base Case, with a 50/50 Bank/IDA blend. [An IDA
Eligibility Paper was distributed to Executive Directors on November 20, 2001
(IDA/SecM2001-0681]. Meanwhile, the CAS assumes that, at a minimum, the
macroeconomic framework will not deteriorate and that the government will stabilize
external debt stock. Given the risks, Bank staff will pay particular attention to
monitoring the overall economic situation, especially the level and profile of external

Page 39

Uzbekistan Country Assistance Strategy

borrowing, movements in the parallel exchange market premium, and foreign currency
reserves.

VI.

CAS PARTICIPATORY AND CONSULTATION PROCESS

89.
In preparing the CAS, an outline of key issues was distributed in mid-CYOO and
formed the background for initial discussions with the government led by the Country
Director. An inter-ministerial working group, chaired by the Deputy Minister of
Macroeconomics and Statistics, was formally established in July 2000, which
subsequently prepared detailed comments on the draft CAS itself in early 2001. At the
same time, the Deputy Prime Minister responsible for economic policy wrote to the
Bank, expressing the authorities' concerns about the Bank's overall assessment and also
the single Low Case lending scenario then proposed. In reply, a high-level Bank team
led by ECA's then Chief Economist visited Tashkent in July 2001 for an additional round
of CAS discussions. Given reforms to the foreign exchange regime then underway and in
prospect, it was decided to postpone completion of the CAS until early 2002, partly to
assess their impact and partly to provide additional time for the authorities' to establish a
track record. Follow-up discussions continued in October 2001, during the Regional
Vice President's visit to Tashkent, and in November 2001, during a visit by the Deputy
Prime Minister to Washington. Unfortunately, despite this extended and extensive
consultation process, the Bank's and the government's views about the country's recent
macroeconomic performance and prospects, and also its deteriorated creditworthiness,
still do not filly coincide.
90.
As far as broader consultation and participation are concerned, Uzbekistan's civil
society and institutions, including its parliament, media, and the small number of
genuinely independent NGOs are still evolving. Given the high degree of governmental
influence, in some cases control, of many aspects of the country's economy, CAS
consultations with civil society posed special challenges. Notwithstanding these
constraints, the Country Office, in addition to its continuous dialogue with members of
parliament, media representatives, local and international NGOs, and members of the
international development and investment community in Tashkent, arranged a series of
CAS-specific consultations in late April/early May 2001, using a draft Executive
Summary and the country manager's oral briefing as the framework.

James D. Wolfensohn
President
By:
Shengman Zhang
Washington, D.C.
February 22, 2002

Peter Woicke

I

Uzbekistan at a glance

1/17/02

Europe &

POVERTY and SOCIAL
Uzbekistan

Central
Asia

'LowIncome

24.7
620
15.3

475
2,010
956

2,459
420
1,030

1.6
2.7

0.1
0.6

1.9
2.4

37
70
19
19
85

67
69
21

32
59
77

90

76

2000
Population, mid-year (millions)
GNI Per capita (Atlas method. US$)
GNI (Atlas method, US$ billions)

Development diamond*
Life expectancy

Average annual growth. 1994-00
Populaton (96)
Labor force (%)
Most recent estimate (latest year available, 1994-00)

I

GNI
pr
capita

Gross
primary
enrollment

4

Poverty (%of population below national povertv line)

Urban population (%of total population)
Life expectancy at birth (years)
Infant mortalitv (per 1,000 live births)
Child malnutrition (%of children under 5)
Access to an improved water source (96of population)
Illiteracv(%ofpopulation age 15+)

Gross primarv enrollment (%of school-ape population)
Male
Female

KEY ECONOMIC RATIOS and LONG-TERM TRENDS
1980

Access to improved water source

1

3

100

100

38

96

100
100

101
99

102
86

1990

1999

2000

GDP (at indicative exchange rate, US$ billion

..

..

8.7

7.7

Gross domestic investmentUGDP
Exports of goods and services/GDP
Gross domestic savingslGDP

..
..
..
..

32.2
28.8
13.2

17.8
35.7
17.3

11.1
44.1
16.6

..

15.9

13.5

..
..
..
..
..
..

..
..

-1.9
2.0
54.6

2.4
3.2

Gross national savingslGDP

Current account balancelGDP
Interest pavments/GDP
Total debtWGDP
Total debt servicelexports
Present value of debtUGDP

Present value of debt/exports
(average annual growth)
GDP
GDP per capita
Exports of goods and services

..
..
..
..

17.7
54.7

56.7
26.5
56.1

151.5

125.9

1980-90 199040

1999

2000

2000-04

*

-0.5
-2.4

4.4
2.9

4.0
2.9

2.4
1.0

..

-1.2

-8.1

9.2

4.3

1980

1990

1999

2000

32.8
33.0

33.5
24.6
10.5

34.9
23.0
9.7

34.3

41.9

42.1

61.4
25.4

62.1
20.6

63.7
19.7

47.8

36.3

38.6

1980-90 199040

1999

2000

0.1
-3.2

5.9
4.0

3.2
1.9

zbekistan

-U

Low-income group

Economic ratios'
Trade

Domestic
savings

Investment
Inetmn

Indebtedness

Uzbe/stan
Low-income group

STRUCTURE of the ECONOMY
(%of GDP)
Agriculture
Industry
Manufacturing

*-

Servioes

..
..
..

Private consumption
General govemment consumption
Imports of goods and services

..
..
..

(average annual growth)
Agriculture
Industry
Manufacturing
Services

..
..
..
..

..

..

0.3

..

3.7

..

6.0

Private consumption
General govemment consumption

..

..

..

..

Gross domestic investment
Imports of goods and services

..
..

..

..

..

GDP Growth I%)
r

07

_se

0 09 oo3

-lo-

-

GDP

Growth of exports and imports (%)
30 T
25
1
10

\

96

20
.- 30

-3.3

-8.0

Exports

e-Irnports

-5.8

Note: 2000 data are preliminary estimates.
The diamonds show four kev indicators in the countrV (inbold) compared with its income-group average. If data are missing, the diamond will
be incomplete.

Uzbekistan
PRICES and GOVERNMENT FINANCE
Domestic prkes

19B0

1990

1999

2000

(%change)
Consumer prices
Implicit GDP deflator
Government finance
(%of GDP, includes current grants)
Current revenue
Current budget balance
Overall surplus/deficit

Inflation (%)
400I

*-

3.1
4.0

..

29.1
44.0

25.0
44.3

300k

200
100
0

..

29.3
4.7
-2.6

..

..

..

28.5
5.5
-2.1

I.

95

go

98

97

00

99

GDP deflator

CPI

TRADE
(UIS$ millions)

1980

1990

1999

2000

2.790

2.935
897
809
205
2.696
361
113
1.044

Total exports (fob)
Cotton fiber
Gold
Manufactures
Total imports (cif)
Food
Fuel and energy
Capital goods

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..

..

..
..

..
..

Export price index (1995=100)
Import price index (1995=100)

..
..

..
..

79
92

88

Terms of trade (1995=100)

..

..

86

95

1999

2000

3,099
3.144
-45

3,383
2.962
422
-251

833
810
205
2.841
408
67

1394

Export and Import levels (USS mill.)
5s000

4.0C0
3.000
2.000

3

L

_

_

_

_

_

95

9B

97

9t

99

1000
0

_

I
94

93

* Exports

:
00

* imports

BALANCE of PAYMENTS
1980

1990

Current account balance to GOP (%)

(US$ millions)
Exports of goods and services
Imports of aoods and serves
Resource balance

..
..
..

Net income

..

-168

Net current transfers

..

49

13

-164

184

4

283

-87
-97

4

Current account balance
Financing items (net)
Channes in net reserves

..

.
.

..
..
..

.
..

..
..

..
..

-99

42 -

o

00

-2

-

-

Memo:

Reserves induding gold (USS millions)
Indicative exchanne rate (local/US$)

1.242
245.6

1,273
416.7

1990

2000

4.737
203

4.344
217

EXTERNAL DEBT and RESOURCE FLOWS

1980
(US$ millions)
Total debt outstanding and disbursed
IBRD

IDA
Total debt service
IBRD
IDA

Composition of net resource flows
Official grants
Official creditors
Private creditors
Foreign direct investment
Portfolio equitv
World Bank program
Commitments
Disbursements
Principal repayments

1990

Composition of 2000 debt (USS mill.)
..

..

.

..

0

..

..

555

904

..

..

..

..

12
0

17
0

..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..

15
380
689
121

16
240
-75
75

G:282 A:217C:127

0G:5A2717
D: 238

F: 1,934

E: 1,546

0

*-0
..
..
..

..
..
..

25
28
1

29
31
5

Net flows

..

..

27

26

Interest pawments
Net transfers

..
..

..
..

11
18

12
14

Development Economics

A -IBRD
B-IDA
C- IMF

D -Other rnxttDtateral

E -Bilateral
F -Private
G -Short-terrr

1/17/02

2

ANNEX 2 (B2)

Uzbekistan: Selected Indicators* of Bank Portfolio Performance and
Management
As of 01/18/2002

Indicator
PortfolioAssessment
Number of Projects Under Implementation a
Average Implementation Period (years) b
Percent of Problem Projects by Number a, c
Percent of Problem Projects by Amount a, c
Percent of Projects at Risk by Number a, d
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount a, d
Disbursement Ratio (%) e
PortfolioManagement
CPPR during the year (yes/no)
Supervision Resources (total US$)
Average Supervision (US$/project)

Memorandum Item
Proj Eval by OED by Number
Proj Eval by OED by Amt (US$ millions)
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Number
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt

1999

2000

2001

2002

7
2.1
28.6
52.4
42.9
63.6
12.4

8
2.7
37.5
56.7
50
66.8
12

7
3.2
14.3
10.1
42.9
47.7
16.2

8
3.2
12.5
8.9
50
51.7
12.8

Yes
747
106.7

Yes
860
107.5

Yes
640
91

No
754
107.7

Since FY 80
Last Five FYs
2**
3**
182
22
50
0
88
0

As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY).
Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio.
Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) and/or implementation progress (IP).
As defned under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the
beginning of the year: Investment projects only.
* All indicators are for projects active in the Portfolio, with the exception of Disbursement Ratio,
which includes all active projects as well as projects which exited during the fiscal year.
** One of the evaluated projects was not rated.

a.
b.
c.
d.
e.

ANNEX 3 (B3)

Uzbekistan: IBRD/IDA Program Summary
As of01118/2002

Proposed IBRD/IDA Low-Case Lending Program '
Fiscalyear

Proj ID

USUM)

2002

BUKHARA/SAMARKAND WATER SUPPLY

40.0

RURAL ENTERPRISE SUPPORT
Result

36.1
76.1

PUB FIN MGMT REFORM
KARSHI PUMPING STATIONS REHAB
Result

10.0
55.0
65.0

DRAINAGE
HEALTH 2

20.0
25.0

Result

45.0

2003

2004

Overall result
a. This table presents the proposed program for the next three fiscal years.

Strategic Rewards
(HIMIL)

b

Implementation Risks
b (HIMIL)

H
H

M
H

H
M

M
M

M
M

M
M

186.1

b. For each project, indicate whether the strategic rewards and implementation risks are expected to be high (H),
moderate (M), or low (L).
c. Rural Enterprise Support Loan is a carry-over from FY98-00 CAS and is not part of the US$ 150 mn. FY02-04 Low Case lending envelope.

ANNEX 4 (B3)

Uzbekistan: IFC and MIGA Program Summary, FY 1999-2002

IFC approvals (US$m)

1999

2000

2001

2002

44.3

2.0

3.0

0.0

68.0

15.0

100.0

Sector (%)
FINANCE & INSURANCE
FOOD & BEVERAGES
INDUSTRIAL & CONS PROD
NONMETALLIC MINERAL

Total

32.0
85.0

100.0

100.0

100.0

0.0

97.0
3.0

64.0
15.0
21.0

100.0

100.0

100.0

100.0

0.0

10.0

10.0

0.0

0.0

Investment instrument(%)
Loans
Equity
Quasi-Equity
Other
Total

MIGA guarantees (US$m)

ANNEX 5 (B4)

Uzbekistan: Summary of Non-lending Services
Product

Completion FY

cost
Cost

Audiencea

Objective

FY00
FY00

199.0
13.5

G, B, D
G, B, D

KG, PS
KG, PS

FY00
FY01/02

25.0
9.6

G, B, D
G, B, D

KG, PS
KG,PS

FY02

399.2

G, B, D

PD

FY02
FY02
FY02
FY03

264.0
81.0
18.0
292.0

G,
G,
G,
G,

B, D
B, D
B, D
B, D

KG,PS
KG,PS
KG,PS
KG, PS

FY03
FY04
FY03/04
FY04
FY04

157.0
300.0
60.0
214.0
100.0

G,
G,
G,
G,
G,

B, D
B, D
B, D
B, D
B, D

KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PD, PS

FYOI
FYO1
FYOI
FY02
FY03

80.8
38.8
80.1
24.1
56.0

b

ESW:
Recent Completions
Social and Structural Policy Report
Economic Note I (Social Cost of Currency
Convertibility)
Economic Note 11 (Competition Policy)
Economic Note III (Assessment of Foreign
Exchange Regime)
Country Assistance Strategy
Underway
Living Standards Assessment
Country Procurement Assessment
Community Driven Development
Country Economic Memorandum
Planned
Country Financial Accountability Assessment
Public Expenditure Review
Demand-Driven Policy Notes
Energy Sector Review
Anti-Corruption Diagnostic Survey
IDF Activities:
Economic Statistics
Economic Policy Analysis
Public Procurement
Competition Policy
Environmental Management

a. Government (G), donor (D), Bank (B), public dissemination (P).
b. Knowledge generation (KG), public debate (PD), problem-solving (PS)

G, B
G, B
G, B, P
G, B
G, B

KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS

ANNEX 6 (B5)

Uzbekistan: Social Development Indicators
Latest single year

POPULATION
Total population, mid-year (millions)
Growth rate (%annual average for period)
Urban population (%of population)
Total fertility rate (births per woman)

Same regionlincome group

1970-75

1980-85

1993-00

Europe &
Central
Asia

13.9
3.0
39.1
5.7

18.1
2.5
40.7
4.7

24.7
1.8
36.9
2.7

474.7
0.1
66.8
1.6

..

..

..

..

..

..

620
548

2,010
182

420
138

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

4.3
5.1
8.8

1.2
3.3

100
100
100

100
101
99

96
102
86

90
95
82

76
88
70

97
97

64
70

70
66
73

69

59
58
60

LowIncome
2,458.7
1.9
31.9
3.7

POVERTY
(%of population)
National headcount index

Urban headcount index
Rural headcount index
INCOME
GNI per capita (US$)
Consumer price index (1995=100)
Food price index (1995=100)

INCOME/CONSUMPTION DISTRIBUTION
Gini index
Lowest quintile (%of income or consumption;
Highest quintile (%of income or consumption

33.3
7.4
40.9

SOCIAL INDICATORS
Public expenditure
Health (%of GDP)
Education (%of GNI)
Social security and welfare (%of GDP)

3.4
7.7

..

..

..

..

..

..

..
..

..
..

..

..

..
..

..
..

..

..

85
96
78

..

..

96

..

..

..

..

99
19

..

Gross primary school enrollment rate
(%of age group)
Total
Male
Female

Access to Improved water source
(%of population)
Total
Urban
Rural

Immunization rate
(%under 12 months)
Measles
DPT
Child malnutrition (%under 5 years)

Life expectancy at birth
(years)
Total
Male
Female

Mortality
Infant (per 1,000 live births)
Under 5 (per 1,000 live births)

Adult (15-59)
Male (per 1,000 population)
Female (per 1,000 population)
Matemal (per 100,000 live births)
Births attended by skilled health staff (%)

..

68
65
71

..

45

..
..

..

254
147

..

219
116

..

..

..

..

64
73

19

21

29

26

116

227
125

289
127

288
258

21
98

Note: 0 or 0.0 means zero or less than half the unit shown. Net enrollment ratios exceeding 100 indicate discrepancies
between the estimates of school-age population and reported enrollment data. Latest year for access to improved water
source data is 2000.
2001 Worid Development Indicators CD-ROM, World Bank

77

ANNEX 7 (B6)

Uzbekistan: Key Economic Indicators

Indicator
National accounts (as % of GDP)
Gross domestic producta
Agriculture
Industry
Services

1996

1997

Actual
1998

1999

2000

Estimate
2001

2002

Projected
2003

2004

100
26
30
43

100
32
26
42

100
31
26
43

100
34
25
42

100
35
23
42

100
34
22
43

100
34
22
43

100
35
22
43

100
35
22
43

Total Consumption
Gross domestic fixed investment
Government investment
Private investment

77
29
7
22

81
23
7
15

84
17
7
10

83
18
7
11

83
11
6
5

87
11
5
7

85
13
5
9

84
13
5
8

84
13
5
8

Exports (GNFS)bC
Imports (NFS) bc

28
34

37
41

31
32

36
36

44
39

44
42

49
47

49
46

49
45

Gross domestic savings
Gross national savingsd

23
22

19
17

16
16

17
16

17
13

13
11

15
13

16
13

16
14

13,949

10,706

10,715

8,669

7,666

7,338

6,840

7,408

7,825

1,010

1,010

870

720

620

550

410

340

310

Real annual growth rates (%, calculated from the previous year's prices)
4.3
1.7
2.5
Gross domestic product at market prices

4.4

4.0

3.8

2.0

2.0

2.0

Real annual per capita growth rates (%, calculated from the previous year's prices)
2.9
2.6
-0.2
0.6
Gross domestic product at market prices

2.9

2.4

0.7

0.7

0.7

Memorandum items
Gross domestic product
(US$ million)'
GNP per capita (US$, Atlas method)'

Balance of Payments (US$ millions)
Exports (GNFS)b
Merchandise FOB
Imports (GNFS)b
Merchandise FOB
Resource balance
Net current transfers
Current account balance

3,862
3,534
4,767
4,240
-905
-2
-980

3,987
3,695
4,424
3,767
-437
29
-584

3,372
3,048
3,417
2,938
-45
43
-103

3,099
2,790
3,144
2,587
-45
49
-164

3,383
2,935
2,962
2,441
422
13
184

3,217
2,755
3,074
2,479
143
33
-33

3,351
2,855
3,233
2,608
118
32
-63

3,616
3,082
3,427
2,771
189
34
16

3,802
3,240
3,560
2,884
242
34
68

Net private foreign direct investment
Long-term loans (net)
Official
Private

90
655
229
426

167
165
32
133

140
627
207
420

121
1,069
380
689

75
165
240
-75

76
234
75
159

83
7
117
-110

88
25
83
-58

92
36
102
-66

Other capital (net, incl. errors &omissions)

185

-229

-663

-927

-327

-336

-93

-96

-172

50

480

-1

-99

-97

59

66

-33

-25

-6.5

-4.1

-0.4

-0.5

5.5

1.9

1.7

2.6

3.1

1.7
3.5
71.5

4.6
-2.4
-11.2

-17.5
-16.8
-25.4

-8.5
-8.8
-9.1

5.2
1.3
-5.1

-6.1
-12.9
1.4

3.6
-1.9
5.1

7.9
6.6
6.1

5.1
4.9
4.0

Change in reservesf
Memorandum items
Resource balance (% of GDP)
Annual value growth rates
Merchandise exports (FOB)
Principal primary commodities'
Merchandise imports (CIF)

(Continued)

Uzbekistan: Key Economic Indicators
(Continued)

Indicator

1996

Public finance (as % of GDP at market prices)"
Current revenues
34.3
Current expenditures
30.8
3.4
Current account surplus (+) or deficit (-)
Capital expenditure
10.8
Overall budget deficit
-7.3
Monetary indicators
M2/GDP
GrowthofM2(%)
Private sector credit growth /
total credit growth (%)
Prices
Indicative exchange rate (US$/LCU)ij
Consumer price index (% changer
GDP deflator (% change)

1997

Actual
1998

1999

2000

Estimate
2001

2002

Projected
2003

2004

30.3
25.1
5.2
7.4
-2.2

31.2
26.7
4.5
7.8
-3.3

29.3
24.6
4.7
7.4
-2.6

28.5
23.0
5.5
7.8
-2.3

27.1
22.8
4.3
6.7
-2.4

28.6
24.6
4.0
7.1
-3.2

28.2
23.6
4.6
7.0
-2.4

28.2
23.6
4.6
6.9
-2.2

21.0
113.3
57.3

17.5
45.6
136.2

15.4
28.1
92.5

13.6
32.1
89.5

12.4
37.1
108.2

11.8
40.7
95.7

11.8
32.9
95.8

12.1
35.8
90.6

12.4
30.7
90.7

40.1

91.2

132.2

245.6

416.7

645.3

920.0

1,126.4

1,359.7

54.0
81.6

70.9
70.5

29.0
39.0

29.1
44.0

25.0
44.3

27.2
42.8

28.3
30.3

30.2
30.0

25.1
25.0

a. GDP at factor cost
b. "GNFS" denotes "goods and nonfactor services."
c. At the indicative exchange rate. Ihe indlicative rate is a weighted average ot otticial rate (ou"/o), commercial bank/O L; rate
(10%), and curb market rate (30%). For 1996 when the multiple exchange rate practice was less pronounced, the official exchange
rate was used.
d. Includes net unrequited transfers excluding official capital grants.
e. Prior to the switch of Atlas GNI per capita calculations for Operational Guidelines to the official exchange rate in 2000, a
synthetic conversion factor was used.
f. Includes use of IMF resources. A negative sign means an increase.
g. Gold, cotton fiber, and energy (mainly electricity)
h. Consolidated central and local government. Operations of extrabudgetary funds and quasifiscal operations of the government are
excluded due to lack of reliable information.
i. "LCU" denotes "local currency units."

j. Period average

ANNEX 8 (B7)

Uzbekistan: Key Exposure Indicators

Indicator
Total debt outstanding and
disbursed (TDO) (US$m)a
Debt to Russian Federationb
Short-term debt

1996

Actual
1997
1998

Estimate
2000

1999

Projected
2002
2003

2001

2004

2,389

2,778

3,221

4,737

4,344

4,533

4,519

4,523

4,537

501
92

501
419

501
147

501
626

501
282

501
282

501
282

501
282

501
282

Net disbursements (US$m)a

621

492

352

1,523

-244

188

-15

3

14

Total debt service (TDS)

302

512

350

555

904

929

924

897

871

61.3
17.1
7.7
25.7

69.5
25.9
12.8
7.4

94.4
30.1
10.2
12.1

151.3
54.6
17.7
15.3

127.3
56.7
26.5
19.7

139.6
61.8
28.6
19.9

133.8
66.1
27.3
21.7

124.3
61.1
24.7
23.0

118.6
58.0
22.8
24.1

3.5
9.0

2.1
19.2

3.0
7.8

2.4
11.2

2.4
18.7

3.7
18.5

3.7
15.3

4.6
16.6

5.4
18.0

0.3
155
0.1
0

0.3
155
0.1
0

0.3
177
0.1
0

0.4
203
0.2
0

0.5
217
0.2
0

0.9
237
0.2
0

0.9
264
0.2
4

1.0
291
0.3
15

1.1
310
0.3
31

0
1

0
3

3
3

5
3

6
3

11
3

11
3

12
3

14
3

10

10

10

10

10

0

0

0

0

(US$m)a

Debt and debt service indicators
(%)
TDO/XGSC
TDO/GDP
TDS/XGS
Concessional/TDO
IBRD exposure indicators (%)
IBRD DS/public DS
Preferred creditor DS/public
DS (%)d
IBRD DS/XGS
IBRD TDO (US$m)
Share of lBRD portfolio (%)
IDA TDO (US$m)
IFC
Loans
Equity and quasi-equitye
MIGA
MlGAguarantees(US$m)

a. Includes public and publicly guaranteed debt, private nonguaranteed, use of IMF credits and net shortterm capital.
b. In dispute since 2000.
c. "XGS" denotes exports of goods and services, including workers' remittances.
d. Preferred creditors are defined as IBRD, IDA, the regional multilateral development banks, the IMF, and the
Bank for Intemational Settlements.
e. Includes equity and quasi-equity types of both loan and equity instruments.

ANNEX 9 (O8)

Uzbekistan: Operations Portfolio (IBRD/IDA and Grants)
As of 02/14/2002
Closed Projects

3

IBRD/IDA
Total Disbursed (Active)

119.10

of which has been repaid
Total Disbursed (Closed)

3.66
181.00

of which has been repaid
Total Disbursed (Active +Closed)

10.10
300.01

of which has been repaid

13.73

Total Undisbursed (Active)

193.88

Total Undisbursed (Closed)

0.00

Total Undisbursed (Active +Closed)

193.88

Active Prolects

Difference Between

Last PSR

Expected and Actual

Supervision Rating
Project ID

Project Name

P046043
RUR ENT SUPPORT
P050508
URBAN TRANSPORT
P009131
FIN INST BLDG
P009125
HEALTH I
P055159
ENT[NSTBLDG
P009121
RURAL WS &SAN
P049582
TASHKENTSOLID WASTE
P009122
COTTON SUB-SECTOR IMPROVEMENT
Overall result
a. Intended disbursements to date minus actual disbursements to date as projected at

Development

S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
appraisal.

Original Amount In USS Millions

ImPlementatfon

Fiscal Year

IBRD

S
S
S
S
U
S
S
S

2002
2000
1999
1999
1998
1998
1998
1995
Result

36.1
29
25
30
28
75
24
66
313.1

IDA

GRANT

Cancel.

Disbursements '
Undisb.

36.1
28.1
18.2
18.5
23.1
42.4
14.8
12.7
193.9

Orig. Frm Rev'd

0.1
6.3
6.8
13.9
13.7
3.4
11.1
12.7
67.9

0.9
12.7
13.6

ANNEX 10 (B8)

Uzbekistan:
Statement of IFC's
Held and Disbursed Portfolio
As of 12/31/2001
(In US Dollars Millions)

Disbursed

Held
FYApproval
1996
1999
1997
1999
2000
1999
1997
2001
2001
1995/00

Loan Equity Quasi Partic Loan Equity Quasi Partic
Company
ABN AMRO Uzbek
0.00
1.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
1.00 0.00 0.00
0.00 0.00 0.00 4.92
0.00 0.00 0.00
Asaka Bank
10.00
Core Pharn
2.68
0.50 0.00 0.00 2.68
0.50 0.00 0.00
NBU-SME
15.00
0.00 0.00 0.00 0.58
0.00 0.00 0.00
0.00 0.00 0.00
1.65
0.00 0.00 0.00 1.20
SEF Asia Granite
SEF Elma Cheese
0.58
0.00 0.00 0.00 0.58
0.00 0.00 0.00
SEF Fayz
1.33
0.50 0.00 0.00 1.33
0.50 0.00 0.00
SEF Hamkorbank
0.00
0.00 1.00 0.00 0.00
0.00 0.00 0.00
SEF Parvina
0.00
0.00 1.00 0.00 0.00
0.00 0.00 0.00
UZBEK LEASING
0.00
0.90 0.00 0.00 0.00
0.90 0.00 0.00

Total Portfolio:

31.24

2.90

2.00

0.00 11.29

Approvals Pending Commitment
Loan
SEF Hamnkorbank

0.00

Equity Quasi Partic
0.00

1.00

0.00

2.90

0.00

0.00

ANNEX 11 (B9)

Uzbekistan Country Program Matrix (FY02 - 04)
(Low Case Scenario)
Development
Objectives

Diagnosis

Government Strategy

Country Performance
Benchmarks

WB Group Instruments
FY02-04
On i

WB Group
Benchmarks

Other Partners

Program Goal: Accelerate the transition from a command to a market-based economy, supported by competent market institutions that
promote a sustainable, broad-based economic development while ensuring that human resources and social safety nets are protected and
equitably allocated.
A. HELP PREPARE THE ANALYTICAL, POLICY, AND INSTITUTIONAL FRAMEWORK FOR EVENTUAL LIBERALIZATION OF THE
FOREIGN EXCHANGE AND TRADE REGIME, INCLUDING RELATED MACROECONOMIC AND STRUCTURAL REFORMS, IMPROVED
GOVERNANCE, AND TRANSPARENCY OF PUBLIC FINANCES
i. Accelerate Ongoing
Stabilization and
Liberalization while
Strengthening Market
Insfitutions

Macroeconomic stabilization
incomplete and very fragile.
Fund-supported macroeconomic
program collapsed in 1996; an
agreement on an SMP only recently
reached.
Widespread implicit subsidies and
relative price distortions.
Trade and exchange rate regimes
are highly restrictive and
discretionary.
Public resource management needs
to be strengthened.

Develop a medium-term policy
framework that provides
macroeconomic stability but
permits continued public sector
involvement in the economy.
Industrialize, achieve selfsufficiency in key conunodities,
develop and strengthen export
potential of the country,
gradually liberalize foreign
economic activities and foreign
exchange market.
Maintain a prudent fiscal and
monetary stance as well as
external borrowing policy to
achieve and maintain macro
stability as a comerstone of
sustainable growth.

Stabilization ofannual inflation at
under 20 percent per annum.
Reduction in the Central Bank's
budget financing to no more than
0.5 percent of GDP, and an increase
in the Central Bank's refinancing
rate to a positive level in real terms.

IBRD Non-lending
-Macroeconomic
Policy Notes (FY98)
-Competition Policy
IDF (FY00)
-Economic Policy
Analysis IDF (FY99)
-Macro-monitoring
(FYOO-01)

Reduction of trade and exchange
rate distortions.
Continued timely servicing of
extemal debt with zero arrears
accumulation. Foreign currency
reserves to cover at least 100
percent of scheduled annual debt
service payTnents.

IBRD/IDA Lending
-Public Finance
Management Reform
Project (FY03)
IBRD Non-lending
-Macro-monitoring
(FY02-04)
-Denmand-Driven
Policy Notes (FY02
04)
-Anti-nonopoly IDF
(FY02)
-Country Economic
Memorandum (FY03)
-Public Expenditure
Review (FY04)
-Energy Sector
Review (FY04)

Improvement in
public expenditure
as stipulated in the
Public Finance
Management
Reform Project.
Liberalization of
access to foreign
exchange for
entesprises and
individuals.

IMF's SMP and
regular consultations
with the authorities.
USAID, GTZ, AsDB,
Switzerland, France
and UNDP technical
assistance for
macroeconomic
management/capacity
building activities.
EU training for and
spgrading of civil
service.
AsDB and UNDP
technical assistance for
aid coordination by
Cabinet of Ministers.

Stabilization of fiscal deficit below
3 percent of GDP.
Reduction of tax burden and
improvement of tax incentives
through the shift of taxation from
production to consumption and
simplification of tax and custom
svstemt_
~~~~~~~~~tariff

_ __ __ __ _ _ __ __ _____ _

2. Strengthen Institutional
Capacity, Governance
and Technology for
Collecting, Processing and
Publishing Economic and
Financial Data, and Policy
Formulation and
Implementation

Weak institutional capacity for data
collection, processing and analysis
hampers policy formnulation and
decision making pmcess. Basic
transparency is lacking.

Strengthen capacity of
institutions in charge ofdata
collection, processing, and
publication through provision of
appropriate technical assistance.

Irnprovement its quality, timeliness,
and public availability of economic
data.

_

IBRD Non-lending
-Economic Statistics
IDF (FY98-01)

Strengthen institutional capacity
for economic policy analysis.

__ ________.________
.

___

_________________

IBRD/IDA Lending
-Public Finance
Management Reform
Project (FY03)
IBRD Non-lending
-Country Procurement
/Financial
Accountability
Assessment (FY02-03)
-Country Economic
Memorandum (FY03)
-Public Expenditure
(FY04)
Review
eview._FY04_

_

_

_

_

Increase in
transparency,
quality and public
availability of
economic data.

EU, JICA statistical
capacity building
n
technicala
technica assistance.

0evelpmnti

s

|

Diagnosis

GovernmentCStrate

Objectives

|

Cou'ntr Perorm nce

WB Group nstrume
Onon

Benchmarks

'WB Group

jBenchmarks

l0-4

Other Partners'

B. HELP IMPROVE THE POLICY FRAMEWORK AND INCENTIVES FOR PRIVATE SECTOR INVESTMENT AND TRADE
1. Increase Private
Foreign Investnent and
Strengthen Transparency

Cumbersome and complicated
investment licensing and
registration proredures.
Lack of transparency in decision.
making; inconsistencies in
legislation.
Difficult access to lgal information
and information on ownership of
"privatized" companies.

Sinmplify registration and
licensing of invesbments.

Increase in private foreign
investment

EU-TACIS capacity
bUilding a porty
building and support to
Foreign Investnent
Agency.

Improve transparency in
decisionmaking and access to
legal and economic infonnation.
Improve thc business
environment and the legal
framework goveming foreign
investmenL

Discretionary and discriminatory
system of incentives to foreign
investors.
2. Improve Effectiveness
of Enterprise
Privatization and
Restructuring

Privatization of large-scale
enterprises is delayed and remains
incomplete.

Imnprove legal and policy
frameworks for private sector
development

Little progress in restructuring of
enterprises.

Increase equity ownership by the
public through privatization and
capital market development, and
encourage entrepreneurship.

Transparent case-by-case sale of
selected large companies to
domestic and foreign investors.

Maintain post-privatization
support program.

Support the restructuring of
privatized enterprises.

Government believes in
establishing holding companies to
attract investment
Enterprise investment is guided by
astate plan.

3. Restructure Land
Reform and Property
Rights to Include a More
Effective and Transparent
Resource Allocation

4. Assure Agriculture
Sector Efficiency by
Public Sector Withdrawal
from Market Activities

Undefined property rights inhibit
private investment and sound
management of land and water
resources.

Excessive state regulation and
control over farms and inadequate
and distorted incentives impair
markets and have undermined farn
productivity.
Low agricultural yield due mainly
to lowland productivity and
distorted incentive strueture,
including mandatory production

Adopt the Privatization Investnment
Funds Regulation as agreed with
the Bank, including anew list of
enterprises.

IBRD/IDA Lending
-Enterprise
Institution Building
(FY98)

Provision of microcredit to
individuals to encourage selfemployment activities.
Improve competitiveness of
production and marketing of
cotton.
Identify, reduce, and remove
barriers to new entry into input
supply and trade.

Successful
implementation of
15 enterprise plans
and sale of 5 largescale fimis to
strategic investors.

EU-TACIS capacity
building and support to
Fi
investmen
Foreign nvestnent
Agency.
EU-TACIS preinvestment support to
Privatization
Investment Fund.
EBRD financing of
Privatization
Ivetrn
Investment Fund.
EBRD and AsDB lines
of credit to SMEs.

IFC Non-lending
-Technical assistance
(consultant training
and enterprise survey)
through Private
Enterprise Partnership
financed by Swiss b ust
funds

Improved privatization should
replace state-sponsored holdings
and investnent
Design and implement program
of land reform and farm
restructuring based on secure
long-term tenure of land at
household level, that promotes
agricultural investmient, efficient
production, employment
generation, and improved rural
incomes.

IBRD/IDA Lending
-Continued
implementation of
Enterprise Institution
Building Project

Strengthened legal framework for
collateralization of nmoveable
property and crops, and renioval of
current restrictions on access to
cash in bank deposits.

IBRD/IDA Lending
-Rural Enterprise
Support I (FY02)

A draft enactment
regarding
subrogation with
respect to land use
rights pledged as
collateral.

EU-TACIS support for
land registration

Pilot farmrestucturing in 5
administrative districts, and
replicate after evaluation.

IBRD/IDA Lending
-Cotton Subsector
Improvement (FY95)
-Rural Enterprise
Support (FY02)

Increase average
quote for Uzbek
cotton exported by
5percent in value
terms (relative to
the average of the
quotes for the other
cotton traded by
other major cottonexporting countries

AsDB support for
microcredits.

l

Replacement of the state order
system for cotton and wheat by a
state procurement system, under
which obligatory sales to the state
will not exceed 50 percent of actual

production.

__

2

.

_

. __

._

....

AsDB economic and
sector work on the
grain sub-sector and
lending for farm
restructuring and onfarm irrigation
structures (Ak Altin

l

Development
Objectives

Diagnosis

Government Strategy

Country Performance
Benchmarks

WB Group Instruments
Flt0-04
Ongoln

quota, and low producer prices.

S. Improve Filnandal
Sector Performance

Financial sector is non-competitive
and subject to extensive public
sector owneTship and control
including extensive use of directed
credits.
Government is actively engaged in
directed credits and in guaranteeing
industrial and agricultural credits.
In some cases, 90 percent of a
bank's portfolio is guaranteed.
Given the guarantees, banks do not
generally require collateral and
often rollover paymnents due.
Capital markets are underdeveloped
and over controlled,
System of accounting and audits is
not consistent with international
standards.

WB Group
Benchmarks
traded on
international
exchanges).

Establish stable financial system
based on market incentives
rather than directed credit,

Sound financial sector able to
support private sector growth
reflecting market criteria.

IBRDAIDA Lending
-Financial Institution
Building (FY99)

Develop a strategy for a phasedin approach to reduce the
government guarantees, and
increase the coverage of the
guaranteed portfolio through
acquisition of collateral from the
final borrowers.

Preparation of a comprehensive
plan for restructuring banking
system, including reduction of the
National Bask's dominant role.

IFC Non-lending
-Training for two
small banks financed
by Japanese trust
funds

Establish a fully functioning
capital market
Develop legal framework for
voluntary private pensions and
other forms of private soial
insurance.

The lgal and regulatory
frameworks for private pension
providers do not exist

Dismanding of domestic credit
controls and introduction of
regulatory measures to enable
resolution of bad debts in the
banking system

IBRDAIDA Lending
- Continued
Inplementation of
Financial Institution
Building Project

Preparationt
restructuring of two
selected Uzbek
banks for
privatization.

Other Partners
district).
EU-TACIS programs
for agricultuiral
extension and Ministry
of Agriculture and
Water Resources
restructuring.
Bilateral support for
agriculture (Germany,
Switzerland, Israel,
USAID).
EU-TACIS support to
advisory services for
rommercial banking
cor.
stor

IFC Non-lending
-Continued training
for two small banks
financed by Japanese
and Irish trust fiuds

Introduction of international
accounting standards for banks.
Further refinement of legal and
regulatory farnework for
introduction of voluntary private
pensions.
Increase competition between
commercial banks and boost
efficiency and innovation of
banking systern, by reduction of
market concentration, and
decreased sectoral segmnentation of
existing banks.
Improved prueintial regulations
and stronger supervision capacity of
the Central Bank of Uzbekistan
(CBU), including stronger reporting
capacity of the commercial banks
and improved skills and
organization of the Supervision
Department of the CBU.

C. CONTINUE HELPING TO IMPROVE THE EFFICIENCY OF RESOURCE USE IN SOCIAL AND MUNICIPAL INFRASTRUCTURE AND
SERVICES
1. Improve Outcomes and
Efficiency in the Health
Sector

Health sector performance is weak
because of rigidity and excessive
planning. Current system is

Enhance the efficiency in the
aseofconstrained resources,
improve the quality of services

Improved access to and quality of
basic health services in selected
regions by improving training

3

IBRD/IDA Lending
-Water Supply,
Sanitation and Health

IBRD/IDA Lending
-Health Reform II
(FY04)

Increased number
of pregnant women
receiving tetanus

USAID and UK
Know-How Fund cofinancing of Health

Development
Objectives

Diagnosis
plagued by misallocation of
resources and overly centralized
administration.
Rise in out-of-pocket payments for
health services and drugs
disadvantages those on subsistence
incomes. Privatization of health
services and emerging private
medical practice in alargely
unregulated environment also
generate concern with regard to
access, equity and quality of
services.

2. Improve
Infrastructure Services,
Management, and
Efficiency

Reduced investment due to fiscal
constraints, insufficient
maintenance, and poor nianagement
have undermined key economic
infrastructure services.
Rapid urbanization has exerted
pressure on the urban water supply
systems and sanitation systems
have deteriorated.
Transport sector is dominated by
state-owned enterprises and overall
sector management is weak.
Except for urban transport, there is
no appropriate financial, regulatory,
and institutional framework for
competitive provision of transport
services.

Government Strategy

Country Performance
Benchmarks

and their cost-effectiveness.

curriculum for general practitioners
and nurses, upgrading equipment,
and improving sustainability
through rationalization of facilities
and incentive structures.

Build capacity in 3 regions for
replication of restructuring in
remaining regions.

WB Group Instruments
Ongoing
FY02-04
(FY98)
-Health Reform
(FY99)

immunization.
IBRD Non-Lending
-Living Standards
Assessment (FY02)

Implement new medical
education curricula for General
Practice physicians and
universal nurses.

Increased level of cost recovery and
cash collection of service fees.

Strengthen market incentives
and institutions involved in
service delivery.

Vodokanals of Bukhara,
Samarkand, Urgench, and Nukus to
increase revenue collection to cover
operation and maintenance costs.

Privatize service providers
where appropriate to improve
efficiency., taking into account
govemment capacity and
framework for regulation of new
private sector.

Introduce commercialization to
finance investment and ensure
proper management and
maintenance.

Reform I Project

Increased coverage
of infants receiving
hepatitis B vaccine.

Placement of
trained physicians
and nurses in rural
SVPs.

Halt deterioration of urban and
inter-urban infrastructure.

Increase cost recovery and cash
collection.

Other Partners

Capitation (I line
payment) fully
implemented in
pilot rayons for
SVPs.

Develop and implement
rationalization plans annually in
each region.

Increase investment in
development and rehabilitation
of water supply and sanitation
system.

WB Group
Benchmarks

IBRD/IDA Lending
-Tashkent Solid
Waste (FY98)
-Water Supply,
Sanitation and Health
(FY98)
-Urban Transport
(FY00)

IBRD/IDA Lending
-Bukhara/ Samarkand
Water Supply (FY02)
IBRD Non-lending
-CDD Strategy
(FY02)

Strengthened institutional capacity
and managerial capacity.

Improved
competitive bus
route franchising
system in main
cities except
Tashkent including
full cost recovery.

AsDB road and rail
rehabilitation projects.

Higher efficiency
of urban bus
transport operators.

EU-TACIS project to
improve Central AsiaCaucasus international
transport to Europe.

Increased operational efficiency.

EBRD-supported
projects in waste
management, railway
and air transport

Increased capability
of city
administrations in
planning and
management of
urban transport
systems.

Development of competition
whenever possible between service
providers under sound institutional
and regulatory framework.
Expansion of privatization or
private management of services.

Improved quality
and access of water
supply services to
1.I million people
living in urban
areas and I million
people living in
rural areas.

Involvement of private sector in the
management and operation of
vodokanals as stipulated in the
Bukhara and Samarkand Water
Supply Project.

Improved financial
policies in the
municipal water
sector as stipulated
in the Bukhara and
Samarkand Water

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~SuppDly
Project.

___________________________

3. Reform Energy Sector

Rapidly dwindling in the
hydrocarbons sector; and significant
investments needed to replace those
reserves.

Attract foreign oil companies to
invest and prospect in the
country; privatize gas
production and transmission
businesses.

In the power sector, the capability

Reform the power and coal

Signing of agreements that conform
with good intemational practice
(whether as PSAs or as licensing
arrangements) with intemational oil
companies for exploration and
production in three blocks.
I
_

4

IBRD Non-lending
-Energy Sector
Review (FY04)

Reduce quasifiscal
transfers from the
energy sector to the
rest of economy by
incrcasing cost
recovery.
_

EBRD, EU-TACIS
PPIAF GEF AsDB

Development
Objectives

Diagnosis
of the present installed and operable
capacity is barely sufficient to meet
the demand, and significant
investments are required for the
rehabilitation and modernizafion of
the energy system.
Tariffs at market rates, translates
into large amounts of implicit
generalized subsidies to the rest of
the economy.

Government Strategy

Country Performance
Benchmarks

sectors to attract private
investmnenL

Creation of a regulatory authority
for the sector

Sign agreements with
intemational oil companies for
exploration and production in
three blocks.

Unbundling Uzbekneftegas and
offering controlling stakes of its
components for privatization.

Offer Uzbekneflegas and
Uztransgas for privatization.

WB Group Instruments

WB Group
Benchmarks

Other Partners

Reform of tariff policy and setting
to demonopolicize; attract private
investors.

Unbundle Uzbekenergo, create a
regulatory authority for the
sector, and offer designated
assets for privatization.

4. Improve Equity,
Emeiency and Outcomes
In the Education Sector

Attrition from basic education by
vulnerable groups
Shortages of basic teaching
materials and equipment, and
deterioration ofphysical
infrastructure have led to declining
student learning outcomes at all
levels.
Inequitable quality resulting from
excessive reliance on local
financing for essential education
inputs.
Inefficient use of resources. Too
many teachers. Teachers paid too
little. Lack of incentives for
improved efficiency, resulting from
an input-based rather than outputbased financing formula, and
fragmented and inconsistent
responsibilities for different levels
of government
Old-fashioned and costly approach
to providing specialized labormarket skills. System needs to
emphasize generic skills rather than
specific skills.

Reform tariff policy and tariff
setting to depoliticize; and
attract private investors
Implement the National Program
for Personnel Training to
reorient the education system to
the needs of the market
economy.
Extend the duration of
compulsory education from II
to 12 years
Restructure educational
programs at secondary and
tertiary levels. A new program
of three year academic lycea,
attached to universities, to
replace the current two year
program for complete secondary
education. Transform existing
network of vocational secondary
teknikums into a new network of
professional colleges at the
secondary level with flexible
curricula intended to respond to
local employment needs
(expected to cover 901% of all
secondary enrollments).

Improved school attendance by
vulnerable groups.

IBRD Non-lending
-Living Standards
Assessment (FY02)

AsDB Textbook
Development Project

Improved provision of textbooks
and other essential teaching and
learning aids.

AsDB Secondary
Specialized Education
Project.

Adequate levels of financing for
key education inputs in all oblasts.

Proposed AsDB
Education Program
Loan

Improved school maintenance.
Reduced teacher/student ratios,
increased teaching hours, higher
teacher salaries
Higher proportion of secondary
enrollments in general education
programs with modemized
curriculum to meet needs of global
economy.

Regrouping of higher education
programs and expansion of
selected programs of higher
education.
Provision of teacher training,
development of education
materials, reform of teaching
and learning process to
emphasize problem solving,
teamwork etc. in lieu of
retention of facts..

5

UNDP/UNESCO
review of sectoral
reform options.
EU-TACIS projects to
restructure Ministry of
Public Education.

Development

Diagnosis

Government Strategy

Objetives
5. Improve Social
Protection of the Poorest
and Vulnerable

Pension system reduces risk of oldage poverty but at high cost.
Rise of dependency ratio
associated with demographic
changes means that financing
problems will emerge in pensions
system around 2010.
The poor benefit disproportionately
from child allowances and social
assistance delivered thrugh
Mahallahs, although many poor are
excluded and many better off
households are covered.
Coverage of unemployment
protection is inadequate.

6. Reduce Poverty and
Inequality by Increasing
Capabillty to Partidpate
in Equitable Economic
Growth

Implement plan to improve
pension administration .
Transfer of collection functions
to the Tax Committee. Use of
financial models to forecast
solvency of pension system
under alternate scenarios of
reduction in privileged
categories. Improve record
keeping and pilot benefit
calculations.
Social assistance and child
allowances are now targeted
schemes, financed from federl
budget financing but provided
locally through innovative
system

Concers with regard to rising open
unemployment and negative social
impact of transition.

Identify approaches to
improving targeting of social
assistance and child allowances
delivered through Mahallahs.

A revised, nationally representative
household survey provides first
initial snapshot into profile of
poverty since trnsition.

Further improve infonnational
base for poverty monitoring and
analysis.

About 31% of the population could
be considered poor in 2000-01 with
consumption below an absolute
poverty line. More than two thirds
of the poor live in rural areas.
Large households with more than
two children. households headed
by individuals with secondary
education and unemployed
individuals are most likely to be
poor although the working
population constitutes a substantial
proportion of the poor.

Prepare a strategy for improving
living standards.

Countr) Performance
-&echmarks
.
Exasnination of options for
systemic pension reform both of
public PAYG system and possible
future mandatory funded pensions.

;.

WB Group Instruments *WBencbhn

IBRD Non-lending
-Pension Reform
Implementation IDF
(FY00)

IBRD Non-lending
-Living Standards
Assessment (FY02)

IBRD Non-lending
-Economic
Information IDF
(FY98-01)

IBRD Non-lending
- Living Standards
Assessment (FY02)

B Group

Other Partners

ari
AsDB TA on pension
reform

Further improvements in targeting
efficiency of social assistance and
child benefit programs.
Identification of options to mitigate
the social cost of transition. in part
through extension of well-targeted
and effectively managed social
progranm.

Development of poverty
monitoring and analysis database,
including further improvements in
nationally representative household
survey.

Living Standards
Assessment
completed.

.AsDB TA to support
preparation of Living
Standards Strategy

-WBI sponsored
PRSP training and
workshops

Adoption of an absolute poverty
line for the purposes of monitoring
poverty.

-CDD Strategy
(FY02)

Build capacity to analyze poverty
data
Preparation of PRSP.

Available infonration suggests that
inequality is high.

D. HELP MAINTAIN AND IMPROVE THE EFFICIENCY OF IRRIGATION AND DRAINAGE INFRASTRUCTURE TO PREVENT
FURTHER ENVIRONMENTAL DEGRADATION AND AVOID POTENTIAL HUMANITARIAN DISASTER
1. Strengthen Local
Governments and
Communities' Ability to
Manage and Maintain
Rural Infrastruature
_______

Rural social services and
infrastructure are deteriotating and
financial services are weak.
Strengthen local govemmentsr
ability to plan and ioplenment nur

_________
infrastructure prognms.

Create institutions for
participatory management of
water resources and introduce
partial cost recovery for
irrigation srrces and water
i supply.
g
aegulations
.

[

Strict water conservation supported
by water pricing and farm
restructuring.
Adoption of procureiment
oarshi
and establishnpent of
sound institutional framework for

6

IBRDIIDA Lending
-Water Supply.
Sanitation and Health
(FY98)

IBRD/IDA Lending
-Bukhanr/
Saminarkand Water
Supply (FY02)
Pu(0 ing
(FY03)
- Dninsge

(FY04)

ILO and UNDP (runl
social infrstructure).

_

Development
Objectives

Diagnosis

-

Government Strategy
Adopt program of rural public
works, including road
maintenance, gasification,
communications, and water
supply.
Improve management,
operational and financial
sustainability of water supply
and sanitation enterprises
through introduction of
international best practice.

Country Performance
Benchmarks

WB Group Instruments
Ongoing
FY02-04

competitive contracting of small
infrastructure works.

WB Group
Benchmarks

Other Partners

IBRD Non-lending
-CDD Strategy
(FY02)

Development of local construction
industry based on labor-intensive
techniques.
Increase in number of communities
and water user organizations
responsible for operafion of rural
water supply services.
Signing of an experienced
intemational operator to a service
contract for Bukhara and
Samnmarkand vodokanals.

2. Reduce Industrial
Pollution and Enhance
Use of Natural Resources
in Sustainable Manner

"Brown" environmental issues in
the old and inefficient heavy
industries.
Unclear institutional responsibilities

Promote industrial restructuring
and modernization and
strengthen the regulatory
policy/institutional frameworks.

and overly complex and out-of-date
environmental management
systems.
Limited public consultation and
environmental awareness.

Revised pollution control
regulations, and air and water
quality standards..
New procedures and guidance for

8RD Non-lending
GEF
TransboundaTy
Biodiversity (FYOO)

IBRD Non-lending
Management IDF
(FYOI)

reviewing environmental
assessments and complying with
environmental assessment and
pollution control laws and
regulations.

Preparation and
policies,
regulations,
procedures, and/or
guidance for
improved
compliance with
environmental
Increased public
participation in
environmental

_________________________

3. Aral Sea Basin Improve Disaster
Preparedness to Minimize
Losses from Natural
Disasters

Resource base is deteriorating,
especially with respect to salinity.
Irrigation and drainage systems are
inefficient and deteriorating.
Formerly productive delta of the
Amu Darya has become decerbfifed.

Develop national water and salt
management strategy, including
policy, institutional and
investment activities.
Implenment wetlands strategy
under Aral Sea Basin Program

Adoption of strategy and
investnment program.

IBRD/IDA Lending
- Drainage (FY04)

Improved habitat for endangered
species.

IBRD Non-lending
-GEF Aral Sea Basin
Water/Environmental
Management (FY98)

decision-making.

Continued
successful
implementation of
the GEF Project

USAID water supply,
energy and water
management policy
issues and health.
Netherlands water
assessments, wetland
restortion preparation,
and capacity-building.
EU-TACIS projects
for interstate water
agreemients
preparation, regional
database, pilot
programs, and on-farm
management
monitoring issues.
Monetary aid by
bilateral agencies
(UINDP/ Canada/
Finland/ Switzerland/
UX./ Italy/ Denmiark/
Swedern/Japanese
PH-IR funds/Kuwait

7~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~Fn)

ANNEX 12 (BIO)

Uzbekistan: CAS Summary of Development Priorities
As of 01/18/2002

Network area

Poverty Reduction & Economic
Management
Poverty reduction

Country
performance'

Majorissue b

Country
priorityC

Bank
priorityC

Reconciliation of country and
Bank prioritiesd

Good

Rural poverty, poverty monitoring

Moderate

High

Living Standards Assessment

Economic policy

Poor

Multiple exchange rates, trade and payment controls, transparency

Moderate

High

Memorandum

Public sector
Gender

Fair
Good

Efficiency of public resource use
Improved representation of women in all aspects

High
Moderate

High
Moderate

Education

Fair

Health, nutrition &population
Social protection

Fair
Good

Declining enrollment rates. Efficiency, content to be brought in line with High
market economy
Efficiency and equity in service provision, quality
Moderate
Inadequate targeting of vulnerable groups
Moderate

Human Development Department

Environmentally & Socially Sustainable
Development
Rural development

AsDB takes lead

High
Moderate

Good
Good

Implicit taxation of agriculture through state orders over production and
exports (cotton and wheat); dilapidating rural infrastructure
Aral Sea, poor water resources management, salinity
Lack of inclusive institutions

Moderate
High
Low

Low
High
Moderate

CDD Study

Financial sector

Poor

Directed credit, foreign exchange controls, health of banking sector

Moderate

High

Memorandum

Private sector

Poor

Trade and foreign exchange controls

Low

High

Energy &mining

Fair

Dwindling hydrocarbon reserves, dilapidated production and network
infrastructure, energy pricing and revenue collection, large investment
needs

High

Moderate

Infrastructure - Water

Good

Dilapidated water supply infrastructure, low level of service, health risks, High
low efficiency, weak financial position of water utilities

High

Infrastructure - Transport

Fair

Inadequate institutional and regulatory framework, low cost recovery,
weak governance and slow privatization of state-owned enterprises

High

Environment
Social development

Fair

Low

Finance, Private Sector &Infrastructure

High

a. Use "excellent," "good," "fair," or "poor."
b. Indicate principal country-specific problems (c.g., for poverty reduction, "rural poverty;" for education, "female secondary completion;" for environment, "urban air pollution").
c. To indicate priority, use "low," "moderate," or "high."
d. Give explanation, if priorities do not agree; for example, another MDB may have the lead on the issue, or there may be ongoing dialogue.

Government's priority shifted to
high recently; recasting on-going
operations to meet needs; ESW
to understand long-term options.

ANNEX 13: Aral Sea Basin Program (ASBP); and
Water and Environmental Management Project (WEMP)
1.

The Aral Sea Basin Program (ASBP), prepared by all five Central Asia countries

with assistance inter alia from the UNDP, UNEP and the World Bank, was launched

formally at an international donors' meeting held in Paris in June 1994. Its main
objectives are: (a) to stabilize the environment of the Aral Sea Basin; (b) to rehabilitate the
disaster area immediately surrounding the sea, including the populations directly affected
in the three regions of Kyzl-Orda (Kazakhstan), Karakalpakstan (Uzbekistan) and
Dashgovuz (Turkmenistan); (c) to help improve the management of land and resources in
the basin; and (d) to strengthen institutional capacity at all levels to plan and implement
community, investment and technical assistance projects.
At the Paris meeting,
international donors committed about US$ 32 million in grant funds for project preparation
and technical assistance for the first phase of what is envisaged as a long-term (e.g. 20-25
year) program comprising eight defined areas and about twenty individual projects.
2.
Against this background, a large number of studies, at both the national and
regional level, and since the late 1990s several investment projects at the national level,
have been initiated, with most of the former now completed and implementation of the
latter now under implementation. In Uzbekistan, the US$120 million Rural Water Supply,
Sanitation and Health Project -- located in Karakalpakstan and Khorezm, approved in 1998
and co-financed by a World Bank loan of US$ 75 million) , KfW and the Kuwait Fund - is
one of the larger efforts to deal with the humanitarian, especially the public health,
consequences of the Aral Sea disaster under the ASBP. Similarly, the proposed Drainage
Project, planned for presentation in FY04, focuses directly on the environment and on
improved water and salt management in Karakalpakstan on the right bank of the Amu
Darya. Several other official and non-governmental donors - including EU-TACIS,
UNDP, UNICEF, UNFPA, WHO; Canada, Germany (KfW), Netherlands, Sweden,
Switzerland, United States (USAID); and Medicins sans Frontieres, Perzent, are involved
in various activities mainly in Karakalpakstan within the ASBP framework.
3.
At the regional level, the Water and Environmental Management Project,
financed by the GEF, European Union, Netherlands, and Sweden, and for which the fivemember-state International Fund for the Aral Sea (IFAS) is formally the implementing
agency, provides a regional framework a number of inter-state technical assistance and
investment projects (e.g. dam safety, trans-boundary water monitoring stations). However,
its most important and ambitious component is a major regional study to develop longerterm, sustainable regional and national water and salt management strategies - to replace
the current system of annual ad hoc water allocation and distribution arrangements
inherited from the Soviet Union, which is slowly breaking down. The definition of this
strategy will involve making of difficult strategic choices at the basin level, such as the
balance between river protection (salinity, environmental flows to the deltas and Aral Sea)
and irrigation and drainage needs; flow regulation through reservoir operation (energyirrigation trade-offs); water allocation between and within the five states; and cost sharing
for operations, maintenance, rehabilitation, and improvement of the existing infrastructure.

ANNEX 14: Improving Portfolio Performance Country Portfolio Performance Reviews (CPPR)
1.
In October 1999, the first Country Portfolio Performance Review (CPPR) for
Uzbekistan was held at the Country Office in Tashkent. At that time, the portfolio
comprised seven loans and four IDF grants. Owing inter alia to slow disbursements
overall and slow implementation of the two largest investment projects (Cotton Sub-sector
Improvement and Rural Water Supply, Sanitation and Health) and one technical assistance
project (Enterprise Institution Building) rated unsatisfactory, the portfolio had been placed
on the Bank-wide watch list. The specific purposes of the first CPPR, attended by
representatives of all the government and project implementation agencies concerned, as
well as most Uzbekistan Country Team staff, were threefold: (a) to assess the overall
performance of ongoing projects; (b) to identify and discuss common or systemic problems
encountered by some or all projects; and (c) to recommend actions or measures required by
the Bank or the Government to resolve these problems and other cross-sectoral issues.
Common or systemic issues identified as areas requiring further improvement or further
scrutiny included:
*

*
*
*

The requirement that all contracts involving imports of goods or service be
registered by the Ministry of Foreign Economic Relations and Trade (MFER) - a
sometimes very time-consuming process that some project implementation units
(PIUs) hoped could be either eliminated, or at least expedited for projects financed
by the IFIs;
The need for more consistent employment and compensation policies and
procedures for the staff of PIUs of externally-financed projects, including more
transparent recruitment procedures;
The very limited utility of Special Accounts, owing to the restrictions on access to
foreign exchange (whether in cash or bank transfer), even to cash in local currency;
The need for enhanced training of PIU staff in World Bank policies and procedures

It was also agreed that a CPPR should be held annually, with implementation review
meetings on a less formal basis at the Country Office in between annual CPPRs.
2.
The second CPPR was held in January 2001. The agenda, developed jointly by
Country Office and PIU staff, included discussion of the following: (a) a review of
experience with MFER import contract registration since during 2000; (b) implications for
Bank-financed projects of a new government limit of US$100,000 on advance payments
for import contracts; (c) investment project cost sharing and local currency counterpart
funding; (d) the need to ensure greater competition in selecting auditors for annual audits
of project accounts, hitherto dominated by the big five international accounting firms; (e)
the proposed development of a database of local experts and consultants in order to
facilitate their participation in project preparation; and (f) the reported inadequacy of PIU
staff salaries.

3.
Based on the learning experience of the first CPPR, participants were better
prepared in focusing on cross-sectoral and generic issues (rather than project-specific
problems and achievements), and had clearly thought through possible practical solutions
to these issues. There was a fair amount of sharing of information and experience, which
will be encouraged not just on the occasion of a CPPR but throughout the year, perhaps
supplemented by mini-CPPRs and other cross-sectoral meetings and seminars organized
by the Country Office.
4.
The topics discussed and possible solutions put forward during the meeting are
presented below in matrix form. Naturally, the solutions cited are not decisive measures
which will resolve problems once and for all, but will require further discussion with the
ministries concerned and, in some cases, with the Cabinet of Ministers.
Issue

Specific Problem

Possible Solutions

1. Registration of a) Substantial and
import contracts at unreasonable delays;
MFER
b) MFER requests
revision to contract
price after contract
signing

i) PlUs could consult with MFER in advance.
ii) MOF and/or MFER should be represented on
tender committees
iii) Waiver of contract registration under IFIfinanced projects.
iv) Invite line and core ministry officials to
procurement training.

2.
Limnit
of a)Advance payment
US$100,000
for exceeding this limit
advance
payment requires
additional
under
import time
contracts

i) MOF should be represented on tender
commnittees.

3. Limited number of
qualified auditors

i) Country Office will make available list of
auditors from Kazakhstan and Russia which the
Bank has certified as acceptable.

4. More involvement
of local experts in
project preparation

a) Five international
firms dominate audit
of
Bank-financed
projects, often no
competition, reduced
quality, higher costs

ii) MFER/MOF approval of higher limit when
needed during pre-tended phase, thus securing
automatic waiver

ii) Bank will undertake an assessment of local
audit firms in Uzbekistan and determine if any
may be qualified to conduct audits for Bank
projects;

a)
Implementation
problems could often
be averted if local
experts familiar with
local conditions and
institutions
were

i) Country Office to compile database of local
consultants who have worked on Bank projects.

more

iii) Bank teams and PIU staff to ensure that

involved

ii) Recommend to Bank project teams that local
experts be involved during project preparation.

in

2

5.
funding

Counterpart

preparation.

MOF, CBU, MMS, and MFER are involved
during preparation stage in order to avoid later
misunderstanding
or confusion regarding
implementation

a)
Counterpart
funding not always
available promptly.

i) Establish clear procedures for PIU to operate
with the counterpart funds.

ii) PIUs and parent ministry to ensure request
b)
Too
many for counterpart funds for the following year are
clearances needed to made at proper timne of budget cycle.
make payments from
counterpart
iii) Signature authority procedures should be
contribution

simplified.

6. Restrictions on
payments to banks
located in specified
off-shore
zones
(since mid-2000).

a) If not worked out
in a timely manner
may
result
in
rejection
of
the
contract registration
by the MFER.

i) Negative list of countries/off-shore zones
should be made know at time tender

7.
PIU
Salary
Ceiling/Structure

a) If salary level too
low, this results in
low
motivation
and/or high turnover

i) Government established a ceiling of US$500
equivalent in local curency as monthly salary or
fee to PIU staff. Within this ceiling, each PIU is
free to decide on its own salary structure.

ii) Since many companies have multiple bank
accounts, PIUs should negotiate where to make
payment.

of PIU staff.

5.

Other comments and observations included:

*

Overall, there needed to be more involvement and coordination by the four core
ministries/agencies to ensure their effective implementation: MOF, representing
the Borrower and thus ensuring that loan funds are properly and efficiently utilized;
MFER, which registers import contracts financed by Bank loans; MMS, which
prepares and sanctions the country's overall public investment program; and, the
Central Bank of Uzbekistan, which is responsible foreign exchange-related issues.
It was agreed that each of these ministries and the CBU should designate a contact
person for issues relating to Bank-financed projects. There was also general
agreement that PLUs and Bank teams should make more effort to inform and
involve these four ministries earlier in the project cycle; and that the four ministries
would also pay more attention to Bank-funded operations.

*

Bank staff announced that a Financial Management Specialist (FMS) would be
posted to the Almaty Regional Office in March 2001, which would greatly
facilitate more frequent contact on FMS-related issues.

*

For future procurement seminars, not only PIIJ staff but officials from MOF,
MFER, and CBU dealing with Bank-financed projects should be invited.

3

ANNEX 15: Improving the Environment for Private Sector Development
1.
Uzbekistan has significant untapped potential for developing its real sector,
particularly small and medium enterprises (SMEs). Development of a vibrant private
sector can be accelerated by: reducing governmental bureaucracy; moving rapidly to
develop a free and transparent currency regime; establishing clearly defined property
rights; developing a transparent and efficient legal and regulatory environment, including
adjudication and enforcement mechanisms related to commercial transactions that comply
with international standards; improving corporate governance; creating a competitive
market structure; and, true financial intermediation through an independent banking and
financial sector. While the government seeks to spur SME development and attract foreign
investment, it has yet to create the necessary conditions to attract investment into an
economy that currently falls far short of its potential as a regional economic hub. It
actively courts foreign investment in productive activities, and provides some tax benefits
to such undertakings (on a case-by-case basis), particularly if the production facilitates
import substitution or is for export. However it also continues to control and interfere with
important market segments, e.g., cotton, that could be of great interest to foreign investors.
In addition, arbitrary and severely restricted access to foreign exchange, lack of local
currency loans, cumbersome banking and payment systems as well as slow bureaucratic
procedures discourage such investment.
2.
Uzbekistan's banking system currently plays a role in both corporate tax
enforcement and collection -- but a limited role in financial intermediation. Due to the
very low domestic savings rate, there are limited local sources of funding to be
intermediated besides government-directed lending. Private citizens do not deposit
savings in banks and banks' domestic currency deposits are primarily captive demand
deposits from corporate clients. To the extent that leading banks can attract foreign
currency funding from bilateral or multilateral sources, the financial system is undertaking
a limited intermediation function. However, credit analysis and supervision methodology
still need to be developed through technical assistance.
3.
A key element leading to this lack of intermediation in Uzbekistan's banking
system is the distinction made between cash and non-cash transactions for enterprises.
Cash withdrawals by legal entities are permitted only for purposes of payment of wages,
pensions, and travel expenses. All other enterprise expenditures, for the purchase of any
items, must be done by bank transfers. This distinction is the most serious constraint on
the intermediation of financial flows, discouraging deposits and inhibiting the development
of the financial sector, thus encouraging a large informal sector and a hard currency curb
market. At the individual level, there is great distrust of the banking system due to losses
that depositors suffered when the Soviet banking system collapsed. Those that have any
savings would rather exchange the local currency into dollars at the curb rate and keep that
in cash. Major purchases (cars and real estate) are done in cash dollars even if the receipt
is in local currency equivalent.

4.
The Uzbek Government has recently taken a number of promising steps towards
creating more transparent and simplified procedures for business registration, licensing,
and customs clearance. A "one-stop shop" procedure for business registration has recently
been introduced and businesses, including joint ventures and 100 percent foreign-owned
companies, no longer have to register separately with the Ministry of Justice, the State Tax
Committee and the Ministry for Macroeconomics and Statistics. The Ministry of Justice
has established a special department for reviewing complaints from private businesses and
to provide assistance against unlawful interference in their activity from various
government entities and local authorities. Private businesses actively resort to this appeal
mechanism. In addition, customs procedures are being simplified in order to reduce
unnecessary storage fees on the importer with no priority given even to perishable goods,
and micro and small enterprises were granted the right to switch to a simplified taxation
system. However, all import contracts still must be approved and registered by the
Ministry of Foreign Economic Relations (MFER), unless the company uses its own hard
currency and is not relying on government funding or guarantees, in which case, in theory
if not in practice, MFER registration is not needed. Access to foreign exchange by
enterprises remains difficult. Even for those international investors who register their
projects through the appropriate channels and have been assured currency conversion, the
paper work that needs to be submitted to be allowed a currency conversion is onerous and
currency conversion applications are routinely rejected for insignificant errors. The
foreign exchange authorities can delay the conversion process indefinitely, leaving
investors with overdue payables and penalties. As a result, foreign suppliers charge more
for goods sold to Uzbekistan to cover the increased payment risks they perceive.
5.
The constraints which hamper the business and investment climate from a private
and financial sector development perspective need to be removed. Such changes cannot be
accomplished overnight, but a clearly defined plan and timetable for implementation must
be developed with information about the expected goals, an action plan and intermediate
steps to reaching the goals along with a timetable published, so all stakeholders will be
able to monitor progress. The World Bank Group is ready to provide assistance in
developing such an action plan and implementing these steps to spur economic growth.
Such assistance would encompass a phased approach to address the following:
*

Internal convertibility, by removing all restrictions on the use of cash.

*

Corporate governance and competition by: (a) phased-in abolition of Resolution
No. 361, which inter alia allows the state representative to defer any decision by
the shareholders' meeting, if the decision "contradicts the interests of the state,"
with no definition of what might constitute a contradiction of state interests; (b)
banning trade associations from all remaining interference in the procurement and
marketing arrangements of privatized enterprises; and (c) strengthening supervisory
councils to act as agents representing the interests of shareholders.

*

New entry of: (a) medium-sized local enterprises by strengthening the
Privatization Investment Funds (PIFs) and by making attractive and viable

2

enterprises available to the PIFs; and (b) small businesses by removing
administrative barriers to entry. Based on a published plan and timetable for
implementation, the state should gradually reduce barriers by: simplifying
procedures for legal entity registration and licensing of activities; simplifying
investment project review and approval and eliminating review when not justified;
eliminating existing administrative barriers to the flow of goods, capital and labor;
radically reducing the number of inspection and monitoring bodies (first and
foremost, for small businesses); and restricting departmental standard setting,
except when required for strategic industries.
*

Clarification of property rights and strengthening of contract law enforcement
to provide certainty for investors in key areas, mainly energy, telecommunications
and natural resources as well as in relation to ownership and the ability to transfer
property rights.

*

Foreign exchange liberalization. The principal policy obstacle to reform in
Uzbekistan stems from the restrictions on access to foreign currency in a uniform
and clearly defined manner, and the resulting multiple exchange rates. The
unification of exchange rates is a necessary pre-condition for successful enterprise
and banking reform as well as to growth and reform in other areas of the economy.
It is also a necessary condition for the attraction of needed FDI.

*

Trade liberalization. Trade liberalization should include the most urgent
measures related to import contract registration, foreign currency access,
commodity exchanges and the cotton trade. Competition could be addressed by
strengthening the Anti-Monopoly Committee (AMC) as proposed in Bank staffs
policy note on competition policy reform. The private sector's perception of the
business environment and barriers to entry and expansion identified in the World
Business Environment Survey conducted recently by the Bank's PSDBE need to be
addressed.

*

Settlement of Disputes. Uzbekistan does not have a uniform, transparent, welldefined method of settling disputes and lacks a judiciary trained in the adjudication
of commercial disputes. The evolving legal system, particularly in relation to
commercial transactions, is not well-developed, which often results in uneven and
ineffective enforcement of property and contractual rights. Conflicting laws often
create confusion and lead to inconsistent interpretation by both government
officials and the judiciary. International arbitration is permitted, but only after a
ruling has been obtained in the Uzbek courts. Under current law arbitration awards
can be challenged in domestic courts, which are often reluctant to enforce foreign
decisions. In response to concems raised by the American Chamber of Commerce
(AmCham), the government expressed interest in establishing a dispute settlement
mechanism based on the UNCITRAL model law on international trade arbitration.

3

* Adjustment of legislation to the business environment, and legal stability. The
legal framework in Uzbekistan is generally improving and many of the new laws
and decrees appear to support private sector business development.
Implementation of the laws and decrees, however, is often slow and is further
complicated by the fact that the laws do not have direct application, and in many
cases address readers to other laws and bylaws. This leaves significant leeway for
bureaucrats to interpret the laws to suit their own purposes and creates confusion
for local and foreign businessmen, who are not able to access all of the existing
numerous "norms and standards." Many norms and standards are inherited from
the Soviet system and do not consider the present capacities and abilities of the
entrepreneurs. Most SMEs complain about an "over-regulated" environment and
difficulties in running their business without violating these norms. It also has to
be noted that the frequent issue of new laws, Cabinet of Ministers' Resolutions,
Presidential Decrees, and other by-laws, as well as amendments to existing
legislation, is very high and leaves an impression of instability of the legal
environment.
* Privatization. The Government recently announced major changes in its
privatization strategy (COM Resolution No. 119 in March 2001), in particular its
intention to: (a) offer a controlling stake (at least 51 percent of shares) for some
large enterprises such as Uztelecom; (b) offer all remaining shares for 1,200
medium-sized enterprises; (c) include for privatization new sectors such as power
and railways; and (d) offer a new list of enterprises to the Privatization Investment
Funds (PIFs). The Government needs to accelerate progress in the case-by-case
privatization of large enterprises by finalizing transactions, including by making
available majority shareholding to strategic investors. A number of companies are
presently in the pipeline for privatization and at various stages of preparation. The
prospects for the successful privatization of these enterprises are mixed, given the
macroeconomic situation and investors' perception of lack of government
commitment to privatization and freedom for enterprises to act without government
supervision.

* Reform in the mining sector, which is underdeveloped because of the lack of
sector reform and the dominant role of state enterprises. Uzbekistan has the second
largest gold reserves in the CIS (after Russia) and the sixth largest in the world.
Gold output estimated at 85 tons in 1998 was low, given the country's geological
potential. The production of copper, lead, molybdenum, silver, tungsten, zinc, and
uranium is also important to the national economy. Excepting the ZarafshanNewmont gold project, mineral production is predominately by government-owned
enterprises. The meager US$10 million of exploration investment by international
mining companies in 1999 testifies to the need to improve the investment
environment. Exploration expenditure in the gold sector could be a multiple of
current levels following implementation of significant reform. Discussions which
have been taking place with several foreign investors over the past few years are
yet to result in concrete new investments.

4

*

Banking Sector Development. The extent of government guarantees issued to
support lending to selected sectors and enterprises through state-owned banks is
increasing the banking system's volatility and risk, in addition to the creation of
disincentives for prudent behavior and moral hazard. For some state-owned banks,
these guarantees sometimes exceeds 90 percent of the banks' total loan portfolios.
Currency unification would result in significant further depreciation in the sum and
substantially increase the vulnerability of enterprises and banks, given the foreign
exchange mismatch of financial positions of some of the major borrowers of the
banks. In many cases, the banks do not require collateral or any other form of
additional security when they acquire government guarantees. This situation
exposes the government directly to credit risk. Another major risk factor is the offbalance sheet exposure of some banks (through guarantees and letter of credits),
some of which is again covered by government guarantees. In some cases, the offbalance sheet exposure of banks may exceed their total capital.

6.
In addition, the Central Bank of Uzbekistan (CBU) is providing direct funding to
selected banks to finance specific government programs. Although the CBU confirmed
that these loans are also fully guaranteed by the government, this could potentially increase
the vulnerability of the CBU itself and limit its role as a lender of last resort. There are
also other serious weaknesses in the banking sector in terms of: (a) credit screening,
portfolio monitoring and, hence, overall asset quality; (b) risk and asset liability
management; (c) corporate governance and internal audit; (d) adequacy of legal and
regulatory framework, and enforcement issues; and (e) accounting practices.
7.
Addressing some of the above issues, such as phasing out government guarantees
and directed credits, will require joint and coordinated efforts by the government and the
CBU and can only be phased in over time. Workout capacity would need to be developed
in the banks, with guarantees replaced by collateral once loans to major borrowers are
adequately reviewed and subsequently restructured.
IFC Activities and Investment.
8.
The difficult business environment has limited the opportunities for IFC investment
during the last CAS period and, without significant improvement, will continue to do so.
Accordingly, IFC is pursuing a strategy that focuses primarily on: (a) providing technical
assistance to improve the investment climate; (b) supporting the development of SMEs that
lack access to credit and technical expertise; (c) building capacity in the financial sector by
supporting financial intermediaries offering services and products needed to deepen the
financial system and assist in making capital markets more efficient; and (d) pursuing
selective investment in sectors with significant export potential, such as natural resources,
or which support the privatization process. Partly to support this strategy, IFC has
strengthened its field presence in Central Asia, with a sub-regional office in Almaty,
supported by the new Southern Europe and Central Asian regional hub in Istanbul.

5

SMEs offer significant potential for IFC investment in Uzbekistan and they are an
9.
important catalyst for the development of the private sector. The Extended Reach
Initiative allowed IFC to gain a better knowledge of this sector and resulted in four direct
investments. IFC has also been able to better understand the problems and needs of SME
borrowers, both in terms of technical assistance and credit facilities, and broaden its
support to improve the business environment, credit lines channeled through financial
intermediaries and directed technical assistance to SME borrowers. However, significant
growth in the SME sector is difficult due to the current business climate and restrictive
foreign exchange regime.
10.
IFC's activities to foster SME and private sector growth will be expanded during
the FY02-04 CAS period. Supported by the Swiss Govermment, IFC's Private Enterprise
Partnership (PEP) is planning to develop a non-financial assistance program to promote
private sector development, and SMEs in particular. The program will include: addressing
industry-specific barriers to business development, particularly related to cross-border
trade and agribusiness; technical assistance support to private and public sector institutions
in specific areas related to the business enviromnent (e.g., identifying and addressing
administrative barriers, capacity building for business/industry associations); and
improving private sector access to information and quality business support services (e.g.,
through capacity building to new or existing business services providers).
11.
Assistance to SMEs is most efficiently channeled through local financial
intermediaries. EFC has taken a leading role in the area of institution building in the
financial sector. During the past three years, it has committed credit lines for on-lending to
SMEs through four financial intermediaries, including two regional banks, the latter being
supported by institution building technical assistance; and, over the next three years, it
plans to focus on building the financial strength and technical expertise of existing banks,
providing new credit lines to support SMEs, encouraging leasing operations and giving
technical assistance to these institutions. If the business enviromnent improves and the
World Bank-supported program for privatization of large state-owned banks moves
forward, IFC would expect to work closely with strategic investors by providing
investment capital and credit lines. Leasing is one of the most efficient vehicles for
providing capital assets to SMEs. IFC has provided support for development of the leasing
industry by approving investments in Uzbekleasing, as well as providing technical
assistance for the development of the country's leasing law. IFC will continue to support
the development of the leasing industry through a regional PEP project . IFC will also be
looking at opportunities to develop the private sector insurance industry. Technical
assistance, based on securing donor funding, may also be provided to assist in broadening
the range of financial sector services, including the development of debit cards and credit
unions.
12.
Agribusiness is of vital importance to Uzbekistan's economy. There is tremendous
potential for development of downstream cotton processing: only 18 percent of the cotton
crop is used for domestic value-added processing and manufacture. The involvement of
the private sector into the seed cotton processing has been very modest so far, with only

6

two private ginneries in operation and two more scheduled for operation during 2002-03
(out of a total of 140 cotton ginneries in the country). The situation is similar for grain
mills. This is due to the fact that both cotton and grains are considered to be strategic
crops and the state maintains tight control over planting areas, seasonal financing,
processing and especially marketing and exports. Grain exports are prohibited. The
situation is somewhat more positive with the further processing of ginned fiber and grain
flour, with a number of private companies and joint ventures engaged in producing cotton
yarn and fabric and a large number of small scale private bakeries.
13.
Due to the substantial deregulation of the livestock, fruits and vegetables sector, the
private sector dominates the processing of meat and dairy products and production of
juices, other non-alcoholic-beverages, and jams, purees, etc. Most agro-processing
enterprises have been corporatized (with the stake of the state typically around 25 percent)
and operate on increasingly commercial terms. Nevertheless, thirty five percent of total
annual fruit and vegetables output rots in the field. Investment and technical assistance for
the agri-processing sector could significantly increase the value added in this sector and
provide for significant export earnings. In this area, IFC has taken the initiative to seek out
prospective local agro-processing entrepreneurs and, through the use of donor assisted
consultants, help them in the development of their project proposals. SME proposals in
this area are currently referred to the banks participating in IFC's credit line facilities. In
addition, IFC is providing technical assistance to the government in outlining the strategic
directions for the development of the textile sector and other initiatives to attract foreign
investors.
14.
In natural resources, Uzbekistan has significant untapped potential, particularly
gold, copper, oil, and gas. To date, most projects have been undertaken by government
joint stock companies and have been funded internally. As the business environment
improves and private sector projects develop, IFC will work with international sponsors
and the government to facilitate the development of projects to extract and process these
deposits. Together with the Bank, IFC could also consider the provision of technical
assistance to improve the legal and regulatory framework that could facilitate more foreign
investment into the natural resources sector.
15.
In telecommunications. IFC could consider supporting existing private operators in
the cellular services market, and is now in the process of evaluating a potential
pre-privatization investment in Uzbektelecom. At present, cellular operators face a
number of challenges. The fragmented market consisting of five operators has hindered
the ability of any one company to generate the critical mass of subscribers needed to justify
significant investment in a nationwide network. Also, the convertibility issues noted
earlier discourage the financing and import of the requisite capital equipment from abroad.
16.
The government is undertaking the privatization of utilities along with some of the
larger enterprises. Actual results to date, however, have been minimal due to investor
reluctance to participate in the process in view of the lack of a strong legal and regulatory
framework coupled with the difficult business environment. Once these privatizations take

7

place and strategic investors are identified, IFC would work with investors and the
government to structure the investment and provide the required investment capital. New
opportunities in power generation may also develop as a result of the February 2001
Presidential Decree which seeks private sector ownership and investment to renovate and
modernize the country's facilities. The government views IFC's catalytic role in attracting
foreign investment to this sector as important in addition to its potential role in providing
technical assistance in the development of the required regulatory framework and
encouraging good corporate governance. The pace of economic reform and currency
liberalization will have a significant effect on IFC's ability to facilitate such investment.
17.
Responding to the government's request to support the development of the private
healthcare Sector in the country, IFC has conducted an overview of the current status of the
sector and identified several potential investment opportunities. However, its ability to
invest in the short term is limited by a restrictive foreign exchange regime and, in many
cases, weak management capacity of prospective borrowers. During the CAS period, IFC
will therefore focus on pre-investment technical assistance to already identified potential
projects and, when appropriate, will facilitate financing through local financial
intermediaries.
18.
Technical assistance. During the last CAS, IFC technical assistance and support
for SME projects have included work to identify potential investment opportunities in
tourism, agribusiness, textiles and construction materials; a study to determine the potential
for business incubation centers; support for SMEs in the development of modern
accounting and MIS systems; and, a review of pre- and post-investment support for SMEs.
IFC expects to continue providing results oriented technical assistance that will support the
growth of the private sector.

8

IBRD 28006R2
55"

e60

652

70S

7,;

UZBEKISTAN

KAHST4N
K

SELECTEDCITIES

eynl

45s

,
ira
A

9

I

_

-A

A

.'

.

j

4.u7

;

'-

.,
,

ovoo

sI'I

----

RIVERS

-.--

INTERNATIONAL BOUNDARIES

.1K

_.

~'~~

-?960-IcwlfAr.tS-a\

;e~~~~~~%

,-i-b

.

''

'Q0

'-'-'i

-RAILROADS

.

ot

I

--.'

NATIONAL CAPITAL
ROADS

Pt

>1'

OBLASTCAPITALS


-MAIN

.ea

*W



o

>

,,K-AKHSTAN

L

)S

5~~~~~~~~~'~~'

\

l- |- t ii ?,~~~~~

,s,Tashkent

r~./-

Ni

fS

*.k..

A

C-

e-u.

K

I

I LII1ftII

d-

>
--

'

AN

-,

-

.,.

5 5

KAZAKI-

mlons.*
-. .-.

.-

I

_~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

)4JlS

.

/

1.

--U;

f-N9

Th5o6mmpwdmpodu5dyft,M,pDesIheeglo.Jah0

<

1 -l,rl

4W~~~~~~~

:t'e:
Gin:7 onylu7

L:

k,~~~~~~~~~~-

F
t. C.-C,C
t , \J ~ifJ - ;i>

0he0 ndrnes
otor
d
shownon
a map&do no/mp/yoorhep

REPUBLIC
>|
trrv

@/

n

aKYRGYZ
Lq^ rw --

,

4

0u

-

'

I

~.t X

A)

I--

ri

-

K

~-2}~- --

;f.)'.afl

.JZr.-~

j

!

l

' .,9K
99t
F'i

x

68-e

S-

1,;f

~:--: -

A

1 1'

ur

N

_ <- *S;

-

TAJIKISTAN

-

N

,6V

..

.

'

1.

ci

AFGHANISTAN
ISLAMICREPUBLIC
OF RAN
ll?

1i.

AFGHAN1STAN

70-

SW

NATkNALCAPTAL

I.R. OF IRAN

INTERNATI0NAL 601\
~~~~~~~~BCUNDARE

,

r

eS

%

r

70

KSA

N

-5

APRIL2000

