Public Disclosure Authorized

Document of
The World Bank

Public Disclosure Authorized

Official Use Only

Report No: 24168

MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENT
OF THE
INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION

Public Disclosure Authorized

TO THE
EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS
ON AN
INTERIM COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
OF THE WORLD BANK GROUP
FOR

Public Disclosure Authorized

THE, REPUBLIC OF COTE D'IVOIRE

May 9, 2002
Country Department for C'8te d' Ivoire
AFC11
Africa Region

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in
the performance of their official duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed
without World Bank authorization.

CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS
Currency Unit
US$1.00

CFA Franc (CFAF)
CFAF 731(April 02)

WEIGHTS AND MEASURES
Metric System
ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS
AfDB
APEXCI
CAA
CACI
CAISTAB
CAS
CECP
CEPICI
CFAA
CIDA
CPAR
CPPR
DSA
ERC
ESAF
ESW
EU
FSAP
GDP
HIPC
ILO
I-CAS
IMF
I-PRSP
JSA
MTEF
OHADA
PER
PHRED
PIP
SIGFIP
SMP
UNDP
UNICEF
UNESCO
WHO

African Development Bank
Association pour la Promotion des Exportations en Cote d'Ivoire
Caisse Autonome d'Amortissement
Cour d'Arbitrage de C6te d'Ivoire
Caisse de Stabilisation
Country Assistance Strategy
Caisse d'Epargne et des Cheques Postaux
Centre de Promotion des Investissements en C8te d'Ivoire
Country Financial Accountability Assessment
Canadian International Development Agency
Country Procurement Assessment Report
Control Portfolio Performnance Review
Debt Sustainability Analysis
Economic Recovery Credit
Enhanced Structural Adjustment Facility
Economic and Sector Work
European Union
Financial Sector Assessment Program
Gross Domestic Product
Heavily Indebted Poor Countries
Intemational Labour Organization
Interim Country Assistance Strategy
Intemational Monetary Fund
Interim Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper
Joint Staff Assessment
Medium Term Expenditure Framework
Organisation pour l'Harnmonisation en Afrique du Droit des Affaires
Public Expenditure Review
Policy and Human Resources Development Fund
Portfolio Improvement Plan
Systeme Informatique de Gestion des Finances Publiques
Staff Monitored Program
United Nations Development Programme
United Nations Children's Fund
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
World Health Organization
Fiscal Year
January I - December 31

Vice President:
Country Director:
Country Program Coordinator:

Callisto E. Madavo
Mamadou Dia
Peter N. Ngomba

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
REPUBLIC OF COTE D'IVOIRE
INTERIMI COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
Table of Contents

EXECUTIVE SUM[MARY ...............................................

i

I.

BACKGROUNI) AND INTRODUCTION ........................................... 1

II.

COUNTRY BACKGROUND .............................................

III.

IV.

2

A.

Recent Socio-Political and Policy Developments ..................................... 2

B.

Country Poverty Profile ................

C.

Recent Economic Developments .....................................................

D.

Dealing with the HIV/AIDS Pandemic ..................................................... 8

..................................... 3
5

GOVERNMENT'S POVERTY REDUCTION STRATEGY ......... 9

9..........................................

A.

I-PRSP Objectives and Strategy

B.

Medium-Term Prospects and Financing Requirements ........................... 11

C.

Policy Track Record And Future Challenges.......................................... 13

INTERIM COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY

..

15

A.

Strengthenin,g Portfolio Management ....................................

16

B.

Lending Pro,gram during the Interim CAS Period ................................... 21

C.

Non-Lending Activities ....................................

D.

Triggers for .Assistance and Performance Indicators ............................... 23

E.

IFC and MIGA Programs ....................................

24

F.

Donor Coorclination and Collaboration .......................................

25

22

V.

BENEFITS, RISKS AND RISK MITIGATION .............................. 25

VI.

CONCLUSION ....................................

27

VIII. ANNEXES .28
Tables
Table
Table
Table
Table

1: Cote d'Ivoire - Human Development Indicators ....................................... 4
.5
2: Cote d'Ivoire - Poverty Indicators, 1985-1998 by Region
3: C6te d'Ivoire: Key Macroeconomic Indicators, 2000-03 .12
4: C6te d'Ivoire Government Financing Operations, 2001-04 .13

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the
performance of their official duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without
World Bank authorization.

MEMORANDUM iND RECOMMENDATION OF THE PRESIDENT
OF THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION
TO THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS ON AN INTERIM
COIJNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
FOR TIHE REPUBLIC OF COTE D'IVOOIRE

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
i. Cote d'Ivoire's previous CAS was discussed by the Board in August 1997. This
Interim CAS (I-CAS) presents the Bank Group's program for the next 12 to 18 months.
The assistance strategy contained in this I-CAS supports the Government's Interim
Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (I-PRSP) endorsed by the Board on March 28, 2002.
In their Joint Staff Assessment (JAS), IDA and IMF staff consider the I-PRSP as
providing a sound basis for developing a fully participatory PRSP and cite the
Government's decision to adopt the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) as a basis
for setting long-run targets. The next full CAS will be based on the full PRSP; this is
expected to be completed in about a year.
ii. C6te d'Ivoire has experienced over the last three years an unprecedented crisis. The
crisis broke the momentum of trade and investment growth and shattered the image of
C6te d'Ivoire as a preferred regional location for foreign direct investment. Economic
performance declined, investment levels plummeted, private investors left the country in
significant numbers, and poverty levels worsened.
iii. However, recent encouraging developments have included peaceful communal
elections and the successful conclusion of a National Reconciliation Forum. As a result,
the major donor partners and the international community at large have decided to
resume their assistance to Cote d'lvoire. Moreover, following successful implementation
of a six-month Staff-Monitored Program (SMI), a three-year PRGF was approved by the
IMF Board in March 2002. Notwithstanding the above encouraging developments, Cote
d'Ivoire's situation is still very fragile. Not only does the government need to
consolidate the gains of the reconciliation process and respond to the aspirations of
Ivorians, but it also needs to fulfill hopes of a lasting economic turn-around.
iv. Supporting a return to growth and improved service delivery will be at the core of the
Bank's Interim CAS. This will be done through improved portfolio management, new
lending, and non-lending assistance.
(a)
More effective use of the ongoing portfolio. The Bank's portfolio currently
includes 12 projects, for a total commitment of $585 million ($248 million undisbursed).
Portfolio performance has been mixed. On the eve of the suspension of World Bank
disbursements in October 2000, 58 percent of commitments were at risk. During the

ii
suspension, project implementation activities virtually ground to a halt leading to an
erosion of portfolio quality. To ensure improvement in portfolio implementation, a
CPPR will be conducted by July-August, 2002, and a Portfolio Improvement Plan agreed
with the Government. The objective is that, by the end of the I-CAS 18-month period,
projects and commitments at risk are no higher than the Africa portfolio average and the
disbursement ratio of the Cote d'Ivoire portfolio has been restored to the FY00 level, i.e.
at about 15 percent.
(b)
New lending. As part of re-engagement under the I-CAS, the planned lending
program amounts to up to US$380 million covering the remaining quarter of FY02 and
FY03. It includes one operation scheduled for Board presentation in FY02. This is the
Economic Recovery Credit (US$200 million), a highly focused emergency operation
targeting rural poverty. The planned FY03 lending program includes the HIV/AIDS
MAP operation (US$50 million) to respond to Cote d'Ivoire's looming AIDS epidemic, a
Capacity Building for Poverty Reduction APL operation (US$80 million) to strengthen
the ability and accountability of central and community-based agencies to ensure quality
service delivery both in rural and urban areas, as well as an Urban Poverty Reduction and
Improved Service Delivery Project (US$50 million).
(c)
Planned non-lending assistance includes: (i) support for the preparation of the full
PRSP and a gender analysis to accompany the full PRSP; (ii) a Public Expenditure
Review (PER in early FY03) and a Medium Term Expenditure Framework (MTEF in
FY03) for priority sectors (rural development, education and health) to assist Government
in aligning public expenditures with poverty reduction priorities and in tracking the entire
expenditure process from budgetary formulation to the delivery and use of allocated
funds; (iii) support toward a potential Cote d'lvoire enhanced HIPC initiative, in
collaboration with IMF in FY03; (iv) a financial sector assessment (FSAP), with IMF
participation in FY 03; (v) an Education Sector Country Status Report in FY03; (vi)
Social Protection: Risk and Vulnerability Analysis in FY03; (vii) Competitiveness Study
in FY03/04; (viii) Country Economic Memorandum/Sources of Growth Study in
FY03/04; (ix) a CPAR to be completed in FY04 and a CFAA in FY03, (x) preparation of
a new CAS in FY03, following completion of the full PRSP; and (xi) preparation of a
Consultative Group (CG) meeting to strengthen the coordination of donor support to the
PRSP in FY03.
v. In both its lending and non-lending activities, the Bank is working in close partnership
with other donors, including the IMF, EU, AfDB, UNDP, other UN agencies and key
bilateral donors, particularly France.
vi. The implementation of the I-CAS could face five major specific risks:
(a) The national reconciliation process may stall or be reversed, which may lead to
renewed social unrest and a disruption of economic activities. However, the preparation
of the full PRSP should provide a national forum for discussions on priority development
issues, and allow for arbitration between conflicting objectives and interests. The ERC

iii
would be instrumental in diffusing social tensions by increasing access to economic
opportunities and basic services to disenfranchised groups.
(b) The high expectations generated by the advent of the new government could give way
to frustrations as expected beenefits take time to materialize. The Bank and other external
partners will have a role to play in supporting the government's reform efforts over the
next twelve to eighteen moinths through policy advice and technical assistance.
(c) The government may lack the critical financial andlor institutionalcapacity to sustain
the stabilization and structural reforms which underlie the recovery effort. This risk will
be mitigated by ensuring that the economic recovery program is fully funded and that ongoing operations and ESW, in particular those funded by IDA, provide concrete
implementation support to the government's emergency recovery program.
(d) The government may limit or even reverse the on-going liberalizationprocess in the
coffee/cocoa and cotton sectors, under pressure from private interests long protected by
the previous marketing arrangements. To help address this, the ERC will provide support
to sustain government's efforts to full liberalization while providing adequate
support/safety nets for vulnerable groups.
(e) New external shocks in the form of export price declines, loss of government revenues
and lack of external concessional financing could interrupt the recovery process and
poverty alleviation programs. However, the possible availability of substantial debt relief
later in 2002 should partly alleviate these risks as should the commitment of major
donors, including IDA, to assisting CMte d'Ivoire during the transition phase and
thereafter.

I.

BACKGROUND AND INTRODUCTION

1.
The last full Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) for Cote d'Ivoire (IDA/Report
No.17007-IVC) was discussed by the Board in August 1997. Its main areas of focus
were: (a) macro-economic stability; (b) human resource development; (c) private and
financial sector development; (d) equitable growth with poverty reduction; and (e)
sustainable growth with focus on renewable natural resources and environmental
protection. Implementation of the CAS was derailed by poor governance, lackluster
policy performance, and most of all by political and social instability and the military
coup of December 1999 that led to suspension of donor programs. The Government has
completed an Interim PRSP (I-PRSP) and expects to have its full PRSP ready in about a
year. The next World Bank CAS will be elaborated in FY03 on the basis of the priorities
set in the PRSP.
2.
The Interim Cowutry Assistance Strategy (I-CAS) presents the framework for
Bank assistance to C6te d']Ivoire, pending preparation of the next CAS. It is limited in its
aims and reflects C6te d'Ivoire's special circumstances as the country makes a
determined effort to change course and extricate itself from the recent crisis. The I-CAS
reviews developments since the 1997 CAS, analyses Cote d'Ivoire's political and socioeconomic situation and performance track record, and presents the Bank Group's short
and medium term strategy for reengagement with and support to the country through its
existing portfolio, lending and non-lending activities.
3.
On January 30, 2002 Cote d'Ivoire cleared its arrears to the Bank leading to
restoration of accrual status and resumption of disbursements on the existing Bank
portfolio. Economic performance has improved and Cote d'Ivoire successfully
completed a Fund SMP, which led to a PRGF approved by the Fund Board in March
2002. Cote d'Ivoire's Interim PRSP, related Joint Staff Assessment, and HIPC
documents were presented by the IMF and the Bank Board's in March 2002.
4.
With a clear turnaround in C6te d'Ivoire's performance and the mobilization of
financing from the EMF, the EU and some bilateral donors (e.g. France), the Bank is
expected to assist covering part of the financing gap estimated at some US$626 million
over the next twelve months. To support the transition from the recent crisis in C6te
d'Ivoire, the Bank has prepared a US$200 million Economic Recovery Credit (ERC),
which is presented to the E,oard with this I-CAS.

2

II.
A.

COUNTRY BACKGROUND

RECENT SOCIO-POLITICAL AND POLICY DEVELOPMENTS

5.
Long hailed as a haven of stability and prosperity, Cote d'Ivoire has experienced
over the last three years an unprecedented crisis analogous in both its extent and
consequences to the situation of a post-conflict country. Poor governance and corruption
during former President Bedie's last years in office and failure to take timely remedial
action created a highly unfavorable climate for policy implementation and strained
relations with donor partners. The overall governance environment and lack of
transparency also negatively impacted CMte d'Ivoire's reputation as a dynamic business
center. The prevailing high tolerance for corrupt practices was of particular concern to
the Bank and the donor community. Under its program with the IMF, the Government of
President Bedie made little progress in addressing key governance issues, such as the
allocation of crop credits to a few well-connected coffee and cocoa exporters, tax fraud,
and control over public spending, ultimately leading to the suspension of the program. In
June 1999, the European Union (EU) disclosed that an amount of about CFAF 18 billion
(about US$30 million) under its budgetary support scheme to health and decentralization
had been misappropriated, and subsequently interrupted its programs. On the sociopolitical front, coinage of the "concept" of Ivoirite had a divisive effect on social
cohesion in CMte d'Ivoire, and symbolized the ascendance of party rivalries over
economic policy-making and the preservation of Ivorian nationhood.
6.
The above crisis of leadership, poor governance, and policy performance, which
bred resentment and weakened political support, explained the popular support for the
military coup that ousted President Konan Bedie and brought in the "national salvation
government" led by the military junta of General Guei. Although the December 1999
coup was bloodless and greeted with relief by the population and political parties, it did
not live up to expectations.
7.
The transition under the military government was marked by increasing violence
and human rights abuses. Institutions were dismantled and the constitution amended to
further General Guei's political ambitions. Poor governance, coupled with human rights
violations, became the keynote of the regime as the military ruler's political aspirations
(beyond the military transition) became more manifest. Program implementation was
given low priority. Debt-service payments to bilateral and multilateral institutions were
frozen and in October 2000, the World Bank suspended all disbursements to CMte
d'Ivoire when the Government failed to service its debt beyond the 60-day grace period.
Relations with the private sector came under increasing strain as faced with the economic
hardships resulting from lack of external financing and under pressure to finance his
election campaign, General Guei resorted to strong-arm and extortion tactics against
businesses (and the central bank) to mobilize resources. Economic performance
deteriorated, with GDP growth rate dropping from 4.8 percent in 1998 to 1.6 percent in
1999 and -2.3 percent in 2000 (although exogenous terms of trade shocks were also
important contributory factors). As investment levels plummeted, poverty levels

3
worsened, particularly in the agriculture-dependent rural areas. Social fissures became
more pronounced and society more polarized.
8.
The transition from military rule to a civilian government following the
presidential elections in October 2000 triggered a spate of violence unprecedented in the
country's recent history. Violence against foreigners from neighboring countries often
spilled over into sporadic attacks and violent reprisals leading to a significant exodus of
migrant workers. In rural areas agricultural productivity suffered considerably as a result.
9.
When Laurent Gbagbo was sworn in as president at the end of October 2002, his
government had to addlress difficult institutional, socio-political, and economic
challenges, with external financing suspended and very high expectations among the
population of a reversal in the rising tide of poverty and declining standards of living. In
addition to the restoration of institutions and the traditions of democratic governance,
Cote d'Ivoire's economic recovery would hinge largely on a major improvement in the
economic climate that would reflect improvements in economic and financial
governance, greater transparency in fiscal policy, the payment of arrears, and a more
equitable and effective utse of public expenditures. On the policy front, important
structural and macro-economic reforms were necessary to set Cote d'Ivoire back on the
path to sustainable growlh, win back the confidence of the private sector, and mend
relations with external partners. At the social level, there was an urgent need to begin to
repair the social fabric of society, address the challenge of rising poverty, and tackle
outstanding governance and human rights issues. In addition, the growing spread of
HIV/AIDS dangerously threatened Cote d'Ivoire's development prospects and its
population, and needed to be urgently addressed.
B.

COUNTRY POVERTY PROFILE

10.
Cote d'Ivoire has a young population profile, with an estimated 43 percent of the
population being less than 15 years old. The population of 16.3 million is still growing
rapidly (2.3 percent per year) and is fast becoming urbanized (51 percent of total
population), with Abidjan alone (3.5 million) accounting for about one fifth of the
country's total population, Population density is moderate at 45 inhabitants/sq km (81 in
Ghana), although it can reach more than 100/sqkm in parts of the more fertile Southern
region where increasing land pressure has resulted in rapidly escalating clashes related to
access to land. The 2000 UNDP Human Development Index ranked Cote d'Ivoire 154th
among 174 countries, well below the country's standing (130) in terms of income,
pointing to a wide gap between economic and social development and growing
inequalities.

4

Table 1: C8te d'Ivoire - Human Development Indicators

Human development Index
Real GDP/head (US$ in PPP)
Life expectancy (years)
Adult literacy ( percent)
Population without access
(percent)
-

Ghana

Nigeria

0.42
1,598
54
43

0.56
1,735
61
69

0.44
795
51
61

Burkina
Faso
0.31
870
45
23

47
40
61

35
75
68

51
33
59

58
30
63

41

43

43

22

to

safe water
health services
sanitation

Combined
primary/secondary/tertiary
school gross enrollment

C6te d'Ivoire

rate

(percent)

Source: UNDP Human Development, 2000 and CMte d'Ivoire Country at a Glance
11.

All indicators of social welfare are low, with poor access to health care, high

infant mortality rates, widespread child malnutrition, low enrollment and literacy rates,
and an average life expectancy of 54 years (and expected to decline further because of the
impact of the HIV/AIDS pandemic). The 1985, 1995 and 1998 household surveys show
that poverty is most prevalent in rural areas: about half of the rural population live below
the poverty line and about three quarters of the poor are rural. The surveys highlighted
the negative impact of the economic recession of the 1980s and early 1990s (a striking
general worsening of poverty, from 10 percent in 1985 to 37 percent in 1995 before a
slight recovery to 33.6 percent in 1998), as well as the high and growing disparities in
income (in 1998 the income of the 10 percent richest households was 13 times that of the
10 percent poorest). The 1994 devaluation and strong economic growth during the 199598 period boosted income per head. However, although there has not been a poverty
survey since 1998, most of these post-devaluation gains were lost during the recent

economic reversal.
12.

According to the 1998 survey, the highest proportion of poor rural households

was found in the Savannah zone (55 percent), but poverty levels were also high in the
forest zone (between 25 percent and 47 percent). Food crop farmers (58 percent) and
agricultural laborers/share croppers were the poorest, but poverty was also high among
export crop producers (43 percent).

5
Table 2: Cote dl'Ivoire - Poverty Indicators, 1985-1998 by Region
Poverty

1985

1995

1998

Incidence

1985

1995

1998

3.3
9.7
10.6
37.5
38.9
100.0

13.2
13.7
27.0
21.7
24.4
100.0

6.8
24.4
24.9
13.7
30.2
100.0

to Poverty

(percent)
Abidjan
Other Towns
East Forest
West Forest
Savannah
Total

Contribution
.(percent)

0.7
8.0
15.2
1.6
25.9
10.0

20.2
28.6
41.0
50.1
49.4
36.8

11.1
33.8
46.6
24.5
54.6
33.6

Abidjan
Other Towns
East Forest
West Forest
Savannah
Total

13.
The recent dramalic fall in the price of CMte d'Ivoire's main export crops (40
percent for cocoa, more than 50 percent for coffee and 25 percent for cotton) has had a
devastating impact on agricultural incomes and rural poverty. Cocoa and coffee
represent the bulk of cash income in the Forest Region, whereas in the Savannah Region
cotton is the dominant cash crop. These crops also provide a considerable part of farm
employment for wage laborers. Agricultural policies and prices are therefore key
determinants of income and employment opportunities, and thus of poverty, in rural
areas. Finally, qualitative assessments showed that Ivorians placed great importance on
economic as well as non-economic factors in evaluating their sense of well-being: in
addition to access to healthi and education services, the precariousness of income sources,
exclusion from social networks and powerlessness were all identified as critical elements
of poverty. In addition to share-croppers, women and people living with AIDS were
identified by the 1995 survey as being particularly vulnerable and marginalized. This
was a clear indication of the extent of the AIDS epidemic and the devastating impact it
was already having, and would continue to have in the future, on the country's economic
and social development. Although some gains had been made during the postdevaluation period (96-98) through the implementation of the government's social sector
program ("Axes Prioritajres"), they were mostly lost during the last two years of
economic and social turmoil.

C.

RECENT ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENTS

14.
During the late 1980s and early 1990s, the Ivorian economy suffered from
economic decline, weak public finances and increasing impoverishment of the
population. The devaluation of the CFA Franc in 1994 started a reversal of that trend.
Economic growth resumed in 1994, accelerating to 6.0 percent p.a. on average during the
1995-97 period. Although the economy responded well to the devaluation and
macroeconomic stabilization policies, implementation of structural reforms and pro-poor
policies fell short of expectations. Economic growth decelerated sharply after 1998 as
real GDP fell from 4.8 percent to 1.6 percent in 1999, due to growing political instability,
a deterioration in the country's terms of trade, deep cuts in the public investment
program, and weakening private investor confidence. Public expenditures in favor of
priority sectors dwindled amd structural reforms stalled when economic growth faltered,

6

extemal assistance dried up and political and social unrest escalated. The Consumer
Price Index which rose by 2.0 percent in 1998 leveled off to under 2 percent in the period
1999-2001. Merchandise exports as a percentage of GDP fell from 8 percent on average
in 1996-1998 to 7.6 percent in 1999-2001. In response to slippages in macroeconomic
management, governance issues and the stalling of structural reforms, the IMF suspended
its Enhanced Structural Adjustment Facility (ESAF) in early 1999. The situation
deteriorated further in 2000 with real GDP contracting by 2.3 percent. The government
failed to meet its debt service obligations. External and domestic arrears reached 14
percent of GDP in 2000. Despite some signs of recovery in 2001, particularly in
manufacturing and services, real GDP declined further by 0.9 percent.
15.
The consequences of the economic and financial crisis in 2000-01 have already
proven severe, and their effects may continue to be felt over a much longer period:
*

Decline in investment,. In 2000, gross domestic investment dropped by 21
percent in real terms. These declines are likely to be reflected in a slowdown
of medium-term growth. Economic recovery will depend on a return of
confidence, which will in turn necessitate improvements in economic and
financial governance and transparency in fiscal policy.
* Drop in public expenditure. In 2000, public consumption expenditures
dropped 9.6 percent. The Government's loss of ability to pay has already
been felt in a short-term drop in the quantity and quality of essential public
services. Public expenditures in favor of priority sectors dwindled and
structural reforms stalled when economic growth faltered, external assistance
dried up and political and social unrest escalated. This has resulted in reduced
school enrollment, a deterioration in health services, and reduced road and
other maintenance, all of which may have medium or even long-term
consequences.
* Drop in household consumption. Per capita consumption by households also
experienced a drop over the 1999-00 period. This undoubtedly aggravated
poverty. Moreover, to the extent that the poor have been unable to gain access
to essential services, there is a risk that poverty will increase.
* Arrears. Internal arrears grew from CFAF 288 billion in late 1999 to 326
billion by the end of 2000. This accumulation of arrears negatively impacted
the national economy by undermining the confidence of suppliers in the
Government and the financial system. The stock of external arrears on nonreschedulable debt rose from 3.3 percent of GDP at end-December 2000 to 5.2
percent of GDP at end-September 2001, mostly to Paris Club creditors, Brady
Bond holders, the World Bank, and the AfDB.
16.
The combination of serious governance problems at the end of the 1990s and the
December 1999 coup d'etat spelled a very difficult transitional period for the private
sector. The coup broke the momentum of trade and investment growth and shattered the
image of C6te d'Ivoire as a dynamic business center and preferred regional location for
foreign direct investrnent and growth. The perceived close relationship of the sector with
the Bedie regime and the corruption that permeated Bedie's administration led to a
general presumption that all contTacts negotiated with the previous administration had a

7

high probability of being firaudulent and led to excessive review of former contracts and
to fiscal harassment.
17.
While the new Government's drive to restore transparency and root out fraudulent
and corrupt practices in both the public and the private sector was welcome and
encouraged, the general concern persisted that the indiscriminate challenge of all existing
contractual obligations an,1 deals may ultimately have the perverse effect of driving
existing businesses out of the country and discouraging potential new investors. A new
course is being set aimed at improving the relationship and confidence between
government, business, and labor, and improve the business environment and investment
climate. The deterioration of the relationship between these sectors during the coup and
subsequent transitional period requires the new Government and the private sector to
have a new, open and healthier dialogue to develop a shared vision and restore mutual
trust, essential preconditions for economic recovery.
18.
The economic situation is slowly improving and efforts to jump-start the economy
are underway. In August 2001, after political and social disturbances had eased
significantly, the IMF initiated a Staff Monitored Program (SMP) for the July-December
2001 period aimed at macroeconomic stabilization. The Government's program also
aims to advance, with BaInk support, critical structural reforms in the coffee/cocoa,
energy, electricity and financial sectors. Performance under the SMP has been
satisfactory, with all quantitative macroeconomic benchmarks being met, fiscal receipts
exceeding targets and budgetary spending being lower due to tight control and slower
than expected investment program implementation. Substantial progress was also
achieved on structural reforms. In the cocoa sector, the new "Caisse de Stabilisation"
(CAISTAB) was liquidated on September 30, 2001, after the new institutions in charge of
managing the sector in a liberalized environment had been established, and the
government launched a strengthened program to recover CAISTAB's claims on
defaulting exporters. In the electricity sector, the government took measures to eliminate
a CFAF 50 billion sector dieficit (through a tariff increase and cost-reducing measures
shared by the government and energy suppliers). Agreement was reached on a strategy to
liberalize the petroleum sector, reduce the CFAF 42 billion deficit of the national refinery
company (SIR) and privatize it. In the financial sector, the Savings and Postal Agency
(CECP) was split into tNvo separate agencies and agreement was reached on the
restructuring of the "Caisse Autonome d'Amortissement" (CAA).
Finally, the
government succeeded in preventing an increase in domestic and external arrears
(priority was given to multilateral lenders, with bilateral and commercial debt to be dealt
with through debt rescheduling).
19.
The satisfactory performance under the SMP significantly improved C6te
d'Ivoire's prospects for a return to normalized relations with donors. On the financial
front, CMte d'Ivoire cleared its outstanding arrears toward the Bank on January 30, 2002
leading to a resumption of ,disbursements on the existing portfolio, restoration of accrual
status and the preparatiorL of new lending operations. Following the review and
endorsement by both the Fund and Bank Boards of the I-PRSP and Preliminary HIPC
documents, the Fund's Board approved a three-year PRGF for SDR 292.7 million on

8
March 27, 2002, with an immediate release of SDR 58.54 million. This program which
covers the period 2002-04 focuses on: (i) restoring macroeconomic stability; (ii)
improving public finance management; and (iii) normalizing relations with creditors by
eliminating arrears on domestic and external debt. It will complement the proposed
Bank's ERC (to be presented to the Board with this I-CAS), which supports key
structural measures with macroeconomic relevance in the cocoa, electricity and financial
sectors, ensuring a satisfactory level of spending in the health and education sectors, and
supporting measures aimed at strengthening public and corporate governance. Provided
the authorities maintain a good track record of policy implementation under the PRGF,
C6te d'Ivoire could reach the decision point under the enhanced HIPC Initiative in
September 2002. Arrears with the AfDB and other multilateral agencies have also been
cleared. Meanwhile, on April 10, 2002, the Paris Club creditors agreed to restructure a
total of US$2.26 billion under Lyon terms, with the immediate cancellation of about
US$911 million of external debt and the reduction of debt service due up to end-2004
from US$2.26 billion to US$750 million.
D.

DEALING WITH THE HIV/AIDS PANDEMIC

20.
Past official denial and C6te d'Ivoire's geopolitical location within West Africa's
trouble spots have provided fertile ground for the rapid spread of the HIV/AIDS virus.
Every region and all segments of the population are affected, and HIV/AIDS is now the
leading cause of mortality among adult males. Sero-prevalence rates currently vary
between 12-15 percent, close to I million adults (15-45 years old) are HIV positive, and
the cumulative death toll stands at 50,000 and is rising. The devastating effect of
HIV/AIDS in C6te d'Ivoire manifests itself in high morbidity and mortality among
teachers, health personnel, and employees in the modern industrial sector. Mortality
from HIV/AIDS is already the leading cause of death among adults and this has led to a
sharp increase in orphaned children. Communities are concerned about the risks of
abandoning centuries-old socialization processes and traditional skills passed down from
parents to offspring. Transport routes (coastal, middle-belt and northern, north to south
lines and sea routes) facilitate HIV transmission among transporters, sailors and regular
traders facilitating the spread of HIV/AIDS in all regions.
21.
Sero-prevalence rates are highest among pregnant women (14 percent), prostitutes
(40 percent), migrants, military personnel, and transporters. There is growing concern
about the faster infection rates among women, the causes of which, though not fully
understood, underscore women's vulnerability in a male-dominated society. Such
vulnerability is at its most acute when a woman loses a husband or offspring to AIDS.
HIV/AIDS-related mortality has raised the number of orphans by over 600,000, and is
having a profound impact on major sectors of the economy. Life expectancy has fallen
from 55 years in 1980 to 54 years in 2000. Increasing public understanding of linkages
between HIV/AIDS on the one hand and unemployment, declining income, and spread of
the virus through rural-urban andi regional migration, on the other, is an important stage
in initiating a better coordinated multi-sector response program.

9

II.

GOVERNMENT'S POVERTY REDUCTION STRATEGY

Early in 2001, the new Government launched a national debate on the main lines
22.
of a priority medium-term program ("la Refondation") to address the aspirations of all
In May 2001, a national workshop, attended by
segments of the population.
representatives from government, academia, civil society, the private sector and
development partners, was organized to launch the preparation of a PRSP. The uWorkshop
concluded that the major constraints to growth and equitable development in C6te
d'Ivoire were: (i) inadequate policies, excessive public intervention, a cumbersome
regulatory environment, and governance problems, including within the judicial system;
(ii) an ineffective and overly centralized public sector, misguided public expenditure
allocation and poor management and control of public finances; and (iii) the exclusion of
the poor and vulnerable groups, particularly in rural areas, from income opportunities and
decision-making processes. A Working Group --including representatives from the
public and private sectors and from civil society -- was established under the leadership
of the Prime Minister to prepare an I-PRSP/PRSP covering the 2002-2005 period. The IPRSP was reviewed by the Fund and IDA Boards last March. It provides a strong
evidence of the government's commitment to poverty alleviation and an adequate
macroeconomic framework for the period under consideration. It also describes the
detailed participatory process that will lead to the design of the full PRSP, and indicates
the main outlines of the government's poverty alleviation strategy. This strategy focuses
on promoting broad-based economic growth and employment creation, improving public
service delivery, and improving governance and capacity building.
A.

I-PRSP OBJECT1VES AND STRATEGY

Set in the longer-term framework of "Cote d'Ivoire 2025", the I-PRSP/PRSP's
23.
overarching objective is to reduce the incidence of poverty from 33.6 percent in 1998
(and probably higher in 2002 due to the recent crisis) to below 30 percent by 2005. This
objective is based on the following strategic priorities.
Promoting Broad-Based Economic Growth and Employment Creation.
24.
Government's objective is to achieve an average real GDP growth of 4.0 percent p.a.
over the 2002-2005 period (rising from 3 percent in 2002 to 6 percent in 2005), which
would translate into a per-capita income increase of about 1.7 percent p.a.. In addition to
restoration of macroeconomic stability, this will require the implementation of key
structural reforms and the provision of facilitating public services and infrastructure, to
increase the profitability of private investment and competitiveness. Because of its
central importance for Cote d'Ivoire's economy, one of the key challenges will be to
achieve strong and sustained growth in the agricultural sector. This can be achieved
through better access to markets (in particular through improved transport infrastructure
and market information) and the promotion of sustained productivity increases by
encouraging a competitive environment and facilitating access to improved technologies.
The I-PRSP
Improving Equitable Access to Essential Public Services.
25.
emphasizes the critical importance of improving the access of populations, particularly
the poorest and most vulnerable groups, to essential public services. Government

10

strategy to do so involves: (i) aligning public expenditures with development priorities
and focusing public intervention on the poorest regions and groups; (ii) improving public
sector management; (iii) reducing the cost of services; and (iv) promoting the
decentralization of government and greater participation of beneficiaries in service
delivery.

26.
The government has decided to use decentralization as one of the main
instruments for improved service delivery. Beneficiaries' participation in policy/program
design, implementation, and monitoring will be systematically sought through, inter alia:
(i) the empowerment of stakeholders in the education and the health sectors by
transferring funds for the operation and maintenance of basic infrastructure directly to the
local school and health center management committees (COGES)I, which include
beneficiary representatives, and making these committees accountable for such resources;
(ii) making agricultural services demand-driven and (partly) financed by beneficiaries
through contractual arrangements; (iii) transferring some of the front-line responsibilities
of technical ministries to the newly created communes; and (iv) fostering communitybased rural development programs which empower local communities to identify their
priority needs and mobilize/manage the services they require from public or private
sources.
27.
Improving Governance and Capacity Building. The I-PRSP also emphasizes the
importance of good governance for (i) improving transparency and enhancing the
capacity of the public sector to deliver services and efficiently manage the economy; (ii)
improving the pass-through of market prices to farmers; and (iii) promoting private sector
confidence and investments through a predictable and reliable legal/regulatory
environment and judiciary system. On the governance front, reforms will be carried out
to: (i) increase the transparency and accountability of the budget process: (ii) strengthen
the Financial Control Directorate (Direction du controle financier) and the General
Inspection of the Ministry of Finance (Inspection Generale des Finances), the latter to be
specifically in charge of undertaking ex-post financial audits of public expenditure
programs; and (iii) restructure the existing National Accounts Chamber (Chambre des
Comptes), responsible for the ex-post audits of budget accounts into a fully autonomous
"Cour des Comptes" under the Supreme Court. The government will also prepare two
major pieces of legislation to be the core of its anti-corruption program: a Fiscal
Responsibility Act and an Anti-Corruption Practices Act. On the capacity building side,
reforms will be carried out to increase the efficiency and client orientation of public
institutions. This will involve (i) restructuring/deconcentrating sectoral ministries to
align their organization, resources and management systems with government's
decentralization policy; (ii) improving their capacity at each level in policy formulation,
planning, budget management and human resources management; (iii) making them more
responsive to clients' needs, by introducing a performance-based staff management
system; and (iv) strengthening their management information/impact monitoring system
to monitor and evaluate performance.

' COGES exist in 68 percent of all primary schools and 100 percent of secondary schools.

11

28.
In their Joint Staff Assessment, IDA and Fund staff considered the I-PRSP as
providing a sound basis for developing a fully participatory PRSP, as well as an adequate
framework for continued Fund and IDA assistance to C6te d'Ivoire. The JSA cites
among others, the following strengths of the I-PRSP: (i) a solid assessment of the existing
poverty data and diagnostics and a good indication of knowledge and data gaps; (ii) a
good analysis of the government policies designed to ensure macro-economic stability
and the impact of these policies on the government's poverty reduction objectives; and
(iii) a strong involvemeni. of civil society and other major stakeholders in the preparatory
process. The I-PRSP prccess was fully owned and led by the Government and involved
consultations with and participation and validation by a broad-based cross-section of the
population. During preparation of the full PRSP, it is planned to deepen the participatory
process, with heightened involvement of parliamentarians, NGOs, civil society, and the
private sector. The Government also plans to undertake a comprehensive poverty
analysis to provide more up-to-date information to feed into the full PRSP, and to adopt
the international development goals and more specially the Millennium Development
Goals (MDGs) as a basis for setting long-run targets.
29.
To further strenglhen the I-PRSP, the JSA made recommendations in a number of
specific areas, including: taking better account of the sector strategies being pursued by
line ministries; a more in-depth treatment of HTV/AIDS and gender issues; better
prioritization, sequencing and costing of activities; better expenditure management and
use of tracking systems and poverty monitoring indicators; better balancing of the focus
on social infrastructure with attention to current inefficiencies in the allocation of
resources, service delivery and effective program implementation; the need for a deeper
analysis of the food security situation; need for a more explicit treatment of how to
strengthen personal an(d institutional accountability within government; ensuring
improved access to justice by the poor; greater clarity on the government's economic
diversification strategy; aid conducting a more in-depth analysis of the interdependencies
of poverty determinants. With regard to the proposed universal health insurance scheme,
the Government was encouraged to explore less costly grassroots approaches built on
local and private initiative,s, such as local health mutual insurance systems, which would
be more accommodating of capacity and resource constraints. The Government has
indicated its intentions to incorporate these suggestions and recommendations in the full
PRSP.
B.

MEDIUM-TERM PROSPECTS AND FINANCING REQUIREMENTS

Medium Term Outlook
30.
Government's objective is to achieve an average real GDP growth of 4.0 percent
p.a. over the 2002-2005 period (6 percent in 2005), and to decrease the headcount
poverty index from 33.6 percent in 1998 to 30 percent in 2005. Achieving this objective
will critically depend on continued political and social stability, sound macroeconomic
policies, decisive progress on key structural reforms and an acceptable solution to the
external debt problem. M:uch of the recovery in 2002 --GDP projected to increase by 3.0
percent-- will be due to the resumption of external assistance and externally funded

12
public investments. Activities in the manufacturing and service sectors are expected to
pick up in 2003 when both consumer and government spending accelerate, private
investor confidence improves, trade and transport activities grow again as CMte d'Ivoire
slowly regains its position as a regional transit hub, and new oil fields come into
production.
31.

In 2001/02, cocoa production is expected to be similar or slightly lower than in

2000/01 (1.2 million

possibly
to 1.4
million tons in the
medium-term.
The
medium-term
price
outlook for cocoa has
brightened,
with
average
prices
expected to recover
from an average of

IY

tons),
increasing

~ted¶reKeMrocnm
200
2

GDP Growth (percent)
Gross lnvestmentlGDP (percent)
Gross National Savings/GDP ( percent)
CPI Inflation, period avg., ( percent)
Overall Fiscal Deficit/GDP ( percent) (incl.
grants)
Current Account Deficit/GDP ( percent)

-2.3
10.6
7.7
2.5
-1.3

-0.9
9.9
7.4
4.4
1.2

3.0
13.5
11.8
3.0
-0.5

4.5
14.6
13.4
3.0
0.2

-2.9

-2.5

-1.7

-1.2

US$1.10/kg in 2001

(up from US$0.90/kg in 2000) to about US$1.20/kg in 2002 and US1.30/kg in 2003 as
the market will remain undersupplied. The 2001/02 coffee production is expected to
remain close to its very low 2000/01 level without much scope for a strong recovery
given the low potential of the country's aging orchards and the expected continued low
international prices which will encourage some producers to switch to more lucrative
crops. Only cotton production is expected to rise in 2002 despite low world prices,
increasing from 290,000 tons in 2000/01 to about 370,000 tons in 2002 and possibly
higher if there is a recovery in world prices.
Financing, Requirements
32.
Government's financial operations over the 2002-04 period are projected to result
in overall deficits (on a cash basis but excluding HIPC transactions) averaging CFAF 113
billion or less than 1.5 percent of GDP. The gap widens when external debt due is taken
into account. For 2002, total financing requirements are estimated at CFAF 1440 billion
(US$ 2,060 million), or 18 percent of GDP. Debt relief from the Paris and London Clubs
is expected to amount to CFAF 984 billion, leaving a residual financing gap of CFAF 456
billion (US$ 626 million)2 . This gap assumes repayment of some CFAF 95 billion in
domestic arrears.

2 It is expected CMte d'Ivoire will become eligible for debt relief under the enhanced HIPC initiative with a
decision point around September-2002.

13
33.
The residual gap of CFAF456 billion for CY02 is expected to be financed by the
IMF (CFAF 108 billion oi US$148 million), IDA (CFAF 118 billion or US$162 million),
the African Development Bank (CFAF 42 billion or US$58 million), the European Union
(CFAF 39 billion or US$53 million), France (CFAF 120 billion or US$164 million), and
other bilateral donors (CFAF 29 billion or US$40 million).
the
Furthermnore,
34.
provision of the HIPC
resources will ameliorate the

prfns20-4

2
On
situation.
March 28, 2002, the Boardbm
approved the prelimirary
ante PG arr
coeld
be
documentss
for
u
o te ofe balance
IMFSaff
69
eloping
e for 202-4 -R9
d'Ivoire's eligibility uinder
the enhanced HIPC initiative.
A decision point is envisaged
trplemenanin o0
PRGF, t

financial

2

2003

-87: ilemented.
Por -S06
in
-28rl

f
-1ei

e

cs

Aalbe¶ncn
by September 2002. C'6te
d'lvoire
had
formally
bt Relief
anloa8e
wrol be
qualified for assistance uinder
notabl
the HrPC Initiative, with a
B
completion point scheduiled
E
for March 2001, subjieci to
continued
strong policy
,ther
ileral
mi
an. srcua
performrance but the progaam
was interrupted in early )b999when the PRGF could not be successfully implemented.
With the successful completion of the 6-month IMF Staff Monitored Progam (SMP) in
December 2001, progress in developing a PRGF for 2002-04, the encouraging results of
the national reconciliation process, completion of the interim-PRSP, and the current
status of data reconciliation and the Debt Sustainability Analysis (DSA) which is well
underway, the country could be considered eligible for an enhanced HIPC facility.

Assuming six months of satisfactory implementation of the PRGF, the estimated decision

point for the enhanced HIJPC could be in the Fall of 2002. Debt relief would be allocated
towards poverty-alleviation programns, notably in education, health, rural development,
roads and water.
C.

POLIcy TRACK REcoRD AND FUTURE CHALLENGES

35.
Since 1994, the government has implemented macroeconomic and structural
reformn programs aimed at- achieving robust and balanced growth and financial viability.
These programs were supported by the IMF with the Enhanced Structural Adjustment
Facility (ESAF) during ihe period 1994-97 and the Poverty Reduction and Growth
Facility (PRGF) during 1998-99. Bank Group assistance under the 1994-97 CAS
supported the macro stabilization and reform program after the devaluation. Those efforts
consisted of, inter alia, an agricultural sector adjustment credit (ASAC; Cr. 2779-PVC for
3

(-) indicate payments of arrear-s or debt/bank credit.

14
US$150 million, fully disbursed on March 27, 1998), a Private Sector Credit (Cr. 2843IVC, for US$180 million), and an Economic Recovery Credit (Cr. 2656-IVC for US$100
million). IDA has also helped the privatization program with a Privatization Support
Project (Cr. 2363-IVC). Meanwhile, quick-disbursing support after the 1997 CAS
included the Transport Sector Adjustment and Investment Credit (TSAIC) approved in
1998 for a total amount of US$238.8 million. Furthermore, under the original HIPC
Initiative, a US$315 million Structural Adjustment Grant (SAG) was envisaged as the
instrument through which the Bank Group's debt relief to CBte d'Ivoire was to be
provided. With the crisis, the process was discontinued but with the reengagement, a
new process has begun under the enhanced HIPC Initiative. The preliminary documents
for this enhanced HIPC Initiative were approved by the Board in March 2002 and a
decision point is envisaged by September 2002.
The results of the comprehensive adjustment strategy implemented during 199436.
97 were encouraging. In particular, the recovery of the economy after the 1994
devaluation, especially in the export sector, was sustained; rapid growth resumed; and
inflation declined considerably to low single-digit levels. The implementation of prudent
macroeconomic policies and progress in structural reforms reduced financial imbalances
and alleviated structural rigidities. A number of measures were taken to improve
government revenue performance and expenditure was scaled back. Significant progress
was made on the structural front, including privatization, the liberalization of prices and
trade, and reform of the coffee and cocoa sectors. Even though much progress was made,
C6te d'Ivoire's financial situation nevertheless was still vulnerable in 1997, with the need
for continuing a number of important structural and social policy reforms. The fiscal
situation continued to be marked by serious cash-flow difficulties, and further
consolidation was needed. Meanwhile, a second wave of structural reforms was needed
to further enhance private sector confidence and encourage investment and growth on a
durable basis. In this context, the Bank's CAS was presented to the Board in August
1997 and agreement was reached with the IMF on a new three-year program in March
1998 for the period 1998-2001 to address the unfinished reform agenda aimed at attaining
a high rate of sustainable growth, reducing poverty, and achieving financial viability.
Serious difficulties emerged with the implementation of the 1998-01 PRGF
37.
Specifically, the fiscal situation remained very fragile, delays in the
program.
implementation of some structural measures persisted, and little progress was made on
outstanding governance issues. The overall budget deficit for 1998 was larger than
programmed, as the adjustment measures that had been put in place had either not been
successful (on the revenue side) or had not been effectively implemented (on the
expenditure side). Agreement could not be reached on the second annual arrangement
because of these policy slippages and insufficient progress in implementing corrective
measures. In August 2001, the Government negotiated a Staff Monitored program with
the IMIF for the period July-December 2001. The program was successfully implemented
and a new PRGF arrangement was negotiated and approved in March 2002.
Notwithstanding the above encouraging developments, Cote d'Ivoire's situation is
38.
still very fragile. Following the past years of crisis, economic decline and missed

15
opportunities, the govermnent's promises and early successes have raised popular
expectations. Not only does the government need to fulfill hopes of a lasting economic
turn-around, but it also needs to consolidate the gains of the reconciliation process and
respond to the aspirations of Ivorians. Demands for wage increases in the public sector
and for concrete actions on the government's generous social promises are poised to rise.
Opposition to several key reforms, such as in the cocoa sector, will also be strong.
39.
On the policy level, reforms launched, e.g. liberalization programs in the
agriculture sector, the conmpletion of the privatization program, implementation of the
decentralization policy, have to be pursued to their successful conclusion such that they
impact directly and equitably on the well-being of the people of Cote d'Ivoire. The
private sector, some of whose members are still cautiously watching the economic
landscape, needs full reassurance that Cote d'Ivoire is regaining its past reputation as a
dynamic business center before undertaking the magnitude of investments necessary for
an economic take-off. In this regard, important governance reforms, including legal and
judicial, will be necessary pre-requisites.
40.
To meet these challenges Cote d'Ivoire has prepared an Economic Recovery
Program (ERP) for 2002-03, whose basic aim is to recover the ground lost to the
combined effects of the economic decline during 1998-2001 and the socio-political
turmoil of 1999-2000, and set the stage for future progress. The specific objectives are
to: (i) create the conditions for renewed growth, in particular, in rural and private sector
development; (ii) improve the delivery of public services to the poor, using and building
local capacity to manage these services; and (iii) improve efficiency and accountability in
management of budgetary resources 4 . The ERP, that provides the underpinnings for the
PRGF and ERC is a building bloc of the I-PRSP/PRSP. These Government. strategy
documents (ERP, I-PRSP/TPRSP) underlie the Bank's assistance strategy developed under
this I-CAS and the full CAS that will be completed after the full PRSP is finalized.

IV.

INTERIM COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY

41.
Coming after three years of crisis and sharp economic decline, the events of the
past three years have taken a terrible toll on Cote d'Ivoire's economy and social fabric.
The country is clearly in a difficult and fragile post-conflict situation, and quick and
substantial support from donors, including IDA, will be critical to support government's
economic recovery program and on-going efforts at mending the social fabric and
restoring conditions for sustainable growth. This I-CAS will support the Government of
Gote d'Ivoire in consolidating its initial progress and addressing its pressing and
immediate challenges within the above fragile context. It builds on the satisfactory
implementation of the SMP1 and the new PRGF, the Interim PRSP, and progress on the
Under the ERP, a reform program has been prepared, which deals with: (i) budget formulation, to align it
with priorities; (ii) budget execulion, including procurement, for efficiency and transparency; and (iii)
intemal controls and audits to increase probity.
4

16
socio-political front with the successful reconciliation process (forum and subsequent
meeting between the four key political leaders). As an interim support strategy, the ICAS's objectives and scope are highly selective and limited to high priority measures
included in the Government's Economic Recovery Program as set forth in the
Government's Letter of Development Policy for the ERC, and which measures would be
carried out within the transition period before a full CAS could be implemented. Longer
term development priorities would be supported under the next full CAS whose
preparation is scheduled for FY03, following completion of a full PRSP and provided the
macro-policy programs supported by the IMF (PRGF) and the Bank (ERC) remain on
track.
42.
Supporting a return to the path of growth and improved service delivery will be at
the core of IDA's Interim CAS. The support strategy will capitalize on and maximize the
synergy between the on-going portfolio, new lending and non lending support to achieve
the following objectives:
(i)

jump starting economic recovery and growth through the consolidation of
liberalization of the agricultural sector and the restoration of the country's
reputation as a dynamic business center for the private sector;

(ii)

improving the accessibility and efficient and inclusive delivery of basic social and
agricultural services through decentralization and empowering communities (in
both rural and urban areas) with the aim of softening the transition from the crisis
on the poor and addressing the HlV/AIDS crisis;

(iii) improving and ensuring the maintenance of basic infrastructure, especially roads
in the rural area; and
(iv) enhancing governance and capacity in public institutions to, inter alia, improve
decentralized delivery of sector services, budget execution and portfolio
management (particularly procurement and financial management to accelerate
disbursement).

A.

STRENGTHENING PORTFOLIO MANAGEMENT

43.
The current portfolio in Gote d'Ivoire consists of twelve projects with a total net
commitment of about US$585 million and a total undisbursed balance of about US$248
million, with projects and programs mainly in the infrastructure, education and training,
health and agriculture sectors.
On the eve of the suspension of World Bank
disbursements in October 2000, 58 percent of commitments were at risk and generic
problems relating to the overly centralized financial management system, SIGFEP5 , and
availability of counterpart funds substantially hampered portfolio implementation. Under
SSIGFEP

isa computerized financial management system introduced in 1998. The system is overly

centralized and has severely constrained implementation of public expenditure programs. But
improvements have been introduced to make the system more flexible and compatible with decentralized
implementation arrangements.

17
the suspension, project implementation activities virtually ground to a halt leading
inevitably to an erosion of portfolio quality. With the lifting of the suspension, the
primary challenge is to restore normal implementation pace for immediate impact on the
ground. Portfolio management in the present phase is being cast in a problem--solving
mode, with focus both on long-term generic and project-specific constraints. The
Government has established a Crisis Committee to proactively monitor the portfolio and
help resolve issues. A detailed working document currently being prepared and
scheduled for completion by end-May 2002, will form the basis of a CPPR and Portfolio
Improvement Plan (PIP) with specific monitorable benchmarks to guide portfolio
management during the remainder of FY02 and beyond. This document will include
time-bound action plans, milestones and implementation performance benchmarks, as
appropriate, for projects in the portfolio over the I-CAS period.
44.
Under the period of the interim CAS, portfolio management will rest on three
pillars: (i) a strategy for re-engagement; (ii) portfolio restructuring; and (iii) a strategy for
ensuring continued improvements in portfolio performance.
45.
The re-engagemenl: strategy aims to help facilitate resumption of normal
portfolio implementation pace. It includes the following elements:
(a) Active portfolio. Before the end of FY02, all operations that will remain in the
FY03 portfolio will update their implementation plans for the 18 months of the
Interim CAS period, detailing key activities, procurement and financing plans, and
disbursement projections.
(b) Problem projects. There will be a special focus on problem projects (42% of
projects), which will all have initiated and/or been implementing pro-active action
plans before the end of FY02 (that may include upgrading, restructuring, and/or
partial credit cancellation, and when warranted suspension) with the objective to
improve their perform;nce status by the end of CY02. Extensions of closing dates
for problem projects that cannot be upgraded immediately (e.g. Education Project),
may be granted exceptionally when justified, subject to Bank policies on closing
dates and proactive actions being initiated.
(c) Steps will be taken to ensure that systemic problems affecting portfolio
implementation even prior to the suspension of disbursements have been addressed.
Depending on need, special attention will be given to cope with possible bunching
of disbursement and procurement-related requests, thereby avoiding backlogs.
(d) Portfolio oversight. An encouraging initiative to give impetus to resumption of
portfolio implementation has been the creation by the Government of a Crisis
Committee to expedite disbursement of IDA resources and resolution of
outstanding portfolio issues. In the same problem-solving spirit, some projects have
scheduled mid-term reviews during the I-CAS period (e.g. the education and health
projects) to identify in a timely fashion needed project adjustments to take account
of current realities.
46.

The portfolio restructuringwill take place in two stages:

18
(a) There will be the restructuring exercise falling within the period of the Interim
CAS (18 months) to improve project performance and/or respond to immediate
emerging challenges in the aftermath of the recent economic and socio-political
crises (e.g. a sharp deterioration in living standards, a growing HIV/AIDS threat,
land disputes, etc.).
(b) Following finalization of the Government's PRSP and during the period of the
next full CAS, a more thorough and profound restructuring of the portfolio is
planned guided by the need to fully accompany Cote d'Ivoire's vision of poverty
reduction through a decentralized community-driven development approach. From
preliminary consultations with government counterparts the one option is to
gradually move from specific project-based approaches to cross-sectoral umbrellatype programs that make for improved resource management and are better
articulated with the integrated development needs of our clients.
47.
Before the end of FY02, all projects slated for restructuring would have been
identified, the rationale for restructuring specified (whether related to orientation, design,
or sector priorities), the content of restructuring spelled out, and a restructuring timeframe defined. In the case of problem projects that need to restructure urgently to place
project implementation back on track, when possible, restructuring would have to be
completed by the end of FY02. For all other projects, the restructuring exercise under the
first stage (I-CAS period) would be concluded before the end of CY02.
48.
To ensure continued improvement in portfolio implementation, a CPPR will
be conducted by July-August, 2002, and a Portfolio Improvement Plan (PEP) agreed with
the Government of Ivory Coast. The PIP would focus, among others, on problems in
areas critical to portfolio performance, e.g. SIGFIP, procurement, disbursements,
financial management, and counterpart funds. Irnplementation of the PIP would be
closely monitored to ensure that agreed measures are being satisfactorily executed and
that portfolio indicators are improving, e.g. in terms of projects and commitments at risk,
disbursement ratios, etc. To ensure sustainable satisfactory portfolio management and
performance, a pro-active approach to portfolio monitoring will be instituted. This will
consist in portfolio reviews of Bank projects every three months to identify problems so
that remedial action could be taken and monitored through subsequent reviews. The
Portfolio Crisis Committee set up as part of the re-engagement strategy would follow up,
if need be, on issues or problems uncovered by these systematic reviews. The objective
is that, at the end of the I-CAS 18-month period, the portfolio indicators would have
improved substantially; specifically, projects and commitments at risk are expected to be
no higher than the Africa portfolio average; and the disbursement ratio restored to the
FY00 level of the Cote d'Ivoire portfolio, i.e. at about 15 percent (in FY01, the Cote
d'Ivoire disbursement ratio was 8.1 percent).
49.
The overall portfolio restructuring and improvement exercise will focus on three
main areas:
* Rural development and infrastructure;
* Improvement of business environment and public/private partnership;

19

Decentralized service delivery.
(i) Rural development and infrastructure: Regarding rural development and
infrastructure, the restructured portfolio will support the Government's poverty reduction
strategy through the following operations:
* The Second National Agricultural Services Program (PNASA 2 approved in
FY99). which supports the development of efficient, demand-driven technology
generation and dissemination systems, the strengthening of producer associations
and the development of information systems, as well as the operations of the
recently created National Agricultural Development Fund, which will ensure the
financial viability/sustainability of the entire agricultural services system.
Restructuring has begun with an extension of this project.
* The TransportSector Adjustment and Investment Program (CI-PAST approved in
FY98) which supports the preparation of a national program for the rehabilitation
of feeder roads, pilot operations for the decentralized planning and
implementation of feeder road maintenance operations, the establishment of a
second generation R%oad Fund to ensure maintenance of the national feeder road
system, and the redaction of illegal road blocks which substantially decrease the
financial competitiveness of Ivorian agriculture. Restructuring has begun with a
Credit amendment that was approved by the Board in December 2001.
*
The Rural Land Mana-aement and Community Infrastructure Development
Program (PNGTE ? approved in FY97), which supports local community
development plans (including infrastructure - feeder roads maintenance, water
supply, and productive investments) and the pilot implementation of the new land
law. Restructuring of this program is currently underway.
50.
In the domain of environmental protection, it is proposed under the restructured
portfolio to mainstream activities aimed at safeguarding the environment and improving
management of natural assets and infrastructure. The intention is to build on the
successful implementation of the pilot Community-based Natural Resources and Wildlife
Management Project (GEPRENAF), a GEF operation which piloted the CommunityDriven Development (CDD) approach in C6te d'Ivoire and enabled important strides in
terms of community empowerment over natural and infrastructure assets.
51.
(ii) Improving business environment and public/private partnership: Regarding
improvement of the environment for business and government relations with the private
sector, the restructured portfolio will provide support at three levels:
* Improvement of the dialogue between the Public and Private Sectors
* Improvement of the Investment Climate
* The Privatization Program
52.
To support the first two of these actions, IDA will focus on the continued
implementation of the P'rivate Sector Development Capacity Building Project
(PDSP/ARC), which has as its main objective promoting investment growth and exports
by supporting the private sector. The deterioration of the relationship between the public

20
and private sectors during the coup and subsequent transitional period, requires the
Govermnent as well as the private sector to conduct an extended dialogue in order to
develop a shared vision for the recovery of the private sector, the creation of new
employment, and the promotion of exports and new investment. Since April 2001, the
Bank has been engaged in a process to support the re-establishment of this dialogue. The
process includes the creation of a "Commission for Competitiveness, Growth and Private
Sector Development" comprising representatives from the private sector as well as from
public administration. Its main mission is to evaluate the problems and major constraints
in these sectors and propose short and long-term measures to improve the business
environment and restore competitiveness to boost the economy. Early results are
encouraging and a Government/Private Sector Dialogue Committee was created in
August 2001 and is presently finalizing the implementation of its methods of operation as
well as its work program for 2002. Within the framework of PDSP/ARC, the Bank
intends to support this Committee.
53.
The PDSP/ARC will also be instrumental in improving the business environment
and investment climate through targeted support to the following:
(a)
(b)
(c)

(d)

(e)

APEXCI - (Agency for the Promotion of Exports in CD; with
particular focus in 2002 on capacity building of Small and Medium
Enterprises, like exporters of cocoa/coffee;
CEPICI (Center for the Promotion of Investments in CI); with
emphasis, in consultation with FIAS and MIGA, on the policy and
strategy of tracking, targeting and assisting investors;
Technical Assistance for Small and Medium Enterprises; with
stress in 2002 on capacity building in Small and Medium
Enterprises, especially to facilitate their greater involvement in the
rehabilitation and maintenance of roads;
OHADA - (Organisation pour l'Harmonisation en Afrique du
Droit des Affaires), with focus on supporting commercial law
reform;
CACI - (Cote d'Ivoire Arbitration Court) to promote greater
recourse to arbitral sentences in preference to the sluggish
traditional courts; and the
Fight against Corruption - with particular emphasis on the
identification and implementation of institutional guidelines and
other corruption control measures.

54.
With regard to the privatization program, IDA will support the finalization of the
Government's privatization program as embodied in its "privatization policy letter", with
the privatization of SIR (the Ivorian Petroleum Refinery Company) being a key element.
Greater private sector participation in the financing of infrastructure (PPD will be
supported through a PHRD grant providing technical assistance for PPI.
55.
(iii) Decentralizedservice delivery: Regarding decentralized service delivery, the
restructured portfolio will provide support through the ongoing health and education

21

projects, the Rural Land Management and Community Infrastructure Development
Program (PNGTER), and the Municipal Support Project (PACOM). These four
operations will provide the delivery of social and other priority services to the poor. To
accelerate the pace of disbursement for project implementation, the following measures
are envisaged: (i) institution of advances (regies d'avance) for six months expenses for
each operation; and (ii) the assignment of the duties of "regisseurs" on the project
financial managers and accountants, to allow for efficient use of the advances. The funds
available under the system of advances will be used for all eligible project expenditures,
including operating expenses.
B.

LENDING PROGRAM DURING THE INTERIM CAS PERIOD

56.
New lending is envisaged to further support the Government's policy reforms and
capacity building and wouldL aim at: (i) consolidating the liberalization of the rural sector;
(ii) ensuring delivery of services to the poor in priority sectors; and (iii) assisting the
Government's poverty reduction objectives, particularly in the rural areas. During the
next 12 to 18-month period, Bank re-engagement in Cote d'Ivoire will involve addressing
two urgent emerging issues: the HIV/AIDS epidemic and the recovery needs arising from
the recent economic decline and socio-political upheavals in C6te d'Ivoire. In the context
of the I-PRSP and the forthcoming HIPC initiative, Bank activities would also support
reforms to address poverty reduction issues more rapidly and effectively, with particular
emphasis on governance, capacity building, fighting corruption and the social sectors.
57.
Planned Bank lending program will amount to up to US$380 million covering the
remaining quarter of FY02 and FY03. It includes one operation sctheduled for Board
presentation with this I-CAS, the Economic Recovery Credit (US$200 million), a focused
emergency operation precisely targeting rural poverty. The FY03 lending program
includes an HIV/AIDS MAP operation (US$50 million) to respond to Cote d'Ivoire's
looming AIDS epidemic, a Capacity Building for Poverty Reduction APL operation
(US$80 million) to strengthen the institutional and human capacity and accountability of
central and community-based agencies to ensure quality service delivery both in rural and
urban areas, and an Urban Poverty Reduction and Improved Service Delivery Project
(US$50 million) to address the urgent and growing poverty needs of the urban areas.
This will complement the restructured PNGTER which focuses on poverty reduction and
service delivery in rural areas.
a.
Economic Recovery Credit (FY02). The ERC would be the main instrument of
IDA's re-engagement strategy in C6te d'Ivoire. It would (i) provide quick disbursing
emergency financial assistance to help stabilize the public finances and; (ii) support
Government's Interim Poverty Reduction Strategy (I-PRSP) aimed at implementing a set
of priority reforms for improving rural productivity and service delivery (basic social and
economic infrastructure and essential services). The ERC would particularly focus on
rural areas where most of the poor live and the country's main broad-based growth
potential lies. No other fast-disbursing support operation will be provided prior to
completion of the full PRSP and next full CAS.

22

b.
HIVIAIDS MAP Operation (FY03) will be a multi-sector support operation to
energize the ongoing national campaign to control the spread of HIV/AEDS through
providing resources to alleviate existing funding constraints and financing worthwhile
new initiatives. As such, it will essentially complement rather than replace existing incountry AIDS control initiatives (by both public and private sectors, NGOs, civil society,
and external donor partners). The operation will include the following components:
(i) prevention; (ii) care and treatment, with focus both on infected individuals and their
dependents and families; (iii) strengthening capacity and coordination; (iv) research and
epidemiological surveillance; and (v) monitoring and evaluation. The program will be
long-term (lasting 12-15 years) and implemented in phases, with the first phase, which is
supported by the MAP operation, scheduled to last for three years. To be eligible for the
proposed MAP funding, the Government: (a) is formulating a multi-sector AIDS control
strategy and action plan; and (b) has agreed to using a variety of implementing agencies
and appropriate and efficient financing mechanisms, including direct financing of NGOs,
community-based organizations and the private sector.
c.
The Capacity Building for Poverty Reduction Program (FY03) will complement
actions already ongoing in other parts of the Bank's program. Its main objective is to
transform government into a supportive and accountable partner actively fostering
poverty reducing activities at the local level and empowering communities and local
governments within the political, fiscal and administrative spheres of decentralization.
The program is expected to improve the effectiveness and increase the efficiency of
public service delivery by addressing the problems of funding constraints, weak human
and institutional capacity, ineffective communication between service providers and
ultimate beneficiaries, and inappropriate performance incentives.
d.
The Urban Poverty Reduction and Improved Service Delivery project (FY03)
will build on the results of the ongoing Municipal Operations Support Project (PACOM).
Its main objectives will include increasing revenue levels in urban areas, improving the
material living conditions of less well-off urban population groups, and increasing the
capacity of the state and local collectivities to ensure effective and sustainably-financed
urban services. The new operation will be based on community-driven development
(CDD) principles. To help improve urban service delivery, it will focus on building local
municipal capacity to respond to the demand of urban communities for improved
services, and on helping communities put in place management systems for improved
basic urban services. Project activities will include investments, capacity building, an
HIV/AIDS component, fiscal management, and Information, Education and
Communication (EEC) for communities.
C.

NON-LENDING ACTIVITIES

58.
The Bank will continue to provide technical assistance to the preparation of the
PRSP. The PRSP, which is expected to be completed in a year, will incorporate lessons
drawn from a gender analysis supported by the Bank and scheduled for completion by
September, 2002. The Bank will continue to maintain a sustained dialogue with

23
government authorities regarding its structural and economic reform program (covering,
amnong others, liberalization in the agricultural sector, implementation of the privatization
program, reforming the computerized financial management system (SIGFIP) to facilitate
disbursements, implementing the new procurement code, strengthening the micro-finance
sector, and dealing with energy and environmental issues). A financial sector assessment
(FSAP) will be undertaken by the Government by June 2003, with support from the Bank
and IMF. Other non-lending activities planned for FY03 include: (i) a Public
Expenditure Review (PER in FY03) and a Medium Term Expenditure Framework
(MTEF in FY03) to assist Government in aligning public expenditures with poverty
reduction priorities and in tracking the entire expenditure process from budgetary
formulation to the delivery and use of allocated funds at the point of consumption; (ii)
support toward a potential Cote d'Ivoire enhanced HIPC initiative, with IMF
participation in FY03; (iii) an Education Sector Country Status Report in FY03; (iv)
Social protection: Risk and Vulnerability Analysis in FY03; (v) Competitiveness Study
(FY03/04) (vi) Country Economic Memorandum/Sources of Growth Study in
FY03/FY04; (vii) a CPAR (FY04) and a CFAA in FY03; (viii) preparation of a new CAS
by the fourth quarter of FY03, following completion of the full PRSP; and (ix)
preparation of a Consultat:ive Group meeting to better coordinate donor support to the
PRSP (fourth quarter of FY03).
59.
To a lesser extent, the suspension of IDA disbursements also adversely affected
the WBI program. In particular, it hampered the development of the Abidjan Distance
Leaming Center's program, as the center was supported by the IDA LIL for its launch.
In spite of that, the center accounted for more than half of the total number of Ivoirian
participants in FY01, thereby proving that it is serving its intended purpose, namely
facilitating capacity building, even in difficult country situations. The themes that
attracted the largest number of Ivoirian participants in FY01 were: gender and health
issues in the context of developing a poverty reduction strategy, financial markets frauds
and investigations, the E]uro and the Franc Zone, public-private partnership in
infrastructure, decentralization, and macroeconomic management. In the coming year,
WBI will support the finalization of the PRSP, and its implementation and monitoring.
D.

TRIGGERS FOR ASSISTANCE AND PERFORMANCE INDICATORS

60.
IDA would continue to provide support under the program described in the
interim CAS if the following conditions continue to be fulfilled:
*
*
*
*

Satisfactory macroeconomic perfornance;
Satisfactory progress in preparing the full PRSP;
Satisfactory progress in portfolio management as detailed in paragraph 48;
and
Satisfactory progress on key structural reforms, mainly the reforms in the
cocoa/coffee/cotton sectors and in the social sectors, as set forth in the
Government's Letter of Development Policy for the ERC.

24
61.
The impact of the implementation of the country's poverty reduction strategy will
be assessed through a comprehensive system of key human and economic development
indicators specific to each of the policy domains. The development of such a full poverty
impact monitoring system (PIMS) has started with the preparation of the I-PRSP and it is
expected that it will be fully operational by the end of 2002. However, specific indicators
have been developed to monitor the implementation of key reforms agreed upon under
the ERC. Annex Cl contains details on the policy actions contained in the ERC and the
associated performance indicators. Furthermore, the Government plans to make
substantial improvements to its existing public expenditure management and tracking
system to ensure that resources reach intended beneficiaries, especially in light of recent
efforts to decentralize budget allocations to schools and health centers.

E.

IFC AND MIGA PROGRAMS

62.
IFC. With Cote d'Ivoire's prior track record on liberalization, PSD, and growth,
the country had become one of the largest and most diverse portfolios for IFC in Africa.
IFC has supported major private infrastructure projects, the development of the oil & gas
sector, agribusiness, the financial sector, and a range of SMEs. Following the December
1999 coup, and the resulting political instability, new investment all but ceased and the
economic and fiscal crisis has severely dampened private business prospects. IFC has
made only one new investment, a small private medical clinic, in this period. Before that,
it financed innovative projects in the energy sector which helped develop, at an early
stage, oil and gas resources and the country's private power production sector. These
projects depended on public/private partnerships and contracting arrangements which
have increasingly come under strain and require action on the part of the government to
preserve their viability. The government has been slow to act and still has not resolved
critical issues impinging on the viability of private involvement in the energy sector. The
committed portfolio totals $118 million and remains IFC's fourth largest country
portfolio in Africa, despite essentially no new investments in the past two years. The
focus for the immediate future will be on working with clients to deal with the difficult
economic conditions prevailing in the country. With the return of stability and an end to
the current crisis, new projects may again be selectively considered. IFC's Regional
Office for Western and Central Africa is located in Abidjan, and serves as a "hub" for the
sub-region. The Abidjan office will be further strengthened if stability is maintained.
63.
MIGA's outstanding portfolio in Cote d'Ivoire consists of one project, with two
contracts of guarantee for a project in the agribusiness sector with a total gross and net
exposure of US US$13.18 million. The project involves the rehabilitation of three cocoa
plantations to enable their product to be internationally competitive for chocolate
manufacture, and represents significant job creation-2000 employees during the
construction phase, and 1,509 regular jobs once operations commence (estimated 2003).
MIGA's Board approved the Marcory bridge project in Abidjan, but the project was
suspended after the events of December 1999. The total amount of foreign direct
investment facilitated to date by MIGA is US$8.32 million. MIGA has no active
applications for C6te d'Ivoire. However, investors have expressed interest in coverage
for investments in the agribusiness and services sectors.

25

F.

DONOR COORDINATION AND COLLABORATION

64.
The Comprehensive Development Framework (CDF) (C6te d'Ivoire has been a
pilot country since inception of the CDF), and the medium-term (2002-05) I-PRSP/PRSP
provide the overall frameworks for donor partnership. There is a division of labor based
on the comparative advantage of each donor, with the Bank focusing on structural and
sectoral issues, an emphasis on poverty reduction and the focus on achieving millennium
development goals. The 13ank's ERC operation has been designed to complement efforts
supported by the IMF under the PGRF and by other donors. The PRGF will focus on a
stabilization program, notably on tightening fiscal policy and public expenditure
management, including through better governance; reducing domestic and foreign debt.
The investment/sectoral programs and the cross-cutting reforms supported by the ERC
would be closely coordinated with those supported by other donors like the AfDB and the
EU.
65.
The HIV/AIDS MAP operation will be predicated on close cooperation among
donors on the ground so that synergies and comparative advantages could be capitalized
upon. The collaborative amd coordinated donor approach to supporting Cote d'Ivoire's
fight against AIDS is symbolized by membership of UNAIDS, which comprises UNDP,
ILO, WHO, the World Bank, UNICEF, and UNESCO.
66.
The planned Capacity Building program for Poverty Reduction is also being
prepared in close coordination with other donor partners. The UNDP, AfDB, EU, CIDA,
and the French Cooperation are all interested in participating in it and, together with the
Government, have put in place a joint Technical Coordination Committee, which has
been meeting regularly. This Committee would facilitate future collaboration and
coordination, especially with regard to a common implementation plan and reporting
requirements.

V.

BENEFITS, RISKS AND RISK MITIGATION

67.
The key benefit of Bank assistance would be to reinforce the stabilization of the
situation in Cote d'Ivoire ('with implication for the whole West Africa region), thereby
helping create conditions umder which Cote d'Ivoire could resume pro-poor social and
economic development. Blank involvement would also play a catalytic role for other
donors to resume assistance, and for the private sector to restart key economic activities.
However, substantial risks exist. To begin with, the reconciliation process will certainly
take some time, and there remain significant risks of chronic political tensions and policy
slippage. Risks on the social side are also important. Recent demonstrations by the
police force and strike actions by magistrates and social workers, and the government's
subsequent promises of salary increases illustrate the type of social tensions that are
likely to re-surface. The government's capability to resist such demands and stick to its
fiscal stance will surely be tested more than once in the coming year.

26
68.
The Bank will continue to monitor the situation and work closely with other
partners who are directly involved. Overall, the main risks facing an effective
implementation of the I-CAS could be subdivided into the following five major specific
risks, and wherever possible mitigation strategies are identified:
(i) The national reconciliation process may stall or be reversed, which may lead to
renewed social unrest and a disruption of economic activities. However, the recent
National Reconciliation Forum (November 2001) has considerably eased social and
political tensions and strengthened the on-going mending process. The preparation of the
full PRSP should provide a national forum to discuss priority development issues and
allow for arbitration between conflicting objectives and interests. By supporting
increased access to economic opportunities and basic services by disenfranchised groups,
the ERC would help addressing some of the tensions that may continue in the mediumterm during the transition to sustained and broad-based growth.
(ii) The high expectations generated by the advent of the Gbagbo regime, following the
recent tumultuous socio-political crisis, could give way to frustrations as expected
benefits take time to materialize. Thus far, the Government has managed to handle the
situation by providing assurances that by 2003, when the economic situation would have
sufficiently improved, it would be possible to revisit and address the various grievances.
Such success will however be short-lived if over the coming months there is a credibility
gap between government reassurances and its actual performance in turning round the
economy. The Bank and other external partners will therefore have a key role to play
through financial support, policy advice, technical assistance, and sustained dialogue with
the Government in supporting the government's reform efforts over the next twelve to
eighteen months.
(iii) The government may lack the critical financial and/or institutional capacity to
sustain the stabilization and structural reforms which underlie the recovery effort. This
would render largely ineffective any additional external financial resources, including
through the ERC, and curtail any further assistance from IDA. This risk will be mitigated
by ensuring that the economic recovery program is fully fimded, the donor program
supports the analysis and improvement of the country's public financial accountability
arrangements, and on-going operations and ESW, in particular those funded by IDA such
as the Capacity Building for Poverty Reduction operation provide complementary
concrete implementation support to government's emergency recovery program.
(iv) The government may limit or even reverse the on-going liberalizationprocess in the
coffee/cocoa and cotton sector, under pressure from private interests long protected by
the previous marketing arrangements and who stand to lose from the establishment of
transparent competitive markets. The ERC will support government's commitment to
full liberalization while providing adequate support/safety nets for vulnerable groups.
(v) New external shocks in the form of export price declines, loss of government
revenues and lack of external concessional financing could interrupt the recovery process
and poverty alleviation programs. However, the expected availability of substantial debt

27
relief later in 2002 should partly alleviate these risks as should the evident commitment
of major donors, including IDA to assisting C6te d'lvoire during the transition phase and
thereafter.
VI.

CONCLUSION

69.
Long hailed as a haven of stability and prosperity, C6te d'Ivoire has experienced
over the last three years an unprecedented crisis analogous in both its extent and
consequences to the situation of a post-conflict country. In recent months, the situation
improved but daunting challenges remain on the road to economic recovery and
institutional/social rebuildin.g. Economic recovery would hinge largely on a major
improvement in the economnic climate and a return of confidence among economic
operators. A focus on poverty reduction will be crucial to ensure greater equity and
inclusiveness. To achieve its poverty reduction objectives in the medium to long-term,
the Government must remain committed to implementing a sound, well prioritized
program to tackle structural and institutional constraints. In the short term, it is crucial
that it intensify its efforts to prepare a participatory poverty reduction strategy consistent
with its implementation and financial capacities. Successful implementation of the
Economic Recovery Program would be key to meeting these challenges and creating
conditions for renewed growth in the private sector and rural areas, improved public
service delivery, especially to the poor, and improved efficiency and accountability in the
management of budgetary resources. To achieve these targets, substantial support by the
Bank and other donors would be critical.
James D. Wolfensohn
President
by Shengman Zhang
Washington, DC
May 9, 2002

28
Republic of C8te d'Ivoire
Interim Country Assistance Strategy

VIII. ANNEXES
CAS Annex A2
CAS Annex B2
CAS Annex B3
CAS Annex B3
CAS Annex B4
CAS Annex B6
CAS Annex B7
CAS Annex B8
CAS Annex B8
CAS Annex B9
CAS Annex C1

C6te d'Ivoire at a Glance
Selected Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance and
Management
Bank Group Program Summary
Bank Group Fact Sheet - IFC and MIGA Program
Summary of Non-Lending Services
Key Economic Indicators
Key Exposure Indicators
Status of Bank Group Operations (Operations Portfolio)
Statement of IFC's Held and Disbursed Portfolio
CAS Matrix - Outcomes under the last CAS
Cote d'Ivoire - Matrix of Policy Actions in ERC

Annex A2
Page 1 of 2

Cote cl'Ivoire at a glance
POVERTY and SOCIAL
2001
Population, mid-year (millions)
GNI per capita (Atlas method, USS)
GNI (Atlas method, US$ billions)

CWte
dilvoire

SubSaharan
Africa

LowIncome

16.3
630
10.4

659
480
313

2,459
420
1,030

2.3
3.2

2.6
2.6

1.9
2.4

Sr7/02

Developrent diamond'
Ute expectancy

Average annual growth, 1995-01
Population (%)
Labor force (%)

GN\
GN
per
capita

Most recent estimate (latest year available, 1991i-01)
Poverty (%of population below national povefty line)
Urban population (%of total population)
Uife expectancy at birth (years)
Infant mortality (per 1,000 live births)
Child malnutrition (%of children under 5)
Access to an improved water source (%of pqpulat?on)
Illiteracy (%of popuration age 15+)
Gross primary enrollment (%of school-age poqpultion)
Male
Female

51

34
47
92

\

Gross
pnmary
enrollment

J /

32
59
77

54
88
24
63
57
71
82
61

55
38
78
85
71

76
38
96
102
86

1981

1991

2000

2001

84
25.9
35.2
18.8

13.6
61
23.2
8.5
-3 8

10.6
10.6
39.6
17 3
7.2

10.4

1

99
39.4
16.9
7.7

|

-9.9
3.6
137 4
40.4

-3.4

5.5
93.5
19.2
55.6
138.5

-3.0
5A
88.3
20.4
57.1
143.9

..

y
|

Access to improved water source

..

Cole d'lvoine
Low-income group

L

KEY ECONOMIC RATIOS and LONG-TERM TRENDS

GDP (USS billions)
Gross domestic investment/GDP
Exports of goods and services/GDP
Gross domestic savings/GDP
Gross national savings/GDP

..

Current account balance/GDP
Interest payments/GDP
Total debt/GDP
Total debt service/exports
Present value of debt/GDP
Present value of debt/exports

..

8.2
96.5
51.2
..
..

..
..

Economi rtios

T
Domestic
savings

,

iemn

-'

Investment

Indebtedness
1981-91

1991-01

2000

2001

2001-05

1.2
-2.5
2.0

7.6
47
4.1

-2.3
-4.2
-6.7

-0 9
-2.8
-1.2

4.5
4.2
45

(average annual growth)
GDP
GDP per capita
Exports of goods and services

Cole divoire
Low-income group

1

STRUCTURE of the ECONOMY
1981

1991

2000

2001

(%of GOP)
Agnculture
industry
Manufacturing
Services

26.5
18.6
11.8
54.9

25.7
19.0
17.3
55.2

24.2
22.2
19.1
53.7

24.3
21.6
18.8
54.1

2T

Pnvate consumption
General govemment consumption
Imports of goodJs and services

63.6
17.6
42.3

78.9
12.7
20.9

73.9
8.8
33.1

74.0
9.1
32.3

-30

1981-91

1991-01

2000

2001

Agriculture
Industry
Manutacturing
Services

2.2
6.3
5.4
-2.1

3.2
5.1
4.4
13.3

12.9
-9.5
-7.2
-5.8

-1.6
-2.4
-1.7
0.1

40
30

Private consumpbon
General government consumption

1.0
-1.2

8.4
2.4

4.3
-11.8

1.3
2.3

o
-10IW

Gross domestic investment

-7 2

11.2

-21.0

-22.5

Imports of goods and services

-2.1

1.5

-1.4

Growth of Investment and GOP (%)
2
1
o

0
or

97" i

20

GDI

e- GDP

_

Growth of exports and Imports (%)

(average annual growth)

20

Io

o?
-E

xpors

99

e

l1wr1ns

-4 0

Note 2001 data are preliminary estimates.
The diamonds show tour key indicators in the cotntry (in bold) compared with its income-group average. It data are missing, the diamond will
be incomplete

Annex AZ
Page 2 of 2
Cote d'lvoire
PRICES and GOVERNMENT FINANCE
1981

1991

2000

2001

8.7
1.1

1.6
-'1°

3.6
-0.1

3.1
2.1

Inflation (%)

Domestic prices

(%change)
Consumer pnces
Implicit GPdePiator
Government finance
(%of GOP, includes current grants)
Current revenue
Current budget balance
Overall surplus/deficit

,s
5

o

__

_
97

9fs

*-

15.1

..
.

;8

_

99

00

17 2
2.3
-0.9

.

-10.4

16.8
1.6
-1.2

1981

1991

2000

2001

Export and Import levels (USS mill.)

2,435

2,810

3,788

3,668

739

839
134
1.277

4

z,oo

-8.1

-O-

GDPc a:or

01

CPI

TRADE
(USS millions)
Total eXoDrts (fob)

Cocoa
Fuel
Manufactures

s.o

1fi

988

783
14
1
1.299

2,445

2.103

2,821

2,722

Foo ad eeg

457

490

433

Fuel
andqoods
eneTgY
Caoital

444

1.000

530
677

530
404

838
447

720
439

10

45
41
112

42
52

82

93
123
76

94
121
77

1981

1991

2000

2001

2,966
3,566
-600

3,149
2,832
317

4,226
3,514
711

4,100
3,364
736

-522

-1,371

-488

-293

-767
-282

-629
-337

Current account balance

N/A

-1,347

-363

-311

Financing items (net)
Changes in net reserves

N/A

1,397
-50

175
188

192
119

37
271.7

29
282.1

663
710.0

729
732 5

1981

1991

2000

2001

8,141
341
8

18,843
1,986
38

9,935
599
1,366

9.198
491
1,362

1533
40

1,279
324

898
97
19

-278
287
138
87

Total imports (cif)

EXDOnt
price index (1995 ,100)
Import Dprce index (1995=100)
Termsoftrade t995=100)

..
..

3000O

0
l

"

1

I'l l
[

1

o~

* Exoc-s

11
mDcnS
-.

.

BALANCE of PAYMENTS
Current account balance to GOP (6)

(USS mrluons)
Exons of goods and sermces
Imports of goods and services
Resource balance
Net income
Net current transfers

Memo:
Reserves including gold (USS millions)
Conversion rate (DEC, locaWLUSS)

..

1
.
2
43

EXTERNAL DEBT and RESOURCE FLOWS
(USS millions)
Total debt outstanding and disbursed
IBRO
IDA
Total debt service
1ERD
IDA

0

0

820
158
18

Composition of net resource flows
Official grants
Official creditors
Private creditors
Foreign direct investment
Portfolio equity

11
74
659
33
0

312
393
-4
16
0

118
-202
-4
134
81

World Bank program
Commitments

317

452

0

0

Disbursements

48

219

191

115

Principal repayrnents
Net flows
Interest Dayments
Net transfers

14
35
26
9

154
64
169
-105

109
82
67
15

Development Economics

Compostuon of 2001 zebt USS mil.>
A, 491

G 7

F 7043
.\

55
60
61
-1

a 1,362
c aI3

4.S50

3

A -IBRO
8-IDA
C-IMF

E- Biiaiersi
D -Other -rL,lateral F- Pnrate
G lsnolste,Th

517/02

Annex B2
Page 1 of 1

CAS Annex B2 -Cote d'lvoire
Selected Indicatoirs* of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
As Of Date 04/05/2002

Indicator
Portfolio Assessment
Number of Projects Unde r Implementation a
Average Implementation Period (years) b
Percent of Problem Projects by Number a,c
Percent of Problem Projects by Amount a,c
Percent of Projects at Risk by Number ^ d
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount a d
Disbursement Ratio (%)"
Portfolio Management
CPPR during the year (yes/no)
Supervision Resources (Iotal US$000)
Average Supervision (U'$000/project)

1999

2000

2001

2002

16
3.4

18
3.6

20

12.5

14.8
33.3
17.9
9.4

9.6
12.5
9.6
14.7

16
4.1
50
82
50
82
8.1

12
4.9
41.7
68.5
50
69.5
4.6

No
1,661
104

No
1,467
81

No
896
56

No
1,188
74,3

Since FY 80 Last Five FYs
Memorandum Item
57
5
Proj Eval by OED by Nurnber
Proj Eval by OED by Amt (US$ millions)
3474
536.1
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Number
36.8
0
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt
0
0

a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
*

As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Perfonmance (except for current FY).
Average age of proje(ts in the Bank's country portfolio.
Percent of projects rat.ed U or HU on development objectives (DO) and/or implementation progress (IP).
As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
Ratio of disbursemenits during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the
beginning of the year Investment projects only.
All indicators are for projects active in the Portfolio, with the exception of Disbursement Ratio,
which includes all active projects as well as projects which exited during the fiscal year.

Annex B3
Page 1 of 2
Cote d'lvoire

CAS Annex B3 - IBRD/IDA Program Summary
As Of Date 0412212002

Proposed IBRD/IDA Base-Case Lending Program
Fiscal year

2002

2003

Overall result

Proj ID

a

US$(M) Strategic Rewards b
(HIMIL)

Economic Recovery Credit

200.0

Result

200.0

HIV/AIDS Multi-Sector Response Project

50.0

Capacity Building for Poverty Reduction

80.0

Urban Poverty Reduction

50.0

Result

180.0

Result

380.0

Implementation b
Risks (H/MIL)

H

L

H
H
H

M
M
L

Annex B3
Page 2 of 2

CAS Annex B3 (IFC & MIGA) for Cote d'Ivoire
Cote d'Ivoire - IFC andl MIGA Program, FY 1999-2002
1999 2000 2001 2002
IFC approvals (US$m)

4.20 3.30

Sector (%)
AGRICULTURE & FORESTRY
FINANCE & INSURANCE
FOOD & BEVERAGES
HEALTH CARE
UTILITIES
Total

44
32
67
33
23
99

100

0

0

0

0

Investment instrument(%)
Loans
Equity
Quasi-Equity

100

Other

0

Total

0

MIGA guarantees (US$mn)

64
36

36

16.26 14.7 12.9 12.9

Annex B4
Page 1 of 1

CAS Annex B4 - Summary of Non-lending Services - Cote d'Ivoire
Product

Completiorn FY

Cost

Audience0

~~~~~~~~~(Tissooo)

-

Objective"

Underway
Public Expenditure Review (PER)
PRSP
Gender Analysis

FY03
FY03
FY03

100
150
80

Govt/Bk/Don
Govt/Bk
Govt/Bk/Don

KG, PS
KG, PD, PS
KG, PD, PS

FY03
FY03
FY03
FY03

140
200
75
80

Govt/Bk/Don
Govt/Bk/Don
Govt/Bk/Don
Govt/Bk/Don

KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PD, PS
KG, PD, PS

FY03
FY03
FY03/FY04
FY03/FY04

80
80
80
80

Govt/Bk/Don
Govt/Bk/Don
Govt/Bk/Don
Govt/Bk/Don

KG, PD, PS
KG, PD, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS

FY04

80

Govt/Bk/Don

KG, PD, PS

Planned
Full CAS
Financial Sector Review
CFAA
Soc. Protection: Risk & Vulnerability
Assessment

Education Sector Country Status Report
Consultative Group (CG)
Competitiveness Study
CEM/Sources of Grovtli Study
CPAR

a
b.

Govemment donor, Bank, public dissemination.
Knowledge generation, public debate, problemn-solving.

Annex B6
Page 1 of 3

CAS Anne) B6 - Cote d'Ivoire - Key Economic Indicators
Est. -

Actual
Indicaior

1995

1996

1997

1998

1999

2000

20u1

Proj.
2002

2003

2004

National accounts
(as % GDP at current
market prices)
Gross domestic product
Agriculture"
Industry'
Services'

100.0 100.0
24.7 24.6
20.8 20.4
54.5 55.0

100.0
23.3
23.7
53.0

100.0
24.1
23.0
52.9

100.0
22.0
24.2
53.8

100.0
24.2
22.2
53.7

100.0
24.3
21.6
54.1

100.0
24.1
21.8
54.1

100.0
23.9
22.0
54.1

100.0
23.4
22.9
53.7

Total Consumption
Grossdomesticfixed
investment
Government
invest.nent
Private investment
(includes increase in
stocks)
Exports (GNFS)b
Imports (GNFS)

77.1
13.7

80.2
14.8

77.2
14.5

80.3
16.0

78.7
14.4

82.7
11.0

83.1
9.0

80.0
13.1

78.4
14.1

77.7
14.3

5.1

4.9

5.4

6.0

4.2

2.8

1.2

4.0

4.3

4.3

10.5

7.2

9.0

7.3

8.9

7.8

8.6

9.5

10.3

10.7

41.8
24.4

41.1
32.4

41.4
33.1

39.4
33.0

40.3
32.2

39.8
33.1

39.4
32.3

38.6
32.1

38.8
31.9

38.9
31.6

Gross domestic savings

22.9

19.8

22.8

19.7

21.3

17.3

16.9

20.0

21.6

22.3

10999 12138

11722

12806

12576

10622

10418

11023

11831

12745

670.0 670.0

730.0

720.0

710.0

680.0

640.0

650.0

670.0

690.0

7.7%

5.7%

4.8%

1.6%

-2.3%

-0.9%

'3.0%

4.7%

4.9%

8.2%

5.1%

5.5%

1.8%

-1.4%

-1.1%

3.2%

4.6%

4.9%

4.5%

2.9%

2.3%

-0.4%

-4.2%

-2.8%

0.9%

2.6%

2.9%

4.3%
5.2%

2.4%
2.6%

5.8%
7.7%

-1.5%
-2.5%

0.5%
2.3%

-0.6%
-0.7%

-0.6%
-0.6%

1.3%
1.0%

2.7%
3.0%

Memorandum items

Grossdoinesticproduct
(US$ million at current
prices)
Gross national product per
capita (US$. Atlas metlhod)
Real arunual growvtl
rates
(%, calculated from
1987
prices)
Gross domestic product at
market prices
Gross Domestic Incomne

Real annual per capita
growth rates (O/o, calculated
from 1987 prices)
Gross domestic product at
market prices
3.2%
Total consumption
2.2%
Private consunption

(continued)

Annex B6
Page 2 of 3
CAS Annex B6 - Cote d'Ivoire - Key Economic Indicators

Indicator

1995

1996

AcludI
1998
1997

1999

2000

ESL
2001

2002

ProJ.
2003

4988.9
4256.4
4187.9
2762.7
801.0
-342.4

4855.1
4275.5
4053.7
2712.5
801.3
-380.4

5047.3
4431.7
4232.2
2759.9
815.1
-394.3

5073.2
4486.1
4046.6
2642.9
1026.6
-387.1

4225.7
3788.1
3514.2
2321.3
711.4
-282.0

4099.8
3668.0
3364.1
2240.1
735.7
-337.2

4253.7
3797.2
3539.5
2300.1
714.2
-353.0

4596.0 4958.7
4105.9 4430.7
3772.9 4021.0
2484.3 2677.7
823.1
937.7
-376.0 -454.0

-378.2

-321.3

-303.0 -107.2

-363.7

-311.0

-192.9

-194.3

-175.3

222.8

313.9

134.0

138.0

190.1

200.8

217.9

-278.4 -299.5
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

-325.1
0.0
0.0

-280.5
0.0
0.0

2004

Balance of Payments
(USSm)
Exports (GNFS)b
5077.6
Merchandise FOB
4303.7
Imports (GNFS)b
3806.8
Merchandise FOB
2473.8
Resource balance
1270.8
Net current transfers
-466.3
(including official
current
transfers)
Current account
-112.9
balance
(after official capital grants)
Net private foreign
direct
investment
Long-term loans (net)
Official
Private
Otther capital (net,
including
errors and omissions)
Clhangeinreservesd
Meemorandum items
Resource balance (% of
GDP at current market
prices)
Real annual growth
rates
(YR87 prices)
Mercliandise exports
(FOB)
Primary
Manufactures
Merclhandise imports
(CIF)
Public finance
(as % of GDP at
current
market prices)'
Current revenues
Current expenditures

234.4

246.5

195.7

..

..

..

..

..

..

189.9
0.0
0.0

-45.2
0.0
0.0

70.0
0.0
0.0

7.8 -110.6
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

-202.1
0.0
0.0

..

-221.6

-38.5

-82.1

1.5

116.9

187.5

119.1

20.0

-9.6

-48.3

11.6%

6.6%

6.8%

6.4%

8.2%

6.7%

7.1%

6.5%

7.0%

7.4%

4.7%

22.5%

10.3%

0.6%

2.4%

-5.8%

-1.3%

1.0%

5.5%

5.4%

9.0%
1.2%
25.0%

30.9%
11.5%
-2.6%

1.6%
2.0%
10.6%

-9.1%
6.0%
5.2%

8.5%
7.1%
-1.5%

6.3%
7.1%
-0.5%

1.5%
3.6%
-3.3%

1.6%
4.6%
0.5%

1.6%
4.9%
5.6%

1.3%
5.4%
5.5%

20.7
24.5

20.5
22.5

20.1
22.1

19.1
17.0
21.2
19.8
(Continued)

16.8
18.1

17.2
16.6

18.2
18.8

18.2
18.2

17.6
18.0

Annex B6
Page 3 of 3
CAS Annex B6 - Cote d'Ivoire - Key Economic Indicators
Actual
Indicator
Current account
surplus (+)
or deficit (-)
Capital expenditure
Foreign financing

1995

1996

1997

Est.
1998

1999

2000

2001

Proj.
2002

20N3

2004

-0.9

-5.3

-4.2

-1.8

-2.7

-2.8

-2.5

-1.7

-1.2

-0.8

5.1
4.4

4.9
3.3

5.4
1.5

6.0
1.3

4.2
0.7

2.8
4.7

3.2
4.9

3.9
-5.6

3.8
0.2

4.0
-0.2

M2IGDP(atcurrent
24.4
market
prices)
Gro%%th of M2 (%)
1.6
Private sector credit growth/
total credit growth

22.3

22.7

21.9

21.5

21.8

22.1

22.5

22.6

23.0

7.2
2.2
0.7

6.1
14.8
10.2

-3.1
3.8
7.5

0.4
-8.4
5.1

-0.1
3.2
-2.2

2.7
6.2
-5.5

2.7
7.8
3.4

3.3
8.9
3.8

3.4
8.9
2.1

128.1

103.9

99.9

101.8

95.7

74.8

69.1

68.8

70.5

72.1

132..'

128.7

124.6

129.5

119.1

101.0

92.7

90.7

92.6

94.7

75.A

77.7

80.3

77.2

83.9

77.4

107.8

108.0

108.5

108.7

70.7

70.7

69.5

74.1

72.7

69.4

70.0

70.6

70.9

71.2

7.70/6

3.5%

5.2%

2.0%

0.7%

3.6%

3.1%

3.0%

3.0%

2.7%

11.00/6

5.0%

4.2%

5.2%

0.9%

-0.1%

2.1%

2.3%

2.0%

2.2%

Monetary
indicators

(%)
Price indices( YR87
=100)
Merchandise export
price
index
Merchandise import
price
index
Merchandise terns of
trade
index
Real exchange rate
(US$/LCUI)
Real interest rates
Consumer price
index
(% growth rate)
GDP deflator
(% growthi rate)

a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f

If GDP components are estimated :t factor cost, a footnote indicating "Data-YR" fact should be added.
"GNFS" denotes "goods and nonfactor services."
Includes net unrequitted transfers excluding official capital grants.
Includes use of IMF resources
Should indicate the level of the government to which the data refer.
"LCLr' denotes "local currency units." An increase in USSILCUI denotes appreciation.

Annex B7
Page 1 of 1
CAS Annex B7 - Key Exposure Indicators Cote d'Ivoire

*

&iaePro'ected
2003
2002

1998

Aotual
200n5
19W

11171.0

10592.0

9935.5

9198.0

8567.3

7933.3

7337.3

6862.9

6443.9

1287

1286

820

898

887

864

802

668

608

1287.0

1285.7

820.0

897.5

878.6

594.2

595.0

686.4

626.3

TDO,XGSb

227%

213%

235%

223%

1990/%

171%

147%

128%

113%

TDO/GDP
TDS/XGS
Concessional/TDO

162%
26%

147%
26%

94%
190%

88%
20%

77%
21%

66%
19%

57%
16%

49%
12%

42%
11%

11%
19%

9%
18%

12%
28%

11%
39%

11%
38%

11%
39%

12%
42%

13%
43%

12%
39%

IBRD DS/XGS
IBRD TDO (USSm)d
Of which present value of
guarantees (IJSSm)
Share of BRD portfolio (%)

3%
942

2%
708

2%
599

2%
491

2%
424

2%
356

2%
286

2%
219

1%
158

na

na

na

na

na

na

na

na

na

IDATDO(USSm)d

1337

1360

1366

1362

1351

1340

1326

1310

1287

..

4.2

2.1

..

..

..

..

..

1.8

..

..

..

lndizaIkr
Total debt outstanding and
disbursed (TDO) (USSm)'
Total debt service (TDS)
(USSm)'
Estimate TDS with Paris Club agreement
Debt and debt service indicators

2001

200S

20W4

26.

(%/0)

IBRD exposure indicators (°)
IBRDDS/publicDS
PrefcrredcreditorDS/public
DS (%)'

IFC (USSm)
Loans
Equity and quasi-equity /c
MIGA
MIGA guarantees (VSSm)

.

16

15

13

13

a. Includes public and publicly guaranteed debt, private nonguaranteed. use of IND credits and net shortterm capital.
b. "XGS" denotes exports of goods and services, including workers' renmittances.
c. Preferred creditors are defined as IBRD. IDA, the regional multilateral development banks, the IMF, and the
Bank for International Settlesrsessts.
d. Includes present value of guarantees.
e. Includes equity and quasi-cquity types of both loan and equity instruments.

..

Cote d Ivoire
Operations Portfolio (IBRDI[DA and Grants)
As Of Date 0410212002
Closed Projects
IBRDIIDA Total Distursed (Active)
d which has been
repaid
Total Disbursed (Closed)
ot which has been
repaid
Total Disbursed (Active +
Closed)
of wtich has been

74

277.90
0.00
3.681.00
2.323.80
3,958.90
2.323.80

Total Undisbursed (ActIve)
248.32
Total Undisbursed (Closed) 0.00
Total Undisbursed (Active + 248.32
Closed)
Active Prolects
Last PSR
Project ID

ProJect Name

P055073

ADULT LITERACY
(LIL)
AGRIC. SCS. II
Cl PRIVATE
ELECTRICITY
DISTANCE LEARNING
-LIL
EDUC. &TRG
SUPPORT
EXPORT
PROMOTION AND
INTEG HLTH SERV
DEVP
LABOR FORCE
TRAINING
MUNICIPAL
SUPPORT
PSD TA
RURALLAND
(PNGTER)
TRANSPSECTOR
ADJ

P037588
P001184
P066353
P035655
P037581
P001214
Poo1186
P037575
P043736
P001194
P0011?7
Overall result

Supervision Rating
Develontnent Imolementatl
Oblecdlves
on Prouresa

FIscal Year

Orilinal Arnount In US$ Millions
IBRD
IDA
GRANT

Difterence
Between
Expected and
Actual
Dlsbumneents
Cancel. Undksb.
Orig.
Frm
Revd

S

S

2000

5

43

3.2

U
S

U
S

1999
1995

50
79.7

392
12.2

42.4
23.4

S

S

2000

2

1.9

1.6

U

U

1998

53.3

46.7

41.8

S

S

1995

58

S

S

1996

40

S

S

1994

17

U

U

1995

40

U
S

U
S

1998
1997

12
41

9.4
26 3

98
16 3

U

U

1998

238.8

76.2

26.3

3.6

Result

584 6

248 3

216

22.3

92

9.2

11.1

2.1

3

3.1

13.5

26.7

2

1.9

2.6

2.6

14.6

18.9
>
CM

NOt;

Annex B8

Page 2 of 2
CAS Annex B8 (IFC) for Cote d'Ivoire
Cote d'Ivoire
Statement of IFC's
Held and Disbursed Portfolio
As of 1/31/2002
(In US Dollars Millions)
Held

Disbursed

FY Approval Companv
Loan Equity Quasi Partic Loan Equity Quasi Panic
1998 AEF Drop-Ivoire 0.99
0
0
0 0.99
0
0
0
1999 AEF SAB
0 0.04
0
0
0 0.04
0
0
2000 AEF SIMMEQ
1.1
0
0
0 1.1
0
0
0
1998 Azito
28.55
0 7.45 25.27 28.55
0 7.45 25.27
1994/96/99
BACI
3.45
0
0
0 3.45
0
0
0
1996 Bereby Finances
0 3.05
0
0
0 3.05
0
0
1993/95/97/98 Block CI-I1
0
5
0
0
0 2.71
0
0
1996 BoA-CI
0 0.21
0
0
0 0.21
0
0
1995 CIPREL
5.48 0.96
0
0 5.48 0.96
0
0
1987/93/96
COSMIVOIRE
0
0 2.18
0
0
0 2.18
0
1995 FTG
0.25
0
0
0 0.25
0
0
0
1977/86
Gonfreville
0
0.2
0
0
0
0.2
0
0
1988 IPS (IVC)
0 0.83
0
0
0 0.83
0
0
1994/96
Multi-Produits
0
0.4
0
0
0 0.35
0
0
1996/99

Petro Ivoire

1997 SHL
1999 SOGB
1996 Sodiro
1995 Texicodi
1997 Tropical Rubber
Total Portfolio:

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

1.54
6
0
0.21
2.38

0.41
0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0
0

0
0
0
2
0
0
0 0.21
0 2.38

0
0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0
0

49.95

11.1

C0

9.63 25.27 44.41

Approvals Pending Commitment
Loan Eqtuity Quasi Partic

8.35 9.63 25.27

Annex B9
Page I of 10
CAS Program Matrix - Outcomes Under the Last CAS
D)evelopment
Objectives
Poverty
Reduction
through Rapid
Grronth

Perfornaice lcicitehnakis

G overmnient Strategy

)iagnois

Status of Progress

Ianik Group

sinstruments
Income at end-95 was
approx. US$725 per capita,
or 22% less than 85-89
average. Between 1985 and
1998 .poverty tastripled, to
the level of 33.8% of
population,

High growth rates supported by a
stable macroeconomic environment,
driven bv increased private
investment and sn export led
cconiomv and based on equiitable
growth. nvith participation of all
segments of socicty.

Annual growth rates of 5-6°o
growth.

1. MIacroEconomdc
Growth
1. Improve
Revente

Inadequate domestic savings;
income at end-95 was S690
per capita; need to maintain
Gov't revenue at least 21%
GDP.

Implement measures to rationalize
the tax ssstem, broaden the tax base,
and strengthen the efficiency oftax
and customs administration.

- Reduce and transparently

2. Improve
EFpendifrtre:

Pulblic spending decreased to
26.5% in 96 and composition
improved modestly Further
progress needed in PIP since
investment level is still
inadequate to sustain groith.

-Contain current expenditure, while
freeing resources for basic social
services (health'education) and
maintenance of essential
infrastructure.

- Contain Gov't wage bill of the

implement tax anid custonms
exemptions.
Reduce butane gas subsidy
- Overhaul forestrv taxation

central Gov't. at -6.5% ofGDP bv
2000.
- Report annually budgetary
execution of human rcsource
development.
-Implement recommendation of

Poverty level fell to 33.6%
in 1998 but recent crisis led
to a fall in economic growth
(-2.3% in 2000) and an
increase in the poverty
level. The Gov't has
completed an l-PRSP wvith
a target of reducing the
poverty level to 30% by
2005.

Emergtng lssues &
Proposed Actions
Povertyv Reorientation of the
senice delivery to the poor
in the Health and Education
sectors through the ERC.

Econ. NIggmt Support (olg)
Filth Dimension
PSD-TA (o'g, 98)
ESW: Sources of Growsth
(98)
PER (o/g)
Econ. higmt Support (o/g)
SAC (98)
ESW: Capacitv Bldg (98)

3 vears of crisis have
worsened use public finance
situation. Prospects are
better with the resumption
of donor support.

Public finance: Creation of a
"ceiiuie oi'pubiic
expenditure to review and
set up the work program of
this yIear.

Comimercial Debt (97)
I IPC (97)
S. C (98)
I.SWVDelbl Nlgiit (99)

Debt: Bank Board
approved preliminary I IIPC
document in Miarch 2002:
Decisioni point under the
enhaniced IIIPC Initiative
could be reached as eariv as

Debt management:
Strengthening of debt
management capacities
(human capacities, training.
softwares).

CGRAE study.
3. Reduce
Debt Debt
Sell-ice

-Reduce public debt senice to a
Pasments to serice of
sustainable level.
external public debt exceed
-Iiipicimliet adequate policies withins
40% Gov't revenue. Allevithc framewvork of its discengngemcnt
ation measuires arc being
sought undcr thc IIII'C and
frotl thc productive sectors.
London and Paris Clubs.
Londonand Paris Clubs.

- Eliminate all existing domestic
and non-reschedule externa
arrears.
- Redice debt service t°rotlgi
London Club
- Restrictiure l'aris Clutb dcbt,
up and improve nmomitorintg of'

~~~~~~~~~Set

Septeniber- 2002.

Debt relief agreement %vith

private debt.

Paris Club creditors reached
in A'pril 2002, providing
rescheduling of somc
US$2.26 billion under
Lyons tenn. Arrears
_ _ __ _ _ _ __ _ __ _ __ __ _ __ __ _ __ __ _ __ _ _

Caisse Generale de Retraite des Agents de l'Etat

_ _ _ _

_ _ _ _ _ _

_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _

_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _

_

tow(to
w

srds orl
B aB
ank na
ACDB cleared in early 02.

Annex B9
Page 2 of 10
Development
Objectives
4. Libei-aleze
Trad .S Pi-ice

Government St rategy

Diagnosis
Suabstatitialreductioti in
NTl Ik hac occurred.-and
prices ofa large nunmber of
products decotitrolled wvithi
the elhiiniiation oftlhe price
equalization fiund.

Perfonrmance Benchniarks

- Increase llexilbility ofprices for
g od(s Dlltd scr%ices anld cil;cietit

- Liberalize pi ices of
goo)ds.'services %uidjectto NTl'lI.

resource allocation

fiiializc eliiliiiationi of NTI3ls
-Liberalize ordinarvl ri'ce hntiporls
-Elisiiiiate e.xport taxes oi goods,
with reductiol] on cocoa to -'20°o
97 CIF price and -I 8°o. i 98
. I il .iali/e cocoa niill tlMe
lilires bv 1999 & 2000,
respecliv iel
-Followv privatization ofcottoti.
pahn oil, rubber filieres (effective
1999-00)
-Adopt 3 rates 1iot exceedihig 25
°o.
-Effectivelv establislh tNCTADsponisored trade infomiation
managenment sy.stein.

* 1111plenlxent pliice *tieiixdadilg
ihistnmnictitsIbr producer profits

-Implement commnon extemnal tariff
structure in WAEMIU countries

- Ensure a moderate strengthening of
dlie external position ofthe banking
s!stem and maintain lowv levels of
inflation.EcnNgnSupr
-Emphasize economic infrastructure
and competitiveness of agricultural

5. honprove
.Alonetory
M\anagemlent

Bank Group
_ nstrunments
ASA C2 ( /g)
l coi ligniit Support (o/g)
ESW\: Reg' Ihategration (o/g)
I.I)(X
S-x (98)
(9S)\ nutalSrtg
(98nhstitultional

Status of Progress

Enmerging Issues h
Proposed Actions

Rice iniports libcralized;
cotSe sector liberalized inl

Coffee/cocoa: Need to
Consolidate a comzpetitive

1998 and cocoa sector
liberalized in 1999. Cottoni
sector parliallv privatized
but not liberafized

enviroiimient
Cotten: Finalize the
privatization of CIDT and
establish a competitive
cliviroiiiiciit in
thte cotton sector
Other sectors: Critical
stapport nicasures necessarv
to ciisure clficielot atid pro:
poor dcvclopmcnt of tdie oilI
palni and nmbber sectors

ASAC (o/g)
SAC (98)
FS D (99)

.ASAC not negotiated and
dropped

og
ES\onExtcmalShpocks(99/)

sector.

D TA (o/g; 98)
Ps DEPS
PS Strategv ("A FC)

Consultativ e coninitete lhas

Partnership in polic\ mak ing

been reinstated. HSowever, it
is not Net fully operational.

lhas still to be strenigthenled.

11.Private

- PrivXate sector iniformned of

-React ivate existing consultat ive

idenceed by
- Regu lar imectilgs, e%

Sector
De%elopment
1.lImprove
public private
sector
consilfiation

Gov't policy. but does not
participate in policy niakinig
process/implementation

group to discuss important polic\
measures and their iniplernentattolla

miillutcs
- No complaints thiat nministries
liave taken unilateral actions
significanitlv without prior
preseiitation to Comlitei

2. Provide a
secuarejtidicial
environmyent

- Imiporta ice ofgood jtdicial
systern is rccogtfized, but

-Adopt effective anti-cornuptioii
nicastires

- hercrasc lio. ofcoti-uptioll cases
satictioiied aiid ptiblislicd in

PsdrD/PSDT (olg; 98)
I'S Strnteg@ (%vAF1C)

No nmajor progres in the
judicial systern I lowcvs r,

anti-corrupt and budget
allocations do tiot folio%%;

-Create separate specialized
contmercial jurisdictions in the cotin

1997198.
Rcecmii 150 ol'iiagistrates

I:conl. Itignit TA (o/,g)
I.SW, Exicnial Slbocks (99)

arbitratioti nicclhaiiistits
have been instittited. Anti-

corruptioii is ranmpart;
inadequate busincss lawv
training and appropriate
placement of specialized
judges; inadequate
courlroomns /comuniercial
chambers. No
mediation/arbitration process.

system.
- Emplhasize ppeciafized training of
judges and appropriate posting
decisions.
- Recruit new judges and
deconscctitratc jurisdictiotis,
especially in Abidjan, by opeafing
new courtrooms.

anntially in 1997-98 (50 per !eir)
- blcrease 1]o vrcolintrooliis in
1997-98
-Crcate separatejurisdicnions.
-Rcorgaifize clerk-of-court offices
- hcrcasc 1liool'cascs cefictivcev
arbitratcd in the Arbitrationl Couil
at Chanmber of Commerce

2

Agriculturatl Sector Adjustment Credit

Fiscal pressure/harasment
on the priv ate sector is a
critical issue that needs to be
addressed ihunediatelv

fratud conmnfissioni has ilot
opcrated satisfactorily
Judiciarv systam refonml to
be re-launched.

Set up an operational system
to fighit corruption
(regulationis atid ihlstitutions)
in the context of governance
improvemlent.
Strettgthieii capaeily oftlic
judiciarv system to liandle
business-related matters.

Annex B9
Page 3 of 10
Diagnosis

Development
Objectives
3. Esaoblish a
more
coamiperifive

Government Strategy

Performance Benchmarks

BankGroup

Status of Progress

Instruments

firamiework,

especially
transport,
rinlithes and
telecom.

- Regulatonr framework has
improved, partiLularly with
refomis in maritime, air, and
road transport, howvecr
Gov't unsupportive to
regulatonr supervision issues.

-Reduce traisport costs by
deregulating domestic,initenatioial
transport and disengaging public
sector from services; nmonitor
effective policy insplementation
-Liberalize cosspletelv maritinsc
transport
- Increase competition in porn
services

Govenunent has privatized
telecom & power companies.

- Broaden domestic coverage for
telecom network; strengtihen)
intenmat'l netwvorks.

-Renio c reiainiing regulatory
oblstaces in road tranisport;
rationalize road controls
-Transfer ofithe execution of
mainitenance work to private sector
- Rehabilitate railwvay network
- Similplify port tranisit procedures
- Adjusl overstafling at port anid
bmicase dialoglu with users of
port.
-Strengthen admin. capacity of
telecom regulatorv unit.
-hicrcase tiumiber of tclelihonic
lines, deve- loping rural telephione
;-..4nVk;t

PSD.'PS D-1TA (o/g. 98)
I -SAC (98)
Railways (98)
ESw -Iifonnationi
Assessment (99)
I'SN I Refomn(00)
ESW: tidustrial Strategy
(98)
I.SWV: Scrvices Devclop.
(99)
ESW: Info. Assesment (00)

Regulatorv framework and
regtilatory bodics in key
infrastructure sctors
(telecom, power, and roads)
are in place. In the port
sector, the container
tenminal is being privatized.
A country frarssemork report
onl P'PI was prepared in
1999.

Emerging Issues &
Proposed Actions
Need for improved
regulatory firamewvork for
private participation in
infrastructure and ror
increased capacity of the
regulators bodies.

.. b .1
a
egl!rend
removed in 2000 but
reappeared until they were
removed again by the
Governmnent in Miarch
2001.
The law gov'eming road
passenger and freight
transport activities and the
decrees simplif\ing access
to the profession of
tranporter were signed on
Februarv 2000. The bill of
iading used for road fl-eight
transport w'as restricted to a
document (contract between
the transporter and the
shipper).
Maritime transport fully
deregulated in December
1996. Abidjan Port
Community established
(Sept. t995) and Port
Competitiveness
Connission created (March
1996).

,v istbeing
nrAts
created to monitor the
number of illegal road
barriers. Authority has been
given to a committee to
remove the barriers.
3. Ililegal road blocks have
multiplied over the last two
years and are inposing a
large cost on the
competitiveness of the
economny, in particular on
that ofthe agricultural/rural
economny

4. Rationalze
Taxation

Corporate taxation is
complex and favors large
companies through special
tax breaks.

Broaden the tax base anid ebluiniate
distortions (excessive tax breaks to
large cosnpanics, double taxation on
SMEs)

Carn- out study on Ivorian
taxation -esp SNIEs -while
comparing Ivorian taxation subregionaily and intemationally
Revicw taxation on stock re\ enue
to mobilize savings and develop
new financial instruments

ESW: Reg'l Integration
(o/g)
PSD/PSD-TA (o/g, 98)
ES\V: Industrial Strategy
(98)

T'ax proceduires manual -as
prepared. Work on
contingent liabilities vas
carried out, but no work on
marginal tax rates.

Collection proccdures are
esven more burdensome for
companies than tax rates

5. limiprove
efficiency and
aultreoch of
a_______________

Sector hampered by overall
lack in depth and breadth of
system; weak implemcntation
of legal and regulatory

-Improve financial infrastnicture at
regional level by enhancinig:
payment system, bank super-ision,
regulator_ firames\ork and reg'l

Mionitor proactive participation in
regional refomis.
-Adopt regulatoryloperationial
Efranimc\oik for newv regional

ESW: Reg'l Integration (o/g)
Rural Savings (o/g)
ASAC (o/g)
Ag. Ser-ices 1,11(o/g,98)

Overall, little progress has
been made due to lack of
macro framework, vhich
iipeded ptiltinig ani

Need to restructure or
lkquidate CAA
Insolvency of the postal
savinigs system

-

Annex B9
Page 4 of 10
Development
Objectives
financial
systeni.

Diagnosis

Government Strategy

frame-work; lack of
institutional diversitN.

securities exchange.

ilicentive stnictire;
- Disengage State from financial

s!stcmi.

- Promote adeqtiate institit'l

framework to suipport iilcro-linianice
development to include bettcr access
to rural credit.

7. Suipport
Professional
Organizations

8. Increase
Labor Market
Flexibilhot

Bank Group

Status of Progress

Instruments
- At national level, improve

6. Facilitate
Private
Investment

Performance Benchmarks

Level increased by more than
50% from 94-96, averaging
8.5So; howcver bias exists
against small investors.

Weak profess'l organizations,
esp. farmers' associations.
Gov't considers financing to
stein from private sector itself

Labor Code has been revised
to ease restrictive lay-offand
hiring practices.

-Adopt non-discriminatony and
transparent regional investment
framework
-Facilitate investment procedures

-Reinforce agriculture professional
organizations (esp. for mktg exports)
-Suipport economic actis ities of
women by imiproviig acc-ss to
agricultuaral services
- 'rovide export developimietit
serices - Provide training in
management, export techciiqutes amid
teclumicaUvocational areas
-Ensure access to professional
services (e.g. management
consulting, accounting)

Efrective implementation of new
labor code.

finianicial market
- Establish regulatorv franicv,ork
for NBFI
- Sibject CA.A to banking
legislation
- Rigorously apply prudential
nonuis
- Restiuctuire postal snvinigs systcin
- Reduce GoCI oniershlip in all
institutions to <20°o
-Establish niationial strategy onl
niicrofinance
-Establish competent Ullit to
suapervise MIFI
-15,000 having access to CR El'99
- 12,000 having access to CoMEC 2002.

Privatization (o/g)
PSD (olg)
ESW: SNIE Develop. (98)
ESW Services Develop (99)
FSD (99)

adjustmenit program in
place.
A regulatory/operational
framework (Bourse des
Valeurs) adopted (96).
Postal savings system has
not becn restructured due to
lack of budget support
operation.
Prudential norms have not
been rigorously applied.
Mlany banks do not comply
with capital adequacy and
risk exposure nomis.
GoCI ownership in BIAO
reduced but not in CAA.
Partial progress made in
tenns of establishing unit to
supervise NIFI. However,
unit's capacity not properly
developed.

- Follow-up on progress made
regionally.

ESW: Reg'l Integration (o'g)
PSD'PSD-TA (o!g, 98)
[ Suipport provided to the
CEPICI and APEX-CIu
ESW: SMIE Develop (98)
ESW: Services Develop (99)

COOPEC have 350 000
members and 30 billion in
deposits; and have extended
significant amount of credit.

-20% of income from cooperati'e
market'g to have direct access to
intemational market
- 50°. ofproduicers (350o arc
womms.sn)
to have access to
ANADER ser ices by 2000.

Ruiral Savings (otg)
Export Promotion (o/g)
PS D/PSD-TA (otg ,98)
ISmipport provided to
expomlers throuighi APEX-CII
ASAC (o/g)
A.g Services 1,11
(o/g,98)
ES\t': SMIE Develop. (98)
EISW: Services Develop (99)

Ag. Services Program has
established an efficient and
sustaitiable institutional
environment for providing
sers ices to ag. producers.
TIhe ag. promotion project
has suiccessfully supported
the developiiment of nontraditiotial ag. exports
Ishc ag. export promotion
project and the ag. services
programs have been
effective in strengthening
the capacities of
professional /producem
associations

- Verify impementation and
publication of decree.

PSD/PSD-TA (otg. 98)

Emerging Issues &
Proposed Actions
Financial weaknesses in the
macro finance cooperatives.
Lackofaccess to fiancing
for small and new
enterprises.
Lack of access to financial
services for losv incomc
households.
All these issues will be
examined in the ongoing
FSAP. Actions addressing
these issues will be decided
based on the conclisionis of
the FSAP.

COOPECs' financial
discipline and situation has
deteriorated and needs
immediate attentioii.
Institutional reforms,
capacity-building and tight
supervision fonm regulatory
agencies necessary
The prograni should he
strengthened bv ciipliasizing
the demand-driven'cost
sharing approach,
developing the infomiation
systmn and addressinig
pressiing issues in the
eucation/training system.
Ag Promotion Credit is to
close (Dec 02); an extension
will be requested, but need
to further develop public
imarkcetmig iiifrastrtscture aiid
services (technical and
financial) to support ag.
production and exports

Annex B9
Page 5 of 10
Development
Objecti%es
9. Increase
LandAccess
Industrial:

Diagnosis

Government StrategY

Govemnment unaware of
magnitude of problents and
bottlenecks in adminiistration.

-Improve procedures of public sale
offers to iicrease the numilber of
potential investors.

Performanice Benchimarks
- Establisih industrial pai ks antd
pcmlit individual proper!
rigits/leases.

Bank Group
Instrujients
Urban Land Mlgrnt (98)

Status of Progress
The objective of promoting
the developmeint of a market
for the provision of serviced
land and housing was
achieved in part with;
*(i) the creation in 1997 of
AGEF and the adoption in
Septemnber 1997 of law
enabling concessions for
land management (Loi sur
la Concession
d'Aminagement); (ii) its
manual of implementationi
was drafted and reviewed

at asiakenoJier

1iu-ii

.,i

Miarch 2000, involving
private land developers,
bankers, central and local
administrations.

Emerging Issues &
Proposed Actions
AGEF still needs to be fiully
operationial.
Dialog to be pursued bv
Government and local
administrations with the
private sector (land
developers and bankers).
Government was provided
with tools for land
development and housing
finance shich are available
to build upon in tht ruture.
To obtain concrete results
I. i
cGovc. .mcm
:
commitment would be
required

Rural:
Rural Land (97)
ESW: Gender Strategy (00)

Continue measures to ensure for
land security, increasing access for
rural women.

A newv land law adopted
(Dec. 98) but its
implementation has not yet
started,

The Law is globally
satisfactory and offers good
potential for establishing an
efficient land market and
help manage conflicts
However,need for careful
piloting and monitoring to
ensure that the rights of
vulnerable groups are
prcserved. This wvill be
supported under the
PNGTER.

10. Fusrther
Privatzation

Substantial pri-atization in
37 companies, include
telecons, poi%cr. agroindustrv sectors, generating
$360 million total proceeds.

-Broaden initial privatization and
improve perfoniance of public
eniterprises
- p'rivatize Residuial Portfolio

- Adopt &inIpIClIci1t aiTiCrs
reductioni plani for cross debts

Prikatization Progranm (o/g)
Econ. Nlgint (o.'g)
SA-C (98)

About 60 enterprises
privatized

I1. Deepen
Private Interest
in Energy and
Aiming Secto-s

Gov't has disengaged from
power, oil and gas, and
mining sectors. Negotiations
are on-going for the
development of a power
project.

- Achieve self-sufficiencv and sub-

- Improve legal and regulator!
franincuoik
- Promote blocks for oil
exploration
- Establisbi safety nonns atid
standards
- Privatize GDCI, SODENII anid
GESTOCI; reduce Gov't shares ii
SIR

PS-Energy/IFC (98)
PSD/PSI)-TA (olg, 98)
Privatization (ofg)
ESW Natural Gas for
Household Use

GESTOCI, SIR, PETROCI
privatization still issucs to
be addressed

regional export potential in power
and refined hydro-carbon products,
while promoting competition withis
the industries.
-Reinforce Gov't as regulatory
body.
-Increase production, storage, and
distribution ofpetroleumn products.

Residuial program still to be
carried out.

Annex B9
Page 6 of 10
Diagnosis

Development

O h cctlves

Government Strategv
- Promote gas utilizationi for
households, commerce and industry
-Promote reserves for mining
industry
-Develop the mining sector for

BanktCroup
n
tProposed
Instruments

Status of Progress
_______________________Is

Emerging Issues &
Actions

- istablisih economiiic priciig
- Promote national artisanal
mining.

private sector.

_______________

Ill. P,ublic
Expenditures
t promo te
liroad liased
Inclusive
Grotih

Perfornance Benchmarks

________________________________

Siginificanit regional, socioeconoqsic and gender
disparities in utili7ation of
services -duc to direct and
opportuitity costs orpoorer
housellolds.

-Prepare speciric and sceoral
programs which target better public
cxpendittires miid improve the
efliciencv and utldity.
- Elaborate an indicators table.
- Follow-up socio-econoimic impacLt
indicators of.ASAC.

- Cany out siutal IouIshCIolId
studies oni thc Ics cl and conditions.
- Ainually pillil Illtese indicatoris.
- Caly nlit stiudiec in itie cofllee

cocoa and rice secnors (1998-99)

(olg)
PiE-'R
Capacity Bldg. TA (98)
I'SNI Refonn (99)
ESW: Gender Strategy (99)
ASAC (o g)
Ag Services I & 11(o/g, 98)

Necd to better align public
expenlditures '.ith
development priorities, aid
to increase thie elliciincv of
ptiblic expenditulre
programts.
Socio-economic impact
monitoring has been
regularly carried out by
BNEDT

PERs are cuirrentiy on their
wav and ItlTEFs to begin
soon. Priority vill be given
to die social, rural anid
infrastructure sectors.
Need to carn' out a
comprehensive policv
analysis of the rice and food
secors

nImplementation of a rural
radio component
Preparation of coffee/cocoa
and HIV/.AIDS programs

1.Improve
primary
ediucation,
emphasizing
girls 'edication
and zones *nrh
u eak levels

-Probable regressive
distribution ofexpenditure,
certainly in health, education
and social funds.

2. Increase
literacy rate

Current literacy rate is only

-Increase net enrollntent rate front
5l%to 55eO in 2000.

Improve children's education,
especially girls, notably in areas with
weakest priinary levels; the
percentage ofgirls increasing froiti
421o to 440%in 2000.

43%

litcrease adult literacy rate to 55% in
2000

- MIainitain recurrcirt expenditures
in education sector at 27o and that
ofbasic education at 45o..
- Coltruct sclhools in poorest
areas and with weakest basic
education levels (1000 basic
education classes per year)
- Recruit primarv sciool teachers
(2000 teachies at basic level per
Near)
- Reduce eduication costs of the
poorest
- limplemnent plaii to increase girl s
access to basic edticationi

IIRD Nlgnit (o/g)
PSNI Reform (99)
PER
ES\W: Gender Strategy (99)

-lhitcitsify literacy programs for
rural wotittci and cliildreit, uibait
children in iotltent regionts with
weak educationt
-Nationial expansioni of niral
training cetiters includinig literacy
- install decentralized structures for
literacy within basic eduication

Ag Services I & 11(o/g, )
Ceittrc Nord/IFAD (o/g)
B3asic Education (98)
Literacy Program (99)

98

-Reliable statistics on
education still not available.
Converging information
point to lack ofprogress due
to deterioration ofeconomic
situation, in particular in
already deprived zones.
Despite that situation.
textbooks are being
delivered to most regions,
schtool canitines progress is
effective. This contributes to
encouraging school
attendance,
Thec Government has
ctinbarked in tlte preparation
ofra status report on
will
education. haltich
provide a sound basis for
the developiltent of a
sectoral strategy.

-The restructuring of the
portfolio is ongoing, in
particular that of basic
education, one ofthie ERC's
priorities. The target actions
are: textbooks, Parents and
Teachers Associations,
School kits and school
cantines.
Need to insure minimum
level of allocation of
expenditure to the sector.
Sectoral public expenditure
reviev will be launched.

TIte National Scrvices
IProgram is supporting a
pilot experiment (Centres
des nmetiers ruraux) on postprimary technical training,
with good results.

Pilot program shouild be
expanded, atid literacy
programs given greater
priority. Primary education
curriculum should be
rqv iewved to increase its
relevance to the nceds of the
rural area .

Annex B9
Page 7 of 10
Development
Objectives

Diagnosis

Goveriunent Strategv

Performance Benchmarks

Banrk Group
Instruments

Status of Progress

Emerging Issues &
Proposed Actions

Previous CAS diagnosis are
inadequjate and do not focus
oni the ss stennic problems.
lhe crisis reinforces
urban/niral disparities.
Little progress made toward
the procurement and
distribtitioni of generic
drugs.

hIealth care system:
Support reforms,
particularly:
-Strengtheniing the
efficiencv and perfom2ance
of M Olt and the health
system through the
introduction of performancebased maniagenient
-Gear such s-sten to the
monitoring, evaluation,
achievement of lI.DGs
- Accord greater managerial
and financial autonomv to
the health districts (with expost control)
-Strengthen partnerships
betnveen NIOH and civil
societv
-Operational
research.'finetuning of healthi
financing options that would
support greater equity in
access and affordabilitv and
achievement of uttiversal
health coverage.
-Carrv out economic
analysis of second tranche of
10-vear plan to achieve
enhanced cost-effectiveness
of health care deliverv
system.

units (IOOxIG regionis)
lInstall rural coiunmunitv radios
-to 44% by tde year 2000.
3. limprove
Health
Sjstemn

Attention is needed on
titilization of available
services and iifrastnicturc;
district health
plaruing/execsntion capacity
needs strengtiening; funher
cost analyses is required

-Improve access and quality of
health services and tiedicincs,
especially in rural and poorer urban
areas.

- Continlue to pronbote generic drugs

for public and private distribiltion

Insufficient awareness of
AIDS among elite; wveak
management ofprograms.

4. Strengthen
Famnily
Planning

\Veak management of family
planning prograrns.

-Increase infant vaccination rate
from 60% to 80%, in 2000.
- Intettsify the figlt against AIDS

-Reduce fertility rate front 56 to 4.5
in 2015.
-Increase modem contraceptive use
from 4% to I oe 0(2000)

Increase total recurrent health
excpenidittires a from 8 90o to 10%
(2000), anid those for primary
health fronti 3300 to 400. (2000).
- Iicrease access to healtil centcrs
in rural and poorer areas, improve
quality care and develop precentive
care.
-Complete cotuparatixc study ott
West African medicine price
.. c...... .-eviein Cl.
-Extension of vaccination program

Pop, Health, Nutrttion-PllN
(0/6)
PER
I'SNI Reforn (99)

PHN (olg)

-Carrn out preventive programs
against STDs anid HIV (education
and prophy-lactic distribution)
targeting the poorest population,
esp. wonen aitd yvoung adults.

-Carry out reproductive health
services' programs in all health
facilities and regions.
- Generalize family planning
programs and distribute
contraceptives

PIIN (o/g)
ESW: Gender Strategy (99)

Low contracentive
prevalence rate and
persistent high fertility
Inequitable allocation of
recurrent budgets to the
periphery in support of
basic health care delivery
Delays in launching
improvements to quality
and access ofbasic health
care in four districts
targeted for pilot under
PDSSI.
Persistently low and
inequitable levels of
co%erage and utilization
rates of basic health care
services
Non-functionality of most
health districts.
I ligh prevalence rate of
IllV/AIDS and inadequate
response to date, including
both prevention and care.
Lack of adherence to ICB
procedures for the purchase
of drugs and medical
supplies and
underutilization of generics,
resulting in higher cost of
drugs to the population.
-Progress in extension of
reproductive health services
to 60+ health centers and
through the NGO sector
(AIBEF)

IIIVIAIDS: Clarification of
institutional mandate.
Raise kno~lvedge to initiate
behtavior chiange.
Rapid increase in number of
orphans di mands
comprehensive multisector
responise.
rsother to cild
transmission: need for urgent
action to reverse this.
Increased households
poverty and malnutrition.
Need for multisector
solutions: Family planning,
education, and services.

Annex B9
Page 8 oflO
DeOblopment

Diagnosis

Co%ernment Strategv
._.

Oblectl' es
I,toroveBasic
Lnfrastructuige:
S 1Voter Suipply

'Ii,sical iiifrastnictureis
amoig the best in sub-region,
but poor comimiunitjics untdrserved by swater, sanitation,
roads. Neglect in extensive
road netwvork duiring the last
decadc

-hIncrease access rate of rurallsater
stupply fro"i, 50% to 65% in 2000
and urbani suppul fromit 75°oto 85%

- Improve access to nural zones by
maintaining rural roads

6. Rural Roads

-Attain a coverage rate from 23°o to
33%o in 2000

7. Suistainable
Ruiral
Electrification

Perfoniiance Benchimiarks
....
- Ihilpiectn ivestilvenit program
ater snpprl!
Ibr %n
-Eniact law onl \;tcr resource
iianageilcitt
-Design decentralized developmenit
strategy %kithcomimuniity
participation oii level of: wr\ ice

Bank Group
eProposed
Instnuments
Water Resource ?Ignmt (00)
Kfulnicipal Support (o'g)

ictwvoik of 35,000 kill
ainishtaitn
of rural roads per ! car

TS. C (98)

-

-Accclerate rural electrification
program (250 rural localities per

Status of Progress
_________________Is

Emerging Issues &

Actions

Access rates achieved but
sustainabilitv or RWS
facilities stili questionable.

Develop policies for
sustainable management and
maintenanice of RWS
facilities

The degradation of rural
infrastructure has
accelerated. An increasing
pars of the rural road
network is not functional
part of the year, more than
40% of existing rural water
points are not operational

There is an urgent need to (i)
re\ iew the instititional aiid
policy framenvork of niral
road miaintenance and niral

-Creation of AGEF (see
supra)
-Adoption ofLasv on land
management (see supra)
-Studies caffied out for the
creation ofSRH (market
oriented housing finance
svstem)
-Studies canied out for the
creation of CGH (guarantee
system), assessing the tYpe
of guarantees possible for
giving lower income
households better access to
housing finance.

SRH and CGH were not
created althotgh there is
interest in both tools.
Govermnent was provided
with tools for land
development and housing
finance which are available
to build upon in the future.
To obtain concrete results
furtier govemnment
conumitmqnt Wvould be
required.

water supply,and (ii) launch
massive programs in these
areas.

Private Electricitv (o'g)

year)

- Implement investment program to

improve production of electrical
energy.
- Review annually fitamicial
capacity of po\%er sector

S. Iniprove
Living
Conditions

Inadequate access to housing
and land tenure

Improve living conditions ofpoorer
population in housing, health,
education

-Adapt staidards to affordabilitv
to targeted households
- Bring in private sector for
housing development and to
-Iliobilize long temi finianicing

Urban Land ligmnt (98)

Urban Slitis

Gov't intenids to rclocate ilhe
existing lower income
population, and develop the
land for residential use.

Evaluate impact ofsocial fulnds in
the fight against poverty

- Inventory area befoic resettlemincit
- Equip die new area with water

Municipal Support Program

and sewerage, before resettlement
date and establish land laos
-Define and execute plait for poor
population before resettleiment,
including social, education, atid
liv'gicne.

_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _

Annex B9
Page 9 of 10
Development
Objectives

Diagnosis

Goverunment Strategv

Performance Benchmarks

Bank Group
Instruments

Status of Progress

Emerging Issues &
Proposed Actions

- hiplemieient preventive measures

to avoid resettlement at risky sites.

9. Social
Fuinds

Funds established following
devaluation are pooriy
targetVd and nmanaged.

Evaluate impact of social funds in
the fight against poverty

- Prepare and ihpleaent
niechatnisns ensuring an.
improvement of itanageeit.it of
targeting the impact oflthc funlds.

IN'. Public
Sector
1N
lanageneint
aiid Capacity
Building

Gov't vision on capacity
building and PSNI reforms
and in its development
agenida to beconie regional
economic center and reduce
poverty is not clearly spelled
out. Need for clarity on
priority areas and
interventions consistent with
rinancial and human resource
constraiits, as wvellas with
equity objectives in liuman
capital development.

Strategy focuses on 3 axes:
strengthening institutl'i capacity
building hulitian resource capacity.
and deceintralization

- lainistream capacit! bhilding
issuies In specific operations
-Increase ins ol cinubt ol
bcieficiares tax pa. ers

-Desigy and launch a
comprehensive and ssstemic
reflection on PSNI reforms and
service management.
-Slift civil service delivery from
administratixe purposes towards
economiiic and social development
requiremenits.

-Fialize civil setvice cetstis
ice, reduce
-Freeze size of civil 5ser\
no. of ci\ il servaits, eirsorce
retiremenit, focis oninewihiriiig in
luealtli anid edicatuomu.
-Establish iiutegrated cotitptiterized
s! stei for civil sen ice anid pa! roll
iualiageineint.
- Lstablisit data bank oni
qualificatiotis
*Establish producti\ itn liniked
remiuneration schlimee.
- Finalize Govenmient pa!
relativity.

I. Reforn
Institutional
Capacity

2. Strengthen
Hunan
Resource
Capacity

ASAC (oig)
IlRD) Nignlit (o'g)
P' IN (omg)
I'SNI ESWVPSNIReform
(98i00)
Basic Education (98)
PSD-TA (98)
TSAC (98)
Ag. Services 11,III (98, 99)
SAC (98)
I gliber Education (99)

-Identify existinlg capacity,
accounting for the Noung astd
recent graduiates
-Designi new traimiiug strategy and
sufitable evaluation inechanisisn for

Linited eftortlAill to create
proper environment!
ituceitives for utilization of
national capacity .when
readily available.

civil servalmits

-lincrease capacit otiamiimg
opportunitics for NGiOs.
conitnunities, professioiial

associations
3. Facilitate
Decentralization

Miunicipalities far too
dependent on central Gov't
resource allocation for small
local investment and
recurrent costs.

-Strengthen role of municipalitics
- Improve overall mobilization of
fiscal resources

-Develop decentralized
matiagenilenit s)steims
- Ratioiialize revtenue distribution
between local etities and cetitral
govt.
- Delegate planining anid execution
of investment to municipalities

PSNI ESW/PSNt Reform (9800)

P'rogrcss is miixed.
I lo" e%er, strong
coltiimle,nit to: (i) sbililg
tite ci' iI sers ace front its
current "controlled"
management mode to a
decentralized service
delivery focused niode; (ii)
establishitig a legal and
regulatory framework for
the decentralization decision
miiaking process through a
botton-up approach; (iii)
strengthening both formal
and informal consultative
and feedback mechanisms
between various service
delivery partners; (iv)
improv ing the efficiencv
and effectiveness ofpublic
service delivery bv
addressing the cotutent of
inappropriate performance
incentives.

Issues are: (i) strengthening
hIiian and institnitional
capacity. (ii) rationializing
the budgetary allocation
expenditure nianagemnexit
and procuremctnt processes
in support of the
decentralization; (iii)
impro\ ing communication
between sensice providers
and the beneficiaries; (iv)
establishing a perfomiance
based incenti\ c system. Ail
the above issues %\illbe
addressed throughi the
emerging capacity building
for poverty reduction
operation (FY03).

Annex B9
Page 10 of 10
De, elopment
Objectives
IEn% Irolulleiitiil
Iy Sustainible
Development

Diagnosis

Government StrategY

lierfonnance Benchmarks

Knowledge/sensitivity is loNv
otn environimental managcniicit. Research necded.
notablv on the deselopment
of"win-win" activities.

Protect Environment While
h
iiproving thle standard offi%
ifig oi
individu.ils aod cinteiprises

- implemncit niatioiial
cenvironniental aid fohrestr% action
plan
- Implemilent code to protect the
environitent
- Establish a national environment
agency
- Set lip \iater treatircrit centert
- 'romiole replantig and
iniairageient ofnationial parks b\
tIre private sector.

Bank Group
Instruments
ES\': NEAP (o! g)
P1' NE: ( 1)
IS\V' I'ailic Nlgiiit ol
PCGAP (02 (NatIl Parks
(O"g))
Rtural l and (97)
Ag Services 1,It, III (97-00)
LSW, Watcr Sector Rte\icxv
(9X)
Forestrv 11(99)
GEPRENAF (SPN)

Status of Progress
NEAP completed since
1997. PAGN E preparation
'1lPltD was niot mitobilized,
Preparation is stalled.
A new Forestry Policy was
adopted in 2000. %s%lch
emphasizes
decentralization,
empowerment of rural
communities and
partnership with the private
sector for the sustainable
use and consenration of
remaining resources.

(JEPREN.-F (GEE)
continues to pilot local
development & biodiversity
conserationat
comonit
level.

3 Programme Cadre de Gestion des Aires Protegees (National Protected Area Management Project)

Emerging Issues &
Proposed Actions
Resume dialog within
Counrtrv cam on the rational
ofa specciic instrunlciet for
Environment capacity
Building.
An institutional/ and
operational audit svill be
latinched in 2002 to support
the preparation of a prioritv
forestry management
program operationalizing
the new Foreast Policy,

3

PCGAP apasli
seudo
appraisal is
seduled for apr2l,
negociations for Mlav 2002,
Board for July 2002.
GEPRENAF is becoming
dte vehicle of transition to
I PCGAP implementation.

Annex Cl
Page 1 of 5
Cote d'Ivoire
Matrix of Policy Actions in ERC

Objectives
A) CREATING
CONDITIONS FOR
RENEWED BROADBASED GQROWTH

Actions Through June 2002

.

T I T,anche

Indicators

1. Agriculture Sector
Coffee/Cocoa Sector
Ensuring effective
Competition in the
C^fee/Cecoa S'er

CAISTAB liquidated
(December 2001)

Adoption of a new regulatory
framewvork for cocoa and
rnffee trAde, hngeid nn

competition and excluding
any administrative restriction
Introduction of an Efficient
Regulatory Framework

Launching of a study of the
regulatory framework to
ensure real competition at all
stages of the cocoa chain and
avoid abuse of dominant
positions; as wvell as to define
the marketing mechanism to
be put in place by July 2002
for the 2002-03 harvest

Establishment of an Efficient
Export Mechanism. Ensuring
Representativeness,
Efficiency, and
Accountability of the New
Institutions (BCC, FRC,
FDPCC)

Launch of audit of activities
and financial operations of
ARCC, BCC, and FDPCC
through March 2002; and
preparation of operational
program and budget for
2002/03

Cotton Sector
Pursuit of Conditions to
Enhance Competition
Adoption of an Efficient

Implementation of the
recommendations of the audit
of the activities, procedures
and financial statements of
ARCC, BCC, and FDPCC;
and approval by their
governing bodies of the
annual programs of the
ARCC, BCC, FRC, and
FDPCC for 2002

Privatization (point of sale) of
lthe "CIDT-Nouvelle"
Adoption by the government

Adoption by BCC, FRC and
FDPCC of levels of non-tax
levies on the 2002-03 crop on
the basis of comprehensive
discussions of the studv's
recommendations, and
adoption and implementation
of the study on the taxation
svstem in the cocoa and
coffee sector

Clearer operational

Annex Cl
Page 2 of 5
C6te d'Ivoire
Matrix of Policy Actions in ERC

PbjZtiv

A¢Iions Throu

ThirtITranch

June 2002e

environment for agents in the
cotton sector;
Greater role of producers in
sector management

and industiy group of guiding
principles of an institutional
and regulatory framework to
ensure competition at all
levels of the cotton chain,
based on contractual relations
between operators; clarifying
the conditions of entry by
new operators; and including,
in particular, the transfer of
the management of advice
and input supplv fuinctions to
producers' organizations as of
the 2002-03 crop year

Regulatory Framework

Wc_r

2. Private Sector
Development
Relaunch of Privatization

Declaration of new policy
stance on privatization in a
Privatization Policv
Statement

Pursuit of rehabilitation of
Financial Sector

Re-establishment of
Confidence with the Private
Sector

Inauguration of ncw stateprivate sector partnership and
launching joint revision of
the manual on the public's
relation with tax authorities
(Fiscal Procedures Manual)

B) EXPANDING ACCESS
TO AND IMPROVING
DELIVERY OF BASIC

.

Reduction of the
govermnent's involvement in
the CAA to 20 percent or less
of the outstanding shares

Greater private sector
ownership of and say in the
operation of the CAA

Adoption, publication, and
implementation of the revised
Fiscal Procedures Mantal

Greater private scctor
confidence through better
balance in relation between
tax collectors and taxpayers

Annex Cl
Page 3 of 5
Cote d'lvoire
Matrix of Policy Actions in ERC

es

_

-.Actions Through Jun

002

Indicators

PUBLIC SERVICES
(EDUCATION AND
HEALTH)
1. Education and Health
Strengthening Local
Community Participation in
Senice Delivery through
COGES

Publication of legal texts

Greater responsibility of

(decree and arrete)
reorganizing the COGES in
the education sector; enabling

parents in the management of
education senrices

the!M to m,narge rSes'.urneS

transferred to them from the
budget or directly collected
bv them, with a reinforced
role and responsibility for
parents; and the adoption of a
guiding manual of procedures
Expansion of access to
education and health services
by increasing resource
allocation to critical input
areas, with some targeting to
the very poor

Increase in the allocation for
primary schools within the
approved 2002 budget of the
Ministrv of National
Education by CFAF 6.8
billion; with CFAF 2.5 billion
for textbooks; CFAF 2.2
billion for school kits; CFAF
1.8 billion to transfer to
COGES; and CFAF 0.3
billion for canteens
Increase the 2002 budget
allocation of the Ministry of
Health by CFAF 680 million
for subsidizing essential
drugs in the poorest health
districts: Tiassale, GrandLahou, Guiglo, and Duekoue

Completion of a study for
procuring and distributing
essential drugs for the public
sector and the adoption and
implementation of an action
plan for improving its
efficiencv

Signature of agreements
between the Ministries of
Education and Health, on the
one hand, and the selected
education and healtlh COGES,
on the other; the opening of
bank accounts in appropriate

Increased access to education
(via delivery of basic inputs
free-of-charge at the lowest
level; and higher volume of
resources to break bottlenecks
to schooling) by the very poor.
and girls;

Incrcased access to primary
healtlh services (via allocation
of resources to subsidize the
cost) by the very poor in four
poorest districts

Annex Cl
Page 4 of 5

Aeiqn Thr"Jg
.:

C8te d'Ivoire
Matrix of Policy Actions in ERC
ae 2002. a- E .
ch .
institutions and the deposit of
at least 75% of the budget in
those accounts

Tird

che

Indicato

Effective opening to
competition of the textbook
publishing and sector;
adoption of a new legal and
regulatory framework for
competitive distribution of
pre-primary education books;
and completion of the
distribution of free textbooks
in the targeted districts

Reduction of the Cost of
School Textbooks by Freeing
the Market

C) PUBLIC
EXPENDITURE
MANAGEMENT
1. Budget Formulation

Agreement with the World
Bank and EU on Concept
Paper for the 2002 PER

Diagnostics of public
expenditure allocation and
management processes as a
basis for reinforcing the EUsupported program

Introduction of an integrated
publicfinancialmanagement
system (SIGFIP) and launch
of a review of procurement
procedures (1999-2000).
Modification of SIGFI
processes by institution of
advances for funding
project/program operation,
supported by regular audits

Accelerated implementation
of programs and projects in
the public development
program

2. Budget Execution
Improving Efficiency of
Budget Execution

The assignment of the duties

Annex Cl
Page 5 of 5
Cote d'lvoire
Matrix of Policy Actions in ERC
Actions Through June 2002
Secojid Tranche
of "regisseur" to project
financial managers and
accountants, to allow for
efficient use of the advances
Improving Procurement

Third Tranche

Preparation of new draft
Procurement Code (2001)

Indi atorO

Budget execution via clearer
procurement processes,
penirtting savings and
probity in the use of public
rPCnh,rCPC

3. Budget Reporting and
Gov-ernance: Internal
Controls, Auditing and
External Oversight

Transmission to the National
Assembly of the report by the
Chambre des Coniptes on the
audits (Lois de Reglemient) of
the 1999 and 2000 budgets
(May 2002)

Transmission to the National
Assembly of the new
Procurement Code and
establislunent of the Couir des
Coniptes (Lois de Reglenrent)

Transmission to the National
Assemblv of the report by the
Cour chanibre des Coniptes
on the 2001 budget

Disclosure of outcomes in the
use of budgetary resources in
1999-2001 to elected
representatives, wvith scope
for sanctions/corrective
action.

IMAGING

24168

Report No.:
Type:

CAS

IVC

