d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

Docum ent of 
The World Bank 

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 

Report No. 61315 - PL  

INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT 

COUNTRY PARTNERSH IP STRATEGY PROGRESS REPORT 

FOR THE 

REPUBLIC OF POLAND 

FOR THE PERIOD 2009-13 

May 9, 2011 

Poland Country M anagement Unit 
Europe and Central Asia Region 

Th is document h as a restr icted dist r ibut ion and may b e u sed b y rec ip ients onl y in th e p er forman ce o f th e ir 
o ffic ial dut ies.  It s cont ent s may not oth erwise b e d isclo sed without Wo rld Ban k aut hor iza tion. 

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REPUBLIC OF POLAND 
COUNTRY PARTNERSH IP STRATEGY PROGRESS REPORT 

CURRENCY EQU IVALENTS 
(Exchange Rate Effective as of February 2011) 

Currency Un it 
US$1.00 
2.8 PLN 
EUR 1.0 
3.97 PLN 

FISCAL YEAR 
Ju ly 1 - June 30 

ACRONYMS AND ABBREV IATIONS 

AAA 
BGK 
CPS 
CPSPR 

CEB 

CEM 
DPL 
EC 
EIB 
EU 
FBS 
FD I 
FSAP 
GDP 
GEF 
GN I 
IBRD 

Analyt ical and Advisory Activit ies 
State Deve lopmen t Bank 
Country Partnersh ip S trategy 
Country Partnersh ip S trategy 
Progress Repor t 
Council of Europe Deve lopmen t 
Bank 
Country Economic Memorandum  
Developmen t Po licy Loan 
European Commiss ion 
European Investmen t Bank 
European Un ion 
Fee-based Services 
Foreign D irect Investmen t 
F inancial Sector Adv isory P rogram 
Gross Domestic P roduct 
G lobal Env ironment Facility 
Gross National Income 
In ternational Bank for 
Reconstruction and Development 

IFC 
IF Is 
IMF 
M IC 
OPF s 
PARSP 

PCF 
PER 
P ISA 

PPP s 
SCAP 
SCHD 

SME 
TA 
VAT 

In ternational F inance Corporation 
In ternational F inancial Institutions 
In ternational Monetary Fund 
M idd le Income Countr ies 
Open Pension Funds 
Post Accession Rural Support 
Pro ject 
Pro totype Carbon Fund 
Pub lic Expend iture Review 
Programme for In ternational 
Student Assessmen t  
Pub lic Pr ivate Par tnersh ips 
Subnational Coope ration Action Plan 
Strategy for Human Cap ital 
Developmen t 
Small and Med ium En terpr ise s 
Techn ical Assistance 
Value-added T ax

V ice Presiden t 
Country D irector 
Task T eam Leader 

Ph ilippe Le Houérou 
Peter Harro ld 
Thomas B latt Laursen 

The CPS P rogress Report was produced by a core team led by Thomas Laursen under the overall 
gu idance of Peter Harro ld.  The preparation of the CPS Progress Repor t has been a team effort, wh ich 
included invo lvemen t of Kaspar R ich ter, Ewa Korczyc, Janet Doo ley, Emilia Skrok, Anna Bokina, 
Elisabetta Capannelli, Radoslaw Czapsk i, Gary S tuggins, Char les G r iff in, John Po llner, Iwona Warzecha, 
Alber to Rodr iguez, N ina Arn ho ld, Leszek Kasek, K irsten P ropst, Natasha Kap il, Jan Ru tkowsk i, 
Valen tina Mar tinovic, Katarzyna Pop ielarska, and Cathy Summers, as well as o ther Po land Coun try T eam 
members. The team is gratefu l for the cooperation on th is with Governmen t off icials. 

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table of Contents 

1 

Introduction ................................ ................................ ................................ .....................1 

2 Recent Political and Econom ic Developm ents................................ ................................ .2 
2.1  Political Developments ................................ ................................ ................................2 
2.2  Econom ic Developments................................ ................................ ..............................2 

3 

Program Implem entation and Progress Towards Results ................................ ..............3 
3.1 
Program Implementation ................................ ................................ .............................3 
3.2 
Progress towards Results ................................ ................................ ............................6 
Pillar 1: Social and Spatial Inclusion ................................ ................................ ......................6 
Pillar 2: Public Sector Reform ................................ ................................ ...............................7 
Pillar 3: G rowth and Competitiveness ................................ ................................ ....................7 
Pillar 4: Regional and Global Public Goods ................................ ................................ ...........7 

4. Modifications to the CPS and Critical Partnership Issues ................................ ..............8 
4.1  New Themes ................................ ................................ ................................ ................8 
4.2  The General Program ................................ ................................ ................................ .8 
4.3  
Subnational Engagement ................................ ................................ .............................9 
4.4  FBS Business Development ................................ ................................ .........................9 
4.5  Graduation ................................ ................................ ................................ ............... 10 

5. R isks................................ ................................ ................................ ............................... 10 
Annex 1: Poland: 2009 -13 CPS Results M atrix ................................ ................................ .... 11 
Annex 2: CPS PR Pillars and Themes FY11 -13 ................................ ................................ ... 20 
Annex 2b: CPS PR: Tentative Program FY11 -13 ................................ ................................ . 21 
Annex 3: Subnational C ooperation Action Plan (SCAP) 2010 -2012 ................................ ..... 22 
Annex 4: Summary of Recent Key Strategic Analytical Work ................................ .............. 24 
Annex 4a: Transition to Low -Em issions Economy in Poland ................................ ................ 24 
Annex 4b: Poland Transport Policy Note—Toward a Sustainable Land Transport Sector ...... 25 
Annex 4c: Poland Public Expenditure Review Analysis of Social and Public Wages ............. 26 
Annex 4d: Europe 2020 Poland --Fueling G row th and Competitiveness through Employment, 
Skills, and Innovation. ................................ ................................ ................................ ......... 27 
Annex 5: Poland at a G lance ................................ ................................ ................................ 28 
Annex 6: Selected Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance and M anagement ..................... 31 
Annex 7: IBRD /IDA Program Summary ................................ ................................ .............. 32 
Annex 8: IFC Investment Operations Program ................................ ................................ ..... 32 
Annex 9: Summary of Analytical and Advisory Assistance ................................ .................. 33 
Annex 10: Poland Social Indicators ................................ ................................ ..................... 34 
Annex 11: Key Economic Indicators ................................ ................................ .................... 35 
Annex 12: Key Exposure Indicators ................................ ................................ ..................... 37 
Annex 13: IFC Comm itted and D isbursed Outstanding Investment Portfolio ........................ 38 
Annex 14: Portfolio (IBRD /IDA/G rants)................................ ................................ .............. 39 

Tables and Boxes 
Table 1. CPS PR 2011: Planned Versus Actual Program (FY09 June -FY11) ..............................5 

Box 1. Subnational Engagement in Poland: Strategy and Experience …….…………………… ..4 

MAP (IBRD 33467R) 

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
POLAND 
CPS PROGRESS REPORT 

This CPS Progress Report (CPSPR) comes at a critical juncture for Poland, as it is about to 
assume the Presidency of the European Union (EU ). Central to the Bank’s program for the next 
two years is achieving convergence w ith European living standards, particularly at the 
subnational level. As such, this CPSPR maintains a strong focus on helping Poland make the 
most of its EU membership. It aims to assist Poland in strengthening national and subnational 
institutions and capacity. The CPSPR proposes a substantial program of know ledge and 
advisory service to be delivered in part through fee -based service (FBS ), complemented by a 
lending program at around US$ 1 billion per year, expected to gradually decline. The 
International Finance Corporation ( IFC) w ill selectively seek opportunities to inve st in 
renewable energy and climate -friendly projects. This CPSPR also places a greater emphasis on 
bolstering Poland as a global partner, not necessarily for just financing but for the know ledge 
Poland can share with the region and the rest of the world. I n this respect, the Bank will also 
support Poland in its emerging role as a donor, and during its EU Presidency . 

1 

INTRODUCTION 

1. 
This CPSPR assesses implem entation of the Bank’s 2009-13 CPS at m id -term. The 
CPS was presented to the Bank’s Board in July 2009. The CPS comprises four pillars: (i) Social 
and Spatial Inclusion; (ii) Public Sector Reform ; (iii) G row th and Competitiveness; and (iv) 
Regional and Global Public Goods. The CPS was foreseen as a flexible tool to support the 
Bank’s work in Poland, in line with the strategy for m iddle income countries (M IC). The CPS 
noted that while the Bank was a secondary partner to the EU , the Bank could continue to add 
significant value to Poland’s development and convergence agenda for the years to come, while 
the active policy dialogue and technical cooperation would also add value to the Bank through 
enhancing its know ledge to the benefit of other client countries in the region and beyond. It was 
thus a clear win-w in partnership. 

2. 
The CPSPR finds that implem entation of the Partnership so far has been broadly 
successful though in som e areas progress ha s been slower than hoped for. Notably, the 
EUR3 billion Development Policy Lending (DPL) lending program , supporting policy reform s in 
the areas of public finance, social se ctors, and private sector development, was completed as 
envisaged in June 2010, and the first operation supporting climate change m itigation —an Energy 
Efficiency and Renewable Energy DPL—is being delivered as planned (though in a higher 
amount) along with this Strategy update. Further, the envisaged Analytical and Advisory 
Activities (AAA ) program for FY10-11 has been fully delivered, including core strategic and 
innovative studies on Poland’s transition to a low -em issions economy, employment, skills, and 
innovation (Europe2020), transport policy, and public expenditures. There has also been 
significant progress in developing subnational and FBS business, though the planned loan to 
Warsaw C ity (as well as the other non -sovereign ope ration—a credit line for small and medium -
term enterprises (SMEs) through the Polish Development Bank (PKO ) could not be delivered 
and important obstacles remain to developing these new lines of business (see Box 1). The 
possibility for scaling up FBS remain constrained by the Pol ish procurement law for competitive 
tendering of advisory services , and the tight fiscal situation, unless mechanism s are further 
developed to utilize the EU Structural Funds to engage the Bank for technical assistance .  

1 

 
 
 
2 RECENT POLITICAL AND ECONOM IC DEVELOPMENTS 

2.1  

Political Developments 

3. 
On April 10, 2010, a tragic plane crash near Smolensk in Russia changed the 
political landscape in Poland. The disaster took the lives of 96 people: political, military and 
religious leaders, including the President of Poland, M r. Lech Kaczynski and the First Lady, the 
President of the National Bank of Poland, as well as several Presidential officials, 
parliamentarians, the heads of all the A rmed Forces and the head of the General Staff, a number 
of heads of other central institutions, as well as a number of respected Poles such as the former 
head of the Polish Government in Exile. Following presidential elections in 2010, M r. Bronislaw 
Komorowski, the former Speaker of Pa rliament, became the new President of Poland. Prime 
M inister Donald Tusk leads a stable and popular majority government . 

4. 
In the second half of 2011, general elections w ill take place and Poland w ill take on 
the Presidency of the EU . General elections are scheduled for October 2011. In July 2010, 
Poland’s Council of Ministers adopted a document provisionally outlining the plans of the Polish 
Presidency. These w ill evolve in line w ith consultations and the final priorities w ill be 
announced in June 2011. General priorities include Internal M arket, Relations w ith the East, 
External Energy Policy, Common Security and Defense policy, the EU 2014-19 Financial 
Perspectives, and Intellectual Capital.   

2.2  

Econom ic Developments 

5. 
Poland has shown remarkable resilience to the global financial crisis and in 2009 it 
was the only EU country to avoid a decline in econom ic activity. Poland grew by 1.7 percent, 
while the EU declined by 4.2 percent.  Poland’s econom ic slowdown was muted for a number of 
reasons: (i) the relatively large domestic economy and lim ited exposure to the decline in world 
trade; (ii) the flexible exchange rate regime; (iii) lim ited vulnerabiliti es in Poland’s banking 
system due to slower credit grow th than in other Central and Eastern Europe countries; and (iv) 
the Government’s appropriate policy responses during the crisis. In 2009, Poland became a high -
income country with a G ross National Income (GN I) of US$12,260.1 

6. 
Poland remained one of the faste st grow ing EU countries in 2010. Real G ross 
Domestic Product (GDP) expanded by 3.8 percent in 2010. While growth in 2009 was mainly 
due to the positive contribution from net exports, growth in 2010 was driven by domestic factors.  
The decline in private investment was largely compensated by a double -digit expansion in public 
investment , stimulated in particular by use o f EU fund s. Inflation marginally exceeded the target 
range of 1.5-3.5 percent in the first three months of 2011 for the first time since September 2009, 
but is expected to drop below the 3.5 percent upper threshold towards the end of the year. 

7. 
Grow th is expected to stabilize at around 4 percent over the next few years. The 
recovery is expected to be driven by improving global conditions and revived credit growth, w ith 
investment also supported by EU funds and improved corporate profitability and consumption 
supported by declining unemployment. These factors are set to compensate for the impact of 
fiscal consolidation, the end of the restocking cycle , and a declining contribution from net 
exports. With domestic demand gaining strength, i nflation is expected to increase from 2.6 

1 (2009 ) Atl as Meth od (u ppe r middl e income US$3,946 – US$12 ,195; h igh income , US$1 2,196 or more).  Th e EU 
ave ra ge is US$35,351 . 

2 

 
 
                                               
 
percent in 2010 to 3.5 percent in 2011 and decline to 2.8 percent in 2012.  The external current 
account deficit is expected to remain at less than 4 percent of GDP, adequately financed by 
Foreign Direct Investment (FD I) inflows and EU funding. The main upside risk to economic 
prospects is a stronger-than-expected recovery in the EU, aided by buoyant growth in emerging 
markets. 
 Downside risks include a larger-than-expected grow th reduction from fiscal 
consolidation , and a reversal in global capital flows in view of the large purchases of government 
securities from nonresidents during the last year. 

8. 
Fiscal consolidation is among Poland’s main econom ic policy challenges. The general 
government deficit doubled to 7.2 p ercent of GDP in 2009 from 3.6 percent of GDP in 2008, in 
part due to fiscal relaxation measures of about 2 percent of GDP . In 2010, fiscal policy continued 
to support recovery and the general government deficit  increased to 7.9 percent of GDP. The 
Government aim s to reduce the fiscal deficit to 5.6 percent of GDP in 2011 and to 2.9 percent of 
GDP in 2012. This would bring Poland ’s general government deficit in line with the reference 
value of 3 percent of GDP referred to in the Treaty.2 The reduction in the general government 
deficit is influenced by three factors: limits on discretionary expenditure grow th to one percent 
over inflation (now reflected in legislation); a 1 percentage point value-added tax (VAT) 
increase; and a planned reduction in the contribution rate to private Open Pension Funds (OPFs) 
from 7.3 percent to 2.3 percent of gross wages which would reduce the fiscal deficit by about 1.2 
percent of GDP by 2012 . The cyclical rebound is expected to reduce social expenditures, 
including on unemployment benefits, and improve tax collection.   

9. 
Public debt is projected to remain at sustainable levels. Strong econom ic recovery, 
steady exchange rate appreciation, fiscal consolidation, better public sector cash management, 
stepped-up privatization and strengthened public debt thresholds at local level s are projected to 
be sufficient to maintain public debt below national and EU thresholds. 

10. 
In January 2011, Poland renewed and increased to US$30 billion a Flexible Credit 
L ine Arrangem ent w ith the International Monetary Fund (IMF) . This was a further 
important signal of confidence in the Polish economy. 

3 PROGRAM IMPLEMENTATION AND PROGRESS TOWARDS RESULTS 

3.1 

Program Implementation 

11. 
The 2009 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) provided a good fram ework for 
cooperation during FY09 -11, and the Bank’s support during the crisis and for Poland’s 
longer term developm ent agenda was highly valued . The strategic pillars of engagement 
remained relevant, and t he macro-oriented and flexible partnership pro ved well-suited to help 
Poland mitigate the impact of the crisis while promoting reform s to support longer-term growth.  
The partnership between Poland and the Bank has continued to strengthen, as it has become clear 
to the clients that the Bank is not onl y an important potential source of financing , but also a 
critical source of global know ledge and expertise.  Poland’s pragmatic attitude towards the Bank 
and other International Financial Institutions (IFIs) served it well during the crisis, with Poland 

2 Th e EU is set to d ec id e in Jun e 2011 on a mo re flexible appro ach, und er th e excessive de fic it p rocedu re, to 
Memb er Stat es wh ich have impl emented syst emic pen sion re forms. As a result, red uc in g the gen eral go ve rnment 
de fic it to 3.5 p ercent o f GDP wo uld be su ffic ient in the future to con sid er t h e abro ga t ion o f th e excessive d e fic it 
procedu re for Pol and in l ight o f Pol and’s second p ill ar p en sion re forms from the l ate 1990 s . 

3 

 
 
                                               
 
becom ing one of the largest borrowers from the Bank and gaining outside support for critical 
policy reform s, while paving the way for a lasting, mutually beneficial know ledge partnership. 

12. 
The CPS envisaged an increasing emphasis on subnational engagem ent and FBS 
delivery, but despite som e progress, important obstacles remain to developing these lines of 
business. In particular, hurdles were encountered in responding to interest in borrow ing by 
subnational governments , and development of FBS was constrained by the Polish Procurement 
Law which generally requires competitive tendering for advisory services (see Box 1 ). These 
challenges are further discussed in Section 4. 

13. 
The envisaged lending program was partially delivered. The cornerstone of the 
lending program , the EUR3 billion DPL program which cut across most of the strategic pillars of 
engagement, was delivered in a full and timely manner . However, the planned non-sovereign 
projects (Warsaw C ity Sustainable Transport and PKO BP Small and M edium Enterprise (SME) 
Credit Line) did not materialize despite strong client interest. Notably, the Bank’s sovereign 
guarantee requirement was met by demands for sim ilar treatment from other key financing 
partners, notably the European Investment Bank (EIB) and the Council of Europe Development 
Bank (CEB), which would increase central government debt levels and raise borrow ing costs. 

BOX 1. SUBNATIONAL ENGAGEM ENT IN POLAND: STRATEGY AND E XP ERIENCE 

World Bank cooperation w ith subnational entities in Poland is gu ided by the Subnational Cooperation 
Action Plan (SCAP) developed by the Bank w ith local experts and partners in 2010 (see Annex 2 for 
further details).  The document proposes a strategic approach to subnational engagement and const i tutes the 
basis for Bank activit ies in this field.  The main objective of the SCAP is to support sustainable socio -
economic development of Pol ish regions and cities, in particular those with low leve ls of income , through 
knowledge -based se rvices and financial coope rat ion. 

Based on the past and current efforts to engage w ith subnational governments, the Bank has identified 
four priority strategic areas: (i) transport sector; (ii) regional development; (iii) pub lic finance; and (iv) 
social sectors. World Bank assistance is to be provided primarily through analyt ic and advisory se rvices, 
where possible on a fee-for-se rvice or cost -sharing basis. Se lect ive financial support to individual self -
gove rnments or through a financial inte rmediary is also be ing pursued to help lesser -developed subnat ional 
gove rnments cofinance EU programs and gain access to market financing.  

Warsaw and the cap ital region of Mazow ieck ie, where the Bank has good contacts and techn ical and 
adm inistrative capacity is h igh , were targeted during FY10 -11 in an initial p ilot phase.  While the 
planned loan to Warsaw City did not mate rialize, the Bank carried out TAs, through a FBS arrangement, for 
Mazowieckie and is current ly implementing anothe r with the Lubelskie region.  Contacts have also been 
establ ished wi th some othe r subnational partne rs. 

FBS bus iness development has been lim ited by the Polish procurement law wh ich does not provide 
exp licit possibility for sole-sourcing of Bank or other IFI advisory services.  Currently the Bank’s own 
resources have been combined with client funding.  In othe r cases, the Bank has been engaged based on the 
uniqueness of the se rvices it provided.  As discussions with the European Commission proceed to clarify that 
its membe rs can sole-source Bank advisory se rvices the re will be greate r possibi lities for this line of business 
going forward as the Gove rnment has stated i ts clear intention to increase use of FBS. 

Subnational lend ing has to date been affected by the Bank’s guarantee requ irement s and associated 
fiscal and borrow ing cost imp lications as well as pari -passu requ irements—in the case of Warsaw 
C ity— from other IFIs, notab ly the EIB and CEB.  Efforts are ongoing to explore lending through the state 
development bank (BGK) or to individual cities whe re the EIB and CEB are not main financial partne rs .  

4 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 1. CPS PR 2011: Planned Versus Actua l Program (June 09 -June 11) 

FY09 

FY10 

Pla n 

Status 

Pla n 

DPL 2 

1.25 

√ 

1.3 Wa rsaw Ci ty 

Status 
LENDING 
Dropped 
Dropped 

0.5 
0.5 

Pla n 

City 2 

PKO BP Cred it Line 

Clima te C ha nge 1 

FY11 

Status 

0.25 N/A 
0.3 
√ EE a nd 
Re newab le 
Ene rgy DPL 

0.55 

1.1 

1.1 

Tota l 

1.25 

1.3 

DPL 3 

√ 

√ 

PBB TA 

Pozna n 
CC 
Housing 
Fin TA 
(FBS) 1/ 

DPL Educat ion TA 

Ma zowiec kie PER 

√ 

1.25 
1.3 
2.25 
1.3 
ANAYTICAL AND ADVISORY ASSISTANCE 
√ 
Lubelskie /Lub in AAA 
(FBS/ongoing) 
Ene rgy ESW 
(ongoing) 

√ 

Ma zowiec kie Tra ns po rt 
FBS 

CC CEM 
Low Emissions Study 
Minist ry o f Ec onomy FBS 
Minist ry o f Re gional 
Developme nt FBS 
Min of Infrast ructure FBS 

PER 

DPL Heal th/SP TA 

Wa rsaw Ci ty Polic y Notes 

Tra nspo rt Polic y Note 
Re gional Deve l TA 1/ 

√  

√(FY11) 

√(FY11) 
Dropped 

Dropped 
√ 

√(FY11) 
√ 

√ 

Tra nspo rt/ rai lways 
ESW 

Fina ncial Re por ting 
TA (FBS/ongo ing) 1/ 
Eu rope 2020 ESW 1, 2/ 

Fina ncial Secto r TA 1,3/ 

Pub lic F ina nce TA 1,4/ 
ROSC (BCP / IA IS) 1/ 

Postponed 

√ 
√ 

√ 
√ 

Amount s in US$ bi llions;  √ Comp leted .  1 / Not planned in CPS; 2 / C ase-study re lated to regiona l wo rk; 3 / R egu lat ion of savin gs 
cooperat ives; 4 / Tax expend itures; m ic ro -mode ling 

14. 
The planned AAA program was fully delivered and very well received by the client 
despite som e delays owing inter alia to the complexity of the work. The core strategic 
diagnostic work delivered during the first half of the CPS included an update of the Public 
Expenditure Review (PER), a Country Economic M emorandum (CEM ) on Transition to a Low -
Em ission Economy, a Policy Note on Sustainable Land Transport , and a study on Employment, 
Skills, and Innovation (see Annex 4 for a summary of these studies). Moreover, the Bank 
undertook additional strategic work and responded ―just -in-time‖ to a number of unfore seen 
client demands. Since 2009, several AAA that were not planned as part of the CPS were 
delivered (see Table 1). Several of these additional activities were fee-based (using Polish budget 
funds, EU funds, and bilateral funds ) marking some progress in this area both at central and 
subnational government levels. FBS activities included areas such as transport planning, housing 
finance regulation, business regulatory reform , and innovation system s. The ongoing Financial 
Reporting Technical Assistance (TA ) Program for 2010-2015 in the amount of US$10 m illion 
(among the largest in the Bank ; funded through the Swiss Contribution to the enlarged EU ) is 
enhancing institutional and regulatory capacity building for corporate sector financial reporting 
and auditing in Poland. The AAA program was well -received by the government, both in term s 
of adding important value to the analy sis and discussion of key current policy issues and in term s 
of timely and effective response to evolving client demands. 

15. 
The current portfolio is not at risk and per formance has been broad ly satisfactory 
despite som e delays in implem entation . The active portfolio consists of seven operations 
amounting to US$471 million, of which US$183 m illion remain undisbursed.  O f these projects, 
three are investment loans, one is a G lobal Environment Facility (GEF) project and three are 
Prototype Carbon Fund (PCF) renewable energy projects. A EUR750 million Energy Efficiency 

5 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and Renewable Energy DPL is being presented to the Board along w ith this CPSPR .  The Odra 
R iver Flood Protection Project has experienced some delays due to the technical complexity of 
the preparatory work but procurement for major construction works is now underway. The Post -
Accession Rural Support Project also experienced delays due to constraints on counterpart funds , 
but the Social Inclusion component is complete and the small KRUS modernization component 
is due for completion this year. The third Road M aintenance and Rehabilitation Project has been 
largely successful though the small component on institutional strengthening has been difficult to 
implement . In the energy sector, the GEF Energy Efficiency Project was part ly delivered to plan 
albeit a component is being restructured, and two of the three PCF alternative energy projects 
have been successful . 

3.2 

Progress towards Results 

16. 
Progress at m id-term towards achieving the results targeted in the CPS has 
generally been good, especially in areas where the program has been fully delivered .  
However, it is challenging to identify results that could be uniquely linked to the Bank ’s program 
given the macro-oriented nature of the program and because the Bank is a relatively small 
partner compared w ith EU institutions. Some of the results are thus higher order.  Poland’s most 
notable achievement during the CPS period was that it weathered the international crisis well and 
was the only count ry in the EU that avoided recession. The main reasons for this were discussed 
in the macro section , but the Bank played an important role in helping preserve confidence in 
Poland through its relatively positive (and in retrospect correct) assessment of Poland’s 
macroeconom ic situation compared to other IFIs, rating agencies, and investment banks, through 
advocating the differences between Poland and the ot her more vulnerable countries in the region , 
and through its timely approval of the EUR3 billion DPL program which was an important 
financial contribution but even more important signal of confidence in Poland .   

Pillar 1: Social and Spatial Inclusion 

17. 
Poland made good progress on labor market and social sector issues supported by 
the DPL program . Despite the crisis and slowdown in growth, labor force participation and 
employment rates increased from 2008 to 2010, esp ecially for older workers. This was 
stimulated by tightening of early retirement privileges, a new program (50+) to raise employment 
of older workers, less generous unemployment benefits, and more flexible working arrangements 
during the crisis. In education, outcomes continue to be commendable w ith the Program for 
International Student Assessment (PISA ) scores stabilizing on a comparatively high level while 
government approved important further reform s in higher education .3 In health, there was 
progress in implementing a voluntary program converting public hospitals to corporate entities 
under the Commercial Code. In pensions, progress is being made through reducing early 
retirement privileges and bringing uniform pensions more in line wit h the main pension system, 
while harmonizing and raising retirement ages, linking indexation purely to inflation, and 
removing privileges for farmers and disabled remain important (as highlighted in the PER) but 
controversial. Poland also moved forward on its regional development agenda. While regional 
income disparities have been increasing since EU accession, EU funds absorption has been 
strong in the last couple of years at both national and subnational levels. The Post Accession 

3 P ISA read in g sco res sli ghtl y decreased from 2006 to 2009 th ou gh Poland is st ill the regio nal leade r in CEE. Th e 
mat h score co ntin ues to be sl ightl y below OECD ave rage , wh ile th e scien ce sco re is now abo ve OECD ave rage . 

6 

 
 
                                               
 
Rural Support Project (PARSP) project contributed importantly to strengthening social inclusion 
in poor communes and raising awareness among key stakeholders.   

Pillar 2: Public Sector Reform   

18. 
Public sector reform was affected by the international crisis and sharp slowdown in 
grow th but important m easures were taken w ith suppor t from the DPL and associated 
AAA program . The fiscal deficit and debt increased substantially thus delaying euro adopti on, 
though this policy response was broadly appropriate.  Fiscal consolidation is starting in 2011, 
supported by strengthened fiscal institutions. The Government has amended the Public Finance 
Act to introduce medium -term and performance-based budgeting and limit the grow th of 
discretionary budgetary spending, including on wages as recommended in the PER. The 
Government is working on legislation to introduce multi -year binding expenditure ceilings, 
tighten fiscal rules for local governments, and integrate u niformed services into main pension 
system . Accompanied by 
increased 
infrastructure spending, social and public finance 
management reform s are helping improve the quality and efficiency of public finances. 

Pillar 3: Grow th and Competitiveness 

19. 
Poland has continued to make progress towards strengthening the environm ent for 
private sector grow th, including through enhancing transport infras tructure—one of the 
key bottlenecks to grow th—though important challenges remain . Poland has stepped up its 
road infrastructure investment program , but as noted in the Bank’s Transport Policy Note, it will 
be important to ensure continued financial sustainability in the roads sector. A lso, Poland needs 
to upgrade its rail infrastructure and make this a more competitive transp ort alternative, as well 
as making better use of inland waterways, including , reducing greenhouse gas em issions. The 
private sector will need to play a greater role in infrastructure , and the legal and regulatory 
framework for Public Private Partnerships (PPPs) has been strengthened in this regard.  
M easures have al so been taken to improve the general business environment through further 
deregulation, for example the Law on Delivery of Services in the context of the EU Services 
D irective. The cost of SME start ups has been reduced by about 20 percent in the last couple of 
years and red tape has been cut through stream lining of business legislation. Outstanding 
challenges include starting a business, property registration, paying taxes, enforcing contracts, 
and protecting investors. Complementing reform s in basic and higher education, Poland has 
taken steps to improve its innovation system s and is continuing to work w ith the Bank on this 
and its human capital development strategy. 

Pillar 4: Regional and G lobal Public Goods   

20. 
Progress in improving energy efficiency and m itigating climate change is by nature 
difficult to m easure over the short term , but som e important m easures have been taken . 
Poland adopted a new energy efficiency law to improve efficiency by 1 percent per year in 
private buildings in the next decade . This action is a cornerstone in the Energy Efficiency and 
Renewable Energy DPL that is being considered by the Board in conjuncti on w ith this CPSPR. 
Poland’s Thermo Modernization Fund w ill play a key role in funding the needed investments .  
Work is also under way to increase co-generation in energy production. Poland is now 
participating in international em issions trading under the Kyoto protocol . The Bank’s recent 
technical and macro -modeling work in this area has been well received and w ill form a good 
basis for further analysis.  Poland’s t ransition to low -em issions economy is technically and 
financially feasible over the longer run to 2030 , w ith energy efficiency offering the highest 
returns in this area over the next decade. 

7 

 
 
21. 
Recent severe floods have demonstrated tha t Poland needs to strengthen water 
managem ent and flood protection. Priority so far has been the Odra R iver, supported by a 
Bank project, and works are expected to start this year follow ing some delays. A ttention is now 
shift ing to the Vistula River, and catastrophe risk insurance is being studied based on a recent 
Bank report assessing mechanism s for financial and fiscal management of su ch risks. 

22. 
Poland has been success ful in preserving financial sector stability during the 
financial crisis. Going forward, there w ill be a Financial Sector Advisory Program (FSAP) in 
2012, and the Bank has stated its readiness to provide support in the context of Poland’s 
upcom ing EU Presidency on the new EU post -crisis regulatory and supervisory architecture . 

4. 

MOD IF ICATIONS TO THE CPS AND CRITICAL PARTNERSHIP ISSUES 

23. 
The CPS remains valid and only minor modifications are called for in the 
remainder of the period.  The Government is interested in a continued and broad-based 
engagement with the Bank.4 The partnership will remain centered around the existing strategic 
pillars but w ill increasingly be coordinated around Poland’s EU role. Focus w ill also remain on 
engaging subnational governments and expand ing provision of advisory services on a fee basis 
in core areas of Bank expertise. Further attention will be given to helping Poland continue 
developing its increasingly important regional and global role, including through sharing its 
development experience and expanding its donor functions. Poland’s upcom ing EU Presidency 
offers an important opportunity in this regard, including because of the importance Poland 
attaches to the Eastern Partnership , given the Bank’s long experience in these countries . 

4.1  

New Themes 

24. G iven that Poland is an EU Member State and that the EU is Poland’s key external 
partner, the Bank’s approach w ill increasingly be EU oriented. New themes include M aking 
Europe work for Poland; Policy Reform s for Europe2020 and Convergence; and Complementing 
the EU Agenda (see Annex 2 for how the existing pillars map to the se themes). While there is no 
change in strategy, the idea is to place Bank engagement and work more clearly w ithin the 
broader framework of complementarity and support of the European Commission’s (EC) 
program in Poland, and to use these themes as filters to select AAA and lending operations.  
A lready, major Bank activities and reports are being discuss ed with the EC and other IFIs. 

4.2  

The General Program  

25. 
The program for the remaining two years envisages delivery of the range of Bank 
services while strengthen ing the know ledge partnership and supporting Poland’s em erging 
donor role.5 The indicative lending amount is intended to be maintained at the current level of 
around US$1 billion per year in FY12 -13, of which about 40 percent is presently expecte d to be 
in the form of DPLs in support of the Government’s ongoing policy reform agenda . However, 
overall lending amounts w ill depend on how government demand and performance evolves over 
the remainder of the CPS period, and on IBRD 's lending capacity and demand from other 
borrowers. The DPLs are expected to support Poland’s fiscal consolidation agenda, including 
through strengthening fiscal rules at both central and subnational government levels, improving 
the efficiency of public adm inistration, and ratio nalizing social spending while maintaining 

4 See p aragraph 30 fo r a d iscu ssion o f gradu ation issu es fo r Poland . 
5 The flexibl e 200 9 CPS sp ecified lend in g throu gh FY12 and AAA throu gh FY11, to b e up dated at p ro gress repo rt. 

8 

 
 
                                               
 
strong social service delivery. In addition, the program includes as a key strategic priority 
lending to targeted subnationals (see below ), and aim s to introduce the new Results-Based 
Lending instrument—most likely in the energy or transport sectors. The Bank is also ready to 
provide support through a variety of instruments to the Government as it seeks to extend its flood 
prevention work beyond the Odra R iver to the V istula R iver. This diversified lending strategy 
allows for sufficient flexibility to respond to client demand, though we would not envisage major 
substitutability between the DPLs and subnational lending.  

26. 
Building on recent core diagnostic work, analytic and advisory services to the central 
government would focus on follow -up TA and other form s of implementation support. In the 
public sector reform area, the public finance work is expected to be extended to public 
adm inistration reform . The Bank’s work on land transport and skills/innovation would also be 
continued , including through technical assistance in support of the development of the Strategy 
for Human Capital Development (SHCD ) for Poland. In the energy sector, the Bank will follow 
up on the low -em issions modeling work and could support further development of alternative 
energy. The IFC will selectively seek opportunities to invest in renewable energy and climate -
friendly projects in Poland where its participation brings significant additionality. Recent 
financial sector work m ight be expanded to support Poland’s alignment w ith the new EU 
financial regulatory and supervisory framework.  Finally, but importantly, the Bank w ill support 
Poland’s emerging donor role, including in the context of its EU Presidency in the second half of 
2011.   

4.3  

Subnational Engagement 

27. Going forward, the Bank’s subnational engagem ent w ill target lesser -developed 
regions especially in Eastern Poland .  This work will be guided by the Subnational 
Cooperation Action Plan (see Box 1 and Annex 2).  In line w ith the Bank’s poverty mandate, 
focus w ill be shifted to lesser-developed regions and cities, notably in Eastern Poland, where 
technical, adm inistrative, and financial constraints are more severe and the Bank can add 
significant value in support of their convergence process while complement ing the work of EU 
financial institutions. Based on the Bank’s work with the M azow ieckie region and ongoing 
collaboration with the Lubelskie region and C ity of Lublin, as well as consultat ions with other 
potential subnational partners, it appears that the Bank can play a useful role in areas such as 
public finance and debt management, land and property asset management, transport planning, 
hospital restructuring, development of PPPs, and re gional development strategies.  

28. 
Bank support could be provided through lending and AAA. The program foresees a 
two-stage process, w ith the first stage lending aimed at providing fungible resources to help 
finance subnational program s and projects and helpi ng clients prepare for accessing capital 
markets, and the second stage aimed at supporting clients in going to the market (including 
potentially with the use of P artial Credit Guarantees). The precise modalities for providing Bank 
financial support have not yet been finalized but could take the form of a credit line administered 
or guaranteed by the State Development Bank BGK .   

4.4  

FBS Business Development 

29. G iven the Bank’s declining administrative budget in Poland, continued strong 
demand for Bank analytic and advisory services at both central and subnational 
governm ent levels, and the mutual desire to strengthen the know ledge partnership, Bank 
AAA will increasingly have to rely on cost-sharing and FBS. Some progress has been made in 

9 

 
 
developing this line of business, w ith FBS projects concluded or in the pipeline with both levels 
of government. While these activities will likely continue to be opportunistic, they are confined 
to areas of the Bank’s broader strategic engagement and focused mainly on institution building 
where the Bank’s expertise can add most value to the benefit of all partners. O ther requests for 
FBS would be contingent on the need for critical Bank expertise. However, there are two key 
constraints to expanding FBS. The Polish procurement law generally requires competitive 
tendering for advisory se rvices, although there are exceptions if only one provider exists for a 
given service or if there is a grant element involved. Second, the current fiscal constraints means 
that clients have limited resources of their own to pay for Bank services and w ill have to rely 
mainly on the very large amount of technical assistance resources available under EU funds.  
Under these circum stances, and also because FBS need to have a critical size in order to be 
efficient , FBS is unlikely to become the dominant business line in the next few years , but its 
grow th and increased frequency is important as we prepare for the next phase of the Partnership.  

4.5  

Graduation  

30. 
Formal consideration of graduation will be taken up in the next CPS . Poland remains 
interested in access to a range of Bank services, including lending. While Poland has now 
crossed the high -income country threshold and has access to international capital markets 
(though spreads remain elevated), institutions require further strengthening, not least at the 
subnational level. However, Poland expects that access to lending should be gradually reduced 
and that AAA services should increasingly be provided by FBS rather than fully on the Bank’s 
budget. The next CPS would therefore see lending further reduced o r phased out and a new 
know ledge partnership phased in. This would be reviewed in particular at the time of the future 
euro adoption, which may provide good indications of the maturity of Poland’s institutions given 
the prom inent role Poland would play in the euro -zone. Poland does not wish to see ―graduation‖ 
in term s of an end to the much valued knowledge partnership . 

31. 
Support to Poland as an International Partner . The Bank is helping Poland share its 
successful development experience w ith other countries, and w ill deepen this work with Poland 
in the next few years to develop its aid infrastructure and strategy to support its emerging donor 
role (e.g. , participation in international aid conferences, policy dialogue on aid agenda, and 
know ledge sharing of Polish officials and experts in development aid). As Poland continues to 
grow , it accepts its obligation to increase its responsibilities in this area, including w ith the Bank.  

5. 

R ISK S 

32. 

The FY09 13 CAS identified several risks which remain relevant. First, the reform 
momentum has in some important areas been less than hoped for, and this is likely to continue 
until elections in October 2011. The EU Presidency w ill also place a heavy burden on 
adm inistrative capacity. Further, policy -making remains fragmented, though the period from 
2012 offers an excellent w indow of opportunity for accelerating outstanding reform s. Second, 
while Poland has weathered recent international and regional financial and econom ic turbulence 
well, it remains vulnerable to further deterioration i n the international environment , euro-area 
banking and debt problem s , and potential reversal of recent sizeable portfolio inflows . Adhering 
to its ambitious fiscal consolidation strategy will be important in this uncertain environment. In 
addition to these risks, the CPSPR proposes to build future bu siness using approaches that have 
only partially worked due to procurement and sovereign guarantee issues. This can be high risk -
high reward, but the risk is contained through the diversified lending and AAA pro gram . 

10 

 
 
Government objectives: 

Annex 1: Poland: 2009-13 CPS Results Matrix 

CPS Pillar 1: Social and Spatial Inclusion 

1: Social Sector Reform 

 

 

Implement EU Lisbon agenda to make Poland a competitive knowledge-based economy with more and better jobs and greater social cohesion. 
(Implement Europe 2020 strategy to make Poland a competitive knowledge-based economy with more and better jobs and greater social cohesion) 
 Modernize the social security system (including through reforming some of the incomplete components of the pension design, increasing the 
efficiency of public spending on social assistance for the poorest households) 
 Strengthen educational outcomes and improve the responsiveness of the educational system to the changes in the job market, and achieve efficient and 
accountable educational system.  
Introduce additional voluntary health insurance, improve the management of healthcare establishments and exercise control over the medical services 
quality (eliminate hospital debt for ongoing operations, improve resource allocation in the health sector and among hospitals, encourage cost-saving 
technical change in hospitals and improved response to payment incentives) 
Improve the condition of social infrastructure 

 

CPS objectives: to help improve labor supply incentives and enhance labor market competitiveness, achieve efficient and accountable education system, improve 
efficiency in allocation and use of resources in the health sector. 

Original  

Revised 

Expected Outcomes/Outputs 

Expected Outcomes/Outputs 

Progress To Date 

WB program (Italics indicate not 
planned in CPS)  

Labor Market, Social Assistance 
and Pensions:  

Labor Market, Social 
Assistance and Pensions:  

Labor Market, Social Assistance and 
Pensions:  

Labor Market, Social Assistance 
and Pensions:  

•Increase in employment/working 
age population ratio to 60% by 
2012 and in labor force 
participation rate of population 
aged 55-64 to 33% by 2010 and in 
proportion of unemployed who 
receive job search assistance and 
vocational counseling to 30% by 
2010.  

• Help Govt achieve its objective 
to increase employment rate 
from 60% (2010) and labor 
force participation rate of 
population aged 55-64 from the 
current level of 37% in 2010.  

Employment rate for population 15-64 
remained stable at around 59.3% from 
2008 to 2010 despite the increase in 
unemployment due to the crisis. 
Employment rate for population 55-64 
increased from 31.6% in 2008 to 34% in 
2010. 

 •LFP rate increased from 63.8% (15-64) 
and 33.3% (55-64) in 2008 to 65.6% and 
36.7% respectively in 2010. 

Measures taken: 
•Implementation of the government 
program to enable increasing labor force 
participation of older workers, known as 
“50+” (PL2 prior action) 

•Parliament adoption of the law on 

11 

Lending:  

•DPL1-DPL3 (FY9-10) 

AAA:  

• Public expenditure review on 
PFM, public wages and social 
sector (ESW) (FY10) 

•Fueling Growth and 
Competitiveness in Poland 
Through Employment, Skills, and 
Innovation (ESW) (FY11) 

•Qualitative field research on 
coverage and leakage in social 
assistance (TA) (FY10) 

•Assessment of plans to encourage 
and regulate child care facilities for 
children under 3 years of age to 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
•Policy options for the 
restructuring of farmers’ pension 
system. 

•Policy options for bringing 
special-scheme pensions in line 
with the main pension system 
identified and implementation 
started. Increase in minimum 
years of service to qualify for 
pension for police/military from 
15 years to 20 years, and the 
introduction of the minimum 
retirement age of 50. 

employment promotion and labor market 
institutions, pursuant to which the level of 
unemployment benefit is reduced after 
three months in order to encourage the 
unemployed to seek a job immediately after 
their registration. 

improve incentives for women to 
participate in the labor market (TA)  

•Training for government officials 
on World Bank simulation tool for 
pension reform (PROST) (TA) 
(FY10) 

•Adoption of regulation of Temporary 
Work Agencies to enable more employers 
to use TWA services 

•Parliament adoption of law on childcare 
to improve incentives for women to 
participate in the labor market and enable 
more flexible forms of child care facilities, 

•Government resolution to increase 
amount of means-tested child benefits by 
average forty percent (PL3 prior action) 
• Adoption of law on foster care to move 
from institutional to household-based care. 

•Enactment of the law on bridging 
pensions reducing the number of people 
eligible for early retirement from 1.7 
million to 300,000 (PL2 prior action) 
•Enactment of law on reducing 
contribution fees charged by PTE to OPF 
members from 7 to 3.5 percent (PL3 prior 
action) 

•Preparation of draft legislation on uniform 
pensions to bring pensions for uniform 
services more in line with the main pension 
system. 

Education: 
•Successful implementation of 
higher education reform; better labor 
market outcomes for the young. 

Education: 
•Successful implementation of 
higher education reform, in 
particular: implementation of 
pro-quality financing system, 
including financial support for 
entities which obtain the status of 
National Leading Scientific 
Center (Krajowy Naukowy 
Osrodek Wiodacy, KNOW); free 

Education: 
•Completed legislative work on Act: Higher 
Education Law, which envisages, among 
other solutions: implementation of pro-
quality financing system, including financial 
support for entities which obtain the status of 
National Leading Scientific Center (Krajowy 
Naukowy Osrodek Wiodacy, KNOW); free 
of charge education on second and more 
faculty in a public university for students, 

Education: 

Lending:  

•DPL1-DPL3 (FY09-11) 

AAA:  
•Regional conferences on higher 
education reform (TA) (FY10) 
•Policy advice on linkages between 
science curricular and development 
of human capital for research, 

12 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
•Improved student learning 
outcomes in Math, Science and 
Reading in PISA 2009 and increased 
participation rates in pre-primary 
and upper-secondary education. 

of charge education on second 
and more faculty in a public 
university for students, who 
receive Rector’s scholarship for 
best students; precise definition 
of the catalogue of free of charge 
educational services provided to 
students by tertiary schools. 

•Increased pre-school 
participation rates among 
children aged 5 years from the 
2008/09 level of 74.8% .  

who receive Rector’s scholarship for best 
students; precise definition of the catalog of 
free of charge education services provided to 
students by tertiary schools. 

•Average PISA score increased marginally 
from 500 points in 2006 to 501 in 2009 
(math performance unchanged at 495,  
reading score declined from 508 points to 
500, and science increased from 498 to 508).  

science and technology (TA) (FY10) 
•Policy notes on enhancing teacher 
performance and assessing the 
quality of educational services at 
higher education institutions (ESW) 
(FY10) 
•Fueling Growth and 
Competitiveness in Poland Through 
Employment, Skills, and Innovation 
(ESW) (FY11) 

•Enactment of law to initiate compulsory 
pre-primary program for 5 yr-olds (Grade 0) 
starting from 2011/12 and begin 
implementing on a voluntary basis in 
2009/10. The same law initiates a 
compulsory school program for 6 yr-olds 
from 2012/13 (PL2 prior action). Enrollment 
rate of 5-yr olds increased from 57.8% in 
2007 to 74.8% in 2008/09. 

Health:  

Health: 

Health: 

•Improved efficiency of hospitals 
and rationalized service delivery 
network to allow reallocation of 
resources towards primary and 
preventive care. 
•Debt of corporatized hospitals 
reduced to 7.5% of total annual 
revenues by December 2010.  

•Improved efficiency of hospitals 
and rationalized service delivery 
network through implementation 
of DRG system. By end-2010, 
90% of hospitals to be covered by 
DRG system. 

•60 hospitals corporatized under 
Commercial Code by end- 2010. 

•DRGs fully implemented in 2010. 

•Data not yet available but planned central 
government transfers to support restructuring 
of hospitals on track. 

Health: 

Lending:  

•DPL1-DPL3 (FY09-10) 

AAA/ TA:  

•Paper on fiscal implications of 
demographic change on long-term 
care (ESW) 
•Workshop on PPP in health sector 
for Mazowieckie voivodship (TA) 

Government objectives: 

2: Regional Development 

 
Improve the condition of technical infrastructure (National Development Strategy 2007-2015 – Priority 2) 
 Support to regional convergence of Eastern Poland as defined in NSRF 2007-13 
 Regional development and raising of territorial cohesion (National Development Strategy 2007-2015 – Priority 6) 
 New National Strategy for Regional Development 2010-2020; Regions, Cities, Rural sets following objectives: 
1. 
 increase competitiveness of regions ( through reducing persistent underutilization of growth potential) 
2. reduce development disparities between and within regions.  
3. strengthen governance (multi-level governance). 

13 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CPS objectives: to provide advisory, technical and financial assistance in supporting internal convergence, including financial assistance in the context of Eastern 
Poland Operational Program. 

Expected Outcomes/Outputs 
•Improved capital investment 
planning and debt management in 
major cities (support for alleviation 
of urban infrastructure bottlenecks, 
including climate change agenda) 

• More strategic allocation of EU 
funds  

•Improved utilization of EU funds 
through capacity building and co-
financing 

• Improving understanding of 
tradeoffs in regional policy 

Revised 
Expected Outcomes/Outputs 
•Improve planning and debt and asset 
management, as reflected by Bank 
staff assessments of medium-term 
debt management strategies for 
selected bigger cities. 

•Increase technical capacity of 
selected regional governments to 
design and improve strategy design, 
planning and implementation, and 
reduce development obstacles in key 
economic sectors at regional level 
reflected in a positive assessment of 
the European Commission on 
Regional Operational Programs 
derived from regional development 
strategies. 

Progress To Date 
•Significant progress with the adoption 
of various laws streamlining the 
investment process on public roads, 
improving public-procurement 
procedures and aligning Polish 
legislation on environmental protection 
rules with EU. Cost-benefit analysis of 
projects has been strengthened, 
including in transport infrastructure 
making it easier to prioritize projects. 

•Poland absorbed all EU funds 
available for 2004-06 (by the end of 
2009 as allowed) and advanced 
absorption of funds for 2007-13 (about 
60 percent of funds available have been 
already contracted). 

•Development of new national strategy 
for Regional development in line with 
new EU approach. 

WB program (realized/Italics indicate 
not planned in CPS) 
Lending: 
•Planned subnational credit line 
through BGK or loans to selected 
lesser-developed subnationals 
(FY12/13)6 

AAA: 
•WDR 2009 discussions and follow-up 
activities (TA) (FY09/10) 
• Subnational Cooperation Action Plan 
2010-2012 (internal document) 
(FY09/10) 
•Public Expenditure Review of 
Mazowieckie Voivodship on capital 
investment planning, spending and 
debt management; also provides 
assessment of the broad policy mix for 
regional development within the 
region (ESW). (FY10) 
•Strategic planning of development, 
rehabilitation and maintenance of 
regional roads in Mazowieckie 
Voivodship (TA; FBS) (FY10) 
•Warsaw City policy notes on Public 
Transport Financial Sustainability, 
Metropolitan Institutions, and Public 
Land and Property Asset Management 
(ESW; part of loan preparation) 
(FY09/10) 
•Support for Regional Development 
Strategy (FY12/13) 
•TA for Land and Property Asset 
Management for 1-2 major cities, of 
which one is Lubelskie (FY13) 

6 Warsaw City Project planned in CPS was cancelled. 

14 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                  
 
CPS Pillar 2: Public Sector Reform 

1: Public Finance 

Government objectives: 
 
Implement task-budgeting, in particular 3-year task-based planning (and continue other institutional reforms to make the budget more transparent, 
predictable, and performance-oriented over the medium term) 
Improve public finance sector efficiency and public funds management; reduce fiscal deficit to enable a secure and sustainable fulfillment of the 
convergence criterion and euro adoption in Poland by 2012. (Implement fiscal consolidation strategy to enable a secure and sustainable fulfillment of 
the convergence criteria by 2012/13 for euro adoption in Poland) 

 

CPS objectives: To assist the Government in improving Public Financial Management systems 

Original  
Expected Outcomes/Outputs 

Revised 
Expected Outcomes/Outputs 

•Increased effectiveness and 
efficiency of public spending 
through introduction of 
performance-based budgeting 
•Improved prioritization between 
various types of expenditures and 
greater control of public finances in 
the context of fiscal constraints 
imposed by euro adoption plans.  

•No change 

• Improved prioritization between 
various types of expenditures and 
greater control of public finances in 
the context of fiscal constraints 
imposed by euro adoption plans, as 
assessed by the EU of Poland’s 
convergence programs. 

•Help Government to achieve its 

WB program (realized/Italics 
indicate not planned in CPS) 

Lending:  

•DPL1-DPL3 (FY09-10) 
AAA:  

•PER on PFM, public wages and 
social sector (ESW) (FY10) 
•EU10 fiscal study on performance-
based, medium-term budgeting 
(ESW)  
•Public Expenditure Review of 
Mazowieckie voivodship (ESW) 
(FY10) 
•Tax expenditure workshop (TA)  

•Social spending incidence analysis 
(TA) 

Progress To Date 

•Enactment of new Public Finance Act 
in 2009 to strengthen transparency, 
efficiency and quality of budget process 
through medium-term fiscal framework 
and performance-based-budgeting, 
enhanced debt safety procedures, 
strengthened control and internal 
budget audit, and increased budget 
transparency through consolidation of 
some budgetary units and separate 
budgeting of EU funds. 

In addition, government has made 
progress in public finance through: 
•Amendment to Public Finance Act to 
improve liquidity management, 
introduce a fiscal rule on discretionary 
expenditures, make fiscal impact 
assessment of new legal initiatives 
compulsory and introduce a VAT 
increase if debt-to-GDP exceeds 55%.  
•2011 state budget incorporates fiscal 
consolidation measures, including a 
freeze in the central govt wage bill and 
a 1 percentage point increase in VAT.  
•Parliament approval of law to 
rationalize employment in state budget 
units and other public entities in 2011–
13 to reduce employment by 10% 

15 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
fiscal deficit target of “close to” 3 
percent of GDP in 2012 through 
strengthening its fiscal responsibility 
framework (indicator: introduction of 
permanent fiscal rule for the Central 
Government). 

relative to Q2 2010. 

•Fiscal deficit increased to 7.9% of 
GDP in 2010 but is targeted to decline 
to 5.6% of GDP in 2011 and 2.9% of 
GDP in 2012.  

CPS Pillar 3: Growth and Competitiveness  

1: Transport Infrastructure Development 

Government objectives: 
 Provide transport and other  infrastructure appropriate for the needs of modern economy  
 Create favorable regulatory and institutional environment for entrepreneurship, innovation and investment in transport 
 
Improve financial sustainability of the transport sector 
 
Improve the condition of technical infrastructure 

CPS Objectives: To provide support in developing and rehabilitating infrastructure to enhance private investment and productivity growth. 

Revised 
Expected Outcomes/Outputs 
•Contribution to the strategy for 
transport sector development 
(including climate change agenda and 
medium long-term financing). 

•% of roads in good condition 
improved from 49% (2005) to 60% 
and adequately maintained (2013) 

•Improved system of strategic and 
operational planning at central and 
subnational levels and programs for 
development/ rehabilitation of land 
transport infrastructure. 

•Improved legal framework and 
institutional capacity for preparation, 
implementation and monitoring of 
infrastructure projects. 

Expected Outcomes/Outputs 
•Contribution to the strategy for 
transport sector development (incl. 
climate change agenda). 

•Improved transport infrastructure 
and road safety. 

 •Increased efficiency of transport 
and reduced negative impact on the 
environment.  

•A system of strategic and 
operational planning and 
management program for the 
development and preservation of 
roads infrastructure; improved legal 
framework and institutional 
capacity for preparation, 
implementation and monitoring of 
transport infrastructure projects. 

•Contribution to development of 
system of high speed passenger 
railways in Poland, including 
technical, environmental, 
economic/ financial aspects and 
potential involvement of private 
sector partners. 

Progress To Date 
•Transport Sector Strategy is under 
preparation by Min of Infrastructure as 
part of the Natl Development Strategy. 

•Natl Motorway and Expressway 
program progressing resulting in over 
750 km of motorways in operation and 
further 500 km under construction 
Percentage of national roads in good 
condition increased from 52 to 58% 
from 2008-2010). 
Decline in road fatalities from 5500 
(2008) to 3900 (2010). 

•Special govt program of financial 
support to subnational roads since 2009 
(PLN 1 billion/ year). Progress in 
adoption of sustainable urban transport 
strategies in a number of big cities 
(including Warsaw & Poznan).  

•Railway sector reform aimed at 
improving competitiveness and 
financial sustainability of railway sector 
delayed. Feasibility study analyzing 
high speed railway potential in Poland 
is underway (financed by EU). 

16 

WB program (realized/Italics 
indicate not planned in CPS) 

Lending:  

• Two road rehabilitation loans 
completed in 2009 and a third one 
under implementation (closing in 
FY12) 
AAA:  
• Land Transport Policy Note (ESW) 
(FY11) 
• Mazowieckie region strategic 
transport planning (ESW/TA; FBS) 
(FY10)  
• Warsaw City sustainable transport 
policy notes (ESW) (FY10) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 •Increased involvement of private 
sector partners in maintenance and 
development of infrastructure and 
provision of public sector services. 

•Improved legal framework for private 
sector involvement in infrastructure 
adopted in 2009 (law on concessions in 
construction and services; PPP law). 

2: Private Sector Development 

Government objectives: 
 To provide favorable regulatory and institutional environment for entrepreneurship, innovation and investment. 

CPS objectives: to assist in improving business regulations in Poland and provide Government with global best practice in this area. 

Expected Outcomes/Outputs 

•New business regulations 
developed in line with global best 
practices.  

•The cost of SME registration and 
start-up and of obtaining licenses is 
reduced by 20% to below PLN 
10,000 by 2010. 

Revised 
Expected Outcomes/Outputs 

• Regulatory reforms facilitating 
business start-up, operations and 
licensing, and other business-to-govt 
requirements (taxes, closures, trade), 
have been made showing a reduction 
in time, cost and transactional steps. 
Indicators: cost of obtaining business 
licenses reduced by at least 20% from 
current levels (currently 122% of per 
capita income), and time to register 
property and close a business reduced 
by 20% to ≈120 days and below 2.5 
years, respectively, by 2012. 

• Programs to promote business 
innovation made more effective via 
further R&D resource allocations to 
such programs as measured by an 
increase in public R&D to GDP ratio 
from 0.68%; R&D for business/GDP: 
0.19%7 (2009); and orienting these 
towards commercialization of products 
in several sectors (indicator: patent 
applications submitted to US patent 
office increased from 8.91 per million 
inhabitants (2009)), as well as 
increasing R&D institute linkages with 
the business community.  

WB program (realized/Italics 
indicate not planned in CPS) 

Lending:  

•DPL1-DPL3 (FY09-10) 

AAA:  
• Improving the business regulatory 
environment in five Doing Business 
areas, where Poland lags behind the 
most: starting a business, property 
registration, paying taxes, enforcing 
contracts, and protecting investors 
(TA; FBS) (FY11) 
• Innovation TA (FY11-12) 

Progress To Date 

•Enactment of Law on Delivery of 
Services enhancing international 
competition in services in line with 
global best practice (EU Services 
Directive). 

• Govt approval of bill on Reduction of 
Administrative Barriers for Citizens and 
Entrepreneurs, which cuts red tape in 
almost 90 different pieces of legislation, 
reduces number of licenses and permits, 
lowers administrative fees, and 
eliminates need for formal certificates 
of evidence in favor of voluntary 
declarations in contacts with public 
administration. Reduction in the SME 
start-up cost to about PLN 8,000 
(including paid-in capital). 

7 As reported by Eurostat 

17 

 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                  
 
CPS Pillar 4: Regional and Global Public Goods 

1: Energy and Climate Change 

Government objectives: 
 Comply with international and EU long-term policies on climate change mitigation and preserve energy security to households and enterprises (Ensure 
adequate energy supplies while meeting environmental targets, including climate protection; and comply with international climate policies and 
targets of the EU energy and climate change package 20-20-20) 
 Seek, elaborate and implement environment-friendly solutions (e.g. low-emission, energy-efficient material-saving production (National Reform 
Program for 2008-2011 – Innovative Economy Priority Measure 6) 
 Using innovation in terms of environmental protection (National Reform Program for 2008-2011 – Innovative Economy Priority Measure 6) 
 
Improvement of the condition of the technical infrastructure, incl. protection against natural disasters, in particular against floods and their effects, incl. 
activities of a legal and organizational character (National Development Strategy 2007-2015 – Priority 2e) 
 Reduce the energy intensity of the Polish economy to the EU-15 level by 2030 

CPS objective: to assist the Government in the area of mitigation and adaptation of the Polish economy to the challenges of climate change. 

WB program (realized/Italics 
indicate not planned in CPS) 
Lending: 
•GEF Energy Efficiency project 
(restructured). 
•Three ―greening‖ PCF projects in 
Stargard, Walbrzych and Puck. 
•Energy Efficiency/Renewable 
Energy DPL  (FY11) 
•Odra River Basin Project 

AAA: 
•Transition to a low-emissions 
economy (ESW) (FY11) 

Expected Outcomes/Outputs 
•Integrated climate change strategy 
to minimize costs and maximize 
potential benefits, given various 
carbon mitigation scenarios. 

•Increased public and private sector 
investments in energy efficiency in 
buildings. 

•Poland participates in the system 
of international emissions trading 
under the Kyoto Protocol; 
implementation of ―greening‖ 
programs supported by the 
revenues from the sale of assigned 
amount units (AAUs). 

Revised 
Expected Outcomes/Outputs 
•Improved energy efficiency (9% 
saving in final energy consumption in 
2008-2016)8. Progress in 2013 
measured by issuance of tradeable 
white certificates and their associated 
energy efficiency obligations. 

• Help Govt meet its target of 11% of 
final energy from renewable energy 
sources by 2013 from 8% in 2009. 

• Increased use of cogeneration to 
decrease total energy use. Indicator: 
Cogeneration 17% of total electricity 
supply by 2013 from 16% (2009). 

• Install 200,000 Smart Meters. 

Progress To Date 
•Parliament adoption of energy 
efficiency law. (EE DPL action) 

•Govt submitted National Renewable 
Energy Plan to the EC through a 
Council decision of December 7, 2010, 
thereby detailing its commitment of at 
least 15.5% of renewable energy use by 
2020. The Govt increased use of 
biomass and windpower 7-fold from 
2004-2009. 

•Govt provided incentives to increase 
share of cogeneration through issuance 
of Ordinance on Heat Tariffs of 
September 17, 2010 (EE DPL action). 

•Govt issued draft Regulatory 
Statement covering all key areas of 

8 Government committing only to the 2016 target, which is beyond the CPS period. 

18 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                  
 
•No change 

•Systems for flood/natural disaster 
insurance, preparedness and 
mitigation; spatial planning in flood 
plains. Protection of people and 
property in Odra River Basin 
against floods of 1997 magnitude 
by 2013. 

implementation of Smart Meters and 
through the SOE Energa has initiated 
implementation (EE DPL action) 

•Too early to assess 

Government objectives: 
 To safeguard the stability of the financial sector, including through strengthened domestic and pan-European regulations, improve access to 
financing, reduce financial exclusion, and promote capital markets development 

CPS objective: To support the Government in safeguarding the stability and promoting the development of the financial sector 

2: Financial sector stability and development 

Expected Outcomes/Outputs 

Revised 
Expected Outcomes/Outputs 

• Implementation of EU and G20 
mandated regulatory initiatives 
resulting in increases of bank core 
capital and counter cyclical loss 
reserves; improved supervision from 
FY11 ROSC from baseline: 
Capital/Asset ratio: 13.8%; Non 
performing loans: 8.8%; Loss 
Provisions/Non-performing loans: 
54.6% (Dec 31, 2010) 

• Increased capital market integration 
with pan-European securities 
markets and improved risk 
management of private pension assets  

Progress To Date 

• PFSA approved a new 
recommendation to tighten criteria for 
local and foreign currency consumer 
lending 
• The level of deposit guarantee was 
raised from EUR50,000 to EUR100,000 
in line with EU legislation.  
• Parliament adopted new legislation, 
currently under review by the Supreme 
Court, subordinating credit unions to 
the supervisory powers of the PFSA, 
reducing systemic risks. 

WB program (realized)/Italics 
indicate not planned in CPS 

AAA/ TA:  
• Credit union supervision 
(ESW/TA) (FY11) 
• ROSC (BCP/IAIS) (FY11) 
• Financial Sector Advisory TA 
(FY12) 

• Improved capacity to oversee and 
supervise credit unions in Poland’s 
regional banking services from 
baseline: Delinquent/Total Loans: 
12.7%; Net Profit/Asset ratio: -0.2% 
(March 31, 2010) 
Note: Text in italics denotes changes/additions from original CPS 

19 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Pillar/Theme 

Making Europe Work for Poland 

Policy Reforms for Europe 2020 and 
Convergence 

Complementing the EU Agenda 

Annex 2: CPS PR Pillars and Themes FY11-131, 2/ 

Regional Development Strategies 
Strengthening Subnational Inst & Capacity 

AAA 
Strategy for Human Capital Dev TA 

Lending 
-Municipal credit 
lines (FIL)1/ (B) 

AAA 
-Municipal finance 
ESW/TA (strategic) 
-Subnational Transport 
-Subnational Reg Dev 
strategies / PERs (FBS) 

Social Sector Reforms 
Lending 
AAA 
DPL series 
-Social Inclusion TA 
(closed) 
(FBS) 

Public Sector Reform: PFM / PAR 
Lending 
AAA 
-PARSP (ongoing) 
-PFM TA (ongoing) 
-Public finance/ 
-Admin reform TA 
Admin Reform 
(FBS) 
DPLs (A) 
Transport Policy & Inst Reform 
Lending  
Roads Rehab & 
Maint (ongoing) 

Pillar 1: Social and 
Spatial Inclusion 

 Social sectors reform  
 Regional development 

Pillar 2: Public Sector 
Reform 

 Public finance management 
 Public admin / governance 

Pillar 3: Growth & 
Competitiveness 

 Transport infrastructure 
development 
 Private sector development 

Transport Policy & Inst Reform 
Lending 
AAA 
Energy / Transport RBL 
Roads/rail reform TA 
(C) 
(FBS) 
PSD: Innovation and Skills 
AAA 
Innovation TA 
(ongoing; FBS) 
PSD: Business Envir & Deregulation 
AAA 
Doing Business  TA 
(FBS) 
Sustainable Energy Efficient Growth Climate 
Change  
Lending 
-Odra River (ongoing) 
-GEF Energy Efficiency 
(ongoing) 
 -Energy Efficiency 
/Renewable Energy 
DPL 
-IFC 

AAA 
-Low-Emissions 
CEM follow-up 
-Energy efficiency 
studies (ongoing) 
-Water/flood mgt TA 
(FBS) 
-Financial Reporting 
TA Program 2010-
2015 (ongoing) 

Pillar 4: Regional and 
Global Public Goods 

 Climate change and energy 
 Financial sector stability 

Financial Sector Regulation 

1/ Subject to confirmation following general elections in October 2011. 
2/ Excludes regional work that generally includes Poland. A: Very likely; B: likely; C; possible 

20 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annex 2b: CPS PR: Tentative Program FY11-13 1/ 2/ 

LENDING 

$ 

FY 

  AAA 

Theme 1: Making Europe Work for Poland 

Municipal credit line (FIL)1(B) 

500 

FY12 

  Municipal finance ESW/TA 

Municipal credit line (FIL)2 (B) 

250 FY13/14 

  Subnational transport ESW 

FY 

FY12 

FY12 

Theme 2: Policy Reforms for Europe 2020 
and Convergence 

Energy Efficiency and Renewable 
Energy DPL 

1000 

FY11 

Energy/transport RBL (C) 

500 FY12/13 

  Subnational RDS/PER (FBS) 

FY12/13 

Innovation TA (ongoing; FBS) 
Strategy for Human Capital 
Development  TA 
Energy efficiency studies 
(ongoing) 

  Doing Business TA (FBS) 
Low-emissions CEM follow-up 
TA 

  Roads/railways reform TA (FBS) 
Financial Reporting TA Program 
2010-2015 (ongoing) 

FY11 

     FY12 

FY11 

FY12 

FY12 

FY12 

FY16 

FY12 

  Public finance TA (ongoing) 

FY11/12 

FY13 

  Administrative reform TA (FBS) 

    FY12 

  Social Inclusion TA (FBS) 

FY12  

Theme 3: Complementing the EU Agenda 

PF/Adm Reform DPL1 (A) 

PF/Adm Reform DPL2 (A) 

Memo: total lending (mill. $) 

FY09 

FY10 

FY11 

FY12 

500 

250 

2500 

1250 

1000 

1250 

FY13 
1/ Subject to confirmation following general elections in October 2011. 
2/ Excludes regional work that generally includes Poland. (A): Very likely; (B): likely; (C): possible 

750 

21 

 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
  
  
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
Annex 3: Subnational Cooperation Action Plan (SCAP) 2010 -2012  

Background 

1 . Over the past couple of years, the World Bank has been increasing its cooperation w ith 
subnationa l governments in Po land.  This ref lects a number of factors: ( i) subnational governmen ts are 
responsib le for important social service delivery and infrastructure functions and accoun t for a substan tial 
share of pub lic spend ing; ( ii) many regions lag sign if ican tly in their economic developmen t relative to the 
national average and are therefore major recip ien t s of EU f inancial aid ; ( iii) regions are responsib le for 
their own development programs, and many cities also undertake longer - term developmen t p lann ing; and 
( iv) subnational governmen ts of ten also have less -developed institutional and techn ical capacity a s 
compared to the cen tral governmen t. 

2 . Initia l efforts to engage subnationa l partners focused on the capita l city , Warsaw , its surrounding 
reg ion, Mazow ieckie , as these are among the most developed and soph isticated subnational governmen ts 
and of ten serve as p ilo ts and examp les for o ther subnational governmen ts.  Recently the cooperation was 
expanded to Lubelskie Vo ivodesh ip, one of the least developed reg ions in Eastern Po land.  
3 . Looking ahead, World Bank cooperation with subnationa l entities in Po land w ill be guided by 
the Subnationa l Cooperation Action Plan for Po land for 2010 -2012 . The documen t proposes a 
strategic approach for developmen t of subnational cooperation in Po land and constitu tes the basis for the 
Bank’s activit ies in th is f ield over the next two to three years. 

Objectives  

4 . The main objective of the SCAP is to support susta inable socio -econom ic development of 
subnationa l governments in Poland through innovative knowledge -based and f inancial cooperation 
with regional and mun icipal au thor ities.  T he goal is to be ach ieved by prov id ing un ique, wor ld class non -
prof it expertise wh ich may be comb ined with f lex ib le, responsive and tailor -made f inancial suppor t.  T h is 
ob jective is fu lly in line with th e pr ior ities of the governmen t National Deve lopm en t S trategy 2007-2015. 

Proposed actions 

5 . Given its mandate, the World Bank a ims to target reg ions and cities w ith relatively low levels of 
income .  The extent of previous cooperation with the Bank and good institu tional con tacts, availab le 
f inancing, and po litical stab ility are also impor tant considerations.  The Wor ld Bank sees the fo llowing 
regions and cities as pr ior ity: Lub lin and Lubelsk ie reg ion, Rzeszów and Podkarpack ie region, B ia łystok 
and Pod laskie region, Wrocław and Do lnośląsk ie region, Warminsko -Mazurskie, and Katowice and 
Ś ląskie region.  

6 . The World Bank has identified the fo llow ing as priority serv ice areas, based on an assessmen t of 
needs/demand, value -added and un iqueness of services, and capacity to deliver , though th is list is non-
exhaustive and can evo lve over time. 
 
Infrastructure: pub lic transpor t includ ing metropo litan transpor t, regional / mun icipal s trategies of 
transpor t developmen t; roads managemen t, ( includ ing innovative PPP s) ;  
 Reg iona l development: regional developmen t strategies, terr itor ial and urban developmen t/p lann ing, 
mun ic ipal land and property asset managemen t; brownf ields redevelopment, mon itor ing and 
evaluation of EU fund s; 
 Public finance: Mun icipal f inancial and deb t managemen t, subnational Pub lic Expend iture Review s, 
Performance-Based Budgeting; and  
 Socia l sector: health sector, education, labor market ( includ ing innovative PPP s). 

Sources o f financing and moda lities o f cooperation  

22 

 
 
 
 
7 . The assumption of the SCAP is to prov ide development support to r eg ions / cities, ma inly 
through ana lytic and adv isory services, most likely on a fee or cost -sharing basis.  However, 
f inancial support is no t excluded.  

8 . In addition to regular Bank budget resources, the Bank’s ana lytical and adv isory work could be 
covered from the fo llow ing financing sources: (i) Po lish pub lic funds; ( ii) EU funds; and also possib ly 
from ( iii) b ilateral gran ts; and ( iv) in ternational f inancial institu tions (IF I) loans.  

9 . However, regardless the orig ins of funding , due to its unique character, the Bank cannot enter 
into competitive bidding for its serv ices .  Wh ile the Po lish Procuremen t Law does not clear ly exemp t 
the Bank from competitive b idd ing for advisory services (as it does for lend ing), the provis ions and 
pub lished op in ions does allow for th is both due to the presumed un iqueness of services provided and the 
specia l procedures of the Bank that prevent it from en ter ing in to competitive b id d ing.  In paralle l with the 
Po lish P rocuremen t Law, the Law on Ru les of Development Po lic y prov ides for a specia l procedure to 
select of par tners for jo in t imp lemen tation of a number of EU co - f inanced pro jects, namely the 
―partnersh ip agreemen t (pro ject)‖. In th is case, pub lic procurement ru les do no t app ly, i. e., there is no 
need for competitive b idd ing. 

Curren t experience and ma in conclus ions 
10 . AAA .  Recent and ongo ing support includes fee-based serv ice agreements w ith two Po lish 
reg ions: ( i) Mazow ieckie Vo ivodship in: (a) improvin g strateg ic p lann ing of developmen t, rehab ilitation 
and main tenance of regional roads on a fee-basis and (b) Pub lic Expend iture Review covered by the WB 
gran t; and ( ii) Lubelskie Vo ivodship ongo ing assistance in analyzing of current and fu ture developmen t 
of the Region and in reviewin g and advising on Regional Developmen t Strategy, provided on a cost -
shar ing basis with EU fund ing invo lved. 
11 . Despite some progre ss made in this area , a primary concern and one of the ma in stumbling 
blocks in developing FBS is Po lish procurement law constra ining sole -sourcing the Bank.  G iven the 
lack of system ic approach to procuremen t, it is treated on a case -by-case basis, so far effectively on ly by 
comb in ing FBS with Bank's own resources so that Bank’s advisory services are exemp ted from the Po lish 
procuremen t law.  Ano ther possib ility wou ld be to so le source the Bank, however , a prerequ isite i s a so lid 
justif ication of un iqueness of Bank's services. 

12 . Subnationa l Lending .  The most promis ing avenue for subnational lend ing cou ld be a line of cred it 
operated by BGK (Bank Gospodarstwa Krajowego).  However, a sovereign guaran tee requ iremen t, as 
well as modality of such an instrumen t and determin ing Po lish governmen t suppor t for subnational 
lend ing still remain issues.  Although IL for Warsaw infrastructure investmen ts was put on ho ld as it has 
tr iggered par i passu clauses with o ther IF Is (wh ich cou ld also be a case for some other Po lish cities) 
suppor t to specif ic subnational governments may be also tested, most likely using BGK as in termed iary. 

Cr itica l success factors  
13 . Successful operationalization and implementation of SCAP for Po land w ill depend on the 
Bank’s ability to match rea l priorities and needs of subnationa l partners w ith its own strong 
comm itment.  Cr itical internal success factors reinforcing the Bank’s engagemen t include the fo llow ing: 
- Ava ilab ility of h igh ly qualif ied techn ical staff for pro ject identif ication, imp lem en tation and quality 
assurance, ideally comb in ing both global and local exper tise; 
- Effective pro ject management and hand ling of relationsh ips with clien ts, preferab ly by locally based 
Bank staff pro ject coord inators. 

14 . However, effective realization of SCAP w ill a lso greatly depend on factors on a client side.  The 
fo llow ing external determinan ts are crucia l for successfu l imp lemen tation of SCAP: 
- Capacity of coun terparts to def ine developmen t programs, identify needs and areas for Bank assistance; 
- Estab lishmen t of close cooperation with the Bank and clien t responsiveness in order to facilitate the 
Bank to carry out advisory services; 
- Con tinu ity and stab ility of counterpar ts. 

23 

 
 
 
 
 
Annex 4: Summary of Recent Key Strategic Anal ytical Work 

Annex 4a: Transition to Low -Emissions Economy in Po land 

This report, part of the World Bank’s series of low -carbon grow th studi es, a ims to assess how 
Po land can move to a low -em issions development path w ithout sacrificing grow th and employmen t.  
The repor t notes that: 

 Po land can cu t its greenhouse gas emissions by almost a th ird by 2030 by app lying exist ing 
techno log ies, at an average cost of €10 to 15 per ton of carbon d ioxide equ ivalen t abated.  

 Costs to the economy w ill peak in 2020 ; but by 2030, the sh if t towards low emissions will augmen t 
growth.  Overall, th is abatemen t will lower GDP by an average one percen t through 2030 from where 
it otherwise wou ld have been. 
 The economic cost in ou tpu t and emp loymen t of Po land’s requ ired abatemen t by 2020 under EU ru les 
is h igher than for the average EU country; and the restr ictions on emis sions trad ing between sectors 
aggravate that cost.  
 The energy sector curren tly generates near half of Po land’s emiss ions; bu t the transpor t sector — with 
precip itous growth and the need for behavioral change in add ition to the adop tion of n ew techno log ies 
— may end up posing the tougher po licy challenge.  

A low -emissions grow th path appears to be particularly difficult for Po land. Po land’s economy 
remains today among the least emiss ions-eff ic ien t in the EU, and the coun try is a European and global 
ou tlier with more than 90 percen t of its electr icit y generated from locally -abundan t coal.  Yet, as an EU 
member, Po land must comp ly with EU energy and climate po licies.  O ver the next few decades, Po land 
faces the test of catch ing up to EU income leve ls wh ile simu ltaneously becoming less dependen t on 
abundant domestic coal for energy needs.  

The sw itch to low -em issions energy supply , end -user energy efficiency measures, and transport 
po licy w ill be the centra l pillars of Po land’s low -em issions strategy .  The power sector, as the dominan t 
source of today’s emissions, necessar ily must be addressed, bu t the sector’s large investmen t costs raise 
f inancing challenges wh ile long lead times guarantee that its structure will sh if t on ly slow ly.  With lower 
cap ital costs and ear lier returns, energy eff iciency measures ho ld out the promise of relative ly low cost 
abatemen t that works d irectly to delink emiss ions from growth, the essence of a low-emissions economy.  
Yet, the transpor t sector may prove the most challeng ing to ho ld emissions growth with in the EU target 
since most techno log ical so lu tions are already in p lace, leav ing po lic ymake rs with on ly behavioral 
so lu tions — such as getting peop le out of their cars and on to pub lic and non -motor ized transpor t— that are 
much more comp licated to imp lemen t.  

Po land’s transition to a low -em issions economy by 2030 seems to be affordable. However, captur ing 
the fu ll package of techno log ically fea sib le and economically sensib le abatement measures requ ires 
coord inated and ear ly action by the governmen t.  With an amb itious approach, Po land can aim to reduce 
its GHG emis sions by abou t one- th ird by 2030 (relative to 1990) at manageab le cost to incomes and 
emp loymen t.  S imilar ly, meeting the EU targets for 2020 appear generally feasib le for Po land at 
manageab le cost as well, albeit likely more challeng ing for less energy - in tensive sectors such as transport 
than for sectors that are covered by EU -wide carbon trad ing.   

The report has a lready made an impact.  One specif ic outcome of th is analy tic work is Bank support 
through the developmen t po licy operation for energy eff iciency po licy reforms in Po land. Moreover, Bank 
representatives were inv ited to partic ipate in the national Energy Round T ab le, a ser ies of h igh - level 
d iscussions on Po land's low carbon strategy.  Also, insigh ts from the study have been used by the 
governmen t in prepar ing its med ium - term and long-term economic strategies.  Last is the transfer of one of 
the models developed under the study to the government for add itional study of EU po lic ies and the use of 
ano ther of the models for more in-dep th analys is of energy eff iciency questions. 

24 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Annex 4b: Po land Transport Po licy Note—Toward a Susta inable Land Transport Sector 

Po land’s rap id economic growth since EU accession has translated in to a strong increase in freigh t and 
passenger traff ic, even above GDP growth.  Most of th is growth has been served by road transport desp ite 
the existence in Po land of one of the largest rail networks in the EU.  In sp ite of many positive 
deve lopmen ts, the country is still perceived by po tential investors as hav ing a poor qualit y of t ranspor t 
infrastructure.  Po land has made sign if ican t progress in develop ing land transport infrastructure over the 
last several years.  It has successfu lly seized the oppor tun ities from the accessio n to the EU and the large 
f inancial suppor t provided for developmen t of transport infrastructure.  For examp le, total road spend ing 
in Po land doub led from 2004 -2007 and almost doub led again in 2007-2010.  The resu lts of such large 
investmen ts are vis ib le mostly in the road sector, where the percentage of roads i n good cond ition 
increased from 49 in 2005 to near ly 60 in 2009 and absorption of EU funds under the curren t 2007 -2014 
program is well underway.  Current road -focused transport po lic y or ien tation is partly understandab le as 
the coun try still lacks a good b ackbone network of h ighwa ys, wh ile the surge in car ownersh ip and road 
traff ic have resu lted in strong demand for h igh quality infrastructure supporting pr imar ily road mob ility. 

Po land is still one of the worst EU performers in road in jur ies desp ite progr ess in legal regu lations, 
enforcemen t and education campaigns.  T he economic and social cost of road crashes is estimat ed at 1.5 
percen t of GDP or US$10 b illion a year. By approach ing road safety in it iatives more as investmen ts 
rather than just costs to th e budget, it was possib le to reduce the number of fatalities in Po land by over 25 
percen t in 2009 -10 to around 3900 in 2010.  To sustain th is positive trend, fur ther coord inated effor ts and 
sustainab le med ium–term fund ing wou ld be necessary.  F inally, the contr ibution of transpor t to CO2 
emiss ions has already reached around 12 percent with road transport represen ting 92 percen t of the sector 
emiss ions.  

Of the imbalances in the land transpor t sector wh ich need to be addressed in the shor t to med ium - term, 
the key ones are related to a relative ly low leve l of state fund ing for railways, resu lting in the need for a 
sign if ican tly larger share of user fund ing of the railway infrastructure compared to road users.  Ano ther 
one is the relative underfund ing of rev it alization and current main tenance of existing land transport 
infrastructure compared to modern ization and construction of new infrastructure.  The sustainab ility of 
road sector f inancing, wh ich depends largely on EU structural funds and debt, is also a mat ter of concern. 

On the d iscrepancy between investmen t in new infrastructure on the one hand and revitalization and 
main tenance of the infrastructure on the o ther hand, we belie ve there is a lo t to be gained from adop ting a 
life-cycle approach to transpor t infrastructure and assur ing suff icien t med ium - term fund ing for reducing 
the back log in rehab ilitation of existing infrastructure as well as proper curren t and per iod ic main tenance 
of newly developed infrastructure.  

Wh ile the current transport po lic y or ien tation of the governmen t seems to focus on improvemen t of road 
mob ilit y, changes are needed in the transport po licy in order to align it wit h EU recommendations 
towards a more balanced and energy eff icien t sector and to overcome numerous other challenges .  T hese 
are mostly linked to fur ther reforms in railwa ys to improve eff iciency and competitiveness of th is 
transpor t mode and the need to focus atten tion on improving railway infrastructure. 

The repor t makes an attempt to identify some basic alternative po licy op tions and provides a general 
impact assessmen t using a simp lif ied simu lation too l developed as par t of the study.  T hese simu lations 
show that mod if ications are needed in the d irection of land transport po lic y, includ ing adoption of a 
med ium term f inancial strategy, fur ther institu tional strengthen ing and improvemen t in coord ination 
between d ifferen t stakeho lders and transpor t modes.  Delay ing these reforms wou ld be r isky.  The study 
suggests a number of pr ior ity actions to be considered by the gov ernment that shou ld lead to improved 
f inancial, economic, social and env ironmental sustainab ility of the Po lish land transpor t sector in the 
med ium- long term. 

25 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annex 4c: Poland Public Expenditure Review Analysis of Social and Public Wages 

This report looks at public spending on pensions, education, hea lth, social assistance, labor market 
programs, and public wages.  Presenting the f ind ings of a ser ies of stud ies and no tes comp iled since 
Apr il 2009, it h igh ligh ts how reformin g such spend ing, wh ich com pr ises abou t one quar ter of GDP, is 
essential for mitigating the impact of the economic cr isis and for transforming Po land from a welfare state 
to a workfare society in line with Governmen t’s V is ion 2030. 

The report has two main messages.  First, Poland c an take measures to reduce public expenditures 
on social sectors and public wages by around 2 .3 percentage po ints over the next three years .  Th is 
wou ld go a long way towards reducing the f iscal def icit from around 6 percen t of GDP in 2009 to below 3 
percen t of GDP in 2012, consisten t with the Maastr icht thresho ld and as advised by the European Council 
from Ju ly 2009.  The ad justmen t wou ld allow the Governmen t to main tain pub lic debt below the 
constitutional ceiling of 60 percen t of GDP and to aim for euro adoption by the midd le of the decade.  
Such f iscal conso lidation can be done wh ile main tain ing economic and social pr ior ity programs that 
mitigate the social costs of the cr isis and enhance growth prospects.  Delay in g the ad justmen t to latter 
years wou ld make the prob lem more d iff icu lt to address, raises the probab ilit y of new f iscal cr is is in the 
years ahead, and runs the r isks of constrain in g po licy f le xib ility in future. 

Second, beyond supporting the fisca l adjustment required in the context of the econ om ic crisis, 
public expenditure reforms can also help bring about structura l changes env isioned as part of the 
Government’s strategy for 2030 .  This vision entails a fundamental transformation to a workfare society 
in response to the challenges of globaliz ation, energy def iciency, climate change, and popu lation ag ing.  
The aim is to bu ild a competitive, innovative and energy eff icien t economy suppor ted by a well 
performing state for a socially and reg ionally cohesive society. 

This report prov ides a comprehensive assessment of Po land’s social sector and public wage po lices 
and lays out options for reform .  The summary report has f ive par ts.  The f irst par t lays ou t the 
macroeconomic con text.  It emphasizes that Po land has weathered the global economic cr isis remarkab ly 
well bu t that the recovery is likely to be feeb le and sub ject to uncer tain ty.  T he next par t d iscusses the 
f iscal fallou t of the cr isis and argues that pub lic expend iture reform shou ld be a crucial p illar for f iscal 
conso lidation.  Sections III to V contain the main f ind ings of the repor t.  Section III presen ts a list of 
impor tant reforms of pub lic expend itures on social sectors and wages in support of V is ion 2030.  Section 
IV simu lates the f iscal impact of pub lic expend iture reforms, with a par ticu lar focus on state budget 
expend itures.  The f inal section d iscusses how institu tional reforms i n the areas of med ium - term and 
performance-based budget can suppor t the reform agenda.  Vo lume 2 presents the detailed analyses of 
social sectors and institutional reforms of pub lic f inance. 

The ana lysis offers three orig ina l contributions to the debate o n public expenditure reform in 
Po land.  F irst, based on emp ir ical evidence from admin istrative and househo ld survey data, the repor t 
provides in -depth treatmen ts of the social sectors.  It takes stock of the ach ievements of the last years, 
presen ts ou tstand ing challenges and lays ou t po lic y op tions to support V is ion 2030, drawin g on exper ience 
in the cen tral Europe and elsewhere. Second, based on the Government’s latest macroeconomic 
framework, the report presen ts estimates of f isca l savin gs for specif ic pu b lic expend iture reforms.  Wh ile 
these calcu lations rely on a number of simp lifying assump tions, they relate pub lic expend iture reforms to a 
f iscal framework and provide order-of -magn itudes for potentia l savings.  Th ird, the repor t presen ts an 
action p lan to meet the goal of program -based budget appropr iations in f inancia l year 2013, as well as the 
new Mu lti-Year S tate F inancial P lan. 

26 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annex 4d: Europe 2020 Poland --Fueling Grow th and Competitiveness through 
Employm ent, Skills, and Innovation. 

This Report a ims to analyze how Po land could help offset a projected decline in potentia l grow th 
rate after the crisis and meet the Europe 2020 targets. Growth and competitiveness through 
emp loymen t, skills, and innovation and techno logy absorp tion are key issues to en ab le the EU to meet the 
targets set out in the Europe 2020 Strategy for Smar t, Sustainab le, and Inclusive Growth.  Po land has 
under taken impor tan t reforms in the f irst two areas, bu t it needs to go fur ther to sustain its impressive pre -
cr is is growth rates and meet the new targets on wh ich Po land still lags beh ind. 

The Report argues that accelerating post-crisis rate of grow th and meeting the EUROPE 2020 
targets could be achieved through reforms in three specific areas : ra ising employment, improving 
skills, and enhancing techno logy absorption and innovation.  

On ra ising employment, the report argues that although labor market cond itions have substan tially 
improved in Po land in recen t years, the curren t emp loymen t rate of 65 percent  is still less than the EU 
average and well below the Europe 2020 target.  Raising the emp loymen t/popu lation ratio is thus one of 
the key challenges that Po land faces on the road to convergence to the income leve l of the EU -15. The 
report shows that reducing labor market inactiv ity of o lder workers wou ld yie ld par ticu lar ly substantial 
economic benef its. Ach ieving a h igher emp loymen t rate wou ld also be cr itical g iven popu lation agin g and 
the grow ing life expectancy.  

On improv ing skills, surveys ind icate that Po lish emp loyers see inadequate workforce skills as one of the 
main constrain ts to the activit y of their f irms, with innovative f irms tend ing to be more affected by sk ill 
shortages than trad itional f irms. T o reduce the skills mismatch in Po land, the key challenge go ing forward 
will be to increase the supp ly of tertiary students, wh ile ensur ing that they are ab le to acqu ire the key 
skills that emp loyers wan t. In add ition, it will be crucial to give greater access to adu lt learn ing 
opportun ities for those already in the labor market and those who are unemp loyed, bu t cou ld sh if t to 
d ifferent jobs requ ir ing d ifferen t skills.  F inally, Po lish h igher education will also need to offer the new 
skills that emp loyers seek as well as provide good qualit y vocational courses at the tertiary le vel.  

On enhancing techno logy absorption and innovation, the repor t argues that growth in Po land in the 
longer term will have to increasing ly rely on techno logica l change in add ition to factor accumu lation.  
The repor t shows that Po land ranks poor ly among EU coun tr ies with regard to the eff iciency of pub lic 
expend itures and that Po land has a large scope to increase the eff iciency of pub lic expend itures on 
Research & Developmen t (R&D ) before increasing its levels.  Further restructur ing of Research and 
Developmen t Institu tes (RD Is), enhancing in terest in innovation among Po lish f ir ms, and promo ting 
in ternational co llaboration on co-paten ts will be crucial to suppor t productiv ity -based growth. 

The Report prov ides a list of specific po licy recommendations for each of the three areas.  It 
recommends, for instance, to make further rev isions regard ing the access to social secur ity benef its so that 
they do not presen t a d is incen tive for labor market participation ; develop a learn ing ou tcomes approach 
for all levels of learn ing, with more emphasis p laced on gener ic skills as a basis for la bor mob ilit y; and 
reform the RD I f inancing system to strengthen app lied research and links with the needs of Po lish small 
and med ium en terpr ises and industry.  

27 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annex 5: Poland at a G lance  

CAS A2 

28 

Poland at a glance5/9/11 Key Development Indicators HighPolandincome(2009)Population, mid-year (millions)38.11,110Surface area (thousand sq. km)31335,527Population growth (%)0.10.7Urban population (% of total population)6177GNI (Atlas method, US$ billions)468.643,030GNI per capita (Atlas method, US$)12,28038,781GNI per capita (PPP, international $)18,44037,286GDP growth (%)1.80.5GDP per capita growth (%)1.7-0.2(most recent estimate, 2003–2009)Poverty headcount ratio at $1.25 a day (PPP, %)<2..Poverty headcount ratio at $2.00 a day (PPP, %)<2..Life expectancy at birth (years)7680Infant mortality (per 1,000 live births)66Child malnutrition (% of children under 5)....Adult literacy, male (% of ages 15 and older)10099Adult literacy, female (% of ages 15 and older)9998Gross primary enrollment, male (% of age group)97101Gross primary enrollment, female (% of age group)97101Access to an improved water source (% of population)..100Access to improved sanitation facilities (% of population)..99Net Aid Flows1980199020002009a(US$ millions)Net ODA and official aid–1,3201,3931,522Top 3 donors (in 2008):   n.a.––––   n.a.––––   n.a.––––Aid (% of GNI)–2.40.80.6Aid per capita (US$)–353640Long-Term Economic TrendsConsumer prices (annual % change)..585.510.13.5GDP implicit deflator (annual % change)..55.27.33.6Exchange rate (annual average, local per US$)..0.94.33.1Terms of trade index (2000 = 100)..1041001091980–901990–20002000–09Population, mid-year (millions)35.638.138.538.10.70.1-0.1GDP (US$ millions)..58,976171,263431,307..4.74.4Agriculture..8.35.03.6..0.50.8Industry..50.131.729.9..7.15.7   Manufacturing....18.516.7..9.98.5Services..41.663.366.5..5.13.8Household final consumption expenditure..48.063.160.5..5.23.6General gov't final consumption expenditure..19.318.519.2..3.74.2Gross capital formation ..25.624.820.2..10.65.9Exports of goods and services..28.627.138.9..11.39.1Imports of goods and services..21.533.538.9..16.78.0Gross savings..15.918.818.6      (average annual growth %)  (% of GDP)64202460-415-1930-3445-4960-6475-79percent of total populationAge distribution, 2008MaleFemale010201990199520002007PolandHigh incomeUnder-5 mortality rate (per 1,000)-10-8-6-4-2024689505GDPGDP per capitaGrowth of GDP and GDP per capita (%) 
 
 
 
 
 
29 

PolandBalance of Payments and Trade20002009(US$ millions)Total merchandise exports (fob)36,179135,811Total merchandise imports (cif)50,381145,151Net trade in goods and services-10,904358Current account balance-10,343-7,199   as a % of GDP-6.0-1.7Workers' remittances and   compensation of employees (receipts)1,4968,816Reserves, including gold27,46679,591Central Government Finance(% of GDP)Current revenue (including grants)38.136.7   Tax revenue19.820.3Current expenditure38.238.2Technology and Infrastructure20002008Overall surplus/deficit-3.0-7.1Paved roads (% of total)68.390.3Highest marginal tax rate (%)Fixed line and mobile phone   Individual..32   subscribers (per 100 people)46141   Corporate3019High technology exports   (% of manufactured exports)3.35.2External Debt and Resource FlowsEnvironment(US$ millions)Total debt outstanding and disbursed64,834195,201Agricultural land (% of land area)6053Total debt service10,15627,538Forest area (% of land area)29.830.4Debt relief (HIPC, MDRI)––Terrestrial protected areas (% of surface area)..24.3Total debt (% of GDP)37.945.3Freshwater resources per capita (cu. meters)1,4021,406Total debt service (% of exports)....Freshwater withdrawal (billion cubic meters)16.2..Foreign direct investment (net inflows)9,34316,974CO2 emissions per capita (mt)7.88.3Portfolio equity (net inflows)447559GDP per unit of energy use   (2005 PPP $ per kg of oil equivalent)5.16.1Energy use per capita (kg of oil equivalent)2,3172,547 World Bank Group portfolio20002009 (US$ millions) IBRD   Total debt outstanding and disbursed2,2291,655   Disbursements34931   Principal repayments199152   Interest payments12262 IDA   Total debt outstanding and disbursed––   Disbursements––Private Sector Development20002009   Total debt service––Time required to start a business (days)–32 IFC (fiscal year)Cost to start a business (% of GNI per capita)–17.9   Total disbursed and outstanding portfolio11138Time required to register property (days)–197      of which IFC own account9138   Disbursements for IFC own account85Ranked as a major constraint to business20002009   Portfolio sales, prepayments and   (% of managers surveyed who agreed)      repayments for IFC own account218      Tax rates..57.5      Access to/cost of financing..50.7 MIGA   Gross exposure20Stock market capitalization (% of GDP)18.331.4   New guarantees00Bank capital to asset ratio (%)7.17.9Note: Figures in italics are for years other than those specified.  2009 data are preliminary.5/9/11.. indicates data are not available.  – indicates observation is not applicable.Development Economics, Development Data Group (DECDG).0255075100Control of corruptionRule of lawRegulatory qualityPolitical stabilityVoice and accountabilityCountry's percentile rank (0-100)higher values imply better ratings20092000Governance indicators, 2000 and 2009Source: Kaufmann-Kraay-Mastruzzi, World BankIBRD, 1,776IDA, 0IMF, 0Other multi-lateral, 0Bilateral, 1,121Private, 150,221Short-term, 64,904Composition of total external debt, 2008US$ millions 
 
 
 
30 

Millennium Development GoalsPolandWith selected targets to achieve between 1990 and  2015(estimate closest to date shown, +/- 2 years)  Goal 1: halve the rates for extreme poverty and malnutrition1990199520002008   Poverty headcount ratio at $1.25 a day (PPP, % of population)   <2<2<2<2   Poverty headcount ratio at national poverty line (% of population)   ..14.614.8..   Share of income or consumption to the poorest qunitile (%)  9.28.27.97.3   Prevalence of malnutrition (% of children under 5)   ........Goal 2: ensure that children are able to complete primary schooling   Primary school enrollment (net, %)....9796   Primary completion rate (% of relevant age group)   98949596   Secondary school enrollment (gross, %)   8895100100   Youth literacy rate (% of people ages 15-24)100100100100Goal 3: eliminate gender disparity in education and empower women   Ratio of girls to boys in primary and secondary education (%)   100..9899   Women employed in the nonagricultural sector (% of nonagricultural employment)   ..474747   Proportion of seats held by women in national parliament (%)   14131320Goal 4: reduce under-5 mortality by two-thirds   Under-5 mortality rate (per 1,000)   1714107   Infant mortality rate (per 1,000 live births)   151286   Measles immunization (proportion of one-year olds immunized, %)95969798Goal 5: reduce maternal mortality by three-fourths   Maternal mortality ratio (modeled estimate, per 100,000 live births)   ......8   Births attended by skilled health staff (% of total)   ....100100   Contraceptive prevalence (% of women ages 15-49)   49......Goal 6: halt and begin to reverse the spread of HIV/AIDS and other major diseases   Prevalence of HIV (% of population ages 15-49)   ..0.10.10.1   Incidence of tuberculosis (per 100,000 people)   52513525   Tuberculosis case detection rate (%, all forms)81828179Goal 7: halve the proportion of people without sustainable access to basic needs   Access to an improved water source (% of population)........   Access to improved sanitation facilities (% of population)........   Forest area (% of total land area)   29.229.529.830.4   Terrestrial protected areas (% of surface area)......24.3   CO2 emissions (metric tons per capita)   9.19.07.88.3   GDP per unit of energy use (constant 2005 PPP $ per kg of oil equivalent)   3.03.55.16.1Goal 8: develop a global partnership for development      Telephone mainlines (per 100 people)   8.614.828.525.5   Mobile phone subscribers (per 100 people)0.00.217.5115.2   Internet users (per 100 people)   0.00.67.349.0   Personal computers (per 100 people)   0.82.96.916.9Note: Figures in italics are for years other than those specified.  .. indicates data are not available.5/9/11Development Economics, Development Data Group (DECDG).Poland025507510012520002002200420062008Primary net enrollment ratioRatio of girls to boys in primary & secondary educationEducation indicators (%)02040608010012014016020002002200420062008Fixed + mobile subscribersInternet usersICT indicators (per 100 people)02550751001990199520002007PolandHigh incomeMeasles immunization (% of 1-year olds) 
 
 
Annex 6: Selected Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance and Managem ent 

as of 3/16/2011 

CAS B2 

Indicator 
Portfolio Assessm ent 
Numbe r o f Pro jec ts Under Imp lementatio n  
Ave rage Imp lementat io n P erio d (yea rs)  
Percent o f Pro b lem P ro jects by Number  
Percent o f Pro b lem P ro jects by Amo unt  
Disbursement Ratio (% )  

a 

b 

a, c 
a, c 

d 

2008 

2009 

2010 

2011 

7 

3.4 
14 .3 
1.5 
  9 .7 

5 

2.7 
40 .0 
11 .1 
26 .8 

5 

3.5 
20 .0 
0.6 
10 .1 

4 

5.1 
25 .0 
2.4 
10 .7 

Portfolio Managem ent 
CPPR during the yea r (yes/no ) 
S upervisio n Reso urces (to ta l US$ ) 
Ave rage S upervisio n (US$/p ro jec t) 

N 

660,674 
94 ,382 

N 

648,027 
129,605 

N 

422,882 
84 ,576 

N 

340,709 
85 ,177 

Memorandum Item 
Pro j Eva l by OED by Numbe r 
Pro j Eva l by OED by Amt (US$ mi llio ns ) 
% o f OED P ro jec ts Ra ted U o r HU by Number 
% o f OED P ro jec ts Ra ted U o r HU by Amt 

Since FY 80 
44 
4,699.2 
20 .5 
11 .2 

Las t Five FYs 

7 

854.4 
28 .6 
11 .3 

a.  As sho wn in the A nnua l Repo rt o n Po rtfo lio P erfo rmance (excep t fo r current FY). 
b.  Average age o f p ro jec ts in the B ank's co unt ry po rtfo lio . 
c.  P e rcent o f pro jects rated U o r HU o n deve lo pment o b jectives (DO ) and /o r im p lementatio n p rogress (IP ). 
d.  Ra tio o f disbursements during the yea r to the und isbursed ba lance o f the B ank's po r tfo lio at the 
     beginning o f the year : Investment pro jects o nly . 

*   A ll ind ica to rs a re fo r p ro jects active in the Po rtfo lio , with the exceptio n o f Disbursement Ra tio , 
    whi ch inc ludes a ll active p ro jects as we ll as pro jects which exited dur ing the f isca l yea r. 

31 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Annex 7: IBRD Program Summary 

as of 3/16/2011 

Proposed IBRD Base-Case Lending P rogram  

Fiscal year 

Proj ID 

2011 

2012 

2013 

PL ENERGY EF FICIENCY DPL 

Munic ip al Cred it Line (FIL ) 1 

PF/ Adm Reform  

Munic ip al Cred i L ine (FIL) 2 
Ene rg y/Ro ads Res ults B ased Le nding *  
PF/Adm R eform DPL2 

*F Y12 or F Y13 

Total 

US$(M) 

 1,000 .0 

 500.0 

 500.0 

 250.0 
 500.0 
 250.0 

 3,000 .0 

CAS B3 

Stra tegic Rew ards b  
(H/M/L) 

Im plem entation b   
Risks (H/M/L) 

H 

H 

H 

H 
M 
H 

M 

H 

M 

H 
M 
M 

Annex 8: IFC Investm ent Operations Program 

32 

 2008200920102011*Original Commitments (US$m)IFC and Participants12.2514.73IFC's Own Accounts only12.2514.73Original Commitments by Sector (%)- IFC Accounts onlyFINANCE & INSURANCE100100Total01001000Original Commitments by Investment Instrument (%) - IFC Accounts onlyEquity45.17Loan54.83Quasi loan100Total01001000* Data as of March 01,2011 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
Annex 9: Summary of Analytical and Advisory Assistance 

Product 

Completion FY 

Cost (US$000 ) Audience a 

CAS B4 

Objective b 

229 
164 

80 
210 
102 
290 
248 
60 
92 
38 
858 

15 

147 
34 

28 

135 

52 

77 

130 

20 

tbd 
25 
tbd 
tbd 
tbd 
tbd 
tbd 

Gov 
Gov 

Gov 
Gov 
Gov 
Gov 
Gov 
Othe r 
Gov 
Gov 
Gov 

Gov 

Gov 
Gov 

Gov 

KG/PS 
KG/PS 

KG/PS 
KG/PS 
KG/PS 
KG/PS 
KG/PS 
KG/PS/PD 
KG/PS 

KG/PD/PS 

KG/PS 

KG/PS 
KG/PS 

KG/PS 

Gov 

KG/PD/PS 

KG/PS 

KG/PD 

KG/PS 

KG/PS 

Gov 

Gov 

Gov 

Gov 

Gov 
Gov 
Gov 
Gov 
Gov 
Gov 
Gov 

Recent comple tions 
TA on Regional Roads Mazovieckie 
Voi vodship (FBS) 
Education Refo rm in Poland TA 
Regulato ry, Business Environment 
and State Cont rol Refo rm 
Poland Transpo rt Policy No te 
Warsaw City Policy Note 
PEIR Update 
Mazow ieckie region PE IR 
Regional Development 
Pri vate & Financial Sector TA 
Tax E xpenditu re Report TA 
Poland Low Em issions Study 

FY10 
FY10 

FY10 
FY10 
FY10 
FY10 
FY10 
FY10 
FY11 
FY11 
FY11 

FY11 

FY11 

FY11 

Underway 
Training o f Supreme Audit Institution  
(SA I0 
Poland Health & SP Technical Cooperation FY11 
Public Finance TA 
FY11 
Lubelskie: Support for Regional 
Development Strategy 
TA for Innovation, Know ledge and  
Competitieness (EU) accession 
countries) 
TA Program of Technical Coope ration 
in Pensions Policy in New EU 
Member States and C roatia (EU 
accession countries) 
ROSC - Financial Sector 
Assessment Program 
Strategy fo r Human Capital  
Development          
Use of Country S ystems for 
Procurement in Poland 
Financial Repo rting TA Prog ram 2010 -2015  
Planned 
Municipal Finance 
Subnational Transpo rt 1 
Monitoring & E valuation TA (FBS ) 
Low em issions CEM follow -up TA 
Roads/Railways Reform TA (FBS ) 
Adm inistrative Refo rm TA (FBS) 
Subnational  RDS/PeR (FBS) 
____________ 

FY12 
FY12 
FY12 
FY12 
FY12 
FY12 
FY12 

FY12 
FY16 

FY11 

FY11 

FY12 

a.  Government , do no r, Bank, pub lic dissemina tio n. 
b.  K no wledge gene ratio n, pub lic debate, pro b lem -so lving . 

33 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Annex 10: Poland Social Indicators 

CAS B5 

Latest single year 

1980-85 

1990-95 

2002-08 

Same reg ion /income group 
Europe & 
Up per - 
Central 
midd le - 
As ia 
income 

POPULAT ION   
Total pop ulatio n, mid -ye ar (mi ll io ns) 
    G ro wth rate (% annual ave rage for pe riod ) 
Urb an pop ulatio n (% of po p ulatio n) 
Total fert ili ty rate (bi rths per wom an) 
POVERT Y 
(% of population) 
Natio nal he adco unt inde x 
    Urb an he adco unt inde x 
    R ural he adco unt inde x 
INCOME 
GNI per c api ta (US$) 
Cons ume r p rice inde x (2000 =100) 
Food pr ice inde x (2000=100) 
INCOME/CONSUMPT ION D IST RIBUT ION 
Gini inde x 
Lowes t q uint ile (% of incom e o r co ns umpt io n) 
Hig hest q uinti le (% of income o r co ns ump tio n) 
SOC IAL INDICATORS 
Public expend i ture 
    He alth (% of GDP) 
    Ed uc atio n (% of GDP) 
Ne t pr imary schoo l enro llmen t rate 
(% of age g roup ) 
    To tal 
        Male 
        Fem ale 
Access to an improved wa ter source 
(% of population) 
    To tal 
        Urb an 
        R ural 
Immun izat ion ra te 
(% of chi ldren ages 12 -23 m onths) 
    Me as les 
    DPT 
Child m alnut ri tio n (% under 5 ye ars) 
Life expec tancy a t birth 
(years ) 
    To tal 
        Male 
        Fem ale 
Mortali ty 
    I nfant (per 1 ,000 live b ir ths ) 
    Unde r 5 (per 1,000) 
    Ad ult (15 -59 ) 
        Male (pe r 1 ,000 pop ulatio n) 
        Fem ale (pe r 1,000 pop ulatio n) 
    Mate rnal (modeled , p er 100,000 l ive b ir ths) 
Bir ths atte nded b y s k illed he alth staf f (%) 

37.2 
0.9 
59.9 
2.3 

.. 
.. 
.. 

.. 

0 
0 

25.2 
9.8 
35.0 

.. 
4.8 

.. 
.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 
.. 

92 
94 
.. 

71 
67 
75 

18 
20 

253 
105 
.. 
.. 

38.6 
0.2 
61.5 
1.6 

23.8 
.. 
.. 

2,970 
48 
62 

32.4 
6.5 
38.9 

.. 
4.4 

.. 
.. 
96 

.. 
100 
.. 

96 
96 
.. 

72 
68 
76 

12 
14 

250 
94 
.. 
.. 

38.1 
0.0 
61.3 
1.4 

.. 
.. 
.. 

11,730 
108 
103 

34.9 
7.3 
42.4 

4.6 
5.7 

96 
95 
96 

.. 
100 
.. 

98 
99 
.. 

76 
71 
80 

6 
7 

209 
80 

8 

100 

443.3 
0.1 
63.7 
1.8 

.. 
.. 
.. 

7,350 
133 
.. 

.. 
.. 
.. 

3.7 
4.5 

92 
93 
92 

95 
99 
88 

96 
96 
.. 

70 
66 
75 

19 
22 

305 
126 
45 
97 

949.3 
0.8 
74.8 
2.0 

.. 
.. 
.. 

7,852 
121 
.. 

.. 
.. 
.. 

3.5 
4.6 

94 
94 
93 

94 
98 
82 

93 
92 

4 

71 
68 
75 

19 
23 

210 
127 
110 
95 

No te: 0 or 0.0 me ans zero o r less than half the uni t s ho wn. Net e nro llme nt rate : b re ak in se ries betwee n 1997 and 1 998 d ue to 
change f rom ISCED76 to ISCED97. Imm unizat io n: refe rs to c hi ldre n ages 12 -23 mo nths who received vacc inatio ns before o ne 
ye ar of age or at any time b efore the s urve y. 
World De velopme nt Ind ic ato rs d atab ase, Wor ld B ank - 23 Apr il 2010. 

34 

 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Annex 11: Key Econom ic Indicators 

CAS B6 

35 

EstimateIndicator200520062007200820092010201120122013National accounts (as % of GDP)Gross domestic producta100100100100100100100100100   Agriculture544444433   Industry313132323232303030   Services656564656565676767Total Consumption818178808080817978Gross domestic fixed investment182022222118192020   Government investment455566765   Private investment141517171513131415Exports (GNFS)b374041404042414142Imports (GNFS)384244444043424343Gross domestic savings181819191818202122Gross national savingsc181718181718192021Memorandum itemsGross domestic product 303976341670425321529401431184468476531981580227630587(US$ million at current prices)GNI per capita (US$, Atlas method)728083409800118701219012420134701492016440Real annual growth rates    Gross domestic product at market prices3.66.26.85.11.73.84.04.03.7Real annual per capita growth rates    Gross domestic product at market prices3.76.36.85.11.63.84.14.24.0   Total consumption2.85.34.76.12.03.33.53.72.4   Private consumption2.15.15.05.72.03.23.94.04.4Balance of Payments (US$ millions)  Exports (GNFS)b112653138060174251213976171071194747215974238652262517      Merchandise FOB96395117269144787176458141309161779190456215632244399   Imports (GNFS)b114681144330186550234942170631199229223336247009270228      Merchandise FOB99161124219161699202329145616170203201978228860257074  Resource balance-2028-6270-12299-20966440-4482-7361-8358-7711  Net current transfers818364928480806866276195881187318970  Current account balance-3716-9225-20094-25533-9055-15385-18096-20968-21580  Net foreign direct investment6951108211807810299858349831016785998450  Long-term loans (net)4059-3674627352042644892379433483153    Official-7514-1976-2533-901919812858202721241949    Private11573160971601253922832034176712241204  Other capital (net, incl. errors & ommissions)84114431021480111098621237262312555722652  Change in reservesd-8135-2672-128253703-14778-15727-22096-16536-12675Memorandum itemsResource balance (% of GDP)-0.7-1.8-2.9-4.00.1-1.0-1.4-1.4-1.2Actual     Projected 
 
 
 
 
 
 
36 

Actual     EstimateProjectedIndicator200520062007200820092010201120122013Public finance (as % of GDP at market prices)e  Current revenues38.839.739.839.136.836.839.339.938.9  Current expenditures39.039.037.337.838.240.239.137.937.3  Current account surplus (+) or deficit (-)-0.20.72.51.3-1.5-3.40.22.01.6  Capital expenditure4.44.84.85.56.35.66.65.84.9Monetary indicators  M2/GDP43.446.747.752.253.654.8......  Growth of M2 (%)13.116.013.418.68.18.3......  Private sector credit growth /105.3105.9108.0102.872.584.6......  total credit growth (%)Price indices( YR02 =100)  Merchandise export price index..................  Merchandise import price index..................  Merchandise terms of trade index..................  Real exchange rate (US$/LCU)f136.3139.4144.7159.3135.0143.5......  Consumer price index  (% change)2.11.02.54.23.52.63.52.82.5  GDP deflator (% change)2.61.54.03.13.61.33.32.62.5a.   GDP at factor costb.  "GNFS" denotes "goods and nonfactor services."c.  Includes net unrequited transfers excluding official capital grants.d.  Includes use of IMF resources.e.   Consolidated central government.f.  "LCU" denotes "local currency units." An increase in US$/LCU denotes appreciation. 
 
 
 
 
Annex 12:  Key Exposure Indicators 

CAS B7 

37 

Actual     EstimatedIndicator200520062007200820092010201120122013Total debt outstanding and 132927169636234052245496281094312214359088388752414464disbursed (TDO) (US$m)aNet disbursements (US$m)a29373670964416114443559831120468742966525712Total debt service (TDS)3742041772609367578682299988389379297387102698(US$m)aDebt and debt service indicators (%)   TDO/XGSb118.0122.9134.3114.7164.3160.3166.3162.9157.9   TDO/GDP43.749.655.046.465.266.667.567.065.7   TDS/XGS33.230.335.035.448.150.843.440.839.1   Concessional/TDO...........................IBRD exposure indicators (%)   IBRD DS/public DS2.23.85.83.53.42.75.32.31.5   Preferred creditor DS/public   DS (%)c...........................   IBRD DS/XGS0.20.20.20.10.10.10.20.10.1   IBRD TDO (US$m)d179619611870177644935417624768077175      Of which present value of      guarantees (US$m)...........................   Share of IBRD portfolio (%)...........................   IDA TDO (US$m)d..................IFC (US$m)   Loans...........................   Equity and quasi-equity  /c...........................MIGA   MIGA guarantees (US$m)...........................a.  Includes public and publicly guaranteed debt, private nonguaranteed, use of IMF credits and net short-     term capital.b.  "XGS" denotes exports of goods and services, including workers' remittances.c. Preferred creditors are defined as IBRD, IDA, the regional multilateral development banks, the IMF, and the    Bank for International Settlements.d. Includes present value of guarantees.e.  Includes equity and quasi-equity types of both loan and equity instruments.Projected 
 
 
 
Annex 13: IFC Comm itted and Disbursed Outstanding Investm ent Portfolio 

CAS B8 (IFC) 

38 

 As of 2/28/2011(In USD Millions)CommittedDisbursed OutstandingFY ApprovalCompanyLoanEquity**Quasi Equity*GT/RMPartici  pantLoanEquity**Quasi Equity*GT/RMPartici  pant1997Cpf00.2400000.140000Fm bank05.1414.660003.245.23002009Fundusz1.0800001.0800000Schwarz group22.48000022.480000Total Portfolio:23.565.3814.660023.563.385.2300* Denotes Guarantee and Risk Management Products.** Quasi Equity includes both loan and equity types. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annex 14: Portfolio (IBRD /Grants)  

CAS B8 

39 

Closed Projects47IBRD/IDA *Total Disbursed (Active) 287.44          of which has been repaid 0.00Total Disbursed (Closed) 4,985.68          of which has been repaid 2,605.42Total Disbursed (Active + Closed) 5,273.13          of which has been repaid 2,605.42Total Undisbursed (Active) 183.40Total Undisbursed (Closed) 0.00Total Undisbursed (Active + Closed) 183.40Active ProjectsProject IDProject NameDevelopment ObjectivesImplementation ProgressFiscal YearIBRDIDAGRANTCancel.Undisb.Orig.Frm Rev'dP070246ENERGY EFFICIENCY (GEF)MUU2005112.4449382.44493770.15P086768ODRA RIVER BASIN FLOOD PROTSMS2007184168.421764.220907P065270POST-ACC RUR SPPRTSS200688.89.756076-1.037561P096214ROAD MAINTENANCE & REHAB 3MSMS2006180.25.224612-10.69391Overall Result45311185.847354.9343740.15Supervision RatingLast PSR Original Amount in US$ MillionsDisbursements a/Difference BetweenExpected and Actual 
 
 
 
Plock
Plock
Plock
Wisla 
Wisla 

S
S

a
a

n
n

N o t e c 
N o t e c 

W a
W a

r t a
r t a

Tarnobrzeg
Tarnobrzeg
Tarnobrzeg
V ist ula 
V ist ula 

O
O

dra 
dra 

O
O

d
d

r
r

a
a

N
N

y
y

s
s

a
a

Warta 
Warta 

Wi
Wi

a
a
s
s

l
l

Bu
Bu

g 
g 

Nar e w 
Nar e w 

K U J AW S K O -
K U J AW S K O -
K U J AW S K O -
P O M O R S K I E
P O M O R S K I E
P O M O R S K I E

L Ó D Z K I E
L Ó D Z K I E
L Ó D Z K I E

L U B E L S K I E
L U B E L S K I E
L U B E L S K I E

LUBUSK IE
LUBUSK IE
LUBUSK IE

MAZOW IECK IE
MAZOW IECK IE
MAZOW IECK IE

O PO LSK IE
O PO LSK IE
O PO LSK IE

PODKAR PACK IE
PODKAR PACK IE
PODKAR PACK IE

P O D L A S K I E
P O D L A S K I E
P O D L A S K I E

P O M O R S K I E
P O M O R S K I E
P O M O R S K I E

W I E L K O P O L S K I E
W I E L K O P O L S K I E
W I E L K O P O L S K I E

ZACHODNIOPOMORSKIE
ZACHODNIOPOMORSKIE
ZACHODNIOPOMORSKIE

W A R M I N S K O -
W A R M I N S K O -
W A R M I N S K O -
M A Z U R S K I E
M A Z U R S K I E
M A Z U R S K I E

SW IE TOKRZYSK IE
SW IE TOKRZYSK IE
SW IE TOKRZYSK IE

S LASK IE
S LASK IE
S LASK IE

D O L N O S L A S K I E
D O L N O S L A S K I E
D O L N O S L A S K I E

MA LO PO LSK IE
MA LO PO LSK IE
MA LO PO LSK IE

Radom
Radom
Radom

Konin
Konin
Konin

Torun
Torun
Torun

Krosno
Krosno
Krosno

Tarnów
Tarnów
Tarnów

Kalisz
Kalisz
Kalisz

Leszno
Leszno
Leszno

Legnica
Legnica
Legnica

Sieradz
Sieradz
Sieradz

Siedlce
Siedlce
Siedlce

Suwalki
Suwalki
Suwalki

Koszalin
Koszalin
Koszalin

Wloclawek
Wloclawek
Wloclawek

Ciechanów
Ciechanów
Ciechanów

Jelenia
Jelenia
Jelenia
Góra
GóraGóra

Zielona Góra
Zielona Góra
Zielona Góra

Skierniewice
Skierniewice
Skierniewice

Piotrków
Piotrków
Piotrków
Trybunalski
Trybunalski
Trybunalski

Pila
PilaPila

Slupsk
Slupsk
Slupsk

Elblag
Elblag
Elblag

Ostroleca
Ostroleca
Ostroleca

Czestochowa
Czestochowa
Czestochowa

Nowy Sacz
Nowy Sacz
Nowy Sacz

,
,
Lomza
Lomza
Lomza

BialaBiala
Biala
Podlaska
Podlaska
Podlaska

ChelmChelm
Chelm

, ,
, ,
Zamosc
Zamosc
Zamosc

,
,
Przemysl
Przemysl
Przemysl

Bielsko-
Bielsko-
Bielsko-
BialaBiala
Biala

Walbrzych
Walbrzych
Walbrzych

OpoleOpole
Opole

Kraków
Kraków
Kraków

Kielce
Kielce
Kielce

Lublin
Lublin
Lublin

Rzeszów
Rzeszów
Rzeszów

Olsztyn
Olsztyn
Olsztyn

Katowice
Katowice
Katowice

Szczecin
Szczecin
Szczecin

Bydgoszcz
Bydgoszcz
Bydgoszcz

Bialystok
Bialystok
Bialystok

Gorzów
Gorzów
Gorzów
Wielkopolski
Wielkopolski
Wielkopolski

Lódz
Lódz
Lódz

,
,
Poznan
Poznan
Poznan

Wroclaw
Wroclaw
Wroclaw

WARSAW
WARSAW
WARSAW

RUSSIAN
RUSSIAN
RUSSIAN
FEDERATION
FEDERATION
FEDERATION

L I T H U A N I A
L I T H U A N I A
L I T H U A N I A

U K R A I N E
U K R A I N E
U K R A I N E

C Z E C H R E P U B L I C
C Z E C H R E P U B L I C
C Z E C H R E P U B L I C

S L O VA K R E P U B L I C
S L O VA K R E P U B L I C
S L O VA K R E P U B L I C

E
E
E
B
B
B

L
L
L

A
A
A

R
R
R

U
U
U

S
S
S

G
G
G

R
R
R
E
E
E

M
M
M

A
A
A

N
N
N

Y
Y
Y

To 
To To 
Berlin
Berlin
Berlin

To To 
To 
Berlin
Berlin
Berlin

To To 
To 
Berlin
Berlin
Berlin

To To 
To 
Dresden
Dresden
Dresden

To To 
To 
Prague
Prague
Prague

To To 
To 
Prague
Prague
Prague

To To 
To 
BrnoBrno
Brno

To To 
To 
Zvolen
Zvolen
Zvolen

To To 
To 
Kosice
Kosice
Kosice

To To 
To 
L'viv
L'viv
L'viv

To To 
To 
Kovel'
Kovel'
Kovel'

To To 
To 
Kovel'
Kovel'
Kovel'

To To 
To 
Vilnius
Vilnius
Vilnius

To To 
To 
GusevGusev
Gusev

To To 
To 
Pinsk
Pinsk
Pinsk

To To 
To 
Baranavichy
Baranavichy
Baranavichy

To To 
To 
Neubrandenburg
Neubrandenburg
Neubrandenburg

Gdynia

Gdansk´

B a l t i c 

S e a

Gu l f o f
Gdan s k

To 
Stralsund

Rysy
(2,499 m) 

54°N

52°N

50°N

5 0 ° N

5 2 ° N

5 4 ° N

18°E

20°E

22°E

24°E

16°E

14°E

18°E

20°E

22°E

24°E

POLAND

This map was produced by the Map Design Unit of The World Bank.  
The boundaries, colors, denominations and any other information
shown on this map do not imply, on the part of The World Bank
Group, any judgment on the legal status of any territory, or any
endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.

0

25

50

75

0

25

50

75 Miles

100 Kilometers

IBRD 33467R

MARCH 2007

P O L A N D

SELECTED CITIES AND TOWNS

PROVINCE (WOJEWÓDZTWO) CAPITALS

NATIONAL CAPITAL

RIVERS

MAIN ROADS

MAIN RAILROADS

PROVINCE (WOJEWÓDZTWO) BOUNDARIES

INTERNATIONAL BOUNDARIES

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
