d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

Document of  
the World Bank 

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 

Report Number:  61923 - MD 

INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION 

COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY PROGRESS REPORT 

FOR 

THE REPUBLIC OF MOLDOVA 

FOR THE PERIOD FY09-FY13 

May 12, 2011 

Ukraine, Belarus, Moldova Country Management Unit 
Europe and Central Asia Region 

International Finance Corporation 
Middle East, North Africa and Southern Europe Region 

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance of their 
official duties. Its content may not otherwise be disclosed without World Bank authorization. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS 
(Exchange Rate Effective March 31, 2011) 

Currency Unit = MDL (Moldovan Leu) 
US$1 = MDL11.9096 

GOVERNMENT FISCAL YEAR 
January 1 to December 31 

WEIGHTS AND MEASURES 
Metric System 

ABBREVATIONS AND ACRONYMS 

AAA 
AEI 
AF 
CEM 
CEP 
CPAR 
CPIA 
CPS 
CPSPR 
DFID 
DPO 
EBRD 

Analytical & Advisory Activities 
Alliance for European Integration 
Additional Financing 
Country Economic Memorandum 
Competitiveness Enhancement Project 
Central Public Administration Reform 
Country Policy and Institutional Assessment 
Country Partnership Strategy 
Country Partnership Strategy Progress Report 
UK Department for International Development 
Development Policy Operation 
European Bank for Reconstruction and 
Development 
EC 
European Commission  
EFA/FTI Education for All/ Fast-Track Initiative 
EIB 
European Investment Bank 
EU 
European Union 
ESRP 
Economic Stabilization and Recovery Program 
FDI 
Foreign Direct Investment 
FY 
Fiscal Year 
GAC 
Governance and Anti-Corruption 
GDP 
Gross Domestic Product 
GEF 
Global Environment Facility 
ICT 
Information and Communication Technologies 
IDA 
International Development Association  
IEG 
Independent Evaluation Group 
IFC 
International Finance Corporation 

IMF 
KfW 
MCC 
MDL 
NBM 
MIGA 
MDTF 
MSIF 
NPL 
PEFA 

International Monetary Fund 
KfW Entwicklungsbank 
Millennium Challenge Corporation 
Moldovan Leu 
National Bank of Moldova 
Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency 
Multi-donor Trust Fund 
Moldova Social Investment Fund 
Non-Performing Loans 
Public Expenditure & Financial 
Accountability 
Public Expenditure Review 
Public Financial Management 
Poverty Reduction Support Credit 
Rural Investment and Services Project 
Accounting and Auditing Report on the 
Observance of Standards and Codes 
Small and Medium-size Enterprises 
Swedish International Development  
Cooperation Agency 
TA  
Technical Assistance 
TF 
Trust Fund 
TSA 
Targeted Social Assistance 
UNDP 
United Nations Development Program 
UNICEF United Nations Children’s Fund 
USAID 
United States Agency for International 
Development 

PER 
PFM 
PRSC 
RISP 
ROSC 

SME 
SIDA 

The World Bank Group Team 

       IDA 

IFC 

Vice President 
Philippe H. Le Houerou 
Country Director 
Martin Raiser 
Task Team Leaders Connie Luff, Carolina Odobescu 

Vice President 
Rashad Kaldany 
Country Director 
Dimitris Tsitsiragos 
Task Team Leader Ana Maria Mihaescu 

i 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The Moldova CPS PR was prepared under the guidance of Martin Raiser, Country Director, with overall 
direction from Indermit Gill, ECA Chief Economist, and M. Willem van Eeghen, Lead Economist.  The core 
CPS PR team included Connie Luff, Ana Maria Mihaescu, Carolina Odobescu and Faith Tempest.  
Contributions are gratefully acknowledged from Melanie Marlett, Pablo Saavedra, Marius Vismantas, Paolo 
Belli, Tamara Sulukhia, Gerardo Corrochano, Peter Thomson, Mamta Murthi, Dina Umali-Deininger, Benu 
Bidani, Caroline Kende-Robb, Dino Merotto, Scherezad Latif, Rajeev Swami, Martin Melecky, Mariana Doina 
Moarcas, Wendy Jo Werner, Vara Vemuru, Kiran Pandey, Vica Rosario Bogaerts, Jock Anderson, Jyoti 
Bisbey, Luisa Masutti, Enver Kamal, Elmas Arisoy, Roumeen Islam, Tevfik Mehmet Yaprak, Abebe Adugna, 
Iryna Trach, Elena Kladova, Zoran Anusic, Julia Smolyar, Anatol Gobjila, Elena Corman, Sandu Ghidirim, 
Victor Neagu, Irina Guban, Ghenadie Cotelnic, Lilia Razlog, Iaroslav Baclajanschi, Felicia Pricop, Kristin 
Sinclair, and Sophia Georgieva.  Administrative support was provided by Olesya Gafurova, Ala Muntean and 
Valentina Golokoz. 

ii 

 
 
COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY PROGRESS REPORT 

REPUBLIC OF MOLDOVA 

TABLE OF CONTENTS 

I. 
II. 
III. 
IV. 
V. 
VI. 

Introduction ...................................................................................................................................... 1 
Relevance of the CPS....................................................................................................................... 2 
Country Context ............................................................................................................................... 3 
Results and progress towards achieving CPS objectives and outcomes .......................................... 5 
Post-crisis agenda and modifications to the CPS ............................................................................. 9 
Risks............................................................................................................................................... 12 

Tables and Figures 

Table 1. Pledges made at the Consultative Group: Moldova Partnership Forum (USD millions) ............... 7 
Table 2. CPS Progress Report Indicative Program for the period FY11-FY13 (USD million)* ................ 11 

Annexes 

ANNEX 1: CPS FY09-13 REVISED RESULTS MATRIX AND PROGRESS TO DATE ..................... 14 
ANNEX 2: LIST OF ACTIVE BANK-ADMINISTERED TRUST FUNDS IN MOLDOVA.................. 33 
ANNEX 3: DEVELOPMENT PARTNER COMMITMENTS BY SECTOR, CONSULTATIVE GROUP: 
MOLDOVA PARTNERSHIP FORUM, MARCH 2010 ............................................................................ 34 
ANNEX 4: STANDARD CPS ANNEXES ................................................................................................ 35 

iii 

 
 
 
 
 
 
MOLDOVA 
COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY PROGRESS REPORT 

I. 

Introduction 

1. 
This Progress Report assesses implementation of the current joint Bank-IFC Moldova 
Country Partnership Strategy (CPS).  The CPS focuses on three pillars: (i) improving economic 
competitiveness; (ii) minimizing social and environmental risks, building human capital, and promoting 
social inclusion; and (iii) improving public sector governance.  The CPS envisages annual commitments 
of approximately USD 45-50 million.  The IDA-15 lending envelope, along with an additional USD 20 
million, and USD 11.2 million from the IDA Crisis Response Window, have been fully utilized.  IFC has 
actively increased its activities in the last three years with a total of USD 79 million in investments and 
envisages annual commitments of USD 30-40 million. 

2. 
The CPS was prepared during a time of political and economic uncertainty and was 
deliberately kept flexible.  Political and economic developments over the last two years confirm that this 
has been an appropriate strategy.  The parliamentary elections of 2009 delivered a mandate for change, 
expressed in Moldova’s European aspirations.  The global economic and financial crisis hit Moldova hard 
and required the Bank to provide rapid and flexible support.  Additional financing to existing projects 
delivered assistance fast to support rural communities and vulnerable people and to promote economic 
recovery.  The DPO was used as a tool to support the Government’s Economic Stabilization and 
Recovery Program (ESRP).  

3. 
Significant progress towards CPS milestones and outcomes has been delivered.  
Development objectives in ongoing investment projects are being met, with a good performance record in 
place.  AAA has been an important component of the Bank’s partnership strategy, both in addressing the 
economic crisis, as well as supporting sector level reform programs with other partners.  IFC’s strategy 
complemented IDA’s efforts in private sector development.  Details of progress to date and updated 
performance indicators are reflected in the Results Matrix (see Annex 1). 

4. 
Following the election of a new, European-oriented coalition government, the Bank has 
helped Moldova receive significant external support to turn its European aspirations into reality.  
The Bank, with other development partners, prepared a set of Policy Notes on key economic and social 
challenges to address the impact of the crisis and build the platform for post-crisis growth and improved 
competitiveness.  The Notes were instrumental in the preparation of the ESRP, which provided the basis 
for the Consultative Group meeting on March 24, 2010.  Development partners pledged USD 2.6 billion 
to support these reforms during 2010-13.  Such leverage of the Bank’s limited resources is critical to 
financing the significant investments Moldova needs to make in its path to European integration.  

5. 
Moldova is now poised for a new phase of sustained growth but fundamental structural and 
governance weaknesses must be addressed.  Critical and comprehensive structural reforms on business 
regulation, de-monopolization, regulatory environment, and improved competitiveness will foster a 
speedier economic recovery.  Governance and anti-corruption remain important and governance as a 
cross-cutting theme will be strengthened to ensure enhanced accountability and transparency in the social 
sectors.  These structural reforms to improve competitiveness and reforms to enhance governance will be 
the focus of the remaining two years of the CPS.  

6. 
Modifications proposed to the CPS respond to the changed environment.  The pillars of the 
strategy remain valid for the post-crisis period.  The Bank will continue to be selective given its limited 
resources and will remain flexible to adjust to changing economic and political realities.  Resources will 
be put into core areas with solid track records, strong government ownership and commitment to reform, 
and opportunities for strategic partnerships.  Where other partners are in the lead, the Bank may exit or 

1 

scale down.  Given the opportunity provided by a reform-minded Government, we propose that the CPS 
period be extended to the end of FY13 to support key reforms and consolidate and focus the Bank’s 
program, with a new CPS starting in FY14. 

A transition to a more strategic and focused Country Partnership Strategy at the mid-point 

In FY09 the flexibility in the CPS reflected concerns about the potential impact of a global financial crisis and the 
expectations of political change after a number of years in power of a Government reticent to undertake reforms.  
The lending program was fragmented but some projects had shown the potential for further gains, particularly in 
the social sectors.  The first two years of the CPS took a conservative approach, initially with no policy based 
lending and an emphasis on additional financing in successful projects.  This additional financing together with 
an Economic Recovery DPO supported Moldova through the financial and economic crisis, and provided the 
opportunity to open a dialogue with the newly elected Government on a longer term reform agenda.  The CPS did 
not set out a lending program beyond the CPS mid-point, leaving this to be decided at the time of the CPS 
Progress Report.  This flexibility has proven effective, allowing the Bank to adapt to changed circumstances.  
Going forward the Bank will consolidate and focus its program to support reforms which will increase 
competitiveness and job creation during the remainder of the CPS period.  Policy based lending will re-
commence, and a selective program of sector investment lending will focus on those sectors in which the 
Government wishes the Bank’s support to make key reforms.  

II. 

Relevance of the CPS 

7. 
The CPS strategic objectives of improving economic competitiveness, minimizing social and 
environmental risks, and improving public sector governance remain relevant to Moldova in light 
of the post-crisis recovery agenda and Government-led reform priorities.  Continued attention to 
addressing economic and social vulnerabilities and building a robust foundation for post-crisis 
competitiveness and sustainable growth remain vital to Moldova’s prospects. 

8. 
Moldova’s politics have been volatile in recent years, but voters have given the Alliance for 
European Integration a mandate for change.  After two rounds of heavily contested elections, the 
Communist Party lost its majority in Parliament and the four centrist parties in opposition to the 
Communists formed a majority coalition, the Alliance for European Integration (AEI), forming a 
government in September 2009.  However, the AEI had insufficient parliamentary votes to elect a 
President (requiring a 60 percent majority under the Constitution) and after two failed attempts, another 
early parliamentary election took place in November 2010.  The AEI gained an increased majority but 
was still short of the number of seats to elect a President.  Despite this uncertainty the population has 
voiced its aspiration for change and the Government has committed to an ambitions reform agenda. Its 
implementation will be challenging given weak political institutions and a relatively underdeveloped 
capacity for collective action. 

9. 
Moldova now benefits from considerable external support, especially from Europe, and is at 
the forefront of the Eastern Neighborhood Partnership supporting European integration.  The 
Government’s pro-European orientation has accelerated progress on visa liberalization and free trade with 
the European Union.  Moldova receives the highest EU aid per capita in the Union’s neighborhood and 
has been praised by Brussels for moving fast on important reforms required to strengthen bilateral 
economic and political integration.  Key areas of programmatic alignment between the Bank and the EU’s 
National Indicative Program 2011-2013 include trade (in particular quality assurance infrastructure and 
standards), public administration reform, social protection, health sector reform and energy.  EU member 
States are also providing significant bilateral support to Moldova.  The United States has expressed at the 
highest levels of government its support for Moldova’s European integration aspirations and recently 
agreed to a significant program of support to Moldova. 

2 

10. 
However the coalition remains fragile and there are deep social and political rifts running 
through Moldova’s population.  The ability of the Government to address effectively the differing 
views on the future direction of the country, while maintaining its EU integration agenda and reforms, 
will be key to stability and cohesion. 

III. 

Country Context 

11. Moldova was hit hard by the economic crisis.  Almost 30 percent of GDP is accounted for by 
remittances, which fell by more than a third during 2009.  GDP growth dropped dramatically from 7.2 
percent in 2008 to -6.5 percent in 2009, with FDI decreasing by 88 percent during the same period.  
Economic sectors, including mining, agriculture and construction, recorded declines in output, ranging 
from 12 percent to 60 percent in 2009 and job losses pushed annual unemployment rates to 9 percent from 
4 percent at the end of 2008.  Almost half of all Moldovans depend on agriculture, and the country also 
depends on exports to and fuel imports from Russia.  Moldova has a large but inefficient public sector 
(taxing 32 percent and spending 45 percent of GDP).  It has an improving but still poor business 
environment and its infrastructure is dilapidated.  

12. 
The banking sector was strained and fiscal imbalances grew.  The quality of the banks’ loan 
portfolio deteriorated rapidly in 2009, with non-performing loans (NPLs) reaching 16.3 percent of total 
loans (up from 4.6 percent in 2008).  The real cost of borrowing increased, making access to loans 
expensive for firms, thereby compressing demand and prolonging the “credit crunch”.  The crisis 
contributed to a fall in tax revenues by 8 percent and pre-election spending hikes in early 2009 increased 
spending by 5 percent (public wages by 22 percent),  opening an unsustainable fiscal deficit, reaching 6.4 
percent of GDP in 2009.  Following the June 2009 elections, the Government took actions to reduce the 
deficit, and with additional fiscal measures under an IMF program and a faster than expected recovery, 
the deficit for 2010 is expected to be below 3 percent of GDP.  External imbalances have also adjusted 
somewhat with exchange rate depreciation, but are expected to widen again as remittances have picked up 
during 2010.  

13. 
The poverty impact of the crisis was felt most acutely in rural areas and the social 
assistance program does not reach all those in need.  Rural food consumption declined by 17 percent 
over a six-month period in late 2008 – early 2009, compared to only 6 percent in urban areas; income 
from self-employment in agriculture declined by 25 percent.  The decrease in remittance-driven revenues, 
and reduced farm revenues as a result of lower food prices drove rural poverty growth, with rural poverty 
rates rising to 36.3 percent in 2009, up from 34.6 percent in 2008.  Urban poverty rates continued to fall, 
masking growing rural urban disparity in stable national poverty rates.  A targeted social assistance 
program was introduced at the end of 2008 but has struggled so far due to low awareness of available 
benefits and a low coverage rate.  These issues will be addressed in the remaining CPS period. 

14. 
Large-scale migration has accompanied both social and economic developments in the 
country.  Remittances have had a palpable impact raising consumption levels and enhancing education 
opportunities in recipient households, but have created inequalities between households with members 
working abroad and those without.  Negative impacts of migration have been felt through children and 
youth “left behind” or in the care of elderly relatives, and in limited investments and civic participation at 
local level.  The incentives for migrants to invest more actively in their communities or to rejoin them are 
still under-researched.  Safety issues and the risk of human trafficking exist alongside migration, with 
women and children especially vulnerable.  Migration is increasingly permanent as a growing number of 
Moldovans are acquiring or are eligible for dual citizenship with Romania, Russia or Bulgaria.  An 
estimated 800,000-1.5 million people are in the application process for Romanian citizenship.   

15. 
Climate change and natural disasters have had a pronounced social and economic impact.  
Severe weather events have become an almost annual occurrence in Moldova, with drought in 2007, 

3 

floods in 2008 and 2010, pointing to the need for higher resilience both at the national level (technology 
and capacity-building), and at the local level supporting the coping strategies of farmers and rural 
communities. 

16. Moldova’s economy is beginning to recover but needs a broader base, with a second engine 
to the remittance-driven growth model.  Macroeconomic trends started to improve by the end of 2009 
and a strong recovery was registered in 2010.  Real GDP increased by 6.5 percent between January-
September 2010 compared to the same period in 2009.  The value added in agriculture grew by 6.6 
percent.  Exports increased by 7.9 percent and imports by 12.2 percent.  However this growth has seen no 
corresponding increase in employment and without significant reform there is a danger that growth will 
not create jobs.  It is expected that economic recovery will continue, but this is essentially dependent upon 
political stability in Moldova, as well as economic stability throughout the rest of Europe.  With a big 
share of the workforce already abroad, fast economic growth is unlikely to come only from an increase in 
remittances.    

17. 
The key is to promote private investment and job creation and build on comparative 
advantages in boosting exports.  There is a window of opportunity for Moldova to expand exports.  The 
introduction of autonomous trade preferences by the EU and normalization of trade relations with Russia 
(which were disrupted again in 2010 with the temporary resumption of a wine ban), create the opportunity 
for Moldova to increase exports in traditional markets and diversify into new markets.  Labor costs in 
Moldova are already low relative to neighbors, so with the right macro and micro policy framework in 
place for competitiveness, and with improvements in infrastructure, Moldova could attract new private 
investment in export sectors and see rapid improvements in productivity growth. 

18. Moldova needs to deepen regulatory reforms and strengthen the rule of law to encourage 
private investment.  Progress has been made on business environment reform, including overhaul of the 
business registration system, streamlining legislation governing the regulatory regime, and efficiencies in 
filing taxes.  The Government has taken steps to de-monopolize exports and imports and to simplify 
licensing procedures.  Further actions are required to facilitate business entry and exit, and to improve 
business regulation and legislation on competition and intellectual property rights.  There needs to be 
fairer enforcement of legislation through the judicial system.  Improvements in the rule of law are a key 
focus of the European integration agenda under which Moldova will receive significant support from the 
EC and other bilateral partners to reform its judicial system and other law enforcement bodies.  These 
efforts are highly complementary to the Bank’s work to help Moldova improve the investment climate. 

19. Moldova’s agricultural policies need to be revised to capitalize on export opportunities, 
which remain far below potential.  At 56 percent, Moldova has the world’s highest ratio of arable land 
in total land area, which, coupled with high-quality soils, favorable climate and low labor costs, gives the 
country a comparative advantage in farming and agro-food products.  However the real value of 
agriculture declined between 2005 and 2009, driven by a rapid deterioration of agricultural terms of trade 
and stagnant yields.  Greater production costs for high-value crops, insufficient access to finance by 
Moldovan farmers and poor marketing of these products has lead to the perverse result of declining land 
area under highly profitable crops and rising area under low-profit crops.  Enhancing the competitiveness 
of high-value products is complex and requires efforts to facilitate farmers’ access to modern inputs, 
improve food safety infrastructure and adopt EU quality standards, promote modern post-harvest 
infrastructure facilities, discourage buyer monopsonies and encourage producer cooperation, improve 
efficiency of cross-border trading, as well as upgrade agricultural research and education programs to the 
evolving needs of the private sector. 

20. 
Recent reform in the ICT sector is promising and this may turn into an additional niche 
industry with important potential links with improved governance in the public sector.  Competition 
in international telecommunications cable connectivity was improved recently with Bank support under a 

4 

Development Policy Operation that de-monopolized access to cross-border fiber-optic cable links.  The 
language skills of most Moldovans mean there is scope for outsourcing back office functions to Moldova, 
which some European firms have already begun, but high external call rates and low broadband access 
under the state-owned telecoms monopoly have prevented growth in these services.  There is scope for 
improvement: Moldova ranks 80th of 129 countries worldwide in international e-readiness rankings.  The 
Government’s commitment to implementation of an e-governance strategy will improve public service 
provision through increased utilization of information and communication technologies. The Government 
has made use of the South-South Experience Exchange Trust Fund to support leadership development for 
government officials on ICT for improved governance and growth, exchanging experience with India on 
improving e-governance.  

21. Moldova’s public services need to be reformed to become more efficient and deliver greater 
quality.  The Government is coming to terms with an unsustainably large and inefficient public sector: (i) 
the education system is, per capita, amongst the world’s most expensive at 9.2 percent of GDP, with 
empty classrooms and poorly paid teachers fearing retirement on low pensions; (ii) the social assistance 
system is fragmented, with most benefits not targeted to poor households; (iii) the pay-as-you-go pension 
scheme is fiscally unsustainable, yielding very low replacement ratios; (iv) health indicators remain well 
below EU averages but health spending, like education spending, is high at 6.4 percent of GDP.  Surveys 
show that out of pocket expenditures in both the health and education sectors are high, suggesting 
structural governance problems which limit access to better quality services by the poor. 

22. More needs to be done to facilitate construction and trade and improve the deteriorated 
infrastructure.  Laws on simplifying construction permits and creating a one-stop shop for business 
registration are still awaiting parliamentary approval.  The Government needs to press ahead with other 
outstanding reforms to promote trade and competition.  Steps must be taken to remove technical barriers 
and simplify customs procedures, which keep trade below potential.  Better protection of competition, a 
more sophisticated financial system, and better access to infrastructure (especially transport logistics) are 
all required to support new exports.  The road network needs major repairs and a dilapidated heating 
sector renders the economy highly energy inefficient.  Just 10 percent of national roads and about 5 
percent of local roads are in good condition.  Moldova uses twice the energy per unit of GDP (PPP rate) 
as Romania – three times more than the EU average.  Reducing the costs of transport and energy by 
improving infrastructure will be key to maintaining competitiveness. 

23. 
The Government, recognizing these development challenges, has shown commitment to 
reforms in the medium term as reflected in its new program.  The Government has started to 
implement comprehensive reforms entailing a shift in economic management and international 
development relations.  In October 2009, the Government launched the Economic Stabilization and 
Recovery Program for 2009-2011.  In January 2010, the IMF approved a 3-year Extended Credit Facility 
and Extended Fund Facility Program based on the ESRP.  Under the ESRP, the Government began 
implementing a comprehensive and detailed action plan of legal and administrative reforms to “de-
regulate, liberalize and de-monopolize” the economy.  In January 2011, the new Cabinet set 7 priorities in 
its program entitled “European Integration: Freedom, Democracy, Welfare”, namely: (i) European 
integration; (ii) reintegration of the country; (iii) efficient and balanced foreign policy; (iv) rule of law; (v) 
fighting poverty, provision of high quality public services; (vi) sustainable economic growth; and (vii) 
decentralization of power.   
IV. 

Results and progress towards achieving CPS objectives and outcomes 

24. 
The Bank’s current portfolio includes 11 investment projects, all of which are proceeding in 
a satisfactory manner.  Total commitments amount to USD 227.3 million, and the disbursement ratio 
constantly exceeds 20 percent annually.  Some projects have faced difficulties during implementation 
which have been addressed through appropriate restructuring, and are now proceeding satisfactorily.  The 

5 

IDA-15 allocation of USD 161 million, including the additional USD 20 million received in FY11, and 
USD 11.2 million allocated from the Crisis Response Window, have been fully committed for existing 
projects.  IFC’s current portfolio of USD 79 million is performing well.  

25. 
The strong emphasis on partnerships with other donors has proven effective in leveraging 
financing and reforms.  The Rural Investment Support Project and the Moldova Social Investment Fund 
attracted the support of other donors (DFID, EC, GEF, KFW, Netherlands, SIDA Switzerland, UNICEF 
and USAID), with additional financing of USD 24 million and USD 36.4 million respectively.  
Development partners (DFID, the Netherlands, SIDA) have looked to the World Bank to administer 
multi-donor Trust Funds for Central Public Administration Reform and support to the Supreme Audit 
Institution.  These partners have also provided USD 5.5 million as co-financing to the on-going Public 
Financial Management Project (USD 8.5 million IDA). 

26. 
Strong partnerships have also allowed the Bank to be more selective in its activities.  
Following World Bank assistance to the Government to develop the Land Transport Infrastructure 
Strategy, including a prioritized investment plan, and to put in place safeguard systems for road sector 
investments, the roads sector has attracted financing from the EBRD, EIB, EC, Romania and MCC 
totaling about USD 550 million and further large funding commitments from the Government of China.  
Due to a case of mis-procurement USD 11 million was cancelled from the Road Sector Program Support 
Project.  The Bank has gradually exited the roads sector given the availability of other donors to provide 
more substantive financing to this area.  Dialogue on transport policy will be maintained through the 
competitiveness DPO. 

27. 
The Bank has provided significant support to enhance donor coordination and improve aid 
effectiveness.  In consultation with other partners, in particular SIDA and UNDP, the Bank supported the 
development of a new set of Partnership Principles for the coordination and harmonization of external 
assistance to Moldova.  The Partnership Principles were signed in March 2010 by the Government and 22 
of Moldova’s development partners.  This was a significant increase from the 6 partners who had signed 
an earlier Partnership Framework in 2006, and was partly the result of the Bank’s efforts to ensure a 
consultative and participatory approach.  The Bank also supported the development of an implementation 
plan for the Partnership Principles to ensure that positive steps are taken to enhance aid effectiveness. 

28. 
The Bank used its leading analytical expertise and investment in AAA to engage early with 
the Government in outlining the Economic Stabilization and Recovery Program.  Together with the 
EC, UN, DFID, SIDA and IMF, the Bank prepared Policy Notes on key economic and social challenges 
to address the impact of the crisis.  The Notes were instrumental in the preparation of the ESRP for 2009-
2011 and, for the first time in Moldova’s history, the entire Cabinet of Ministers convened for a whole-
day discussion of the recommendations.  The ESRP provided the basis for the Consultative Group 
meeting on March 24, 2010, jointly hosted by the Bank and the EU, where development partners pledged 
USD 2.6 billion (see Table 1) to support key reforms during 2010-13. 

29. 
The first two years of the CPS were marked by flexibility to react to the combined 
challenges of significant political change and the global economic crisis.  The Bank used additional 
financing to deliver support through existing successful projects, in particular to assist vulnerable 
populations to deal with the crisis.  Noteworthy examples include the Rural Investment and Services 
Project (RISP) providing help to farmers by facilitating access to credit, which otherwise was unavailable 
during the crisis; Moldova Social Investment Fund (MSIF) helping rural communities with a focus on job 
creation; and the Competitiveness Enhancement Project (CEP) helping exporters at a time when world 
markets were down and access to credit was blocked.  This use of additional financing also had the effect 
of better focusing the investment lending portfolio, which had been fragmented at the start of the CPS.  

6 

 
 
Table 1. Pledges made at the Consultative Group: Moldova Partnership Forum (USD millions) 

EU 
Members 
251.6 

EC 

US 

EBRD 

EIB 

UN 

749.8 

177.7 

129.5 

129.5 

129.5 

World 
Bank 
302.3 

IMF 

Other 

Total 

578.8 

58.0 

2605.5 

10.0 

29.9 

7.0 

5.1 

5.1 

5.1 

12.1 

23.1 

2.3 

100.0 

Total Pledge 
(2010-13) 
percent of 
Total 

30. 
A one-off DPO in support of the Government’s ESRP proved effective.  The global economic 
crisis demanded that the Bank provide more significant financing for the ESRP than envisaged in the 
initial PRSC series, which was cancelled.  A USD 25 million Economic Recovery DPO (including USD 
11.2 million from the IDA Crisis Response Window) provided much-needed budget support and focused 
the reform agenda on laying the foundations for post-crisis recovery.  Moldova’s strong performance in 
2010 shows the strategy worked. 

31. 
The portfolio continues to deliver strong development results across all three pillars.  
Through the MSIF project, 700 community based organizations have participated in 225 MSIF sub-
projects benefitting almost 932,000 people.  Such benefits include an increase by 5 percent in student 
attendance during winter as a result of installation of central heating.  Indirect benefits accrue through the 
26,000 temporary jobs created, providing around 2 million days of work.  The Education for All/Fast-
Track Initiative (EFA/FTI) project has supported renovation of 65 kindergartens and provision of 
teaching materials to 600, and assisted the Government to implement policies for improving kindergarten 
education standards.  The Competitiveness Enhancement Project has assisted 150 companies to date (with 
another 100 applications) to improve quality standards, leading to increases in product quality and 
improved sales.  The project also supports reform of the regulatory sector and has contributed to a 
reduction by 35 percent in management time spent on compliance.  The Rural Investment and Services 
Project has assisted in the creation of 1,700 new businesses in high value agriculture, livestock and small 
industries, creating 7,000 new jobs.  The Results Matrix (Annex 1) gives more details of how the Bank’s 
programs, including MSIF, EFA/FTI, Quality Education in Rural Areas, and Health Services and Social 
Assistance, have supported greater social inclusion and have reached the most vulnerable.  

32. 
Reforms have established the basis for improved management of public funds and a more 
effective public service but there has been little progress in consolidating the public sector.  In 2009 
the Government revived Central Public Administration Reform.  The basis has been laid for improved 
public financial management but the complete implementation of the Financial Management Information 
System is necessary to see through reforms fully.  Fiscal discipline has improved.  Although the 2009 
budget exceeded its estimated deficit of 1 percent due to the financial crisis and pre-election spending, 
significant austerity measures by the Government together with external financing prevented a worse 
situation than the eventual deficit of 6.4 percent of GDP in 2009.  2010 budget performance was better 
than agreed under the IMF program.  The foundations for a merit-based, professional civil service are 
being laid through legal reform, strengthened HR management capacity and a functional civil service 
training system.  Legislation on civil service remuneration is being drafted and is expected to increase 
civil service salaries by 25 percent, making it a more attractive career choice, but there has been little 
corresponding streamlining of the civil service to allow higher salaries without an increased wage bill.  
Strategic planning and policy coordination capacity has increased, but requires further support to embed it 
across Government.  The Government has asked for additional support through the CPAR MDTF to 
continue this reform over the next two years.  

33. 
The IDA 16 special theme of gender will continue to be integrated into the program.  The 
latest CPIA assessment notes the positive legislative environment for gender equality in Moldova, but 

7 

 
 
gender inequality persists through lower pay and lower status jobs for women and in the under-
representation of women in decision making positions in the business, public service and political 
spheres.  Social attitudes contribute to high rates of domestic violence.  In the education and health 
sectors boys and men are disadvantaged through higher drop-out rates in the higher grades of school and 
higher rates of early death.  Women and girls are vulnerable to trafficking. The Government has 
developed a National Strategy for Gender Equality for the years 2010-2015, and is closely supported in its 
implementation by UN Women.  The Bank worked with SIDA to introduce gender perspectives in 
budgeting in the PER in 2009.  The program going forward offers opportunities to enhance gender 
equality, for example, through education sector reform, and the regional consultations on the next WDR 
on Gender may also identify additional opportunities.   

34. We will continue to address the IDA 16 theme of climate change.  During this CPS period a 
number of interventions have helped address climate change vulnerabilities by reducing environmental 
degradation, specifically soil conservation, community forestry development, pollutant management, 
emissions reduction, and agricultural pollution-related activities.  These activities could be continued and 
strengthened under the Agricultural Competitiveness Project.  With the ongoing Energy 2 Project and 
follow-up Energy Efficiency TA, the Bank will help Moldova to increase its energy efficiency.  Water 
resources management and adaptation to increasing water shortages and an increasing risk of flooding is 
likely to be a key issue in the long run to mitigate climate risks.  The Disaster and Climate Risk 
Management Project will help address this through improved hydro-meteorological services and 
preparedness.  AAA on adaptation and mitigation practices will help set the ground for further activities 
in this area. 

35. 
IFC remains an active partner in the private sector.  The IFC strategy in Moldova 
complements IDA’s efforts in private sector development by focusing in particular on the financial sector, 
SMEs, agribusiness, healthcare and infrastructure modernization.  Since 1995, IFC has invested a total of 
USD 174 million of its own funds in 19 projects and arranged USD 25 million in syndications to support 
power, telecommunications, agribusiness, SMEs, and the financial sector.  IFC has ramped up its 
activities in the last three years with a total of USD 79 million in investment in FY08-FY10, with the 
largest exposure in financial markets followed by infrastructure.  IFC will focus on policy reforms and 
implementation in select areas to support development of High Value Agriculture.  In agribusiness 
investment, the IFC Advisory Services project will focus on investment generation activities, assisting the 
Government to develop and implement a targeted FDI attraction strategy in the agribusiness and high-
value agriculture subsectors, as well as establish a better framework for public-private dialogue on 
agribusiness policy issues.   

36. MIGA currently has two active projects in Moldova.  A USD 61.1 million guarantee issued to 
Union Fenosa Internacional of Spain protects against political risks of transfer restriction, expropriation, 
war and civil disturbance, and breach of contract for investments in the upgrading of three privatized 
electricity distribution companies.  A guarantee of USD 7.34 million was issued by MIGA to Raiffeisen 
Bank SA in Romania, covering its shareholder loan to its subsidiary I.C.S. Raiffeisen Leasing S.R.L. in 
Moldova providing coverage against the risks of transfer restriction and expropriation of funds.  This 
project constitutes the start-up phase of Raiffeisen Zentralbank Group’s leasing operations in Moldova, 
undertaken by its Moldovan subsidiary. 

37. 
Trust Funds are integrated into the Bank strategy and support key institutional reforms 
and project implementation.  The Bank administers a substantial USD 80.9 million TF portfolio, which 
provides co-financing to IDA operations, finances GEF and carbon operations, and provides other forms 
of support, such as an USD 8.8 million Education for All/Fast Track Initiative grant for pre-primary 
education, an USD 16.7 million Regional Development and Social Protection TF with the EC, and a USD 
6.15 million Public Administration Reform MDTF.  Annex 2 gives details of active TFs in Moldova and 
shows that many will close in FY12, leading to consolidation.  

8 

38. 
Going forward, it will be crucial to maintain a solid track record of project implementation.  
Overall, the Bank’s portfolio performance in Moldova has been smooth, with some minor exceptions.  
During the CPS implementation period, the Bank has been proactive in appropriate restructuring or partial 
cancellation when necessary.  The Country Portfolio Performance Review in 2011 focused on the 
portfolio under implementation.  It identified best practices and looked at cross-cutting themes, including 
issues such as readiness for implementation, capacity building for results monitoring, and excessive 
complexity of project design.  These reviews will be a regular instrument to assess jointly with the 
Government implementation performance and address any project-specific issues. 
V. 

Post-crisis agenda and modifications to the CPS 

39. 
Although the pillars defined in the CPS remain valid, there have been important changes 
which require an adaptation to the Bank’s program in the CPS PR.  These changes are: (i) the global 
economic and financial crisis; (ii) a significant change in the political landscape and the opportunity 
created by the reform mandate given to the Government by the Moldovan people; and (iii) the country’s 
European integration agenda.  

40. 
The Government has shown strong commitment to post-crisis structural reforms and the 
Bank will follow the Government’s lead in defining its activities.  For the remaining period, a 
competitiveness DPO series will be launched based on an in-depth diagnostic provided in the CEM and 
supporting the Government’s competitiveness and private sector job creation agenda.  The focus will be 
on the business climate, as well as on sector policies in agriculture, IT and other areas that would lift 
current constraints to growth.  This will be complemented by an expansion by IFC of advisory services in 
the agribusiness sector and for small and medium enterprises.  The competitiveness agenda will also be 
supported by one or two new additional IDA lending operations per annum in areas such as agricultural 
competitiveness or energy efficiency.  The timing of these operations will depend on progress made in 
addressing key policy and institutional constraints in both sectors. 

41. 
The Government has strongly embraced the need for reform to improve the efficiency and 
quality of public services.  IDA will support this in three areas: social assistance, health care and 
education.  The Strengthening Social Safety Net results-based operation will seek to improve the 
efficiency and equity of social assistance through a fiscally sustainable expansion and strengthening of the 
targeted Ajutor Social Program.  Additional financing will be provided to the Health Services and Social 
Assistance Project to improve the efficiency and viability of the primary health sector.  

42. 
An ambitious education reform agenda based on school optimization has recently become 
the focus of the Government’s attention.  Inefficiency in the sector – and with it declining quality – has 
focused the reform discussions on rationalization and school network optimization and the savings they 
can bring.  The Government's reform plan is intended to increase the efficiency of the general education 
sector, while simultaneously improving the quality and relevance of education to meet the demands of the 
modern economy.  An IDA results-based education project will provide much-needed support to these 
important reform efforts.  The Bank’s support will also address the potential risks of such reforms, 
including of increased drop outs and marginalization of minority groups or the poorest, through a 
monitoring and evaluation scheme that tracks students to gauge the impact of reforms.  Moreover, the 
Bank’s System Assessment and Benchmarking for Education Results (SABER) toolkits in various aspects 
of education, including Skills Measurement, will be used as part of the work on the competitiveness 
agenda, allowing the Government to ensure that education can deliver skills for growth sectors of the 
economy.  It is imperative that improved quality of education be accompanied by a sustainable growth 
model that creates jobs and economic opportunities for young people. 

43. Moldova’s European aspirations will place increasing demands on the country’s 
institutions.  The authorities have intensified efforts to improve core country systems, including public 

9 

financial management (PFM) and public administration.  Strengthening of PFM reform is an important 
component to increase the efficiency, transparency and strategic alignment of the budget in the medium to 
long term – elements that could be supported through a potential PFM 2 operation and the ongoing CPAR 
MDTF.  Such reforms will require strong leadership and coordination from central Government, as well 
as significant inputs and commitment to change from Government staff in all ministries.   

44. 
The Bank needs to reorient its approach towards governance and corruption given the 
political changes and realities in Moldova.  Governance as a cross-cutting theme will be strengthened 
to ensure enhanced accountability and transparency in the social sectors, for example through support to 
more equitable and less fraud prone administration of social assistance payments and support to the 
development of health and education information systems to improve transparency.  With the 
Government’s goal of European Union integration, areas of core GAC importance such as business 
regulation, public financial management and central public administration reform will remain essential.  
Demand for good governance and social accountability will continue to be supported, for example 
through the Civil Society Fund, which issues grants to NGOs to develop innovative communication and 
information applications which increase transparency and social accountability.  The World Bank, in 
partnership with SIDA and UNDP, commissioned the Moldova Citizen Report Card, which provides a 
comprehensive overview of public perceptions of the accessibility and quality of the Moldovan public 
sector.  It is an important entry point for the Governance e-Transformation Project to improve the quality 
of selected public services using ICT.  E-transformation will help improve governance and tackle 
corruption through IT solutions.   

45. 
The Bank’s program going forward will respond to the opportunities created by the 
changed environment and continue consolidating the Bank’s support with an extension of the CPS 
to FY13.  The CPS was developed for a period of four years from FY09-12 and commenced with a 
fragmented lending program.  This legacy, the prevailing economic context, and an uncertain political 
environment led us to rely in the first two years of the Strategy on additional financing which had the 
added benefit of providing more focus to the program.  The recovery in the economy and a more 
favorable political environment for reform now allow us to move towards a more strategic program of 
support in the last years of the CPS, with a focus in the lending program on a small number of operations 
supporting key reforms being implemented by the Government.  During FY13 a number of projects will 
exit, and extending the CPS until the end of FY13 will enhance the prospects for a focused and strategic 
CPS beginning in FY14.  

46. 
The Bank faces constraints and therefore must be selective in its support to the 
Government’s reform agenda.  Selectivity will be driven by the principles of comparative advantage in 
areas in which the Government is ready for and committed to necessary policy reforms, as well as a solid 
implementation track record, and availability of alternative sources of financing and analytical support, 
leveraged through strategic partnerships with other development actors.  The Bank’s lending program will 
include one or two new investment lending operations per year, in addition to a DPO and continued 
investment in AAA.  The choice and timing of investment lending operations will be driven by the 
Government’s willingness to take complementary reform measures to enhance the economic impact of 
supported projects.  The Government has indicated that reform areas could include education, public 
sector reform, agricultural competitiveness and energy efficiency.  The Bank will use a number of tools to 
support dialogue on reforms, including utilizing portfolio reviews for policy discussions, developing 
policy notes on the reform agenda in sectors in which investment lending is proposed, and raising 
awareness of policy constraints or options which both policy and investment lending can help to address.  
Table 2 below provides a summary of the planned IDA lending and IFC investment program for the 
remaining CPS period covering FY11-13. 

10 

Table 2. CPS Progress Report Indicative Program for the period FY11-FY13 (USD million)* 

Proposed Program 

Lending/ 
Investment 
FY 11 Actual 

AAA and TA Program 

Country Economic Memorandum: Growth Study 
Accounting &Auditing ROSC follow-up 
Agricultural Policy Revision and Budget TA 
Public Expenditure Review 
Financial Sector Monitoring TA 
Chisinau Energy Supply Improvement TA 
Applications for good governance  - Civil Society Fund Demand for 
Good Governance 
Reducing Vulnerability to Climate Change of Agricultural Systems in 
Moldova TA 

Credit Bureau Technical Assistance 
Risk Management Technical Assistance 
Health Public Private Partnership Technical Assistance 
MoldTelecom Technical Assistance 

$10 
$37 

$20 

$67 

$6 
$10 
$26 

$42
FY12  

IDA 
Disaster and Climate Risk Management 
Strengthening the Effectiveness of the Social 
Safety Net 
Governance e-Transformation 

TOTAL IDA lending FY11 
IFC 
Moldova Agroindbank  
Chisinau Municipality 
EximBank 

TOTAL IFC Investment FY11 

IDA 
Competitiveness DPO 1 
Health Services and Social Assistance AF 
Agricultural Competitiveness 

TOTAL IDA lending FY12 
IFC  
Investment in Real Sector and Financial 
Markets 

TOTAL IFC Investment FY12 

Competitiveness DPO 2 
Education Program for Results  
Public Financial Management 2 

TOTAL IDA lending FY13 
IFC 
Investment in Real Sector and Financial 
Markets 

Competitiveness and structural reform follow-up work 
Programmatic fiscal work (including BOOST studies) 
Financial Sector Monitoring TA 
Food Security TA 
Agricultural Competitiveness TA 
Energy Efficiency TA 
Education Rationalization TA 

$20 
$10 

$20 

$50 

$30 Credit Bureau TA 
Risk Management TA  
Investment Climate Reform Technical Assistance 
Health Public Private Partnership Technical Assistance 

$30
FY13  
$20 
Competitiveness and structural reform follow-up work 
$30 
Financial Sector Assessment Program  
$20 
Corporate Financial Reporting Enhancement TA 
Public Financial Management TA 
Energy Efficiency TA (continuation) 
Social Inclusion and Resilience TA  

$70 

$30 

Investment Climate Reform Project TA 
Credit Bureau TA 
Health Public Private Partnership Technical Assistance 

TOTAL IFC Investment FY13 
$30 
* NOTES: IDA16 allocations are indicative.  Actual IDA lending will depend on (i) total IDA resources available (ii) Moldova’s performance 
rating (iii) performance and assistance terms of other IDA borrowers (iv) the terms of IDA’s assistance to Moldova (grants or credits) (v) the 
number of IDA eligible countries.  In FY14, the last year of IDA16, the lending program could include a third Competitiveness DPO and an 
energy efficiency project.  

47. 
IFC will play an important role in support of the competitiveness agenda and continue to 
provide trade finance, credit lines for on-lending to medium and small enterprises and agriculture, 
as well as advisory services in corporate governance and risk management.  IFC has a portfolio in 
four banks and is planning to support additional banks with advisory services and access to trade finance. 
Progress was also registered with the development of a Credit Bureau.  In infrastructure, IFC is financing 
the rehabilitation and expansion of the water and wastewater networks and street rehabilitation in the City 

11 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of Chisinau.  This is the World Bank Group’s first sub-sovereign loan in Moldova.  IFC is supporting the 
Government to implement the first PPP in the health sector, working with the Ministry of Health to open 
an imaging center at the National Hospital and with the Ministry of Economy to assess a sustainability 
strategy for MoldTelecom. 

48. 
The Bank will continue to leverage strategic partnerships with others to support the reform 
agenda.  Given the limited resources of the Bank, it will be important to work with other development 
partners who may have additional investment resources, and the Bank will maintain its role as a convener 
in the donor community.  The Bank will seek increased partnerships with the EU and EU Member States 
and other development partners to ensure coherence in understanding of and support for critical reforms 
with a view to achieving maximum impact.  A key focus will be where other partners’ resources 
complement financially the Bank’s AAA program.  Annex 3 gives details of the activities of other donors 
in key sectors. 

49. 
The Bank will seek to use Trust Fund resources more strategically to support core 
objectives.  The Bank is exploring opportunities for increased partnerships with the EU, including 
through the existing Regional Development and Social Protection TF, and other ongoing/planned TFs for 
Improving Forest Law Enforcement and Governance, Food Safety, a coordinated program in the health 
sector, investment regulation activities, and Public Expenditure Financial Accountability assessment.  
Other potential areas for TF support include public sector reform supported by the Russian PFM Trust 
Fund, and technical assistance to improve Corporate Financial Reporting could also be funded through a 
Trust Fund, although donor support still needs to be identified.  These types of partnerships will build on 
the Bank’s efforts towards a more programmatic approach to mobilizing TF resources and consolidating 
them in order to reduce portfolio fragmentation and administration costs.  Trust Fund resources will, to 
the extent possible, complement limited resources to finance Bank staff.   

50. 
The Bank’s AAA will continue to have a prominent role in forming a solid basis for the 
Bank’s support in Moldova.  For example, the recommendations of the recent Country Economic 
Memorandum and follow-up work would set the background for deeper and more comprehensive fiscal 
and competitiveness reforms.  The Bank will continue to provide economic and social analysis as a basis 
to discuss policy choices and needed structural reforms with the authorities.  Possible AAA work includes 
the continuation of the programmatic fiscal work, follow-up work on competitiveness and structural 
reforms, public financial management technical assistance, and analysis of social inclusion and resilience, 
taking a broad view of social inclusion and enhancing the focus on gender.  Sector-specific analytical 
work to complement the proposed lending program could take place in energy, education rationalization 
TA, as well as agriculture.  A new TA project related to food security is under implementation.  AAA in 
the financial sector could include monitoring to support crisis resilience and market development 
measures, and a Financial Sector Assessment Program update with a focus on development issues. 

51. 
IFC will expand Advisory Services in Investment Climate with a new project in FY12.  The 
project will aim to increase the competitiveness of the Agribusiness sector through regulatory reform and 
more targeted investment promotion, as well as address key constraints for SMEs and the private sector in 
(i) construction permits; (ii) insolvency; and (iii) business inspections. 
VI. 

Risks 

52. 
The risks identified in the CPS remain.  Fiduciary risks continue to be mitigated through the 
Bank’s emphasis on improved public financial management, as do the risks associated with limited 
institutional capacity through support to planning and allocation of budgetary resources.  A continued 
global recession, particularly in the EU, may limit the benefits to be gained from Moldova’s greater 
integration into the global economy through reduced exports and remittances, and perhaps reducing the 
support available from the EU for the Government’s integration agenda.  Conversely, there is a risk that a 

12 

rapid return of remittance flows may weaken the reform resolve, delaying key reform measures, allowing 
IDA deliverables to slip or need to be redesigned to match a less ambitious agenda.  Recent restrictions on 
exports highlight this risk.  These risks suggest the continued need for a flexible approach from the Bank 
and other donors to assist Moldova to weather these external shocks, as well as the Bank working closely 
with others, in particular the EU and IMF, for joint leverage.  Climate change and natural disasters 
continue to pose a risk to the country, but the Bank’s support for disaster risk mitigation and agricultural 
competitiveness should help to address these.  

53. 
Risks arising from the political economy may continue for some time.  The stalemate over 
election of a President could still lead to early elections, potentially limiting Government commitment to 
undertake unpopular reforms.  Perhaps more significant are the differing views amongst coalition 
members over the pace and depth of reforms.  These differences reflect social and political rifts 
throughout the wider population including concerns about the impact of a transition to a market economy 
on different segments of the population.  Although the Alliance partners are bound by their desire for 
European integration, it remains to be seen whether the Alliance can maintain support for its reform 
agenda.  Should possible future elections bring a less reform-committed Government, the Bank would 
follow a more traditional investment program.  If the Government secures a four year parliamentary 
mandate, it will be important that there is political commitment to the reform agenda across all parties – 
lack of such commitment may pose a risk to both the Bank’s DPO series, as well as the IMF program.  
The Bank may help mitigate this to some extent by offering a platform for inter-ministerial discussions on 
key areas of reform, which needs to be done consciously and continuously, not just as problems arise, and 
will be a key challenge for the Country Team. 

13 

ANNEX 1: CPS FY09-13 REVISED RESULTS MATRIX AND PROGRESS TO DATE 

CPS Pillar I.   Improving economic competitiveness to support sustainable economic growth  

Country Development Goals / Outcomes 
 
Export of goods and services increased as percent of GDP from 30.5 percent in 2007. 
 
FDI increased (net) from USD 130 per capita (2007). 
 
Increased length of roads rehabilitated. 
 Decreased share of electric power losses as share of total energy consumption from 12.7 percent in 2007. 
 
Improved competitiveness of rural farm sector as reflected in rising exports and unit values of agricultural products. 
Issues and Obstacles 
 Moldova production and export structure are dominated by low-value products.  The range of both markets and goods for export are poorly diversified. Lack of 
conformity with international standards on product quality is a particular constraint for market access. 
 Moldova still has one of the highest regulatory compliance costs in the region. 
 Cost of financial intermediation is relatively high and access to long-term financing for investment purposes remains limited. 
 Adequate physical infrastructure is necessary to attract investments and support production. 
 
The road network has experienced severe and prolonged neglect over the last 15 years due to lack of maintenance. 
 Road rehabilitation will require support from the international donor community and the use of foreign contractors for works execution, given the low capacity of the 
domestic road construction industry 
 Due to outdated equipment and technology, energy consumption is intensive—totaling about 3 times the respective indicators reported in developed countries.   
 Heavy reliance of the economy on imported energy resources, coupled with significant price increases, restricts the production sector. 
 Unfinished reform agenda and accumulation of new debts (mainly in the district heating sector in Chisinau) threaten the financial viability of main parts of the energy 
sector.  
Lack of access to finance for productive cultivation of crops and investments in land improvements.   
Lack of information and quality management has reduced productivity and export potential of farms. 
Land privatization resulted in fragmentation of agricultural land ownership, with individuals’ small holdings often being spread over 3 or more distinct parcels located 
kilometers apart.   
Strategic Goal  1:  Improved competitiveness of Moldova’s enterprise sector 
CPS Outcomes 
Milestones 
Revised CPS Outcomes and 
Milestones 

Progress to date 

 
 
 

MSTQ system meeting the WTO 
commitments. 

Number of EU-compatible 
standards adopted increases from 
200 (2007) to 500. 

Number of firms obtaining 
internationally recognized 
certificates of quality increases 

514 EU compatible standards 
adopted by Oct 2010; though 
delays exist in adoption of 
standards from the Romanian 
Standardization Authority. 
160 firms had received 
international certificates of quality 
by end of 2010. 

Ongoing/Completed Lending: 
Competitiveness Enhancement 
Project, including Additional 
Financing 
Planned Lending: 
Competitiveness DPO 
Partnerships and TFs: 

14 

CPS Instruments and Partners 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
from 130 (2007) to 300. 

Decreased regulatory compliance 
costs for enterprises from 16 
percent in 2007 to less than 12 
percent (as measured by Cost of 
Doing Business survey).   

Reduction in cost of getting 
construction permits from 292 
days (DB09) to less than 200 
days. 

Increased share of enterprises 
with access to formal sources of 
investment finance from 17.71 
percent (2005) to 25 percent 
(BEEPS survey). 

Establishment of a fully 
functioning credit information 
bureau. 
Increased share of credit going to 
private sector, from 27.9 percent 
(2006). 

The number of accredited testing 
facilities increased from 36 in 
2005 to 117 by Oct. 2010. 
RIA made mandatory for all new 
legislation in January 2008, with a 
standardized consultation 
mechanism, including Government 
and private sector representatives. 
Some 1,300 government officials 
and business representatives 
trained in principles and 
techniques of RIA. 
Regulatory compliance costs 
estimated at 9.9 percent in 2010 
CODB report. 
Yearly number of inspections from 
State Agencies per company 
decreased from over 10 in 2006 to 
less than 8 as of end of 2010. 
Two private credit information 
bureaus established, covering the 
majority of the banking sector. 

Moldova Dutch TA-TF Financial 
Sector Reform  
PHRD-Moldova: 
Competitiveness Enhancement 
Project 
Credit Bureau TA (IFC) 
Ongoing/Completed AAA: 
FSAP Update (IMF) 
Country Economic 
Memorandum – Competitiveness 
INF Sector Investment Planning 
Capacity  
Corporate Financial Reporting 
Doing Business Report 
GFRP Moldova Food Security 
TA  
PSD/FSD Dialogue 
Policy Notes for the Government 
of Moldova 
Planned AAA: 
Corporate Financial Reporting 
Enhancement TA 
Financial Sector Assessment 
Program  
Financial Sector Monitoring TA 
(including Secured Transactions, 
Modernization of Payment 
Systems, Security Settlement 
Systems) 
TF for Investment Regulation 
(EU) 
Skills Measurement Survey 
Remittance intermediation work 
Programmatic fiscal work 
Competitiveness and structural 
reform follow-up work 
IFC: 
Loan and equity investment and 
advisory service in financial 

15 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Strategic Goal 2:  Improved management of the road network 
CPS Outcomes 
Milestones 

Increased percentage of roads in 
good or fair condition from 7 
percent in 2006--transport costs 
will be estimated based on the 
percentage of National Roads in 
good, fair, and bad condition. 

Technical audits confirming that 
road works comply with 
contractual specifications. 

Revised CPS Outcomes and 
Milestones 
Significant restructuring of this 
investment after cancellation of 
69 percent of credit. 
Results remain the same since 
they are based on collective 
investments of several partners, 
though Bank is no longer 
providing financing. 

Vehicle operation costs on the 
roads improved under the Road 
Sector Program have decreased 
by at least 8 percent according to 
ex-post economic evaluation. 

Total funds allocated for 
maintenance works on public 
roads are at least 450m MDL in 
FY09/10. 

Increased Road Asset Value 
from USD 8.4 billion in 2007.   

Percent of funding used for road 
maintenance awarded through 
competitive bidding increased 
from 0percent in 2008 to 20 
percent in 2010 and 30 percent in 
2011. 

sector, to strengthen local banks, 
direct financing in real sectors 
and regional private equity fund, 
and develop non-bank financial 
institutions. 

Progress to date 

CPS Instruments and Partners 

Ongoing/Completed Lending: 
IDA credit for Roads Sector 
Program Support Project  
Ongoing/Completed AAA: 
Transport Sector Strategy 
(EBRD, EIB) 
Policy Notes for the Government 
of Moldova 
Partnerships and TFs: 
Additional loans and grants from 
EBRD, EIB, EC, MCC and 
China 
EC Regional Development and 
Social Protection Grant (Roads 
Component) 

The State Road Administration 
has implemented successfully, 
and to contract specifications, the 
investments funded by EIB 
under the Roads Sector Program 
Support Project and by the 
National Budget, with 120 km of 
roads rehabilitated between 
project start and the end of 2010. 
5 additional contracts have been 
awarded in early 2011. 
Budget allocations for road 
maintenance have increased 
significantly and exceeded 
targets in FY09/10, with an 
amended Road Fund Law and 
new fuel excise tax regime, but 
there is still a gap between actual 
allocations and those planned 
under the LTIS, this gap will 
need to be closed when macro-
situation permits. 
All contracts for periodic road 
maintenance are awarded based 
on competitive tenders. Routine 
road maintenance works and 
winter maintenance are not being 
tendered until now. 

16 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Strategic Goal 3:  Reduced energy vulnerability through improved energy efficiency and increased diversification of energy sources 
CPS Outcomes 
Milestones 
Revised CPS Outcomes and 
Progress to date 
Milestones 

Ten percent reduction in energy 
intensity measured by the total 
primary energy use (toe) per 
USD 1000 of GDP at PPP rate.   

Government adopts and starts 
implementing an Energy 
Efficiency Program (pending 
approval by the Government) in 
support of the 2020 Energy 
Strategy of Moldova (adopted in 
2007). 

Ten percent increase in 
production from renewable 
energy sources (RES).   

Government and ANRE develop 
and adopt measures supporting 
renewable energy production, 
including feed-in tariffs for RES. 
Moldelectrica commissions a 
new power dispatch center and 
introduces modern supervisory 
control and remote monitoring of 
all transmission substations. 
At least one project signed and 
started disbursement with energy 
efficiency component. 

Cost recovery of heat, gas and 
electricity tariffs for all 
categories of consumers 
approaches 100 percent, while 
cash collection ratios stay above 
95 percent (for gas and 
electricity) and 90 percent for 
district heat. 

A new Energy Law was adopted 
in December 2009 enabling 
Moldova to meet requirements 
and become a full member of the 
Energy Community Treaty. 
The Energy Efficiency Program 
and Action Plan updated by 
government, but delays in 
documents’ formal approval by 
the Government. 
Moldova has ratified the ECT. 
EC and SIDA to provide TA 
support to Government and 
ANRE to work on feed-in tariffs 
for RES. 
The dispatch center to be 
commissioned by September 
2011. 
85 percent of AF for the heating 
component committed. 
Tariffs for DH in Chisinau 
approved by ANRE starting 
January 2010. All tariffs at cost 
recovery levels. 
Cash collections for gas and 
electricity on target. 
Concerns remain regarding the 
fiscal sustainability in the sector, 
unless prompt reforms are made 
in the district heating sector and 
efforts to further improve the 
regulatory environment continue. 
The outage rates of 
Moldelectrica transmission lines 
and substations were reduced by 
48 percent (the initial target was 
35 percent). 

17 

CPS Instruments and Partners 

Ongoing/Completed Lending: 
Energy 2, including Additional 
Financing 
Planned Lending: 
Energy Efficiency Project 
Ongoing/Completed AAA: 
District Heating Sector Reform 
TA 
Chisinau Energy Supply 
Improvement TA 
Energy Efficiency Program and 
Action Plan 
Public Utilities Subsidies Study 
(DFID) 
Energy Policy Note 
Policy Notes for the Government 
of Moldova 
Partnerships and TFs: 
CDCF – Moldova Biomass 
Heating ERPA 
CDCF – Energy Conservation 
and Emissions Reduction  
SIDA TF on Financing Energy 
Sector Reform and Efficiency 
Improvements 
PPIAF: Chisinau Energy Supply 
Improvement Project  
Planned AAA: 
Energy Efficiency TA 
IFC: 
Advisory service and investment 
to promote PPPs, energy 
efficiency credit lines to local 
banks. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Non-technical losses in the 
transmission network were 
nonexistent in 2009, while the 
non technical losses in the 
distribution network were 
reduced by 94.5 percent, 
reaching 0.6 percent in 2009 (the 
initial target was the reduction of 
non technical losses in the 
transmission and distribution 
networks by 75 percent). 
Targets for public heating 
exceeded. 35 institutions and 37 
residential buildings have heat 
and domestic hot water 
availability throughout the entire 
year (including during the winter 
heating season, which is more 
than 120 days/year as initially 
planned). 8,399 students and 1.5 
million patients, staff and visitors 
benefit from facilities heated 120 
days or more during the winter 
season. Additional Financing 
allowed scaling up the heating 
component, thus increasing the 
impact.  

Strategic Goal 4:  Agricultural competitiveness   
CPS Outcomes 
Milestones 

Number of agricultural 
enterprises with internationally 
recognized quality certificates 
increased from 30 in 2007 to 80 
at the end of 2011. 

More efficient use of market info 
and technical knowledge along 
agricultural value chain leading 
to (as measured in 6 pilot 

Law promoting enabling 
environment for SCA (Savings 
and Credit Associations) 
development passed. 
Increased entrepreneurial activity 
in the Rural Investment Services 
Project areas and increased 
survival rates. 
Land re-parceling implemented 
with participation of at least 30 
percent of the population in 6 
villages. 

Revised CPS Outcomes and 
Milestones 

Progress to date 

CPS Instruments and Partners 

SCA Regulator established. The 
financial crisis impacted 
negatively the portfolio quality 
of SCAs; the SCA Regulator was 
initially slow to respond but now 
showing stronger supervisory 
capacity and interventions with 
problematic institutions.  
40 percent of village population 
participated in land re-parceling 
implemented in 6 villages; re-
parceling now being undertaken 

Ongoing/Completed Lending: 
Rural Investment Services 
Project 2 Additional Financing 
Competitiveness Enhancement 
Project 2 Additional Financing 
Disaster Risk Mitigation and 
Adaptation Project 
Planned Lending: 
Agricultural Competitiveness 
Project 
Competitiveness DPO 

Re-parceling activities 
implemented in another 40 
villages, in addition to the 6 pilot 
villages. 

18 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
villages compared with baseline 
and control cases): 
 Higher output value and 
lower variability; 
 
Fewer loss making farms; 
 Higher total factor 
productivity in surveyed 
farms. 

USD value of loans disbursed 
with at least one bank with credit 
lines to rural sector. 

Ongoing/Completed AAA: 
Country Economic 
Memorandum   
Policy Notes for the Government 
of Moldova 
Agricultural Sector Policy 
Revision and Budget TA 
Reducing Vulnerability to 
Climate Change of Agricultural 
Systems in Moldova TA 
Partnerships and TFs: 
Agricultural Pollution Control 
Project (GEF) 
SIDA Support to RISP 2 
GFRP Moldova Food Security 
TA 
Planned AAA: 
Agricultural Competitiveness TA 
Competitiveness and structural 
reform follow-up work 
Skills Measurement Survey 
IFC: 
Direct financing to companies in 
agribusiness, credit lines to local 
banks, which lend to 
agribusiness sector and to the 
rural areas. This will be 
complemented by IFC expansion 
of advisory services in the 
agribusiness sector and for small 
and medium enterprises.  

in 40 additional villages (20 
percent participation). Impact 
assessment of the six pilot 
villages is under way, to be 
completed by the end of April 
2011. 
762 rural businesses have been 
created (as of end-March 2011) 
under RISP II, with a first-year 
survival rate close to 100 
percent. 
Growth in lending to agricultural 
and rural sectors has exceeded 
targets. It has reached MDL 3.5 
billion as of end-March 2011 
(compared to a 2012 target of 
MDL 2.85 billion and a baseline 
of MDL 2.14 billion). 
A total of 111 agricultural 
enterprises (which exceeds the 
target of 80) received 
internationally recognized 
quality certificates: 80 – I 
SO9000, 21 – HACCP, and 10 – 
GlobalGap. 
Increased number of agro-
processors adopting mitigation 
measures and increased area of 
agricultural land with resource 
conservation technologies and 
increased production of 
organically-certified products 
through the Ag Pollution Control 
Project: 
 
59 farms installed adequate 
manure storage facilities. 
7 agro-processors installed 
WWTPs. Efficient irrigation 
technology introduced on 
720ha of land exposed to 
soil erosion on 27 farms. 
Grassed waterways, buffer 

19 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
strips, forest belts on 253ha 
(9farms) (while the 
percentage of achievement 
cannot be measured since 
no target was set at 
appraisal (the M&E 
framework at the time did 
not require performance 
targets), the number of 
interventions is significant). 

Strengthened farmers’ 
preparedness to climate risks 
through information on practical 
techniques for adaptation, i.e. 
grants/demonstration about 
adaptation to climate risks, on a 
pilot basis: 
 At least 50 investment 
grants are provided and 
introduced at demonstration 
plots. 

Pillar II.  Minimizing Social and Environmental Risks, Building Human Capital, and Promoting Social Inclusion 

Country Development Goals / Outcomes 
 Decreased percentage of people below poverty line of USD 4.3/day PPP from 34.5 percent in 2006. 
 
Increased access to quality preschool programs from 71.1 percent in 2008 to 75 percent in 2011 for children aged 3-6 and from 77.1 percent in 2008 to 85percent in 2011 
for children aged 5-6. 
 
Improved quality and equitable access to general education from 94.1 percent in 2004 to 95 percent in 2011 and to 98 percent in 2015. 
 Reduced maternal mortality rate.  
 Reduced HIV/AIDS incidence per 100,000. 
 Reduced TB-associated mortality per 100,000. 
 
Improved coverage and quality of water and sanitation services—57 percent of population will have sustainable access to improved water source by 2010 and 68.5 
percent will have access by 2015. 
Issues and obstacles 
 
Fragmentation of social assistance transfers has limited their ability to reach the poor. 
 
Increased Government capacity is needed to implement the recently approved social support law. 
 
Pension benefits in Moldova are not yet based reliably on actual contributions paid.  The long-term financial sustainability of the pension system will require expanding 
the limited capacity of the ministry for policy analysis and monitoring and evaluation on social protection issues. 
 
There is a reduced capacity for preschool services, particularly in rural communities.   
 Modern learning and development standards have been developed and implemented; Early Childhood Curriculum reviewed; human resources need to be trained on 

20 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

modern teaching methods; new teaching and learning materials need to be introduced.   
 
School enrollment varies by income level.  
 
Population-based funding is used to allocate budgets to schools but school directors have had no flexibility in the use of their budgets. 
 A declining number of school age children has led to smaller classes and smaller schools.  
 Health indicators remain below EU averages.  Chronic diseases such as cardiovascular disease cause double the share of avoidable mortality in the working age 
population as in the EU-10.   
Problems in the health sector include: 
informal payments for health services; 
lack of health insurance for the non-public sector working population; 
lack of adequately skilled doctors and nurses; 
need for consolidation of the healthcare infrastructure;   
poor capacity for surveillance and diagnosis to react to infectious diseases. 
The quality and reliability of Moldova’s water supply and wastewater services are generally deficient. Few of the existing wastewater treatment facilities meet standards 
and many are abandoned due to unaffordable operating and maintenance costs. 
 Water and sanitation service coverage should be expanded in a way that favors the poor, who typically are connected to public services last.   
 
The absence of an obsolete pesticides management strategy has increased the possibilities for leakage of toxic materials to the environment. 
 Moldova has an unusually high amount of PCBs requiring disposal.  
Strategic Goal 5:  Broader inclusion and better social protection 
CPS Outcomes 
Milestones 

Progress to date 

CPS Instruments and Partners 

o 
o 
o 
o 
o 

Share of non-contributory social 
transfers received by the bottom 
20 percent of households in 
terms of income increased from 
40 percent in 2009 to 50 percent 
in 2011. 

Proportion of new pensioners 
with pension eligibility 
determined outside the Pension 
Insurance Law increased from 98 
percent (excluding military and 
police) to 100 percent. 

Proportion of new pensions 
calculation based on actual 
contributions paid increased 
from 60 percent to 100 percent. 

More actuarially sustainable 
retirement age – increasing by 6 
months per calendar year (2008 
baseline is age 62 for men and 57 
for women). 

Law on social care services 
adopted and Strategy on disabled 
persons approved. 

Revised CPS Outcomes and 
Milestones 
Improved equity and inclusion: 
increased coverage and 
maintained targeting accuracy of 
the Ajutor Social Program: 
 20 percent of population in 
the poorest quintile receive 
AS benefits. 
 Targeting accuracy is 
maintained such that at least 
65 percent of Ajutor Social 
transfers reach the poorest 
population quintile. 
 Spending on categorical 
benefits reduced by 22 
percent. 

Increased allocative efficiency - 
categorical benefits 
consolidation for fiscally 

21 

New Social Assistance system 
piloted in 2008 and scaled up in 
2009 and 2010; old system still 
in place but being phased out by 
freezing Nominative 
Compensation benefits and 
stopping new entrants while 
cancelling them for all categories 
of recipients except WWII 
veterans, Afghanistan veterans 
and Chernobyl victims in 2012.  

According to the MOU with 
IMF, the GoM embarked upon 
development of plan for 
consolidation of all categorical 
benefits which should be 
delivered by end 2011. 
The distribution of benefits 

Ongoing/Completed Lending: 
Health Services and Social 
Assistance, including Additional 
Financing 
Social Investment Fund 2 
Strengthening the Effectiveness 
of the Social Safety Net Project 
Planned Lending: 
Health Services and Social 
Assistance Additional Financing 
Partnerships and TFs: 
EC Moldova Regional 
Development and Social 
Protection Grant (Social 
Component) 
Grant for Second Additional 
Financing for the Moldova 
Social Investment Fund Project 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
sustainable expansion of Ajutor 
Social Program: 
 Enhanced administrative 
efficiency, governance, and 
transparency. 
 Turnaround time for Ajutor 
Social application processing, 
including verification and 
eligibility decision, is reduced 
to 25 days. 
 Increased number of Moldova 
citizens is aware of Ajutor 
Social (5 percent increase 
from the baseline). 
 Process of Social Assistance 
Automated Information 
System (SAAIS) introduction 
is launched.  
 Social Inspectorate is 
established and functional. 
New initial pensions calculation 
fully based on actual 
contributions paid (valorized 
with wage growth), and the real 
value of pensions preserved 
(indexed with inflation rate). 
More actuarially sustainable 
retirement age – retirement age 
equalized and increased for both 
genders at 6 months increments 
per calendar year. 
Strategic Goal 6:  Increased quality of and access to education in line with MDGs 
CPS Outcomes 
Milestones 
Revised CPS Outcomes and 
Milestones 
Increased enrollment in 
preschool programs from 71.1 
percent in 2008 to 75 percent in 
2011 for children aged 3-6 and 
from 77.1 percent in 2008 to 85 
percent in 2011 for children aged 
5-6. 

Increased access to quality 
preschool programs from 71.1 
percent in 2008 to 75 percent in 
2011 for children aged 3-6 and 
from 77.1 percent in 2008 to 85 
percent in 2011 for children aged 
5-6. 

Preschool facilities rehabilitated 
and endowed in selected 
communities. 
Percent of preschool staff trained 
by EFA-FTI, cumulated with 
other trainings provided by the 
MEY through other sources will 

across consumption deciles 
focusing on social assistance 
shows that only 20.9 percent of 
the overall benefits reached the 
poorest 10 percent of the 
population in 2009, and about 40 
percent of benefits reached the 
poorest 20 percent of population. 
During 2010, a total of 59,000 
households benefited from 
Ajutor Social with an average 
allowance of 721 lei per month. 
Concerns over IT system 
capacity to support Social 
Assistance program, and 
retention of qualified IT staff to 
manage it. 
SAAIS development has been 
launched and is being extended 
with additional functionalities. 
Concerns regarding the capacity 
of MLSPF for analysis and 
monitoring of SAAIS data that 
would feed into social safety net 
policy-making. 

(SIDA) 
PHRD Grant for 
deinstitutionalization and 
mentally ill 
Community Participation in 
Post-conflict Regions (Japan) 
PSIA TF  
Ongoing/Completed AAA:   
Country Economic 
Memorandum 
Pension Policy Note 
Poverty Update and TA 
Policy Notes for the Government 
of Moldova 
Impacts of the International 
Financial Crisis on Workers’ 
Remittances, Migration and 
Poverty in Moldova 
Planned AAA: 
Social analyses (ESW) 

Progress to date 

CPS Instruments and Partners 

Significant increases in pre-
school enrolment rates, reaching 
80 percent in 2009. 

Ongoing/Completed Lending: 
Quality Education in Rural Areas 
Project 
Social Investment Fund 2, 
including Additional Financing 
Planned Lending: 
Education Program for Results 

22 

 
 
 
 
 
(P4R)  
Partnerships and TFs: 
Education for All—Fast Track 
Initiative-Preschool Phase II 
(Grant) 
Education for All—Fast Track 
Initiative Phase III (Grant) 
Ongoing/Completed AAA: 
Country Economic 
Memorandum 
Policy Notes for the Government 
of Moldova 
Planned AAA: 
Public Expenditure Review 
Education Chapter/Note (stand 
alone) 
Education Rationalization TA 

6.4 percent of all pre-schools 
renovated and endowed; approx 
34 percent of pre-school teachers 
trained and 37.5 percent of pre-
schools provided with teaching 
and learning materials. 
New policies developed and 
applied in pre-schools: child-
centered curriculum, early 
learning development standards, 
and professional standards for 
teachers, pre-service and in-
service curriculum for teachers, 
and associated guides.  
Baccalaureate scores increased 
by an average of 3.2 percent 
since baseline, and the difference 
between rural and urban scores 
reduced. The difference not only 
decreased but also reversed. The 
difference between average score 
for rural and for urban BAC is 
1.8 points in favor of rural area. 
Rural average score is 2.4 
percent higher than urban 
average score. 
MOE in the process of 
developing an implementation 
plan for the reform program to 
take place from April 2011 – 
2013.  

increase from baseline of 14.7 
percent in 2008. 

Preschool facilities rehabilitated 
and endowed in selected 
communities. 
Percent of preschool staff trained 
by EFA-FTI, cumulated with 
other trainings provided by the 
MEY through other sources will 
increase from baseline of 14.7 
percent in 2008. 

Participation by Moldova in at 
least one international 
assessment program. 

Increased quality of education in 
rural areas as measured by 
increased student achievement 
(baseline 9th Grade National 
Assessment and Baccalaureate 
scores identified by subject: 
achievement will increase by at 
least 5 percent). 

 

Improved efficiency of spending 
on education 
 
Formula funding, developed 
in 2008, will be piloted in 2 
raions by 2010. 
Increased average class size 
from 22 students in urban 
areas and 18 students in 
rural areas in 2007 to 23 
students in urban areas and 
19 students in rural areas by 
2012. 

Revised funding formula for 
schools has been piloted and 
rolled out nationwide 
percent of schools in pilot Raions 
that have become autonomous 
will increase from 0 percent in 
2008 
School optimization strategy 
piloted and rolled out 
nationwide. 

Improved efficiency of spending 
on education as illustrated by 
school optimization, class 
rationalization, implementation 
of per student financing and 
other measures agreed to in an 
MOU with the IMF implemented 
successfully. 
Amendments to the legal code to 
allow for larger class sizes and 
change in the way teachers are 
hired. 
Increased average class sizes 
nationwide by start of school 
year of September 2012 [exact 
numerical increase TBD]. 

23 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rationalization of the school 
network by closure of schools 
and creation of hub schools 
[exact numerical values TBD]. 
Per student financing being 
implemented in 11 raions by 
2012.  
Strategic Goal 7:  Improved access to and quality of health, water, and sanitation services and reduced environmental degradation and health hazards 
CPS Strategic Goals and 
Milestones 
Revised CPS Outcomes and 
Progress to date 
CPS Instruments and Partners 
Outcomes 
Milestones 
Increased efficiency in resource 
Increased utilization of primary 
use in the health sector as 
health care services:  
measured by higher utilization of 
Baseline: 9,763,321 visits per 
primary care services.  
annum; more recent update 
10,225, 282 
Increased satisfaction for use of 
government health services: 
Baseline (from LiTs 2006): 43 
percent of citizens were 
satisfied); more recent update 
(LiTs 2010): 67 percent of 
citizens are satisfied with quality 
and efficiency of public service 
delivery. 
Decreased number of GP 
vacancies in rural areas from 20 
percent to 15 percent by 2012. 

Number of visits to primary care 
facilities increased by at least 5 
percent. 
Increased number of primary 
care physicians to be directly 
contracted by National Health 
Insurance Company. 
# of rural primary care facilities 
upgraded and staffed with 
trained personnel 
Decrease in GP vacancies in 
rural health facilities  

Improved access to quality 
health services.  

20 Primary Care centers 
rehabilitated, and 15 in advanced 
stage of works 
88 primary care providers 
directly contracted by NHIC by 
end 2010, up from 29 in 2007 – a 
203 percent increase. 
Revised curriculum for primary 
health care staff and managers 
approved and implemented; 
Cumulative increase of 11 
percent in number of GPs 
employed at rehabilitated PHCs. 
35 standardized medical 
protocols for primary care 
produced. 
New Diagnostic Related Group 
System piloted in 7 hospitals. 
Legislative Framework for PPPs 
established and PPP pilots 
initiated. 
Hospital Master Plan completed 
and approved in 2010: 
Government Decision No. 379 
dated 07.05.2010 regarding 
Hospital sector development 
Program for 2010-2012. 
Health insurance extended to 
include social assistance 
beneficiaries; incentives for other 
vulnerable groups and farmers 

Ongoing/Completed Lending: 
Health Services and Social 
Assistance, including Additional 
Financing 
Avian Influenza Project 
National Water Supply and 
Sanitation Project 
Social Investment Fund 2, 
including Additional Financing 
Disaster and Climate Risk 
Management Project 
Planned Lending: 
Health Services and Social 
Assistance Additional Financing 
Agricultural Competitiveness 
Project 
Partnerships and TFs: 
EC Regional Development Grant 
(Water and Sanitation 
component – Wastewater 
Treatment Plant in the town of 
Orhei) 
JSDF for Hepatitis B & C  
Moldova Health PPPs (IFC) 
Coordinated Program in the 
Health Sector (EU) 
POPS Stockpiles Management 
and Destruction (GEF, Dutch, 
Canada) 
PCF: Moldova Soil Conservation 

National Hospital Master Plan 
completed and approved by 
Government to guide health 
infrastructure investments. 

Increased health financial risk 
protection. 
Baseline: 76.7 percent of 
population covered by health 

A strategy to increase insurance 
coverage among 15-49 year olds 
developed and implemented. 

Increased share of the population 
with health insurance:  
Baseline: 76.7 percent (2007) 

24 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
insurance (2007). 

Value in 2010: 80.8 percent. 

Increased proportion of the 
population with sustainable 
access to an improved water 
source, urban and rural (MDGs 
Indicator 29: by 2010 (FY11) 57 
percent and by 2015 (FY16) 68.5 
percent. 

# of Apa Canal employees per 
thousand households connected 
to a water network (baselines 
identified for each village). 
# of drinking water samples 
meeting Moldovan 
bacteriological standards from 
participating villages’ water 
supply system. 

Reduced environmental 
degradation as measured by 
reduction in pollution of areas 
under improved land 
management. 

25 

introduced and approved. 
Additional financing supported 
distribution of food packages to 
11.6 percent of pregnant and 
lactating women and 10 percent 
of children under 2 years in 
response to the financial and 
economic crisis. 
Successful implementation of the 
Avian Influenza project has 
established the capacity to 
monitor and respond to 
infectious disease outbreaks in 
both the animal and human 
health sectors. 
Sector strategy financing revised 
(funded by EC/ADA). 
The National Water Supply and 
Sanitation Project is undergoing 
major restructuring, including a 
revision of project outcomes and 
monitoring and evaluation 
indicators. The restructuring will 
be completed by November 2011 
(mid-term review is planned for 
September 2011). 

Quantitative targets for POPs 
project, such as the destruction 
of POPs contaminated stocks of 
obsolete pesticides and PCB 
capacitors were achieved and in 
some cases surpassed: 
 
safe disposal of 1,293 
metric tons of obsolete 
pesticides;  
safe disposal of 934 metric 
tons of PCB-contaminated 
capacitors (approximately 
19,000 units);  
Technical capacity of Moldovan 
laboratory and testing 

 

Projects 1,2 
Renewable Energy from 
Agricultural Waste (GEF) 
CDCF – Moldova Biomass 
Heating  
Energy Conservation and 
Emissions Reduction (Carbon 
Fund) 
Community Support Program for 
Sustainable and Integrated Forest 
Management and Carbon 
Sequestration through 
Forestation 
Improving Forest Law 
Enforcement and Governance’ 
(FLEG) TF 
GFDRR: Moldova Disaster and 
Climate Risk Management CB 
Ongoing/Completed AAA:   
Advisory services and 
investment to promote public-
private partnerships in health 
(IFC) 
Policy Notes for the Government 
of Moldova 
Sector Coordination Council 
GFDRR: Moldova Post-Disaster 
(Flood) Needs Assessment 
Reducing Vulnerability to 
Climate Change of Agricultural 
Systems in Moldova TA 
Planned AAA: 
Health sector BOOST  
Agriculture TA 
TA / Dialogue on environment 
investment strategies and 
integration of environmental 
considerations in other sectors 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
infrastructure for POPs 
substances upgraded.  
New legislation, by-laws and 
guidelines aimed at improving 
the regulatory framework for 
POPs substances, introduced.  
Forestation of 20,300 hectares 
through the Soil Conservation 
projects. As a result, Moldsilva – 
the State Forestry Agency, is 
receiving regular carbon 
payments for an estimated total 
of 1.9 million tons of CO2 to be 
sequestered by 2017. The 
Projects have supported the 
implementation of a national 
competitive grant scheme for 
participating communities that 
provided grants to more than 50 
localities for capacity building 
activities aimed at improving 
management of more than 6,000 
hectares of community land 
(mostly pastures). 
The Community Forestry Project 
has contributed to the forestation 
of 10,600 hectares and is now 
awaiting validation under the 
United Nations Framework 
Convention on Climate Change 
(UNFCCC) Clean Development 
Mechanism procedures. Around 
600 thousand tons of CO2 are 
estimated to be sequestered. A 
national competitive grant 
scheme for participating 
communities to provide grant 
funding for localized capacity 
building and improvements in 
forest and pasture management.  
Increased awareness of 
environmental issues in agro-
industry and among farmers 

26 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
through the Ag Pollution Control 
Project: 
 
58 percent of people 
surveyed aware of 
environmental issues in 
agriculture (while a 
percentage evaluation of the 
achievement is not possible 
due to the absence of a 
target, the increase in public 
awareness of environmental 
issues in agriculture is 
significant). 

Enhanced ability of the State 
Hydro-meteorological Center to 
forecast severe weather and 
improve Moldova’s capacity to 
prepare for and respond to 
natural disasters, as measured by: 
 More accurate and specific 
forecasting of weather 
conditions; 
Expanded lead-time of 
weather warnings to users, 
particularly Department of 
Exceptional Situations 
(DES);  
Strengthened capacity to 
coordinate response to 
emergencies. 

 

 

Pillar III.  Improving Public Sector Governance 

Country Goals 
 
Improved performance of civil servants. 
 
Improved quality of regulatory services. 
 
Sound policies developed, approved, and implemented by the GoM.    
 Overall fiscal discipline and resource allocation improved (as evidenced by IMF monitoring and assessment). 
Issues and obstacles 
 
Systematic performance appraisal for civil servants linked to career development is not being practiced. 

27 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

The pay system is fragmented and opaque due to multiple supplements, does not motivate consistent performance and professional development, and  is not competitive 
in the labor market. 
 Citizens are dissatisfied with long waits, poor customer service, and convoluted procedures of services provided by government regulatory agencies (issuing permits, 
licenses, certificates) 
The National Development Strategy is adopted, its management has moved from the Ministry of Economy to the Government Office, initial capacity building skills for 
policy review and coordination have begun, but the procedures, methodologies and skills for drafting policies and linking them to higher level policy goals are lacking.   
 Budget management information is fragmented and is not readily available to decision makers.  
 
Public financial decisions rely on overly centralized, command-oriented management and financial controls, and undeveloped audit systems. 
 An effective public procurement system depends on Public Procurement Law which accords to international standards, effective secondary legislation and an efficient 
and effective authorizing environment. 
 
Provision of public services to citizens and businesses is slow, bureaucratic and corrupt.  
 There is no strategic framework or common infrastructure for e-Government, which results in duplications, increased operational costs and risks of data loss.  
Strategic Goal 8:  Building a professional civil service 
CPS Outcomes 
Milestones 

CPS Instruments and Partners 

Progress to date 

Revised CPS Outcomes and 
Milestones 

Merit system and ethics 
improved for civil servants.  
Basic compliance with the EU 
civil service assessment 
requirements achieved.   

Performance management 
system in the civil service 
implemented; annual 
performance ratings fall into 
each category of ratings.   

Percentage of vacancies filled 
through competitive merit-based 
selection improved from 50 
percent to 80 percent. 
Turnover percentage of newly 
recruited civil servants over the 5 
year period decreased.  
Number of qualified civil 
servants applying to vacant 
positions in the government 
increased.  
Regulation on civil service 
performance management 
adopted and enforced at the level 
of central public administration 
authorities. 
Compulsory requirements for 
receiving a regulatory service are 
revised and redundant 
requirements abolished; business 
processes of regulatory services 
redesigned; performance of civil 
servants in regulatory agencies 
improved as assessed by periodic 
client satisfaction survey. 

28 

New civil service classification 
and grading system developed. 
Increasing trend of competition 
based employment at the central 
government level during 2007-
2010. 

Personnel performance appraisal 
system introduced in 2009 and 
applied in 2009 and 2010. 86 
percent of civil servants 
participated in the performance 
evaluation exercise in 
2009/2010. 

Ongoing/Completed Lending: 
Economic Recovery DPO 
(including CRW allocation) 
Planned Lending: 
Competitiveness DPO 
Partnerships and TFs: 
Public Administration TA—
Multi-Donor Trust Fund (DFID, 
SIDA, Dutch) 
Ongoing/Completed AAA:   
Country Systems Assessment 
Country Economic 
Memorandum 
Policy Notes for the Government 
of Moldova 
Planned AAA: 
Structural reform follow-up work 

   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The structure of the civil service 
New civil service remuneration 
pay improved by incorporating 
act (based on grading that 
supplementary payments into the 
reflects job classification criteria) 
base pay and allowing for less 
approved and implemented as of 
than 20 percent performance 
2010. 
bonus. 
Average civil service 
Improvement of pay adequacy 
remuneration increases relative 
and wage bill management, as 
to private sector wages, reaching 
measured by CPIA rating #15.d 
at least 80 percent of 
(from 2.5 to at least 3.0). 
corresponding labor market avg. 
Strategic Goal 9:  Increased capacity of the public sector to develop and implement public policies   
CPS Outcomes 
Milestones 
Revised CPS Outcomes and 
Milestones 
Sector policies are reflected in 
the Medium-term Budget 
Framework (MTBF). 
Government Action Plan is 
aligned with the National 
Development Strategy, other 
strategic documents and 
budgeted in line with the MTBF. 

The legal and methodological 
basis for policy process approved 
and implementation started. 

The new sector policies are 
aligned with NDS, budgeted, and 
their impact assessed prior to 
government approval. Any issue 
on policy impacts are cleared at a 
technical level prior to policy 
decision-making by the GO with 
ministries. 
Improvement of policy 
coordination and responsiveness, 
as measured by increased CPIA 
indicator from 3.5 to at least 4.0.    

Central policy coordination 
capacity in the GO improved 
through proper staffing and 
training. 

Impact assessment methodology 
developed and respective civil 
servants trained. 

Ministries and agencies are 
required to issue (and publish on 
their web sites) annual results 
reports according to methodology 
approved by the Government. 

29 

Revision and endorsement of the 
payroll scheme in 20 out of 24 
Central Government authorities 
during 2010. 

Progress to date 

CPS Instruments and Partners 

Planned Lending: 
Competitiveness DPO  
Partnerships and TFs: 
Public Administration TA—
Multi-Donor Trust Fund (DFID, 
SIDA, Dutch) 
Planned AAA: 
Structural reform follow-up work 

Methodologies for National 
Development Strategy 
preparation have been approved 
and applied.  

Policy coordination improved 
through institutional re-
structuring; State Chancellery 
policy coordination function 
introduced in 2008 increased the 
efficiency of the policy 
coordination efforts at the 
Central Government level; 
Capacity of Policy, Strategic 
Planning and Aid Coordination 
Department strengthened.  
A system of ex-ante policy 
impact analysis has been 
developed and introduced in 
selected policy areas. 
Methodology for the 
development of Institutional 
Development Plan completed, 
approved and applied at the level 
of central government.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Strategic Goal 10:  Increased transparency and accountability in the management of public monies   
CPS Outcomes 
Milestones 
Revised CPS Outcomes and 
Milestones 

Improvement of budget 
classification system, as 
measured by improved PEFA 
rating (baseline rating - C, 
expected rating - A). 

New budget classification is 
integrated with the unified chart 
of accounts and aligned with 
COFOG and GFS2001 
standards.  

Improved effectiveness of 
external audit (PEFA baseline 
rating C+, expected rating - at 
least B). 

Increased competition in public 
procurement (increase in percent 
of value of all awarded contracts 
awarded through competitive 
process). 

Public internal financial control 
and audit system based on EU 
model established. 

Institutional capacity of the 
Court of Accounts to perform 
external audit function 
strengthened. 
All required secondary 
procurement legislation in place, 
public procurement department 
strengthened (AMRPPHA), 
electronic procurement system 
implemented, and appropriate 
amendments introduced into the 
primary legislation (PPL). 

30 

Progress to date 

CPS Instruments and Partners 

Despite the fiscal situation, 2009 
budget deficit target met, and 
2010 budget performance better 
than agreed under IMF program.  
MoF approved new integrated 
budget classification and chart of 
accounts compliant with GFS 
2001. Implementation will be 
through FMIS, on which 
progress has been slow though if 
now kept on track should be 
implemented in time for 2012 
budget preparation process.  
National Internal Audit 
Standards introduced; Public 
Internal Financial Control 
legislation approved. 
Five Performance Audit Pilots 
successfully completed by the 
Court of Accounts in 2009 and 
results of two published. 

Public Procurement Law passed. 
Brought substantial 
improvements in the legislative 
framework and public 
procurement in line with 
international standards and 
practices.  
AMRPPHA restructured in late 
2009 and new Public 
Procurement Agency (PPA) 
established under the Ministry of 
Finance. 
The public procurement system 
of Moldova assessed in 2010 by 

Ongoing Lending: 
Public Financial Management 
Project 
Governance e-Transformation 
Project 
Planned Lending: 
Public Financial Management 2 
Partnerships and TFs: 
Public Administration TA—
Multi-Donor Trust Fund (DFID, 
SIDA, Dutch) 
Strategic Development of the 
Court of Accounts (DFID, 
Dutch) 
Dutch Grant for Co-financing of 
the PFM Project 
Successor Grant for PFM Project 
(SIDA) 
Training Capacity Building and 
Training related to Management 
of Public Finances (SIDA) 
IDF Grant for Capacity Building 
in Moldova Public Sector 
Accounting Project 
e-Transformation Trust Fund 
(Dutch) 
Ongoing/Completed AAA:   
Country Systems Assessment 
Country Economic 
Memorandum  
Policy Notes for the Government 
of Moldova 
Country Procurement 
Assessment Report (CPAR) 
Public Expenditure Review 2 
Public Expenditure Review 2011 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Moldova e-development TA 
Citizen Report Card 2010 
A&A ROSC Follow-up 
Planned AAA: 
Public Financial Management 
TA 
Apps for good governance in 
Moldova (Third Party 
Monitoring Window - CSF 
Demand for Good Governance) 
IDF for Public Procurement 
PEFA (led by the EC) 

using OECD/DAC methodology 
based on four main pillars and 
twelve indicators. 
There are still deficiencies in the 
legislative and institutional 
framework, which could be 
addressed by amending the 
Public Procurement Law, 
completing missing secondary 
regulations, including standard 
bidding documents and standard 
forms of contracts, improving the 
existing website of the Public 
Procurement Agency to make it 
fully functional to ensure greater 
transparency, developing 
guidance notes to and manuals to 
improve contract administration, 
improving existing training 
programs, and ensuring 
independent complaint handling 
mechanism. 
The use of single source 
procurement decreased 
significantly. 
Electronic Government 
Procurement (e-GP) readiness 
assessment conducted as part of 
CPAR. First phase of the e-GP 
application developed by 
contracting a private software 
development company. 
However, lack of financial 
resources and no final decision 
regarding the e-GP business 
model delayed the 
implementation of the system. 

Improved capacity and 
management of ICT in the public 
sector: 
 Governance center set up and 
operational (staff trained; 
public support for e-

31 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
government increased from 
53 to 60 percent; percentage 
of cost recovery of the e-GC 
increased from 0 to 20 
percent). 
 e-transformation enabling 
environment present, 
including the policy, legal 
and regulatory frameworks 
(100 data sets available on the 
Open Government Data 
website; 2 institutions making 
datasets available through 
OGD); 
Improved service delivery and 
transparency in the public sector: 
 Shared e-Government 
infrastructure established 
(percentage of civil servants 
using shared e-government 
infrastructure increased to 5 
percent; number of 
Government databases with 
central backup increased to 
5). 
 e-services developed (number 
of transactions completed 
through Government services 
portal increased to 100,000 
by 2013; average processing 
time for public services 
(business licenses) decreased 
to 3 days by 2013). 

32 

 
ANNEX 2: LIST OF ACTIVE BANK-ADMINISTERED TRUST FUNDS IN MOLDOVA 

TF # 
TF053065 

TF054017 

TF055170 
TF055175 

TF055875 
TF056111 

TF056601 
TF056815 
TF057273 
TF057662 

TF058159 

TF092641 

TF093088 

TF093288 
TF093407 

TF093408 
TF093702 
TF093720 
TF094297 
TF094801 
TF094952 

TF095950 

TF096087 
TF097442 
TF097543 
TF097665 
TF097883 
TF097895 
TF098049 
TF098414 

TF098462 
TF099088 

TF099216 
Total 

Trust Fund Name 
PCF-MOLDOVA:SOIL CONSERVATION PROJECT 
TRAINING CAPACITY BUILDING AND TRAINING RELATED TO 
MANAGEMENT OF PUBLIC FINANCES (CF UNDER TF054016) 
DUTCH GRANT FOR CO-FINANCING OF THE PUBLIC FINANCIAL 
MANAGEMENT PROJECT 
PHRD-MOLDOVA: COMPETITIVENESS ENHANCEMENT PROJECT 
GEF FSP-MOLDOVA: POPS STOCKPILES MANAGEMENT AND 
DESTRUCTION PROJECT 
CDCF - MOLDOVA BIOMASS HEATING ERPA 
MDTF TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE SUPPORT TO PUBLIC 
ADMINISTRATION REFORM OF MOLDOVA 
BCF - MOLDOVA SOIL CONSERVATION ERPA 
SUPPORT TO RISP 2 
MDTF FOR STRATEGIC DEVELOPMENT OF THE CoA 
REPUBLIC OF MOLDOVA: IDF GRANT FOR CAPACITY BUILDING IN 
MOLDOVA PUBLIC SECTOR ACCOUNTING PROJECT 
MD: HEALTH SERVICES AND SOCIAL ASSISTANCE ADDITIONAL 
FINANCING GRANT 
COMMUNITY SUPPORT PROGRAM FOR SUSTAINABLE AND 
INTEGRATED FOREST MANAGEMENT AND CARBON SEQUESTRATION 
THROUGH FORESTATIO N. 

MOLDOVA DUTCH TA-TF FINANCIAL SECTOR REFORM 
COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION IN POST-CONFLICT REGIONS 
COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION IN POST-CONFLICT REGIONS (BANK 
EXECUTED) 
PREVENTING HEPATITIS B&C IN MOLDOVA 
PREVENTING HEPATITIS B&C IN MOLDOVA (BANK-EXECUTED) 
MD - EFA FTI SPN - CF 
Successor Swedish Grant for Public Finance Management Project 
Moldova Regional Development and Social Protection Project 
Swedish Grant for Second Additional Financing for the Moldova 
Social Investment Fund II Project 
Impacts of the International Financial Crisis on Workers’ 
Remittances, Migration, and Poverty in Moldova. 
GFDRR: MOLDOVA POST-DISASTER (FLOOD) NEEDS ASSESSMENT 
GFDRR: Moldova Disaster and Climate Risk Management CB 
Moldova Health 
ECSPE - Shared Growth Moldova 
Chisinau Energy Supply Improvement Technical Assistance 
PPIAF: CHISINAU ENERGY SUPPLY IMPROVEMENT PROJECT 
Moldova Food Security AAA 
Leadership Development Program for Moldovan Officials on ICT for 
Improved Governance and Growth 
MOLDOVA ESREI TF: SUPERVISION OF RECIPIENT ACTIVITIES 
Regional Education for All-Fast Tract Initiative Education Program 
Development Fund (EPDF)  

Net Grant 
Amount 
4,550.00 

Funds Disb.  
1,523.91 

2,209.58 

1,556.65 

4,350.03 
4,500.00 

6,350.00 
1,969.04 

6,150.00 
2,478.00 
7,272.44 
2,786.60 

3,302.65 
2,887.25 

6,336.43 
286.95 

4,404.09 
776.67 
6,082.27 
2,629.50 

 ( Figures in thousands of USD ) 
Closing Date 
Donor Name 
Exec. By 
12/31/2013 MULTIPLE DONORS 
Recipient 

12/31/2011 SIDA 
Netherlands - Minister for 
Europ. Affairs & Intern. Coop. 
Japan - Ministry of Finance 

12/31/2011 
6/30/2012 

12/31/2010 MULTIPLE DONORS 
7/15/2016 MULTIPLE DONORS 

12/31/2012 MULTIPLE DONORS 
12/31/2015 MULTIPLE DONORS 
4/30/2012 SIDA 
6/30/2011 MULTIPLE DONORS 

Recipient 

Recipient 
Recipient 

Recipient 
Recipient 

Recipient 
Recipient 
Recipient 
Recipient 

160.00 

156.24 

12/31/2010 

IBRD 1818 H Street, NW 

Recipient 

7,000.00 

6,472.66 

8/31/2011 

IBRD 1818 H Street, NW 

Recipient 

975.90 

264.87 

4/2/2013 

Japan - Ministry of Finance 
Netherlands - Minister for 
Europ. Affairs & Intern. Coop. 
Japan - Ministry of Finance 

6/30/2011 
3/17/2013 

3,184.59 
1,950.00 

50.00 
1,383.76 
26.00 
160.08 
2,791.60 
16,549.15 

1,239.21 
480.91 

4.22 
684.25 
24.04 
110.11 
2,450.16 
6,194.90 

12/15/2011 
Japan - Ministry of Finance 
5/5/2012 
Japan - Ministry of Finance 
5/5/2012 
Japan - Ministry of Finance 
2/28/2011 MULTIPLE DONORS 
6/30/2011 SIDA 
6/30/2011 
EU-Commission  

2,531.65 

2,301.98 

12/31/2010 SIDA 

97.00 
100.00 
100.00 
200.00 
45.00 
150.00 
75.00 
320.00 

120.00 
238.96 

0.00 
93.45 
4.30 
46.28 
29.82 
39.72 
0.00 
8.54 

5.95 
0.00 

80.00 
80,904.38 

0.00 
50,397.98 

12/30/2011 MULTIPLE DONORS 
2/28/2011 MULTIPLE DONORS 
6/30/2011 MULTIPLE DONORS 
12/30/2012 
IFC 
4/30/2011 MULTIPLE DONORS 
6/30/2011 MULTIPLE DONORS 
6/30/2011 MULTIPLE DONORS 
6/30/2013 MULTIPLE DONORS 

9/30/2011 MULTIPLE DONORS 
12/31/2012 SIDA 

6/30/2011 MULTIPLE DONORS 

33 

Recipient 

Recipient 
Recipient 

Bank 
Recipient 
Bank 
Bank 
Recipient 
Recipient 

Recipient 

Bank 
Bank 
Bank 
Bank 
Bank 
Bank 
Bank 
Bank 

Bank 
Bank 

Bank 

 
  
 
ANNEX 3: DEVELOPMENT PARTNER COMMITMENTS BY SECTOR, CONSULTATIVE GROUP: MOLDOVA PARTNERSHIP 
FORUM, MARCH 2010 

2010 

2011 

Partners** 

Czech Republic, Finland, 
Romania, Slovakia, Sweden, EU 

2012 
Czech Republic, Finland, 
Romania, Slovakia, Sweden, EU, 
UN, World Bank 

2013 

Czech Republic, Finland, 
Romania, EU, UN, World Bank 

Sector* 

Not yet allocated 

Civil Service 
Anti-Corruption 
Fiscal And Administrative 
Decentralization 
Judiciary 
E-Government 

Business Environment 

Agriculture 

Infrastructure 
Regional Development 

Education 

Health 

Social Protection 

Budget Support 

Other Sector 

Czech Republic, Romania, 
Slovakia, Sweden, UK, EU 
Czech Republic, France, 
Hungary, Sweden, Netherlands, 
UK, UN 
Sweden, US, 

Sweden, Netherlands, US,  
Finland, UK, US, UN 
UN, World Bank 
Sweden, Netherlands, UK, EU, 
US, UN 

Switzerland, US, UN 
Czech Republic, Finland, 
Sweden, EU, Switzerland, US, 
EBRD, EIB, World Bank 
Hungary, Sweden, UK, EU 
Czech Republic, France, 
Netherlands, EU, UN, World 
Bank 
Finland, Hungary, Luxembourg, 
Switzerland, UN, World Bank, 
Global Fund 
Czech Republic, Finland, 
Hungary, Luxembourg, 
Netherlands, UK, US, UN, World 
Bank 
Poland, Netherlands, UK, EU, 
World Bank, IMF 
Denmark, Finland, France, 
Sweden, Netherlands, EU, UN, 
World Bank 

France, Sweden, UN 
US 

France, UN 

France, UN 

Sweden, Netherlands, US, UN 
Finland, US, UN 
UN 

Sweden, Netherlands, UN 
Finland, UN 

Sweden, EU, US, UN 
Switzerland, US, UN, World 
Bank 

Sweden, EU, UN 

US, UN 

Finland 

EU 

US, UN 

Finland, Sweden, Switzerland, 
US, EBRD, EIB, World Bank 
EU 

Finland, Switzerland, US, EBRD, 
EIB 
EU 

Switzerland, US 
EU 

France, Netherlands, EU, UN 

France, EU, UN 

France, EU 

Luxembourg, Switzerland, UN, 
Global Fund 

Finland, Luxembourg, 
Netherlands, US, UN 
Netherlands, EU, World Bank, 
IMF 

Switzerland, UN, Global Fund 

Switzerland, UN, Global Fund 

Finland, Netherlands, UN 

Finland, UN 

Netherlands, IMF 

Finland, Sweden, Netherlands, 
EU, UN 

Denmark, Sweden, Netherlands, 
EU, UN 

Denmark, EU, UN 

* Sectors are the chapters of the document "Rethink Moldova", prepared by the Government for the Consultative Group meeting Moldova Partnership Forum, 24th March 2010, against which 
indicative pledges were made. 
** These are partners who made pledges at the Consultative Group meeting; a number of other partners are also active in Moldova including Austria, China, Germany, Japan, Lithuania and Turkey.  

34 

 
ANNEX 4: STANDARD CPS ANNEXES 

Annex A1- 
Moldova
Key Economic & Program Indicators - Change from Last CAS

Prepa red fo r a ll CASs/Prog ress Repo rts, bu t included in Board version o f Prog ress Repo rts On ly 
As Of Date 3 /15 /2011

Forecas t in Las t CAS

Ac tual

Current CAS Forecas t

2008 a

2009 b

2010 b

2011 b

2009 c

2010__ c

2011 a

2012 b

2013 b

2014 b

Economy (CY)
Growth rates (% )
GDP
Exports
Imports

Inflat ion (% )

Public finance (% GDP)
Fiscal balance
Foreign financ ing

Internat ional reserves
 (as months of imports )

a.  Es t imated year
b.  Projec ted year
c .  Ac tual outcome 

Nat ional accounts (% GDP)
Current account balance
Gross inves tment

-18.9
33.5

-19.2
30.1

-17.0
31.4

-16.2
32.0

-0.5
1.6

-1.5
3.1

-1.0
3.0

-1.0
3.0

6.5
11.1
14.6

12.8

3.5
3.0
0.0

7.8

5.0
5.0
2.0

7.8

5.0
5.0
2.0

7.8

-6.0
-12.1
-23.6

0.0

-8.5
21.7

-6.4
5.0

6.9
12.8
13.7

7.4

-8.3
24.1

-2.5
4.8

3.5
8.7
7.3

8

-10
24.9

-1.9
3.6

4.5
7.7
6.7

6.1

-8.4
25.0

-0.7
4.4

5.0
8.7
7.0

5.4

-8.1
25.6

-0.4
4.7

4.5
9.1
6.2

4.6

-7.9
26.2

-0.7
2.8

3.3

3.2

3.3

3.4

4.4

4.5

4

4.2

4.2

4.3

35 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
36 

Moldova at a glance

5/ 9/11

Euro pe &
C ent ral
A s ia

Lo wer
m iddle
inc o m e

K e y D e v e lo pm e n t Ind i c a t o rs

M o ldo v a

( 2 0 0 9 )

P o pulat io n, m id-year (m illio ns )
Surfac e area (tho us and s q. km )
P o pulat io n gro wt h (%)
Urban po pulat io n (% o f to tal po pulat io n)

3.8
..
-0.1
..

403
23,549
0.3
64

3,767
31,923
1.2
40

GN I (A t las m et ho d, US$ billio ns )
GN I per c apita (A t las m etho d, US$ )
GN I per c apita (P P P , internat io nal $ )

5.6
1,480
3,010

2,772
6,880
13,297

7,682
2,039
4,502

GDP gro wt h (%)
GDP per c apita gro wth (%)

-6.0
-5.9

4.0
3.6

7.5
6.3

( m o s t r e c e n t e s t im a t e , 2 0 0 3 – 2 0 0 9 )

P o v ert y headc o unt rat io at $ 1.25 a day (P P P , %)
P o v ert y headc o unt rat io at $ 2.00 a day (P P P , %)
Life expec tanc y at birth (years )
Infant m o rtalit y (per 1,000 liv e births )
C hild m alnut rit io n (% o f c hildren under 5)

2
12
..
..
..

4
9
69
20
..

..
..
68
44
25

A dult lit erac y, m ale (% o f ages 15 and o lder)
A dult lit erac y, fem ale (% o f ages 15 and o lder)
Gro s s prim ary enro llm ent , m ale (% o f age gro up)
Gro s s prim ary enro llm ent , fem ale (% o f age gro up)

99
98
..
..

99
97
100
98

87
73
109
105

A c c es s to an im pro v ed water s o urc e (% o f po pulat io n)
A c c es s to im pro v ed s anitat io n fac ilit ies (% o f po pulat io n)

..
..

95
89

86
50

N e t A id F l o ws

19 8 0

19 9 0

2 0 0 0

2 0 0 9 a

(US$ m illio ns )
N et ODA and o f f ic ial aid
T o p 3 do no rs (in 2008):
   Euro pean C o mm is s io n
   United Stat es
   Sweden

..

10

123

299

..
..
..

0
9
0

5
35
2

83
36
14

A id (% o f GN I)
A id per c apit a (US$ )

..
..

0.4

9.4
..

4.5
79

..

L o n g - T e rm E c o n o m ic T re nds

C o ns um er pric es (annual % c hange)
GDP im plic it def lato r (annual % c hange)

..
..

788.5
13.5

31.2
27.3

0.0
2.2

Exc hange rate (annual av erage, lo c al per US$ )
T erm s o f t rade index (2000 = 100)

..
..

0.0
..

12.4
100

11.1
107

19 8 0 – 9 0 19 9 0 – 2 0 0 0
2 0 0 0 – 0 9
      (av erage annual gro wth %)
0.8
..
2.7
-9.6

P o pulat io n, m id-year (m illio ns )
GDP (US$ m illio ns )

4.0
..

4.4
3,593
  (% o f GDP )
36.1
36.7
36.0
27.2

..
1,288

3.8
5,438

..
5.6

A gric ulture
Indus t ry
   M anufac t uring
Serv ic es

..
..
..
..

29.0
21.7
16.3
49.2

10.1
13.1
12.6
76.8

..
..
..
..

-11.2
-13.6
-7.1
0.7

-1.0
-1.4
1.6
10.6

H o us eho ld f inal c o ns um pt io n expenditure
General go v ' t f inal c o ns um pt io n expenditure
Gro s s c apital fo rm at io n 

..
..
..

57.5
15.1
24.9

91.4
10.3
23.9

88.3
22.1
23.1

..
..
..

9.9
-12.4
-15.5

8.1
5.2
8.9

Expo rt s o f go o ds and s erv ic es
Im po rt s o f go o ds and s erv ic es
Gro s s s av ings

..
..
..

48.2
50.6
58.1

49.8
75.4
16.3

36.9
73.5
17.6

..
..

1.0
5.9

10.0
11.5

N o t e: F igures in italic s are fo r years o ther than tho s e s pec if ied. 2009 dat a are prelim inary.  .. indic at es dat a are no t av ailable.
a. A id data are fo r 2008.

D ev elo pm ent Ec o no m ics , D ev elo pm ent D ata Gro up (DECDG).

6

4

2

0

2

4

6

0-4

15-19

30-34

45-49

60-64

75-79

percent of total population

Age d istr i bu tion , 2009

Male

Female

0

10

20

30

40

50

60

1990

1995

2000

2008

Mol dov a (..)

Europe & Central As i a

Under -5 mo r tal i ty rate (p er 1,000)

10
5
0
-5
-10
-15
-20
-25
-30
-35

95

05

GDP

GDP per c api ta

Growth o f GDP and GDP per cap i ta (%)

 
 
 
37 

Moldova

B a l a n c e o f P a ym e n t s a nd T r a d e

2 0 0 0

2 0 0 9

(US$ m illio ns )
To t al m erc handise expo rt s (f o b)
To t al m erc handise im po rt s (c if )
Net t rade in go o ds and s erv ic es

477
793
-331

1,329
3,273
-1,988

Current ac co unt balance
   as a % o f GDP

-98
-7.6

-465
-8.5

Wo rkers ' rem it t ances and
   c o m pens at io n o f em plo yees (rec eipt s )

179

1,211

Res erves , inc luding go ld

218

1,480

C e n t r a l G o v e rnm e n t F in a n c e

(% o f GDP )
Current revenue (inc luding grant s )
   T ax revenue
Current expendit ure

31.9
25.0
34.7

38.3
31.3
40.3

T e c hno lo g y a nd In f r a s t ru c t u r e

2 0 0 0

2 0 0 8

Overall surplus /def ic it

-2.6

-6.3

P aved ro ads (% o f t o tal)
F ixed line and m o bile pho ne
  subs c ribers (per 100 peo ple)
H igh techno lo gy expo rt s
  (% o f m anuf ac tured expo rt s )

86.1

85.7

H ighes t m arginal tax rat e (%)
   Indiv idual
   C o rpo rate

..
..

..
..

18

97

3.2

4.2

E xt e rn a l D e b t a nd R e s o u r c e F lo ws

E n v i ro nm e n t

(US$ m illio ns )
To t al debt o ut s tanding and dis burs ed
To t al debt s erv ic e
Debt relief (H IP C , M DR I)

1,693
150
–

3,457
387
–

A gricultural land (% o f land area)
F o res t area (% o f land area)
T erres t rial pro t ec ted areas (% o f surf ac e area)

77
..
..

75

..
1.4

To t al debt (% o f GDP )
To t al debt s erv ic e (% o f expo rt s )

131.4
18.1

63.6
12.0

F reshwater res o urces per c apita (c u. m eters )
F reshwater wit hdrawal (billio n c ubic m eters )

252
2.3

275
..

Fo reign direc t inv es tm ent (net inf lo ws )
P o rt fo lio equit y (net inf lo ws )

127
117

0
0

CO2 em is s io ns per capit a (m t )

0.86

1.3

GDP per unit o f energy use
   (2005 P P P $ per kg o f o il equiv alent )

2.1

2.7

Energy use per c apita (k g o f o il equivalent )

694

910

 W o r ld B a n k G ro up po r t f o l io

2 0 0 0

2 0 0 9

 (US$ m illio ns )

 IB RD
   T o t al debt o ut s tanding and dis burs ed
   D isbursem ent s
   P rinc ipal repaym ent s
   Int eres t paym ent s

191
6
5
11

110
0
18
4

 IDA
   T o t al debt o ut s tanding and dis burs ed
   D isbursem ent s
   T o t al debt s erv ic e

103
30
1

332
21
6

P r i v a t e S e c t o r D e v e lo pm e n t

2 0 0 0

2 0 0 9

T im e required t o s t art a bus ines s (days )
Co s t to s tart a bus ines s (% o f GN I per c apita)
T im e required t o regis ter pro pert y (days )

–
–
–

10
7.0
5

 IFC (f is c al year)
   T o t al disbursed and o ut s tanding po rt f o lio
      o f whic h IFC o wn ac c o unt
   D isbursem ent s fo r IFC o wn ac c o unt
   P o rt fo lio s ales , prepayment s and
      repaym ent s f o r IFC o wn ac co unt

35
19
1

16
16
0

Ranked as a m ajo r co ns t raint t o bus ines s
   (% o f m anagers s urveyed who agreed)
      A c c es s t o / c o s t o f f inanc ing
      T ax rates

2 0 0 0

2 0 0 9

0

7

..
..

40.4
37.2

 M IGA
   Gro s s expo s ure
   New guarant ees

3
3

73
6

St o c k m arket c apitalizat io n (% o f GDP )
B ank c apital to as s et rat io (%)

3.2
30.6

..

17.0

No te: F igures in italic s are fo r years o ther than t ho s e s pec if ied.  2009 dat a are prelim inary.
.. indic at es data are no t av ailable.  – indic at es o bserv at io n is no t applicable.

5/ 9/ 11

Dev elo pm ent Ec o no m ic s , Develo pm ent Dat a Gro up (DECDG).

0

25

50

75

100

Control of cor ruption

Rule of law

Reg ulatory q ual i ty

Pol i tical stabi l i ty

Voice and accountabi l i ty

Country' s percenti le rank (0-100)

hi gher v al ues impl y better ratings

2009
2000

Go vern an ce ind icato rs, 2000 and 2009

Sourc e: Kaufmann-K raay -Mas truzzi , Worl d Bank

IBRD, 110
IDA , 332

IMF, 154
Other mul ti -
l ateral , 71

B i l ateral , 265

P ri v ate, 1,207

Short-term, 
1,318

Compo si tion o f to tal extern al d eb t, 2009

US$ m i l l ions

 
Mi l lennium Deve lopment Goals

Moldova

Wi th se lected targe ts to ach ieve b etween 1990 and  2015

(es t im at e c lo ses t to dat e sho wn, +/ - 2 years )  

G o a l 1: h a lv e t h e r a t e s f o r e xt r e m e po v e r t y a nd m a lnu t r i t io n
   P o v ert y headc o unt rat io at $ 1.25 a day (P P P , % o f po pulat io n)   
   P o v ert y headc o unt rat io at nat io nal po v ert y line (% o f po pulat io n)   
   Share o f inco m e o r c o nsum pt io n t o the po o res t qunit ile (%)  
   P rev alenc e o f m alnut rit io n (% o f c hildren under 5)   

G o a l 2 : e n s u r e t h a t c h i ld r e n a r e a b l e t o c o m p le t e p r im a r y s c ho o l ing
   P rim ary s c ho o l enro llm ent (net , %)
   P rim ary co m plet io n rat e (% o f relevant age gro up)   
   Sec o ndary s c ho o l enro llm ent (gro s s , %)   
   Yo ut h lit erac y rate (% o f peo ple ages 15-24)

G o a l 3 : e l im in a t e g e nd e r d i s p a r i t y in e du c a t io n a nd e m po we r wo m e n
   Rat io o f girls t o bo ys in prim ary and s ec o ndary educat io n (%)   
   Wo m en em plo yed in t he no nagricultural sec t o r (% o f no nagricultural em plo ym ent )   
   P ro po rt io n o f s eat s held by wo m en in nat io nal parliam ent (%)   

G o a l 4 : r e du c e und e r - 5 m o r t a l i t y b y t wo - t h i rd s
   Under-5 m o rt alit y rate (per 1,000)   
   Inf ant m o rtalit y rat e (per 1,000 live births )   
   M eas les imm unizat io n (pro po rt io n o f o ne-year o lds imm unized, %)

G o a l 5 : r e du c e m a t e rn a l m o r t a l i t y b y t h r e e - f o u r t h s
   M aternal m o rtalit y rat io (m o deled es t im ate, per 100,000 live births )   
   B irths at t ended by s k illed health s t af f (% o f to t al)   
   Co nt rac ept iv e prevalenc e (% o f wo m en ages 15-49)   

19 9 0
17.0

..
..
..

89
..
94
..

105
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

G o a l 6 : h a l t a nd b e g in t o r e v e r s e t h e s p r e a d o f H IV / A ID S a nd o t h e r m a jo r d i s e a s e s
   P rev alenc e o f H IV (% o f po pulat io n ages 15-49)   
   Inc idenc e o f tuberc ulo s is (per 100,000 peo ple)   
   T uberculo s is case detec t io n rate (%, all f o rm s )

..
..
35

G o a l 7 : h a lv e t h e p ro po r t io n o f p e o p le wi t ho u t s u s t a in a b le a c c e s s t o b a s ic n e e d s
   A c ces s to an im pro v ed water s o urce (% o f po pulat io n)
   A c ces s to im pro v ed sanitat io n fac ilit ies (% o f po pulat io n)
   F o res t area (% o f t o tal land area)   
   T erres t rial pro tec t ed areas (% o f s urface area)
   CO2 em is s io ns (m et ric to ns per capit a)   
   GDP per unit o f energy us e (co ns t ant 2005 P P P $ per kg o f o il equivalent )   

..
..
..
..
5.4
1.7

G o a l 8 : d e v e lo p a g lo b a l p a r t n e r s h ip f o r d e v e lo pm e n t   
   T elepho ne m ainlines (per 100 peo ple)   
   M o bile pho ne s ubs c ribers (per 100 peo ple)
   Int ernet users (per 100 peo ple)   
   P ers o nal co m put ers (per 100 peo ple)   

10.6
0.0
0.0
..

M o ldo v a

19 9 5
15.1
..
..
..

..
94
81
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
59

..
..
..
..
2.6
1.5

13.1
0.0
0.0
0.2

2 0 0 0
33.0

..
..
..

2 0 0 8
2.4

..
..
..

..
98
82
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

0.1
..
53

..
..
..
..
0.9
2.1

14.2
3.4
1.3
1.5

..
91
88
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

0.4

..
70

..
..
..
1.4
1.3
2.7

30.7
66.7
23.4
11.4

Edu cation ind i cato r s (%)

Measles immun i zation (% o f 1-year 
o ld s)

ICT ind i cato r s (per 100 p eop l e)

25

0

2000

2002

2004

2006

2008

P rimary net enrol lment rati o (..)

Rati o of gi rl s to boy s i n primary & s ec ondary 
educ ati on (..)

100

75

50

25

0

120

100

80

60

40

20

0

1990

1995

2000

2008

2000

2002

2004

2006

2008

Mol dov a (..)

Europe & Central A s i a

Fi x ed + mobi l e s ubs c ri bers
Internet us ers

No t e: F igures in it alic s are f o r years o t her t han t ho s e spec if ied.  .. indic at es dat a are no t av ailable.

5/9/11

Develo pm ent Eco no m ic s , D ev elo pm ent D at a Gro up (DECDG).

38 

CAS Annex B2 - Moldova
Selected Indicators* of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management

As Of Date 3 /15/2011

Indica tor
Portfolio Assessment
Number of Projec ts Under Implementat ion a
Average Implementat ion Period (years ) b
Percent of Problem Projec ts by Number a, c
Percent of Problem Projec ts by Amount a, c
Percent of Projec ts at Risk by Number a, d
Percent of Projec ts at Risk by Amount a, d
Disbursement Rat io (%) e
Portfolio M anagement
CPPR during the year (yes /no)
Supervis ion Resources (total US$)
Average Supervis ion (US$/projec t)

2008

14
2.3
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
21.8

N
1200.1
85.7

2009

12
3.3
25.0
8.6
25.0
8.6
23.8

N
169.9
28.31

2010

13
3.9
15.4
7.3
15.4
7.3
28.6

N
643.2
107.2

2011

11
4.6
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
28.7

Y
917.8
152.96

Memora ndum Item
Proj Eval by OED by Number
Proj Eval by OED by Amt (US$ millions )
% of OED Projec ts Rated U or HU by Number
% of OED Projec ts Rated U or HU by Amt

Since FY 80 La st Five FYs
23
7
448.4
66.1
18.2
0.0
17.9
0.0

a.  As shown in the Annual Report on Port folio Performance (except for current FY).
b.  Average age of projec ts in the Bank 's country port folio.
c .  Percent of projec ts rated U or HU on development objec t ives (DO) and/or implementat ion progress (IP).
d.  As defined under the Port folio Improvement Program.
e.  Rat io of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank 's port folio at the 
     beginning of the year: Inves tment projec ts only .
*   A ll indicators are for projec ts ac t ive in the Port folio, with the except ion of Disbursement Rat io,
    which inc ludes all ac t ive projec ts as well as projec ts which ex ited during the fiscal year.

39 

 
 
Annex B3

Moldova: IFC Investment Operations Program

Origina l Comm itments (US$m )
IFC and Part ic ipants
IFC's Own Accounts only

2008

2009

2010

2011*

10.00
10.00

7.00
7.00

30.00
30.00

23.82
23.82

Origina l Comm itments by Se ctor (%)- IFC Accounts only
ELECTRIC POWER
FINANCE & INSURANCE
FOOD & BEVERAGES
UTILITIES
Tota l

100

100

Origina l Comm itments by Inve stment Instrument (%) - IFC Accounts only
Equity
50
Guarantee
Loan
Tota l

50
100

100

100

100
100

50
50

100

100
100

58.02

41.98
100

58.02
41.98
100

* Data as of March 01,2011

40 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CAS Annex B4 - Summary of Non-lending Services - Moldova 

As Of Date 3/15/2011 

Product 

Completion FY 

Cost (US$000) 

Audiencea 

Objectiveb 

14 
34 
115 
111 
33 
55 
166 
101 
143 
44 
9 

342 
104 
111 
114 
140 
320 

2.5 

G, D, B 
G, D 
G, D, B 
G, D, B 
G, D 
G, D 
G, D, B 
G, D, B 
G, D, B 
G, D 
G, D 

G, D, B, PD 
G, D, B 
G, D, B 
G, D, B 
G, D, B 
G, D, B 

K, PS, PD 
K, PS, PD 
K, PS 
K, PS 
K, PS 
K, PS 
K, PS 
K, PS, PD 
K, PS, PD 
K, PS 
K, PS 

K, PD, PS 
K, PS 
K, PS, PD 
K, PS 
K, PS 
K, PS 

G, D, B 

K, PS 

15 

G, D, B, PD 

K, PS, PD 

Recent completions 
Policy Notes for the Government of Moldova 
Pension Policy Note 
Poverty Update and TA 
Moldova Telecom Sector Assistance 
PSD/FSD Dialogue 
MTDS Moldova 
District Heating Restructuring Study 
Country Procurement Assessment Report 
Public Expenditure Review 2 
Moldova e-development TA 
A&A ROSC follow-up 

Underway 

Country Economic Memorandum 
Agricultural Policy Revision and Budget TA 
Public Expenditure Review 2011 
Financial Sector Monitoring TA 
Chisinau Energy Supply Improvement TA 
Moldova Food Security TA 
Applications for good governance  - Civil 
Society Fund Demand for Good Governance 
Reducing Vulnerability to Climate Change of 
Agricultural Systems in Moldova TA 

____________ 

a.  Government, donor, Bank, public dissemination. 
b.  Knowledge generation, public debate, problem-solving. 

FY09 
FY09 
FY09 
FY09 
FY09 
FY10 
FY10 
FY10 
FY10 
FY10 
FY11 

FY11 
FY11 
FY11 
FY11 
FY11 
FY11-12 

FY11 

FY11 

41 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
42 

M oldova - Ke y Economic Indicators

Annex B6

Es t imate
2009

Ind icato r

2004

2005

A ctual     
2006
2007

2008

2010

Pro jected
2011
2012

2013

National accounts (as % of GDP)
Gro s s domes t ic p roducta
   Ag ricu ltu re
   Indu s try
   Serv ices

100
20
16
64

100
17
16
67

100
12
15
73

100
11
14
75

100
10
13
77

100
10
12
78

100
9
12
78

100
9
12
79

100
9
11
80

To tal Con s ump t ion
Gro s s domes t ic fixed inves tmen t
   Governmen t inves tmen t
   Private inves tmen t

110
25
2
23

114
28
2
26

112
34
3
31

114
34
2
32

109
26
4
22

116
27
4
23

112
26
4
22

110
26
4
22

108
26
4
22

Expo rts (GNFS)b
Impo rts (GNFS)

51
92

45
92

47
97

41
94

37
73

45
89

45
85

45
83

46
82

Gro s s domes t ic s av ing s
Gro s s nat ional s av ing s c

-10
21

-14
21

-12
26

-14
23

-9
19

-16
17

-12
18

-10
19

-8
20

Memorandum i tems
Gro s s domes t ic p roduct 
(US$ million at cu rren t p rices )
GNI per cap ita (US$, A t las method )

2988

3408

4402

6055

5403

5314

5882

6450

7074

820

960

1090

1420

1460

1620

1660

1780

1980

Real annual g rowth rates (%, calcu lated from 96 p rices )
   Gro s s domes t ic p roduct at market p rices
7.5
   Gro s s Domes t ic Income
3.0

4.8
3.7

3.1
1.0

7.8
7.6

-6.5
-6.0

4.0
-1.3

3.5
4.9

4.0
5.5

5.0
5.9

Real annual per cap ita g rowth rates (%, calcu lated from 96 p rices )
   Gro s s domes t ic p roduct at market p rices
0.0
6.0
   To tal con s ump t ion
7.4
12.2
   Private con s ump t ion
7.9
10.8

4.2
4.7
6.2

7.9
7.1
6.4

-6.4
-12.6
-13.4

5.1
3.1
3.4

4.5
5.3
5.5

5.1
5.5
5.6

6.1
5.3
5.2

Balance of Payments (US $ mi l l ions )
  Expo rts (GNFS)b
      Merchand is e FOB
   Impo rts (GNFS)b
      Merchand is e FOB
  Res ou rce balance
  Net cu rren t tran s fers
  Cu rren t accoun t balance

1528
1104
2739
2295
-1211
567
-285

1542
1053
3129
2644
-1587
800
-387

1998
1373
4308
3676
-2310
1219
-674

2483
1646
5691
4866
-3208
1623
-987

2000
1332
3989
3276
-1989
1221
-465

2385
1592
4721
3890
-2336
1382
-620

2643
1746
5002
4101
-2359
1451
-589

2918
1916
5333
4361
-2415
1514
-541

3273
2161
5788
4736
-2515
1607
-576

  Net p rivate fo reign d irect inves tmen t
  Long -term loan s (net)
    Official
    Private

225
74
-10
84
114
-129

243
116
-14
130
169
-141

522
372
14
358
309
-529

691
388
8
380
360
-452

121
-31
-7
-25
174
201

190
326
52
274
96
8

291
342
130
211
235
-279

436
213
121
91
173
-192

415
243
48
196
145
-228

  Other cap ital (n et , incl. erro rs & omm ission s)

  Change in res erves d

Memorandum i tems
Res ou rce balance (% o f GDP)
Real annual g rowth rates ( YR96 p rices )
  Merchand is e expo rts (FOB)
    Primary
    Manu factu res
  Merchand is e impo rts (CIF)

-40.5

-46.6

-52.5

-53.0

-36.8

-44.0

-40.1

-37.4

-35.6

12.2
20.4
-15.6
22.9

-25.3
-33.6
34.2
9.4

9.1
1.3
45.9
24.4

-1.6
-3.5
22.6
12.5

-3.2
21.0
-54.9
-28.0

13.0
12.5
14.9
4.8

8.2
9.5
2.6
7.7

7.2
7.9
4.2
7.0

9.2
10.1
5.1
7.2

(Con t inued )

 
M oldova - Ke y Economic Indicators

(Continued)

Ind icato r
Ind icato r

2004

2005

A ctual     
2006
2007

Es t imate
2009

2008

2010

Pro jected
2011
2012

2013

Publ ic finance (as % of GDP at mark et prices )e
  Cu rren t revenues
  Cu rren t expend itu res
  Cu rren t accoun t s u rp lu s (+) o r deficit (-)
  Cap ital expend itu re
  Fo reign financing

38.1
30.7
7.4
6.4
-0.1

Monetary indicators
  M2/GDP
  Growth o f M2 (%)
  Private s ecto r cred it g rowth /
  to tal cred it g rowth (%)

Price indices ( YR96 =100 )
  Merchand is e expo rt p rice index
  Merchand is e impo rt p rice index
  Merchand is e terms o f trade index
  Real exchange rate (US$/LCU)f

  Real in teres t rates
  Con s umer p rice index  (% change)
  GDP deflato r (% change)

42.0
35.0
155.1

82.4
277.6
29.7
114.3

11.9
9.3

39.9
32.4
7.4
7.7
-0.5

43.7
23.6
103.1

106.3
298.3
35.6
114.3

12.7
13.4

41.0
34.5
6.5
7.4
0.2

51.2
39.8
110.8

124.4
328.5
37.9
99.5

12.3
15.8

40.0
34.5
5.5
7.1
0.1

38.6
40.6
-2.0
5.0
3.7

50.4
15.9
119.3

54.4
3.2
5387.0

150.5
387.6
38.8
74.4

12.7
9.3

129.4
359.7
36.0
86.5

0.0
2.0

40.5
40.4
0.1
5.1
1.6

50.0
1.7
-43.8

137.1
408.0
33.6
81.7

14.5
6.5

41.0
39.7
1.3
5.3
2.8

50.0
11.8
-16.6

139.1
399.3
34.8
90.7

4.1
8.0

41.4
38.6
2.8
5.1
2.4

50.0
10.8
75.1

142.3
397.0
35.9
97.1

3.9
6.5

41.5
37.9
3.7
5.0
1.2

50.0
10.8
76.9

147.0
402.1
36.6
100.4

4.0
5.5

a.   GDP at 
b .  "GNFS" deno tes " good s and non facto r s erv ices ."
c.  Includes net un requ ited tran s fers exclud ing o fficial cap ital g ran ts .
d .  Includes us e o f IMF res ou rces .
e.   Con s o lidated cen tral governmen t .
f.  "LCU" deno tes " local cu rrency un its ." An increas e in US$/LCU deno tes app reciat ion .

43 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Moldova - Key Exposure Indicators

Annex B7

Indicator

2004 

Total debt outstanding and 
disbursed (TDO) (US$m)a 
Net disbursements (US$m)a 

Total debt service (TDS) 
(US$m)a 

Debt and debt service indicators
(%)
   TDO/XGS b 
   TDO/GDP 
   TDS/XGS
   Concessional/TDO

IBRD exposure indicators (%) 
   IBRD DS/public DS 
   Preferred creditor DS/public
   DS (%)c 
   IBRD DS/XGS 
   IBRD TDO (US$m)d
      Of which present value of 
      guarantees (US$m)
   Share of IBRD portfolio (%)
   IDA TDO (US$m)d

Actual 
2006

2007

Estimated
2009

2008

2005 

2010

2011 

Projected 
2012 

2013

2053 

2417

3203

3787

3457

3751

4086 

4283

4485

69 

267 

370

335

383

338

399

481

-46

387

467

395

335 

437 

196 

518 

202

656

83.4 
68.7 
10.8 
10.2 

22.1 
78.3 

0.8 
161 

0
209 

87.9
70.9
12.2
10.0

21.9
62.8

0.8
151

0
242

90.2
72.8
9.5
9.1

28.2
69.2

0.7
141

0
292

85.7
62.5
10.9
8.2

28.2
70.5

0.5
129

0
312

107.4
64.0
12.0
9.6

100.5
70.6
10.6
0.0

100.9 
69.5 
10.8 
0.0 

23.7
53.1

0.7
110

0
332

26.5
65.7

0.7
90

0
373

27.5 
65.8 

0.6 
70 

0 

434 

96.8 
66.4 
11.7 
0.0 

23.0 
69.9 

0.5 
51 

0 

493 

92.6
63.4
13.6
0.0

16.4
70.4

0.4
31

0
547

a.  Includes public and publicly guaranteed debt, private nonguaranteed, use of IMF credits and net short-
     term capital.
b.  "XGS" denotes exports of goods and services, including workers' remittances.
c. Preferred creditors are defined as IBRD, IDA, the regional multilateral development banks, the IMF, and the 
    Bank for International Settlements.
d. Includes present value of guarantees.
e.  Includes equity and quasi-equity types of both loan and equity instruments.

44 

 
 
 
 
B8 (IFC ) for Moldova

Moldova
Comm itte d a nd Disburse d Outsta nding Inve stme nt Portfol io
As of 2/28/2011
(In USD Mi l l ions)

Comm itte d

Disburse d Outsta nding

FY Approva l

Compa ny

Loa n

Equity

**Qua si 
Equity *GT/RM

Pa rtici 
pant

Loan

Equity

**Qua si 
Equity *GT/RM

Pa rtici 
pant

2008
2011
2010
1999/00/01
2009
2001/10
2004

Bos tavan
Chis inau
Maib
Orange moldova
Pc bank moldova
Uf moldova
V ic toriabank

Tota l Portfol io:

0
10
15
0
7
17.14
0.5

49.64

1.34
0
0
0
0
0
0

1.34

0
0
0
1.62
0
0
0

1.62

0
0
0
0
0
0
0

0

0
0
0
0
0
0
0

0

0
0
5
0
4
7.14
0.5

16.64

1.34
0
0
0
0
0
0

1.34

0
0
0
1.62
0
0
0

1.62

0
0
0
0
0
0
0

0

0
0
0
0
0
0
0

0

* Denotes Guarantee and Risk Management Produc ts .
** Quas i Equity inc ludes both loan and equity types .

45 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CAS Annex B8 - 
Moldova
Ope rations Portfolio (IBRD/IDA and Grants)

As Of Date 3/15/2011

Closed Projects

29

IBRD/IDA *

Total Disbursed (A c tive)
          of w hich has been repaid
Total Disbursed (Closed)
          of w hich has been repaid
Total Disbursed (A c tive + Closed)
          of w hich has been repaid

Total Undisbursed (A c tive)
Total Undisbursed (Closed)
Total Undisbursed (A c tive + Closed)

 140.41
 0.00
 143.03
 136.86
 283.44
 136.86

 91.87
 0.00
 91.87

Active Projects

Project ID

P099841
P115634
P040558
P095250
P089124
P107612
P082916
P090340
P090673
P100929
P079314
Overall Result

Project Name

AVIAN FLU - MD
S
DISASTER & CLIMATE RISK MGT
S
ENERGY 2
S
HEALTH SERV ICES AND SOCIAL ASS ISTANCE MS
MD Compet it iveness Enhancement
S
NATIONAL WATER SUPPLY & SANITATION
MS
PUB FIN MGMT TA
S
QUAL EDUC IN RUR AREAS OF MD
S
RISP (APL #2)
S
ROAD SECTOR PROG SUPPORT
S
S IF 2
MS

Last PSR 
Supervis ion Ra ting
Development 
Implementation 
Objectives
Progress
S
S
MS
MS
MS
MS
MS
S
S
MS
MS

Fisca l Year

IBRD

2006
2011
2004
2007
2006
2008
2005
2006
2006
2007
2004

Original Amount in US$ Millions

Difference Be tw een
Expected and Ac tual
Disbursements a/

IDA

8.00
10.00
45.00
17.00
33.80
14.00
8.55
10.00
31.00
16.00
45.00
238.35

GRANT

Cancel.

Undisb.

Orig. Frm Rev'd

0.76
10.35
6.86
9.11
14.81
9.50
7.79
3.42
8.22
3.18
17.86
91.87

0.17
0.05
-7.50
5.98
-9.64
5.19
7.50
2.27
-8.81
13.24
-7.29
1.17

-2.18
3.73
4.21
-0.94
3.65

-0.38
1.93
3.75
13.78

11.03

11.03

46 

 
