d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

Document of 

The World Bank 

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 

Report No.   63504-BZ        

INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT  

COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY 

(FY2012-FY2015) 

FOR 

BELIZE 

July 29, 2011 

Caribbean Country Management Unit 
Latin America and Caribbean Region 

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance of their 
official duties.  It contents may not otherwise be disclosed without World Bank authorization.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The Interim Strategy Note for Belize was discussed by the Executive Directors on March 19, 2009 
CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS (BZ$) 
US$1.00 = BZ$2.00 (Fixed) 
FISCAL YEAR 
April 1 – March 31 

ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS  

AAA 
AIDS 
AMS 

BHIS 
BOOST 

CABEI 

CAPRA 
CCRIF 
CCT 
CDEMA 

CDB 
CEA 
CPI 
CPS 
DoE 
DFC 
DSA 
EC 
ENDA 
EU 
FAO 
FIRST 
FSAP 
FY 
GDP 
GEF 
GFDRR 

HD 
HDI 
HIV 
HRH 
IBRD 

IDB 
IDF 
IFAD 

Analytical and Advisory Activities 
Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome 
Accompanying Measures for Sugar Protocol 
Countries 
Belize Health Information System 
Building Opportunities for Our Social 
Transformation 
Central American Bank for Economic 
Integration 
Central American Probabilistic Risk Initiative 
Caribbean Catastrophe Risk Insurance Facility 
Conditional Cash Transfer 
Caribbean Disaster Emergency Management 
Agency 
Caribbean Development Bank 
Country Environmental Analysis 
Consumer Price Index 
Country Partnership Strategy 
Department of Environment 
Development Finance Corporation 
Debt Sustainability Analysis 
European Commission 
Emergency Assistance for Natural Disasters 
European Union 
Food and Agriculture Organization 
Financial Sector Reform and Strengthening  
Financial Sector Assessment Program  
Fiscal Year 
Gross Domestic Product 
Global Environment Facility 
Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and 
Recovery 
Human Development 
Human Development Index 
Human Immunodeficiency Virus 
Human Resources for Health 
International Bank for Reconstruction and 
Development 
Inter-American Development Bank 
Institutional Development Fund  
International Fund for Agricultural 
Development 

IFC 
IMF 
ISDR 
ISN 
JSDF 
MBRS 
MDG 
MDP 
MTDS 
NEAC 
NEMO 
NHI 
NLTA 
NPESAP 

NPL 
OPEC 

PAHO 
PEFA 
PFM 
PUP 
RAAP 
RB 
SEETF 
SEMCAR 

SFA 
SFLAC 

SCCF 
TA 
TFSCB 
UDP 
UNDP 
UNIFEM 
UNFPA 
UNICEF 
UNISDR 

WB 

International Finance Corporation  
International Monetary Fund 
International Strategy for Disaster Reduction 
Interim Strategy Note 
Japan Social Development Fund 
Mesoamerican Barrier Reef System 
Millennium Development Goals 
Municipal Development Project 
Medium Term Development Strategy 
National Environmental Appraisal Committee 
National Emergency Management Organization 
National Health Insurance 
Non-lending Technical Assistance 
National Poverty Elimination Strategy and 
Action Plan 
Nonperforming Loan 
Organization of the Petroleum Exporting 
Countries 
Pan American Health Organization 
Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability 
Public Financial Management 
People’s United Party 
Rapid Assessments and Action Plan 
Restore Belize 
South-South Experience Exchange Trust Fund 
Supporting Economic Management in the 
Caribbean 
Special Framework of Assistance 
Spanish Fund for Latin America and the 
Caribbean 
Special Climate Change Fund 
Technical Assistance 
Trust Fund for Statistical Capacity Building 
United Democratic Party 
United Nations Development Programme  
United Nations Development Fund for Women 
United Nations Population Fund 
United Nations Children’s Fund 
United Nations International Strategy for 
Disaster Reduction 
World Bank 

  Vice President:
Country Director: 
Task Manager:

Pamela Cox 
Françoise Clottes 
Michael Corlett 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Acknowledgements 

The CPS was prepared under the guidance of Françoise Clottes, Country Director, and the Sector 
Leaders Christina Malmberg Calvo, Auguste Kouamé, and David Warren.  Afef Haddad 
provided invaluable guidance and inputs.  The CPS team, led by Michael Corlett (TTL), 
consisted of:  Enos Esikuri, Hannah Kim, Ana Carolina Saizar Renart, Andrea Coppola, Miriam 
Muller, Jun Zhang (IFC), Kalim Shah (IFC), Frank Fusco (IFC), Keiko Ashida, Ricardo Tejada, 
Irina Kyltchnikova, Ludovic Subran, Yoonhee Kim, Ellen Hamilton, Carmen Carpio, Viviana 
Maya, Niels B. Holm-Nielsen, Rossella Della Monica, Stephen Brushett, Jane Hwang, Angelica 
Afanador-Ardila, Marea Eleni Hatziolos, Timothy Cheston, Yingwei Wu, Joseph Kizito, Lisa 
Bhansali, Joscelyn O'Rell Truitt and Jimmy Pannett.  The CPS also benefitted from strong 
collaboration with OPCS (Lawrence Bouton and Tevfik Yaprak) and Bruce Courtney.  The 
support of Armele Vilceus, Anna Musakova, Elisabeth Mekonnen and Betty F. A. Bain is highly 
appreciated.  The team greatly appreciates the close collaboration with the Government of 
Belize. 

1 

 
 
 
 
 
Table of Contents 
I. 
Executive Summary ............................................................................................................1 
II. 
INTRODUCTION...............................................................................................................2 
III.  COUNTRY CONTEXT......................................................................................................2 

A.  Country Context .............................................................................................................................. 2
B.  Political Developments and Governance ....................................................................................... 3 
C.  Poverty, Social indicators and Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) .................................. 4 
D.  Recent Economic Developments .................................................................................................... 6 
E.  Macroeconomic Outlook ................................................................................................................ 8 

IV.  GOVERNMENT VISION AND DEVELOPMENT CHALLENGES ...........................9 
V.  WORLD BANK GROUP SUPPORT FY2009-2011 ......................................................13 

A.  Bank program under ISN and lessons learned........................................................................... 13
B.  Role of Development Partners ..................................................................................................... 15 
C.  Consultations ................................................................................................................................. 17 
D.  Proposed Bank Program .............................................................................................................. 18 
E. 
IFC Strategy .................................................................................................................................. 25 

VI.  RISKS AND RISK MITIGATION .................................................................................25 
Annex A1:  Results Monitoring Framework .............................................................................28 
Annex B1:  Belize At A Glance ...................................................................................................32 
Annex B2:  Selected Indicators* of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management ............34 
Annex B3:  IBRD/IDA Program Summary ...............................................................................35 
Annex B4:  Summary of Nonlending Services – Belize ............................................................35 
Annex B6:  Belize - Key Economic Indicators...........................................................................36 
Annex B7:  Belize - Key Exposure Indicators ...........................................................................38 
Annex B8:  Operations Portfolio (IBRD/IDA and Grants) ......................................................39 
Annex B8:  IFC Operations Portfolio ........................................................................................40 
Annex C:  Belize: Country Financing Parameters ...................................................................41 
Annex D:  Belize Debt Sustainability Analysis ..........................................................................42 
Annex E:  CPS Consultations .....................................................................................................46 
Annex F:  Bank Experience in Climate Change, Natural Disaster Risk Management, and 
Environment .................................................................................................................................51 
Annex G:  Donor Harmonization Matrix ..................................................................................53 
MAP: .............................................................................................................................................56 

2 

 
 
I. Executive Summary 

i) 
Belize is a small lower middle income country endowed with unique natural resources, 
including the largest barrier reef in the Americas and pristine tropical forests.  The country’s 
global comparative advantage is derived from its natural resource base, which supports the 
tourism and agriculture sectors, and its advantageous geographical proximity to major markets.  
Belize’s principal development challenges are rooted in its high vulnerability to external shocks 
including terms of trade, natural hazards and impacts of climate change, while the Government’s 
ability to address these challenges is constrained by high debt levels and limited fiscal space.      

ii) 
The global economic crisis had a major impact on the country, and came on the heels of 
other exogenous shocks including food and fuel price increases of 2008 and natural disasters.  
Furthermore, these shocks hit the country amid an ongoing fiscal consolidation following a 2007 
market friendly debt restructuring.  Following a long period of robust growth, GDP growth was 
flat in 2009, due to declines in tourism, foreign direct investment, and remittances.  As a result 
unemployment levels have increased and a 2009 Country Poverty Assessment showed that the 
overall poverty rate increased to 41% of the population from 33% in 2002.  Similarly, crime and 
violence rates reached and remain at disconcerting levels.  While growth resumed in 2010, 
reaching 2.9%, buoyed by an increase in electricity production, high debt levels (83.5% of GDP 
in 2010) and increasing fiscal pressures remain a persistent challenge for policymakers, limiting 
the government’s ability to address pressing social concerns and to respond to further shocks. 

iii) 
The Government’s medium and long-term strategies highlight that the country’s 
development prospects are intricately linked to the sustainable management of its natural 
resource base in the face of high vulnerability to exogenous shocks and development pressures.  
Belize’s development strategies lay out an ambitious program to create a conducive enabling 
environment for private sector led growth, improve education and health outcomes, and 
sustainably manage the country’s natural resources.  Belize’s development plans recognize that 
fiscal constraints compel sound macroeconomic management including efforts to institutionalize 
fiscal discipline and mobilize official financing.   

iv) 
The Bank’s Country Partnership Strategy for 2012-2015 follows the successful 
implementation of an Interim Strategy Note, which represented the Bank’s re-engagement with 
the country after a long hiatus.  The ISN included the Bank’s first loan to Belize in almost 10 
years and knowledge services which served to establish a productive dialogue with the 
Government and for the Bank to build the necessary knowledge base to underpin a long-term 
engagement.    

v) 
This CPS will support the Government’s efforts to adopt a sustainable natural resource 
based economic model while enhancing the country’s resilience to climate change and natural 
hazards.  Three results areas support this overall objective and include:  i) policies and strategies 
for mainstreaming of natural resources and climate resilience; ii) institutional capacity 
strengthening for natural resource management and climate change; and iii) investments to 
strengthen climate resilience.  The Bank’s program is selective, reflects an area in which the 
Bank has a comparative advantage, and supports an area central to Belize’s development 
prospects.  Capitalizing on heightened global awareness of climate change, the proposed 
program aims to leverage substantial grant resources to complement modest IBRD lending to 
increase the impact of the program.  

1 

 
II. 

INTRODUCTION 

1. 
After a long hiatus1, the Bank re-engaged with Belize in 2009 with a two-year Interim 
Strategy Note (FY09-11).  The ISN has been satisfactorily implemented and has helped the Bank 
establish a productive dialogue with Government and build a knowledge base of the country’s 
development challenges to inform future engagement.  Based on the success of the re-
engagement, the Bank is moving to a four year Country Partnership Strategy, which will be 
highly selective and concentrate on supporting the country’s efforts to move towards a more 
sustainable development model, safeguarding its natural resource base while reducing 
vulnerabilities to climate change and natural hazards.   

III. COUNTRY CONTEXT 

A. Country Context 

2. 
Belize is a small, lower-middle-income country with a population of 330,000.  It is 
remarkably diverse ecologically with substantial natural capital along its coast, represented by 
the largest coral reef and associated ecosystem in the Americas2, as well as significant areas of 
mangroves, tropical forest and inland wetlands.  Belize has a unique cultural heritage as well, 
owing to its strong ties to the English-speaking Caribbean, and geographic ties to Spanish 
speaking Central America, which have strengthened substantially over the last 20 years due to 
immigration from neighboring countries, especially Guatemala, and trade links with Guatemala 
and Mexico.  Since the country achieved full independence in 1981, it has largely experienced 
peaceful and stable democracy. However a long-standing territorial dispute with its neighbor 
Guatemala has not yet been resolved. In December 2008, both countries agreed to refer the 
dispute to the International Court of Justice (ICJ), requiring referenda in both Belize and 
Guatemala which to date has not been carried out. Although the economy has traditionally been 
oriented towards agriculture, the services sector grew in importance during the 1990s and has 
been by far the largest contributor accounting for 60 percent of GDP. The agricultural sector, 
which accounts for around 10 percent of GDP but over 50 percent of total exports, is dominated 
by the sugar and citrus industries.  

3. 
Belize is highly vulnerable to natural hazards and climate change. Belize's long low-
lying coastal areas are especially vulnerable to more intense and frequent tropical storms and 
hurricanes, flood damage, and rising sea levels3.  Like the rest of the Caribbean, Belize has 
experienced frequent natural disasters of catastrophic proportions, and most recently suffered the 
impact of a Category 1 hurricane (Richard in October 2010) and widespread flooding in 2008. 
Tropical Storm Arthur (May 2008) caused extensive damage to infrastructure and the agriculture 
sector. Hurricanes Keith (2000) and Iris (2001) struck Belize in the first year of the previous CPS 
period, each causing damage reaching 45 percent and 25 percent of GDP, respectively.  In 1961, 
Hurricane Hattie destroyed Belize City and prompted the Government to build a new 

1 The Bank suspended its program in 2001 due to fiscal and governance concerns, but maintained limited 
engagement through regional programs financed by Global Environment Facility (GEF). 
2 A UNESCO world heritage site. 
3 Recent natural disasters, including flooding in 2008 and Hurricane Richard in 2010, affected large parts of the 
country, highlighting the vulnerability of the whole country to natural hazards.   

2 

 
 
                                                            
administrative capital 50 miles inland in Belmopan. Belize’s vulnerability to natural disasters is 
exacerbated by the effects of climate change, as storm hazards are expected to become stronger 
and develop more rapidly, and that greater variations in precipitation are predicted to affect 
droughts and floods. Beyond economic and social losses, natural disasters have contributed to 
large fiscal deficits and debt accumulations that required Belize to restructure its public debt in 
2007. These severe budget constraints, in turn, have limited Belize's ability to finance adaptation 
and mitigation activities. 

4. 
Belize’s natural resources are critical to the health of its economy and well-being of 
its most vulnerable population.  Belize's growth prospects and main economic activities, 
including tourism, agriculture, and fishing, are strongly linked to the country's environment and 
natural resource base which give the country its key inherent comparative advantages. In 
particular, the barrier reef provides critical economic and environmental services (fisheries, 
tourism, and coastal protection), is habitat for many unique species, is possibly an important 
carbon sink, and contains a large genetic resources pool.  The poorest people and communities in 
Belize are predominantly rural and their livelihoods depend largely on access to land and natural 
resources; furthermore, the highest poverty levels tend to occur in areas with the highest (e.g., 
South and West of Belize) or lowest (e.g., North and East of Belize) levels of biodiversity, thus 
presenting critical poverty-environment challenges (for example with encroachment and 
enforcement issues). It is therefore important to support effective and improved management of 
the environment and natural resources for sustainable livelihoods and economic growth in 
Belize. 

5. 
Although Belize has managed to preserve its environmental capital to a greater 
extent than its neighbors, it still faces some serious environmental problems that adversely 
affect the poor, and growth prospects. These include: (i) unsustainable management of solid 
waste and liquid effluents resulting in water and soil pollution; (ii) unregulated development of 
urban and coastal areas and the rising pollution from cruise ship tourism leading to the 
degradation of mangroves and coral reefs; (iii) overfishing, resulting in recent declines in catch 
levels and species varieties; (iv) deforestation and unsustainable extraction of non-timber forest 
products in hotspot areas; and (v) mitigation of environmental risks from oil exploration in 
environmentally sensitive areas.  The short-term impacts of natural disasters and the long-term 
effects of climate change are expected to undermine the resilience of the natural ecosystems and 
human vulnerability, increasing the urgency of tackling these challenges.  

B. Political Developments and Governance  

6. 
Since gaining independence from the United Kingdom on September 21, 1981, 
Belize has experienced peaceful and democratic transitions, with power alternating between 
two major parties, the United Democratic Party (UDP) and the People’s United Party (PUP).  
The governing party, the United Democratic Party led by Prime Minister Dean Barrow, won a 
commanding majority in the March 2008 parliamentary elections, and requested the Bank to re-
engage with the country.  Parliamentary elections are due by June 2013.   

7. 
The governing party entered office amid a challenging environment characterized by 
severe natural disasters (widespread floods during 2008) and external shocks (food and fuel price 
increases), followed by the onset of the global economic slowdown.  The administration also 
inherited a challenging fiscal situation owing to high debt levels (80 percent of GDP in 2008) 

3 

 
despite a market-friendly debt restructuring in 2007 and a legacy of weak governance left by the 
previous administration, which was beset with allegations of corruption.  The governing party 
faces public pressure to combat rising levels of poverty, unemployment and crime and violence, 
amid a constrained fiscal environment. 

C. Poverty, Social indicators and Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) 

8. 
Poverty has increased sharply in recent years, partially attributed to the stagnating 
economic situation and the effects of the 2008 floods.  The latest Country Poverty Assessment 
(2009) showed that the overall poverty rate increased from 34 percent in 2002 to 41 percent.   
Extreme poverty increased from 11 percent to 16 percent during the same period.  In addition to 
the 41 percent of the population classified as poor, a further 14 percent of households are deemed 
vulnerable to poverty.  Therefore, 55 percent of all households are either poor or susceptible to 
falling into poverty.  Poverty is more prevalent in rural areas (56.6 percent) than in urban areas 
(30.3 percent). Income inequality is high, with a Gini coefficient of 0.42 in 2009, but it is lower 
than its Central American neighbors.  Sharp regional and ethnic differences in poverty exist, 
ranging from 32.5 in the Belize district to 64.6 percent in Toledo, with its heavy concentration of 
indigenous Mayan communities.  Poverty and indigence increased in all districts, though the 
sharpest increase has been in Corozal which now has a similar level of overall poverty as Toledo.  
Despite the effects of the global recession, there are industries, such as the oil sector that have 
prospered, but the gains have not generated multiplier effects across the wider economy.   

9. 
High poverty rates persist despite the devotion of a significant amount of resources 
to social protection (5.7 percent of GDP)4.  Yet this spending has not translated into results, 
evidenced by the large number of poor families that remain vulnerable in Belize. The Social 
Protection System in Belize is inadequate to address the risks these vulnerable groups face due to 
poor resource allocation, weak targeting, and low program effectiveness.  When facing hardship, 
poor people most often seek the assistance of elected officials to solve their problems, which 
underscores the limitations of Belize’s existing safety net.   

10. 
Social indicators and progress towards achieving the Millennium Development 
Goals (MDGs) have been mixed.  According to the 2010 United Nations Development 
Programme (UNDP) Scorecard and Outlook Report, Belize is on track to meet MDG targets with 
respect to child mortality, major diseases, and the environment.  However, it is not on track to 
meet targets related to poverty, education, gender, maternal health, and debt management.  
Belize is in last position (131st) on the Global Gender Gap Index5 in the area of political 
empowerment of women, along with Saudi Arabia, Qatar and Brunei.  With the proportion of 
seats held by women in national parliament being a critical indicator of MDG 3 (Promote gender 
equality and empower women), Belize is not on course to achieve this MDG.  The National 
Women’s Commission is currently working on an update of the 2002 national gender policy.  
Box 1 summarizes gender issues in Belize6.  Belize ranks 78 out of 169 countries according to 
the 2010 Human Development Index (HDI), which places the country below the regional 
average.  Chronic diseases have become important causes of disability and death imposing an 

4 World Bank Draft Policy Note (June 30, 2010).  BELIZE: Issues and Options to Strengthen the Social Protection 
System. 
5 Ricardo Hausmann, Laura D. Tyson, Saadia Zahidi, Editors (2010). "The Global Gender Gap Report 2010". World 
Economic Forum, Geneva, Switzerland. http://www.weforum.org/pdf/gendergap/report2010.pdf. 
6 Based on a Gender background note prepared for the CPS.  

4 

 
                                                            
increasing burden on individuals and on the healthcare system because of the cost and the life-
long nature of these diseases (e.g., cardiovascular diseases, cancer).  HIV/AIDS continues to 
pose a major challenge to national development with adult prevalence rates estimated at 2 
percent in 2007, which is among the highest in the Caribbean and Central American regions.  

Box 1.  Gender Issues in Belize 

While not on course to achieve MDG 3, Belize has made clear progress in many areas including the legal 
and institutional framework for the promotion of gender equality.7 Belize’s provision of sexual and 
reproductive health services has improved over the last decade.  Girls have caught up with or surpassed 
boys in education – in tertiary education, a large gap in favor of girls can be observed.  However, girls’ 
increased educational attainment relative to boys has not resulted in their equal participation in politics or 
in private sector careers.  Power and decision-making remain dominated by men in all sectors.  In the 
labor market, women continue to earn less than men, are limited mainly to the service sector and face 
higher unemployment rates.  
Despite the progress made, a number of priority gender concerns persist in the country.  Adolescent 
fertility and maternal mortality are higher than the regional average; HIV/AIDS is increasingly feminized, 
particularly among young girls; and gender based violence is a severe and pervasive problem.   Male 
issues, such as high suicide rates, boys dropping out of school, and young men’s increasing involvement 
in crime and violence, also pose challenges to policy makers.  Moreover, country-level aggregates mask 
important inequities within the country, particularly along ethnic lines. Rural and indigenous women 
seem to be a particularly vulnerable group. However, many indicators used in this note are not 
disaggregated by ethnicity, which poses certain limits to these findings. 

11. 
Recent efforts to ensure equitable access to education have been successful, but have 
not always translated into improved outcomes. The gender parity index between girls and 
boys in primary education increased from 0.939 in 1995 to 1.01 in 2009; in secondary education, 
from 1.105 in 1995 to 1.13 in 2009; and for tertiary education, from 1.49 in 2002 to 1.73 in 
20098.  Net primary enrolments fell from 90.3 percent in 1992 to 83.7 percent in 2009, but male 
enrolments declined further due to the high drop-out rates among boys. Both male and female 
primary enrolment rates have declined, but male enrolment rates showed greater declines, a 
common trend in the Caribbean.  Key factors that explain declining primary attendance and 
drop-out rates amongst boys include low-quality primary education, high proportion of untrained 
teachers, and the absence of role-models who can motivate young boys to stay in school.   

12. High drop-out rates among boys is a growing concern, particularly due to their 
implications for the incidence of crime and violence.  There is a clear gender dimension to the 
problems of at-risk youth, or young people who are neither working nor in school, since young 
boys and girls tend to engage in different kinds of risky behaviors. While girls continue to be 
disadvantaged in terms of higher unemployment rates and earlier family responsibilities, boys’ 
underachievement in education and lack of employment opportunities can lead to their 
participation as perpetrators and victims of violent crime. This has compelled the Government to 

7 Belize has introduced or adopted legislative initiatives to promote gender equality such as a National Gender 
Policy, 2003-2008.   The Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women (CEDAW) 
as well as the Optional Protocol to CEDAW have been ratified, as has been the Inter-American Convention on the 
Prevention, Punishment and Eradication of Violence against Women (Convenção do Belém do Pará). The preamble 
to the Constitution was amended to read “to guarantee gender equality”. 
8 Government of Belize (2002).  National Gender Policy. 

5 

 
                                                            
include interventions aimed at addressing high youth unemployment and low secondary level 
completion rates. 

13. 
Crime and violence, which has increased steadily in Belize over the last decade, 
reached crisis levels in 2010. The homicide rate of 34.3 (per 100,000 people) is very high 
compared to 11.6 for Mexico, 18.1 for Ecuador, and 38.8 for Colombia (Human Development 
Report 2010), and more than doubled from 16 murders per 100,000 citizens in 2000 (according 
to the Belize Police Department), making it the third highest homicide rate in the Caribbean.  
Though violence tends to be concentrated in urban areas, particularly in Southside Belize City, 
the rising incidence of crime in tourist areas threatens to damage the country’s image as a safe 
and secure tourist destination. The high levels of violence have been attributed to high levels of 
poverty, lack of employment and educational opportunities, the increased abuse of alcohol and 
drugs, the use of weapons, the weakness of state institutions, and a breakdown in the family 
structure.  The surge in violence is linked to increased transit of drugs.   

D. Recent Economic Developments 

14. 
Belize was adversely impacted by the global downturn and the effects of floods in 
late 2008; however the economy has recovered modestly in 2010. Owing to the impact of the 
2008 floods on agricultural output and the fallout from the global recession, the economy 
registered zero growth in 2009. Among the hardest hit sectors were wholesale and retail trade, 
tourism and agriculture (which in 2009 contracted by 7.1 percent, 7.2 percent and 4.8 percent 
respectively). Manufacturing output improved amid a 24 percent expansion in petroleum 
production, as three additional production wells were installed.  The economy expanded by 2.9 
percent in 2010 driven by a substantial increase in electricity generation and modest recovery in 
the tourism sector.  Amid a weak economic recovery, unemployment has increased from 8.2 
percent in May 2008 to 12.6 percent, contributing to worsening social conditions as evidenced by 
the spike in crime and violence.  

15. 
Economic performance has been highly uneven and dependent on fiscal stimulus. 
Between 2000 and 2009 the economy grew by an annual average of 5.0 percent, peaking at a 
record rate of 13 percent in 2000. Economic performance has been vulnerable to external shocks 
as well as erratic policymaking.  During 1999-2003, the Government pursued an expansionary 
fiscal policy financed largely by external commercial borrowing which produced strong GDP 
growth rates but drove public debt to over 100 percent of GDP in 2003 and the following years.  
In 2007, debt restructuring eased external debt service and enabled Belize’s debt to become 
fiscally manageable, avoiding a macroeconomic crisis. However, public debt remained high and 
foreign reserves low, which limited the policy capacity to respond to shocks.  

16. 
Inflationary pressures are modest in Belize, including food prices.  After deflating by 
an average of 0.4 percent in 2009 (eop), growth in the price level rose to 0 percent in 2010.  The 
increase reflected the rise in fuel prices (a 3.2 percent rise in transport & communications and 1.4 
percent rise in rent, water, fuel & power categories) and the 2.5 percent increase in the general 
sales tax (which came into force in April 2010), although it was offset by declines in food, 
beverages and tobacco prices as well as household goods and maintenance reflecting the still 
weak demand pressures.  International food prices are on the rise and although Belize is a net 
food exporter and the country as a whole could gain from a positive terms of trade shock, those 

6 

 
gains can be distributed very unevenly and also it could endanger the wellbeing of the poor net 
buyers. As of February 2011, average food prices remain at a 3 year low. 

17. 
Despite government efforts to promote credit conditions, domestic credit demand 
remains weak.  In line with the Central Bank's objective of promoting credit conditions, in 
November of 2010 the minimum interest rate on savings deposits was reduced from 4.5 percent 
to 3.5 percent. However, credit to the private sector contracted by 3.6 percent in 2010 from 4.8 
percent growth in 2009 with manufacturing, financial institutions and transportation sectors 
making a sizeable contribution to the reduction.  The decline in the domestic credit along with an 
expansion in foreign assets was reflected in a highly liquid banking system. 

18. On the external front, Belize's current account balance has improved. The current 
account balance in Belize registered a deficit of 2.8 percent of GDP in 2010 down from 9.8 
percent in 2008. This was the result of three main factors: improved earnings due to higher oil 
prices and agricultural prices (predominantly earnings from citrus exports) in 2010, strong 
performance of the services sector, especially tourism which boosted travel receipts by 6 percent, 
and decreased capital goods imports for projects that occurred in 2008.  However, the capital and 
financial account surplus plunged by 49 percent in 2009 and is expected to continue decreasing 
in 2010, owing to lower grants, the ending of the United Kingdom's debt relief program in 2009 
and a significant decline in foreign direct investment.  International reserves stood at US$219 
million at end-2010 (3.2 months of imports), strengthening from the low levels seen in previous 
years.  

19. Weak fiscal results along with the modest economic performance have been 
reflected in an increased public debt burden. Despite debt restructuring in 2007 public debt 
ratio remains high, at around 83.5 percent of GDP at end-2010, leaving the government with 
limited fiscal headroom.  In line with the IMF's advice, the authorities' ongoing efforts to 
strengthen tax administration center on improving controls over large taxpayers; and adopting a 
new management and auditing system for customs.  In addition, the government implemented 
tax measures in April 2010, including the increase in the general sales tax from 10 percent to 
12.5 percent; and new taxes on petroleum, which together improved government fiscal revenues 
in FY2010/11.  Lower revenues from external grants have been offset by higher oil revenues, 
that in tandem with flat total expenditures have improved the overall fiscal deficit to 0.8 percent 
of GDP in FY2010/11 from 1.6 percent of GDP in FY2009/10.  

20. 
The overall health of the banking system has deteriorated.  According to 2010 IMF 
Article IV consultations, three banks (of the five banks) which account for over 40 percent of 
deposits in the banking system are facing high levels of nonperforming loans (NPLs).  By 
September 2010, nonperforming loans (NPLs) surged to nearly 30 percent of total loans in the 
distressed banks compared to 20 percent in September 2009.  As a result, foreclosures 
proceedings are already taking place on several large businesses in Belize. While banks comply 
with current regulations, provisioning remains low by international standards, covering less than 
16 percent of NPLs.  Preliminary computations show that the capital that would be required to 
absorb potential loan losses is estimated at up to 5 percent of GDP.  Protecting the stability of the 
banking system is a priority. The 2010 Article IV recommends that the government should 
specify the size of the capital increase that is needed in each bank and set a timeline for the 
implementation of a recapitalization plan. In line with IMF technical assistance advice, the 

7 

 
central bank has implemented measures to intensify oversight of the overall banking system and 
to strengthen the regulatory and bank resolution framework.   

Table 1: Belize: Selected Economic Indicators, 2008-2012 
Prel. 
2010 

2008 

2009 

(Annual percentage change) 

National income and prices 
GDP at constant prices 
Prices (GDP Deflator) 
Consumer prices (end of period) 

3.8 
2.6 
4.4 

0.0 
-0.7 
-0.4 

2.9 
0.9 
0.0 

Money and credit 
Credit to the private sector 
11.6 
4.8 
-3.6 
Money and quasi-money (M2) 
14.0 
5.8 
-1.8 
(In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated) 

National accounts 
Consumption 
Gross domestic investment 
Net exports 
Gross National saving 
Central Government 1/ 
Revenue and Grants 
Total Expenditure 
Primary balance 
Interest 
Overall balance 
External Sector 
Current account balance 
     of which exports of goods and services 
    of which imports of goods and services 
Change in reserves (- increase) 
Gross int. reserves (in months of imports) 
Public and publicly guaranteed debt 
Domestic 
External  

Source: IMF 2010 Art IV 
1/ Fiscal year ends in March 

E. Macroeconomic Outlook 

80.6 
27.5 
-8.0 
17.7 

28.7 
28.3 
4.2 
3.8 
0.4 

-9.8 
62.5 
70.5 
-4.3 
2.1 
79.7 
7.4 
72.3 

82.2 
22.0 
-4.2 
15.7 

27.0 
28.2 
2.4 
3.6 
-1.6 

-6.3 
53.8 
58.0 
-3.6 
3.3 
82.3 
7.1 
75.2 

80.1 
18.0 
1.9 
15.2 

27.7 
28.5 
2.6 
3.4 
-0.8 

-2.8 
59.7 
57.8 
-0.3 
3.2 
83.5 
11.8 
71.7 

Projections 
2011 
2012 

2.8 
2.9 
4.5 

1.6 
5.7 

81.6 
19.0 
-0.6 
13.9 

27.2 
29.1 
2.0 
3.9 
-1.9 

-5.1 
61.6 
62.3 
-3.2 
3.5 
80.6 
11.4 
69.1 

3.0 
2.5 
2.5 

3.8 
5.6 

82.3 
19.5 
-1.8 
12.5 

26.6 
29.2 
2.0 
4.5 
-2.5 

-7.0 
62.1 
63.9 
-0.6 
3.3 
78.3 
12.2 
66.1 

21. 
 With the economy showing signs of recovery from the impact of the global 
economic slowdown, the economic outlook has improved marginally.  Moderate growth is 

8 

 
 
 
  
  
  
  
 
  
  
  
  
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
  
  
  
  
 
 
  
  
  
  
 
  
  
  
  
 
  
  
  
  
 
  
  
  
  
 
  
  
  
  
 
expected over the next 2 years (2.8 percent and 3.0 percent for 2011 and 2012) largely driven by 
an expansion in electricity generation and tourism, and increased estimated oil reserves that will 
allow the present level of oil output to be maintained for the next few years.  Inflation is 
expected to rise to 4.5 percent in 2011, due to increases in fuel prices.  The fiscal deficit is 
expected to deteriorate to 1.9 percent and 2.5 percent of GDP in FY2011/12 and FY2012/13 
respectively, reflecting anticipated increases in interest payments as scheduled increases in 
interest rates of restructured external debt come into effect, as well as reflecting reduced revenue 
collection.  Nevertheless, public debt is projected to fall to 78.3 percent of GDP in 2012, from 
the 2010 level of 83.5 percent of GDP (mainly external debt, around 72 percent). 

22. 
According to the latest debt sustainability analysis (DSA) conducted by the IMF 
(October 2010), public debt remains high and vulnerable to shocks over the medium-term.  
The DSA (see Annex D) indicates that under the baseline scenario, debt levels would remain 
almost constant and slightly under 80 percent of GDP through 2015. The stable debt ratio reflects 
the positive effect of a gradual increase in growth that offset the impact of the step-up coupon 
rates on the restructured debt.  The debt ratio is highly sensitive to shocks in growth and the 
primary balance and to a slightly lesser extent to shocks in the interest rates. Under the active 
scenario, fiscal consolidation improves primary surplus to above 4 percent of GDP over the 
medium-term, resulting in a downward path of the debt ratio reaching almost 40 percent by the 
end of the decade.  

IV. GOVERNMENT VISION AND DEVELOPMENT CHALLENGES 

23. 
Belize's developmental challenges are rooted in its high vulnerability to external 
shocks including terms of trade, natural hazards and impacts of climate change.  The 
country's natural resource base, which holds the key to its developmental prospects in terms of 
sustainable growth and poverty reduction, is particularly vulnerable to these shocks, and faces 
additional pressures from unsustainable development practices.  These challenges were evident 
during the implementation of the ISN as the country was affected by multiple exogenous shocks 
including severe flooding in 2008, food and oil price increases, the global financial crisis, and 
Hurricane Richard in October 2010.  These shocks manifested themselves in an economic 
slowdown with negative impacts on growth and employment, and contributed to a dramatic 
increase in poverty levels (41 percent), and a surge in crime and violence.  Furthermore the 
country's size and low population density pose significant challenges for the provision of 
infrastructure necessary to underpin economic activity in main areas including tourism and 
agriculture, and services to support human capital development. The government's ability to 
confront these challenges is limited due to fiscal constraints, owing to a high debt burden, 
accumulated during the 2000s due to serious governance failures. 

24. 
The Government’s development agenda is articulated in the National Poverty 
Eradication Strategy and Action Plan, 2009-2013 (NPESAP) and the Medium-Term 
Development Strategy, “Building Resilience against Social, Economic and Physical 
Vulnerabilities” (MTDS, 2010-2013), which is closely linked to the NPESAP.  A long-term 
draft development plan, Horizon 20309, emphasizes sustainable natural resource management, 

9 Horizon 2030 is currently being finalized.  The draft vision statement is “Belize is a country of peace and 
tranquility, where citizens live in harmony with the natural environment and enjoy a high quality of life.  Belizeans 
are an energetic, resourceful and independent people looking after their own development in a sustainable way”. 

9 

 
                                                            
governance, and education.  The main government priorities and challenges discussed in these 
strategies include the following: 

25. 
Sustainable Environment and Natural Resource Management.  Despite the progress in 
strengthening environmental management in several areas, and, most lately, the highly 
significant move of the government to ban the bottom trawling fishing method in Belizean 
waters so as to protect the ocean floor and deep-sea coral reefs, serious challenges remain.  Due 
to weak institutional capacities, implementation and enforcement of environment and natural 
resources management actions has been inadequate. The institutions that are directly responsible 
for the management of Belize’s environment and natural resources (e.g., Department of 
Environment, Forest Department, Fisheries Department, Coastal Zone Management Authority 
and Institute) are under-funded, under-staffed and in many cases do not have the capacity to 
perform their basic functions.  For example, the Department of Environment currently has about 
15 staff which can hardly cover the mandate given to the Department under the Environmental 
Protection Act; and the Forest Department has just under 40 staff charged with managing 
protected areas (PAs), licensing, monitoring, and enforcement within and outside PAs. The 
Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) system—the main instrument in the environmental 
management toolbox—needs substantial strengthening.  Furthermore, there is an overriding need 
to develop, adopt and implement a comprehensive natural resources and environmental policy 
and strategy including planning for climate change and mitigating its effects. 

26. 
Government priorities10 
to address 
these challenges 
include: (i) strengthening 
environmental institutions, governance and regulation; (ii) recognizing the contribution of 
environmental stewardship to economic growth and poverty outcomes by valuing the 
environment; and by making the protection and sustainable use of natural resources an integral 
part of the development strategy and sectoral policy planning; and (iii) international technical 
and financial assistance to help the Government strengthen the resilience of the country's 
economy and natural resources to climate change shocks and natural disasters. 

27. 
Disaster Risk Management.  The policy framework relating to disaster risk management 
in Belize is fragmented, with several sectoral policies but no overarching policy in place as a 
more comprehensive measure. The most comprehensive attempt to date is Belize’s National 
Hazard Mitigation Policy(2004),11 which provides an integrated approach to hazard risk 
management and sustainable development at national, sectoral, and community levels within a 
broader national development framework.  The National Emergency Management Organization 
(NEMO), established in the aftermath of Hurricane Mitch (1998), coordinates ex-post disaster 
preparedness and response activities, but lacks a focus on mainstreaming risk management into 
sectoral planning and building a culture of ex-ante prevention through risk reduction.  Public 
sector agency organization and legislative frameworks mainly support the emergency 
management cycle, and suffer disparities in addressing comprehensive risk management.   

28. 
Strengthen macroeconomic and fiscal management.  A main challenge for the 
government will be to further strengthen the macroeconomic framework to ease Belize's 
vulnerability to shocks and improve growth and social prospects.  Despite Belize's vulnerability 

10 Which were validated during a February 24, 2011 stakeholder workshop in Belize City and discussions with 
Government of a Bank policy note entitled "Natural Resources for Climate Resilient Growth". 
11 The National Hazard Mitigation Policy has been prepared through a concerted effort of the Government, CDB and 
CDEMA (at the time CDERA). 

10 

 
                                                            
to external shocks, the government has very little flexibility to implement countercyclical fiscal 
policy given high debt levels and limited external financing.  In February 2007, Belize 
restructured 98 percent of its public external commercial debt of US$550 million, avoiding what 
had been an imminent threat of a fiscal crisis. Though the 2007 debt restructuring temporarily 
eased fiscal pressures, Belize faces the challenge of increasing debt service in the years ahead 
associated with the “Superbond” 12 along with competing demands to address the increase in 
poverty and infrastructure needs to support economic development.  In the 2010 Article IV 
consultation, the IMF has called for a fiscal consolidation strategy geared towards reducing 
public debt to a more sustainable level (40 percent of GDP by 2019), since this would ease fiscal 
pressures13 and help Belize regain access to external private financing.  Lower debt ratios would 
also provide additional space to respond to adverse shocks and facilitate the future rollover of 
amortizations coming due from the restructured debt.  The government has implemented reforms 
to improve revenue collection, but has avoided public expenditure cuts due to concerns that they 
would derail the incipient economic recovery.   

29. Government is committed to implementing sound fiscal policies in the face of 
increasing fiscal pressures.  Government’s strategy has been to mobilize bilateral and 
multilateral support, enact measures to bolster fiscal revenues, and undertake a comprehensive 
reform of public financial management programs to enhance fiscal discipline.  On the latter 
initiative, the Inter-American Development Bank (IDB) is supporting actions to improve 
budgeting framework including implementing a Medium-Term Fiscal Framework.  Belize is also 
a subscriber to the Caribbean Catastrophe Risk Insurance Facility (CCRIF).   

30. 
Improve Government Transparency and Accountability.  The lack of government 
transparency and accountability has been a long-standing challenge in Belize.  Entering office on 
a mandate to improve governance, the administration has taken several measures to increase 
transparency and accountability including: i) term limits for the Prime Minister; ii) a recall 
mechanism for elected officials; iii) extension of powers and functions of the Senate (enabling 
the Senate to initiate and conduct inquires into the operations of any government office or public 
statutory body); and iv) fiscal transparency legislation which sets standards to increase 
transparency throughout the whole budget process.  Additionally, the Auditor-General is 
empowered by law to report on the use of public monies to Parliament.    

31. 
The Administration’s governance reform agenda focuses on improving the public 
financial management framework. Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability Program 
(PEFA) and procurement assessments undertaken during the ISN period revealed significant 
weaknesses in public financial management (PFM), public procurement, public investment 
management, and government internal audit and control. Government has initiated a wide-
ranging agenda to improve the public financial management framework, and has developed 
extensive action plans, with donor support, which are currently under implementation.  Reform 
areas include the adoption of a fiscal transparency and responsibility framework, supported by 

12 The “Superbond” was structured in such a way that, for the first 12 fiscal years, no payments will be made on the 
principal. Starting August 2019, Belize will pay principal payments annually until the bond is paid off in 2029. 
13 The pressures are the result of:  i) the increase in the interest rate on the “Superbond” from 4.25 percent to 6.00 
percent in 2010 and to 8.50 percent in 2012;  ii) an expected decline in oil revenues as production from existing 
wells will weaken during the forecast period; and  iii) increased spending in infrastructure and anti-poverty 
programs that will result from the 2010-13 development plan.    

11 

 
                                                            
IDB.  In addition, the Finance and Audit (Reform) Act was amended to provide sanctions for 
violations and to enhance transparency in the tendering process of Government procurement. 

32. 
Investment in Human Capital Development.  Belize faces immediate challenges on the 
social front including a rise in poverty levels and an escalation in crime and violence.  The 
Government has undertaken several initiatives to tackle these challenges including the 
RESTORE program, a government-wide citizen security umbrella program supported by IDB 
and the Caribbean Development Bank (CDB), and other social programs including a youth skills 
project and food pantry pilot.  Related to these efforts, the social protection system has been 
undergoing major reforms since 2008 to address deficiencies in coverage despite substantial 
spending levels.  Government priorities include the need to improve the capacity to target, 
coordinate, monitor, and evaluate social services.  The recent launch of a conditional cash 
transfer program, supported by World Bank NLTA (Building Opportunities for Our Social 
Transformation, BOOST), an innovative way to transfer income to poor households is an 
important step in upgrading Belize's social policy and programs.  BOOST’s co-responsibilities 
include 85 percent school attendance for children 5-17 years old and 100 percent immunization 
for children 0-5 years old.  However, further efforts are needed to consolidate the institutional 
set-up, the actual implementation of the program, and leverage the opportunities this represents 
in rationalizing social protection expenditures.       

33. 
Improved access, coverage, efficiency and equity 
in health and education.  
Affordability of health and schooling remains an important barrier to equity in Belize, and 
spending on the 0-5 age group remains very low which confirms the need for re-investing in 
human capital, using income transfers, as well as bridging the gaps in the supply of services, 
especially for the poor.  Key policy areas in the education sector include: (i) early childhood 
development; (ii) expanding access to secondary education; (iii) quality in schools; and (iv) 
teacher development and management.  Several donors are active in the education sector, 
including the IDB, which completed a project to improve equity in educational resource 
allocation, and is planning to focus future engagement in improving teacher quality.  The 
Government, with CDB support, is carrying out an education sector strategy and action plan in 
2011, which is expected to receive support by IDB.  The United Nations Children’s Fund 
(UNICEF) has provided technical assistance in the area of early childhood development, which 
has led to an announcement in the FY2011-2012 budget of a child care subsidy to support early 
childhood development.  Health priorities include the need to expand access to healthcare, 
particularly for those in the lower income brackets, and to further improve the quality of service.  
The need to upgrade health care facilities at all regional hospitals to provide all basic testing and 
care services has also surfaced as a priority.  Further to this, the Belize health sector reform 
policy prioritizes the development of Belize’s Health Information System (HIS) which is 
recognized among the international community as good practice in the initial development and 
implementation of a comprehensive HIS.   

34. 
Foster an Enabling Environment for Growth and Sustainability:  The Government has 
prioritized actions to enhance the enabling environment to support private sector led growth.  
Belize’s comparative advantage is based on its unique tourism product and advantageous 
geographical location near large markets including the United States, Mexico and Central 
America.  In the face of trade preference erosion, which has affected traditional agriculture 
exports such as bananas, and sugar, the Government aims to diversify the country’s economic 
base, targeting expansion of non-traditional export related products and services, including 

12 

 
primary and agro-industry sectors, fisheries, and tourism.  The country is also attempting to 
increase trade relations with Mexico and its Central American neighbors14. Growth prospects in 
these areas face four major constraints including road transport infrastructure, institutional 
capacity for trade policy making and implementation, access to finance and export promotion.  In 
addition, recent expropriations of the telecommunications (August 2009) and electricity 
companies (June 21, 2011) could reduce the attractiveness of the country’s investment climate to 
foreign investors.  Government initiatives to promote private sector development include the re-
establishment of the Development Finance Corporation to improve access to finance, and IDB 
supported operations to enhance competitiveness of the tourism and agriculture sector.   

35. 
The Government continues 
to prioritize enhancement of 
the country’s 
infrastructure following years of low capital investments as a result of fiscal constraints.  
The Government has mobilized substantial bilateral and multi-lateral financing of infrastructure, 
particularly transport investments, which are critical to support private sector development. 
Requirements for future investments on the primary network include raising the level of 
robustness to potential future disaster events (particularly coastal flooding) and addressing 
substandard conditions in parts of the network which have safety consequences.  A particular 
challenge is the absence of sustainable road maintenance financing mechanisms, owing to fiscal 
constraints but also to institutional resistance to adopting alternative approaches, including 
private sector participation.  However, the government has expressed commitment to undertake 
institutional reforms, supported by the EU program which is developing a road maintenance 
plan. 

V. WORLD BANK GROUP SUPPORT FY2009-2011 

A.  Bank program under ISN and lessons learned  
36. 
The Bank program during the ISN period (March 2009-2011) includes one 
operation, the US$15 million Municipal Development Project (MDP), which became 
effective in January 2011.  Currently its implementation is rated as satisfactory. During this 
period several Analytical and Advisory Activities/ Non-lending Technical Assistance (NLTA) 
have been ongoing and are expected to be finalized in 2011. Three trust funds (see Table 2 
below) have also been approved during this period and are currently under implementation.  In 
the social sectors, Bank activities include a multi-year Conditional Cash Transfer (CCT) NLTA; 
an Influenza Detection and Response project, and a JSDF grant, Improving Children's Health and 
Nutrition in Poor Mayan Communities in Toledo.  Supporting the government’s PFM and 
procurement reform agenda, the Bank has an IDF grant to Strengthen Capacity of Auditor-
General and procurement.  In disaster risk management, Belize is participating in the Central 
American Probabilistic Risk Assessment Initiative (CAPRA), with the support of the World 
Bank, Center for the Coordination of Natural Disasters Prevention in Central America, United 
Nations International Strategy for Disaster Reduction (UNISDR), and IDB.  The Marine 
Conservation and Climate Adaptation Initiative NLTA seeks to find innovative and sustainable 
financing mechanisms for long-term marine conservation and climate adaptation actions.  This 
work builds on a long Bank engagement in climate, environment and disaster risk management 
issues in Belize and the region (see Annex F).   

14 Belize is a member of the Central American Integration System (SICA) 

13 

 
                                                            
Table 2: Active Belize Trust Funds 

Trust Fund  

South-South Experience Exchange Trust Fund (SEETF) 
Effective Cash Transfers Program:  Lessons Across Honduras, 
Belize, Mexico, and Jamaica 

TF094035 

TF094490 
TF095644 

Building Institutional Capacity of Auditor General and 
Improving Quality of Public Procurement  
Influenza Detection and Response 

Net Grant 
Amount (US$ 
‘000s 

75.00 

351.00 
501.74 

37. 
IFC.  As of April 30, 2011, IFC's disbursed and held portfolios totaled US$5.2 million. 
IFC's portfolio consists of two projects.  Work done to date for the establishment of a Credit 
Bureau consists of a market assessment which was presented to stakeholders. IFC is now 
working with the Central Bank on a National Strategy document, which will then be followed by 
assistance in drafting of the required legislation.  Regarding SME support, discussions are 
underway with a client bank for a SME market evaluation. 

38. 
Achievements during the ISN period:  The MDP was the first Bank loan to Belize in 
nearly 10 years and will address mounting infrastructure needs of several municipalities, most of 
which had not benefitted from any major infrastructure works in a decade due to fiscal 
constraints in the 2000s.  The project will contribute to higher-level objectives including: 
1) addressing key infrastructure bottlenecks needed to support economic growth and mobility;  
2) contributing to modernize and enhance municipal management; 3) reducing vulnerability and 
risk associated with natural disasters; and 4) improving government’s transparency and 
accountability.  The Conditional Cash Transfer (CCT) NLTA has provided just-in-time 
assistance to support the Government in its assessment of the suitability and feasibility of the 
CCT, culminating in the government’s decision to launch a pilot CCT, a key part of the 
government’s strategy to combat rising poverty and crime and violence.  An important 
achievement of this NLTA was to build the WB reputation with the client to provide quality 
assistance based on flexible, client-based responsiveness and global experience.  The NLTA 
benefitted from South-South TFs to share experiences with CCTs between Belize, Jamaica, 
Honduras, and Mexico.  The Bank was able to deliver just-in-time assistance following the 
H1N1 outbreak (Avian Flu TF), which focuses on strengthening health surveillance systems.   

39. Knowledge services also contributed to building the Bank’s depleted knowledge 
base and initiating dialogue in key areas.  Several analytical reports (mentioned above) were 
produced during the ISN period.  The policy note, "Natural Resources for Climate Resilient 
Growth", was well received by officials in the Ministry of Natural Resources and a wider 
stakeholder audience, and has resulted in a request for further engagement to tackle priority 
environmental challenges. The social protection NLTA produced a Policy Note on Issues and 
Options for Social Protection Reform at a very opportune moment to help the Government 
articulate a response to evidence of higher poverty levels in the 2009 Country Poverty 
Assessment.   The objective of the Agriculture Sector Risk Assessment NLTA was to assist the 
government in managing agriculture risks, which is critical both for economic growth, 

14 

 
 
 
competitiveness and poverty reduction.  The objective of the Housing diagnostic NLTA is to 
provide an analysis of the housing sector in Belize focused on its parameters, potentials, and 
pitfalls, in order to assist the Government as well as the various stakeholders in the housing 
sector in moving towards ensuring “access to quality and affordable housing by all” in the 
coming years.  

40. 
Implementation of the ISN has provided important lessons to guide the preparation 
of the CPS.  Through the implementation of the ISN, Bank teams faced a number of challenges 
related to the Bank’s long absence, including limited knowledge of the political economy of 
reform, the government’s unfamiliarity with Bank procedures, and limited Bank knowledge of 
other donor programs.       

41. 
 These achievements and challenges provide ample lessons to inform the design of the 
new CPS, including:   

42. 
Challenges of small size.  While project teams have consistently noted the high 
qualifications of government counterparts, the scarcity of qualified personnel leads to delays in 
project implementation.  The Bank needs to make an effort to ensure that it does not overburden 
the core group of government staff who manage most Bank activities.  This also points to a need 
to exercise selectivity, simplify project design, and account for the need to conduct extra 
supervision.     

43. 
Coordination and harmonization with development partners. With no local presence nor 
formal donor coordination mechanism, the Bank needs to invest more efforts into donor 
coordination/mapping activities.    

44. 
Consensus building to achieve reform.  Achieving sustainable results requires a better 
understanding of the political economy of reform, and investment in consensus building in order 
to bring about policy change. 

45. 
Country financing parameters (CFP) for Belize, which have been agreed upon by 
Authorities, are included in Annex C.   

B. Role of Development Partners 

46. 
The design of the CPS is intended to fill key gaps/complement other donor 
programs in order to most effectively address the country’s development challenges.  The 
major multilateral donors in Belize are the Caribbean Development Bank (CDB), IDB and UN 
agencies, and significant bilateral partners include the EU, Taiwan, China, and Venezuela.  Other 
donors include OPECs Fund for International Development, and the Central American Bank for 
Economic Integration (CABEI).  Belize does not have a formal IMF program, but has benefitted 
from close collaboration through Article IV consultations.   

47. 
The Bank program in Belize has traditionally been small, relative to other donors, 
and it is the only donor to have suspended its program during the early 2000s (though other 
donors reduced disbursements) when fiscal conditions rapidly deteriorated amid financial 
irregularities.  Aid flows in Belize decreased from the early 2000s as the fiscal situation 
deteriorated and the government reverted to costly commercial borrowing.  Beginning in 2005, 
the previous administration implemented a home-grown adjustment program, under IMF 

15 

 
guidance, and supported by substantial budget support by CDB and IDB.  The Barrow 
administration entered office vowing to avoid costly commercial borrowing and to seek only less 
costly bilateral and multi-lateral financing, including the World Bank.  Thus far it has made good 
on this pledge as donor programs have ramped up since 2008 with several major infrastructure 
projects planned or underway.   

48. 
The Ministry of Economic Development is the liaison for development partners, but 
no formal donor coordination mechanism exists.  Bank project teams have actively pursued 
donor coordination on an ad-hoc basis, including the CCT team's collaboration with the IDB and 
UNICEF on a single beneficiary information and targeting system, and a joint WB/IDB 
commitment to ensure harmonization of activities in the areas of PFM and procurement reform.  
The CDB and World Bank recently signed a Memorandum of Understanding to increase 
collaboration and coordination.     

49. 
IDB’s program tackles several of Belize’s key development challenges through 
lending and technical assistance.  IDB has a lending portfolio of US$70 million and is active in 
several sectors (see Annex G).  The IDB’s country strategy (2008-12) focuses on the following 
development objectives: i) Ensuring sound fiscal management and public sector transparency; ii) 
Creating the conditions for and restoring sustainable, private sector led growth; iii) Improving 
human resource development and social protection; and iv) Rehabilitating road infrastructure 
damaged by floods in early November 2008. IDB has active projects (or projects under 
preparation) in tourism, agriculture competiveness, solid waste management, health, education, 
disaster risk mitigation, and crime and violence. IDB is also delivering substantial technical 
assistance under development objective i.  IDB’s program is front-loaded in 2008-2009, with a 
base-line envelope of US$51.5 million (maximum envelope is US$101.5 million), though several 
additional loans have been approved or are under preparation including an education program, 
Community Action for Public Safety (Crime and violence), and a Hurricane Richard 
reconstruction loan.    

50. 
Similarly, CDB’s large and diverse portfolio (US$64 million) consists of projects in 
infrastructure (water, bridges, roads), financial sector (credit line to the Development Finance 
Corporation (DFC)), and social development (Basic Needs Trust Fund, health and skills).  CDB 
is currently preparing a country strategy paper for the years 2011-13.  CDB is also currently 
preparing an Education Sector Strategy and action plan, which will include an investment plan to 
be financed by CDB and IDB.   

51. 
The European Union (EU) is the largest provider of grants, primarily for rural 
development, including banana and sugar support.  A Global Climate Change Alliance15 grant 
(€2.9 million) for Belize, financed by the EU, is expected to disburse in 2011. The grant will be 
implemented by UNDP to enhance adaptive capacity and resilience to climate change in national 
policies, including the water sector in Belize. According to the EU, 80 percent of the funds will 
finance investments in the water sector, where a climate change strategy is already in place.  The 
remaining funds will be dedicated to mainstreaming climate change policy, a pre-condition of 
which is that the Government of Belize establishes a climate change desk.   

15 Initiated in September 2007 by the European Commission, (EC) the Global Climate Change Alliance seeks to 
enhance cooperation and support between the European Union (EU) and poor developing countries, most vulnerable 
to climate change, to adapt to the effects of climate change without prejudice to achieving the Millennium 
Development Goals. 

16 

 
                                                            
52. 
UNDP’s main areas of focus include: i) Poverty Elimination by Investing in People; ii) 
Reverse the Spread of HIV and AIDS; and iii) Improving Sustainable Development Practices 
(Disaster Risk Reduction, Natural Resource Management and Climate Change).  UNDP also 
plays a leading role in gender and development, using its convening services to engage 
stakeholders, and has conducted workshops in gender and economic policy management, 
Disaster Risk Reduction and Gender Workshop.  UNDP also supports initiatives aiming at 
increasing the contribution of women to national decision-making in the National Assembly, and 
at 
increasing national capacity for gender-mainstreaming 
in policy development and 
implementation.   

53. 
IMF macro policy advice is generally well regarded by Authorities. It is presently 
providing technical assistance related to the resolution of banking problems.  In 2009 Belize 
received financial assistance from the IMF Emergency Assistance for Natural Disasters (ENDA), 
following extensive flooding. Taiwan, China has provided budget support (grants and 
concessional lending) and agriculture investments while Belize benefits from the Venezuelan 
Petro-Caribe program and a housing grant. 

54. 
In sum, the programs of Belize’s main development partners are well-aligned with 
the Government’s national strategies and generally address the key development challenges 
outlined in Section IV.  IDB’s program addresses the country’s macro and fiscal challenges 
through technical assistance focused on improving the PFM framework.  The Government’s 
program to tackle rising poverty rates and associated crime and violence is supported by IDB and 
CDB, and the World Bank through its existing CCT technical assistance.  Health and Education 
challenges are addressed under the leadership of CBD and IDB.  Several development partners 
support the promotion of an enabling environment for private sector led growth through 
infrastructure lending, including targeted investments to key growth sectors (tourism and 
agriculture) and improved access to finance.  However, while elements of the challenges related 
to sustainable natural resource and disaster risk management are addressed by various 
development partners, including IDB and UNDP, the programs lack sufficient scope and 
coordination to adequately address the magnitude of the challenge facing the country.   

C. Consultations 

55. 
Stakeholder consultations (see Annex E) played an instrumental role in the design of 
the CPS.  The Bank conducted consultations in Belize during the week of February 23-27, 2011 
and May 9-12, 2011.  The team met with varied state and non-state stakeholders including 
representatives from government ministries, private sector, academia, NGOs, and other 
development partners, sharing the Bank’s diagnostic of Belize’s development challenges.  A 
recurring theme in these discussions was that Belize’s development prospects are intricately 
linked to its natural resource base.  There was a general concern that Belize must manage its 
natural resources in a more sustainable manner and strengthen resilience to natural hazards and 
climate shocks in order to achieve its medium- and long-term development goals.  While this 
conclusion is reflected in the Government’s national development strategies, there is a lack of a 
systematic approach to address the critical challenges posed by unsustainable natural resource 
use and climate change.  Stakeholders encouraged the donor community, including the World 
Bank, to play a more supportive role in this area. 

17 

 
56. 
The Bank’s main government counterpart also identified priority areas for Bank 
engagement including the need to enhance the country’s infrastructure, strengthen the education 
system, continue to strengthen the social protection system, and modernize the country’s 
payment systems.  Discussions with key decision makers focused on indentifying the most 
strategic role for the World Bank that would leverage IBRD resources/financing with additional 
resources, in a manner that responds to Government priorities and addresses the country’s main 
developmental challenges.  The outcome of these discussions was an agreement to focus the 
Bank’s program on the country’s development challenges related to Sustainable Environment 
and Natural Resource Management.    

D. Proposed Bank Program 

57. 
The CPS will concentrate on one central area:  to support the Government to achieve 
Inclusive and Sustainable Natural Resource-Based Growth and Enhanced Climate Resilience.  
The rationale behind this selectivity is threefold: (i) the Bank’s comparative advantage and the 
potential impact it could have given the importance of natural resources in Belize’s growth;  
(ii) the Bank’s capacity to leverage additional funds to complement the limited resources; and 
(iii) the fact that other priority sectors are supported by other donors (see Annex G).   

58. 
This selected program will support the Government’s efforts to adopt a sustainable 
natural resourced based economic model while enhancing the country’s resilience to 
climate change and natural hazards.  Natural resources are undoubtedly central to Belize’s 
development prospects, and there is a sense of urgency to adopt a sustainable model in the face 
of more frequent and intense natural hazard impacts.  Belize also has an opportunity, afforded by 
the uniqueness of its natural resource base, to position itself on the global climate stage as a 
responsible steward of its natural resources.  By supporting these efforts, the proposed program 
could substantially leverage IBRD funding with other existing funds that target environment and 
natural resources management, emerging global climate funds (grants), and other development 
partners’programs. A program to protect the natural capital of Belize would help improve growth 
prospects and benefit the poor who tend to depend on natural resource-driven sectors in Belize.  
Furthermore, the CPS would also support fiscal sustainability to the extent to which increased 
resilience to climate change and natural hazards would reduce associated fiscal costs borne by 
the government as a result of disasters.      

59. 
The proposed CPS includes a range of potential activities under 3 main results 
areas:  i) Policies and strategies for Mainstreaming of natural resources and climate resilience; 
ii) Institutional capacity strengthening for natural resource management and climate change; and 
iii) Investments to strengthen climate resilience.  The results areas correspond to activities related 
to policy, capacity building, and investments, respectively.  The results matrix (Annex A) is 
indicative, as specific activities will be developed during the course of an annual programming 
exercise, subject to available Bank and grant resources.  A CPS progress report will be prepared 
in FY14, following Parliamentary elections due by June 2013.  At this time, the results matrix 
will be revised to reflect actual programmed activities. 

60. Governance and gender issues are integrated in the CPS.  Supporting the 
Government’s commitment to transparency and accountability, the Bank will identify 
opportunities to integrate governance into ongoing and new activities. Ongoing activities, 
including the Municipal Development Project and the IDF grant to Strengthen Capacity of 

18 

 
Auditor-General and Procurement, already include governance related activities, as described 
below.  As the Government and the Bank seek to identify new entry points for enhancing 
governance capacity, particular focus will be given to identifying activities related to the demand 
side of good governance, such as information and transparency, consultation and participation, 
and monitoring and oversight. Regional development in the demand-side of good governance 
area continues to be a high priority agenda with the implementation of various initiatives 
focusing on decentralization, citizen and civil society participation and open access to 
information. This creates an opportunity for Belize through the CPS to engage in learning 
exchanges on progress within the LCR Region, taking advantage of South-South knowledge 
exchanges, or outside the region with other countries addressing similar issues of interest. The 
CPS also provides a window to address gender issues in the natural resource based economy, as 
described below.   

61. 

Bank support can be provided through two main instruments:  

i) 

ii) 

Analytical, Knowledge, and Convening Services: aimed at enhancing the 
institutional capacity of the Government in natural resources management and 
climate change related activities in a sustainable manner, including policy and 
strategy formulation, planning, coordination, implementation and monitoring. 
This implies substantial strengthening of institutional capacity in a systematic 
fashion at the macro-level (i.e., MED/MoF), micro-level (i.e., implementing 
ministries/departments/agencies such as Ministry of Natural Resources and 
Environment, Agriculture and Fisheries, National Emergency Management 
Organization, and others), and community level.  CPS resources could also 
selectively strengthen agencies involved in natural resource management and 
climate resilience activities. 
Financing: an 
investment program 
targeted at 
the 
improvement and/or 
development of climate resilient infrastructure (roads/bridges, drainage, schools, 
health facilities, emergency shelters).  The investment activities would build on 
the analytical and capacity building initiatives undertaken, and could be financed 
by IBRD, GEF, Adaptation Fund and other trust funds.  

62. 
The CPS spans a four-year period.  Early in the CPS period, the Bank will focus on 
knowledge services which may lead to operations later. These operations may be funded by 
grant resources, including the Adaptation Fund, Special Climate Change Fund, GEF, Global 
Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery (GFDRR), and others, allowing for the scaling-up 
of the program.  For example, applications are currently being prepared for the Adaptation Fund 
and Special Climate Change Fund (SCCF).  The Bank team expects that the CPS' focus, and 
Government commitment to its stated goals, will further enhance fund-raising efforts.  The Bank 
will engage in an annual programming exercise in close coordination with Government and 
donors.  In allocating Bank resources to support the program, priority will be given to activities 
that support the CPS’ main focus and leverage grant resources and additional donor financing to 
increase developmental impact.  The CPS will continue to support ongoing activities (see section 
on "Ongoing Activities") identified as Government priorities including the CCT technical 
assistance (under a HD NLTA) and payment systems work, but Bank engagement in education is 
expected to be limited to upstream activities on account of substantial donor support (CDB and 
IDB) in the sector.   

19 

 
 
63. 
Consideration will also be given, particularly in the event that additional resources 
are identified, to other strategic areas outside the scope of the CPS, including follow-on to 
ongoing activities described below.  Such demands will be evaluated according to the following 
criteria i) Government demand and a demonstrated strong will for political reform, where 
applicable; ii) alignment with National Development Strategies; and iii) resource availability.      

64. 
Limited indicative lending is US$5-7 million per year over four years with the 
possibility for higher amounts subject to client demand, country performance, global economic 
developments, and IBRD financial capacity.  This would likely translate into one large or two 
medium-sized IBRD financed projects. 

Table 3:  Ongoing and Planned Knowledge Services and Lending Activities 
(FY12-15) 

Ongoing activities (committed during ISN 
preparation and implementation) 

Municipal Development  
Project (lending through FY15) 
JSDF Improving Children's Health and Nutrition in 
Poor Mayan Communities in Toledo (through FY13) 
BZ (TF) Influenza Detection and  Response (FY13) 
IDF grant on Building Institutional Capacity of the 
Auditor- General and Improving Quality of Public 
Procurement (through FY12) 
Payment Systems TA (FIRST trust fund) (FY12) 
Financial Sector Assessment Program (joint with IMF) 
(FY12) 
Central American Probabilistic Risk Assessment 
Initiative (CAPRA) (through 2015) 

Inclusive and Sustainable Natural Resource-
Based Growth and Enhanced Climate 
Resilience (Planned Activities)  

Natural Resources for Climate Resilient Growth 
NLTA (through FY15) 

Human Development NLTA (FY12) 

Natural Resources for Climate Resilient Growth 
IBRD financing ( FY13) 

Marine Conservation and Climate Adaptation 
Initiative (Adaptation Fund and other donors to 
be identified) 

GEF Mesoamerican Barrier Reef System II 
Project 

Results Area 1:  Policies and Strategies for Mainstreaming of natural resources and climate 
resilience  

65. 
Horizon 2030 states that “the principles of sustainable development should be at the 
center of decisions to allocate and utilize the natural resources of the country”.  To achieve this 
vision, the strategy calls for the incorporation of environmental sustainability into development 
planning.   

66. 
The Bank Group will contribute to the following outcomes:  i) Principles of 
environmental sustainability/climate resilience/disaster risk reduction are incorporated into 
development planning; and ii) Improved coordination on climate change across sectors.  The 
Bank aims to achieve these two outcomes through supporting UNDP’s preparation of a climate 
change adaptation and disaster risk reduction policy and strategy (described below), and 
establishing a climate change desk to improve coordination across sectors.     

20 

 
 
 
 
 
 
67. 
The Bank Group will support this Results area through a Natural Resources for Climate 
Resilient Growth NLTA.  The Bank will work closely with UNDP, under the EU funded Global 
Climate Change Alliance grant (€2.9 million), whose objective is to enhance adaptive capacity 
and resilience to climate change in national policies, including the water sector in Belize, to 
identify specific areas of engagement. Bank objectives will focus on filling the analytical gaps 
and undertaking consensus building efforts to support the mainstreaming of climate change 
adaptation agenda.  Bank activities could also seek to capture the incomes and services generated 
by the key ecosystems, to illustrate to policymakers the various trade-offs of alternative 
development scenarios through a Natural Capital (Ecosystems) Valuation.   

68. 
The World Bank is currently preparing the Mesoamerican Barrier Reef System II Project 
to be funded by the Global Environment Facility (GEF).  The scope of this project is 
complementary to the proposed Marine Conservation and Climate Adaptation Initiative (see 
below) as it is directed at land-based threats, work on judicial system (court enforcement), and 
trans-boundary watersheds among the Mesoamerican Reef countries (Belize, Guatemala, 
Honduras, and Mexico).   The project aims to consolidate on-going efforts to coordinate national 
policies for the conservation and sustainable use of the shared reef system and broaden the multi-
sectoral focus with the participation of the tourism and agriculture sectors. Accordingly, the 
project will support both outcomes of this results area. 

Results Area 2:  Institutional capacity strengthening for natural resource management and 
climate change 

69. 
A strategy to protect the natural capital of Belize includes the need to strengthen 
environmental institutions, governance and regulation.  The institutions that are directly 
responsible for the management of Belize’s environment and natural resources (e.g., Department 
of Environment, Forest Department, Fisheries Department, Coastal Zone Management Authority 
and Institute) are under-funded, under-staffed and in many cases do not have the capacity to 
perform their basic functions.   

70. 
The Bank Group will contribute to the following outcomes:  i) Enhanced effectiveness of 
the Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) System; ii) Enhanced human resilience and capital 
for a natural resource based economy; iii) Strengthened capacity for compliance monitoring and 
enforcement of key agencies responsible for environment in Belize; iv) Strengthened institutions 
for implementing climate resilience measures; and v) Better preparedness through improved 
disaster risk management institutions. 

71. 
To achieve these outcomes, the Bank could undertake activities to develop mechanisms 
for implementing an effective EIA process by: i) establishing EIA certification process under the 
DoE; ii) strengthening the National Environmental Appraisal Committee (NEAC) by 
establishing clear terms of reference for NEAC; iii) upgrading the data and records management 
system of the DoE; and iv) increasing NEAC autonomy and transparency of procedures via 
regular update and publication of the committee’s decisions on publicly accessible website. 
Under this initiative, the Bank would explore supporting the Government efforts to access 
climate funds from sources such as the Adaptation Fund and Special Climate Change Fund, the 
GEF, and other climate change funds, and support through the Clean Development Mechanism.  
Particular focal areas could include the identification of policies and programs that improve 
inclusiveness and human resilience and build human capital for a natural resource based 

21 

 
economy.  The Bank would seek opportunities to include specific gender based programs in the 
area of climate change adaptation and disaster based mitigation, complementing UNDP’s efforts. 
The Bank could also assess, in short periods of time, key public management arrangements of 
the institutions involved in environment and climate resilience activities (human resource 
management, asset management, tax administration, public procurement, ensuring fiscal 
sustainability, and public expenditure management), through Rapid Assessments and Action 
Plans (RAAPs).     

72. 
The Bank could also support the Government’s efforts to adopt a road maintenance 
program through upstream technical assistance under the Natural Resources for Climate 
Resilient Growth NLTA.  As part of a financing agreement with the EU, the Government is 
currently preparing a national road maintenance strategy that would seek to create a sustainable 
financing mechanism.  The Bank is prepared to offer upstream technical assistance, including 
sharing regional experiences.  Further assistance could be considered during the CPS as the 
reform process advances, and potential Bank activities would be linked to the climate resilience 
theme of the CPS.     

73. 
The Bank would support building the country’s capacity for assessment of natural risks 
and integration of such assessment into policy and decision making process for the development 
of investments, disaster risk mitigation and disaster response across sectors, through the 
provision of technical advisory services, training and acquisition of goods. Ongoing activities 
include Belize’s participation in CAPRA, which will establish probabilistic risk assessment 
capacity in Belize as well as a risk information platform. The initiative will train local users in 
the use of open-source risk models in order to facilitate a comprehensive understanding of risk 
and risk management and its integration in decision-making processes.   

Results Area 3:  Investments to strengthen climate resilience 

74. 
This results area would address the Government’s strategy to Foster an Enabling 
Environment for Growth and Sustainability, and focus on infrastructure investments to 
strengthen the country’s resilience to climate change and natural hazard impacts.  Through this 
strategy, the Bank Group is expected to contribute to achieving the following outcomes:  i) 
Enhanced climate resilience of key infrastructure; ii) Increased ecosystem resilience to climate 
change impacts; iii) Strengthened legal and administrative framework for PAs; and iv) Increased 
human resilience to climate change impacts. 

75. 
Priority investments are expected to be identified in climate change adaptation plans, 
which would be developed under Results Area 1.  IBRD financing and additional grant funding 
would be sought to support these investments.  Civil works to be financed would focus on 
retrofitting and climate-proofing existing infrastructure as well as the construction of key 
infrastructure designed to protect the most vulnerable assets. These interventions will mitigate 
the adverse affects of future economic and natural shocks, and at the same time, create an 
enabling environment for sustained economic development better adapted to a rapidly changing 
climate. 

22 

 
76. 
The Marine Conservation and Climate Adaptation Initiative16, which is expected to be 
partly financed by the Adaptation Fund, would seek to find innovative and sustainable financing 
mechanisms for long-term marine conservation and climate adaptation actions that would 
strengthen the climate resilience of the Belize Barrier Reef System through a comprehensive 
package of climate adaptation and conservation measures.  The initiative embodies a two-track 
approach which combines ecosystem-based adaptation with national level enabling policy, 
finance, and legal frameworks as an effective long-term approach to help strengthen the 
resilience of the reef system to the adverse effect of climate change. The initiative will produce 
long-term economic, environmental, and social benefits by addressing the challenges posed by 
climate change on marine ecosystems and on the livelihoods of future generations. The 
objectives of the program, which contribute to outcomes in each of the three results areas,  are:  
i) to expand and secure Marine Protected Areas and Replenishment (no-take) Zones (Result 2, 
and Result 3 – outcome ii); ii) to improve the reef's policy and regulatory protection regime 
(Result 1); iii) to scale up the pilot repopulation of coral reefs with resilient varieties grown in 
coral nurseries; iv) to provide a comprehensive support in alternative livelihoods for affected 
users of the reef (Result 3, outcome iv); v) to reduce impacts from resident and tourism activity 
in keys (Result 3, outcome ii); and vi) to raise awareness, build local capacity, and disseminate 
information (Result 2).  The alternative livelihoods program will pay particular attention to 
gender dimensions.   

77. 
Existing activities which support this results area include the Municipal Development 
Project (MDP), which includes capacity enhancement in town planning such as in the area of 
disaster risk reduction and mitigation.  The Project will also finance specific investments in 
drainage improvement which should help in flood mitigation and management.  It also supports 
the Government's efforts to improve land subdivision standards, to ensure adequate land fill of 
plots and roads, as well as adequate storm drainage.  The focus on the MDP as a dual entry point 
for the CPS enhances both natural resource management and the demand-side of good 
governance, as the MDP currently includes activities designed to strengthen accountability and 
transparency including: i) public disclosure of financial statements of municipalities; and ii) 
ensuring public participation through townhall meetings on investment prioritization.  New 
activities under this pillar would seek to enhance the climate resilience aspects already built into 
MDP. The Bank would seek resources from the Special Climate Change Fund (SCCF)17, to 
finance additional activities aimed at enhancing climate resilience in the targeted municipalities. 
Additional financing for MDP would also be strongly considered on the grounds that the 
demand/need for additional infrastructure in the municipalities exceeds the scope of the project.18  
This approach would capitalize on the strength of the Project Implementation Unit in the Social 
Investment Fund, which after initial delays is fully staffed and well-functioning.   

16 The Government has officially requested the Bank to prepare an application to the Adaptation Fund and act as 
Implementation Agency (May 18, 2011). 
17 The Special Climate Change Fund (SCCF) was established in November 2004 under the United Nations 
Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) at its seventh session in Marrakesh to finance activities, 
programs and measures relating to climate change that are complementary to those funded by the resources allocated 
to the climate change focal area of the Global Environment Facility (GEF) Trust Fund and by bilateral and 
multilateral funding 
18 Should the Bank pursue additional financing for the Municipal Development Project, OP/BP 7.60 (Projects in 
Disputed Areas) would likely be triggered given the unresolved territorial dispute between Belize and Guatemala as 
mentioned in paragraph 2 (said OP/BP was triggered in the original project in 2010). 

23 

 
 
                                                            
Ongoing Activities 

78. 
The CPS will also continue to support the government’s social agenda in the context 
of rising crime and poverty levels, building on the promising results of the CCT NLTA.  The 
second phase of CCT technical assistance, under the HD NLTA, will aim to consolidate the gains 
under the program, making social protection more efficient in spending and more effective in 
results, and move towards the creation of a flagship CCT program that helps rationalize other 
programs (efficiency) and provides a further support for the accumulation of human capital 
amongst the poor (effectiveness).  The Bank will work with the Government to introduce good 
practices on increasing transparency and accountability of CCT program. Continued support for 
CCT implementation provides an excellent entry point to target gender-related issues, given that 
reducing male drop-outs is one of the objectives of the program, and draws on regional Bank 
experience including the Boys at Risk in the Caribbean Initiative19. Support of CCT programs 
serves as a separate entry point for capacity strengthening of municipal and local governments 
and fostering improved relationships between national and local-level governments, service 
providers and beneficiaries. The program will also support deepening dialogue in the education 
sector with government and the donor community through upstream participation in the 
development of an education sector strategy, led by CDB.  The program will also provide a 
window to sustain health sector engagement initiated during the ISN period through the Avian 
Flu TF and JSDF on Childhood Nutrition.  In general, through the continued HD engagement 
through the NLTA, the Bank will be well-positioned to support the CPS’ theme of climate 
resilient growth.   

79. 
The Bank will continue its support for the strengthening of public financial 
management in Belize. It will continue its current support for the strengthening of the capacity 
of the Office of the Auditor General and upgrading public procurement systems in the country.  
This project could include governance and anti-corruption activities in the procurement 
component including:  i) designing a system to safely report cases of malpractice, fraud or 
corruption; and ii) training of bidders and procurement specialists from the Government. 
Additional fiduciary training on World Bank operations strengthens the capacity of PFM in 
handling both donor funds and State funds while building a more transparent and accountable 
environment.  This support will complement IDB’s activities.  Belize is also a potential 
beneficiary of SEMCAR (Supporting Economic Management in the Caribbean), a new program 
funded by the Canadian International Development Agency to support improved economic and 
public financial management including revenue administration in the Caribbean. 

80. 
In the financial sector, the Bank is providing technical assistance, financed by FIRST, to 
support the Central Bank (CDB) in improving the safety and efficiency of the Payments, 
Remittances and Securities Settlement Systems (PRSSS) in Belize, through: (i) developing an 
overall National Payment Systems (NPS) development strategy and (ii) reforming the legal and 
regulatory framework for payment systems.  The CBB would use the NPS development strategy 
created to guide its NPS reform process which will include development of the necessary 
payment systems platforms.  The Bank is also conducting jointly with the IMF a Financial 
Sector Assessment Program (FSAP), a comprehensive and in-depth analysis of the country’s 
financial sector. 

19 The Bank is supporting regional efforts to tackle crime and violence, through an IDF grant to SICA (Sistema de 
Integracion de Centro America) which includes Belize. 

24 

 
                                                            
E. IFC Strategy 

81. 
IFC’s strategy for the Caribbean has four pillars: (i) crisis response (to the financial crises 
and Haiti’s earthquake); (ii) financial inclusion and job creation; (iii) regional competitiveness 
and integration; and (iv) climate resilience.  In Belize, IFC’s focus will be specifically on 
financial markets development and access to finance, infrastructure, agribusiness and tourism, 
and green construction and other climate resilient activities.  

82. 
One of the key constraints to private sector development is access to finance, especially 
for MSMEs and the informal sector. IFC’s financial sector strategy in Belize is geared towards 
expanding credit through: (i) Advisory Services with a bank to identify the SME market potential 
and, if attractive, on how to structure its operations to address it; (ii) increase trade through the 
provision of trade facilities; and (iii) assist with the establishment of the legal framework for the 
creation of Credit Bureaus. In infrastructure, IFC’s advisory services could help improve the 
regulatory framework and facilitate private sector participation in infrastructure projects (public-
private partnerships, or PPPs), with the objective of improving access to basic services for the 
underserved and leveraging donor financing.  Once a clearer regulatory framework is in place, 
IFC could also explore potential direct investment in existing private sector infrastructure 
companies.  In the agribusiness, tourism and green construction, IFC will partner with the 
suitable private sector players to identify opportunities that are consistent with IFC’s strategy.  In 
all these sectors, once IFC has a specific engagement, it will seek to ensure that the companies 
meet benchmarks for energy and other input usage as well as meeting IFC’s environmental and 
social standards. 

83. 
Given the small size of the economy, the relatively slow pace of reform and the 
participation of other multilateral agencies, it is expected that IFC’s activity will continue to be 
limited.  As reforms intensify, IFC will respond to opportunities to support viable projects, 
particularly in export-oriented sectors like infrastructure, agribusiness and tourism. 

VI. RISKS AND RISK MITIGATION 

84. 
Based on lessons of experience in implementing the ISN and based on the fiscal situation 
of Belize, the risks associated with this program are characterized as high.  The mid-term CPS 
Progress Report to be prepared following parliamentary elections (to be held by June 2013) will 
allow the Bank to revisit the risks associated with the strategy and make adjustments as needed. 

85. High Debt risk.  Despite the 2007 debt restructuring exercise, public external debt levels 
remain high at 83.5 percent of GDP.  IBRD exposure to Belize is US$11.8 million, or 0.9 percent 
of GDP.  The debt restructuring has given Belize some additional fiscal space and greater 
predictability on its interest payments, but increases in the step-up coupon rate of the 
“Superbond”  will place pressure on fiscal accounts.  The Government has taken tough actions 
on the revenue side, raising the General Sales Tax rate, but would need to exercise greater 
expenditure constraint, to confront deteriorating conditions. Foreign reserves have strengthened 
and the near-term outlook has improved moderately, but Belize remains susceptible to downside 
risks.  In line with IMF recommendations from the 2010 Article IV, further fiscal consolidation 
measures are needed to reduce public debt to a more sustainable level.   

25 

 
 
86. 
Financial sector risk.  The global slowdown and severe floods adversely affected 
economic activity, delayed the adoption of plans for fiscal consolidation, and contributed to 
increased bank risks.  Weaknesses in the banking system could undermine systemic stability, 
though the IMF is providing technical assistance to strengthen the regulatory and bank resolution 
frameworks.  In addition, the Bank is conducting jointly with IMF a Financial Sector Assessment 
Program (FSAP) in July 2011.  

87. 
Implementation risk.  Belize's capacity limitations and lack of familiarity with World 
Bank processes and procedures could constrain effective project implementation, resulting in 
slower than anticipated implementation.  Though government counterparts have gained 
experience with Bank processes in the context of the ISN, including staff in the PIU of the 
municipal development project, this remains an important risk.  The Bank will continue 
assessing this risk and mitigating it with frequent supervision as needed and training efforts 
integrated in the operations.   Implementation of the CPS is also highly dependent on obtaining 
significant grant resources, which if they do not materialize, would limit the Bank’s ability to 
deliver the full scope of the program.  This risk is partially mitigated by the Bank’s demonstrated 
success in leveraging trust funds to support country programs, as in the case of the Pilot Program 
for Climate Resilience (PPCR) program which has leveraged US$65-70 million (see Annex F).   

88. 
Vulnerability to natural hazards and climate change.  As previously noted, Belize is 
highly vulnerable to natural disasters and climate change.  The proposed CPS is focused on 
mitigating these risks through activities related to policy, capacity building, and investments.    
Should a natural hazard event occur during CPS implementation, the Bank would be prepared to 
provide support, inter alia, through IBRD financing and additional financing of the Municipal 
Development Project.   

89. 
Political Risk.  With Parliamentary elections due by June 2013, there is a risk that a new 
administration would not support the Bank’s program.  This risk is considered low since both 
political parties support a development model based on sustainable natural resources-based 
growth and the related need to strengthen the country’s resilience to climate change and natural 
hazard impacts.   

90. Governance.  Concerns related to transparency and a weak public financial management 
and procurement framework pose a risk to the Bank’s program with Belize.  The key for 
mitigating these risks is the Government's demonstrated commitment to improving the 
governance and PFM framework, and its initial actions in this direction, including developing 
action plans for PFM and procurement reform supported by the IDB and the Bank. These risks 
are also mitigated through initiatives to strengthen governance which have been mainstreamed 
into activities starting with 
the Belize Municipal Development Project and 
include:  
i) developing a national framework for strengthening integrity in infrastructure that mitigates 
corruption risks through information sharing; ii) independent monitoring involving beneficiaries; 
iii) better use of information and communication technologies; and iv) tighter financial controls. 
Other specific procurement measures include improved oversight, enhancing procurement 
performance and monitoring to make the public procurement system more efficient and 
transparent (including the emphasis on the open transparent competition), strengthening public 
procurement processes and other business process reforms, capacity constraints in individual 
procuring entities and needs assessment for procurement training, capacity building, and contract 
management.   

26 

 
91. 
Investment climate risk.  Since 2009, two expropriation events have occurred involving 
Belize Telemedia Limited (BTL) and Belize Electricity Limited (BEL).  Belize has been engaged 
in numerous lawsuits with regards to its expropriation of BTL in 200920, and concerns about 
protracted lawsuits could undermine the quality of the investment climate and reduce prospects 
for private sector led growth.  The Government welcomes genuine foreign direct investments and 
maintains that both expropriations were carried out in the public interest with a commitment to 
provide fair compensation, as required by Belizean law.  The Bank will monitor further 
developments in connection with these expropriation cases. 

20The Belize Court of Appeal ruled on June 24, 2011 that the expropriation of BTL was unconstitutional. In turn, the 
Government introduced an amendment to the legislation to satisfy concerns expressed by the Court of Appeal’s 
judgment and seeking to re-acquire the same property that was expropriated in 2009.  Also, the Government has 
indicated its intention to take the case to the Caribbean Court of Justice. The potential application of OB/BP 7.40 
(Disputes over Defaults on External Debt, Expropriation, and Breach of Contract) will be analyzed depending on the 
outcome of said disputes.   

27 

 
 
                                                            
Inclusive and Sustainable Natural Resource-Based Growth and Enhanced Climate Resilience 

Annex A1:  Results Monitoring Framework 

Results Area 1: Policies and Strategies for Mainstreaming of natural resources and climate resilience 

Outcomes 

Milestones, Outputs of CPS Program and Proxy 
Indicators* 

Instruments/Partners 

Principles of environmental 
sustainability/climate resilience are 
incorporated into development 
planning 

Climate change adaptation policy and strategy 
adopted by parliament 
Indicator:  Published Act/approved bills 

Specific climate resilience measures incorporated into 
sectoral development plans and investment programs  
Indicator:  Natural resources wealth 
valuation/accounting undertaken for consideration 
within the national development agenda 

Improved  coordination on climate 
change across sectors 

Framework of climate change coordination and 
planning of project activities adopted by  key 
ministries 

Natural Resources for Climate Resilient Growth 
NLTA. 

Mesoamerican Barrier Reef System II Project 
(GEF)   

Partners:  UNDP, EU 

Natural Resources for Climate Resilient Growth 
NLTA 

Partners:  UNDP 

Empowered and efficient climate change coordination 
mechanism established 
Indicator:  Functioning inter-ministerial Steering 
Committee as demonstrated by regular meetings and 
follow-up actions taken.  

Results Area 2:  Institutional capacity strengthening for natural resource management and climate change 

Enhanced effectiveness of the 

EIA certification program established for enhanced 

Natural Resources for Climate Resilient Growth 

28 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Environmental Impact Assessment 
(EIA) System 

environmental compliance 
Indicators:  Number of people certified,  Number of 
investment projects with EIAs 

NLTA 

GEF 

Natural Resources for Climate Resilient Growth 
NLTA  

HD NLTA 

Partners:  CDB, IDB, UNDP 

Natural Resources for Climate Resilient Growth 
NLTA 

GEF 

Municipal Development Project (IBRD 
US$15millions) 

Partners:  UNDP 

Enhanced human resilience and 
capital for a natural resource based 
economy 

Strengthened capacity for compliance 
monitoring and enforcement of key 
agencies responsible for environment 
in Belize  

Strengthened institutions for 
implementing climate resilience 
measures 

Policies and programs supporting skills development 
that improve inclusiveness and human resilience and 
build human capital for a natural resource based 
economy 
Indicator:  Education strategy that improves the 
system’s capacity to produce skills relevant for a 
natural resource based economy is adopted 

Targeted training programs and collaboration 
arrangements with communities, private sector, NGOs 
which will result in enhanced capacity to: 

 

access funds and manage climate change 
impacts 
Indicator: Functional national entity(ies) with 
technical and fiduciary capacity to access climate 
funds and implement measures 

 measure and monitor climate variables 
Indicator: Number of  staff in key agencies trained 
and equipped with better assessment and compliance 
monitoring tools and capacities 

 prepare for and respond to adverse natural 
events 
Indicator: No. communities organized as part of 
national emergency response organization 

29 

 
 
 
 
 
Better preparedness through improved 
disaster risk management institutions 

Improved Early Warning systems for hurricane and 
coastal flooding 
Indicator:  Number of functioning communication 
nodes forming part of the national system 

Results Area 3:  Investments to strengthen climate resilience 

Enhanced climate resilience of key 
infrastructure 

Increased ecosystem resilience to 
climate change impacts 

Select bridges, schools, hospitals, shelters, Ministries 
retrofitted to improve their climate resistance and 
functionality during natural hazard emergencies 
Indicator:  No. of  bridges, schools, hospitals, 
shelters, Government buildings climate-proofed 

Provision of drainage in the selected Municipalities 
Indicator:  Km of drainage financed under the 
Project 
Baseline: 0    Target: 3 
Improved local road infrastructure 
Indicator:  Km of drainage financed under the 
Project 
Baseline: 0  Target:  4 
Integrated watershed and coastal zone management 
Indicator:  Area (ha) rehabilitated and or under 
sustainable management 

Natural Resources for Climate Resilient Growth 
NLTA 

GFDRR 

Partners:  UNDP 

Natural Resources for Climate Resilient Growth 
(IBRD lending) 

Municipal Development Project (ongoing, IBRD 
US$15millions, potential additional financing) 

Trust Funds:  Special Climate Change Fund 

Partners:  IDB, UNDP, EU, CDB 

Natural Resources for Climate Resilient Growth 
(IBRD lending) 

Strengthened legal and administrative 
framework for PAs 

Replanting of mangroves and restoring forests and 
habitats in target areas 
Indicator:   Number of people (local labor) employed 

Marine Conservation and Climate Adaptation 
Initiative (Adaptation Fund) 

30 

 
 
 
 
 
 
in ecosystem restoration activities 

Increased human resilience to climate 
change impacts 

Alternative local livelihoods program, including 
vulnerable groups and women 
Indicator:  Number of households facilitated to 
engage in sustainable livelihood activities 

* Baselines and targets will be developed as specific activities are identified. 

Partners:  The Nature Conservancy 

Natural Resources for Climate Resilient Growth 
(IBRD lending) 

Marine Conservation and Climate Adaptation 
Initiative (Adaptation Fund) 

GEF 

Partners:  UNDP, The Nature Conservancy 

31 

 
 
 
 
32 

Annex B1:  Belize At A Glance

Belize at a glance

2/25/11

Lat in
A merica
& C arib.

Lo wer
m iddle
inc o m e

K e y D e v e l o pm e n t I nd i c a t o rs

B elize

( 2 0 0 9 )

P o pulat io n, m id-year (m illio ns )
Surface area (tho us and sq. km )
P o pulat io n gro wth (%)
Urban po pulat io n (% o f to t al po pulat io n)

0.33
23
3.4
52

566
20,422
1.1
79

3,767
31,923
1.2
40

GN I (A t las m etho d, US$ billio ns )
GN I per c apita (A t las m etho d, US$ )
GN I per c apita (P P P , internat io nal $ )

1.2
3,740
5,990

3,882
6,856
10,525

7,682
2,039
4,502

GDP gro wth (%)
GDP per capita gro wth (%)

0.0
-3.4

4.3
3.2

7.5
6.3

( m o s t r e c e n t e s t im a t e , 2 0 0 3 – 2 0 0 8 )

P o vert y headco unt rat io at $ 1.25 a day (P P P , %)
P o vert y headco unt rat io at $ 2.00 a day (P P P , %)
Life expec tanc y at birth (years )
Infant mo rtalit y (per 1,000 live births )
C hild malnut rit io n (% o f children under 5)

13 a
23 a
76
16
5

8
17
73
20
4

..
..
68
44
25

A dult literac y, m ale (% o f ages 15 and o lder)
A dult literac y, female (% o f ages 15 and o lder)
Gro s s primary enro llment , male (% o f age gro up)
Gro s s primary enro llment , fem ale (% o f age gro up)

..
..
122
119

92
90
118
114

87
73
109
105

A c ces s to an im pro ved water so urce (% o f po pulat io n)
A c ces s to im pro ved sanitat io n fac ilit ies (% o f po pulat io n)

99
90

93
79

86
50

N e t A id F l o ws

19 8 0

19 9 0

2 0 0 0

2 0 0 9 b

(US$ m illio ns )
N et ODA and o f f ic ial aid
T o p 3 do no rs (in 2007):
   Euro pean C o mm is s io n
   United Stat es
   Japan

15

30

15

25

1
0
0

2
12
0

7
-1
1

13
2
1

A id (% o f GN I)
A id per c apit a (US$ )

7.5
99

7.5
160

1.9
59

2.1
78

L o n g - T e rm E c o no m ic T r e nd s

C o ns um er prices (annual % change)
GDP implic it def lato r (annual % change)

11.2
11.4

3.0
2.8

0.6
0.5

2.3
-0.3

Exchange rate (annual average, lo cal per US$ )
T erm s o f t rade index (2000 = 100)

2.0
..

2.0
..

2.0
..

2.0
..

19 8 0 – 9 0 19 9 0 – 2 0 0 0
2 0 0 0 – 0 9
      (average annual gro wth %)
2.6
2.8
4.7
4.5

P o pulat io n, m id-year (m illio ns )
GDP (US$ m illio ns )

0.1
195

0.2
413
  (% o f GDP )
20.0
22.2
13.1
57.8

0.2
832

0.3
1,354

3.2
4.2

A gric ulture
Indus t ry
   M anufac turing
Serv ices

27.4
30.9
23.9
41.7

16.7
21.2
10.9
62.1

12.2
22.8
14.3
65.1

2.9
3.8
1.4
5.1

5.5
2.8
2.3
4.6

2.0
5.9
7.5
4.1

H o us eho ld f inal co nsumpt io n expenditure
General go v ' t f inal c o ns um pt io n expendit ure
Gro s s capital fo rmat io n 

71.9
17.2
24.1

57.7
12.9
27.2

79.1
12.9
28.7

66.7
15.8
25.5

-0.6
1.1
7.9

7.0
5.0
2.8

1.0
4.6
-0.2

Expo rt s o f go o ds and s erv ices
Im po rt s o f go o ds and s erv ices
Gro s s sav ings

55.4
68.6
21.2

62.2
60.1
34.9

53.0
73.7
7.6

62.1
70.0
13.8

6.7
3.4

4.4
6.4

7.3
1.2

N o te: F igures in italic s are fo r years o ther than tho se spec if ied. 2009 data are prelim inary.  .. indic ates data are no t available.
a. Co unt ry po vert y es t im at e is fo r earlier perio d.  b. A id data are fo r 2008.

D evelo pment Eco no m ic s , Develo pm ent Dat a Gro up (DECDG).

10

5

0

5

10

0-4

15-19

30-34

45-49

60-64

75-79

percent of total population

Age d istr ib u tio n , 2009

Male

Female

0

10

20

30

40

50

60

1990

1995

2000

2008

Be l i ze

Lati n Ameri c a & the Cari bbean

Under -5 mo r tal i ty rate (per 1,000)

-5

0

5

10

15

95

05

GDP

GDP per c api ta

Growth o f GDP and GDP per cap i ta (%)

 
 
 
 
33 

Belize

B a l a n c e o f P a ym e n t s a nd T r a d e

2 0 0 0

2 0 0 9

(US$ m illio ns )
T o t al merc handis e expo rt s (f o b)
T o t al merc handis e im po rt s (c if )
Net t rade in go o ds and s erv ic es

260
462
-168

429

..

-55

Current ac c o unt balanc e
   as a % o f GDP

-165
-19.9

-93
-6.9

Wo rk ers ' rem it tanc es and
   c o m pens at io n o f em plo yees (rec eipt s )

26

80

Res erv es , inc luding go ld

114

73

C e n t ra l G o v e rnm e n t F in a nc e

(% o f GDP )
Current rev enue (inc luding grant s )
   Tax rev enue
Current expendit ure

22.0
18.0
17.8

25.4
21.3
24.4

T e c hno lo g y a nd In f ra s t ru c t u re

2 0 0 0

2 0 0 8

Ov erall s urplus / def ic it

-9.1

-2.8

P av ed ro ads (% o f t o t al)
F ixed line and m o bile pho ne
  s ubs c ribers (per 100 peo ple)
H igh t ec hno lo gy expo rt s
  (% o f m anuf ac t ured expo rt s )

17.0

..

H ighes t m arginal t ax rat e (%)
   Indiv idual
   Co rpo rat e

..
..

..
..

21

59

0.0

0.1

E xt e r na l D e b t a nd R e s o u r c e F lo ws

E n v i r o nm e n t

(US$ m illio ns )
T o t al debt o uts t anding and dis burs ed
T o t al debt s erv ic e
Debt relief (H IP C , M DR I)

612
76
–

1,092
100
–

A gric ult ural land (% o f land area)
F o res t area (% o f land area)
T erres t rial pro t ec t ed areas (% o f s urf ac e area)

7
72.5
..

7
72.5
44.5

T o t al debt (% o f GDP )
T o t al debt s erv ic e (% o f expo rts )

73.5
16.2

80.7
12.4

F res hwat er res o urc es per c apit a (c u. m et ers )
F res hwat er wit hdrawal (billio n c ubic m et ers )

60,332
0.2

49,674
..

F o reign direc t inv es tm ent (net inf lo ws )
P o rt f o lio equit y (net inf lo ws )

23
0

95
0

CO2 em is s io ns per c apit a (m t )

2.8

1.4

GDP per unit o f energy us e
   (2005 P P P $ per k g o f o il equiv alent )

..

..

Energy us e per c apit a (k g o f o il equiv alent )

..

..

 Wo r ld B a n k G ro up po r t f o l io

2 0 0 0

2 0 0 9

 (US$ m illio ns )

 IB RD
   To t al debt o ut s t anding and dis burs ed
   D is burs em ent s
   P rinc ipal repaym ent s
   Int eres t paym ent s

40
2
4
3

16
0
4
1

 IDA
   To t al debt o ut s t anding and dis burs ed
   D is burs em ent s
   To t al debt s erv ic e

0
0
0

0
0
0

P r i v a t e S e c t o r D e v e lo pm e n t

2 0 0 0

2 0 0 9

T im e required t o s t art a bus ines s (days )
Co s t t o s t art a bus ines s (% o f GN I per c apita)
T im e required t o regis t er pro pert y (days )

–
–
–

44
45.5
60

 IFC (f is c al year)
   To t al dis burs ed and o ut s t anding po rt f o lio
      o f whic h IFC o wn ac c o unt
   D is burs em ent s f o r IFC o wn ac c o unt
   P o rt f o lio s ales , prepayments and
      repaym ent s f o r IFC o wn ac c o unt

11
11
1

4
4
0

Rank ed as a m ajo r c o ns t raint t o bus ines s
   (% o f m anagers s urv eyed who agreed)
      n.a.
      n.a.

2 0 0 0

2 0 0 9

1

0

..
..

..
..

 M IGA
   Gro s s expo s ure
   New guarant ees

–
–

–
–

Sto c k m ark et c apit alizat io n (% o f GDP )
B ank c apit al t o as s et rat io (%)

..
..

..
..

No t e: F igures in it alic s are f o r years o t her t han t ho s e s pec if ied.  2009 dat a are prelim inary.
.. indic at es data are no t av ailable.  – indic at es o bs erv at io n is no t applic able.

2/ 25/ 11

Dev elo pm ent Ec o no m ic s , D ev elo pm ent Dat a Gro up (DECDG).

0

25

50

75

100

Control of cor ruption

Rule of law

Reg ulatory q ual ity

Pol itical stabi l ity

Voice and accountabi l ity

Country' s percenti le rank (0-100)

hi gher v al ues impl y better ratings

2009
2000

Go vern an ce ind i cato rs, 2000 and 2009

Sourc e: Kaufmann-K raay -Mas truzzi , W orl d Bank

IBRD, 16

IDA , 0

IMF, 7

Other mul ti -
l ateral , 230

B i l ateral , 162

P ri v ate, 669

Short-term , 8

Compo si tion o f to tal extern al deb t, 2009

US$ m i l l ions

 
 
Annex B2:  Selected Indicators* of Bank Portfolio Performance and 
Management 

As Of Date 5/25/2011

2011

1
0.7
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

Indicator 
Portfolio Assessment 
Number of Projects Under Implementation a
Average Implementation Period (years) b
Percent of Problem Projects by Number a, c
Percent of Problem Projects by Amount a, c
Percent of Projects at Risk by Number a, d 
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount a, d 
Disbursement Ratio (%) e
Portfolio Management 
CPPR during the year (yes/no) 
Supervision Resources (total US$)
Average Supervision (US$/project)

Memorandum Item 
Proj Eval by IEG by Number
Proj Eval by IEG by Amt (US$ millions)
% of IEG Projects Rated U or HU by Number
% of IEG Projects Rated U or HU by Amt 

Since FY 80 Last Five FYs
9
0
80.5
0.0
33.3
0.0
30.0
0.0

a.  As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY).
b.  Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio.
c.  Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) and/or implementation progress (IP).
d.  As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
e.  Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the 
     beginning of the year: Investment projects only.
*   All indicators are for projects active in the Portfolio, with the exception of Disbursement Ratio,
    which includes all active projects as well as projects which exited during the fiscal year.

34 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Annex B3:  IBRD/IDA Program Summary 

Propose d IBRD/ IDA Ba se -Ca se Lending Program

Fis ca l year

Project ID

2010
2013

Munic ipal Development Projec t
Natural Resources f or Climate Res ilient Grow th Projec t 

US$(M)

 15.0

Stra teg ic Rewards b 
(H/M/L)

Im p lem en ta tion b  R is ks 
(H /M/L)

H

H

Annex B4:  Summary of Non­lending Services – Belize 

Product 

Completion 
FY 

Recent completions 

BZ Economic Policy Notes   
BZ Housing Diagnostic  
BZ CCT TA 
BZ Agriculture Sector Risk Assessment  

Underway 

JSDF Improving Children's Health and Nutrition in Poor Mayan Communities in Toledo   
IDF Building Institutional Capacity of the Auditor General and Improving Quality of Public 
Procurement 
FIRST Payment Systems TA  
Comprehensive Approach for Probabilistic Risk Assessment (CAPRA) 
Financial Sector Assessment Program (joint with IMF)  

Planned 

Human Development NLTA   
Natural Resources for Climate Resilient Growth NLTA  
GEF Mesoamerican Barrier Reef System II Project   

2011 
2011 
2011 
2010 

2015 

2013 
2012 
2015 
2012 

2015 
2015 
2015 

35 

 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
36 

Annex B6:  Belize ­ Key Economic Indicators 

Es t imate
2010

Ind icato r
National accounts (as % of GDP)
Gro s s domes tic p roducta
   Ag ricu ltu re
   Indus try
   Serv ices

2005

2006

A ctual     
2007

2008

2009

Pro jected
2011
2012

100
15
17
67

100
15
21
65

100
12
21
66

100
12
23
65

100
..
..
..

100
..
..
..

100
..
..
..

100
..
..
..

To tal Con s ump tion
Gro s s domes tic fixed inves tmen t

90
19

82
18

83
17

81
28

82
22

80
18

82
19

82
20

Expo rts (GNFS)b
Impo rts (GNFS)
Gro s s domes tic s av ing s
Gro s s nat ional s av ing s c
Memo randum i tems
Gro s s domes tic p roduct 
(US$ million at cu rren t p rices )
GNI per cap ita (US$, A tlas method )
3570
Real annual g rowth rates (%, calcu lated from 84 p rices )
   Gro s s domes t ic p roduct at market p rices
3.0
4.7
   Gro s s Domes t ic Income
-0.1
5.7
Real annual per cap ita g rowth rates (%, calcu lated from 84 p rices )
   Gro s s domes t ic p roduct at market p rices
-0.2
1.3
   To tal cons ump tion
-4.8
-6.0
   Private con s ump t ion
-5.8
-6.4
Balance of Payments (US $ mi ll ions )
  Expo rts (GNFS)b
      Merchand is e FOB
   Impo rts (GNFS)b
      Merchand is e FOB
  Res ou rce balance
  Net cu rren t tran s fers
  Cu rren t accoun t balance

55
64
10
5

65
63
18
16

65
64
17
13

62
71
19
18

54
58
18
16

60
58
20
15

62
62
18
14

62
64
18
13

1115

1213

1277

1359

1349

1401

1481

1563

3650

3560

3770

3780

..

..

..

1.2
4.5

3.8
4.3

0.0
..

2.9
..

2.8
..

3.0
..

-2.1
2.6
1.5

0.4
0.6
0.4

-3.4
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

618
325
715
556
-97
..
-160

790
427
764
612
26
74
-25

824
426
810
642
14
93
-52

849
480
958
788
-109
112
-132

726
382
782
621
-56
80
-85

837

913

971

..

..

..

810

922

999

..

..

..

27
..
-39

-9
..
-75

-28
..
-110

  Net p rivate fo reign d irect inves tmen t
  Long -term loan s (net)
    Official
    Private

126
31
25
6
36
-33

108
-13
66
-79
-21
-50

142
-108
-24
-84
41
-23

188
33
5
28
-31
-58

95
0
26
-26
..
..

0
0
-9
9
39
0

0
0
-6
6
75
0

0
0
-12
12
110
0

  Other cap ital (n et , incl. er ro rs & omm issio n s)

  Change in res erves d
Memo randum i tems
Res ou rce balance (% o f GDP)

-8.7

2.1

1.1

-8.0

-4.2

1.9

-0.6

-1.8

(Con tinued )

 
 
 
Ind icato r

2005

Actual     
2006
2007

Es timate
2009

Pro jected
2011

2010

2012

2008

Publ ic finance (as % of GDP at mark et prices )e
  Cu rren t revenues
  Cu rren t expend itu res
  Cu rren t accoun t s u rp lu s (+) o r deficit (-)
  Cap ital expend itu re
  Fo reign financing

Money and credi t
  Money and quas i-money (M2)
  Cred it to the Private Secto r

Price indices ( YR84 =100 )
  Real exchange rate (US$/LCU)f

  Real in teres t rates
  Con s umer p rice index  (% change)
  GDP deflato r (% change)

23.6
25.2
-1.6
5.7
..

..
..

25.8
25.1
0.7
4.6
..

17.3
13.1

28.2
23.2
5.0
5.7
..

15.0
13.9

28.7
23.4
5.3
4.9
..

14.0
11.6

27.0
24.5
2.5
3.7
..

5.8
4.8

94.3

95.2

92.5

93.0

95.3

3.6
2.4

2.9
4.0

4.1
4.0

4.4
2.6

-0.4
-0.7

27.7
24.0
3.7
4.5
..

-1.8
-3.6

..

0.0
0.9

27.2
24.7
2.5
4.4
..

5.7
1.6

..

4.5
2.9

26.6
25.2
1.4
4.0
..

5.6
3.8

..

2.5
2.5

a.   GDP at facto r co s t
b .  "GNFS" deno tes " good s and non facto r s erv ices ."
c.  Includes net un requ ited t rans fers exclud ing o fficial cap ital g ran ts .
d .  Includes u s e o f IMF res ou rces .
e.   Con s o lidated cen t ral governmen t .
f.  "LCU" deno tes " local cu rrency un its ." An increas e in US$/LCU deno tes app reciation .

37 

 
 
 
 
Annex B7:  Belize ­ Key Exposure Indicators 

Ind icato r

2005

2006

A ctual     
2007

2008

2009

Es timated
2010

Pro jected
2011
2012

1012

1181

1173

1083

1110

1170

1194

1224

..

..

..
90.7
..
14.9

..
..

..
35

0
..

..

..

0

64

0

51

0

47

0

44

0

41

0

39

149.5
92.5
..
14.3

142.4
86.3
7.1
16.0

127.6
79.7
5.4
18.9

..
..

0.8
30

0
..

..
..

0.7
25

0
..

..
..

0.6
21

0
..

152.9
82.3
6.5
20.3

5.4
23.2

0.7
16

0
..

139.8
83.5
5.3
19.1

130.8
80.6
4.5
18.7

..
..

..
12

0
..

..
..

..
8

0
..

126.1
78.3
4.0
17.8

1.9
28.7

..
7

0
..

To tal deb t ou ts tand ing and 
d is bu rs ed (TDO) (US$m)a

Net d is bu rs emen ts (US$m)a

To tal deb t s erv ice (TDS)
(US$m)a

Deb t and deb t s erv ice ind icato rs 
(%)
   TDO/XGSb
   TDO/GDP
   TDS/XGS
   Conces s ional/TDO

IBRD expo s u re ind icato rs (%)
   IBRD DS/pub lic DS
   Preferred cred ito r DS/pub lic
   DS (%)c
   IBRD DS/XGS
   IBRD TDO (US$m)d
      Of wh ich p res en t value o f
      guaran tees (US$m)
   Share o f IBRD po rtfo lio (%)
   IDA TDO (US$m)d

IFC (US$m)
   Loan s
   Equ ity and quas i-equ ity  /c

M IGA
   MIGA guaran tees (US$m)

a.  Includes pub lic and pub licly guaran teed deb t , p rivate nonguaran teed , u s e o f IMF cred its and net s ho rt-
     term cap ital.
b .  "XGS" deno tes expo rts o f good s and s erv ices , includ ing wo rkers ' remit tances .
c. Preferred cred ito rs are defined as IBRD, IDA , the reg ional mu lt ilateral developmen t banks , the IMF, and the
    Bank fo r In ternat ional Set tlemen ts .
d . Includes p res en t value o f guaran tees .
e.  Includes equ ity and quas i-equ ity types o f bo th loan and equ ity in s trumen ts .

38 

 
 
Annex B8:  Operations Portfolio (IBRD/IDA and Grants)   

As Of Date 5/25/2011

Closed Projects

9

IBRD/IDA  * 

Total Disbursed (Active)
          of which has been repaid
Total Disbursed (Closed)
          of which has been repaid
Total Disbursed (Active + Closed)
          of which has been repaid
Total Undisbursed (Active) 
Total Undisbursed (Closed) 
Total Undisbursed (Active + Closed) 

 1.01 
 0.00 
 7.30 
 41.60 
 8.31 
 41.60 
 13.87 
 0.00 
 13.87 

Active Projects

Project ID 
P111928 

Project Name

BZ Municipal Development

Last ISR 
Supervision Rating
Development 
Implementation 
Objectives
Progress
S           
S

Fiscal Year

2011

IBRD 
15

Original Amount in US$ Millions

IDA

GRANT

Cancel.

39 

Difference Between
Expected and Actual

Disbursements a/

Undisb

. 

13.87

Orig.

-1.13

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annex B8:  IFC Operations Portfolio 

Be l ize
Comm itted a nd Disburse d Outsta nding Investment Portfol io
As of 4/30/2011
(In USD Mi l l ions)

Comm itted

FY 
Approva l

Compa ny

Loa n

Equity

**Qua si 
Equity

*GT/RM Pa rticipant

Tota l

Loan

Equity

Disbursed Outstanding

**Quasi 
Equity

*GT/RM Pa rticipa nt

Tota l

2010/2011 A t lant ic Belize
1998
Nova/ambergris

Tota l Portfolio:

0
4.31

4.31

0
0

0

0
0

0

0.85
0

0.85

0
0

0

0.85
4.31

5.16

0
4.31

4.31

0
0

0

0
0

0

0.85
0

0.85

0
0

0

0.85
4.31

5.16

* Denotes Guarantee and Risk Management Produc ts .
** Quas i Equity inc ludes both loan and equity types .

40 

 
 
 
 
Annex C:  Belize: Country Financing Parameters 

Item 

Parameter 

Explanation 

Cost Sharing and Local Cost 
Financing 

Up to 100 
percent 

Limit on the proportion of 
individual projects costs that the 
Bank may finance. 

Recurrent Cost Financing 

Limits that would apply to the 
overall amount of recurrent 
expenditures that the Bank may 
finance. 

No country 
level limit.  

The Bank may finance up to 100 percent of the cost of a 
project in Belize provided that Government maintains its 
commitment towards fiscal sustainability in addition to 
careful prioritization of the scarce resources available to 
support the development program.  

The Bank will determine the possibility for financing 
recurrent cost on a project by project basis. The Bank may 
finance incremental recurrent cost after careful consideration 
of the fiscal impact of the recurrent costs and the impact on 
indebtedness in the short and medium terms as well as the 
sustainability of the sector and project achievements. The 
conditions for the Bank’s recurrent cost financing in Belize 
are (i) incremental nature of the recurrent cost; (ii) decreasing 
flow of financing by the Bank; and (iii) establishment of 
mechanisms for sustainable financing of the recurrent cost by 
the local counterpart at the end of the Bank financing. Loan 
proposals should specify the mechanisms for the country to 
cover the recurrent cost at an increasing rate towards a 100 
percent local cost coverage before the end of the project.  

Local cost financing.  Are the 
requirements for Bank financing of 
local expenditures met, namely that: 
(i) financing requirements for the 
country’s development program 
would exceed the public sector’s 
own resources (e.g., from taxation 
and other revenues) and expected 
domestic borrowing; and (ii)  the 
financing of foreign expenditures 
alone would not enable the Bank to 
assist in the financing of individual 
projects 

Taxes and Duties  Are there any 
taxes and duties that the Bank 
would not finance? 

Yes  

The two requirements are met.  The Bank may therefore 
finance local costs in the proportions needed in individual 
projects. 

None 

The Bank considers the taxes in Belize to be generally 
reasonable and nondiscriminatory.  

41 

 
Annex D:  Belize Debt Sustainability Analysis 
Belize’s debt restructuring in 2007 opened the path to restoring fiscal sustainability but 
total public debt burden remains still high. In February 2007, Belize restructured 98 percent 
of its public external commercial debt of US$550 million, avoiding what had been an imminent 
threat of fiscal crisis. The “Superbond” was structured in such a way that, for the first 12 fiscal 
years, no payments will be made on the principal and payments will be only made for interest. 
Starting August 2019, Belize will pay principal payments annually until the bond is paid off in 
2029. The bond features step-up coupon rates: 4.25 percent during the first three years after 
issuance; 6 percent for fiscal years 2010 and 2011; and finally 8.50 percent (twice the initial 
amount) from 2012 until maturity in 2029. Public debt decreased significantly in the last five 
years (from 98.7 percent of GDP in 2005 to less than 80 percent in 2010) but the debt burden is 
still high and further actions to lower the debt to GDP ratio are needed. 
The debt sustainability analysis presented in this annex considers two alternative scenarios. 
A baseline scenario and an active scenario are taken into account.  These scenarios are based on 
the macroeconomic assumptions which are consistent with the medium-term macroeconomic 
frameworks envisioned in the 2010 IMF Article IV consultation (see Table 1). The baseline 
scenario assumes the continuation of present policies, which are likely to lead to slower growth 
and a moderate primary surplus. The active scenario incorporates the effect of policies able to 
reduce expenditures and increase revenues. As a consequence, the active scenario would imply 
higher primary surplus and lower external financing needs.  
Bound tests are performed to assess the vulnerability of Belize’s debt to standard shocks. 
To test how deviations from their predicted values of key macroeconomic variables (growth rate, 
exchange rates, primary balance and interest rates) affect the debt path in Belize, the following 
settings are considered: a) historical scenario based on the assumption that key macroeconomic 
variables stay at their historical averages for 1999–2008; b) an exchange rate shock (one time 30 
percent real depreciation in 2010); c) a negative shock in the output; d) a negative shock in the 
primary balance; and e) a contingent liabilities shock (one time 10 percent of GDP shock to 
contingent liabilities in 2010). Unless specified, all the shocks are considered to persist in the 
projected years.   
Under the baseline scenario, public debt will hover around 77 percent of GDP through 
2015 (see Table A.1 – Panel A). The baseline scenario is based on the continuation of the 
current fiscal policy. This assumption implies that growth rate won’t be higher than 2.5 percent 
until 2019 and that the primary surplus will stabilize at 1.5 percent of GDP over the medium 
term. Slower growth and a low primary surplus will entail higher financing needs which will be 
mostly covered by external commercial creditors at market interest rates (10 year U.S. T-Bond 
plus 400 bps) and to a lesser extent by multilaterals lending. In this scenario, the public debt-to-
GDP ratio will remain slightly below the 80 percent threshold. The limited primary surplus will 
imply lower fiscal space and, therefore, a lower capacity to spend in order to address social 
priorities. 
Bound tests reveal that the public debt is vulnerable to standard shocks (see Figure A.1). In 
the baseline scenario, Belize would be extremely vulnerable to a real exchange rate shock. This 
vulnerability stems from the composition of the public debt: 90 percent of the public debt is 

42 

 
denominated in foreign currency. As a consequence, a 30 percent real depreciation of the local 
currency would result in the public debt breaking the threshold of 115 percent of GDP. Lower 
growth will negatively impact the level of public debt, too. A pessimistic scenario for growth 
(half standard deviation contraction) will take public debt up to 96 percent of GDP in 2015. 
Higher expenditures will have a similar impact. A contraction of half standard deviation of the 
primary balance will lead to a situation of primary deficit with public debt climbing to 92 percent 
of GDP by 2015.  
In the active scenario of fiscal consolidation, public debt would gradually decline to under 
60 percent by 2015 (see Table A.1 – Panel B). The active scenario is based on the assumption 
that the Government will be able to achieve and maintain a primary surplus of 4.5 percent of 
GDP since 2011. Higher primary surplus will increase the fiscal space and give the possibility to 
the Government to increase capital investments and address social priorities. Improved 
confidence would also favor foreign direct investments. As a result of these assumptions, 
economic growth will be higher than in the passive scenario and will reach 3.5 percent over the 
medium-term. The joint impact of higher growth and lower financing needs will reduce the 
public debt ratio to 60 percent by 2014 and 40 percent by the end of this decade, when Belize 
will start paying the principal payments of the “Superbond”. Bound tests reveal reduced 
vulnerability to standard shocks compared to the baseline scenario. In this case, stronger primary 
balance and higher growth would facilitate a rapid absorption of the impacts produced by the 
shock considered, although the standard depreciation shock would result in a substantial step-
increase in the debt ratio as in the baseline scenario, followed by a steady decline. 
Based on the above analysis, the sustainability of Belize’s public debt depends on the set of 
policy actions that will be undertaken during next years. Fiscal consolidation will 
significantly reduce the debt-to-GDP ratio and Belize’s vulnerability to shocks. It will imply 
measures to increase revenues, reduce/reassign expenditures, and improve debt management. A 
strong commitment from the government is needed to proceed in this direction. Moreover, bound 
tests underlined the vulnerability of Belize to a depreciation of the exchange rate. Therefore, it is 
crucial for the Government to continue in its effort to strengthen the stability of the exchange rate 
by sustained fiscal consolidation, the successful resolution of weaknesses in the banking system, 
and a disciplined monetary stance. 

43 

 
 
 
44 

Pane l A. Base line  Scenario

2009
2010
2011
(Annual  pe rcent change )

Projected
2012
2013

2014

2015

Real  Economy 

    GDP a t cons ta nt pr i ces
    Pr i ces  (GDP  Defl a tor )

0.0
-0.5

2.0
3.8

2.3
2.5

2.5
2.5

2.5
2.5

2.5
2.5

2.5
2.5

Public Sector

    Pr ima ry ba l a nce
    I nteres t
    Overa l l  ba l a nce

0.7
3.6
-2.9

1.5
3.9
-2.4

1.5
4.2
-2.6

1.5
4.6
-3.1

1.5
5.2
-3.7

1.5
5.4
-3.9

1.5
5.7
-4.1

External  Sector

   Cur rent a c count ba l a nce
  Gros s  offi c i a l  res erves  (i n months  of impor ts )

-6.8
3.2

-5.7
3.4

-6.7
2.9

-5.6
2.7

-7.0
2.6

-7.6
2.6

-8.0
2.6

Base line : Publ ic Sector debt

80.2
73.1

78.1
71.2

77.2
69.2

76.6
67.3

76.5
67.3

76.8
67.6

77.2
68.2

  o/w forei gn cur rency denomi na ted

Bound tests

    Hi s tor i ca l  s cena r i o
    Rea l  excha nge ra te s hock
    Rea l  output s hock
    Pr ima ry ba l a nce s hock
   Conti ngent l i a bi l i ty s hock

80.2
80.2
80.2
80.2
80.2

80.1
115.2
79.9
80.4
83.6

80.1
114.6
81.3
81.8
82.7

80.0
114.4
83.4
83.5
82.1

80.0
115.1
86.8
85.9
82.2

79.9
116.2
91.0
88.7
82.6

79.9
117.6
96.2
91.7
83.1

Pane l B. Active  Scenario

2009
2010
2011
(Annual  pe rcent change )

Projected
2012
2013

2014

2015

Real  Economy 

    GDP a t cons ta nt pr i ces
    Pr i ces  (GDP  Defl a tor )

0.0
-0.5

2.0
3.8

2.3
2.5

3.5
2.5

3.5
2.5

3.5
2.5

3.5
2.5

Public Sector

    Pr ima ry ba l a nce
    I nteres t
    Overa l l  ba l a nce

0.7
3.7
-2.9

2.7
3.9
-1.1

4.5
4.0
0.5

4.5
4.2
0.2

4.5
4.4
0.1

4.5
4.2
0.3

4.5
3.9
0.6

External  Sector

   Cur rent a c count ba l a nce
  Gros s  offi c i a l  res erves  (i n months  of impor ts )

-6.8
3.2

-5.4
3.5

-5.0
3.5

-4.7
3.5

-4.6
3.5

-4.6
3.6

-4.2
3.7

Base line : Publ ic Sector debt

80.2
73.1

76.9
70.2

72.8
66.4

68.4
62.4

64.4
58.7

60.4
55.1

56.4
51.3

  o/w forei gn cur rency denomi na ted

Bound tests

    Hi s tor i ca l  s cena r i o
    Rea l  excha nge ra te s hock
    Rea l  output s hock
    Pr ima ry ba l a nce s hock
   Conti ngent l i a bi l i ty s hock

80.2
80.2
80.2
80.2
80.2

80.1
114.0
78.7
79.2
86.9

80.1
110.2
76.8
77.5
82.9

80.0
105.8
75.0
75.3
78.5

80.0
102.0
73.9
73.6
74.5

79.9
98.4
73.4
72.0
70.6

79.9
94.6
73.2
70.4
66.7

Table A.1. Macro framework and Debt Sustainability: Baseline and Active Scenario 

 
 
Figure A.1. The impact of bound tests in the baseline and active scenarios 

Pub lic debt  to  GDP  rat io (%): Baseline Scenario

120
115
110
105
100
95
90
85
80
75

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

Baseline: Public Sector debt

H istorical scenario

Real exchange rate shock

Real output  shock

Primary balance shock

Contingent  liability shock

45 

 
 
 
 
 
1. 

2. 

3. 

4. 

5. 

Annex E:  CPS Consultations 

The preparation of this strategy was based on a continuous and in-depth dialogue with 
the Government of Belize, civil society, the private sector, and regional development 
partners.  
The process of arriving at the CPS focus was highly consultative, and involved initial 
discussions with the Government during the 2010 October Annual Meetings and the 
2010 December Municipal Development Project loan signing ceremony, in which 
Government laid out its initial priorities.  

The formal country consultations with high level officials and broader government 
and civil society began in February and continued in May 2011, and consisted of a 
brief presentation by the Bank team, setting out the Bank’s diagnosis of challenges 
and development priorities, and proposed areas of intervention. This was followed by 
comments and questions and answers on the proposed strategy as well as on broader 
issues and concerns. The consultations were organized and hosted by the Ministry of 
Economic Development and the Bank team met with a total of 74 government, 
private sector, and civil society representatives in addition to development partners.  
During 
the consultations, 
there was a general understanding 
that Belize’s 
developmental prospects are intricately linked to its natural resource base, which 
faces a variety of pressures from the impacts of climate change, natural hazards and 
economic development. Overall, the consultations served to deepen the Bank’s 
understanding of the development challenges, government priorities, and the role of 
other development partners.  
A results summary of the consultations is provided below. This summary is not 
comprehensive and does not reflect the official views of any group or audience 
consulted.  

Main Consultation Comments and Outcomes 
Public Sector Consultation 
6. 
This consultation was held with the Ministry of Economic Development and other 
line ministries, and discussed the following priorities:  
 Supporting key areas, including infrastructure, payments system, and 
education  
 Understanding that economic development goes hand in hand with natural 
resource conservation measures and that important synergies between 
ecological services and tourism remain untapped 
 Strengthening the social protection system as a whole, in addition to 
supporting early childhood development, expanding access to secondary 
education, improving the quality of schools, and teacher development  
Involving the planners in order to position the natural resources agenda on a 
higher platform that can be translated into a coherent program 

 

46 

 
 
 
 
 
Civil Society Consultation 

7. 

A roundtable was held with representatives from civil society, the private sector and 
development partners which stressed the following priorities: 
 Private sector growth should be encouraged and stimulated with a view to 
enhance competitiveness and reduce the cost of doing business. 
 Natural resources management should be integrated into national planning due to 
the importance of the environment for the country’s growth; there is an important 
window of opportunity to work on a unified economic development plan focused 
on cross-sectoral and long-term issues. 
 A formal mechanism to incorporate non-state actors would facilitate collaboration 
between the government, civil society groups, and the private sector.  

Consultation on the Natural Resources Dimension of Development 

8. 

9. 

A workshop was held with the Government and other stakeholders based on the 
Belize Natural Resources for Climate Resilient Growth draft policy note. Participants 
stressed 
the multidimensional and cross-cutting nature of natural resource 
management and the need to take such considerations into account when formulating 
reforms.  
Current deficiencies in addressing natural resource management issues were 
highlighted, notably insufficient institutional mechanisms that foster inter-sectoral 
collaboration, and long-term strategic planning.  
Consultation with Development Partners 
10. 
Consultations with development partners (IDB, EU, and UNDP) focused on 
discussing any potential gaps in addressing the country’s strategic development with 
a view to align activities moving forward.  
The IDB stressed the importance of adopting an intersectoral approach and in finding 
strategic entry points on the natural resources management agenda to bring key 
stakeholders to engage in higher-level dialogue with Government counterparts.  

11. 

47 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Local Consultation Participants 

Consultations between February 21st and 24th, 2011 

Non-state Stakeholders: 

1. Albert Reimer, BAS Group 
2. Alex Martinez, The Nature Conservancy 
3. Amanda Burgos Acosta, Belize Audubon Society 
4. Dareece Chuc, Belize Audubon Society 
5. Dudley Heredia, Belize Audubon Society 
6. Andre Cho, Geology and Petroleum Department (GPD) 
7. Audrey Matura-Shepherd, Oceana 
8. Colin Gillett, Coastal Zone Management Institute (CZMAI) 
9. E. Irving, Galen University 
10. Ernest N. Raymond, Social Investment Fund (SIF), Belize Municipal Development Project 
11. Imani Fairweather Morrison, Oak Foundation 
12. Jose Alpuche, Belize Agro-Productive Sector Group 
13. Joseph Hendrilex, UNICEF 
14. Kerry Beliste, Protected Area Conservation Trust (PACT) 
15. Sharon Ramclam, PACT 
16. Leandra Cho-Ricketts, University of Belize 
17. Vincent Palacio, University of Belize 
18. Marilyn Gentle-Garvin, Belize Family Life Association 
19. Melanie McField, Healthy Reefs/Smithsonian 
20. Mike Heusner, National Environmental Appraisal Committee (NTIA NEAC) 
21. Nadia D. Bood, WWF Central America 
22. Nellie Catzim, Southern Environmental Association (SEA) 
23. Olivia Rhaburn, National Association of Village Councils of Belize (NAVCO) 
24. Orlando Dawson, NAVCO 
25. Seleni Matus, Belize Tourism Board 
26. Tracey Hutchinson, Belize Social Security Board 
27. Yvette Alonzo, Association of Protected Areas Management Organizations (APAMO) 
28. Evita Quiroz, APAMO 
29. Caroline Clarke, Representative, Belize Country Office, Inter-American Development 
Bank 
30. Harold Arzu, Operations Advisor, Belize Country Office, IDB 

Government of Belize:  

1. Mary Vasquez, RESTORE Belize, Office of the Prime Minister 
2. Yvonne Hyde, Chief Executive Officer, Ministry of Economic Development 
3. Emily Waight-Aldana, Economist, Ministry of Economic Development 
4. Yvette Alvarez, Senior Advisor, Ministry of Finance 
5. Martin Alegria, Chief Environmental Officer, Department of Environment, Ministry of 
Natural Resources 

48 

 
 
6. Colin Young, National Protected Areas Secretariat (NPAS) Director, Ministry of Natural 
Resources 
7. Arlene Mabela, NPAS, Ministry of Natural Resources 
8. Paul Flowers, Strategic Planning and Policy Advisor, Ministry of Natural Resources 
9. Tanya Marsden, Policy Unit (PCPU), Ministry of Natural Resources 
10. Marlen Westby, PCPU, Ministry of Natural Resources 
11. Marcelo Windsor, Forestry Department, Ministry of Natural Resources 
12. Safira Vasquez, Strategic Approach to International Chemicals Management (SAICM), 
Department of Environment, Ministry of Natural Resources 
13. Edgar Ek, Agriculture Dep. Chief Environmental Officer, Ministry of Natural Resources 
14. Jeavon Hulse, Department of Environment, Ministry of Natural Resources 
15. Gilroy Lewis, Solid Waste Management Authority (SWAMA), Ministry of Natural 
Resources 
16. Lumen Cayetano, SWAMA, Ministry of Natural Resources 
17. Beverly Wade, Fisheries Department, Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries 
18. Eugene Waight, Chief Agriculture Officer, Department of Agriculture, Ministry of 
Agriculture and Fisheries 
19. George Myvett, Sr. Fisheries Officer, Fisheries Department, Ministry of Agriculture and 
Fisheries 
20. David Leacock, Chief Executive Officer for the  Ministry of Education and Youth 
21. Christopher Aird, Chief Education Officer, Ministry of Education and Youth 
22. Ellajean Gillett, Ministry of Education and Youth 
23. John Bodden, Ministry of Health 
24. Judith Alpuche, Chief Executive Officer for the Ministry of Human Development and 
Social Transformation 
25. John Flowers, Ministry of Human Development and Social Transformation 
26. Lawrence Sylvester, Chief Executive Officer for the Ministry of Housing and Urban 
Development 
27. Nigel Vasquez, Ministry of Tourism, Civil Aviation & Culture 
28. Nonatis Canta, Pesticides Control Board (PCB) 

Consultations between May 9th and 13th, 2011 

1. Dean Barrow, Prime Minister 
2. 
Joseph Waight, Financial Secretary, Ministry of Finance 
3. Yvette Alvarez, Senior Advisor, Ministry of Finance 
4. Yvonne Hyde, Chief Executive Officer, Ministry of Economic Development 
5. Emily Waight-Aldana, Economist, Ministry of Economic Development 
6. Beverly Castillo, Chief Executive Officer, Ministry of Natural Resources 
7. Martin Alegria, Chief Environmental Officer, Department of Environment, Ministry of 
Natural Resources 
8. Colin Young, National Protected Areas Secretariat (NPAS) Director, Ministry of Natural 
Resources 
9. Paul Flowers, Strategic Planning and Policy Advisor, Ministry of Natural Resources 
10. George Myvett, Sr. Fisheries Officer, Fisheries Department, Ministry of Agriculture and 
Fisheries 

49 

 
 
11. James Azueta, Fisheries Officer, Fisheries Department, Ministry of Agriculture and 
Fisheries 
12. Lisa Carne, Marine Biologist, Placencia, Stann Creek District 
13. Nadia D. Bood, WWF Central America  
14. Brian Young, Tour Guide and Co-Chairman of Friends of Laughing Bird Caye, Stann 
Creek District  
15. Kenrick Leslie, Executive Director, Caribbean Community Climate Change Centre 
16. Ulric Trotz, Science Adviser, Caribbean Community Climate Change Centre 
17. Mark Bynoe, Environmental/Resource Economist, Caribbean Community Climate Change 
Centre 
18. Winston Bennett, Project Manager, Caribbean Community Climate Change Centre 
19. Kay Menzies, President of the Belize Chamber of Commerce 

50 

 
 
 
Annex F:  Bank Experience in Climate Change, Natural Disaster Risk 
Management, and Environment 

Climate Change 

The World Bank's involvement in adaptation to climate change impacts was initiated in the Latin 
America region with the formulation of the Caribbean Planning for Adaptation to Climate 
Change (CPACC) Project in 1997, an enabling activity of regional nature (US$6.2 million from 
the GEF, closed in November 2002), which included all CARICOM nations.  It focused on the 
vulnerability of Caribbean island nations to the impacts of climate change.  

The Bank continued to support these areas through the Mainstreaming Adaptation to Climate 
Change (MACC) project (US$5 million from the GEF, closed in March 2009), the objective of 
which was to facilitate the creation of an enabling environment for climate change adaptation in 
the small islands of the Caribbean Community, and coastal developing states (Antigua and 
Barbuda, Bahamas, Barbados, Belize, Dominica, Grenada, Guyana, Jamaica, St. Kitts and Nevis, 
St. Lucia, St. Vincent and the Grenadines, and Trinidad and Tobago). Under the MACC, a 
National Adaptation Strategy and Action Plan in the Water Sector in Belize was completed in 
March 2009. Belize also actively participated in the elaboration and formulation of a Caribbean 
Regional Framework for Achieving Development Resilience to Climate Change (2009-2015) 
which was endorsed by the Heads of State in July 2009. Also, regional position papers have been 
prepared and agreed upon prior to UNFCCC related meetings (e.g. COP, SBSTA) once a year, 
sometimes twice a year. These are incorporated into the Alliance of Small Island States (AOSIS) 
negotiating position.  

Pilot Program for Climate Resilience (PPCR): The Caribbean countries accepted the invitation to 
be a regional PPCR pilot in May 2009. This is a regional program for: (i) country-based 
investments in six nations -  Haiti, Jamaica, Dominica, Grenada, St. Lucia, and St. Vincent and 
the Grenadines; and (ii) region-wide activities to support national climate change strategies as 
well as regional planning strategies, policies and financing mechanisms. The latter is directly 
benefitting Belize. The planned activities are: (i) monitoring and climate impact modeling 
activities; (ii) facilitating an enabling environment (policy and institutional framework); (iii) 
providing the right data and tools to enable countries to factor climate risks into sustainable land-
use management and spatial planning; (iv) capacity building and awareness raising aimed at 
different levels, including sectors and policy makers; and (v) integration of climate change into 
development and budget planning.  These two tracks will work through key entities in the 
Caribbean region. CCCCC is a member of the PPCR Regional Steering Committee and also 
implementing specific activities (see brief on CCCCC). The total grant allocation for the 
Caribbean Regional PPCR is US$60-75 million.  

Environment 

Belize's sector-specific policies and legislation are generally robust. Various key environmental 
policies and legislations exist, such as the National Biodiversity Strategy Action Plan, the 2009 
Water Resources Management Act, the 1992 National Lands Act and the 1999Coastal Zone 
Management Act. In December 2010, Belize also has banned bottom trawling in territorial 
waters, which is known to be very destructive to the marine ecosystems. However, integration 

51 

 
and implementation of legislation have been lacking. For example, due to weak institutional 
capacities, implementation and enforcement of environmental management actions have been 
inadequate. On the other hand, environmental civil society organizations are very strong and 
actively participate in the formulation of policies and management of protected areas (PAs).  

The Conservation and Sustainable Use of the Mesoamerican Barrier Reef System (MBRS I) 
Project Phase I, which was executed by Central American Commission on Environment and 
Development (CCAD) and closed on June 30, 2007, aimed at assisting Belize, Guatemala, 
Honduras, and Mexico to strengthen and coordinate national policies, regulations, and 
institutional arrangements for the conservation and sustainable use of the MBRS as a shared 
regional ecosystem. The project was successful in catalyzing international cooperation among 
the four countries and was widely regarded as a model for regional coordination and joint 
management of a transboundary resource.  

Building on the successes of MBRS I project, the Conservation and Sustainable Use of the 
Mesoamerican Barrier Reef System (MBRS) II Project is under preparation with the objective to 
consolidate on-going efforts to coordinate national policies for the conservation and sustainable 
use of the shared reef system and broaden the multi-sectoral focus with the participation of the 
tourism and agriculture sectors. It will also promote adoption of biodiversity-friendly activities in 
local communities and the private sector. Currently, the legal agreement for the preparation grant 
has been prepared but is on hold due to a lack of consensus among the 4 countries as to which 
agency should be the recipient of the grant resources. The parties are considering various options 
on how to move the process forward..   

Disaster Risk Management 

The Central American Probabilistic Risk Assessment Initiative (CAPRA) aims to strengthen the 
regional capacity for assessing, understanding and communicating disaster risk.  CAPRA is a 
partnership between Center for Coordination of National Disaster Prevention in Central America 
(CEPREDENAC), the UN International Strategy for Disaster Reduction (ISDR), the IDB and the 
World Bank as a means to raise awareness among client countries in the region by providing 
them with a set of tools that would let them better understand the risk of adverse natural events. 
CAPRA uses probabilistic methodologies to assess risk.  

In Belize, during the first phase of CAPRA financed by the IDB, a country risk profile and 
specific disaster risk assessments including seismic and hurricane risks (winds, storm-surges and 
rain) have been developed for Punta Gorda, Belmopan and Belize City. For these locations, the 
Average Annual Loss (AAL) calculated are between 1 to 3 percent of the total exposed value, 
due mainly to contribution of losses associated with hurricane risk.  Based on these analyses, the 
Bank may support the second phase to improve the quality and reliability of these preliminary 
results and focus on creating technical capacity in the country through a training strategy and by 
supporting selected key institutions on the development of specific risk assessments using the 
CAPRA platform.   

52 

 
 
Annex G:  Donor Harmonization Matrix 

Productive Sectors 

Infrastructure 

Social Development 

Environment/Disaster Financial Sector 

External 
Partner 

CDB 

Macroeconomic 
Policy 

Modernization of 
Customs and Excise 
Department 

Hurricane Dean 
Emergency Relief 

DFC Line of Credit 

National Disaster 
Management (Tropical 
Storm Arthur 
Recovery) 

Solid Waste 
Management (and 
OFID) 
Disaster Risk 
Management (CAPRA) 
Support for the 
Preparation of an 
Integrated Disaster 
Risk Management (TA) 

Institutional 
Strengthening of the 
credit union sector 
(TA) 

Placencia Road 
Upgrading Project 
Belize River Valley 
Water Supply System  
Kendall / Mullins 
River Bridges 
Northern Highway 
Haulover Creek Bridge 
to Airport Road  
Macal River Crossing 

Post Hurricane Richard 
flood risk mitigation 
infrastructure in Belize 
City  5mn 
Integrated Water and 
Sanitation Program for 
the Placencia Peninsula 

53 

Technical & 
Vocational Training 
Project 

Social Investment 
Fund (Basic Needs 
Trust Fund) ($15mn) 

Health Reform Project 
(with CDB/EU) 
Education Program 
(5mn) under 
preparation 
Community Action 
for Public 
Safety.($5mn) 
Social Policy Support 
($15mn) 
Strengthening of 
Pension System in 
Belize (TA) 

IDB 

Sustainable Tourism 
Loan 
Agricultural Services 
Program 
Belize City Downtown 
Rehabilitation (ta) 
Land Management 
Program III ($2.5mn) 

Strengthening Results-
based Management in 
the Public Sector 
Strengthening Belize’s 
Fiscal Transparency 
and Responsibility 
Program to support the 
implementation of the 
Medium Term Action 
Plan to Enhance 
Expenditure 
Management (TA) 
Integrated Fiduciary 
Action Plan (IDB, EC) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
External 
Partner 

Macroeconomic 
Policy 

World Bank 

IDF Building 
Institutional Capacity 
of the Auditor General 
and Improving Quality 
of Public Procurement 

EC 

UN 

SFA (Special 
Framework of 
Assistance) - Banana 
Support Programme 
Accompanying 
Measures for Sugar 
Protocol Countries II 
(AMS) 
Rural Development 
Project (BRDP) II 
(US$12.8 mn) 

Productive Sectors 

Infrastructure 

Social Development 

Environment/Disaster Financial Sector 

Municipal 
Development Project 
National Housing and 
Urban Development 
Plan, non-lending TA 

Rehabilitation of Sugar 
/Feeder Roads - 
Corozal/Orange Walk 

CCT – Education 
Belize Influenza 
Detection and 
Response 
JSDF  Improving 
Children's Health and 
Nutrition in Poor 
Mayan Communities 
in Toledo  
George Town High 
School; Technical 
High School Building 
- Stann Creek District 

Disaster Risk 
Management (CAPRA, 
GFDRR) 
MBRS (II) 
CCRIF 

Global Climate Change 
Alliance ($4mn) 

UNICEF Programs - 
Human Development 
(Strengthen Protection 
System for Children) 
MDG Needs 
Assessment and Cost 
Prognosis 

Mainstreaming and 
Capacity Building for 
Sustainable Land 
Management Project 
(GEF) 
Integrating Protected 
Areas and Landscape 
Management in the 
Golden Stream 

54 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
External 
Partner 

Macroeconomic 
Policy 

Productive Sectors 

Infrastructure 

Social Development 

Environment/Disaster Financial Sector 

OPEC Fund 
for 
International 
Development 

Others 

Watershed 
Strengthening of 
Disaster Preparedness 
and Emergency 
Response Capacity in 
Belize 
Strengthening National 
Capacities for the 
Operationalization, 
Consolidation, and 
Sustainability of 
Belize’s Protected 
Areas System (GEF) 

Southside (Belize City) 
Poverty Alleviation 
Project - Phase I, II, 
and III  
Belize/Guatemala 
Border (Completion of 
the Southern Highway 
Project) (and Kuwait, 
OPEC, CABEI) 
Santa Elena New 
International Crossing 
(CABEI) 

55 

National Forest 
Program Facility 
(FAO) 

Rural Finance Project 
(IFAD/CABEI) 

HIV/AIDS 
prevention, care, 
treatment and support 
(PAHO, UNICEF, 
UNFPA, UNIFEM, 
UNDP) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
89°W

88°W

IBRD 33371

BELIZE

M E X I C O

Corozal

To 
Xpujil

To 
Lázaro Cárdenas
To 
Chetumal

Chetumal
Bay

Buena Vista

San
Jose

COROZAL

Orange
Walk

Hondo

Maskall

Ambergris
Cay

San Pedro

18°N

Turneffe
Islands

Caribbean
Sea

17°N

0

0

10

20

30

40 Kilometers

10

2 0

30 Miles

B E L I Z E

SELECTED CITIES AND TOWNS

DISTRICT CAPITALS

NATIONAL CAPITAL

RIVERS

MAIN ROADS

DISTRICT BOUNDARIES

INTERNATIONAL BOUNDARIES

SEPTEMBER 2004

18°N

Blue

Cree
k

Neustadt

oth’s
o
B

Gallon Jug

ORANGE
WALK

Burrell
Boom

BELIZE

Hattieville

Belize City

17°N

To 
El Cruce

G U AT E M A L A

Belize

San Ignacio

BELMOPAN

Gales Point

CAYO

M

a

c
a

l

Mts.

a

y

M a

Middlesex

STANN
CREEK

Victoria Peak
(1,160 m)

Dangriga

Hopkins

Riversdale

Placentia

TOLEDO

San Antonio

Monkey River Town

Punta Gorda

Gulf of
Honduras

16°N

Barranco

Sarstoon

This map was produced by the Map Design Unit of The World Bank.  
The boundaries, colors, denominations and any other information
shown on this map do not imply, on the part of The World Bank
Group, any judgment on the legal status of any territory, or any
endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.

89°W

