d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

Document of  
The World Bank 

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 

Report Number:  60255-RO 

INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT 

INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION 

PROGRESS REPORT 
ON THE 
COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY 
FOR  
ROMANIA 

FY09 – FY13 

November 28, 2011  

Central Europe and the Baltic Countries Country Unit 
Europe and Central Asia Region 

International Finance Corporation 
Europe and Central Asia Department 

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance 
of their official duties. Its content may not otherwise be disclosed without World Bank 
authorization. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DATE OF CURRENT CPS 
June 12, 2009 

GOVERNMENT FISCAL YEAR 
January 1 – December 31 

CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS 
(Exchange Rate Effective as of November 1, 2011) 

Currency Unit 
US$1.00 

Romanian New Leu 
3.17 

ABBREVIATION AND ACRONYMS 

AAA 
ARD 
CPRR 
CoG 
CPS 
DPL 
EBRD 

EC 
EIB 
EMTN 
ESW 
EU 
FDI 
FRs 
FY 
GDP 
GEF 
GMI 
IBRD 

ICT 

IDA 

Analytical and Advisory Assistance 
IFC 
Agriculture and Rural Development 
IDF 
Country Portfolio Results Review 
IMF 
Center of Government  
GoR 
Country Partnership Strategy 
IFIs 
Development Policy Lending 
NBR 
European Bank for Reconstruction  NRP 
and Development 
P4R 
European Commission 
PEFA 
European Investment Bank 
Euro Medium Term Note 
Economic and Sector Work 
European Union 
Foreign Direct Investment 
Functional Reviews 
Fiscal Year 
Gross Domestic Product 
Global Environment Facility 
Guaranteed Minimum Income 
International Bank for 
Reconstruction and Development 
Information and Communication 
Technology 
International Development  
Association 

PFM 
PPP 
PR 
RSDF 
R&D 
SBA 
SIP 
SMEs 
SOEs 
TA 
UPL 
VAT 
WB 

PEIR 

International Finance Corporation 
Institutional Development Fund 
International Monetary Fund 
Government of Romania 
International Financial Institutions 
National Bank of Romania 
National Reform Program 
Program for Results Lending 
Public Expenditure & Financial 
Accountability 
Public Expenditure and Institutional  
Review 
Public Financial Management 
Public Private Partnership 
Progress Report 
Romanian Social Development Fund 
Research and Development 
Stand-By Agreement 
Social Inclusion Project 
Small and Medium-size Enterprises 
State Owned Enterprises 
Technical Assistance 
Unitary Pay Law 
Value Added Tax 
World Bank 

       IBRD 

IFC 

Vice President: 
Philippe H. Le Houerou Vice President: 
Dimitris Tsitsiragos 
Country Director: Peter Harrold 
Regional Director: Tomasz Telma 
Team Leader: 
François Rantrua 
Team Leader: 
Ana Maria Mihaescu 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Acknowledgements  

This Country Partnership Strategy Progress Report (CPS PR) was prepared under the guidance of Peter 
Harrold, IBRD Country Director, and Tomasz Telma, IFC Regional Director, by a team led by 
Francois Rantrua, Task Team Leader (TTL) and IBRD Country Manager for Romania. The IFC team 
was led by Ana Maria Mihaescu, IFC Chief Resident Representative. The CPS Core Team included: 
Corina Grigore, Cornelia Boranescu, Janet Dooley, Catalin Pauna, Mariko Higashi, Richard Florescu, 
Daniel Kozak, Manuela Stanculescu, Arabela Aprahamian, Nadia Badea, Gabriel Ionita, Cesar  
Niculescu, Mariana Moarcas, Mihaela Dumitrascu and Valentina Martinovic. The following Romania 
Country Team Members and other colleagues have also made important contributions to this strategy: 
Nina Arnhold, Aziz Bouzauher, Sudharshan Canagarajah, Elisabetta Capanelli, Ruxandra Costache, 
Bogdan Constantinescu, Dina Umali-Deininger, Donato DeRosa, Anca Gherman, Charles Griffin, 
Anthony Gorman, Isamiddinova, Sereen Juma, Holger Kray, Jean-Francois Marteau, Keith McLean, 
Mamta Murthi, Bernard Myers, Lalit Raina, John Daniel Pollner, Paulo Correa, Ana Revenga, 
Christine Richaud, Lars Sondergaard, Alexandru Stanescu, Emil Tesliuc, Yvonne Tsikata, Luisa 
Masutti, Kari Nyman, Sophie Sirtaine, Penny Williams, Sally Zeijlon from IBRD and Hester Marie 
DeCasper, Andreia Radu, Mircea Stoica, Oana Visinescu from IFC. Other members of the Bank -wide 
Romania Country Team (including IBRD and IFC) have also contributed. 

Special thanks are extended to the counterpart team of the Government of Romania: Mr. Bogdan 
Dragoi, State Secretary to the Ministry of Public Finance (MoPF), Angela Carabas, Director General, 
and Adrian Baila, Expert in the General Directorate for Treasury and Public Debt and their colleagues 
in the Government, Stefan Nanu, Alternate Executive Director at the World Bank, as well as Silvia 
Viceconte, Policy Adviser in the General Secretariat of the European Commission. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 

I. 

INTRODUCTION ...................................................................................................... 1 

II. DEVELOPMENTS SINCE THE CPS ....................................................................... 2 

III. PROGRESS TOWARD ACHIEVING CPS OBJECTIVES AND OUTCOMES ..... 3 

IV. PROPOSED ADJUSTMENTS TO THE CPS ........................................................... 6 

V. RISKS ....................................................................................................................... 10 

Annexes 

Annex 1 Results Framework ............................................................................................ 11 
Annex 2 Proposed CPS framework based on strategic pillars and cross-sectoral themes20 
Annex 3 CPS Results Summary....................................................................................... 21 
Annex 4 Bank Support to the Government’s Public Administration Reform ................. 25 
Annex 5 Country needs and World Bank comparative advantage .................................. 29 
Annex 6 Summary of Sectoral Consultations .................................................................. 30 
Annex 7 Romania at a Glance .......................................................................................... 33 
Annex 8 Selected Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management ............. 36 
Annex 9 Social Indicators ................................................................................................ 37 
Annex 10 Recent Economic and Financial Indicators ..................................................... 38 
Annex 11 Romania Key Exposure Indicators .................................................................. 42 
Annex 12 Operations Portfolio IBRD and Grants ........................................................... 43 
Annex 13 Summary of Analytical and Advisory Activities ............................................ 44 
Annex 14 IFC Committed and Disbursed Outstanding Investment Portfolio, Romania . 45 

Tables 

Table 1: Key economic indicators 
Table 2: FBS arrangements under themes 1 and 2 
Table 3: Proposed IBRD lending 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY FY09 – FY13 
PROGRESS REPORT FOR ROMANIA 

This Country Partnership Strategy Progress Report comes at a time when Romania has been emerging from the 
global financial crisis, though like other countries, faces risks of contagion from economic volatility in Europe. 
Romania is undergoing broad and systemic reform of the public administration to lay the foundations for a more 
sustainable growth path and convergence with the EU. The Bank’s approach through the CPS is designed to 
support this process and continue to help Romania mitigate risk of further crises. In the first two years of the CPS, 
the cornerstone of the Bank’s program was, with the EU and IMF, helping Government overcome the crisis 
through DPLs and ongoing portfolio, together with identifying reforms to build a stronger public administration 
through Functional Reviews of twelve Ministries. Now at mid-point, the Bank is turning toward helping the 
Government implement such public reform through the Modernization of Administration Program and projects in 
the social sectors and tax administration, supporting its external issuance program through deferred drawdown 
operations and advancing the discussion on growth via a series of growth policy notes, and private sector 
development with the IFC. Through this work, the Bank hopes to help the country’s efforts for Romania’s people 
to reap the full benefits of EU membership and enjoy a quality of life similar to its EU neighbors. 

I. 

INTRODUCTION 

1. 
This Progress Report (PR) covers the implementation at midpoint of the FY09 -13 
Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) between the Government of Romania (GoR) and the 
World Bank Group. The CPS was designed around three pillars: (i) reforming the public sector, 
(ii) resuming growth and enhancing competitiveness, and (iii) promoting social and spatial 
inclusion. The main anchor of the strategy was the EUR1 billion Development Policy Lending 
(DPL) 1-3 program complemented by the existing portfolio and a program of Analytical and 
Advisory Assistance (AAA). The International Finance Corporation (IFC) investment strategy in 
the short term was to provide a crisis response by helping to recapitalize the existing client banks, 
supporting financial institutions to continue on-lending and offering trade finance products. IFC 
provided long-term credits to banks to co-finance European Union (EU) funded projects and to 
foster competitive real sector. Overall, considerable improvements were made under all pillars with 
satisfactory and timely implementation of the Bank supported program, as well as proactive efforts 
to restructure the portfolio. The Bank program for FY09-13 was clearly defined for the first two 
years, and broadly outlined for the outer years. Challenges remain to be addressed in FY12-13, and 
greater focus will be given to the growth agenda. 

2. While the strategic focus of the pillars remains relevant, this PR proposes a more 
European lens to help frame the Bank’s support to Romania. The midterm review is an 
opportunity to adjust the Bank program to current country needs. The original pillars remain 
relevant in light of the still fragile economic recovery and the need to strengthen the foundations for 
medium-term competitiveness and growth. As Romania’s policies and economy are inevitably tied 
with EU membership, this Progress Report tries to more clearly reflect Bank’s activities in this 
context through three EU related themes: (i) policy reforms to reap the benefits of EU membership, 
(ii) modernization of public institutions to enhance resource allocation and absorption of EU funds, 
and (iii) complement to EU funding. The risks outlined in the CPS remain relevant, but this PR 
identifies additional ones and proposes mitigation measures.   

3. 
This Progress Report proposes new lending and AAA work to support Romania’s 
convergence to EU living standards. The PR proposes about EUR1.7 billion in new lending, 
while the AAA program has been growing with a strong portfolio of Fee Based Services (FBS). The 
Bank will, however, remain flexible to address client needs that may arise in the next two years. 
While the original CPS envisioned a phased reduction in IFC investment, the ongoing risks 
associated with the global economic downturn and worsening European debt crisis require the IFC 
to continue play an important counter-cyclical role through selective private sector investments. In 
the real sector, this includes supporting projects which create jobs, increase investment in 
underserved frontier regions, contribute to the growth and competitiveness of local firms in 
promising sectors such as agribusiness, infrastructure and improve resource efficiency.  

1 

 
 
 
 
 
 
II. DEVELOPMENTS SINCE THE CPS 

4. 
The political environment is characterized by some uncertainty. As no party holds a 
majority in the Parliament, coalition politics makes unpopular reforms difficult to implement. So 
far, the current coalition government has survived multiple no-confidence votes and its stability and 
future durability may depend on the timely implementation of reforms and the economic policy 
program. This uncertainty is inherent in the case of any coalition government facing a strong and 
vocal opposition and in the context of the approaching 2012 local and parliamentary elections. 
While there is political will to return to growth by deepening structural reforms, strengthening 
public administration and making needed budgetary adjustments, some reforms are unpopular with 
a part of the Romanian population and the past year witnessed several public protests.  

5. 
Faced with an unfavorable international environment due to the global financial crisis, 
a slowing economy, and a large fiscal and financial gap, Romania turned to the international 
financial institutions (IFIs) for support in early 2009. The International Monetary Fund (IMF), 
the European Commission (EC), the Bank, and other international financial institutions (IFIs) 
supported the reforms to which the Government committed with a package totaling EUR19.95 
billion over 2009-2011, of which the Bank would contribute about EUR1 billion under three DPL 
operations1. The package aimed to help the GoR bring down the fiscal deficit in a sustainable way, 
improve the efficiency of public spending and strengthen the financial sector. The ultimate goal was 
to help Romania emerge from the economic and financial crisis on a stronger footing, so as to 
converge to the living standards of more advanced EU economies.   

6. 
In 2009, the economy was in a recession which continued in 2010. Economic activity 
declined by 8.4 percent in 2009 and 2010, largely due to a sharp fall in private consumption, 
reflecting a decline in bank credit, the reduction in households’ disposable incomes, and 
plummeting investor confidence. Declining domestic demand led to a major current account 
contraction to less than half of the 2008 level. Foreign direct investment also declined to less than 
half of its pre-crisis level. The fiscal deficit widened to 7.3 percent of GDP in 2009 and 6.5 percent 
in 2010 (Table 1) due to the effect on revenues in particular of the crisis, which was deeper than 
initially expected. In 2010, strong government measures were undertaken, including a hike in VAT 
from 19 to 24 percent and a 25 percent cut in public wages.  

Table 1: Key economic indicators, 2008-13 (CPS period: 2009-2013) 
20122 
2008 
2009 
2010 
2011 
1.8 
1.5 
2.9 
-1.9 
0.0 
-4.7 
2.6  
77.8  

Real GDP growth (%) 
Domestic demand (%) 
Consumer price index (%, average) 
Fiscal balance (% of GDP) 
Structural fiscal balance (% of GDP) 
Current account balance (% of GDP) 
FDI balance (% of GDP) 
Gross external debt (% of GDP) 

7.3 
8.3 
7.8 
-4.8 
-8.5 
-11.6 
6.7 
51.8 

-7.1 
-14.6 
5.6 
-7.3 
-7.0 
-4.2 
3.0 
69.0 

-1.3 
-1.0 
6.1 
-6.5 
-5.1 
-4.1 
1.8 
75.7 

1.5 
0.3 
6.4 
-4.4 
-2.6 
-4.5 
2.2  
75.4  

2013 
3.2 
3.6 
3.2 
-2.0 
-0.5 
-5.0 
2.2 
72.9 

7. 
Growth has resumed in 2011, but it is expected to linger below potential in the medium 
term, while important downside risks remain. Earlier expectations on Romania’s quick 
economic recovery and improved macroeconomic outlook have been dampened by the resurgence 
of the global economic crisis and the ongoing challenges in the Eurozone. Growth of 1.5 percent is 
projected for 2011 from -1.3 percent in 2010, and is currently expected to only modestly increase in 
2012 to around 1.8 percent of GDP, and continue at 2-3 percent per annum over the medium term. 
Growth depends however on the recovery of the global economic environment, renewed investor 
confidence, and a steady increase in domestic demand. The fiscal deficit (in cash terms) is on track 
to meet the target of 4.4 percent of GDP (or within 5 percent in ESA3 terms) in 2011 and it is 
expected to bring the ESA and cash deficits within 2 percent of GDP in 2012.  

1 The DPL1, for EUR 300 million, was disbursed in 2009; the DPL2, for EUR 300 million, was disbursed in June 2011; and the 
DPL3, for EUR 400 million, is expected to accompany this Progress Report. 
2 Forecasts based on IMF data. 
3 European System of National and Regional Accounts in the European Community 

2 

 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
                                                           
8. 
The IMF, EC and the WB continue to support fiscal stabilization, economic growth  
and structural reforms including through a 24-month precautionary Stand-By Agreement 
(SBA). This should help Romania weather better the impact of the deepening crisis in the 
Eurozone and the risk of contagion.  The IMF released seven tranches totaling SDR 10.57 billion 
under the SBA which expired in March 2011. The eighth tranche was made available on a 
precautionary basis, at the Government’s request. The EC also released in June 2011 the fifth and 
last tranche of its EUR5 billion program accompanying the SBA with the IMF. A new SBA of 
EUR3.5 billion was approved by the IMF in March 2011, in conjunction with precautionary support 
from the EU of EUR1.4 billion. The SBA focuses on boosting growth through structural reforms 
and aims at deep-rooted reforms in energy and transport. The IMF and EU precautionary support 
helps to reassure the markets and provide a cushion against potential adverse shocks.   

9. 
Social protection spending made it possible to continue reducing poverty despite the 
crisis. The absolute poverty rate decreased from 36 percent in 2000 to 5.7 percent in 2008 and 4.4 
percent in 2009. The 2009 decline in the poverty rate has been partially due to increases in the 
minimum pension, but this effort proved to be costly and not well targeted. In addition, the rise in 
unemployment was partly contained due to strong labor hoarding effect aided by the GoR through a 
generous “technical unemployment” subsidy to companies. However, the poverty rate increased to 
5.4 percent in 2010 due to the crisis hardship. Social spending rose from 10.15 percent in 2008 to 
14.3 percent of GDP in 2010. 

10. 
The Government National Reform Program (NRP) 2011-13, adopted in April 2011,  
indicates a gradual shift of the reform agenda away from crisis management towards reviving 
economic growth and enhancing competitiveness. The NRP outlines new reforms derived from 
specific objectives of the Europe 2020 strategy. This reinforces the country’s objective of achieving 
convergence with the EU in terms of competitiveness, income and living standards. Thus, the NRP 
proposes short and medium term priority reforms to close the gap with the EU and fall into three 
categories: 
i. Measures to consolidate the macroeconomic framework include expenditure and revenue 
adjustments, public pay policy reforms, health, state owned enterprises (SOE); 
ii. Policy reforms to address root causes of vulnerabilities exposed by the global economic crisis 
and improve functioning of markets aim to increase allocational efficiency of public and 
private sector resources; reforms are envisaged in: R&D, energy, health, education; 
iii. Administrative capacity building measures aim to enable better delivery of public services and 
effective strategic prioritization of Government actions, including better policy coordination 
and monitoring and evaluation; these target the functioning of the General Secretariat of the 
Government, the Ministry of Public Finance and institutional set-up and business processes in 
line ministries (i.e. education, social protection, tax administration, EU funds absorption) and 
governmental agencies; the measures are derived mainly from the recommendations of the FRs.  

11. Government priorities have been endorsed and supported by key stakeholders . The 
multilateral program with the IMF, EC and the Bank supported the established priorities. These 
have also been validated by a number of exercises conducted by the Bank such as the benchmarking 
exercise, mapping of reforms and stakeholders’ analysis, confirming at the same time the role of the 
Bank as a key advisor to the Government in implementing the reforms agenda, building upon its 
comparative advantage (as presented in section IV). 

III. 

PROGRESS TOWARD ACHIEVING CPS OBJECTIVES AND OUTCOMES 

12. 
Progress toward achieving the CPS objectives and outcomes is broadly satisfactory 
through there remains a significant agenda for the two years ahead. The CPS design was not 
overly ambitious in setting the objectives and results of the Bank’s contributions over the CPS 
period. With Bank support through DPL 1-2 and technical assistance (TA), the budget process now 
relies on tighter discipline, prioritization and monitoring practices. These improvements have been 
triggered by a strengthened medium-term expenditure framework (MTEF), a longer-term fiscal 
strategy and legislation encouraging fiscal responsibility. More efficient expenditure policies are 
implemented in health and education. Comprehensive efforts to rationalize and consolidate social 

3 

 
 
  
 
 
 
assistance are underway. The CPS contributed to developments in various sectors as described 
below, such as: agriculture and rural development, knowledge economy, energy, as well as to 
increased EU funds absorption in selected areas. However, the latter remains a major challenge.  

13. 
During its first two years, the CPS was centered on the DPL program. The DPL series 
was the main policy instrument for dialogue with the Government, IMF and EC. They supported a 
comprehensive - and probably unprecedented in terms of coverage and depth - reform agenda 
including a new pension system, new public pay system, budget reforms, health expenditure 
efficiency reform, rationalization of the social assistance system, and reforms to consolidate 
financial sector. The policy dialogue was assisted by an array of TA through a joint program of the 
Bank, IMF and EC. The DPL and accompanying TA helped the Bank strengthen its collaboration 
with the EC, paving the way to the partnership on Functional Reviews (FR) and Modernization of 
Public Administration. Progress under pillars is presented below (see also Annex 3). 

Pillar 1 - Public Sector Reform  

14. 
Progress on Public Sector Reform is on track and this pillar has become a primary 
focus of Bank support to the GoR. The CPS has supported the fiscal sustainability targets in the 
2009-2012 Government’s program, and fiscal reforms critical to Romania’s medium-term agenda.  
In the budget area, CPS instruments (DPL1-2, Public Expenditure and Institutional Review, 
Education and Health TA) have helped underpin improved budget discipline, accountability, 
efficiency and sustainability of the public wage bill. In governance, the Bank continues to support 
strengthening the efficiency and accountability of the judiciary. Proactive measures4 by the Ministry 
of Justice bode well to meet CPS objectives in the judiciary by 2013.  

15. Over the past year and a half, the Bank carried out functional reviews (FRs) of twelve 
public institutions in Romania under the overall framework of an MoU signed in June 2009 
between the EU and the GoR. The reviews provide operational recommendations on strategic 
management, organizational structure, sector governance, budgeting, and human resources 
management to help guide structural reforms. While this possibility was envisaged in CPS, it 
materialized in a much stronger way than anticipated and has become a cornerstone of the Bank’s 
work program in Romania. Phase 1 (presented to Government in October 2010) covered Transport, 
Pre-University Education, Agriculture and Rural Development, Public Finance, the Center of 
Government, Competition Council; and phase 2 (presented to Government in March 2011) analyzed 
Environment and Forestry, Energy and Economy, Health, Labor and Social Protection, Regional 
Development and Tourism, Higher Education, Research, and Innovation). In December 2010, the 
Government approved their action plans derived from the recommendations of the first phase, part 
of which the Bank may support under the EU financed Modernization of Romanian Public 
Administration FBS series (see section Proposed Adjustments to the CPS). The Government has 
recently completed Action Plans based on the second phase of the Functional Reviews and 
submitted them to the European Commission. 

16. 
The Bank’s support under Pillar 1 is expected to exceed the CPS original objectives. 
Under DPL1, the GoR elaborated a MTEF that, together with the Fiscal Responsibility Law, 
represents the basis for a credible medium-term fiscal plan and linking allocations to outcomes and 
performance. The MTEF is already being used as a tool to enhance fiscal discipline and improve 
resource allocation, resulting in achieving satisfactory outcomes for this CPS pillar. This should be 
reflected by a steady reduction of discrepancy between the approved budget and actual expenditures 
for major ministries. The implementation of measures to attract and retain skilled public employees 
remains to be addressed (under DPL3). The Judicial Reform Project was restructured to better 
support the Strategy for the Development of Justice as a Public Service 2010-14 and the needs 
resulting from the Cooperation and Verification Mechanism5.  

4 "Small Reform Law" to speed up Courts procedures, new strategy 2010-2014 Justice as a Public Service, progress in impact 
assessment of four new codes, design and preparation of roll out of Resource Monitoring System for Judiciary 
5 This is a safeguard measure of the EC in case a new member or acceding state of the EU failed to implement commitments 
undertaken during accession negotiations (freedom, security and justice or internal market policy) 

4 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
Pillar 2 - Growth and Competitiveness  

17. Given the focus of the first two years on the crisis, and given its longer term nature, the 
Bank’s support to this pillar is less advanced, despite some important achievements: (i) 
financial sector, the Bank contributed mainly via the DPL to maintaining financial stability, 
improving governance and the sector’s resilience (i.e. Mortgage and Corporate Debt Resturcturing 
Guidelines issued, adopted legislation on political independence and financial autonomy of sector 
regulators); (ii) education, the DPL supported the shift to per-student financing; (iii) the Knowledge 
Economy project provided access to, and use of the Information and Communication Technology 
(ICT) resources for 255 local communities; (iv) hazards mitigation, the related project financed the 
development of an Emergency Management Information System and helped mitigate earthquake 
and flood risks by retrofitting public buildings and rehabilitating selected large and small dams) ; 
(iv) energy, the internal market opening including the residential market and the development of the 
Commercial Operator Power Exchange6); (v) environment, the Municipal Services Project helped 
the Ministry of Environment to meet the EU environmental directives). Key challenges that the 
Bank could support upon demand on the growth agenda include business environment, R&D and 
innovation, skills, competition, digital agenda, transport and climate change.  

Pillar 3 - Social and Spatial Inclusion 

18. 
A number of reforms have been contributing to improved targeting and efficiency of 
social spending. The design and funding of the best targeted programs for social assistance, such as 
the Guaranteed Minimum Income, were improved. The Social Inclusion Project (SIP) supports the 
improvement in social and spatial inclusion of Roma communities (through the Romanian Social 
Development Fund) as well as greater participation of Roma children in early childhood education 
programs. In addition, the DPL2 promoted reforms to strengthen the fiscal viability, integrity and 
equity of the public pension. Similarly, the DPL series has contributed to progress in the financial 
sustainability of the health sector as well as in the efficiency and quality of health services through 
the reform of provider payment methods and a plan to better align hospital infrastructure with 
demand - the national hospital rationalization strategy (approved in March 2011) contributes to 
meeting some of the CPS targets. Some 373 hospitals were decentralized and all hospitals 
contracted by the National Health Insurance House were assessed and classified or reclassified 
following the Hospital Classification. A results-based operation on the modernization of the social 
assistance systems was approved end FY11. This EUR500 million project supports the government 
efforts to improve overall performance of the social assistance system by strengthening 
performance management, improving equity, administrative efficiency, reducing error and fraud. 

19. However, adjustments are needed to make the best use of limited resources in 
achieving greater social and spatial inclusion . So far, the main Bank instrument in support of 
Roma inclusion has been the Social Inclusion Project. Unfortunately, implementation has been 
hampered by the GoR’s long investment approval cycle and institutional capacity of the National 
Agency for Roma, and was restructured to enhance the Roma component and accommodate two 
new sub-components: (i) the upgrade of the IT system for social assistance benefits and (ii) the 
improvement of the cash benefits in the social assistance system. Additional reforms supported by 
the DPL 2 aim at increasing the effectiveness and efficiency of income-tested family benefits such 
as the Lone Parent Allowance and the Complementary Child Allowance (legislation to this end was 
submitted to the Parliament as a DPL2 prior action, to be implemented under DPL3). Less progress 
than hoped was made on an Avian Flu project, which closed marginally unsatisfactory during the 
CPS against its original development objectives (though marginally satisfactory against its revised 
ones) and as a number of project activities were cancelled or transferred. 

Overall Portfolio  

20. 
The IBRD portfolio consists of 12 active projects. While the number of projects is 
declining, the AAA program, largely fee based services, is growing. At end October 2011, the 

6 the share of electricity supply sourced from the liberalized market accounts for about 50 percent of total electricity supply in 
Romania 

5 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
portfolio included 12 investment operations totaling US$1.7 billion; 2 co-financing GEFs; one 
Prototype Carbon Fund; one PHRD for policy making for People with Disabilities; 7 AAAs 
including one FBS following up to the FRs. In addition, FBS TAs in support of the implementation 
of the action plans derived from FRs recommendations are undergoing pre-signing approval 
procedures. The AAA portfolio covers public finance, education, health, regional development, 
labor and social protection.  

21. 
Proactive efforts have improved quality of the portfolio. Disbursements are satisfactory 
with a ratio of 29 percent at end-FY10 and 19.4 percent in FY11. Projects at risk decreased from 46 
percent at end FY10 to 25 percent in FY12. Quarterly portfolio meetings evaluate portfolio 
performance and address implementation challenges. An online monitoring system in place since 
FY11 tracks portfolio performance and implementation of recommendations. A characteristic of the 
Romania portfolio has been a number of old projects unable to complete implementation during the 
planned project life resulting in a large number of extensions. Greater efforts to avoid project 
extensions will make more room for new projects/loans. Apart from close monitoring, other efforts 
include restructuring operations to maintain relevance to the GoR policy agenda by revising project 
development objectives, transferring funds toward new sub-components or canceling amounts for 
components where time-bound actions were not met.  

22. 
IFC commitments are approximately US$660 million with the largest share for  finance 
(67 percent) and infrastructure (20 percent) sectors. IFC’s current committed portfolio is the fourth 
largest in Europe and Central Asia. Romania will also benefit from two crisis response regional 
funds: the CRG CEE Restructuring Fund and the ADM CEECAT Recovery Fund. These funds aim 
to raise a total of EUR500 million to address regionally bad debts and assist local companies facing 
financing difficulties. IFC has played an active crisis response role in Romania, investing in FY09 -
12 approximately US$466 million of its own funds and mobilizing an additional US$242 million in 
fifteen projects in various sectors. Particular support was provided to financial, renewable energy 
and health sectors. The IFC portfolio is performing very well on both loans and equity.  

23. 
Since FY09, the Bank has carried out AAA to assist Government in designing and 
implementing the crisis response, strengthen capacity for improved governance, and provide 
detailed advice on key sectoral reforms. Sector notes were produced on power, water, road 
maintenance, environment, and agriculture and rural development. In FY10-11 the AAA portfolio 
increased significantly with emphasis on TA, reflecting the addition of the fee-based Functional 
Reviews (Annex 13) to support structural changes required by the EC. The “regular” AAA portfolio 
has continued to inform Bank lending and policy dialogue. IFC advisory services focused on 
investment climate reforms, banking sector development, and sustainable energy finance. These 
services underpinned Bank interventions and built the capacity of ministries and IFC clients . 

24. 
The Bank works closely with the IMF, the EU and other donors . Through donor 
coordination, the World Bank was able to leverage its portfolio and exercise greater selectivity.    
The Bank closely and successfully collaborated on the overall fiscal stimulus package with the IMF, 
the European Union, as well as EIB and EBRD, and supported communication and outreach 
through various workshops and events.  

IV. 

PROPOSED ADJUSTMENTS TO THE CPS 

25. 
The overarching objective of CPS implementation remains to support Romania’s 
convergence with the EU through robust, sustainable and equitable growth , and enhanced 
competitiveness. To sustain the convergence process with the rest of the EU and boost 
competitiveness, attention needs to be paid to unfinished structural reforms in the NRP, and to 
further consolidation of the macroeconomic environment, including additional fiscal adjustment.  

26. Over the past two years of the CPS, the Bank has accumulated a more solid knowledge 
base on Romania, which will be used to support the Bank’s program going forward, and 
Government policy reforms and institutional development, including for strategic planning, 
coordination and monitoring and evaluation (M&E) of policies. This includes: (i) fee-based 
work, namely the twelve FRs; (ii) analytical and advisory activities, including the benchmarking 

6 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and performance-informed portfolio review, the 2009 sector policy notes, the Policy Notes on 
growth and competitiveness, the Public Expenditure and Institutional Review (PEIR), the ongoing 
mapping of reforms, and other sector work; and (iii) policy-based and investment lending 
operations. In particular, the benchmarking exercise and the mapping of reforms (in progress) are 
highly germane to performance monitoring and capacity building. The benchmarking provides an 
operational M&E tool to help prioritize strategic choices and monitor programs through Key 
Performance Indicators. In particular, the work conducted by the Bank through the FRs has 
informed the preparation of the 2011-13 NRP and are acknowledged as substantial contributions to 
restructuring and modernizing the central and local public administration, enhancing the efficiency 
of government expenditures, and improving the quality of and access to public services. 

27. 
The CPS PR went through a participatory consultative process with stakeholders in 
different sectors, including NGOs, think-tanks, private institutions, academia, government and 
international organizations. A survey assessed the perceived performance of the Bank in 
implementing the CPS in the first two years and eight sectoral roundtables discussed the challenges 
and potential Bank role in: agriculture and rural development, climate change, education, 
governance, the social sectors, health, public finance and smart growth (focusing on: business 
environment, research, development and innovation, competition and the digital agenda). Key 
findings from the consultations are included in Annex 6.  

28. 
The relevance of the CPS areas and the Bank’s comparative advantage in supporting 
national priorities were validated through a strategic positioning exercise. The exercise was 
based on a perception survey done in February 2010 among high-level representatives of the 
Romanian public administration to identify the needs for technical and financial assistance. Data 
analysis provided valuable information regarding clients’ perception of the way in which the Bank 
comparative advantage matches country needs (see the graph on survey’s results in Annex 5). In 
particular, the survey made it possible to determine sectors and sub -sectors in which the country’s 
needs for assistance are high and Bank capacity is perceived as good. This, in turn, confirmed the 
relevance of the CPS pillars and guided the identification of the main areas for action for 2010-13.  

29. 
Public sector reform, growth and competitiveness, and social and spatial inclusion 
continue to be appropriate pillars for the remainder of the CPS and are complemented by 
three EU cross-sectoral themes. While the focus in the first two years was to help Romania deal 
with the immediate aftermath of the economic and financial crisis, a transition to a longer term 
perspective with a view to achieve convergence with EU standards of living is now possible and the 
CPS emphasis will increasingly shift towards this direction. Moreover, given the limited Bank 
resources and the collaboration between the Bank, GoR and the EC, the Bank’s role is of a strategic 
advisor. Bank contributions are grouped in three cross-sectoral EU related themes. Although 
distinctions are made between those sectors that still need policy reforms (under theme 1) and 
sectors that have made many of the policy reforms happen and need capacity strengthening (theme 
2), the proposed Bank interventions reinforce and complement each other and are subordinated to 
the objectives of sustained growth, increased efficiency and transparency of public administration. 
Theme 3 groups operations not generally covered by EU funding. While there is no change in 
strategic pillars, the idea is to place Bank’s engagement and work clearly within the broad 
framework of complementarity and support of the EC program in Romania and to use the themes as 
filters to select AAA and lending operations for the remaining CPS period. Ongoing and proposed 
activities are reflected under pillars and themes in Annex 2.  

Theme 1: Policy reforms to reap the benefits of EU membership and meet the objectives of the 
Europe 2020 strategy.  

30. 
Supporting ongoing structural reforms and new policy actions in line with NRP will be 
critical for Romania to achieve greater convergence with EU Member States . Reforms in 
health, education, financial sector and budget processes are supported under DPL3. Policy reforms 
in social assistance, health, tax administration, energy, transport, SOEs are likely areas for a new 
DPL. Additional AAA aligned to theme 1 will be guided by GoR demand and Bank’s comparative 
advantage. Issues on macroeconomic stability and building blocks for sustainable growth may be 

7 

 
 
 
 
 
 
considered. Also, inclusion and participation may demand attention, especially on the enormous 
challenges to provide opportunities for the Roma while overcome prejudice and stigma. This is 
complemented by a set of Policy Notes on Growth and Competitiveness, which provide a 
framework to orient policy dialogue concerning challenges to EU convergence. 

Theme 2: Modernization of public institutions to enhance resource allocation and absorption of 
EU funds.  

31. 
The Bank aims to support Government priorities in terms of strengthening 
administrative capacity to enable better delivery of public services and effective strategic 
prioritization of Government actions, resources allocation and absorption of EU funds, 
including better policy coordination and monitoring and evaluation . The Bank has been asked 
to provide technical support to the Government to implement its action plans derived from phase 1 
FRs recommendations, currently seventeen projects7 under the MAP (Annex 4).  The Bank has also 
been requested similar assistance in justice, procurement and EU funds absorption, as part of the 
MAP8.  The MAP package supports several interventions both on policy reforms and institutional 
capacity building (Table 2). Government action plans for the second phase have been approved and 
the Bank is ready to support their implementation upon request.  

32. 
Strenghtening the institutional capacity at central level is supported by the Bank . This 
theme also requires measures to support  the “Center of Government”, including the functioning of 
the General Secretariat of the Government, and the Bank aims to support strengthening the 
institutional capacity at this level by enhancing the monitoring and evaluation functions in 
policymaking through an IDF grant.  Strengthening strategic organizational reform areas such as 
human resource management, communication and processes including IT systems is expected to 
increase administrative capacity in specific sectors covered by the MAP (see Table 2). 

Table 2: MAP FBS TAs under themes 1 and 2 
Sector  
Theme 1 (policy reforms to reap the 
benefits of EU membership)  

Public 
finance  

Agriculture 
& 
rural 
development 

Treasury/debt management, 
improving 
capacity in tax policy analysis, strengthening 
macro forecasting capacity  
developing a vision and strategy 
for 
capitalizing 
on 
agri-food 
production 
potential; supporting the strategic planning 
for ARD administration 

and 

optimization 

school 
network 
management 
update 
transport strategy and assist 
its 
implementation, support railway system 
with focus on definition and refinement of 
public service contracts, support public-
private partnerships with emphasis on the 
road sector 
revising Competition Council’s legislative 
mandate to promote competition / strengthen 
competition advocacy in public institutions 

Education  

Transport  

Competition  

Justice  
EU 
funds 
absorption 
Procurement  

Theme 2 (Modernization of public institutions to 
enhance resource allocation & EU 
funds 
absorption ) 
improving communication with 
tax payers and 
strengthening human resource management 

implementing the management information system of 
the Ministry, developing and 
implementing an 
integrated IT system for financial management; 
conducting a FR of the National Agency for Cadaster 
and Real Estate Publicity 
developing Ministry’s administrative capacity and 
management of information resources 

implementing a new business architecture in the 
Competition Council and 
increasing 
its human 
resource capacity on competition matters  
functional review of the judicial system 
analysis of processes and legislative impediments to 
greater EU funds absorption 
Review procurement procedures 

33. 
The Bank has been requested to support capacity building for absorbing EU funds . As 
of end October 2011, the absorption rate of EU structural funds for 2007-13 was around 3.7 percent, 

7 The MAP consists of 20 projects, out of which 17 are derived from the action plans and 3 are additional requests; the Bank received 
formal requests for assistance from all sectors except for the 2 education related  projects, still under consideration until the financing 
proposals are approved by the Managing Authority  
8 Estimated at around USD30M including the education projects under consideration 

8 

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
leaving about EUR 20 billion available. The current economic program aims to raise it to 20% in 
2012, which is an ambitious agenda. The Plan of Priority Measures for strengthening the capacity 
to absorb structural and cohesion funds, was approved by the government in April 2011, and could 
significantly reduce barriers to absorption. One of its key components is to identify the 100 top 
project priorities, and concentrate counterpart funding and administrative capacity on these projects. 
The Government also recently created a dedicated Ministry of European Affairs, with a former EU 
Commissioner as Minister. The GoR, in agreement with the EC, requested the Bank to carry out an 
analysis of policy impediments constraining EU funds. This work has been requested on a fee for 
service basis and the scope of Bank’s support in this area is under discussion with the Government. 

Theme 3: Complement to EU funding.  

34. 
The availability of Structural Funds makes Bank financing a minor instrument for 
Romania. However, the Bank can complement EU support by financing activities not planned to be 
covered by Structural Funds or alternative instruments. For instance, development policy lending 
and results-based operations can support improved outcomes from current budgets. Subnational 
activities, access to financial markets via guarantees and areas of national responsibility (i.e. 
education, health, justice) for which typically structural funds are not allocated or with EC’s prior 
agreement could be explored.  
35. 
For the CPS remainder, new IBRD lending could reach EUR1.4 billion in FY12 9 and 
perhaps EUR325 million in FY13 (Table 3). This potential new lending is indicative and actual 
delivery will depend on the GoR's request for IBRD resources, sector needs, Romania's performance, 
IBRD's financial capacity, demand from other borrowers, and global economic developments. 

Project Commitment M 
FY 2011 
DPL2 
SASM10 
TOTAL 

Table 3: Potential IBRD lending  
Project 
Commitment M 
FY 2012 
€300 (US$426)  DPL 3  
€500 (US$710) New DPL (DDO) 
€800 (US$1136) 
TOTAL 

Project 
Commitment M 
FY 2013  (t.b.c.) 
€400 (US$560)   Tax Admin 
€1000 (US$1380) 11  Health  
€1400 (US$1940) 
TOTAL 

€75 (US$100) 
€250 (US$344) 
€325 (US$444) 

FY12-13 after the DPL3 based on exchange rate of EUR 1.377 to US$1 

36. 
The Bank will support the modernization of social assistance, tax administration and 
health systems. In addition to supporting the implementation of the recently approved results-based 
operation on the modernization of the social assistance systems, other types of lending activities in 
the second half of the CPS period will be guided by GoR’s demand.  For FY12, the third DPL is 
under preparation. Operations to support improved tax administration and implementation of health 
sector reforms are envisaged for FY13 (see Table 3).  

37. 
The Government has expressed its interest in a new DPL in FY12, possibly with a 
deferred drawdown option. This would focus on the Structural Reform program being supported 
by the IFIs. While the exact content is not yet determined, several areas have emerged as main 
potential candidates: Health, Energy, Transport, SOEs, Tax administration and PFM. These key 
structural reforms would follow the current DPL series and be correlated to the EU and IMF 
support.  As the market volatility and regional uncertainties are persisting, the DDO can help in two 
ways: (i) as a buffer that can help Romania accomplish its external issuance program under EMTN 
in reasonable terms and conditions; and (ii) if vulnerabilities are persisting and some risks 
materialize raising significant challenges in the financing strategy, the Government could draw the 
funds.  

38. 
In light of the crisis, IFC is investing in Romania on a selective basis . IFC has withdrawn 
from sectors and business lines where the private sector is ready to take over. In the banking sector, 
largely dominated by foreign banks (about 90 percent of banking assets), IFC strategy is to work 
with local banks and strengthen their capacity to provide loans to underserved sectors and products 
such as local currency, housing finance, agribusiness, renewable and energy efficiency. IFC will 

9 To be confirmed with the Government of Romania.  
10 Social Assistance System Modernization 
11 The GoR requested EUR1 billion  

9 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
assist local companies to become competitive in the domestic market and expand to other countries 
in the region, and promote South-South investments. IFC will continue to support projects of high 
development impact such as in infrastructure, frontier regions and climate change related projects. 

39. Graduation prospects will be reassessed under the next CPS. Although Romania is over 
the income threshold for consideration of graduation, it is proposed that no detailed discussions to 
prepare for graduation be held for the remainder of this CPS period given the need to continue the 
develop Romania’s institutional capacity.  A fuller treatment of this issue would be prepared in the 
context of the next CPS beginning in FY14.  

40. 
The CPS Results Matrix presented in Annex 1 has been updated to reflect the program 
for the remaining period. The main pillars have remained unchanged while targets and indicators 
have been revised reflecting the progress, changes and restructuring measures taken during the first 
two years, and the milestones assessed. The new operations have been added to the matrix . 

V. RISKS 

41. 
Below is a summary of risks and an update on mitigation measures.  
 Institutional capacity risks relate to the uneven quality of policy making and coordination 
across various government entities. These risks are currently mitigated by the Bank through 
technical assistance (both formal and informal) as well as an IDF grant (FY12) to improve the 
capacity for policy formulation, monitoring and evaluation in the central government.  
Implementation of the FRs recommendations would help strengthen public administration in 
selected sectors and therefore contribute to mitigating institutional capacity risks. 
 Economic risks increased with the global economic crisis, and the large external and fiscal 
deficits at the onset of the crisis made it all the more difficult to adjust to the severe economic 
downturn.  The IFIs multilateral support package and the proactive measures taken by the state 
institutions have helped contain negative impacts and should enable recovery12. Like other 
countries in the region, Romania faces risk of eurozone crisis contagion and exposure to Greek 
banks. This risk is mitigated by structural reforms, the proactive stance of state institutions, and 
the resource cushion provided by the extension on a precautionary basis of the multilateral 
program with the IMF and the EC until Spring 2013, as well as the significant foreign exchange 
reserves accumulated during the last three years.  
 Social risks are associated primarily with the impact of the Government’s fiscal austerity 
measures; new policy reforms including those affecting social assistance and restructuring and/or 
privatization of SOEs; and with planned 2012 increases in energy prices that col lectively could 
impede the implementation of the DPL program and broader policy reforms. These are mitigated 
by the acceleration of social assistance reform and the provision of funding.  
 Political risks stem particularly from the inherent fragility of a coalition government facing a 
strong opposition, and uncertainty from 2012 elections. So far, these risks have been managed 
well by the Romanian authorities. Bank dialogue with the parliamentary opposition to explain 
the need for reforms and inform on progress in their implementation are helping to build broader 
support and mitigate the risk of a change of direction. 
 Implementation risks. There will be a risk of implementing the MAP program of FBS until the 
legal agreements are signed, however, there is strong support from the highest levels of the GoR, 
the IFIs, and particularly the EC. The Managing Authority received the financial proposals for 
the six sectors under consideration for the MAP, which represents a strong mitigation measure. 

12 Natural disasters and climate change are an area of risk for future study. 

10 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
Annex 1. Results Framework 

RESULTS AREAS AND OUTCOMES TO WHICH THE CPS IS CONTRIBUTING 

MILESTONES  
CAS PILLAR 1: PUBLIC SECTOR REFORM 

WBG INSTRUMENTS

13 

GOALS: To improve the accountability and responsiveness of the public administration and to enhance predictability and efficiency in public resource management. 
Issues and Obstacles as identified in 2009:  Pro-cyclical fiscal policies and weak fiscal management have led to serious macroeconomic vulnerabilities.  The budget process lacks predictability and transparency, 
as well as weak prioritization of public investment.  Introduction of an MTEF will require capacity and support to both plan on a multi-year horizon and to link budget with outcomes .  Public sector wages have 
more than doubled since 2005 contributing to pro-cyclical policies, but without adequately rewarding performance or productivity.  Governance is weak and monitored by the EU bi-annually.  The court system 
has a large back-log of cases.  Since CPS approval in 2009 the GoR made significant progress in improving public finance management and reforming the public pay system (see achieved milestones under1.1 
PFM and 1.2 public administration reform and Annex 3) 

1.1  PUBLIC FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT 

Objective: Reduce fiscal vulnerabilities by restoring budget discipline, 
improving the effectiveness and efficiency of public expenditures, and 
improved resource mobilization. 

 

 

Fiscal Responsibility Law 69/2010 approved & enacted 
(2010) 
Independent Fiscal Council established (2010) 

 Mid Term Expenditure Framework approved by Parliament 
with three-years ceilings for major spending ministries 
(2011 and beyond - in progress)  

 

Fiscal Strategy 2011-13 approved by Government (Done) 

 
 
 
 
 
 

Completed:   
Policy Briefs (FY09) 
PEIR Update (FY09) 
DPL 1-2 (FY10 - FY11)) 
TA Fiscal Decentralization (FY11) 
TA Tax Administration (FY11) 
PEIRs updates focusing on opportunities for fiscal savings 
and efficiency gains in major expenditure categories, 
starting with education and  health (FY09-FY10) 
FBS Functional Review on Public Finance (FY11) 

 

 

Outcome 1.1.1: Medium Term Expenditure Framework operational by 
2012 and beyond  
Indicator 
(revised): Reduction 
in variance between main 
aggregate ceiling (Wage, Goods & Services, Capital) approved by 
Parliament in the MTEF (2011-13) and the actual expenditures. 
Baseline (2008): 27% variance for three largest economic classes 
(Wage, Goods&Services, Capital) Target: deviation ≤ 17% 

 

Outcome 1.1.2: Sustainable growth in public wage bill 
Indicator: Annual expenditure 
for personnel 
(2011-13)  
consistent with the limits approved in MTEFs and does not 
increase as a share of GDP above expected 2009 level. Baseline: 
9.4% in 2009  In progress: Wage bill: at 8.3% of GDP in 2010 
(preliminary data) 

1.2 PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION (PA) REFORM 

Objective (revised): support GOR effort to improve the organizational 
effectiveness and transparency of the public administration at central 
and local levels; and improve the public pay system to enhance 
transparency and predictability, motivate performance among public 
sector employees, attract and retain critical skills. 

Outcome 1.2.1 (new): Initiation by GOR of the RO PA Reform -
approval of Reform Action Plans for selected PA institutions (Done – 
all Functional Reviews Phase 1 and 2 ministries and agencies) 

Outcome 1.2.2 (new):  Progress in enacting and implementing the 
strategies/ tools/ procedures/ etc. in the Reform Action Plans. 

 Wage bill increases below inflation rate (Increase in 2010 is 
2% vs. 5.6% inflation rate)  

Ongoing 
Social Assistance Modernization Project (Results Based) 

 

 

Summary of multi-year public investment program annexed 
to 2010-2011 budget (Done) 

 
 

New 
DPL3 (FY12) 
FBS – TA support to GOR for the implementation of the 
action plans drafted by the GoR on the modernization of 
public administration (FY12) 
PEFA 

 

 

 

 

Functional reviews of the public administration undertaken 
to identify budget resources that could be realized for 
better targeting pay (Done)  
Recommendations for public administration reform and 
modernization formulated and shared with Government 
(Done) 

Reform Action 
Plans 
for Agriculture, 
Transport, 
Competition, Pre-University Education (1-2), Public Finance, 
Center of Government, Health, Labor, Environment, 
Regional Development, Economy and Energy, R&DI (Judicial 
in progress) developed by the ministries and Government 
agencies based on recommendations of the Functional 
Reviews TA series (Done) 

 
 
 
 

Completed 
Public Sector Pay Practices in Romania (FY08) 
DPL 1-2 (FY10-FY11) 
PFM-Civil Service Pay (FY10) 
FBS Functional Reviews (FY11) (Agriculture, Transport, 
Competition, Pre-University Education (1-2), Public Finance, 
Center of Government,  Economy & Energy & Business 
Environment , Research, Development & Innovation, Higher 
Education, Health, Labor and Social Protection, Environment 
& Forestry, Regional Development and Tourism) 

Ongoing 
Social Assistance Modernization Project (Results Based) 

 

13 Results of the potential new DPL (possibly DDO) not included as the program is yet to be designed, however, will be outlined in the program document.  

11 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
RESULTS AREAS AND OUTCOMES TO WHICH THE CPS IS CONTRIBUTING 

MILESTONES  

WBG INSTRUMENTS

13 

 

Indicator (new) Favorable assessment by EC of Romania’s 
progress in improving the organizational effectiveness and 
transparency of its Public Administration ( EC Opinion on the 
National Reform Plan  and progress under the Memorandum of 
Understanding with EU) 

 

Outcome 1.2.3: Alignment of  public sector pay system to EU practice 
(transparency, equity, ability to attract & retain critical skills in public 
administration) 
Indicator : Reduction in aggregate allowances and bonuses and 
limit amount for any individual   
Target: Maximum 30% percent of the total public compensation 
by 2011, and maintained (empirical evidence indicates higher 
percentages, varying from sector to sector) 
Indicator :  Align pay structures more closely to actual labor 
market conditions  (evidence to be provided via  salary survey 
results of MLFSP) (dropped) 

 

1.3  GOVERNANCE 

Objective:  strengthen the efficiency, accountability, transparency of 
the justice system.  
Outcome 1.3.1 : (revised) Improved judicial efficiency in pilot courts  
Indicator (revised) 10% increase by 2013 in the number of cases 
disposed of or archived in selected pilot courts.  Baseline: 11.224 
cases in 2008 

 

Outcome 1.3.2: Enhanced competence, professionalism and integrity 
of judiciary staff (Bank contributes via creation of pre-requisites) 
Indicator: New qualification examination procedures are 
successfully piloted by Nat. Institute of Magistracy (Done) and 
maintained 

 

Outcome 1.3.3 (new):  Progress in Judicial Reform acknowledged by 
EC under the Cooperation and Verification Mechanism (Codes entering 
into force area) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Progress Reporting mechanisms 
for 
inform 
the EC 
developed by GSG (Done – first reporting completed).  

New salary legislation on public sector pay which limits  
non wage expenditures approved (Done - Unitary Pay  
Law (UPL) 330/2009 approved.)  
A detailed pay reform plan is approved by Government for 
implementing (a) a uniform job grading framework for the 
public service (Done) and (b) more closely aligning pay for 
selected benchmark jobs to actual labor market conditions 
(through a salary survey) (Done)  
Regulations enforcing compliance with merit based 
principles of employment and promotion drafted (Done – 
Regulations published in Official Gazette (OMJ 
622/C/25.02.2010 and subsidiary pay legislation approved 
by Parliament. 

Uniform standards for the Courts operational processes 
developed and country-wide implementation started. 
(In progress- TA contract under implementation) 

Recommendations for the optimization of courts’ activity 
formulated and adopted by SCM. 

Publication by Courts and SCM  of courts performance data 
and findings  from periodic Surveys on access to and 
satisfaction with judicial services (Courts financed by  JRP) 
(in progress- Baseline Survey completed, results posted on 
SCM site) 

Completion of Impact assessment of the four revised/new 
Codes (Civil Code, Civil Procedure Code, Criminal Code and 
Criminal Procedure Code) and sharing with SCM and MOJ 
(ongoing - contract signed Sep 2010) 

CAS PILLAR 2: GROWTH AND COMPETITIVENESS 

 
 

New  
DPL 3 (FY12) 
FBS TA Functional Reviews on Judicial, Land Administration, 
Agency for Coordinating Structural Instruments 
FB TA (supplemental) to Government for follow up on FRs 
recommendations (Agriculture, Transport , Competition 
Council, Center of Government, Public Finance, Pre-
University Education 1-2 (compl.FY13) 
IDF Grant 

 

 

 
 

Ongoing:  
Judicial Reform Project (cl. FY13) 
Country Economic Memorandum (FY12) developed as a 
sequence of Policy Notes prepared with the participation of 
relevant Romanian specialists  
FBS Functional Review Ministry of Justice (FY12) 

 

Working tools developed for Financial Sector strengthening 
(stress tests, Strategic Action Plan) assimilated and in 
use/updated by the NBR 

GOALS:  in the short-run, put in place crisis-management measures in the financial sector; and in the medium -term, establish the building blocks for sustainable convergence to EU -average living standards 
through improved business environment, enhanced skills, better infrastructure and more efficient agriculture. 
Issues and Obstacles as identified in 2009:  The crisis has revealed weaknesses in financial sector supervision across the region, new, best practices will need to be ado pted to strengthen the system.  A recovery 
in growth will depend both on recovery in key trading partners and on the strength of Romania’s own reforms and policies.  All countries are seeking to emerge from the crisis in a strong position, so competition 
will be strong.  Romania lags international competitors on education, business environment and agriculture productivity indic ators. Transport and energy need significant investment and reform to be able to 
meet demand.   
2.1 Growth Agenda 
Objective: (new) support to the Government for identification of 

Ongoing: Bank AAA – via a series of Policy Notes for growth and 

Symposium on Economic Recovery and Growth in Romania 

12 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RESULTS AREAS AND OUTCOMES TO WHICH THE CPS IS CONTRIBUTING 

MILESTONES  

priority reforms for growth  

Outcome : 1.3.4 (new) Policy options available to the Government for 
informing the update of  the National Reform Program14 and reflecting 
the EU 2020 Strategy  goals in Romania’s  national reform agenda 

2.2 FINANCIAL SECTOR 

Objective: deepen and strengthen the resilience of the financial sector 
Outcome 2.2.1: Improved stability and resilience of the financial 
system to economic shocks  
Indicator: Bank system remains well capitalized (average capital 
ratio at 14.2% in June 2011 - IMF assessment) (Done) 

 

 

Outcome 2.2.2: Improved governance of financial sector supervision. 
Indicator: Recommendations of the “de La Rosiere” report 
adopted, notably with respect to independence and autonomy of 
financial sector supervisors  (CSA, CNVM, CSSPP) (Done) 
Indicator : Supervision standards, regulations and practices 
strengthened, in line with Basel II (Done) 

 

2.3. BUSINESS ENVIRONMENT & COMPETITION 

Objective: improve the business environment and (new) the capacity 
to enforce competitive business practices in the marketplace 

 

Outcome 2.3.1 (new): Improved competition regulatory framework (in 
line with EU practices)  
Indicator:  Revised  regulatory framework enacted (by 2013) in 
relation to competition principles 
Outcome 2.3.2 (new)  Enhanced Competence of the Romanian 
Competition Council (RCC)  
Indicator: RCC ranking15 in the EU  
Baseline: RCC the lowest in EU ranking Target: Improved RCC 
ranking by 2013 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(with participation of decision makers, National Bank of 
Romania, private sector, academia and specialists from IFIs) 
to facilitate the diagnosis of different areas (growth, fiscal 
sustainability, labor markets, absorption of EU, etc.)  The 
Symposium findings  will serve to document the CEM (Done 
– May 2011) 
Stress tests conducted and Strategic Action Plan for 
Financial Sector strengthening approved by NBR and 
Ministry of Public Finance (MoPF) (DPL1 - 2010) 

Out-of-court insolvency proceedings set in place,  Mortgage 
Debt Restructuring and Corporate Debt Restructuring 
Guidelines issued & published by NBR & MoPF (DPL2 - 2010) 

WBG INSTRUMENTS

13 

competitiveness & Conferences, with the participation of 
Romanian think-tanks and international experts 

 
 

Completed 
Financial Sector Assessment Update (FY09) 
Consumer Protection and Financial  Literacy Survey and 
Conference (FY10) 
IT assessment of National Bank of Romania (FY10) 
DPL1-2 (FY10 - FY11) 
IFC financing to local financial institutions 

 
 
 

Updated legislation on the Political Independence and 
Financial Autonomy of the Financial Sector Regulators and 
Supervisors approved by Government (Done , 2011) 

New 
DPL 3 (FY12) 

 

Assessment and amendments of a) adequacy of definition 
of Financial Conglomerates (Done) and b) adequacy of 
supervision arrangements (Done- 2011, DPL3 pre-condition) 

NBR to issue regulations for Joint supervision of financial 
groups by the relevant regulators (Done, 2011-DPL3 ) 
Specific Policy Recommendations provided to the 
Government that support the enforcement of competitive 
business practices and improvements in the business 
environment (Done-2011) 

Development of Protocols of Cooperation between RCC and 
other regulated sectors and  public agencies (ex. Telecom 
regulator, Energy regulator, Procurement Authority) to 
jointly implement pro-competitive and non-discriminatory 
regulation 

 
 
 

Completed 
FBS Functional Review Competition Council 
FBS Functional Review MEC & Business Environment 
TA Accounting and Audit (FY11) 
New 
FBS TA Competition (compl.FY13) 
Streamlining enforcement of competition policies  
Strengthening of advocacy activities in the field of 
competition 
Implementing a new business architecture for the 
Competition Council  
Increasing HR capacity of RCC  

o 
o 

o 

 

o 

14 The National Reform Program, an EU requirement, is the national response of member states to the Lisbon Strategy, through whi ch they explain how their development strategies are aligned with 
the latter.  The NRP is updated annually and reviewed by the EC. Stating with 2011, the NRP has to be aligned with the objectives of the EU 2020 Strategy.  
   The Europe 2020 Strategy sets the vision for the EU member countries beyond 2013.  Five measurable targets for 2020 steer the process of growth in the EU member countries and give them the 
direction for reforms in employment, research and innovation, climate change and energy, education, and poverty alleviation. The expression of these reforms in national targets and the adoption of a 
National 2020 Strategy require Romania to identify the priorities for intervention and the most appropriate actions for accelerating EU convergence.   
15 Ranking reflects RCC staffing for competition enforcement and economic analysis and internal target deadlines to track performance 

13 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
RESULTS AREAS AND OUTCOMES TO WHICH THE CPS IS CONTRIBUTING 
2.4 K-ECONOMY & DIGITAL AGENDA 

Objective: Development of the K-based society and economy 

 

Outcome 2.4.1: 
Increased participation of K-disadvantaged 
communities in K-based society/economy 
Indicator: % of Population in disadvantaged communities using 
the Local Community e-Networks as tool for education, business, 
public administration and are satisfied with the results. Baseline 
(2005) 0%. Target (2013) 40%. Actual: 25%. 
Indicator: (new) Level of ICT integration in schools Baseline 
(2007) 35%. Target 100% by 2013. Actual: 79%  

 

2.5  RESEARCH, DEVELOPMENT & INNOVATION (RD&I) 

Outcome 2.5.1: (new) Policy Recommendations available to the 
Government that support RD&I Sector Reform (Done 2011) 

2.6 EDUCATION 

Objective (revised):  improved organizational capacity in the Education 
Sector and access to quality education delivered in a fiscally sound 
manner, with improved outcomes 

Outcome 2.6.1: 
Improved efficiency 
in primary and secondary 
education by providing more flexible financing, more autonomy and 
enhanced accountability (focusing on results) to local authorities and 
school principles  
Indicator: Increase in average class size. (Baseline: 19.6 in school 
year 2008/09. Target: 23 in school year 2013/14) (in progress - at 
21.7 in 2011) 

 

Outcome 2.6.2: Financial support to tertiary students in a more 
equitable manner and with better incentives built into the support.  

Outcome 2.6.3 (new): Analytical Work completed & Conceptual 
Frameworks available to Government for development of the 
Organizational Capacity 
in the Education Sector (MERYS) and 
improving Romania’s pre-university education system 

2.7 AGRICULTURE  AND RURAL DEVELOPMENT (ARD) 

Objective (revised): 
 provide advisory, technical and financial 
assistance to support the strengthening the administrative capacity 
and efficiency of ARD sector and the market-based restructuring and 
competitiveness of the Romanian agriculture 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

MILESTONES  

Local Community e-Networks  established (Done - 255 local 
community networks (LCeNs) established in 208 K-
disadvantaged communities and 47 small cities) 
Support for EU Funds Absorption:  812 new projects 
addressing community needs were developed by LCeNs 
users and declared eligible for financing with EU structural 
funds (for a total of €240M)  
Increased access to quality education through ICT 
connectivity, knowledge and use  (502 primary and 
secondary schools with some 89,000 students – KE Prj) 

New Agricultural Research Law (Enacted in 2009) 
Reform of four agriculture research institutes (Done - 2009-
10) 
Functional Review16 of the Research, Development and 
innovation sector (Done)  

Legislation adopted to enable per capita financing in 
education (Done – at country level vs. eight counties 
envisaged, starting with school year 2010/11).  

Analytical foundation developed, to support the 
optimization of the schools network, and was share with the 
Ministry of Education, Research, Youth and Science 

Student Loan Scheme developed and discussed with 
Government & stakeholders (Done) 
First disbursements from student loans scheme begin 
starting with the school year 2011/12 (On hold because of 
crisis constraints) 

Proposal for modified organizational structure of the 
Ministry of Education, Research, Youth, Science (MERYS)  
submitted to the Minister   

Integrated agricultural offices rolled out nationwide (pilot 
established –MAKIS; roll out delayed because of new 
strategy for establishment of Agricultural Chambers) 

WBG INSTRUMENTS

13 

Ongoing 
Knowledge Economy Project (KE) 

 

 

Completed 
FBS Functional Review Research, Development, Innovation 
(FY11) 
Ongoing 
MAKIS project (Agricultural research sub-comp) (cl. FY12) 
Completed: 
Rural Education project (cl. FY09) 
HD Policy Briefs (FY09) 
TA Decentralization of primary and secondary education 
(FY09) 
Public Expenditure& Institutional Review update (FY10) 
TA Student Loan Scheme (FY11) 
FBS Functional Review Pre-University Education (I + II) 
(FY11) 
FBS Functional Review Higher Education (FY11) 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 

 

 
 

Ongoing: 
Knowledge Economy (KE) – Digital Literacy in Schools sub-
component 
Social Inclusion Project – Early Childhood Education  
IFC financing in private education 
New:  
FBS TA School Network Restructuring (compl. FY13) 
FBS TA Development of the Organizational Capacity of the 
Ministry of Education (compl. FY13) 
Skills and Competitiveness 
Completed:  
FBS Functional Review on Agriculture (FY11) 

 
 

 

 

Systematic survey and registration of land property titles in 

Ongoing 
Irrigation Reform & Rehabilitation (cl. FY12) 

 

16 RD&I sector Functional Review covers legal framework and governance, funding, alignment to national priorities, transmitting RD &Innovation to the private sector, private sector participation 

14 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
selected rural areas (in progress) 

MILESTONES  

Piloting of socio-economic advisory services  
Training and certification of 300 advisors in socio-economic 
advisory services) 

WBG INSTRUMENTS

13 

 
 

 MAKIS project (cl.FY13) 
CESAR project (cl. FY13) 
IFC direct lending to agribusiness projects and support to 
local financial institutions which provides MSMEs lending 
and agriculture financing 

RESULTS AREAS AND OUTCOMES TO WHICH THE CPS IS CONTRIBUTING 

Outcome 2.7.1: Increased capacity of RO advisory and information 
systems to provide services to farmers and agro-processors in the 
context of EU membership 
Indicator : Number of trained and graduated advisors Target 
(revised upward) 2000 by 2013 vs. 0 in 2008 

 

Outcome 2.7.2: Improved convergence of Romania toward EU practice 
in ARD (in line with the National Rural Development Plan 2007-2013) 
Indicator: Handbook of Socio-Econ Guidance based on EU best 
practice available to farmers (Volume I completed) 

 

Outcome 2.7.3 
(new): 
Increased efficiency of operational 
management at MADR and selected structures 
Indicator: New Internal Management System in use by MARD’s 
and subordinated structures’ management 

 

Outcome 2.7.4 (new): Increase in EAFRD17 funding to Romanian 
beneficiaries. Baseline: 20% of EAFRD allocation.  Target: 40% of 
EAFRD allocation by 2013 

2.8 ENERGY AND ENVIRONMENT 

Objective:  Support Romania in implementing its energy strategy in 
line with EU Directives, 
including EU 20-20-20 targets, and 
implementing selected environmental directives 

Outcome 2.8.1: Increased security of electricity supply through 
integration of regional markets and  attracting private sector18  in the 
development of energy markets 
Indicator 1: Develop energy transmission services, including 
availability of ancillary services for stronger integration into 
regional markets, and absorption of energy generated by 
renewable sources (Done) 

 

Outcome 2.8.2 (new): Reduction of probability of severe accidental 
mine spills in the Tisza basin 
Indicator: Risk reduced by at least 70% (via remedial works) 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Strategies/ tools/ procedures for strengthening the admin 
capacity and efficiency of ARD sector (per FB TA Agriculture 
program) developed and applied by MARD (by 2013) (new) 

Proposal on structure and operation framework for  an 
Advisory Board on ARD Strategy finalized and delivered to  
the Government (new) 

Evidence of restructuring the farming sector  (partial 
progress: reorganization of Romanian extension system, 
reform of agric. Research, reform of irrigation subsidy and 
tariff setting mechanisms, phasing out of irrigation 
subsidies, more participatory approach in irrigation: Water 
Users Organizations operational). 
Romania and its electricity market and power system 
operates with help of ancillary services from Lotru Rrj 
(Done) 
 Privatization of Banat and Dobrogea electricity distribution 
companies (Completed with support of a Partial Risk 
Guarantee)  

Best practice knowledge and procedures on 
environmentally friendly mine closure transferred to 
Romanian counterparts and implemented (Done Mine 
Closure Project) 

Analytical Work completed (including adaption options and 
greenhouse gas emissions management) and available to 
the Government for elaboration of a Climate Change 
Adaption Strategy 

o 

 
 

New 
FBS Functional review Land Administration (FY12) 
FB TA Agriculture & Rural Development (compl. FY13) 
Strengthening ARD sector strategy formulation in the 
Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development (MARD) 
Strategic Planning for the Agricultural Administration 
Implementation of an Internal Management System at 
MARD  
Creating and Implementing an Integrated Financial 
Management IT System at MARD 

o 
o 

o 

 
 

Completed:  
Energy Community in SEE (cl.FY10) 
Privatization risk Guarantee Privatization for Banat and 
Dobrogea electricity distribution companies (Discoms) (cl. 
FY11) 
FBS Functional Review Ministry of Economy / Energy 
(compl. FY11) 
FBS Functional Review Environment and Forestry (compl. 
FY11) 

 

 

 

Ongoing 
Hazards Risks Mitigation and Emergency Preparedness 
Project – GEF sub-component (cl.FY12) 
Integrated Nutrient Pollution Control Project and GEF grant 
(cl.FY13) 
 Municipal Services Project (cl.FY12) 
 Mine Closure and Socio-Economic Regeneration (MCSER) 
Project (cl.FY12) 
IFC support to local financial institutions which provided 

 

Outcome 2.8.3: 
Directives  

Implementation of the EU Water and Nitrate 

 Water and Waste Water Master Plans for 11 counties 
completed and adopted by final beneficiaries (Done) 

17 European Agricultural Fund for Rural Development 
18 Increasing the participation of the private sector remains below expectations because of potential risks to the functioning of the electricity market  - specifically GoR plans to consolidate state-owned power 
generation and coal/lignite mining companies into 1-2 integrated mining and power generation companies.  

15 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
 
RESULTS AREAS AND OUTCOMES TO WHICH THE CPS IS CONTRIBUTING 

 

Indicator : Favorable EU assessment of Romania's progress 
towards meeting EU Nitrates Directive requirements 

Outcome 2.8.4  (new): Increasing EU Funds absorption  
Indicator 2:  EU grant amount attracted with Bank TA Target: € 
1bn by 2013 

 

2.9  TRANSPORT , HAZARDS RISKS MITIGATION 

Objective (revised): Improve the transport sector’s governance, 
operational and financial sustainability, including the efficiency of the 
roads and railways sub-sectors 

 

Outcome 2.9.1: Improved road safety (dropped-Transport projects 
closed w/out reaching target) 
Indicator: Fatalities per 10,000 vehicles. Target: 5 in 2009 vs. 6.7 
in 2008 (dropped) 
Outcome 2.9.2: (new) Improved Ministry of Transport capacity to 
consistently implement a general strategy that links each strategic 
item to the overall strategy. 
Indicator: New strategy approved and translated 
into the 
approved Investment program for 2014-2020 and in the 2013 
and 2014 proposed budgets. 

 

 

Outcome 2.9.3: Improved emergency preparedness and response 
management in Romania 
Indicator: An Emergency Communication System is created and 
operational (EMIS elaborated) 
Indicator: The Emergency Management Information System is 
extended to include all central and local administration units (in 
progress) 
Indicator (revised):  Seismic retrofitting of 40 or more public 
buildings, flood protection works completed 
in 10 critical 
locations, (significant progress) 

 

 

MILESTONES  

At least 80 percent of targeted Nitrates Vulnerable Zones 
show 10 percent reduction in nutrient discharge in water 
bodies (work in progress) 

Percentage of population in targeted NVZ area adopting 
preventive and remedial measures to reduce nutrient 
discharge (work in progress) 

WBG INSTRUMENTS

13 

 

energy efficiency lending. 
IFC direct lending to power projects and to renewable 
energy projects (wind and/or biomass). 

New 

 
 

ESW/TA Climate Change (FY12) 
New DPL (DDO) TBC 

TRANSPORT 

Road safety activities not done (the Road Agency decided to 
implement the activities under an EU financed program, 
than re-considered, but no action taken. 
Reduction of traffic congestion not achieved – main physical 
output-by passes construction program-was not finalized.  

Officially approved national transport sector strategy, and 
translation into the approved investment program for 2014-
2020 and the 2013 and 2014 proposed budgets. 
Public Private Partnership strategy included in the national 
transport strategy in line with EU directives 

HAZARDS RISKS MITIGATION 

Risk assessment of public buildings, dams and waste 
deposits is undertaken, based on country regulations to 
enable prioritization of investments (Done) 

Short term investment and financing plans prepared in 
accordance with risk assessment & prioritization (Done) 

Completed 
Transport Restructuring Project (cl. FY10) 
Transport Sector Support Project (cl. FY10) 
 FBS Functional Reviews Transport (compl. FY11) 

 
 
 

 

Ongoing 
Hazards Risks Mitigation and Emergency Preparedness 
Project (cl.FY12) 
IFC support financing of private sector in financing PPPs 

 

New 
FB TA Transport Strategy (compl.FY13) 
FB TA Public-Private Partnerships (compl.FY13) 
FB  TA Railway Strategy (compl. FY13) 
New DPL (DDO) TBC 

 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

GOALS:  in the short-term, protect the vulnerable from the adverse effects of the crisis; in the medium -term, promote social inclusion and regional development. 
Issues and Obstacles as identified in 2009:  The crisis will temporarily increase the number of poor people, especially those involved in service and manufacturing industries.  The long -term poor in rural areas 
and among some population groups remain hard to reach.  Some of the social assistance programs are not well targeted.  The pe nsion system can be important for poverty reduction, but is currently running a 
deficit and does not reach all those who need it.  Romania’s health indicators are lagging the average of those in the EU in important areas. 

CAS PILLAR 3: SOCIAL AND SPATIAL INCLUSION 

16 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RESULTS AREAS AND OUTCOMES TO WHICH THE CPS IS CONTRIBUTING 

MILESTONES  

WBG INSTRUMENTS

13 

3.1 SOCIAL INCLUSION  

Objective: assist Romania to improve the social inclusion and living 
conditions of  most disadvantaged and vulnerable people in the 
Romanian society 
Outcome 3.1.1:Improved social inclusion of Roma living in poor 
settlements reduced 
Indicator: Gap in living condition index between targeted Roma 
settlements and neighboring communities 
Baseline: 504 points19 Target: 403 points (20% reduction of gap 
2013 vs. 2008 level)  

 

 

 

 

79% of the disadvantaged localities in the former mining 
areas reached by Socio-Economic Regeneration (SER) 
measures extended under the Mine Closure project 

Improvements in water and road infrastructure evident in  
targeted Roma communities (in progress) 

Roma in poor settlements report a closer link (through 
annual consultations) with the local authorities, for 
addressing community needs. (In progress)  

Outcome 3.1.2: Increased inclusiveness of children in disadvantaged 
groups in Early Childhood Education services  (SIP targeted areas) 
Indicator: Percentage point increase in number of children in 
disadvantaged groups participating in ECE programs 
Target: 5 percent in 2013 vs. almost none in 2007  

 

3.2. SOCIAL ASSISTANCE 

Objective:  improve the cost effectiveness and targeting of social 
assistance programs to mitigate the impact of the crisis on the 
vulnerable, and promote activation policies 

 

 

Outcome 3.2.1: increase the coverage and adequacy of the most 
efficient and well targeted social assistance program - the Guaranteed 
Minimum Income (GMI)  
Indicator : Number of unpaid GMI entitled beneficiaries  
Target: 0 by 2013 vs. 25 percent in 2009 (in progress20) 
Indicator :  Maintain level of benefit adequacy over time (share 
of benefits in average household consumption) 
Target: 25%  in 2008 is maintained 
Outcome 3.2.2 (new): Improved Social Assistance equity (targeting of 
poorest people) and efficiency (lower admin costs) 
Indicator: Share of SA funds going to poorest quintile Baseline: 
37.7% in 2009. Target: 45% by 2013 
Indicator: Administrative and client participation costs for 
means-tested programs.  Baseline: TBD Target: Reduction by 20% 
Outcome 3.2.3: Consolidate SA programs to better serve poor in most 

 

 

(Note: Indicator to be measured when kindergarten works are 
completed) 

 

Legislation to improve funding and design  of well targeted 
social assistance programs (e.g., GMI) is passed (Done) 

 More transparent and predictable GMI budget allocations & 
benefits (Done) 

 

 

Enactment of 
legislation on 
income-tested 
child 
allowances21 that offers higher benefits to households 
earning less than 200 RON/month and to Lone Parent 
families. (approved by Parliament end 2010 –DPL3). 

Harmonized means-testing for GMI, family allowance and 
heating benefits (same) 

 Monthly monitoring reports for 4 programs22 to be 
produced by National Agency for Social Benefits starting 
2011(in progress) 

Completed 
Rural Education Project (cl. FY10) 

 

 

Ongoing 
Social Inclusion Project (cl. FY13) 
 Mine Closure and Socio-Economic Regeneration   (cl.FY12) 
FBS Functional Review Regional Development and Tourism 
(FY11) 

 

New 
Results Based Modernization of Social Assistance Project (cl. 
FY13) 

 

Completed:  
Programmatic Poverty Monitoring Program (FY08) 
DPL 1-2 (FY10  / FY11) 
FB Functional Reviews Labor and Social Protection (FY11) 

 
 
 

Ongoing 
Social Inclusion Project (SIP) (cl.FY13) 

 
 

New 
DPL 3 (FY12) 
Results Based Social Assistance System Modernization 
Project (cl. FY13) 
Europe 2020 - Reducing Poverty and Social Protection 

 

19 Gap between targeted settlements and neighboring communities (measured in points) as calculated for 81 pairs of communities by RSDF 
20 Significant progress through combined effect of stronger enforcement of eligibility conditions (which has discontinued  GMI payments to 12% of recipients) and increase of the number of families to benefit 
by the GMI (by 15%) 
21 The income tested allowances are  the complementary child allowance (CCA) and the lone parent allowance (LPA) 
22 Family Allowance, Child Raising Benefits, Guaranteed Minimum Income, State Child Allowance 

17 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
RESULTS AREAS AND OUTCOMES TO WHICH THE CPS IS CONTRIBUTING 

 

cost efficient manner 
Indicator:  One consolidated program for low-income households 
Baseline: fragmentation of SA (too many programs) Target: One 
consolidated program for low-income households by 2013 

3.3. SOCIAL INSURANCE  

Objective: strengthen the fiscal viability, integrity and equity of the 
multi-pillar pension system 

 

Outcome 3.3.1: Improved fiscal sustainability of the public, pillar 1 
pension.  
Indicator : Deficit of Pension Pillar 1 
Target: Deficit (2.95% in 2011) ≤ by 2013  (target was revised 
upward. The consolidation in 2010 of special pension systems –
army, internal affairs- into the public pension system pushed the 
deficit to 2.95%. →Deficit decrease by 0.5% is now unrealistic) 
Indicator : Retirement age equalized 
Target (revised): Gradual increase of retirement age for women 
to 63 (vs. 65) (in progress per new Pension Law 263/2010) 
Outcome 3.3.2: Improved equity of pension system  
Indicator:  Introduction of a zero pillar to cover elderly poor  
(dropped ) 

 

 

3.4. HEALTH SECTOR 

Objective: 
support 
the design and 
implementation of 
the 
Government’s health sector reform program to improve efficiency and 
quality of health services; mobilize additional resources for health and 
improve health outcomes 

 

 

Outcome 3.4.1: Better efficiency and quality of health services 
Indicator: Annual rate of admission to acute care facilities. 
Baseline: 229 per 1,000 people; Target: below 200  by 2013 
Indicator : Share of generic drugs  in total compensated  drug 
expenditures (revised and in progress) Baseline: 40% in 2008. 
Target: >=45% by 2012 
Indicator: 24-hour death rate among patients treated in ER and 
then admitted to hospital. Target: Decrease by 10 percent in 
2013 vs. 2007 (in progress) 
Indicator: Maternal Mortality Ratio 
Baseline of 0.24%o in 2004 Target: Reduce by 20 percent by 2013 
(in progress) 

 

 

Outcome 3.4.2: Additional resources for health mobilized 
transparent and equitable manner 
Indicator : Amount of copayment raised 
Indicator: Coverage of copayment exemption among eligible 
population.  Baseline: no compayment legislation. Target: < 50% 
by 2012 (upon approval of legislation) 

 
 

in a 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

MILESTONES  

Thematic 
Inspections of major SA programs being 
undertaken annually and remedial action plans produced ( in 
progress). 

Legislation enacted on the public pension unitary system to 
gradually link  state pension adjustment to inflation  (Done - 
DPL2 prior action) 

The new adopted legislation on retirement age (DPL2 prior 
action), , would gradually equalize through 2030 the 
retirement age of women and men at the age of 65   

WBG INSTRUMENTS

13 

 
 
 

Completed 
Policy Briefs (FY09) 
Poverty Assessment Series (Phases I and II) (FY08-09) 
Rapid Assessment of Impact of Economic Crisis on Poverty 
(FY09) 
TA Poverty and Social Policy (FY10) 
TA Rural Elderly Pension Scheme (FY11) 
DPL1-2 (FY10 / FY11) 

 
 
 

The TA on Elderly Farmers Pension Scheme completed (and 
concluded that a Zero pillar social pension contravenes the 
Social Assistance Strategy) 

New 
DPL 3 (FY12) 

 

Adoption of the updated Hospital Rationalization Strategy 
through a Government Decision 
in/by 2010 -National 
Strategy prepared with Bank TA was posted on the MoH site 
for public consultations.  An updated draft would  be 
presented for Cabinet approval in 2011 

 
 
 

Completed 
HD Policy Briefs (compl.FY09) 
DPL 1-2 series (FY10 / FY11) 
IFC  advisory services and financing to support  private 
sector participation in the health sector 
FBS – Functional Reviews Health (FY11) 
Health & Education TA support for DPL (compl.FY12) 

 
 

Adoption of the Rural Primary Care Strategy in/by 2010 - 
Work  initiated–TA under procurement (Health APL2)  

Ongoing 
Health Sector Reform APL2 Project (cl. FY12) 

 

New 
DPL 3 (FY12) 
Pipeline Health Project (instrument TBD) (cl. FY14) 
New DPL (DDO) TBC 

 
 
 

Adoption of the legislation of the revised benefit package, 
including (i) the introduction of copayments (pending) and 
exemption mechanisms for the poor and (ii) transparent 
mechanisms for inclusion of new technology and new drugs 
in the benefits package (DPL 3 trigger). Legislation 
regarding co-payment mechanism (amending Law 95/2006) 
sent to Parliament but not yet approved. 

Approval of a new  legal framework for drug prescription 
management   (revised DPL3 prior action).  

Adoption of  legislation for voluntary health insurance 
(dropped) 

18 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MILESTONES  

WBG INSTRUMENTS

13 

RESULTS AREAS AND OUTCOMES TO WHICH THE CPS IS CONTRIBUTING 

 

Indicator: Percent of households with voluntary insurance.  
Baseline: NA; Target: 10 percent (dropped) 

Outcome 3.4.3 (new): Rationalization of  medical services provision 
and integration of the services as nation – wide networks 

 

Indicator : Reclassification of 100% hospitals based on new 
Strategy criteria  (Done, 2011) 

 

Indicator: Health Networks operational (per new Strategy) 

Baseline: None. Target: At least 4  regional or local health 
national networks functionally and legally established, including 
its Tertiary Hospital by 2013 

19 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annex 2: Proposed CPS framework based on strategic pillars and cross-sectoral themes (current and new activities in FY12) 

CPS Pillars / cross-
sectoral themes 

Europe 
2020 

1. Policy reforms to reap 
benefits of EU 
membership 

2.Modernization of public institutions 
to enhance resources allocation and 
absorption of EU funds 

3.Complementing EU financing 

1.Public sector reforms 
1.1.Public financial 
management 
1.2.Public 
administration reform 
1.3.Governance  
2.Growth and competitiveness  

2.1.Financial sector 

2.2.Business env. and 
competition 
2.3. K economy Digital 
agenda  
2.4.Research Devpt 
Innovation 

smart 

 PREM MAP, DPL2 

PREM MAP, CoG MAP 

Tax admin, DPL 3, DPL2, PEFA, 
policy notes 2, DPLDDO23 

PREM MAP 

PREM MAP, ACIS TA, ANRMAP TA 

IDF 

Judicial Reform Project 

MAP justice FR 

CC TA (MAP) 

CC TA (MAP) 

KE 

2.5.Education  

EDU1 MAP, SIP 

EDU2 MAP 

SIP, KE 

2.6.Agriculture and 
rural development 

2.7.Energy and 
Environment 

2.8.Transport, hazards 
mitigation 

ARD MAP,  Irrigation 
Rehab. 

ARD MAP, ANPCI FR, MAKIS, 
CESAR 

sustainable 

INPCP, Mine Closure 

TRANSP MAP,  Hazards 
Mitigation 

CESAR, Irrigation Rehab. 

INPCP, Municipal Serv, Mine 
Closure, climate change TA 

Hazards Mitigation 

3.Social and spatial inclusion 

3.1.Social inclusion  

3.2.Social assistance  

SASM 

inclusive 

3.3.Social insurance 

3.4.Health  

APL2 

SIP 

SIP, citizen scorecard ESW 

SIP, SASM 

SIP 

APL 2, Health 

Legend:                    in active portfolio     in pipeline      new activity in FY12 

23 Details to be clarified in the upcoming weeks 

20 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
Pillar 1: Public sector reforms 

Annex 3 - CPS Results Summary 

The CPS has been effective in supporting the fiscal sustainability targets in the 2009-2012 GoR program 
as well as fiscal reforms that are critical to the GoR medium-term agenda. The CPS has complemented 
the EU and IFM programs and has helped create the premises for improved budget discipline, 
accountability, efficiency and sustainability of  public wage bill. 
The CPS contribution (through the Judicial Reform Project) to strengthening the efficiency and 
accountability of the judiciary has been only partially successful (progress still required in optimization 
of courts procedures, transparency, etc).  

1.1 PF Management : Fiscal sustainability has improved  
 MTEF 2009 approved by GOR (DPL1); MTEF 2010-12 submitted to EC through the Convergence 
Program 2009-12, including fiscal risk analysis (DPL2); MTEF 2011-13  approved by Parliament 
with ceilings for selected spending ministries 
 1.1.1 Fiscal Responsibility Law 69/2010 enacted (partnership with IMF) 
 1.1.1 Fiscal Strategy 2011-2013 approved by GOR and sent to Parliament and the Independent 
Fiscal Council –now operational 
 1.1.1 Revenue boosting measures adopted (VAT, social contributions, excises, property taxes) 
 1.1.2 Improvement in Wage Bill sustainable growth in 2010: wage bill increased below inflation rate 
(2% vs. 5.6%) and has remained below 2009 level as percentage of GDP 
 1.1.2 Functional Reviews of the Public Administration on-going and likely to help improve pay 
practice 

1.2 Public Administration Reform: Public Pay Reform Agenda is in progress, Functional review of 
Public Administration in progress  
 1.1.2 Unitary Pay Law 330/2009 which reduces non-wage bonuses and allowances approved and 
gradual implementation in progress.  
 1.1.2 Subsidiary pay legislation  approved by Parliament, pay adjustments in 2011 in accordance 
with UPL targets, new regulations  approved by Government to reduce the use of temporary 
appointments for positions in the public administration   
 1.1.2 Reduction of non-wage personnel expenditures in progress 

1.3 Governance: Limited progress in the area of judiciary efficiency and accountability. Targets 
(under JRP) re-designed in line with GoR needs and likely to be achieved  
Strengthening the Capacity of Courts 
 1.3.0. Development of a Resource Management System for the  Justice sector in progress 
 1.3.2 Superior Council of Magistracy (SCM) 24 finalized its contribution to the Terms of Reference 
for the Optimization of Courts  TA (to be contracted by Oct 31, 2011).  
 New Civil and Criminal Codes and related procedure Codes adopted by Parliament; TA for 
preparation of enforcement ongoing. 
Institutional Development and Reform of the Judiciary 
 1.3.2 SCM has assumed the function of policy formulation and performance monitoring 
 1.3.2 SCM has adopted the new training syllabus for the National School of Clerks 
 1.3.2 Magistrates recruitment regulations modified and including qualification examination 
procedures 
 1.3.3. New/amended Civil and Criminal Codes and related procedure Codes adopted by Parliament; 
TA for preparation of enforcement ongoing. 
EU2020 
 1.3.4 Support to GoR for ensuring the reflection of Functional Reviews into the National Reform 
Plan  

24  The Optimization of Courts TA is the major Judicial Reform project TA that supports this outcome. The TA will  generate 
Uniform standards for the Courts operational processes and optimization recommendations for the Courts activity. Contract yet to be 
signed (by Oct 31, 2011)  

21 

 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
Pillar 2: Growth and Competitiveness  

Bank assistance was successful in helping maintain the viability and stability of the financial sector. The 
CPS envisaged responses to address solvency problems derived from the financial crises by supporting 
the preparation of the Guidelines on Corporate Debt Restructuring and Mortgage Debt Restructuring, 
as well as the amendment of the Insolvency Law to remove obstacles to out-of-court corporate debt 
restructuring. The review of competition policy helped to focus priorities on achieving full integration of 
Romanian markets with the EU. The review of the national innovation system set priorities to promote a 
knowledge-based economy, in line with the EU2020 strategy. Bank support helped improve the quality 
of education in a fiscally sound manner. A mix of AAA and project lending contributed to encouraging 
results in agriculture and rural development (ARD), and hazards mitigation. Progress was made in 
meeting the energy and environment CPS objectives.   

2.1 Financial Sector: all Indicative Milestones achieved. Bank system remains well capitalized, 
solvency levels relatively high.  
 2.1.1 NBR undertook  bank stress test to serve as input into its Strategic Action Plan (TA-FSA) 
 GoR prepared (DPL1, TA-FSA) a Strategic Action Plan for strengthening the Financial Sector (incl. 
methodology of potential interventions in the resolution of illiquid Banks) 
 2.1.1 Regulatory framework for Bank resolution, mortgage and corporate debt restructuring was 
improved  
 2.1.1 The Law on the Political Independence and Financial Autonomy of Financial Sector 
Regulators and Supervisors passed by Parliament. 
 2.1.2 Internal regulations for Basel II policy & accreditation decisions adopted by NBR (TA – 
Financial Sector Update) 
 2.1.2 Improved definitions of “Financial Conglomerates” (Ordinance 98/2006) and supervisory 
arrangements (by NBR, Private pension Supervision Commission, Insurance Supervisory 
Commission, National Securities Commission) 

2.2 Business Environment25 :  Improvement of insolvency and bankruptcy regulations 
 2.2.1 Improvement of insolvency and bankruptcy regulations (pre-insolvency procedures introduced 
in 2010, special insolvency departments created with Romanian courts, rules on out of court 
settlements for bankruptcy) (DPL2-prior actions) 
 2.2.1. Functional review of the RO Competition Council & Recommendations for its strengthening 
(FRs) 
2.3 Knowledge Economy  and Digital Agenda  
 2.3.1Through the Knowledge Economy project, 255 knowledge disadvantaged communities now 
have access to and use the Information and Communication Technology (ICT)-based resources in 
schools, local public administrations, public libraries and public points of access. Specific assistance 
has been provided to increase the digital competencies and for the utilization of ICT resources in 
pre-university education.  
 2.3.1By July 2011 812 new projects addressing community needs were developed by LCeNs users 
and declared eligible for financing with EU structural funds (the total value of the projects declared 
eligible is €240M) 
2.4 Research, Development and Innovation 
 2.4.1. Functional review of the Romanian Research Development and Innovation system & 
Recommendations for its strengthening (FRs) 
 2.4.2. Reform of agricultural research (legislation, governance and coordination, core financing; four 
research institutes have implemented reform plans  - MAKIS) 

2.5 Education:  Significant progress  
 2.5.1 GoR, with DPL support,  has shifted to per-student financing (starting with 2010-2011 school 
year). This is a fundamental structural budget reform that aligns labor and capital in the sector to the 
number and location of students.GOR decided to introduce per-capita financing for the entire school 

25

 However business taxation remains costly and cumbersome and Romania ranks second but last regarding the number of tax payments accordi ng to 
last Doing Business Report 

22 

 
 
 
   
 
                                                           
system as of 2010-11 vs.  an initial program of piloting reforms in 8 counties  
 2.5.3 Functional Review Ministry of Education – Recommendations formulated and largely adopted 
by GoR for strengthening the organizational structural of the Ministry for Education and improving 
the quality and efficiency of pre-university and higher education. 

2.6 Agriculture and Rural Development: Overall Progress although some CPS targets delayed 
(namely: completion of irrigation sector strategy, systemic registration of land properly titles, delivery 
mechanism of socio-economic advisory services ) 
 Support for EU integration and Convergence 
o Functional network of Border Food Safety Inspection Points  (MAKIS) 
o 
Improved food safety regulation (EU convergence target - MAKIS);  
o 
Improved information management systems (MAKIS - support to Paying Agency)  
o 
Improved farmers preparedness for the EU environment through delivery of socio-economic 
advisory services (MAKIS) 
o Revised National Rural Development Plan (2009) in line with EU requirements 
 Reform and Rehabilitation of Irrigation System 
o Substantial contributions to irrigation sector institutional restructuring & reforms (subsidies, 
tariffs setting) (Irrigation Reform and Rehabilitation)  
o Rehabilitation of selected irrigation schemes (Irrigation Reform project) 
o 2.6.1 Supply of advisory services to farmers, agro-processors, researchers via Training and 
Information Centers set under MAKIS project (Bucuresti, Cluj, Timisoarea, Iasi) – thousands of 
persons reached. Awareness about the EU Common Agriculture Policy. 
 Knowledge services - Functional Review(s) - Discussions ongoing to implement some if the FRs 
recommendations under on-going projects – CESAR) 

2.7 Energy, Environment:  
 2.7.1 Romania’s electricity market operates with ancillary services from the Lotru (Bank financed) 
project (Energy community in SE Europe). With support by the Privatization Risk Guarantee two 
Electricity Distribution Companies (Banat and Dobrogea) were privatized.  
 2.7.3 Knowledge and procedures on mine closure aligned to international best practice; 8 mines 
closed in an environmentally friendly manner; 447 ha of rehabilitated land transferred by mining 
companies to other parties (Mine Closure and Socio-Econ Regeneration) 
 2.7.3 Romania has participated – on a voluntary, non-binding basis – in the 2008 reporting on the 
EU Environmental Directives, including the Nitrate Directive. (INPCP) 
 2.7.4 TA provided to Ministry of Environment under the Municipal Services project for preparation 
of water & waste water projects 

2.8 Transport, Hazards Mitigation 
 2.8.x Rehabilitation of 11 bridges affected by floods (emergency task added by GOR) 
 2.8.x Flood emergency repairs at 50 bridges (emergency task added at GOR request) 
 2.8.2 Functional Review & GOR Action Plan Ministry of Transport completed 
 2.8.3 Improved emergency preparedness through implementation of specific risk reduction 
investment floods protection and dam safety (5 large and small dams retrofitted & reinforced), 
earthquake (22 public buildings retrofitted) and landslides (Hazards Risk Mitigation Project). 

Pillar 3: Social and Spatial Inclusion 

Since CPS inception a number of reforms have been implemented, to improve the targeting and 
efficiency of social spending. An example is the improved financing, administration and targeting of the 
Guaranteed Minimum Income Instrument. The majority of disadvantaged localities in the former mining 
areas benefitted from new socio-economic and employment opportunities. Progress was achieved in 
improving the social and spatial inclusion of Roma communities (via community development work and 
small investments in partnership with the  Romanian  Social Development Fund) as we ll as for the 
participation of Roma children in early childhood education programs. In addition, budgetary support 
lending (DPL2) promoted reforms to strengthen the fiscal viability, integrity and equity of the public 
pension and increased cost-effectiveness in the health sector. 

23 

 
 
 
 
 
 
3.1 Social Inclusion: Indicative milestones partially met and in progress 
 79% of the disadvantaged localities in the former mining areas were reached by Socio -Economic 
Regeneration (SER) measures extended under the Mine Closure & SER project 
 US$25M in socio-economic regeneration micro projects ( income generation activities, social 
services, human development ) for disadvantaged populations of former mining com munities (Mine 
Closure & SER Project)  
 3.1.1 Sub-projects worth $20M for Roma communities (small infrastructure works, kindergartens)  
in various stages of implementation (SIP) 
 3.1.1 50% of SIP Roma community members consider their living conditions improved 
 3.1.2 The partial impact on improving the lives of Roma communities and including  Roma children 
in ECE programs already witnessed by various counterparts, incl. EU (SIP) 

3. 2 Social Assistance: improved targeting and predictability of social programs 
 3.2.1 Legislation enacted (DPL1) to increased the eligibility threshold of GMI by 15%  
 3.2.1 More transparent and predictable GMI budget allocations & benefits (DPL2) through (a) 100% 
financing of GMI from  the state budget; (b) GMI budget transferred to MLFSP; (c) transfer of 
benefits payments from local budgets to NASB26 
 3.2.1 Revised draft legislation for the income tested family allowances to provide  higher benefits to 
poorest families 

3.3. Social  Insurance: Premises for increasing the public pension system sustainability  
 3.3.1 Pension legislation introduced to gradually link indexation of retirement benefits to inflation 
and equalize retirement age between men and women (DPL2) 

3.4 Health  Sector: Improving the financial sustainability of the sector 
 3.4.1 Legislation adopted to increase of tobacco excise and  improved framework for drug pricing  
(DPL1) 
 3.4.1  Technical work and roadmap finalized for inclusion of new technology and drugs in the 
benefits package using evidence based, transparent mechanisms (TA in support of DPLs) 
 3.4.2  Hospital rationalization strategy developed and consultations in progress (TA in support of 
DPLs)  
 Ministerial order issued on drug pricing and joint order to promote generic drugs in framework 
contracts.  

26 NASB – National Agency for Social Benefits 

24 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
Annex 4. Bank Support to the Government’s Public Administration Reform 
via fee-based service activities 

Work with the Government of Romania and the European Commission 

The Government National Reform Program (NRP27) 2011-13 outlines reforms derived from the 
objectives of the Europe 2020 strategy and informed by World Bank recommendations on key 
sectors of the economy (the first phase of the Functional Reviews outlined below).  The NRP aims 
to help achieve the country’s objective of convergence with the EU in terms of income and living 
standards.  It proposes short and medium term priority reforms grouped in three areas: (i) measures 
to consolidate the macroeconomic framework ; (ii) policy reforms to address root causes of 
vulnerabilities; and (iii) administrative capacity building measures. 

With support from the European Commission and the World Bank, the Romanian 
Government has been undertaking far reaching reform to improve the functioning of its 
public administration. The Bank has been providing its sector and technical expertise to support 
this effort through a series of fee-based services, which has both informed the NRP and is now 
supporting its implementation. This evolving program goes well beyond the original scope of the 
Bank’s 2009-13 Country Partnership Strategy. 

I. 

Functional Reviews  

Over the past year and a half, the Bank carried out functional reviews (FRs)28 of twelve public 
institutions in Romania under the overall framework of the MoU signed in June 2009 between 
the EC and the GoR.  Phase 1 (presented to Government in October 2010) covered six areas: 
Public Finance, Transport, Pre-University Education, Agriculture and Rural Development, the 
Center of Government, Competition Council. Phase 2 (presented to Government in March 2011) 
covered: Environment and Forestry, Energy/Economy and Business Environment, Health, Labor 
and Social Protection, Regional Development and Tourism, Higher Education, Research, and 
Innovation).  The 12 reviews provide operational recommendations on strategic management, 
organizational structure, sector governance, budgeting, and human resource management to help 
guide structural reforms.  

• 

Cross cutting recommendations of the Functional Reviews 
• 
Improve strategies in Transport, Agriculture, and Education by aligning them to available medium term 
resources and identifying programmatic trade-offs required for their implementation. 
Strengthen procedures in General Secretariat of the Government and Ministry of Public Finance to assure that 
new policies are approved only when financing is available over the medium term and rationalize existing 
public investment portfolio so that projects can be implemented efficiently.  
• Develop an annual Government work plan with deadlines for major legislative acts and increase consultation 
with external stakeholders to improve the quality of policy analysis before adoption of new laws. 
• Modernize Tax Administration through implementation of new technologies and reduce reliance on manual 
procedures and regional office network 
• Develop a new organization structure of the Ministry of Education so that it can exercise a more strategic role 
over the sector and enhance accountability 
 Create a more arms-length relationship between the Ministry of Transport and the state companies, starting 
with the introduction of a professional board of directors and increased public accountability for performance 
Strengthen the qualifications for entry into senior civil service positions to assure that experience is well-
aligned to the needs of the ministry. 

• 

• 

In the public finance sector, the FR covered the Ministry of Public Finance and identified 
several key reform areas: (i) improving budget credibility and macro-fiscal discipline, (ii) 

27 NRP 2011-13 (adopted in April 2011) 
28 EUR 3.2 million received from EU Funds to carry out this work. 

25 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
strengthening the policy basis for budget preparation, (iii) modernizing budget execution and 
treasury functions, (iv) improving capacity for absorption of EU funds, (v) modernizing revenue 
administration, (vi) organizational reform, (vii) IT modernization, and (viii) developing a more 
strategic management of human resources. Budget planning is also covered by the “Center of 
Government” Functional Review. 

In the agriculture and rural development sector, the FR covered all core functions in central 
and regional branches of the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development, the two 
agricultural paying agencies,29 and relevant subordinated and associated agencies. The FR 
conclusions related mostly to (i) promoting changes in the sector governance through a bold vision 
doubled by a system-wide strategy to set targets for meeting the vision, (ii) addressing the 
operational management deficiencies which represent the most pronounced constraint to effective 
policy and service delivery, (iii) enhancing performance through increased consolidation and co-
location of institutions and through more integration or outsourcing of functions, and (iv) focusing 
on the low-performing units to bring them up to speed with the high-performing ones.   

In the transport sector, the FR focused on the Ministry of Transport and Infrastructure and 
the largest land transport state owned enterprises (SOEs). The main conclusions relate to: (i) 
promoting changes in the sector governance through an improved transport strategy, a rethinking of 
the roles of government and SOEs and a better contracting of services requested by the state; (ii) 
improvements in corporate governance of the main transport SOEs; (iii) greater efficiency of SOE 
operations, especially to increase the absorption of EU funds; and (iv) the need to review policy for 
public-private partnerships in the transport sector. The GoR has started measures to improve the 
governance of some SOEs and to increase the efficiency of units responsible for EU funds 
absorption for roads.  

In the education sector, the FR focused on the Ministry of Education, Research, Youth and 
Sport (MERYS) and its main subordinated agencies. Main recommendations included the need 
to (i) reorganize the Ministry in the context of decentralization; (ii) improve the management 
culture and practices of the sector, with a particular focus on the  balance between operational 
management and strategic management  and on managers’ skills and accountability; (iii) improve 
the capacity to absorb Structural Funds; (iv) optimize the school network; (v) improve the 
availability, use and management of information; and (vi) enhance research on education.  

Following the completion of the Functional Reviews, the Government prepared and approved in 
December 2010, its action plans for Modernization of the Romanian public administration. 
According to the MOU between the Government of Romania and the EU, the implementation of the 
first set of action plans need to show progress. 

II. Modernization of the Public Administration 

The Government requested the Bank to support implementation of some of their action plans. 
The Modernization of Administration Program of TA FBS program (to be financed from EU 
Structural Funds) currently includes seventeen projects in FR Phase 1 ministries, estimated at about 
US$30 million30. In addition to the FR related projects, the program includes three requests for 
assistance on justice, procurement and EU funds absorption. Together with the DPL program, they 
will offer options to advance structural reforms, to inform the NRP and ensure it reflects the thrust 
of the Europe 2020 strategy. Line ministries of agriculture and rural development, education, public 
finance, transport, justice as well as the Competition Council submitted for approval to the 
Managing Authority their proposals for approval to be financed from EU funds. The first MAP TA 

29 Agency for Payments and Interventions in Agriculture, and Paying Agency for Rural Development and Fisheries. 
30 This may be subject to change depending on the legal agreements to be signed in the end 

26 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
whose financial request was approved in a previous batch of requests was signed on July 22, 2011 
and aims to assist the Government at the central level in improving its institutional capacity to 
facilitate policy coordination, ex-ante impact assessment, and the monitoring and evaluation of 
public policies. Line ministries are expected to sign the contracts for assistance with the Bank by 
December 2011/January 2012.   

The overall WB assistance package is currently estimated at around US$30 million for a total 
of seventeen projects in six sectors - public finance, agriculture and rural development, 
transport, education, justice and competition31. Below is a synopsis of the proposed TA services 
by sector32. 

 Public Finance - five TAs. These projects include: (i) treasury/debt management; (ii) 
strengthening macro forecasting capacity, (iii) improving communication with tax payers; 
(iv) improving capacity in tax policy analysis; (v) strengthening human resource 
management.  

 Agriculture and Rural Development – five TAs. These projects focus on: (i) developing a 
vision and strategy for capitalizing on the agri-food production potential; (ii) supporting the 
strategic planning for agriculture and rural development administration; (iii) implementing 
the management information system of the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development; 
(iv) developing and implementing an integrated IT system for financial management. Also, 
the Ministry of Administration and Interior officially requested for WB support in 
conducting a dedicated Functional Review of the National Agency for Cadastre and Real 
Estate Publicity (ANCPI) and of the institutions under its supervision, and to develop a 
strategy and action plan for strengthening administrative, human resource and financial 
capacity to improve efficiency and service delivery of the Agency. 

 Transport and Infrastructure - three TAs. The three projects aim to, respectively: (i) 
update the transport strategy and assist with its implementation, focusing on cost recovery 
mechanisms in the transport sector and contracting arrangements with the main SOEs, 
including the purchase of services; (ii) support the railway system with a particular focus on 
the definition and refinement of public service contracts and increasing capacity for 
applying EU policies; and (iii) support the implementation of public-private partnership 
projects with a specific emphasis on the road sector.   

 Education - two TAs33. These projects cover essential areas including: (i) development of 
the administrative capacity of the Ministry, strategic management and institutional 
leadership; (ii) school network optimization and management; and (iii) management of 
information resources. At this stage, the Bank team considers its role in implementing 
activities under the first two areas, as they are the most relevant and have the highest 
potential impact over the short and medium term. 

31 The following ministries have finalized proposals (called “project forms”) that would involve WB assistance: the Ministry of 
Public Finance, the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development, the Ministry of Administration and Interior, the Ministry of 
Transportation and Infrastructure, the Ministry of Justice and MERYS. In addition, the Competition Council submitted its own 
project form for PODCA financing through the General Secretariat of the Government (GSG).  The Competition Council is not 
subordinated to the GoR and therefore is not directly eligible for PODCA. 
32 It should be noted that the total amount of a project form may be higher than the amount for Bank TA because part of the proj ect 
activities may be implemented by the GoR itself or a third party (e.g., administration, or procurement of goods/services not provided 
by the Bank). Also, the role of the WB will vary with each project form. In some cases the demand is for the Bank to have 
responsibility for overall project management, in other cases for the WB to deliver directly some activities, and in others still for the 
WB to supervise firms contracted by the ministry. 
33 The Ministry of Education submitted the project proposals for approval to the funding Managing Authority without having 
requested yet World Bank support for the implementation of these two projects. 

27 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
 Competition - one TA. The areas of probable intervention are the following: (i) revising the 
legislative mandate of the Competition Council to promote competition; (ii) strengthening 
competition advocacy in public and government bodies; (iii) implementing a new business 
architecture in the Competition Council based on high quality and secure infrastructure, 
tools and services for information and communication technology; and (iv) increasing 
human resource capacity on competition matters in the Council as well as in ministries and 
regulatory agencies. 

 Justice – one TA. The project covers a functional review of the judicial system and the 
main areas of WB intervention would cover the analysis and the provision of 
recommendations for the following: (i) the organizational and functional design of the main 
judicial institutions; (ii) the HR strategy and the making use of the budgetary allocations for 
the judicial system; (iii) the IT management system (hardware and software); and (iv) 
proposal for the setup of a system and business processes for identifying, mitigating and 
solving the risks in the judicial system.  

Action Plans were prepared and adopted by the Government based on the Phase 2 Functional 
Reviews.  The Bank is ready to support implementation of those action plans upon request, 
comparative advantage, and ability to deliver. 

III. World Bank support to Absorption of EU Funds 

The Bank has also been requested to support capacity building for absorbing EU funds . As of 
end 2010, the absorption rate of EU structural funds for 2007-2013 was below 3 percent, leaving 
about EUR 20 billion available. The Plan of Priority Measures for strengthening the capacity to 
absorb structural and cohesion funds, approved by the Government in April 2011, could 
significantly reduce barriers to absorption.  

(i) 

(ii) 

The Government, in agreement with the EC, has requested the Bank to carry out an 
analysis of legislative and policy impediments of EU funds absorption. This work has 
been requested on a fee for service basis and the proposal is under discussion with the 
Government.   
Additionally, in November 2011, a new request has been made by the European 
Commission and Government of Romania to IFI (EIB, JASPERS, EBRD, and World 
Bank) support for various TAs to improve the absorption of Structural and Cohesion 
Funds and to prepare the 2014-2020 programming period.  A list of requested TAs has 
been provided to the IFIs and is currently under evaluation. Further discussions are 
expected in the upcoming months between DG REGIO, the Ministry of European affairs 
and IFIs on the possibilities to best respond to the request. 

IV. 

Procurement 

The Bank has also been requested to do a Functional Review of procurement and is reviewing this 
request with the European Commission, the Government and how it interrelates with the other TA 
work.  

28 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annex 5. Country needs and World Bank comparative advantage 

29 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annex 6: Summary of Sectoral Consultations 

General Objective 

 Inform WB Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) Progress Report on the perceived stage of CPS 
implementation and future role of the WB in selected policy sectors 

Specific Objectives 

 Open a participatory process in drafting the Country Partnership Strategy for 2011-2013 
 Evaluation of the knowledge on the World Bank activities in Romania 
 Assessment of the stage of implementation of the Country Partnership Strategy for 2009-10 
 Identification of main risks and bottlenecks in implementing CPS 2009-2013  
 Evaluation of the degree to which the directions of action/pillars respond to Romania’s 
development needs 
 Identification of the main directions for action (pillars, sectors, subsectors and assistance tools) 
in implementing CPS for the period of 2011-2013. 

Methodology 

 Primary and Secondary Stakeholders Surveys34: two main target-groups have been identified 
for carrying out the surveys: WB Project Management Units (PMUs), considered as CPS 
primary stakeholders and representatives of NGOs, consultants, researchers, financial 
institutions, international institutions and organizations, foreign investors, referred to as 
secondary stakeholders group. Data collection period is December 2009 - February 2010. 
Primary stakeholders’ survey was carried out on a number of WB 31 Project Management Units 
(PMUs), while secondary stakeholders’ survey included a sample of 194 persons (mainly NGO 
representatives). The response rates are 71% for primary stakeholders’ survey and 43% for the 
secondary group. 

 Sectoral roundtables35: in order to in-depth grasp the potential WB role in shaping future 
development in Romania, eight sectoral roundtables have been conducted. More than 45 
participants discussed key policy sectors: agriculture and rural development, climate change, 
education, governance, the social sectors, health, public finance and smart growth (including 
areas contributing to smart growth, such as: business environment, research, development and 
innovation, competition and digital agenda). Participants included Government, private sector, 
NGOs, trade unions and academic representatives. Discussion guidelines conducted in April-
May 2011 covered the following topics: acceleration of EU funds absorption, technical support 
for capacity development, implementation of the functional review recommendations, new 
policy related to the EU 2020 Strategy and thematic policy notes.  

Key findings 

 General remark: the consultations process provided a forum for discussing essential needs for 
country development among different stakeholders and has been positively appreciated by 

34 Online survey for two target groups. For a complete list of methodological notes and results please refer to the 
Primary Stakeholders Survey and Secondary Stakeholders Survey Final Reports, February 9, 2011. 
35 For summaries of all eight sectoral roundtables please refer to Summary of WB Consultations, June 9, 2011. 

30 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
participants from both surveys as well as roundtables. The World Bank has a very positive image 
in Romania, with potential role in various policy fields. 

 Primary and Secondary Stakeholders Surveys   
o Primary and secondary stakeholders were not involved in consultations for CPS 2009-2013. 
o WB Pillars of Growth respond to a great extent to Romania’s development needs.  
o Most of the sectors were evaluated as average in achieving the objectives set in the CPS 
during the period of 2009-2010. 
o For 2011-2013 period, WB should support developments in agriculture & rural development, 
public administration, education & labour market, social inclusion and health sector. 
o Main obstacles in achieving the objectives set in CPS 2009-2013 are the Political System and 
Human Resource Management.  

 Sectoral roundtables36 

o Theme 1: Policy reforms to reap the benefits of EU membership and meet the objectives of 
the Europe 2020 strategy 
 Strengthen policy coordination. Lack of coordination mainly between different 
governmental institutions translates into lack of policy coherence, mentioned by 
representatives of various policy sectors, from both public and private sectors. A 
programmatic vision accompanied by a suitable institutional set-up should ensure policy 
coordination across sectors and institutions, in line with Europe 2020 Strategy and with 
national initiatives of programming documents - National Reform Program . 
 Strengthen policy-based budget prioritization. The unjustified increased role of MoPF in 
expenditure prioritization, as perceived by representatives of line ministries, is, according 
to MoPF representatives, a consequence of lack of expertise in budget prioritization in 
ministries. In this respect, WB TA programs should address the training needs in MoPF 
together with line ministries. 

o Theme 2: Modernization of public institutions to enhance resource allocation and the 
absorption of EU funds 
 Simplifying administrative procedures at the level of all Management Authorities for 
structural funds, through a WB Technical Assistance (TA) project. Absorption of European 
Funds represents the only viable financial resource, particularly in the context of excessive 
deficit procedure. The technical assistance needs in this field are represented by uniform 
procedures for Management Authorities (MA) and training for MA personnel. 
 Impact assessment of projects financed from structural funds. A potential WB role could be 
materialized under a TA on monitoring and evaluating the outcomes produced from 
structural funds projects. The project should also include public dissemination activities of 
results from European-funded projects. 
 Reforming HR Management in the public sector on performance-based. There is a clear 
need for amendment of Civil Servants Statute, with the goal of establishing a performance-
based recruitment, evaluation, promotion and pay system of public personnel.  
 Implementation of Functional Review recommendations. There are high expectations 
regarding both accomplishments of WB Functional Reviews (e.g. governance, R&D) 
together with 
implementation of selected operations 
from Functional Review 
recommendations. Moreover, besides the projects already submitted for implementation, 
WB should continue the problem-identification part addressed with the functional reviews 
with a monitoring & evaluation exercise in order to ensure implementation of the FR 

36 The following findings represent a mere selection of cross-cutting issues, grouped under CPS themes for the next period. They do not reflect 
entirely all the views and opinions expressed during discussions. For a complete list of WB alternatives for action in different policy sectors, please 
refer to Summary of WB Consultations, June 9, 2011.  

31 

 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
recommendations. This type of exercise clearly needs a strong commitment of behalf of 
the Government.  

o Theme 3: Support complementing EU funding 
 Raising awareness on crucial policy issues. Representatives of different institutions 
pointed out the need to bring further on the public agenda crucial topics for Romania’s 
future path of development such as smart growth or climate change. WB is perceived with 
a competitive advantage on this area, based on its role to streamline coherent policies 
across multiple stakeholders from both public and private sectors. 
 Support financing gap up to the next period of structural funds implementation . As the 
next period of structural funds starts only in 2015 and there are numerous areas not 
covered by the current programming period, which need formulation of immediate 
response at national level, WB could supplement this financing gap through various 
assistance tools. 

32 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annex 7. Romania at a Glance 

33 

Romania at a glance10/25/2011 Europe &UpperKey Development Indicators CentralmiddleRomaniaAsiaincome(2010)Population, mid-year (millions)20.0405994Surface area (thousand sq. km)23823,54948,659Population growth (%)-0.20.60.9Urban population (% of total population)546476GNI (Atlas method, US$ billions)158.02,9457,403GNI per capita (Atlas method, US$)7,9017,2697,423GNI per capita (PPP, international $)13,91013,30212,802GDP growth (%)-1.35.64.1GDP per capita growth (%)-1.25.03.2(most recent estimate, 2005–2010)Poverty headcount ratio at $1.25 a day (PPP, %)<24<2Poverty headcount ratio at $2.00 a day (PPP, %)49<2Life expectancy at birth (years)736971Infant mortality (per 1,000 live births)102020Child malnutrition (% of children under 5)0..0Adult literacy, male (% of ages 15 and older)989995Adult literacy, female (% of ages 15 and older)979792Gross primary enrollment, male (% of age group)100100111Gross primary enrollment, female (% of age group)9998110Access to an improved water source (% of population)..9595Access to improved sanitation facilities (% of population)728984Net Aid Flows1980199020002010a(US$ millions)Net ODA and official aid..243431920Top 3 donors (in 2007):   n.a.........   n.a.........   n.a.........Aid (% of GNI)..0.61.21.2Aid per capita (US$)..101942Long-Term Economic TrendsConsumer prices (annual % change)......6.1GDP implicit deflator (annual % change)12.113.644.34.2Exchange rate (annual average, local per US$)..0.02.23.2Terms of trade index (2000 = 100)..83100931980–901990–20002000–10Population, mid-year (millions)22.223.222.420.00.4-0.3-0.5GDP (US$ millions)..38,29937,053162,0191.3-0.65.5Agriculture16.423.712.56.01.9-1.97.2Industry56.649.936.426.4-1.0-1.25.9   Manufacturing..33.814.521.9....5.6Services and constructions27.026.351.156.5..0.95.1Household final consumption expenditure53.765.978.561.2..1.36.2General gov't final consumption expenditure12.313.37.27.2..0.84.2Gross capital formation 36.330.219.530.5..-5.111.4Exports of goods and services..16.732.726.5..8.19.5Imports of goods and services..26.237.941.2..6.013.5Gross savings..20.715.835.8Note: Figures in italics are for years other than those specified. 2009 data are preliminary.  .. indicates data are not available.a. Aid data are for 2008.Development Economics, Development Data Group (DECDG).      (average annual growth %)  (% of GDP)64202460-415-1930-3445-4960-6475-79percent of total populationAge distribution, 2010MaleFemale01020304050601990199520002010RomaniaEurope & Central AsiaUnder-5 mortality rate (per 1,000)-15-10-50510900010GDPGDP per capitaGrowth of GDP and GDP per capita (%) 
 
34 

RomaniaBalance of Payments and Trade20002010(US$ millions)Total merchandise exports (fob)10,36649,381Total merchandise imports (cif)13,05457,192Net trade in goods and services-1,930-7,943Current account balance-1,355-8,101   as a % of GDP-3.7-5.0Workers' remittances and   compensation of employees (receipts)963,171Reserves, including gold3,39650,308Central Government Finance(% of GDP)Current revenue (including grants)31.131.3   Tax revenue29.228.0Current expenditure31.833.7Technology and Infrastructure20002010Overall surplus/deficit-4.0-2.7Paved roads (% of total)49.530.3Highest marginal tax rate (%)Fixed line and mobile phone   Individual..16   subscribers (per 100 people)29147   Corporate2516High technology exports   (% of manufactured exports)5.57.5External Debt and Resource FlowsEnvironment(US$ millions)Total debt outstanding and disbursed11,160125,889Agricultural land (% of land area)6558Total debt service2,50017,624Forest area (% of land area)27.727.7Debt relief (HIPC, MDRI)––Terrestrial protected areas (% of surface area)..10.7Total debt (% of GDP)30.177.7Freshwater resources per capita (cu. meters)1,9401,971Total debt service (% of exports)20.123.2Freshwater withdrawal (billion cubic meters)23.223.5Foreign direct investment (net inflows)1,0373,839CO2 emissions per capita (mt)3.94.2Portfolio equity (net inflows)580GDP per unit of energy use   (2005 PPP $ per kg of oil equivalent)4.25.8Energy use per capita (kg of oil equivalent)1,6121,799 World Bank Group portfolio20002010 (US$ millions) IBRD   Total debt outstanding and disbursed1,8982,830   Disbursements384187   Principal repayments91262   Interest payments10451 IDA   Total debt outstanding and disbursed00   Disbursements00Private Sector Development20002010   Total debt service00Time required to start a business (days)–14 IFC (fiscal year)Cost to start a business (% of GNI per capita)–3.0   Total disbursed and outstanding portfolio284656Time required to register property (days)–26      of which IFC own account112..   Disbursements for IFC own account17..Ranked as a major constraint to business20002010   Portfolio sales, prepayments and   (% of managers surveyed who agreed)      repayments for IFC own account5..      Tax administration..35.6      Tax rates..34.1 MIGA   Gross exposure20..Stock market capitalization (% of GDP)2.922.1   New guarantees0..Bank capital to asset ratio (%)8.68.0Note: Figures in italics are for years other than those specified.  2009 data are preliminary.10/25/11.. indicates data are not available.  – indicates observation is not applicable.Development Economics, Development Data Group (DECDG).0255075100Control of corruptionRule of lawRegulatory qualityPolitical stabilityVoice and accountabilityCountry's percentile rank (0-100)higher values imply better ratings2…2…Governance indicators, 2000 and 2010Source: Kaufmann-Kraay-Mastruzzi, World BankIBRD, 2,803IDA, 0IMF, 15,092Other multi-lateral, 7,522Bilateral, 860Private, 74,583Short-term, 25,029Composition of total external debt, 2010US$ millions 
 
35 

Millennium Development GoalsRomaniaWith selected targets to achieve between 1990 and  2015(estimate closest to date shown, +/- 2 years)  Goal 1: halve the rates for extreme poverty and malnutrition1990199520002010   Poverty headcount ratio at $1.25 a day (PPP, % of population)   <25.03.7<2   Poverty headcount ratio at national poverty line (% of population)   ..25.428.915.9   Share of income or consumption to the poorest qunitile (%)  10.08.98.28.0   Prevalence of malnutrition (% of children under 5)   ....3.73.5Goal 2: ensure that children are able to complete primary schooling   Primary school enrollment (net, %)..879490   Primary completion rate (% of relevant age group)   968610296   Secondary school enrollment (gross, %)   102778191   Youth literacy rate (% of people ages 15-24)....9896Goal 3: eliminate gender disparity in education and empower women   Ratio of girls to boys in primary and secondary education (%)   9810110099   Women employed in the nonagricultural sector (% of nonagricultural employment)   42424646   Proportion of seats held by women in national parliament (%)   34779Goal 4: reduce under-5 mortality by two-thirds   Under-5 mortality rate (per 1,000)   32272213   Infant mortality rate (per 1,000 live births)   25221911   Measles immunization (proportion of one-year olds immunized, %)92939897Goal 5: reduce maternal mortality by three-fourths   Maternal mortality ratio (modeled estimate, per 100,000 live births)   170725227   Births attended by skilled health staff (% of total)   ..999899   Contraceptive prevalence (% of women ages 15-49)   ..576470Goal 6: halt and begin to reverse the spread of HIV/AIDS and other major diseases   Prevalence of HIV (% of population ages 15-49)   ..0.10.10.1   Incidence of tuberculosis (per 100,000 people)   140140170130   Tuberculosis case detection rate (%, all forms)49727476Goal 7: halve the proportion of people without sustainable access to basic needs   Access to an improved water source (% of population)........   Access to improved sanitation facilities (% of population)71727272   Forest area (% of total land area)   27.827.827.727.7   Terrestrial protected areas (% of surface area)......10.7   CO2 emissions (metric tons per capita)   6.85.73.94.4   GDP per unit of energy use (constant 2005 PPP $ per kg of oil equivalent)   2.93.54.26.0Goal 8: develop a global partnership for development      Telephone mainlines (per 100 people)   10.213.117.423.4   Mobile phone subscribers (per 100 people)0.00.011.1113.7   Internet users (per 100 people)   0.00.13.628.8   Personal computers (per 100 people)   0.21.33.219.2Note: Figures in italics are for years other than those specified.  .. indicates data are not available.10/25/11Development Economics, Development Data Group (DECDG).Romania025507510012520002003200620082010Primary net enrollment ratioRatio of girls to boys in primary & secondary educationEducation indicators (%)05010015020002002200420062010Fixed + mobile subscribersInternet usersICT indicators (per 100 people)02550751001990199520002010RomaniaEurope & Central AsiaMeasles immunization (% of 1-year olds) 
 
Annex 8: Selected Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management 

36 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annex 9: Social Indicators 

37 

Romania Social IndicatorsLatest single yearSame region/income group Europe &Upper-Centralmiddle-1980-851990-952003-09AsiaincomePOPULATION  Total population, mid-year (millions)22.722.721.5404.21,001.7    Growth rate (% annual average for period)0.5-0.5-0.20.20.9Urban population (% of population)49.654.054.464.074.9Total fertility rate (births per woman)2.31.31.41.82.0POVERTY(% of population)National headcount index....13.8....    Urban headcount index....6.8....    Rural headcount index....22.3....INCOMEGNI per capita (US$)..1,4708,3306,7937,502Consumer price index (2000=100)..4127141127Food price index (2000=100)011184....INCOME/CONSUMPTION DISTRIBUTIONGini index..28.231.2....Lowest quintile (% of income or consumption)..8.98.1....Highest quintile (% of income or consumption)..37.239.3....SOCIAL INDICATORSPublic expenditure    Health (% of GDP)..0.04.33.93.8    Education (% of GDP)....4.34.14.3Net primary school enrollment rate(% of age group)    Total..87909293        Male..87919393        Female..87909292Access to an improved water source(% of population)    Total......9595        Urban......9898        Rural......8986Immunization rate(% of children ages 12-23 months)    Measles8893979693    DPT9598979593Child malnutrition (% under 5 years)..5......Life expectancy at birth(years)    Total7069737072        Male6766706669        Female7373777575Mortality    Infant (per 1,000 live births)2522101919    Under 5 (per 1,000)3227122122    Adult (15-59)        Male (per 1,000 population)228270192286201        Female (per 1,000 population)11411982123122    Maternal (modeled, per 100,000 live births)..72273282Births attended by skilled health staff (%)..99999796Note: 0 or 0.0 means zero or less than half the unit shown. Net enrollment rate: break in series between 1997 and 1998 due tochange from ISCED76 to ISCED97. Immunization: refers to children ages 12-23 months who received vaccinations before oneyear of age or at any time before the survey.World Development Indicators database, World Bank - 15 April 2011. 
 
Annex 10: Recent Economic and Financial Indicators 

38 

 
39 

 
 
 
 
40 

 
 
 
 
41 

 
Annex 11 Romania Key Exposure Indicators 

Actual 

Indicator 

2007 

2008 

2009 

2010 

Estimated 
2011 

2012 

2013 

Projections 
2014 

2015 

Total debt outstanding and  
disbursed (TDO) (US$m) 

a 

88,374 

104,943 

102,074 

116,804 

108,394 

95,782 

82,752 

82,752 

71,103 

a 

9,316.1 
11,721 

14,390.3 
18,537 

16,269.3 
48,360 

4,534.9 
20,391 

-6,739.6 
19,451.0 

-10,351.6 
17,246.0 

-14,336.4 
13,491 

-14,378.7 
13,490 

-12,771.2 
11,224 

143.0 
53.2 
39.0 

12.7 
0.6 
2,106 

2 
0 

149.6 
52.3 
56.0 

269.7 
63.4 
127.8 

12.3 
0.6 
2,879.63 

10.2 
0.7 
2,609.63 

3 
0 

3 
0 

231.9 
72.3 
40.5 

8.4 
0.6 
2,911 

3 
… 

199.6 
58.5 
35.8 

9.5 
0.7 
3,427 

2 
… 

166.5 
47.1 
30.0 

8.5 
0.7 
5,293 

134.1 
37.2 
21.9 

7.5 
0.6 
5,619 

124.0 
34.1 
20.2 

3.3 
0.6 
5,472 

2 

…. …. 

2 

…. 

3 

…. 

98.5 
26.8 
15.5 

1.7 
0.5 
5,228 

2 

269.7 
192.0 

278.8 
196.1 

375.5 
112.0 

384.2 
65.8 

579.5 
60.8 

b 

Net disbursements (US$m) 
Total debt service (TDS) 
(US$m) a 
Debt and debt service indicators  
(%) 
   TDO/XGS 
   TDO/GDP 
   TDS/XGS 
IBRD exposure indicators (%) 
   IBRD DS/public DS 
   IBRD DS/XGS 
   IBRD TDO (US$m) 
      Of which present value of 
      guarantees (US$m) 
   Share of IBRD portfolio (%) 
   IDA TDO (US$m) 

d 

d 

IFC (US$m) 
   Loans 
   Equity and quasi-equity  /c 

MIGA 
   MIGA guarantees (US$m) 

a.  Includes public and publicly guaranteed debt, private nonguaranteed, use of IMF credits and net short - 
     term capital. 
b.  "XGS" denotes exports of goods and services, including workers ' remittances. 
c. Preferred creditors are defined as IBRD, IDA, the regional multilateral development banks, the IMF, and the 
    Bank for International Settlements. 
d. Includes present value of guarantees and effective but undisbursed DPL DDOs. 
e.  Includes equity and quasi-equity types of both loan and equity instruments. 

42 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annex 12: Operations Portfolio IBRD and Grants 

43 

 
 
 
 
Annex 13: Summary of Analytical and Advisory Activities 

FY2013 
Tax Administration 
TA (TBC) 

FY2009 
Education Reform 
RO FSAP Update 
(ESW) 

FY2010 
Financial Sector TA 
IT TA Support to NBR 

HD Policy Briefs & 
Dialogue (ESW) 

Consumer Protection and 
Financial Literacy (REG) 
PEIR Update (ESW) 
PFM Civil Service Pay 

FY2011 
Fiscal decentralization 
Social Protection Coverage to Elderly 
Farmers 

FY2012 
Justice Functional Review  
Modernization of 
Administration Program 
(CoG, Public Finance, 
Education, Transport, 
Agriculture)  
ANRMAP Functional 
Review (TBC) 
Health and Education TA to support DPL ANPCI Functional Review 
Policy notes on growth and 
ACIS TA 
competitiveness (I) 
NEW: Accounting and External Auditing 

Students Loan Scheme 

Poverty & Social Policy  NEW: Fee Based TA – Functional 
Reviews Phase 1 Agriculture, Transport, 
Finance, Pre-University Education 1, 
Competition, Core of Government 
NEW: Fee Based TA – FR 2 
Health, Economy/Energy/Business 
Environment, Labor and Social 
Protection, Regional Dev & Tourism, 
Pre-Univ Education 2, Higher Education, 
R&D, Cross-cutting 

NEW: Sector Notes:  
power, water, roads 
maintenance, 
environment, and 
agriculture 

Policy notes on growth and 
competitiveness (II) 
Citizen Scorecard/Social 
Accountability ESW 

Public Expenditure 
Framework Assessment 

Climate Change 
Regional study on Skills and 
competitiveness 

Note: NEW refers to assistance provided during the period and which was not initially captured under the CPS. The new TAs nee d to be clearly defined for the 
implementation of the Functional Reviews.  

44 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annex 14: IFC Committed and Disbursed Outstanding Investment Portfolio, Romania 

As of 10/31/2011 
(In USD Millions) 

FY Approval 

Company 

Loan Equity 

**Quasi 
Equity 

*GT/R
M 

Partici  
pant 

Loan Equity 

**Quasi 
Equity 

*GT/R
M 

Partici  
pant 

Committed 

Disbursed Outstanding 

2007/08 
2005/08/09 
0 

2003/04/06/09 
2011 
2011/12 
2007 
2004 
2012 
2007/10/12 
2012 

Arabesque SRL 
ATE Romania 
Banat Construct 
Banca 
Comerciala 
Bancpost 
Cernavoda Power 
Credit Europe bk 
DomeniaCredit 
Garanti Bank Ro 
Medlife SA 
Pestera 
ProCreditRomani
2002/03/04/07/10/11 
a 
2004/05/10 
Schwarz Group 
2004/05/07/09/10/11 TransilvaniaBank 
2008 
Tts romania 
2006 
Tts sa 

36.1 
10.0 
0.0 

107.7 
80.7 
59.1 
20.4 
1.6 
31.5 
19.1 
37.2 

3.3 
43.8 
120.0 
0.0 
8.8 

0.0 
3.5 
0.0 

0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
3.2 
0.0 

5.6 
0.0 
18.1 
0.0 
0.0 

0.0 
0.0 
5.4 

0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 

0.0 
0.0 
16.8 
10.5 
0.0 

0.0 
0.0 
0.0 

0.0 
17.6 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 

0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 

33.6 
0.0 
0.0 

0.0 
0.0 
21.4 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
56.1 
13.7 

0.0 
34.5 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 

36.1 
10.0 
0.0 

107.7 
80.7 
59.1 
20.4 
1.6 
31.5 
19.1 
37.2 

3.3 
43.8 
120.0 
0.0 
8.8 

0.0 
3.5 
0.0 

0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
3.2 
0.0 

5.6 
0.0 
18.1 
0.0 
0.0 

0.0 
0.0 
3.2 

0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 

0.0 
0.0 
16.8 
10.5 
0.0 

0.0 
0.0 
0.0 

0.0 
17.6 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 

0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 

33.6 
0.0 
0.0 

0.0 
0.0 
21.4 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
37.0 
13.7 

0.0 
34.5 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 

Total Portfolio: 660.2, of which: 

579.7 

30.3 

32.7 

17.6 

159.3 

579.7 

30.3 

30.5 

17.6 

140.2 

* Denotes Guarantee and Risk Management Products. 
** Quasi Equity includes both loan and equity types. 

45 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Moldoveanu
Moldoveanu
Moldoveanu
(2,544 m )
(2,544 m )
(2,544 m )

B
B

a
a

n
n

a
a

t
t

W a l a c h i a
W a l a c h i a
W a l a c h i a

D
D

o
o

b
b

r
r

u
u

j
j

a
a

M
M

o
o

l
l

d
d

a
a

v
v

i
i

a
a

T
T

r
r

a
a

n
n

s
s

y
y

l
l

v
v

a
a

n
n

i
i

a n  
a n  

A l p s
A l p s

O
O
O

lt
lt
lt

Arges
Arges
Arges

I a l o m i t a
I a l o m i t a
I a l o m i t a

B u z a u
B u z a u
B u z a u

S
S
S

ir
ir
ir
et
et
et

S
S
S

ir
ir
ir
et
et
et

Bistrita
Bistrita
Bistrita
t
t

 Crisul Alb
 Crisul Alb

P
P
P

r
r
r

ut
ut
ut

Mures 
Mures 

Ti
Ti
is
is

m
m

o
o
S
S

m
m

e
e

s
s

Ji
Ji

u
u

D
D

a
a

n
n

u b e 
u b e 

Danube 
Danube 

A R A D
A R A D
A R A D

G O R J
G O R J
G O R J

HUNEDOARA
HUNEDOARA
HUNEDOARA

C A R A S -
C A R A S -
C A R A S -
S E V E R I N
S E V E R I N
S E V E R I N

T I M I S
T I M I S
T I M I S

PRAHOVA
PRAHOVA
PRAHOVA

B R A S O V
B R A S O V
B R A S O V

COVASNA
COVASNA
COVASNA

S I B I U
S I B I U
S I B I U

A R G E S
A R G E S
A R G E S

I A L O M I TA
I A L O M I TA
I A L O M I TA

V R A N C E A
V R A N C E A
V R A N C E A

V A S L U I
V A S L U I
V A S L U I

G A L AT I
G A L AT I
G A L AT I

T U L C E A
T U L C E A
T U L C E A

N E A M T
N E A M T
N E A M T

I A S I
I A S I
I A S I

BOTOSAN I
BOTOSAN I
BOTOSAN I

M U R E S
M U R E S
M U R E S
HARGHITA
HARGHITA
HARGHITA

S U C E AVA
S U C E AVA
S U C E AVA

M A R A M U R E S
M A R A M U R E S
M A R A M U R E S

A L B A
A L B A
A L B A

C L U J
C L U J
C L U J

B I H O R
B I H O R
B I H O R

S AT U M A R E
S AT U M A R E
S AT U M A R E

O L TO L T
O L T

D O L J
D O L J
D O L J

MEHEDINTI
MEHEDINTI
MEHEDINTI

TELEORMAN 
TELEORMAN 
TELEORMAN 
G I U R G I U
G I U R G I U
G I U R G I U

C O N S TA N TA
C O N S TA N TA
C O N S TA N TA

BUCURESTI
BUCURESTI
BUCURESTI
BUCHAREST
BUCHAREST
BUCHAREST

DÂMBOVITA
DÂMBOVITA
MBOVITA

V Â L C E A
V Â L C E A
L C E A

B I S T R I TA -
B I S T R I TA -
B I S T R I TA -
N A S A U D
N A S A U D
N A S A U D

B U Z A U
B U Z A U
B U Z A U

B R A I L A
B R A I L A
B R A I L A

C A L A R A S I
C A L A R A S I
C A L A R A S I

S A L A J
S A L A J
S A L A J

B A C A U
B A C A U
B A C A U

Lugoj
Lugoj
Lugoj

Hunedoara
Hunedoara
Hunedoara

Turda
Turda
Turda

Petrosani
Petrosani
Petrosani

Orsova
Orsova
Orsova

Calafat
Calafat
Calafat

Caracal
Caracal
Caracal

Medias
Medias
Medias

DejDej
Dej

Roman
Roman
Roman

OnestiOnesti
Onesti

Birlad
Birlad
Birlad

Medgidia
Medgidia
Medgidia

Fetesti
Fetesti
Fetesti

HusiHusi
Husi

Turnu Magurele
Turnu Magurele
Turnu Magurele

Tecuci
Tecuci
Tecuci

Gheorgheni
Gheorgheni
Gheorgheni

BradBrad
Brad

DevaDeva
Deva

Arad
AradArad

Sibiu
SibiuSibiu

Zalau
Zalau
Zalau

Tulcea
Tulcea
Tulcea

Vaslui
Vaslui
Vaslui

Oradea
Oradea
Oradea

Giurgiu
Giurgiu
Giurgiu

Craiova
Craiova
Craiova

Slatina
Slatina
Slatina

Suceava
Suceava
Suceava

Slobozia
Slobozia
Slobozia

Târgu Jiu
Târgu Jiu
rgu Jiu

Baia Mare
Baia Mare
Baia Mare

Satu Mare
Satu Mare
Satu Mare

Alexandria
Alexandria
Alexandria

Alba
AlbaAlba
Iulia
IuliaIulia

Cluj-
Cluj-Cluj-
Napoca
Napoca
Napoca

Râmnicu
Râmnicumnicu
Vâlcea
Vâlcealcea

Miercurea-
Miercurea-
Miercurea-
Cuic
CuicCuic

Drobeta-
Drobeta-
Drobeta-
Turmu Severin
Turmu Severin
Turmu Severin

Bistrita
Bistrita
Bistrita

Târgurgu
Târgu
MuresMures
Mures

Botosani
Botosani
Botosani

Iasi
Iasi
Iasi

Piatra-
Piatra-
Piatra-
Neamt
Neamt
Neamt

Ploiesti
Ploiesti
Ploiesti

Târgoviste
Târgoviste
rgoviste

Pitesti
Pitesti
Pitesti

Resita
Resita
Resita

Timisoara
Timisoara
Timisoara

Galati
Galati
Galati

Brasov
Brasov
Brasov

Focsani
Focsani
Focsani

Bacau
Bacau
Bacau

Calarasi
Calarasi
Calarasi

Braila
Braila
Braila

Buzau
Buzau
Buzau

SfSfântuntu
Sfântu
Gheorghe
Gheorghe
Gheorghe

C
C

a
a

r
r

p
p

a
a

h
h

i
i

a
a

n
n

M
M

t
t

s
s

.
.

ILFOV
ILFOV
ILFOV

U K R A I N E
U K R A I N E
U K R A I N E

U K R A I N E
U K R A I N E
U K R A I N E

H U N G A R Y
H U N G A R Y
H U N G A R Y

B U L G A R I A
B U L G A R I A
B U L G A R I A

To To 
To 
Chisinau
Chisinau
Chisinau

To To 
To 
Chisinau
Chisinau
Chisinau

To To 
To 
Ivano-Frankivs'k
Ivano-Frankivs'k
Ivano-Frankivs'k

To 
To To 
Uzhhorod
Uzhhorod
Uzhhorod

To 
To To 
Budapest
Budapest
Budapest

To 
To To 
Budapest
Budapest
Budapest

To 
To To 
Subotica
Subotica
Subotica

To 
To To 
Novi Sad
Novi Sad
Novi Sad

To 
To To 
Sofiya
Sofiya
Sofiya

To To 
To 
Varna
Varna
Varna

To To 
To 
Shumen
Shumen
Shumen

To 
To To 
Shumen
Shumen
Shumen

To 
To To 
BaltiBalti˘
Balti˘

To To 
To 
Veliko Turnovo
Veliko Turnovo
Veliko Turnovo
˘
˘

To To 
To 
NisNis˘
Nis˘

SERB IA
SERB IA
SERB IA

Navodari

Mangalia

Constanta

M O L D O VA

Mure s 

B l a c k

S e a

22°E

24°E

26°E

28°E

24°E

48°N

4 6 °N

4 4 °N

44°N

30°E

30°E

ROMANIA

This map was produced by the Map Design Unit of The World Bank.  
The boundaries, colors, denominations and any other information
shown on this map do not imply, on the part of The World Bank
Group, any judgment on the legal status of any territory, or any
endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.

0

25

50

75

0

25

50

75 Miles

100 Kilometers

I

B
R

D

3
3
4
6
9
R
2

F
E
B
R

U
A

R
Y
2
0
0
8

R O M A N I A

SELECTED CITIES AND TOWNS

COUNTY (JUDET) CAPITALS

NATIONAL CAPITAL

RIVERS

MAIN ROADS

RAILROADS

COUNTY (JUDET) AND MUNICIPALITY
(MUNICIPIU) BOUNDARIES

INTERNATIONAL BOUNDARIES

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
