d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

Document of  
The World Bank Group 

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 

Report No.  60339-BI 

INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION 
AND 
INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION 

COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY PROGRESS REPORT  
FOR 
THE REPUBLIC OF BURUNDI 

April 21, 2011 

Eastern Africa Country Management Unit 1 
Africa Region 
International Development Association 

International Finance Corporation 
Sub-Saharan Africa Department 

This document is being made publicly available prior to Board consideration. This does not imply a 
presumed outcome. This document may be updated following Board consideration and the updated 
document will be made publicly available in accordance with the Bank’s Policy on Access to 
Information. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DATE OF CURRENT COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY 
July 8, 2008 

GOVERNMENT FISCAL YEAR 
January 1— December 31 
CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS 

(Exchange Rate Effective as of April 11, 2011) 

Currency Unit = Burundi Franc (FBu) 
US$1.00 = 1,210 FBU 

ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS 

AAA Analytical and Advisory Activities 
ADC Democratic Alliance for Change 
AfDB African Development Bank 
ART Antiretroviral Treatment 
BCB Banque de Crédit de Bujumbura 
CAS Country Assistance Strategy 
CAS PR CAS Progress Report 
CEM Country Economic Memorandum 
CPPR Country Portfolio Performance Review 
CSOs 
Civil Society Organizations 
DFID 
Department for International Development (United 
Kingdom) 
DRR Demobilization, Reinsertion, and Reintegration 
DSA 
Debt Sustainability Assessment 
EAC 
East Africa Community 
ECF Extended Credit Facility 
ESP Education Sector Plan 
EFA-FTI Education for All – Fast Track Initiative 
ERSG Economic Reform Support Grant 
ESW Economic and Sector Work 
EU European Union 
FBu Burundi Franc 
FDI Foreign Direct Investment 
FNL-
National Liberation Front – Party for the Liberation of the 
PALIPEHU
Hutu People 
TU 
FY Fiscal Year 
GAC Governance and Anti-Corruption 
GAVI Global Alliance for Vaccines and Immunizations 
GDP Gross Domestic Product 
GFRP 
Global Food Crisis Response Program 
GNI 
Gross National Income 
GTZ German Agency for Technical Cooperation 
HIPC Highly Indebted Poor Countries (Initiative) 
HIV/AIDS Human Immunodeficiency Virus/Acquired Immune 
Deficiency Syndrome 
Information and Communications Technology 
International Development Association 
Independent Evaluation Group 
International Fund for Agricultural Development 
International Finance Corporation 
International Monetary Fund 

ICT 
IDA 
IEG 
IFAD 
IFC 
IMF 

ISN 
Interim Strategy Note 
ITEKA Burundian League of the Humans Rights  
MDGs Millennium Development Goals 
MDRI Multilateral Debt Relief Initiative 
MDRP Multicountry Demobilization and Reintegration Program 
for the Great Lakes 
MOU Memorandum of Understanding 
MIGA Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency 
MTEF Medium-term Expenditure Framework 
NGO Non-Governmental Organization 
NPV Net Present Value 
ODA Official Development Assistance 
OLUCOM
Anti-corruption and Economic Malpractice Observatory  
E 
OTRACO Office des Transports en Commun 
PBA Performance Based Allocation 
PBF 
Performance-Based Financing 
PEMFAR 
Public Expenditure Management and Financial 
Accountability Review 
PER Public Expenditure Review 
PIU Project Implementation Unit 
PRSP Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper 
PSD Private Sector Development 
RBF Results Based Financing 
RRI Rapid Results Initiative 
SDR Special Drawing Right 
SME Small and medium enterprise 
SOSUMO Société Sucrière du Moso  
SOE State-Owned Enterprise 
SWAp Sector-Wide Approach 
TA Technical Assistance 
TFGIA Trade Finance Guarantee Insurance Agreement (IFC) 
UN United Nations 
UNDP United Nations Development Program 
UNFPA United Nations Population Fund 
UNICEF United Nations Children’s’ Fund 
US United States 
USAID United States Agency for International Development  
WBI World Bank Institute 
WHO World Health Organization 

Vice President: 
Country Director/Director: 
Country Manager: 
Task Team Leaders: 

IDA 
Obiageli Katryn Ezekwesili 
John Murray McIntire 
Mercy Tembon 
Mercy Tembon 
Johannes Widmann 

IFC 
Thierry Tanoh 
Jean Philippe Prosper 

Aida Kimemia 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY PROGRESS REPORT  
FOR THE REPUBLIC OF BURUNDI 

TABLE OF CONTENTS  

I. 
Introduction .......................................................................................................................................................... 1 
II. Context ................................................................................................................................................................. 1 
A. Political and Social Context ............................................................................................................................ 1 
B. Economic and Poverty Context ....................................................................................................................... 2 
III. Progress toward CAS Outcomes ........................................................................................................................... 4 
A. Progress on CAS Objective One: Promote Sustainable and Broad-Based Economic Growth ........................ 5 
B. Progress on CAS Objective Two: Improve Access to Social Services and Consolidate Social Stability ........ 6 
C. Progress on the Governance Objective ............................................................................................................ 9 
IV. Adjustments to the CAS and Progress in Implementation .................................................................................. 10 
V. Risks ................................................................................................................................................................... 13 

Tables:  

Table 1: Performance Indicators in Health and Education Sectors……………………………………………..……  9  

Annexes: 

Annex 1: Updated CAS Results Matrix ....................................................................................................................... 14 
Annex 2: Revised CAS Outcomes ............................................................................................................................... 19 
Annex 3: Division of Labor ......................................................................................................................................... 20 
Annex 4: Lending Program ......................................................................................................................................... 21 
Annex 5: Analytic and Advisory Activities ................................................................................................................. 22 
Annex 6: Selected Indicators of Portfolio Performance and Management .................................................................. 23 
Annex 7: IDA and Grants Operations Portfolio, Regional Projects and Trust Funds .................................................. 24 
Annex 8: IFC Operations Portfolio .............................................................................................................................. 25 
Annex 9: Burundi at a Glance ..................................................................................................................................... 26 
Map of Burundi: IBRD No. 33380………………………………………………………………………………… .29

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
BURUNDI 
COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY PROGRESS REPORT 

I. 

INTRODUCTION 

1. 
This report presents a midterm implementation assessment of the World Bank’s 
FY2009-12 Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) for Burundi.1  The CAS is aligned with 
priorities of the Government of Burundi’s Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (PRSP) (2006-2010).  
It assists Burundi’s transition from a post-conflict to a developing economy by selectively 
supporting the implementation of its development program.  The CAS has two strategic objectives: 
(i) to promote sustainable and broad-based economic growth and (ii) to improve access to social 
services and consolidate social stability.  Improving governance is a cross-cutting objective of the 
CAS.  The results framework of the CAS program is crafted around six outcomes: (a) increased 
productivity of food and high value export crops; (b) improved business environment; (c) improved 
infrastructural services and enhanced regional integration; (d) improved reintegration of ex-
combatants and vulnerable groups; (e) more efficient and transparent public financial management; 
and (f) improved access to and quality of basic services and decreased vulnerability to HIV/AIDS.  
Given the cross-cutting nature of governance, the CAS program envisages improved governance at 
the project, sector and macro levels.  

2. 
The objective of this CAS Progress Report (CAS PR) is to describe any changes in the 
country context, show progress toward CAS outcomes, signal remaining challenges and make 
any necessary adjustments to the Bank’s program.  Section II will provide an update on recent 
political, social and economic developments.  Section III will, together with the revised results 
framework presented in Annex 1, show progress on CAS outcomes and highlight any outstanding 
challenges for the rest of the CAS period and beyond.  A description of adjustments to the CAS 
program and a report on implementation progress is presented in section IV with the perspective of 
the pillars, foundation and instruments of the New Africa Strategy. Section V will provide an update 
to the risk framework. 

II. CONTEXT 

A. POLITICAL AND SOCIAL CONTEXT 

3. 
There has been mixed progress on both political and security fronts since finalization 
of the CAS in 2008.  Although the government and the FNL-PALIPEHUTU, the last remaining 
rebel group, had signed a cease-fire agreement in September 2006, sporadic fighting continued and 
it took two further years of negotiations to reach a cessation of hostilities.  In December 2008, the 
government and the FNL-PALIPEHUTU signed a power sharing agreement, and in January 2009 
the rebel group removed the ethnic connotation "PALIPEHUTU" from its name, making it 
constitutionally eligible to register as Burundi's 42nd political party following disarmament, 

1 The CAS (Report No. 44193-BI) is dated July 8, 2008 and was presented to the Board of Executive Directors on 
August 08, 2008.  

1 

 
 
 
 
 
                                                            
demobilization, and reintegration efforts.  These developments are historic milestones, although 
they have been accompanied by bouts of violence and insecurity. 

4. 
Burundi's second democratic elections in 2010 constituted a milestone in the country's 
political transition.  The second democratic elections under the new constitution since 2005 took 
place from May 24th to September 8th.  They tested the strength of the country's institutions and 
stability of its democracy.  The election process began with local councils, followed successively by 
presidential, parliamentary, and senatorial elections, and ending with hillside (local) elections.  
According to international observers, the elections conformed to international standards despite 
minor observed irregularities during the local council elections.  However, thirteen opposition 
parties, alleging fraud and vote-rigging, formed a coalition to boycott the presidential election, 
leaving President Nkurunziza to stand unopposed.  President Nkurunziza was therefore, in June, re-
elected for a second term, claiming 92 percent of the votes cast.  Three political parties, notably the 
Union pour le progress national (Uprona) and Front for Democracy in Burundi (FRODEBU) 
decided to contest the legislative elections, which took place in July, and are now represented in 
parliament.  

5. 
The security situation remains calm but uncertain.  The controversies over the election 
results sparked violence that sometimes led to loss of life.  The self exile of the FNL president and 
former rebel leader Rwasa Agathon along with other opposition leaders in the consortium of 
opposition parties, also known as the Democratic Alliance for Change (ADC), has created an 
atmosphere of uncertainty.  Although Rwasa has denied any intention to return to armed struggle, 
sporadic attacks on the population have continued.  There are reports of desertions of some officers 
from the armed forces with arms, and lingering rumors of a rebellion forming in the Kibira and 
Rukoko forests in the west of the country.  Although most of the country is at peace with sufficient 
security for economic and social activities, fear and skepticism still abound. 

6. 
Political anxiety is widespread, especially among opposition parties who boycotted the 
elections.  The ruling party holds an overwhelming majority in the government, parliament and 
senate.  Opposition parties allege an absence of inclusive political dialogue in public affairs and 
persecution of opposition political leaders.  Efforts by the ruling party to reach out to other 
opposition parties include appointments of opposition party members in government and convening 
meetings for political dialogue. 

B. ECONOMIC AND POVERTY CONTEXT 

7. 
The performance of some sectors of the economy has improved, but gross domestic 
product (GDP) growth has been lower than expected, while the country has experienced the 
impact of the economic crises.  In 2008, Burundi’s economy grew by 4.5 percent of GDP, owing 
to improved agriculture performance, an expansion of manufacturing and increased donor 
financing, and despite increases in fuel and food prices and energy shortages.  In 2009, Burundi 
experienced the impact of the global economic and financial crisis; economic growth slowed to 3.5 
percent, mainly because of lower than expected private transfers and foreign direct investment as 
well as continued energy shortages.  In 2010, however, as the economy is emerging from the effects 
of the global crisis, economic growth is estimated to rise to 3.9 percent.  Economic growth remains 
volatile due to its dependence on the widely fluctuating agricultural sector, which constitutes about 
half of GDP and employs approximately 90 percent of the population.   
2 

 
 
 
 
 
 
8. 
Inflation increased in the wake of the international food and fuel price crisis, but has 
subsequently decreased and is expected to remain in the single digits in the absence of new 
global shocks.  In 2008, inflation rose to 24.4 percent (period average) due to increases in food and 
fuel prices and to some extent depreciation of the currency.  In 2009, period average inflation 
decreased to 10.7 percent and declined further to 6.4 percent in 2010.  Due to higher international 
food and oil prices, inflation rates are expected to increase slightly in 2011. Nevertheless, inflation 
rates are expected to be contained in the single digits owing to government's commitments to 
macroeconomic policies, the continuation of reforms under the Extended Credit Facility (ECF) 
program with the IMF, as well as the absence of a twin food and oil crisis in the magnitude of the 
2008 crisis.   

9. 
Lack of diversity in exports, and reliance on oil and capital goods imports, continue to 
lead to consistent current account deficits.  In 2008, the current account deficit (including official 
transfers) improved to 12.3 percent (from 15.7 percent in 2007).  In 2009, however, the deficit 
increased again to 15.9 percent mainly due to lower donor assistance, which represents more than 
60 percent of net current transfers.  Even though Burundi’s trade balance improved in 2009, after 
the negative effects of higher food and fuel prices on the trade deficit in 2008, it still reflects the 
country’s narrow range of exports, which consists almost entirely of coffee and tea, and its 
dependence on imported oil and capital goods.  The external current account deficit is estimated to 
have declined to around 12 percent of GDP in 2010, because of higher exports and official transfers.  
Gross official reserves represented about 5.2 months of imports in the period 2008-2010. 

10. 
 The private sector’s contribution to growth remains limited.  Foreign direct investments 
(FDI)—representing less than one percent of GDP—remain low in Burundi, despite a significant 
improvement from US$0.5 million in 2007 to US$13.6 million in 2008, as a result of renewed 
involvement of foreign firms in the banking and telecommunication sectors.  However, in 2009, 
FDI is estimated to have declined slightly to US$10.2 million.  Domestic private investments 
remain at low levels of about 7.6 percent of GDP (on average in 2005-2008).   

11. 
Burundi’s external debt situation has improved, but remains vulnerable to debt 
distress due to the country’s narrow export base.  In January 2009, Burundi reached the Highly 
Indebted poor Countries (HIPC) completion point and was eligible for US$833 million (in net 
present value) in debt relief, including US$425 million from IDA and US$38 million from the IMF.  
The most recent Debt Sustainability Assessment (DSA) from July 2010 reveals that Burundi 
continues to face debt distress and recommends: (i) acceleration of structural reforms to increase 
and diversify the export base; and (ii) continued reliance on grants and highly concessional loans. 

12. Medium-term growth prospects supported by productivity improvements in the 
agriculture sector are favorable.  Growth is projected to rise from 3.9 percent in 2010 to reach 4.5 
percent in 2011 and average 4.9 percent in 2012-2013.  Under these projections, growth would be 
supported by productivity improvements in the agriculture sector (including coffee) and its linkages 
with the secondary sector (mostly agro-industry, mining and energy, and construction).  In addition, 
a renewed impetus in the service sector, including banking and telecommunications, within the East 
Africa Community (EAC) should have a positive effect on growth.  Finally, planned investments in 
the energy sector should relieve the economy from a significant constraint.  

13. 
The macroeconomic framework is expected to be stable and the current account deficit 
should improve.  Inflation is projected to decrease to about 7.0 percent in 2011-2013.  Despite the 
3 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
slow recovery of the global economy, the current account deficit will likely decline compared to its 
2009 level.  Following the liberalization reforms of main export crops, Burundi’s export earnings 
will increase, but higher international food and oil prices are expected to exacerbate the trade 
deficit.  As a result, the current account deficit will deteriorate to about 15 percent of GDP in 2011-
13 from 11.9 percent of GDP in 2010.  FDI is expected to continue to rise over the next couple of 
years to about US$12.8 million on average in 2010-2013 from US$10.2 million in 2009, due to the 
modest recovery of the world economy, as well as continued reforms of the investment climate and 
public finance.  Gross official reserves will average 5.4 months of imports in 2011-2013. 

14. 
Burundi’s poverty outlook remains daunting; the country continues to be unlikely to 
reach the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) by 2015.  Burundi’s GDP per capita remains 
very low, even though it increased from about US$147 in 2008 to US$178 in 2010 according to 
IMF estimates.  In 2010, Burundi ranked 167th of 169 countries on the UNDP Human Development 
Index.  The last measured poverty level for Burundi stood at about 67 percent in 2006, still far from 
the MDG target of 18 percent in 2015.  However, the country achieved progress on some key social 
indicators, such as maternal and child health, HIV/AIDS prevalence and in education enrollment.  

15. 
Burundi’s economic structure and geographic location continues to make the country 
vulnerable to various economic, political and climatic shocks.  First, as already discussed, 
economic growth depends mainly on the performance of the agriculture sector which is very 
sensitive to weather shocks.  Second, because Burundi is a net food importer and depends heavily 
on fuel imports, it is very susceptible to shocks in international markets.  Third, recurrent episodes 
of conflict have been a huge drag on growth in the past decades.  Given Burundi’s landlocked 
position, political problems in neighboring countries can have large negative impacts.  These 
shocks, especially when they are cumulative, can have large welfare consequences.  For instance, 
because households spend a large share of their income on food, an increase in food prices worsens 
poverty.  Internal and external conflicts drive prices even higher or delay the delivery of food and 
magnify the size of the welfare losses.  Moreover lack of adequate safety nets reduces the country’s 
ability to protect its population from shocks.       

16. 
Burundi is in the process of formulating its second PRSP expected to be finalized in 
mid-2011.  A comprehensive performance and impact assessment of the first PRSP has been 
prepared and informs ongoing consultations for the formulation of the second PRSP.  The new 
PRSP is not expected to deviate from the objectives set forth in the first PRSP, but rather build on 
the progress achieved and deepen the reform efforts put in place.  It will focus on increasing growth 
and employment opportunities though investments in: (i) agriculture; (ii) infrastructure (water, 
energy, roads, and ICT); (iii) private sector development; and (iv) tourism.  The current CAS 
continues to be in line with these objectives, and the new CAS will be designed based on the second 
PRSP.  

III. PROGRESS TOWARD CAS OUTCOMES 

17. 
Burundi’s progress toward CAS outcomes has been mixed.  Within the two CAS 
objectives (i) Promote sustainable and broad-based economic growth; and (ii) improve access to 
social services and consolidate social stability – there has generally been more progress under the 
second objective and major challenges remain to achieve more satisfactory outcomes under the first 
objective.  Among eleven outcome indicators under the first objective, three have been achieved 
4 

 
 
 
 
 
 
and six are on track albeit with much more work still needed; one indicator (energy) remains off 
track (the ICT progress indicator is not available).  While agriculture indicators progressed well 
with respect to food crops, export crops indicators have lacked behind and proved too ambitious. 
Business environment indicators were achieved even though a lot more needs to be done.  Roads 
and water remain on track, but energy outcome indicators are currently off track.  Among thirteen 
outcome indicators under the second objective, four have been achieved and five are well on track.  
Four indicators are currently off track.  Progress toward reintegration of ex-combatants and 
vulnerable groups is going well, even though one indicator on effective reintegration is currently off 
track.  In addition, there has been good progress on public finance management indicators.  
Excellent progress has been achieved toward meeting the CAS outcomes in health and HIV/AIDS.  
A total of three indicators are currently off track in the education sector, which continues to face 
major challenges further described below.   

18. 
The recent Performance and Impact Assessment of the Growth and Poverty Reduction 
Strategy Framework confirmed the good progress on key human development indicators, 
particularly in health, albeit with some shortcomings in education.  It emphasized the important 
challenges that remain on promoting the country’s economic transformation and increasing growth, 
especially of exports.   

A. PROGRESS ON CAS OBJECTIVE ONE: PROMOTE SUSTAINABLE AND BROAD-
BASED ECONOMIC GROWTH 

19. 

The CAS outcomes under Objective One are:  

1.1: 
1.2: 
1.3:  

Increased productivity of food and high-value export crops;  
Improved business environment; and 
Improved infrastructural services with enhanced regional integration. 

20. 
There has been progress in increasing productivity of food crops, but improving the 
productivity of export crops and increasing overall agriculture sector growth are key 
challenges.  While there have been noticeable improvements in the production and yields of rice, 
milk and oil palm, production of traditional export crops, such as tea and coffee, was either stagnant 
or declining.  As already outlined above, sluggish growth of the economy overall during the last 
years can be, among other factors, ascribed to limited progress in agriculture production, which 
resulted in weak agriculture growth of less than 3 percent from 2006-2009.  This also continuous to 
severely hamper any progress in poverty reduction given that about 90 percent of Burundians work 
in the agriculture sector.  Specific key challenges in this regard include the need to further improve 
the productivity of agriculture investments through adoption of agriculture technology aimed at 
increasing yields, and improved agriculture research and extension efforts, including the production 
of seed and the distribution of fertilizer.  Additional challenges include the need for further 
irrigation development and the rehabilitation of rural feeder roads.  Traditional export crops need to 
be modernized, but agriculture exports—just like the country’s economy overall—are also in a dire 
need for diversification.  Finally, an important challenge remains for increased private sector 
participation in commercial agriculture.  This challenge is evident in the CAS outcome indicator on 
a reduction in government ownership of coffee assets, which proved too ambitious and had to be 
revised.  One specific challenge includes the privatization of coffee washing stations. So far only 13 
out of the 117 washing stations have been privatized. 
5 

 
 
 
 
 
 
21. 
Progress in improving the business environment has been good according to the targets 
set forth in the CAS, but significant challenges remain in making Burundi a better place to do 
business.  Arrears to the private sector have been paid and there has been some progress in revising 
legislative codes (commerce, corporations, and investments) and improving collaboration between 
the public and the private sector.  While there has been significant contribution to this outcome from 
the Bank’s financing program, certain knowledge products had a significant impact as well.  For 
example, a 2009 report of the legal and institutional framework for privatization pointed out the 
weaknesses of the agency in charge of privatization and its lack of capacity in bringing about 
substantial improvements in the performance of the sector and to plan and monitor the privatization 
program envisaged by government.  In addition, the FY10 CEM recommended improvements in the 
regulatory environment to attract domestic and foreign investment.  Among other things it pointed 
out the need for the implementation of the investment code, the finalization of a revision to the tax 
code and the establishment of an export and investment promotion agency. Nevertheless, private 
sector activities remain severely hampered by institutional constraints and slow progress with 
respect to the development of the formal sector and the restructuring or privatization of public 
enterprises.  The country’s business climate continues to be uninviting, hampered by its small 
domestic market and landlocked position, but also a high cost of doing business, which is due to 
high energy and telecommunication costs and poor infrastructure.  According to the 2011 Doing 
Business report, the country ranks 181st (among 183 countries) in the world and much remains to be 
done to improve this situation.   

22. 
Progress on improving transport and water infrastructure has generally been good. 
The country made progress on the roll-out of ICT coverage, but important challenges remain 
with respect to energy generation and access as well as in sector governance.  Development of 
infrastructure in general remains a key growth impediment.  Given the landlocked position of 
Burundi, regional infrastructure continues to play a key role, but improved domestic infrastructure 
to improve market access from rural areas to urban centers, is also key.  In the transport sector, there 
has been good progress on road rehabilitation and notable efforts have been made to improve road 
maintenance for which domestic resources more than doubled between 2007 and 2010.  The paved 
road network in good and fair condition has improved from 21 percent of 1,100 km to 49 percent in 
the same period.  IDA contributions in the road sector complemented government’s contributions 
and resources by other partners, including the EU.  However, Burundi’s international transportation 
costs, representing 40 percent of the value of agriculture exports, remain exorbitant.  Internet access 
increased, as did the expansion of mobile phone services, thanks to the private sector.  The 
extremely weak levels of electricity generation – currently only about three percent of the 
population has access to electricity – remain a key constraint, calling for the mobilization of 
increased public and private investments.  Infrastructure sectors in general still lack comprehensive 
governance frameworks and exhibit the need to streamline and harmonize various efforts in 
building their regulatory capacity as a priority going forward. 

B. PROGRESS ON CAS OBJECTIVE TWO: IMPROVE ACCESS TO SOCIAL SERVICES 
AND CONSOLIDATE SOCIAL STABILITY 

23. 

The CAS outcomes under Objective Two are:  

2.1: 

Improved reintegration of ex-combatants and vulnerable groups;  
6 

 
 
 
 
 
 
2.2:  More efficient and transparent public financial management; and 
2.3:  
Improved access to and quality of basic social services and decreased vulnerability to 
HIV/AIDS. 

24. 
Demobilization of ex-combatants and reintegration of vulnerable groups has 
progressed well.  Since the 2008 peace agreement with the FNL to transform the rebel movement 
into a political party, the Government of Burundi moved forward with the final phase of 
demobilization, reinsertion and reintegration (DRR) and as a result over 6,500 FNL ex-combatants 
were demobilized.  The Government is now focusing on reintegration efforts for these ex-
combatants and the host communities. On the other hand, there has been slower than expected 
progress on the amount of returnees and displaced persons that have been effectively reinserted into 
their communities.  A key challenge remains the unemployment of ex-combatants.  While 
opportunities for labor-intensive public works jobs have been created by the Bank-financed public 
works program, it is important for the government to develop an environment conducive to private 
sector development so that more jobs will be created.  Partnerships have been a strong element of 
demobilization and reintegration activities in Burundi. The DRR project has brought together, on 
one level, collaboration between four bilateral donors and the Government of Burundi. The 
effective execution of activities has been realized through the engagement of 15 implementing 
partners representing a broad spectrum of civil society actors. These implementing agencies 
represent regional CSO’s working on the ground in Burundi, as well as specialized agencies 
working in the domain of medical service provision for disabled ex-combatants, as well as psycho-
social support services. DRR programming in Burundi is achieved by the successful management of 
partnerships at all levels. 

25. 
Important progress has been achieved in putting in place the framework and systems 
for more efficient and transparent public financial management, but the quality of public 
spending must be improved.  Significant progress was made in the enactment of the 2009 Budget 
Framework Law (Loi Organique).  In addition, there has been a modernization of the procurement 
code and a computerized financial management system has been extended to virtually all financial 
management and cash flows.  There has also been good progress on the development of central and 
sector medium-term expenditure frameworks (MTEF), even though there is still need for the central 
MTEF to be used to define the overall budget envelope and allow for inter-sector budget choices 
consistent with national priorities.  While the percentage of expenditures allocated to priority 
sectors increased laudably, from about 41 percent in 2005 to 55 percent in 2009, challenges remain 
with respect to improvements in budget planning process and the quality of public spending.  A mix 
of instruments contributed to progress under this outcome, including an economic management 
project and the development policy series, but most notably also various analytic work and technical 
assistance.  A Public Expenditure Financial Accountability report in FY09 recommended, among 
other things the development of an MTEF to improve budget planning as well the implementation 
of cash management plans.  Other knowledge products included a study on options for pay reform, 
the Financial Sector Advisory Program, a debt management performance assessment, as well as 
technical assistance for poverty monitoring and quantitative macro-fiscal framework.   A FY11 
Public Expenditure Review (PER) assessed the state of public expenditure in Burundi, with a focus 
on public investment, and recommended specific actions that need to be taken to stimulate growth 
and reduce poverty.  Another PER is planned for FY12 in addition to technical assistance that will 
aim at building capacity to extend the use of MTEFs across ministries.   

7 

 
 
 
 
 
26. 
Significant progress has been achieved in the health sector including a major and 
successful reform through the introduction of performance-based financing.  Significant efforts 
have been made to train general practitioners and nurses and increase capacity.  Government policy 
of free health care for pregnant women and children under the age of five has increased utilization 
rates.  The number of women giving birth in health facilities is increasing; maternal and child 
mortality rates have been declining albeit not significantly.  The introduction of performance 
contracts with health facilities with support from IDA financing has significantly improved the 
utilization and quality of services (including with regard to availability of essential drugs).  Burundi 
is now only the second country in Sub-Saharan Africa (after Rwanda) to have performance-based 
financing (PBF) for all public and private non-profit health facilities nationwide.  This is a major 
achievement that exemplifies positive changes in the health sector, including: (i) the creation of an 
internal market for PBF with IDA financing leveraging funding from other sources; (ii) successful 
innovative civil service reform in the health administration at all levels; (iii) introduction of 
innovative data management systems, which led to an advanced level of transparency and a 
different way of doing business.  Key challenges going forward will be to consolidate and enhance 
these gains in utilization and quality and to show progress in certain indicators and areas of the 
country where progress has been lagging. It will be important to continue to strengthen health 
systems, especially with respect to human resources but also regarding the systems for distributing 
and managing drugs and medical consumables, planning and budgeting, M&E, enhancing the 
autonomy of decentralized structures (e.g. health facilities) and addressing various inefficiencies in 
resource use.  

27. 
Combating HIV/AIDS has made steady progress with respect to several prevention 
and screening measures.  As of June 2010, 20,307 new HIV/AIDS patients out of a total 63,000 
patients (i.e. 37 percent) have been enrolled on antiretroviral treatment (ART); 8,758 out of almost 
16,900 HIV+ pregnant women (i.e. 52 percent) were receiving ART prophylaxis for the prevention 
of mother-to-child transmission.  IDA funding is highly complementary with funding from other 
partners, including UNAIDS.  Prevalence rates are declining overall.  Compared to 2002, the 2008 
National serological survey suggests that HIV/AIDS prevalence is stable in urban areas (from 4 
percent to 3.8 percent) but moderately increasing in rural areas (from 2.2 percent to 2.9 percent).  
The most important challenge will be to not become complacent, but continue to widen efforts, 
especially with respect to prevention measures. 

28. 
The education sector has trouble in providing quality education after the spectacular 
growth in enrollment since 2005 (Table 1).   Reintegration combined with the abolition of school 
fees resulted in gross enrollment growth from about 80 percent in 2005 to 134 percent in 2009.  In 
order to accommodate this increase, there has been an expansion in the number of classrooms, but 
key quality indicators such as completion rates, student-teacher or student-textbook ratios are 
improving at a much slower speed than expected by the CAS.  Burundi, however, did achieve 
gender parity in primary education.  A key short-term challenge will be for Burundi to join the 
Education for All – Fast Track Initiative (EFA-FTI).  One key obstacle for joining the EFA-FTI has 
been the absence of an endorsed Education Sector Plan (ESP).  The Government had prepared a 
plan in October 2009, but Development Partners did not endorse it for various reasons including its 
complexity.  In October 2010 a new policy of 9-years of Basic Education was introduced.  
Government is currently working on updating the ESP to accommodate the new policy.  A new plan 
is envisaged for November/December 2011, following which the ESP will be reviewed and 
endorsed by donors.  

8 

 
 
 
 
 
2005 

2006 

2007 

2008 

2009 

Table 1: Performance Indicators in Health and Education Sectors 
2000 

Health 
Births attended by skilled health staff (% of total) 

Under 5 mortality rate (per 1,000 live births) 
Infant mortality rate (under 1, per 1,000 live births) 
Maternal mortality ratio (modeled estimate, per 
100,000 live births) 
Maternal mortality ratio (GOB estimate, per 
100,000 live births) 
Person sick/injured during the last 4 weeks 
preceding surveys (%) 
HIV/AIDS 
Prevalence of HIV, total (% of population aged 15-
49) 
Education 
Primary completion rate (GOB, %) 
Net school enrollment, primary (GOB, %) 
Pupil-teacher ratio, primary (GOB, number)
Pupil-classroom ration (GOB, number)
Girl-boy ratio (GOB, number) 

177.6
107.3
1,200 

3.2(b) 

26.8 
44.0 

33.5(a)

176(a)
103.9 
1,100 

615 

170 
103.3 

168.7 
102.6 

29.9(e)

167.5 
101.9 
970 

620 

2.97(c) 

40.7 
82.6 

46 
84.6 

36.1 
69.8 
49
76.3
0.86

38.5 
72.4 
55
86.3
0.91

64.4(f)

166.3 
101.3 
970 

620 
23.4(f)

3.0(d) 

48 
89.7 
51.9
82.7
0.97 

Notes: (a) estimated by the GOB from the MICS-2005 survey; (b) figure estimated from the 2002 survey; (c) HIV sero-prevalence survey of 2007; 
(d) figure estimated in 2009 from a survey of 63,741 people (in the general population) conducted by Family Health International (FHI); (e) 
estimated from CWIQ-2006 survey; (f) estimated from the 2009 baseline Bank-funded health survey. Other data come from the World 
Development Indicators database. GOB stands for Government of Burundi. 

Source: Various sources assembled/calculated by World Bank staff. 

C. PROGRESS ON THE GOVERNANCE OBJECTIVE 

29. Governance is a cross-cutting objective under the CAS, and is addressed at three 
levels: (i) at the project level; (ii) at the sector level; and (iii) at the macro level.  At the project 
level, a recently completed Country Portfolio Performance Review (CPPR) concluded that financial 
management and procurement performance of the 14 projects in the portfolio has been generally 
satisfactory.  Burundi's portfolio has no current projects in problem status, compared to 28 percent 
on average for the Sub-Saharan Africa region. Remaining challenges include the need to: (i) 
strengthen internal audit capacity in technical ministries; and (ii) train procurement specialists in 
Project Implementation Units (PIUs) on procurement issues, such as (a) standardized procurement 
documents, (b) procurement software PROCYS, and (c) the preparation of bidding documents. At 
the sector level, the IDA-financed health project has introduced results-based financing to 
accompany the government's free health care policy for under 5 children and pregnant women at the 
time of delivery, helping to ensure that resources reach the intended beneficiaries.  In the 
infrastructure sectors there has generally been good progress on governance at the project level, but 
there is still a lack of more comprehensive governance frameworks at the sector level.  This 
includes the need to streamline and harmonize various efforts in building regulatory capacity in the 
sectors. 

30. 
At the macro level, progress includes: (i) the revision of the budget framework law, which 
has improved the transparency of public financial management; (ii) the revision of the procurement 
code to increase transparency; (iii) the establishment of the Financial Management Information 

9 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
System (SIGEFI) to improve the transparency of budget execution; and (iv) the computerization of 
payroll management, which was effectively introduced with the January 2011 payroll.  The 
introduction of the new software in payroll management has already started showing positive 
results: data entry mistakes have been reduced, resulting in savings of about US$18,000 in the wage 
bill of January 2011.  Other measures at the macro level that will be important to reduce corruption 
include the need to improve ethics and internal control, internal and external audit, forensic 
investigation and improved prosecution and sanctions.  

31. 
Strengthening governance and fighting corruption remain major challenges. The 
government has not yet finalized its Governance Strategy (First draft September 2009) which was 
expected to provide the framework and action plan for addressing governance issues.  The lack of 
consensus around governance reform priorities undermined the ability of government to approve the 
Governance Strategy prior to the September 2010 Presidential Elections.  Nevertheless, following 
the elections, the new administration has expressed a renewed commitment to encourage good 
governance and fight corruption, and has taken some steps towards finalization of the strategy—
including during a High Level Cabinet Seminar on governance in March 2011.  It is now envisaged 
that the strategy will be presented to the Council of Ministers for approval in May 2011.  
Furthermore, the Ministry in charge of Good Governance and Privatization, the anti-corruption 
Brigade and civil society organizations, such as the Burundian League of the Humans Rights 
(ITEKA) and the Anti-corruption and Economic Malpractice Observatory (OLUCOME), are 
collaborating to set up local committees of good governance.  There have been recent arrests of 
officials of public enterprises such as Société Sucrière du Moso (SOSUMO) and Office des 
Transports en Commun (OTRACO) accused of embezzlement.  However, high profile graft cases 
such as the sale of the presidential plane (2007) and Interpetrol (2006) remain unresolved.  The 
government has not recovered the US$42 million owed by petroleum companies, as identified by a 
petroleum sector audit.   

32. 
The Bank provides knowledge and technical assistance aimed at 
improving 
governance.  Three Policy Notes drawn from the findings of a FY10 Country Economic 
Memorandum (CEM) on (i) priority areas for economic growth, (ii) creating fiscal space for 
productive investment and (iii) improving governance for development effectiveness, served as the 
base document for discussion at the High Level Cabinet Seminar on governance held in March 
2011.  Technical Assistance from the World Bank Institute has provided support to the governance 
objective of the CAS, including through the Rapid Results Initiative (RRI) program that has helped 
to improve the provision of public services and enhance efficiency and accountability in public 
expenditure.  So far, 2,764 civil servants have been trained in RRI and 7 of 25 ministries are using 
the RRI method. 

IV. ADJUSTMENTS TO THE CAS AND PROGRESS IN 
IMPLEMENTATION 

33. 
Although the implementation period of the Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (PRSP 
2006-2010) supported by the CAS has just been completed, its development objectives remain 
relevant. The government has recently launched the preparation of a second generation PRSP 
(2011-2015). After stakeholder consultations, the objectives of the new strategy will remain similar 
given that the country’s economic and social challenges remain broadly the same. The new PRSP 
would focus more on the acceleration of economic growth (closing the infrastructure gap and 
10 

 
 
 
 
 
raising agricultural productivity and accelerating private sector development), while consolidating 
peace and security, improving governance and the rule of law and enhancing human capital 
development.  The strategy to promote sustainable and broad-based growth and to improve access 
to social services and consolidate social stability as laid out in the CAS therefore remains relevant.  
Furthermore, these new PRSP and CAS objectives are also aligned with the two pillars and the 
foundation of the new Africa strategy.  The instruments of partnerships, knowledge and finance also 
remain valid.  Therefore, no major changes to the CAS program are proposed.   

34. 
The Bank’s program in Burundi will continue to address vulnerability issues through a 
multi-sectoral approach.  Various Bank interventions, across different sectors, aim to address 
Burundi’s vulnerability to external shocks mentioned above.  For example, agriculture projects aim 
to increase food crops productivity, which will make the country less susceptible to rising 
international food prices.  At the same time, the projects also focus on making sure vulnerable 
groups are being effectively integrated into their communities by supporting them in their own 
agriculture activities.  These efforts synch directly with other projects that promote better and more 
equitable local service delivery together with projects that focus on demobilization of ex-
combatants and providing them with socio-economic integration.  Furthermore, the Bank’s program 
supports short-term employment through public works aimed at providing income and safety nets 
outside of agriculture.  These efforts are being complemented by transport projects with a focus on 
enhancing road maintenance that creates permanent jobs.  The Bank’s program will continue and 
further elaborate its multi-sector approach to vulnerability in the next CAS in conformity with the 
directions outlined in the World Development Report 2011.              

35. Overall delivery of planned projects has been on track, with slight adjustments to 
accommodate a few project delays.  The delivery of two regional projects (Lake Victoria Project 
and Rusumo Falls Project) that were planned in FY10 and FY11 respectively have been moved one 
year later.  They took a longer time to prepare than anticipated because of national capacity 
constraints in project preparation.  The regional transport project planned for FY11 has been slipped 
to the next CAS period (FY13-17) to allow time to identify a regional transport project that will 
involve Burundi, given that Burundi is not likely to be included in the proposed East Africa 
Transport Links Project (FY12).  To respond quickly to changing circumstances and the energy 
crisis, Crisis Response Window resources were used to finance an Emergency Electricity 
Infrastructure Project (US$15.4 million) in FY11.  In FY09, to respond to the impact of the twin 
crisis in fuel and food prices on the 2008 national budget (estimated at about 1.1 percent of GDP), 
the Bank granted Burundi with US$10 million under the Global Food Crisis Response (GFRP) 
program.  The impacts of the crisis were also mitigated by the authorities’ policies, such as revising 
the 2008 budget to include a number of measures, notably: (i) suspension of custom duties and 
domestic transaction taxes on 13 basic food items, (ii) sustaining and/or extending school feeding 
programs (including for girls) in primary schools of vulnerable provinces, and (iii) adding more 
resources to the budget for the emergency humanitarian relief to cope with a threat of famine in the 
country following the drought. 

36. 
The combination of development policy and investment lending grants has provided 
significant financial support to Burundi’s development program. The IDA portfolio currently 
has 13 projects with net commitments of US$414.5 million. Key sectors include: agriculture (22 
percent); water and energy (16 percent); roads (12 percent); private sector (11 percent); public 
works and urban (11 percent) and health and HIV/AIDS (10 percent). The portfolio has currently no 
problem projects and the implementation period averages 3.3 years (see Annex 6).  The portfolio 
11 

 
 
 
     
 
also includes three regional projects with a total (national and regional) IDA amount of US$40.4 
million of which US$21.4 million remain undisbursed (see Annex 7).  Projects planned for the rest 
of the CAS period include Lake Victoria Environmental Management Project (FY11), Fourth 
Economic Reform Support Grant (FY11), Financial and Private Sector Development -Additional 
Financing (FY11), Road Sector Development Additional Financing (FY11), Regional Rusumo Falls 
Hydroelectric and Multipurpose Project (FY12), Fifth Economic Reform Grant (FY12) and Public 
Works and Urban Management Additional Financing (FY12).  The government has asked the Bank 
to provide assistance to mitigate the impact of the recent increases in fuel prices and to improve its 
trunk road links with its EAC neighbors.  In addition, there is a possibility for additional financing 
of the results-based financing program for health due to the better-than-expected performance and 
rapid increase in utilization.  Taking into consideration Burundi’s IDA 16 allocation, the indicative 
lending program might need to be revised further.  

37. 
Trusts funds have complemented IDA resources for Burundi. There are currently 14 
trust funds with a total grant amount of US$32 million.  Only four trust funds exceed US$2 million, 
with the majority providing less than US$0.5 million.   

38. 
The Bank has played an active role in the aid effectiveness agenda.  In October 2009, the 
Bank chaired Burundi’s first Consultative Group at which Burundi presented progress on its first 
PRSP.  Over the past two years the Bank has chaired the sector working group on agriculture and on 
HIV/AIDS and has co-chaired the Strategic Forum for donor coordination, which serves as a forum 
for dialogue in the coordination of development aid and fosters alignment and harmonization of 
development partner programs and projects with the development priorities of the Government of 
Burundi.  In the health sector, IDA financing contributed to the creation of an internal market for 
the purchase of quality health services, which has currently ten fund holders.  Government’s own 
budget together with HIPC debt relief and IDA financing provide 70 percent.  The remaining fund 
holders include the European Commission, Belgium, Switzerland, the Global Fund, the Global 
Alliance for Vaccines and Immunization (GAVI) and others.  

39. 
The Bank also strengthened its working relations with civil society groups, the media 
and Parliamentarians during the CAS Implementation period. The Bank meets quarterly with 
civil society organizations to discuss issues related to the Bank’s analytic work, project design and 
implementation and key issues in policy dialogue.  The Bank has also offered training to journalists 
on how to report on economic and governance issues.  Parliamentarians have had a briefing on the 
World Bank project cycle and their role in ensuring efficient project implementation in their 
respective constituencies. This has also been useful in building confidence between citizens and the 
state and thereby facilitating the transition out of fragility.   

40. 
IFC investment in Burundi currently consists of one project of US$1.5 million.  The 
project is an equity participation in Diamond Trust Bank Burundi S.A., a greenfield subsidiary of 
Diamond Trust Bank Kenya Limited (DTB-Kenya).  The project is expected to have a high 
development impact in the following areas: (i) increasing credit availability to small- and medium- 
sized enterprises (SMEs); (ii) enhancing competition in the banking sector in Burundi; and (iii) 
expanding credit availability across all segments of the market.  IFC also recently approved a 
US$25 million senior loan to help upgrade and expand the telecommunications network of U-Com 
Burundi S.A. Commitment is expected in the coming weeks. In addition, IFC is considering a senior 
loan of US$6.4 million to Opulent (B) Limited to support the renovation and rebranding of the 
former Novotel hotel in Bujumbura, Burundi.  A Country Advisory Services (AS) strategy was 
12 

 
 
 
 
 
 
recently completed and identified access to finance, agribusiness, SME capacity building and 
privatization as areas for IFC AS focus.  The IFC Investment Climate Team, in cooperation with the 
IFC Conflict Affected States in Africa (CASA) program is currently helping the government to 
undertake a range of reforms in the areas of (i) Doing Business; (ii) business taxation; (iii) public-
private dialogue; (iv) support to the implementation of the East African Community Common 
Market Protocol and (v) reform communication. 

41. 
To improve the quality and realism of the CAS results matrix, some indicators have 
been updated.  Some indicators required updating, due to either: (i) indicators that are not being 
monitored by the program and for which there is no indication of progress; (ii) indicators that 
proved too ambitious and had to be revised; or (iii) a change in program delivery.  Annex 2 provides 
an overview of the updated CAS indicators. 

V. RISKS 

42. Most of the major risks identified in the FY 09-12 CAS are still valid.  Some of the risks 
have materialized in various degrees. Going forward, the Bank’s program will continue to support 
the government’s efforts to manage those risks and to reduce their impact. 

43. Macroeconomic stability will continue to be threatened by fiscal pressures.  The origins 
of those pressures include weak performance of agriculture, due to exogenous shocks including 
weather and fuel and food prices, and slow economic growth due to the global economy.  These 
might lead to the loss of revenue and a weakening of the debt sustainability position as well as 
insufficient investment in energy and infrastructure that drive growth.  The Bank will continue to 
support national investments in agriculture and infrastructure to maintain growth and thereby 
improve macro stability.  

44. 
The weak governance environment remains a risk to the CAS program. As already 
noted above, while there has been progress on the project level, important reform efforts are needed 
to improve governance in some sectors (e.g. infrastructure).  Reforms in public finance management 
and procurement supported by development policy grants and policy advice will help mitigate this 
risk.  The Bank will continue to support the governance strategy once it is finalized.   

45. 
Burundi’s political and security situation remains stable but fragile.  The insecurity 
level according to UN security sources has significantly decreased.  Movement throughout the 
country is relatively free and the implementation of development programs is not hampered.  On the 
political front, so far the Cabinet Ministers sworn in after the elections in September 2010 are still 
in office and there have been few changes in key technical team in ministries working on Bank-
financed projects.  Nevertheless there are fears that opposition leaders in exile might return and 
incite conflict, and ordinary criminality is high in much of the country. 

13 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annex 1: Updated CAS Results Matrix

FY11 Status 

- On track (4.5 tons/ha in 
2010) 
- On track (10 tons/ha in 
2010) 
- On track (6 l/cow/day in 
2010) 
- Achieved (3 tons/ha in 2010) 

- On track (13 coffee washing 
stations have been privatized 
in 2010) 

CAS Outcomes 
Milestones 
& Results Indicators 
CAS STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE I: PROMOTE SUSTAINABLE AND BROAD-BASED ECONOMIC GROWTH  
Aligned with PRSP Axis 2: Promotion of sustainable and broad-based growth 
1.1 Increased productivity of food 
Food crops 
crops and high-value export 
- Increase in area under irrigation from 300 ha in 2008 to 
crops  
1,225 ha by 2010. Achieved (1,475 ha of marshland in 
Food crops 
the project areas are currently under irrigation)  
- 
Irrigated rice: from 4.0 tons/ha 
- At least 10 new agricultural technologies 
(2008) to > 5.0 tons/ha by 2012 
developed/disseminated by 2010. Partially achieved (8 
- Cassava: from 10 tons/ha (2008) to 
had been disseminated by 2010) 
at least 18 tons/ha by 2012 
- At least 1,050 additional productive investment 
- Milk: from 5 l/cow/day (2008) 
subprojects (including for tea and coffee) implemented 
8l/cow/day by 2012 
by 2010 (from 2,345 in 2008 to 3,400 by 2010). 
- Palm oil: from 2.2 tons/ha  (2008) to 
Achieved (4,433 subprojects by 2010 of which 3,416 
3.0 tons/ha of oil by 2012 
have been implemented)   
Export crops 
Export crops 
- At least 30 (of 117) coffee washing 
- Action plan on divestiture in coffee sector implemented 
stations are sold to private investors 
by December 2009. Achieved (Action plan for state 
by 2012 (revised indicator)      
divestiture was adopted, including the establishment of 
the regulatory agency in mid-2009)  
- A clear time-bound strategy for state’s divestiture of key 
tea sector assets is available by December 2009. Not 
achieved (Tea sector reform has been delayed)  
Land Management 
- Increase in area of selected watershed under SLM 
practices from 3,000 ha in 2008 to 9,000 ha by 2010. 
Achieved (25,215 ha in 2010) 
- Land use plans developed and adopted for 8 provinces 
in 2010 up from 2 in 2008. Achieved (10 provinces in 
2011) 
- Tax payment process simplified by end of 2009. Not 
Achieved (Acquisition of tax software still underway) 
- Updated legal framework (investment code, commercial 
code, business and privatization laws) more transparent 
and in line with international standards by 2009. 
Achieved (Investment code and privatization law, 
commercial code and private and public business code 

1.2 Improved business environment  
- At least 70% of Government arrears 
to the private sector have been 
cleared by 2012 
- Commercial court cases where the 
delays in rendering  judgment is 
over 60 days reduced from 40% in 

- Achieved (All arrears to the 
private sector have been 
settled) 
- Achieved (Considerable 
reduction in delays of court 

World Bank and Partner 
Support 

Ongoing operations: 
 PRASAB: Agriculture 
Rehabilitation and Sustainable 
Land Management (FY05) and 
Additional Financing (FY08) 
 PAGE: Economic  
Management Support (FY04) 
Agro-Pastoral Productivity and 
Markets Development Project 
(FY10) 
Road Sector Development 
(FY04)    
ERSG DPL Series (Annual)  

Planned operations: 
ERSG DPL Series (Annual)  
Lake Victoria-regional 
(FY11) 

Ongoing/Planned AAA and 
TFs: 
Coffee Sector Strategic 
Environmental Assessment 

Main partners: USAID, FAO, 
EU, IFAD  

Ongoing operations: 
PAGE: Economic Management 
Support (FY04) 
Financial and Private Sector 
Development (FY10) 
ERSG DPL Series (Annual)  
Burundi Investment Climate 

14 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CAS Outcomes 
& Results Indicators 
2008 to below 25% in 2012 

FY11 Status 

cases to 10% of cases 
beyond the 60 day deadline 
by July 2009)  

1.3 Improved infrastructural 
services with enhanced regional 
integration  
Roads 
- 51% of paved road network in good 
and fair condition by 2012 (from 
21% in 2008) (revised indicator) 

- On track (49% of paved 
roads in good and fair 
conditions in 2010)  

Water 
- 363,200 people served with access 
to improved water in Bujumbura 
(with surroundings) in 2012, 
compared to185,000 in 2008  

- On track (218,874 in 2010)  

Milestones 

have been adopted) 
- Strategy to clear Government arrears to the private 
sector implemented. Achieved (Strategy has been 
implemented)  
- Computerized business registry operational by 2009.  
Not available  
- Priority organizational measures to speed up 
Commercial court proceedings adopted by 2009. 
Achieved (Measures have been adopted and court 
proceeding accelerated) 
- Action plan for improving the institutional capacity for 
public sector reform adopted by 2010. Achieved 
(Action plan was adopted) 
- Financial Sector Assessment completed and 
implementation of recommendations initiated by 2010. 
Achieved (Financial Sector Assessment has been 
completed)  
Roads 
- 240 kilometers of paved roads and 300 km earth roads 
(including rural access roads) rehabilitated by 2010. 
Partially Achieved (Achieved for paved roads; 154 km 
of earth roads by 2010) 
- National Road Fund Revenues increase from US$3.7 
million in 2007 to US$ 5 million in 2009. Achieved 
(US$7.5 million in 2010) 
- Increased Fuel Levy for road maintenance from 6 Cents 
in 2007 to 8 Cents by end-2009. Achieved (8 cents by 
end-2008) 
Water 
- Water production capacity in Bujumbura increased from 
66,000 (2008) to 96,000 m3/day in 2010. Not Achieved 
(there has been no progress on this indicator) 
- Functioning water stand posts in Bujumbura increased 
from 35 to 60 in 2010.  Achieved (The number of 
public stand posts increased from 35 to 65 using largely 
internal resources; an additional 85 stand posts are 
planned with works started in December 2010 financed 
by IDA) 

15 

World Bank and Partner 
Support 
Reform Program (IFC/WB) 

Planned operations:  
ERSG DPL Series (Annual)  

Main partners: 
US 

Ongoing operations: 
Road Sector Development 
(FY04) and Additional 
Financing (FY11) 
Multisectoral Water and 
Electricity infrastructure 
(FY08) 
Regional Communications 
Infrastructure Project (RCIP) 
(FY08) 
ERSG DPL Series (Annual)  

Planned operations: 
ERSG DPL Series (Annual)  
Rusumo Falls - regional 

Ongoing AAA and TFs: 
Tariff study on water and 
electricity (FY11) 

Planned AAA and TFs: 

 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CAS Outcomes 
& Results Indicators 

FY11 Status 

Milestones 

- Not available (no data for 
2010)  

- Off track (3,100 minutes in 
2010)  

Energy 
- Unplanned power interruptions 
reduced from 3,100 minutes of 
unplanned MV interruptions/quarter 
in 2007 to 2,000 in 2012 (revised 
indicator) 

Energy 
- Thermal generation capacity increased by 11 GWh/year 
from 2009, 2010.  Achieved (Target exceeded by 6.7 
GWh/year through a combination of IDA financing (9.9 
MWh/year) and other GoB resources (7.6 MWh/year ) 
through power purchase agreement with private 
operator) 
ICT 
ICT 
- Annual volume of international 
- Number of internet subscribers from 2,000 in 2007 to: 
Internet traffic from 250 (Mbit/s 
10,000 in 2010.  Not Achieved (4,652 subscribers in 
simplex) in 2007 to500 in 2011 
2010) 
CAS STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE II: IMPROVING ACCESS TO SOCIAL SERVICES AND CONSOLIDATION OF SOCIAL STABILITY 
Aligned with PRSP Axis 1: Improved Governance and Security; Axis 3: Development of Human Capital; Axis 4: Fight against HIV/AIDS 
2.1  Improved reintegration of ex-
- 90% of demobilized ex-combatants participate in 
Ongoing operations: 
combatants and vulnerable 
reintegration support programming within one year of 
Emergency Demobilization & 
groups reintegrated  
discharge. Achieved (about 95% received timely 
Transitional Reintegration 
reintegration support)  
Project (FY09)  
- All irregular armed groups in Burundi are dismantled 
Public Works and Urban 
by 2010. Achieved (achieved in 2009) 
Management (FY09) 
- At least 50% of the targeted Communes have integrated 
Agriculture Rehabilitation and 
the concerns of Vulnerable Groups in their Communal 
Sustainable Land Management 
Development Plans. Achieved (100% of communes 
(FY05) and Additional 
have plans) 
Financing (FY08)  
- Provision of counseling and juridical assistance to 
Community and Social 
vulnerable groups in Communes supported by the 
Development (FY07) 
PRADECs. Achieved 
Road Sector Development 
(FY04) and Additional 
Financing (FY11)   

- On track (242,000 in 2010; 
but 48,000 permanent jobs 
created by road 
maintenance) 

- Off track (40,000 in 2010) 

- On track (61% of 
beneficiaries in 2010) 

- 70% of beneficiaries (ex-
combatants) report being in a similar 
economic situation to that of their 
peers in the community (revised 
indicator) 
- 500,000 person-days short-term 
employment created through labor-
intensive public works by 2012 
(accumulative number) (revised 
indicator) 
- 120,000 returnees and displaced 
persons have been effectively 
reinserted into their communities 
(from zero in 2005) by 2012 
(revised indicator) 

World Bank and Partner 
Support 
Study on management of 
public stand posts (FY12) 

Main partners:  Germany, 
EU, AfDB, China, Belgium 

2.2    More efficient and transparent 
public financial management  
- Draft annual budget prepared on the 
basis of new Budget law and 

- On track (draft budget 
presented to the National 

- Up-to-date budget framework law with clear definitions 
of tasks and responsibilities of all involved entities by 
2009. Achieved (the 2009 budget has been developed 
based on the new organic law and since then is being 

16 

Planned AAA and TFs: 
Poverty Assessment (FY12) 

Main partners (DDR):  EU, 
Belgium, Netherlands, Norway 
Ongoing operations: 
PAGE: Economic Management 
Support (FY04) 
PARSEB: Education Sector 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CAS Outcomes 
& Results Indicators 
presented to National Assembly 3 
months before beginning of the 
fiscal year from 2009 onwards 

FY11 Status 

Assembly three months 
before the beginning of the 
fiscal year since 2009, albeit 
with some delays.) 

2.3   Improved access to and quality 
of basic social services and 
decreased vulnerability to 
HIV/AIDS 
Education  
- Increase in the primary completion 
rate from 40% in 2006/7 to 65% in 
2012 
- Increase in primary gross 
enrollment rate (GER) from 80% in 
2005/06 to 100% in 2010 (new 
indicator) 
- Improvement in student teacher 
ratio from 57:1 (2006/07) to 50 ( 
2012) 
- Textbooks per student in French & 
Kirundi increase from 3:1 in 2006 
to 1:1 in 2012 
- Reach parity in ratio of girls to boys 
in primary (%) (new indicator) 

- Off track (48% in 2010) 

-  Achieved (Primary GER 
134% in 2009)  

- Off track (52 in 2009) 

- Off track (3:1 in 2010) 

- Achieved (parity reached in 
2010) 

Milestones 
implemented in the sector ministries)  
- Public expenditure tracking surveys (PETS) in health, 
education and justice sectors and beneficiary 
assessments are finalized and published. Partially 
achieved (PETS and elements of action plans have 
been prepared) 
- SIGEFI includes functional models for calculation 
payroll and covers complete budgetary execution cycle 
by 2010. Partially achieved (SIGEFI is operational 
since December 2009, but wage bill is still captured by 
interim system)  
- Revised accounting and budgetary chart adopted by 
2010 
- Establishment of the procurement regulatory authority 
by end 2009. Achieved (New procurement code 
promulgated in February 2008; regulation agency and 
central procurement directorate established in July 
2008) 
Education 
- 420 classrooms built or rehabilitated by 2010. 
Achieved (431 classrooms built or rehabilitated) 
- 2,950 unqualified teachers trained by 2010. Not 
achieved (2,343 teachers trained by 2010) 
- 1.5 million primary level textbooks distributed by 2009. 
Nearly achieved (1.4 million textbooks by early 2010) 
- 940,000 lower secondary level textbooks distributed by 
2010. Not available (indicator not tracked)   
- Burundi joins the EFA-FTI by 2010. Not achieved 
(Evaluation and endorsement of EFA FTI sector plan 
envisaged for November/December 2011) 
- MINEDUC establishes targets for improvements in the 
equitable distribution of the teaching force between 
schools by 2010. Not achieved (Not yet established) 
- 40% of schools distribute de-worming tablets twice a 
year. Not available 
Child and Maternal Health 
- 40 general practitioners and 80 nurses trained in basic 
obstetric care and deployed in the country by 2010. 
Achieved (46 general practitioners and about 500 

17 

World Bank and Partner 
Support 
Recon. (FY07) 
Second Multi-Sector 
HIV/AIDS (FY08) 
Health Sector Development 
Support (FY09) 
ERSG DPL Series (Annual)  

Planned operations: 
ERSG DPL Series (Annual)  
Public Works Additional 
Financing 

Planned AAA and TFs: 
Annual PERs 

Main partners:  AfDB, EU, 
Belgium, France, IMF, 
Netherlands, Norway 
Ongoing operations: 
PARSEB: Education Sector 
Recon. (FY07) 
Second Multi-Sector 
HIV/AIDS (FY08)  
Health Sector Development 
Support (FY09) 
PRADEC: Community and 
Social Dev. (FY07) 
Regional Great Lakes Initiative 
on HIV/AIDS 
Multi-Sector Water and 
Electricity Infrastructure 
(FY08) 

Planned AAA and TFs: 
Poverty Assessment (FY12) 

Main partners: 
Belgium, EU, Japan, France, 
Switzerland, UK-DFID, 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CAS Outcomes 
& Results Indicators 

FY11 Status 

 Child and Maternal Health 
- % of children covered by 
DPT3/pentavalent 3 vaccine before 
reaching age one from 63% in 2005 
to at least 80% over the CAS period 
(revised indicator) 
- % of assisted births increase from 
37% in 2006 to at least 45% by 
2012 
- % of pregnant women with at least 
three ante-natal care visits increase 
from 20% to 40% by 2012 
HIV/AIDS 
- 20% of HIV-infected pregnant 
women receive complete PMTCT 
services  by 2012 (6% in 2008) 

- On track (87% in 2009) 

- Achieved (64% in 2009) 

- Achieved (57% in 2008) 

- On track (11% in 2009) 

Milestones 

nurses) 
- Performance contracts with health facilities in place to 
deliver the basic service package (including ante-natal 
care, child delivery and child vaccination) by 2010. 
Achieved (All public and private non-profit health 
facilities have signed performance contracts since April 
2010)  
HIV/AIDS 
- 70% of people most-at-risk populations who received 
an HIV/AIDS test in the last 12 months and came back 
for test result by 2010. Not available  
- Peer-to-peer education and behavioral change 
activities. Not available 
- 30% of health facilities offer HIV testing to all 
pregnant women by 2010. Partially achieved (20% in 
2010) 
- Public Sector Organizations include in their annual 
action plans or sector strategies HIV/AIDs related 
targets. Achieved (12 organizations in 2010) 

World Bank and Partner 
Support 
UNICEF, UNFPA, UNAIDS, 
UNFPA, OMS, Global Fund, 
UN   

18 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
Annex 2: Revised CAS Outcomes 

- Dropped. Indicator not tracked.  

- Revised. At least 30 (of 117) coffee washing stations are 
sold to private investors by 2012.   
- Dropped.  

Original CAS Outcomes and Indicators  
Revised CAS Outcomes and  Indicators 
CAS Outcome 1.1 Increased productivity of food crops and high-value export crops
Export crops 
- Reduction in Government ownership of coffee 
assets from 90% in 2008 to 40 % by 2012  
- First grade coffee: from 65 % 2008 of 
production to 80% by 2012 
- First quality tea: from 75% of production in 
2008 to 90% in 2012 
CAS Outcome 1.2 Improved business environment  
- Simplified small business tax reduces tax 
- Dropped. Indicator not tracked.  
complexity by consolidating at least 3 taxes into 
one 
CAS Outcome 1.3 Improved infrastructural services with enhanced regional integration   
- 30% of paved road network in good condition by 
- 51% of paved road network in good and fair condition by 
2012 (from 21% in 2008)  
2012 (from 21% in 2008)  
- 332,00 people served with access to potable 
- Updated. 363,200 people served with access to improved 
water in Bujumbura (with surroundings) in 2012, 
water in Bujumbura (with surroundings) in 2012, 
compared to185,000 in 2008  
compared to185,000 in 2008  
- Unplanned power interruptions reduced from 
- Updated. Unplanned power interruptions reduced from 
3,100 minutes of unplanned MV 
3,100 minutes of unplanned MV interruptions/quarter in 
interruptions/quarter in 2007 to 1,000 in 2012 
2007 to 2,000 in 2012 
CAS Outcome 2.1 Improved reintegration of ex-combatants and vulnerable groups integrated  
- 80% of former combatants supported by the 
- Revised. 70% of beneficiaries (ex-combatants) report 
program are able to access mainstream (regularly 
being in a similar economic situation to that of their peers 
available) employment and productive 
in the community  
opportunities 
- Increased job creation from public works 
programs to 120,000 man-months from 2009 
onwards 

- Updated. 500,000 person-days short-term employment 
created through labor-intensive public works by 2012 
(accumulative number) (revised indicator) 
- Updated. 120,000 returnees and displaced persons have 
been effectively reinserted into their communities (from 
zero in 2005) by 2012 

- 120,000 beneficiaries capable of producing seeds 
and restarting own agricultural activities by 
2012(from 71,810 in 2007) 
CAS Outcome 2.2 More efficient and transparent public financial management 
- Percent of expenditure authorized and executed 
- Dropped. No data available.  
by exceptional procedures below 1% from 2009 
onwards 
- Number of days from commitment to payment is 
reduced from 84 to 40 days by 2012 
CAS Outcome 2.3 Improved access to and quality of basic social services and decreased vulnerability to 
HIV/AIDS 
- Increase in primary gross enrollment rate (GER) 
from 80% in 2005/06 to 100% in 2010 
- Reach parity in ratio of girls to boys in primary 
(%) (new indicator) 
- % of children under 1 year fully immunized 
increase from 40% to at least 60% by 2012 

- Dropped. No data available. 

- New indicator.  

- New indicator. 

- Revised. % of children covered by DPT3/pentavalent 3 
vaccine before reaching age one from 63% in 2005 to at 
least 80% over the CAS period  
- Dropped. Indicator not tracked.  

- Every province has at least 2 general 
practitioners and 4 nurses trained in basic 
obstetrics (baseline information available) 
- 30% increase in female sex workers reporting 
use of a condom with their most recent client 
(baseline currently being established) 

- Dropped. No data available.  

19 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20 

W

o

r

l

B
d

n
a

k

u
E

r

n
a
e
p
o

o
C

m
m

i

s
s

i

n
o

D
A

f

B

I

F

D
A

B

g
e

l

i

u

m

F

r

n
a

c

e

U

S

D
A

I

D

F

I

D

N

e

t

e
h

r

l

d
n
a

s

G

e

r

m

n
a

y

S

w

i

t

z

e

r

l

d
n
a

N

o

r

w

y
a

U

n

i

t

d
e

N

a

t

i

n
o

s

Agriculture 

L 

X 

X 

L 

X 

L 

X 

Economic Governance 

X 

L 

X 

X 

X 

Education 

X 

L 

X 

L 

L 

Energy 

L 

X 

X 

X 

Environment / Forestry /Land 

X 

L 

X 

X 

Health (incl. HIV/AIDS) 

X 

X 

L 

X 

L 

X 

X 

Housing development 

X 

X 

ICT 

L 

Macroeconomics 

L 

L 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

Peace building ‐ Justice, Human 
Rights, Reconciliation 

X 

X 

L 

Private Sector Development 

X 

L 

X 

Public Administration / Capacity 
Building 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

Regional Integration 

X 

X 

X 

L 

X 

Reintegration / Community 
Development 

L 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

L 

Security Sector  

L 

X 

X 

L 

X 

DDR 

L 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

Transport 

L 

L 

X 

Water and Sanitation 

X 

X 

L 

L 

L :  Lead donor or key player 

 X :  Complementing other donors

Annex 3: Division of Labor 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annex 4: Lending Program 

Orig inal CAS Program

Fis cal 
Year

2009

2010

2011

Economic Refo rm Suppo rt Gran t II
Health Secto r Suppo rt
Second Pub lic W o rks and Urban Managemen t
Emergency Demob ilizat ion and Tran s it ional Rein teg rat ion Pro ject
Total
Economic Suppo rt Refo rm Gran t III
Ag ricu ltu re (Ag ro -Pas to ral Product iv ity and Markets 
Developmen t Pro ject)
Pub lic En terp ris e and Financial Secto r (Financial & Private Secto r 
Developmen t Pro ject)
(Reg ional) Lake Victo ria Env ironmen t Managemen t
Total
Developmen t Po licy Operat ion (ERSG IV)
Add it ional Financing : Roads
(Reg ional) Trans po rt
(Reg ional) Hyd ropower (Rus umo Falls Hyd roelectric and 
Mu lt ipu rpos e Pro ject)

Total
IDA 15 Total
Developmen t Po licy Operat ion (ERSG V)
Add it ional Financing : Second Pub lic W o rks

2012

Total

Note: The FY12 IDA envelope is indicative only.

Orig inal IDA 
Amount 
(US $ mi l l ion)

                       30.0 
                       25.0 
                       45.0 
                       10.0 
                    110 .0 
                       25.0 
                       43.0 

                       16.0 

                         5.0 
                      89 .0 
                       25.0 
                       20.0 
                       15.0 
                       10.0 

                      70 .0 
                    269 .0 
                       25.0 
                       15.0 

                      40 .0 

Add it ional Planned
 Emergency Electric In fras tructu re Pro ject 
 Add it ional Financing - Financial and Private 
Secto r Developmen t Pro ject 
 (Reg ional) Lake Victo ria Env ironmen t 
Managemen t 

Add it ional Planned
(Reg ional) Hyd ropower (Ru s umo Falls 
Hyd roelectric and Mu lt ipu rpo s e Pro ject)

21 

Revis ed Program

A ctual
A ctual
A ctual
A ctual

A ctual
A ctual

A ctual

S l ipped to FY11

A ctual
Planned
S l ipped
S l ipped to FY12

Revis ed IDA Amount 
(US $ mi l l ion)
National Reg ional CRW

         30.0 
         25.0 
         45.0 
         10.0 
     110 .0 
         25.0 
         43.0 

             -  
             -  
             -  
             -  
             -  
             -  
             -  

      -  
      -  
      -  
      -  
      -  
      -  
      -  

         19.0 

             -  

      -  

      -  
        87 .0 
             -         -  
         25.0              -         -  
         19.0             -  
      -  
            -  
      -  

             -    15.4 

A ctual
Planned

Planned

             -  
           8.0 

           5.0 

Planned (Augu st 2011 )
Planned (March 2012 )

        57 .0 
             -   15 .4 
     254 .0 
             -   15 .4 
         25.0              -         -  
         15.0              -         -  
       -  

Planned (March 2012 )

         27.0 

        67 .0 

             -  

 
 
 
   
Annex 5: Analytic and Advisory Activities

Fis cal Year
2009

Analytic and Advis ory Activities by CAS Theme 

Financial Secto r A s s es smen t Prog ram (ESW )
Pub lic Expend itu re Financial A ccoun tab ility - PEFA (ESW )
Poverty & PRSP TA BPRP 2 (TA )
Legal and in s t itu t ional framewo rk fo r p rivat izat ion (TA )
Op t ion fo r pay refo rm (TA )
Petro leum Secto r Techn ical Adv ice (TA )

Coun try Economic Memo randum (Co re ESW )
Deb t Managemen t Perfo rmance A s s es smen t (ESW )
GAC Strategy Developmen t (TA )
TA fo r Poverty Mon ito ring (TA )
Quan t itat ive Macro -Fis cal Framewo rk (TA )
Rev iew o f Poverty Reduct ion and Tran s po rt Strateg ies (TA )
Inves tmen t Climate Refo rm Prog ram (WB/IFC Adv is o ry )

Pub lic Expend itu re Rev iew (ESW )
Co ffee Secto r Strateg ic Env ironmen tal A s s es smen t (TA )
Inves tmen t Climate Refo rm Prog ram (WB/IFC Adv is o ry )

2010

2011

2012

Poverty A s s es smen t (Co re ESW )
Pub lic Expend itu re Rev iew (ESW )
Extend ing Med ium Term Expend itu re Framewo rks (MTEF) Capacity Bu ild ing (TA )
Inves tmen t Climate Refo rm Prog ram (WB/IFC Adv is o ry )

TA T echnical Assist ance
ESW Economic and Sect or Work

22 

 
 
 
 
 
Annex 6: Selected Indicators of Portfolio Performance and Management

As Of Date 3/24 /2011

Indica tor
Portfol io Assessment
Number of Projec ts Under Implementat ion a
Average Implementat ion Period (years ) b
Percent of Problem Projec ts by Number a, c
Percent of Problem Projec ts by Amount a, c
Percent of Projec ts at Risk by Number a, d
Percent of Projec ts at Risk by Amount a, d
Disbursement Rat io (% ) e
Portfol io M anagement
CPPR during the year (yes /no)
Supervis ion Resources (total US$)
Average Supervis ion (US$/projec t)

Memora ndum Item

Proj Eval by OED by Number
Proj Eval by OED by Amt (US$ millions )
% of OED Projec ts Rated U or HU by Number
% of OED Projec ts Rated U or HU by Amt

2008

9
3.3
0.0
0.0
11.1
15.7
27.1

Yes
1107
79

2009

10
2.8
10.0
14.6
20.0
29.6
20.9

No
913
57

2010

12
3.3
16.7
16.3
16.7
16.3
26.8

No
1328
89

2011

13
3.3
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
25.4

Yes
698
50

Since FY 80 La st Five FYs

50
937.5
30.0
30.3

5
205.0
20.0
12.6

a.  As shown in the Annual Report on Port folio Performance (except for current FY).
b.  Average age of projec ts in the Bank 's country port folio.
c .  Percent of projec ts rated U or HU on development objec t ives (DO) and/or implementat ion progress (IP)
d.  As defined under the Port folio Improvement Program.
e.  Rat io of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank 's port folio at the 
     beginning of the year: Inves tment projec ts only .
*   A ll indicators are for projec ts ac t ive in the Portfolio, with the except ion of Disbursement Rat io,
    which inc ludes all ac t ive projec ts as well as projec ts which ex ited during the fiscal year.
** 2011 data is as of March 24, 2011

23 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annex 7: IDA and Grants Operations Portfolio, Regional Projects and Trust Funds   

As Of Date 3/23/2011

Closed Projects

59

IBRD/IDA *

Total Disbursed (A c tive)
of w hich has been repaid
Total Disbursed (Closed)
of w hich has been repaid
Total Disbursed (A c tive+Closed)
of w hich has been repaid

Total Undisbursed (A c tive)
Total Undisbursed (Closed)
Total Undisbursed (A c tive+Closed)

Act ive Pr o je cts

 225.93
 0.00
 385.28
 103.28
 611.21
 103.28

 188.52
 0.00
 188.52

Pr o je ct ID

Pr o je ct Nam e

P064558
P095211
P078627
P064557
P122217
P107851
P101160
P097974
P064876
P109964
P113506
P112998
P107343
Ove r all Re s u lt
Re g ional Pr o je cts
P080413
P094103
P103298
Ove r all Re s u lt
Trus t Funds
TF053661
TF094010
TF094469
TF095007
TF095638
TF096384
TF096411
TF096439
TF096921
TF096986
TF097438
TF098380
TF098638
TF098669
Ove r all Re s u lt

BI-A gr Rehab & Sus tain Land Mgmt (FY 05)
BI-Community and Soc ial Dvpt  SIL (FY 06)
BI-Econ Mgmt Supt SIL (FY 04)
BI-Educ . Sec tor Recons tr . (FY 07)
BI-Emergency Elec t. Inf ras t. Projec t
BI-Finance & Pr ivate Sec tor Development
BI-Health Projec t (FY 09)
BI-Multisec toral Water & Elec tr ic ity Inf
BI-Road Sec Dev SIM (FY 04)
BI-Second HIV /A IDS MAP (FY 08)
BI: Emerg Demob and Trans itional Reint.
BI:Public Works and Urban Management
BI-A g. Pas t. Produc t. & Market Devel.

Las t PSR 
Supe r vis ion Rat ing
De ve lopm e nt 
Im plem e ntat ion 
Ob je ct ive s
Progr e s s
S
S
MS
MS
S
S
MS
MS
S
S
S
S
S
MS
MS
MS
S
S
MS
S
S
S
MS
MS
S
S

3A -HIV /A IDS Great Lakes Init APL (FY 05)
3A -Telecommunications A PL (FY 07)
3A -Lake V ic tor ia Phase II APL1 (FY 09)

U
MS
MS

MS
MS
MU

GEF3 FSP BI-A gr icultural Rehabilitation and Sus tainable Land Management Projec t
Salary Expenditure f or International and Local ETCS
GAV I Proposal f or A f r ica HSS Work in Burundi
A r tisanal and Small-Scale Mining in Burundi
FIRST #9012 Burundi: Development of Financ ial Sec tor Strategy
Emergenc y Demobilization and Trans itional Reintegration Projec t-Bank executed por tion
Emergenc y Demobilization and Trans itional Reintegration Projec t-Trus t Fund adminis tration
Emergenc y Demobilization and Trans itional Reintegration Projec t-Rec ipient executed por tion
Ex tending capac ity building ef f or ts f or Sec tor Medium Term Expenditure Framew orks
GAV I Proposal f or A f r ica HSS Work in Burundi
IDF: Capac ity building f or the use of sec toral Medium Term Expenditure Framew orks
Pover ty and Soc ial Impac t A naly s is f or Results Based Financ ing in Health in Burundi
BI-HRBF Res truc tur ing
BI-Four th Economic Ref orm Suppor t Grant

Diffe r e nce Be tw e e n
Expe cte d and Actual
Dis bur s em e nts
Frm 
Re v'd
0.7

Or ig .

-14.3
-0.1
4.2
4.1

3.2
-2.1
2.7
-23.7
0.8

3.1

2.9

-33.4

3.5

Fis cal Ye ar

IDA

Cance l.

Und is b .

5.0

50.0
1.5
40.0
12.3
26.0
5.9
20.0
4.7
15.4
15.7
19.0
16.3
25.0
15.1
50.0
32.5
51.4
3.4
15.0
2.7
15.0
2.1
45.0
35.1
43.0
41.1
414.8
5.0
188.5
Re g ional IDA  Nat ional IDA Total Und is b.
20.0
n/a
0
13.4
6.7
17.9
7.0
n/a
3.5
40.4
6.7
21.35
Gr ant Am ount
Und is b .
5.0
4.9
2.4
0.6
0.2
0.2
0.1
0.1
0.3
0.2
0.8
0.2
0.1
0.0
12.5
3.0
0.2
0.0
0.2
0.2
0.4
0.0
0.1
0.0
0.3
0.0
9.5
0.0
32.0
9.4

2005
2007
2004
2007
2011
2010
2009
2008
2004
2008
2009
2009
2010

2005
2007
2009

24 

 
 
 
Annex 8: IFC Operations Portfolio  

2008

2009

2010

2011*

Origina l Comm itments (US$m)
IFC and Part ic ipants
IFC's Own Accounts only

2.88
2.88

Origina l Comm itments by Se ctor (%)- IFC Accounts only
FINANCE & INSURANCE
Tota l

0

100
100

0.03
0.03

100
100

Origina l Comm itments by Inve stment Instrument (%) - IFC Accounts only
Equity
27.99
Guarantee
72.01
Tota l
100

100
100

0

0.66
0.66

100
100

100

100

* Data as of March 01,2011

Burundi
Comm itte d and Disbursed Outstanding Inve stment Portfol io
As of 2/28/2011
(In USD Mi l l ions)

Comm itte d

Disbursed Outsta nding

FY 
Approva l

Compa ny

Loan

Equity

**Qua si 
Equity *GT/RM

Pa rtici 
pant

Loan Equity

**Qua si 
Equity *GT/RM

Pa rtici 
pant

2009/11

Dtb burundi

Tota l Portfol io:

0

0

1.51

1.51

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

1.51

1.51

0

0

0

0

0

0

* Denotes Guarantee and Risk Management Produc ts .
** Quas i Equity inc ludes both loan and equity types .

25 

 
 
 
 
 
  
26 

Annex 9: Burundi at a Glance 

Burundi at a glance

2/25/11

Sub-
Saharan
A f ric a

K e y D e v e lo pm e n t Ind ic a t o r s

Lo w
inc o m e

B urundi

( 2 0 0 9 )

P o pulat io n, m id-year (m illio ns )
Surfac e area (t ho us and s q. km )
P o pulat io n gro wth (%)
Urban po pulat io n (% o f to tal po pulat io n)

8.3
28
2.8
11

819
24,242
2.5
36

828
17,838
2.2
28

GN I (A t las metho d, US$ billio ns )
GN I per c apita (A t las m et ho d, US$ )
GN I per c apita (P P P , internat io nal $ )

1.2
150
390

897
1,095
1,981

389
470
1,131

GDP gro wth (%)
GDP per capita gro wth (%)

3.5
0.6

5.2
2.7

6.2
3.9

( m o s t r e c e n t e s t im a t e , 2 0 0 3 – 2 0 0 8 )

P o vert y headc o unt rat io at $ 1.25 a day (P P P , %)
P o vert y headc o unt rat io at $ 2.00 a day (P P P , %)
Life expec tanc y at birth (years )
Infant m o rtalit y (per 1,000 liv e births )
C hild m alnut rit io n (% o f c hildren under 5)

81
93
50
101
..

51
73
52
83
25

..
..
57
77
28

A dult lit erac y, m ale (% o f ages 15 and o lder)
A dult lit erac y, f em ale (% o f ages 15 and o lder)
Gro s s primary enro llm ent , m ale (% o f age gro up)
Gro s s primary enro llm ent , fem ale (% o f age gro up)

72
60
139
132

72
54
105
95

73
59
107
100

A c ces s to an im pro ved water s o urc e (% o f po pulat io n)
A c ces s to im pro v ed s anitat io n fac ilit ies (% o f po pulat io n)

72
46

60
31

64
35

N e t A id F lo ws

19 8 0

19 9 0

2 0 0 0

2 0 0 9 a

(US$ m illio ns )
N et ODA and o f f ic ial aid
T o p 3 do no rs (in 2007):
   Euro pean C o mm is s io n
   B elgium
   N etherlands

116

263

93

509

12
28
1

36
40
1

9
6
4

85
58
32

A id (% o f GN I)
A id per capita (US$ )

12.6
28

23.5
46

12.9
14

43.7
63

L o ng - T e rm E c o no m i c T r e n ds

C o ns um er prices (annual % c hange)
GDP im plic it def lato r (annual % c hange)

9.5
16.4

7.0
6.0

24.3
13.2

5.0
13.6

Exc hange rate (annual av erage, lo c al per US$ )
T erm s o f t rade index (2000 = 100)

90.0
225

171.3
148

720.7
100

1,230.2
108

19 8 0 – 9 0 19 9 0 – 2 0 0 0
2 0 0 0 – 0 9
      (average annual gro wth %)
3.2
1.3
4.4
-2.9

P o pulat io n, m id-year (m illio ns )
GDP (US$ m illio ns )

4.1
920

5.7
1,132
  (% o f GDP )
55.9
19.0
12.9
25.2

6.5
709

8.3
1,325

2.8
3.0

A gric ulture
Indus t ry
   M anufac turing
Serv ic es

62.2
12.6
7.4
25.1

40.4
18.8
8.7
40.8

34.8
20.0
8.8
45.1

3.1
4.5
5.7
5.6

-1.9
-4.3
-8.7
-2.8

-1.5
-6.2

..

10.4

H o us eho ld f inal co ns um pt io n expenditure
General go v ' t f inal c o nsum pt io n expenditure
Gro s s c apital f o rm at io n 

91.4
9.2
13.9

94.5
10.8
14.5

88.5
17.5
6.1

91.1
28.8
16.4

3.4
3.2
6.9

-4.8
-2.6
-0.5

..
..
..

Expo rt s o f go o ds and serv ic es
Impo rt s o f go o ds and serv ic es
Gro s s s av ings

8.8
23.3
..

7.9
27.8
-5.4

7.8
19.9
0.5

10.7
47.0
1.3

3.4
1.5

-1.2
-1.6

..
..

N o te: F igures in italic s are fo r years o ther than tho s e s pec if ied. 2009 data are prelim inary.  .. indic ates data are no t available.
a. A id dat a are fo r 2008.

D evelo pm ent Ec o no m ic s , D ev elo pm ent D at a Gro up (DECDG).

10

5

0

5

10

0-4

15-19

30-34

45-49

60-64

75-79

per cent of total population

Age d i str ib u tio n , 2009

Male

Female

0

50

100

150

200

1990

1995

2000

2008

Burundi

Sub-Saharan A fri c a

Un der -5 mo r tal i ty r ate (per 1,000)

-10

-5

0

5

10

95

05

GDP

GDP per c api ta

Growth o f GDP and GDP per cap i ta (%)

 
 
 
 
 
27 

Burundi

B a l a n c e o f P a ym e n t s a nd T r a d e

2 0 0 0

2 0 0 9

(US$ m illio ns )
T o t al m erc handis e expo rt s (f o b)
T o t al m erc handis e im po rt s (c if )
N et t rade in go o ds and s erv ic es

49
127
-96

56
234
-223

C urrent ac c o unt balanc e
   as a % o f GDP

-50
-7.0

-68
-5.9

Wo rkers ' rem it tanc es and
   c o mpens at io n o f em plo yees (rec eipt s )

..

28

R es erv es , inc luding go ld

..

..

C e n t r a l G o v e rnm e n t F in a n c e

(% o f GDP )
C urrent rev enue (inc luding grant s )
   T ax rev enue
C urrent expendit ure

19.2
18.3
18.8

30.7
17.8
19.2

T e c hno lo g y a nd In f r a s t ru c t u re

2 0 0 0

2 0 0 8

Ov erall s urplus / def ic it

-1.8

-10.4

P av ed ro ads (% o f t o t al)
F ixed line and mo bile pho ne
  s ubsc ribers (per 100 peo ple)
H igh tec hno lo gy expo rt s
  (% o f m anuf ac t ured expo rt s )

7.1

10.4

H ighes t m arginal t ax rat e (%)
   Indiv idual
   C o rpo rat e

..
..

..
..

1

6

0.0

7.7

E xt e rn a l D e b t a nd R e s o u r c e F lo ws

E n v i ro nm e n t

(US$ m illio ns )
T o t al debt o ut s t anding and dis burs ed
T o t al debt s erv ic e
D ebt relief (H IP C , M DR I)

1,108
22
964

518
19
70

A gricult ural land (% o f land area)
F o res t area (% o f land area)
T erres t rial pro t ec t ed areas (% o f s urf ac e area)

88
7.7
..

89
5.2
5.6

T o t al debt (% o f GDP )
T o t al debt s erv ic e (% o f expo rt s )

156.3
39.0

39.1
21.7

F res hwat er res o urc es per c apit a (c u. m et ers )
F res hwat er wit hdrawal (billio n c ubic met ers )

1,487
0.3

1,246
..

F o reign direc t inv es tm ent (net inf lo ws )
P o rt fo lio equit y (net inf lo ws )

12
0

10
0

CO2 em is s io ns per c apit a (m t )

0.05

0.02

GDP per unit o f energy use
   (2005 P P P $ per k g o f o il equiv alent )

..

..

Energy us e per capit a (k g o f o il equivalent )

..

..

 Wo r ld B a n k G ro up po r t f o l io

2 0 0 0

2 0 0 9

 (US$ m illio ns )

 IB RD
   T o t al debt o uts t anding and dis bursed
   D is burs em ents
   P rinc ipal repaym ent s
   Int eres t paym ent s

0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0

 IDA
   T o t al debt o uts t anding and dis bursed
   D is burs em ents
   T o t al debt s erv ic e

600
36
13

147
9
1

P r i v a t e S e c t o r D e v e lo pm e n t

2 0 0 0

2 0 0 9

T im e required to s t art a bus ines s (days )
C o s t t o s t art a bus ines s (% o f GN I per c apit a)
T im e required to regis t er pro pert y (days )

–
–
–

32
151.6
94

 IFC (f is c al year)
   T o t al dis burs ed and o ut s t anding po rt f o lio
      o f whic h IFC o wn ac c o unt
   D is burs em ents f o r IFC o wn ac c o unt
   P o rt f o lio s ales , prepayment s and
      repaym ent s fo r IFC o wn ac c o unt

0
0
0

1
1
1

R anked as a majo r c o ns t raint t o bus ines s
   (% o f m anagers s urv eyed who agreed)
      Elec t ric it y
      A cc es s t o / co s t o f f inanc ing

2 0 0 0

2 0 0 9

0

0

..
..

40.7
16.0

 M IGA
   Gro s s expo s ure
   N ew guarant ees

0
0

0
0

St o ck m ark et capit alizat io n (% o f GDP )
B ank c apit al t o as s et rat io (%)

..
..

..
..

N o t e: F igures in it alic s are f o r years o t her t han t ho s e s pec if ied.  2009 dat a are prelim inary.
.. indic at es dat a are no t available.  – indic at es o bs erv at io n is no t applic able.

2/ 25/11

D ev elo pm ent Ec o no m ic s , D ev elo pm ent D at a Gro up (DECDG).

0

25

50

75

100

Control of cor ruption

Rule of law

Reg ulatory q ual i ty

Pol i tical stabi l i ty

Voice and accountabi l ity

Country' s percenti le rank (0-100)

hi gher v al ues impl y better ratings

2009
2000

Go vernan ce ind i cato r s, 2000 and 2009

Sourc e: Kaufmann-K raay -Mas truzzi , W orl d Bank

IBRD, 0

IDA , 147

IMF, 91

Other mul ti -
l ateral , 175

B i l ateral , 98

P ri v ate, 0

Short-term, 7

Composi tion o f to tal extern al d eb t, 2009

US$ m i l lions

 
 
 
Mi l lennium Deve lopment Goa ls

Burundi

With se lected targe ts to ach ieve b etween 1990 and  2015

(es t imate c lo s es t t o dat e sho wn, +/ - 2 years )  

B u run d i

G o a l 1: ha l v e t h e ra t e s f o r e xt re m e p o v e r t y a n d m a ln u t r i t io n
   P o v ert y headc o unt rat io at $ 1.25 a day (P P P , % o f po pulat io n)   
   P o v ert y headc o unt rat io at nat io nal po v ert y line (% o f po pulat io n)   
   Share o f inc o m e o r co ns umpt io n t o t he po o res t qunit ile (%)  
   P rev alenc e o f malnut rit io n (% o f c hildren under 5)   

G o a l 2 : e ns u re t h a t c h i ld re n a re a b le t o c o m p l e t e p r im a ry s c h o o l ing
   P rimary sc ho o l enro llm ent (net , %)
   P rimary co mplet io n rat e (% o f relevant age gro up)   
   Sec o ndary s c ho o l enro llm ent (gro s s , %)   
   Yo ut h lit erac y rat e (% o f peo ple ages 15-24)

G o a l 3 : e l im ina t e ge n de r d i s p a r i t y in e d uc a t io n a nd e m p o we r wo m e n
   R at io o f girls t o bo ys in primary and s ec o ndary educat io n (%)   
   Wo men em plo yed in the no nagric ultural s ec t o r (% o f no nagricult ural emplo yment )   
   P ro po rt io n o f seats held by wo m en in nat io nal parliament (%)   

G o a l 4 : re d uc e un de r - 5 m o r t a l i t y b y t wo - t h i rd s
   Under-5 mo rt ality rat e (per 1,000)   
   Infant mo rt ality rat e (per 1,000 liv e birt hs )   
   M eas les imm unizat io n (pro po rt io n o f o ne-year o lds immunized, %)

G o a l 5 : re d uc e m a t e rna l m o r t a l i t y by t h re e - f o u r t hs
   M aternal m o rt alit y rat io (mo deled es t imat e, per 100,000 liv e birt hs )   
   B irths at t ended by s k illed health s t af f (% o f t o t al)   
   C o nt rac ept iv e prev alenc e (% o f wo men ages 15-49)   

19 9 0
84.2
36.4
7.9

..

..
41
5
..

79
14
..

189
114
74

1,200
..
..

G o a l 6 : ha l t a nd b e g in t o re v e rs e t he s p r e a d o f H IV / A ID S a n d o t he r m a jo r d i s e a s e s
   P rev alenc e o f H IV (% o f po pulat io n ages 15-49)   
1.7
   Inc idenc e o f tuberc ulo s is (per 100,000 peo ple)   
150
   Tuberc ulo s is c as e det ec t io n rat e (%, all f o rm s )
52

G o a l 7 : ha l v e t h e p ro po r t io n o f pe o p le wi t ho u t s us t a in a b l e a c c e s s t o b a s i c ne e ds
   A c ces s to an impro ved wat er s o urce (% o f po pulat io n)
   A c ces s to impro v ed s anitat io n f ac ilit ies (% o f po pulat io n)
   Fo res t area (% o f t o t al land area)   
   Terres t rial pro t ec t ed areas (% o f s urf ac e area)
   CO2 em is s io ns (met ric t o ns per c apita)   
   GDP per unit o f energy us e (c o ns t ant 2005 P P P $ per k g o f o il equiv alent )   

70
44
11.3
..
0.1
..

G o a l 8 : de v e lo p a g lo b a l pa r t ne rs h ip f o r de v e lo pm e n t   
   Telepho ne m ainlines (per 100 peo ple)   
   M o bile pho ne subs c ribers (per 100 peo ple)
   Internet us ers (per 100 peo ple)   
   P ers o nal c o m put ers (per 100 peo ple)   

0.1
0.0
0.0
..

19 9 5
..
..
..
..

50
53
7

80

..

..
..

184
111
80

1,200
..
..

5.2
220
24

71
45
9.5
..
0.1
..

0.3
0.0
0.0
..

2 0 0 0
86.4
68.0
5.1
38.9

2 0 0 8
81.3

..

9.0

..

43
25
..
73

..
..
6

178
107
76

1,200
25
16

3.8
320
28

72
45
7.7
..
0.0
..

0.3
0.3
0.1
0.1

85
45
18
76

91
..
31

168
102
84

970
34
9

3.0
360
24

72
46
5.2
5.6
0.0

..

0.4
6.0
0.8
0.9

Edu catio n ind i cato r s (%)

Measles immu n i zatio n (% o f 1-year 
o lds)

ICT ind i cato r s (p er 100 peop le)

125

100

75

50

25

0

2000

2002

2004

2006

2008

P rimary net enrol lment rati o

100

75

50

25

0

8

6

4

2

0

1990

1995

2000

2008

2000

2002

2004

2006

2008

Rati o of gi rl s to boy s i n primary & s ec ondary 
educ ati on

Burundi

Sub-Saharan A fri c a

Fi x ed + mobi l e s ubs c ri bers
Internet us ers

N o te: F igures in italic s are f o r years o t her t han t ho s e s pec if ied.  .. indicat es data are no t av ailable.

2/25/11

D ev elo pment Ec o no m ics , D ev elo pment D at a Gro up (DECDG).

28 

 
 
 
Mt. Heha
Mt. Heha
Mt. Heha
(2,670 m)
(2,670 m)
(2,670 m)

Most distant
Most distant
Most distant
headwater of
headwater of
headwater of
the Nile River
the Nile River
the Nile River

CIBITOKE
CIBITOKE
CIBITOKE

NGOZI
NGOZI
NGOZI

KAKAYYANZAANZA
KAYANZA

BUBANZA
BUBANZA
BUBANZA

KARUZI
KARUZI
KARUZI

KIRUNDO
KIRUNDO
KIRUNDO

MUYINGA
MUYINGA
MUYINGA

CANKUZO
CANKUZO
CANKUZO

RUYIGI
RUYIGI
RUYIGI

GITEGA
GITEGA
GITEGA

MWARO
MWMWAROARO

RUTANA
RUTRUTANAANA

BURURI
BURURI
BURURI

MAKAMBA
MAKAMBA
MAKAMBA

MM UU
M U

RR
R

AA MM VV
A M V

YY
Y

AA
A

BB UUJJUU MMBBUURRAA
B UJU MBURA

Nyanza-Lac
Nyanza-Lac
Nyanza-Lac

Rumonge
Rumonge
Rumonge

Mabanda
Mabanda
Mabanda

Matana
Matana
Matana

Bukirasazi
Bukirasazi
Bukirasazi

Mutangaro
Mutangaro
Mutangaro

Rusiba
Rusiba
Rusiba
Musada
Musada
Musada

Buhiga
Buhiga
Buhiga

Bururi
Bururi
Bururi

Mwaro
MwaroMwaro

Gitega
GitegaGitega

Muramvya
Muramvya
Muramvya

Bubanza
Bubanza
Bubanza

Kayanza
Kayanza
Kayanza

Ngozi
Ngozi
Ngozi

Cibitoke
Cibitoke
Cibitoke

Ruyiga
Ruyiga
Ruyiga

Cankuzo
Cankuzo
Cankuzo

Karuzi
Karuzi
Karuzi

Muyinga
Muyinga
Muyinga

Kirundo
Kirundo
Kirundo

Rutana
Rutana
Rutana

Makamba
Makamba
Makamba

BUJUMBURA
BUJUMBURA
BUJUMBURA

DEM . RE P.
O F CONGO

RWA N D A

TA N Z A N I A

K a nyaru

Rusizi

Rumpungu

Kagera

Ruvuvu

Ruvuvu

Ruvuvu

u
L

vir

z
n
o

a

Mw e r

u s i

M u r a

g

a r a zi

Lake
Tanganyika

Lake
Kivu

Lake
Cohoha

Lake
Rweru

To 
Kasulu

To 
Uvira

To 
Kibondo

To 
Kakonko

To 
Nyakanura

To 
Rulenge

To 
Kigali

To 
Gitarama

To 
Butare

To 
Cyangugu

29°E

29°E

30°E

30°E

31°E

31°E

4°S

4°S

3°S

3°S

BURUNDI

This map was produced by the Map Design Unit of The World Bank.  
The boundaries, colors, denominations and any other information
shown on this map do not imply, on the part of The World Bank
Group, any judgment on the legal status of any territory, or any
endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.

0

10

20

30

0

10

20

30 Miles

40 Kilometers

IBRD 33380

SEPTEMBER 2004

B U R U N D I

SELECTED CITIES AND TOWNS

PROVINCE CAPITALS

NATIONAL CAPITAL

RIVERS

MAIN ROADS

PROVINCE BOUNDARIES

INTERNATIONAL BOUNDARIES

