d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

Document of 
The World Bank 
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 

Report No. 59966-MU 

THE INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND 
DEVELOPMENT 

INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION 

MULTILATERAL INVESTMENT GUARANTEE AGENCY 

COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY PROGRESS REPORT 

FOR 

THE REPUBLIC OF MAURITIUS 

April 11, 2011 

South Indian Ocean Country Department 4 
Africa Region 

International Finance Corporation 
Sub-Saharan Africa Department 

Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency 
Sub-Saharan Africa Department 

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance of 
their official duties.  Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without World Bank authorization. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS 
Date of last CPS discussion: November 2, 2006 

CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS 
(Currency Unit: Mauritius Rupee (MUR) 
US$1.00 = MUR 31 (as at March 8, 2010) 

WEIGHTS AND MEASURES 
Metric System 

FISCAL YEAR 
January 1 - December 31 

ABREVIATION AND ACRONYMS 

AAA 
Analytical and Advisor Activities 
ADB 
Asia Development Bank 
AfDB 
African Development Bank 
AFD 
Agency Française de Développement 
CEM 
Country Economic Memorandum 
CPE 
Certificate of Primary Education 
CPS 
Country Partnership Strategy 
DDO 
Deferred Drawdown Option 
DPL 
Development Policy Loan 
EAP 
Eradication of Absolute Poverty Program 
EC 
European Commission 
EIB 
European Investment Bank 
EPZ 
Economic Processing Zone 
ESW 
Economic Sector Work 
EU 
European Union 
ERCP 
Economic Restructuring and Competitiveness Program 
EDF 
European Development Fund 
FDI 
Foreign Direct Investment 
FSAP 
Financial Sector Assessment Program 
GDP 
Gross Domestic Product 
GEF 
Global Environment Fund 
GoM 
Government of Mauritius 
ICA 
Investment Climate Assessment 
ICAC 
Independent Commission Against Corruption 
ICT 
Information and Communication Technology 
IDF 
Institutional Development Fund 
IFC 
International Finance Corporation 
IMF 
International Monetary Fund 
IPLC 
International Private Leased Circuit 
METAP Mauritius Economic Transition Technical Assistance Project 
MFA 
Multi-Fiber Agreement 
MIC 
Middle Income Country 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MTEF Medium Term Expenditure Framework  
NEF 
National Empowerment Foundation 
PBB 
Program Based Budgeting 
PER 
Public Expenditure Review 
PIM 
Public Investment Management 
PPP 
Public Private Partnerships 
RMCE Regional Multidisciplinary Center of Excellence 
SADC 
Southern Africa Development Community 
SME 
Small and Medium Enterprise 
OECD      
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development 
UNDP United National Development Program 
WBG World Bank Group 
VAT 
Value Added Tax 

Vice President 
Acting Country Director 
Task Team Leader 

         IBRD 
 Obiageli K. Ezekwesili  
 Constantine Chikosi 
 Constantine Chikosi 

IFC 
      Thierry Tanoh 
      Jean-Philippe Prosper 

MIGA 
Izumi Kobayashi 

This Progress Report benefited from contributions from the Mauritius Country Team, including 
Jacques Morisset, Juan Gaviria, William Wiseman, Asya Akhlaque, Rafael Moreno, Sawkut Rojid, 
Khoudijah Maudarbocus-Boodoo, Andrew Asibey, Eugenia Marinova and Katy Roffe.   

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Country Partnership Strategy Progress Report for the Republic of Mauritius 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 

I.  
II.  

Introduction. .............................................................................................................1 
Country Context .......................................................................................................1 
          The Successful Adjustment to the “triple trade shock’ of the past decade ... 1 
                      The Impact of the Global Crisis and the Euro Crisis .....................................3 
                      The Policy Response and the Economic Outlook ..........................………..  4 
III.  
The Bank’s Role and Program .................................................................................8 
IV.  Going Forward .......................................................................................................12 

Annexes: 
Annex 1  
Revised Results Matrix 
Annex A1 
Key Economic and Program Indicators 
Annex A2  Mauritius at a Glance  
Annex B2  
Selected Indicators of Portfolio Performance and Management 
Annex B3  
IBRD/IDA Program Summary 
Annex B4  
IFC Investment Operations Program  
Annex B5  
Summary of Non-lending Services 
Annex B8  Operations Portfolio (IBRD/IDA) 
Annex B8  
IFC Committed and Disbursed Outstanding Investment Portfolio  
Annex B10  CAS Summary of Development Priorities 

Tables: 
Table1:  

Boxes: 
Box1:  
Box 2:   
Box 3:  

Preliminary macro projections, 2010-15 

Downsizing Mauritius’ Sugar and Textile Production 
The causes of Mauritius’ Skills Mismatch Problem  
The 2011 Budget 

        16 
        21 
        22 
        25 
        26 
        37 
        38 
        39 
        30 
        31 

        7 

          2 
          3 
          6 

Map:  IBRD 33446 

 
 
 
 
 
          
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
 
 
 
 
 
COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY PROGRESS REPORT 
FOR THE REPUBLIC OF MAURITIUS 

I.  Introduction 

1. 
In November 2006, the Executive Directors discussed the Country Partnership 
Strategy (CPS) that would guide the relationship between the Government of Mauritius 
(GoM) and the World Bank Group (WBG) through 2013. The CPS, jointly developed 
with the GoM and the European Commission (EC), provided a flexible framework within 
which the relationship could evolve over time based on country demand, WBG 
comparative advantage and changes in the global environment.  

2. 
This Progress Report provides an update on recent developments in Mauritius 
including the impact of the global economic recession and reports on progress in 
implementing the CPS. The CPS was structured around the Government’s four pillars of 
reform: fiscal consolidation and improving public sector efficiency; improving trade 
competitiveness; improving investment climate; and democratizing the economy through 
participation, inclusion and sustainability. While the objectives of the CPS remain 
relevant and aligned to the country’s development agenda the programs have been 
adjusted to respond to the changing global environment. The Progress Report provides 
the context and rationale for the proposed WBG program for the remainder of the CPS 
period which has been extended to FY15 to align with the elections.  

II.  Country Context 

The successful adjustment to the ‘triple trade shock’ of the past decade 

3. 
Mauritius has achieved remarkable success since its independence in 1968, 
with one of the highest per capita incomes in Africa.  Between 1968 and 2009 GDP 
per capita grew from US$260 to more than US$6,000. Underpinning this performance 
have been macroeconomic and political stability, robust institutions, an efficient 
administration, a favorable regulatory environment, a well developed financial system, 
and preferential market access for sugar and textile exports. In the mid 1990s a new 
vision began taking shape in Mauritius of a higher value added, more diversified, skill 
and knowledge 
intensive economy 
through 
investment 
in human capital and 
infrastructure, and making use of advanced technologies and reform the regulatory 
environment to harness the creativity of the private sector.  Yet little was achieved in 
these areas during the decade that followed, perhaps in part because of the continuing 
successful growth of sugar and textiles exports to the protected EU market. 

4. 
In the middle of the current decade Mauritius experienced a triple trade 
shock with reduced preferences and lower prices for its sugar and textile exports 
(see Box 1) and higher prices for its petroleum imports.  The Government enacted a 
major restructuring of the tax and incentive systems to promote the diversification 
of the economy.  It also instituted an Empowerment Program to ensure inclusive growth 
with equity and a Maurice Ile Durable initiative to promote sustainable development and 
contribute to combating climate change.  A central revenue authority was established, and 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
a public debt law was enacted that stipulated reducing public debt to 50 percent of GDP 
by 2013 from its peak of 80 percent in 2003.  

Box 1: Downsizing Mauritius’ sugar and textile production in the face of external shocks 

Over the years Mauritius has been heavily dependent on first sugar and then textile production as the 
major sources of export earnings. These exports grew rapidly as a consequence of the protected EU 
market for sugar, and the Multi-Fiber Agreement (MFA) for textiles allowing Mauritius duty-free 
access to the EU and US markets.  Sugar was 30 percent of GDP in the seventies. It is now down to 3 
percent. Considerable restructuring has taken place.  Production has shifted from raw sugar to white 
sugar, energy from bagasse, and rum. The number of sugar mills has been reduced from 22 to 6 and 
will eventually reduce to 4. In addition there has been a great deal of mechanization of sugar cane 
growing and harvesting, though this is limited by Mauritius’ hilly terrain.  Mauritius still gets double 
the world price for its sugar exports to the EU– the reduction so far is from triple the world price, i.e. 
one-third. The question for the future is how rapidly the EU will reduce its tariff (Mauritius is treated 
in the same way as domestic EU producers for a quota it shares with other external suppliers.) The 
Brazilian producer price is 7 cents a kg – the Mauritian producer price is 16 cents a kg.  The objective 
is to reduce this to 11 cents. The textile issue is also difficult, given the number of female workers 
employed in textiles and the difficulty of shifting them to other kinds of employment. There has been 
some diversification of textile output and a shift in production to higher quality and value addition.  A 
special public private group is assessing each textile producer. Mauritius still has duty free access to 
the EU and US market.   EU tariffs are 12 percent on average and US are 16 percent. 

5. 
These reforms had considerable success in achieving an acceleration of the 
rate of growth, reduction in unemployment and speeding up the pace of 
diversification of the economy through the development of new sectors.    

• Tourism is the most important economic success – arrivals nearly reached 1 
million in 2008.      
• Real Estate has become an increasingly important source of foreign exchange and 
stimulus for the construction sector in recent years.  
• Financial services have become an increasingly important foreign exchange 
earner, with Mauritius emerging as a potential regional hub for East Africa. 1

6. 
This was supported by a rapid increase in Foreign Direct Investment (FDI), 
helping to diversify the economy.  In 2005 Mauritius received only Rs2.5bn of FDI.   In 
the past five years it has received Rs50bn.   

7. 
Growth reached 6.5 percent in 2007/08.  The overall fiscal deficit was lowered to 
3.4 percent of GDP in 2007/08 from 5.4 percent in 2005/06, while public sector debt was 
reduced to about 60 percent in June 2008 from close to 70 percent in June 2005.  Net 
employment creation was over 8,000 jobs a year in 2007 and 2008, compared to 3,000 in 
2005.    

8. With rapid growth, human resources and infrastructure emerged as 
important constraints to sustaining the 2006 to 2008 growth surge. The ‘skills 

1 Mauritius is taking advantage of double taxation agreements with India and China that have induced 
investors in those countries to channel their investment via Mauritius – spurring a fast growing offshore 
finance sector. 

2 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
 
mismatch’ remains an important constraint to future growth. As explained in Box 2, 
Mauritius’ education, training and incentive systems do not adequately address the needs 
of a rapidly growing, technologically advanced society. Infrastructure is also emerging as 
an important constraint, particularly the transport system. While Mauritius has 
outperformed most African countries on the Doing Business Index, it has not fared well 
in the Logistics Performance Survey. In 2010 Mauritius under-performed in the Global 
Logistics Survey in three aspects - infrastructure, logistics competence, and tracking and 
tracing. Mauritius is confronted with serious infrastructure bottlenecks and poor logistics 
performance both of which are not at par with its upper middle income status. In 
particular this is a deterrent if Mauritius is to attract globally competitive industries.  The 
traffic congestion around the capital Port Louis and on Mauritius’ single freeway 
connecting the capital to the East and West coasts, are raising costs for business.   In 
recognition of this, a large program of transport investment is planned to provide much 
quicker and more efficient connections within the island.   In addition port infrastructure 
is being upgraded and new investments in electricity generation and sewage systems are 
planned.    

Box 2: The causes of Mauritius ‘skills mismatch problem’ 

Mauritius has a very traditional education system with strict standards for completion of primary 
education.  Thirty six percent of students are unable to pass the primary school certificate and in the 
process a considerable pool of potential skills is lost.   In addition the numbers who reach tertiary 
education are relatively small due to very high entrance requirements.   Efforts are being made to 
provide remedial services and opportunities for those left behind by the system, but the rigid 
approach of very high entry standards at each level has resisted efforts at change. There is a sizeable 
brain drain out of Mauritius.  Young people want to study abroad, but most (70 percent) do not 
return. As a consequence the technical skills needed in areas such as ICT as well as managerial skills 
for SME development, are very thin on the ground. As part of the reform package, Mauritius eased 
restrictions on importing labor.  With some exceptions workers from abroad who are paid US$1,000 
a month or more receive an automatic work permit.  Another difficult problem is the shortage of 
unskilled labor in areas such as construction where Mauritians have been unwilling to take jobs in the 
sector.  This is compounded by the fact that women figure disproportionately among Mauritius’ 
unemployed.  This is being partly dealt with by importing labor and there are ongoing efforts also to 
provide training for more specialized functions in the construction sector, such as painting or 
carpentry.    

The Impact of the Global Crisis and the Euro Crisis 

9. 
The Mauritian economy proved quite resilient to the global economic crisis 
but growth has slowed down to levels below the long term average and recovery 
may be slow.  Growth was 3.1 percent in 2009 and although it rebounded to an estimated 
4 percent in 2010, very close to the long run average of 5 percent, estimates for 2011 and 
2012 suggest growth at 3.5 to 3.7 percent with a projected level of 4 percent thereafter if 
current estimates of fairly low rates of long term growth in the EU market prove correct.   

10. 
The leading drivers of the slowdown have been trade in goods and services 
and FDI inflows.   Between 1990 and 2007 Mauritian exports of goods and services 
fluctuated at around 60 percent of GDP. Because of the crisis however, this fell to 52 
percent in 2008 and is estimated to have declined further to 42 percent in 2009.  Tourism 
receipts fell by 13.4 percent and arrivals fell by 6.4 percent in 2009 compared to the 
previous year. In 2009, the VAT declined by about Rs1b. or about 8 percent and the share 

3 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
    
 
of tourism fell to 20 percent.  Faltering external demand for textile exports has created 
heightened uncertainty in the sector. In 2007 following successful restructuring in the 
context of the phasing out of preferences, the sector had grown by 8.5 percent.   There 
was zero growth in 2008 and a 4 percent decline in 2009. Decreased liquidity in 
international capital markets and negative prospects for demand contributed to zero 
growth in FDI inflows in 2008 and a decline of 26 percent in 2009.  

11. 
The fiscal outlook deteriorated during 2009. The overall deficit for FY08/09 
was 3.6 percent of GDP.  The deficit has been partly contained by low execution rates of 
capital expenditures in the first half of 2009.  For the six month budget – July 1- 
December 31, 2009 – the overall deficit is estimated to have reached 4.9 percent of GDP. 
For 2010 the Government expects the deficit to be above 5 percent.   Given low fiscal 
revenues (22.9 percent), relatively high levels of current expenditure (23.6 percent), and 
the ambitious public investment program, there are clear downside risks. Public debt to 
GDP has interrupted its declining trajectory and is expected to go over the 60 percent 
threshold.  

12. Higher levels of unemployment have created pressures for increased 
spending on social programs.  Unemployment increased from 7.2 percent in 2008 to 8 
percent in 2009 and is estimated to have increased further in 2010. Because of the impact 
of the crisis on the textile sector, the impact of increased unemployment has fallen 
disproportionately on low-skilled women employees who have relatively few options for 
alternative employment.  This constitutes a significant potential social problem.    

The Policy Response and the Economic Outlook 

13. Mauritius’ prudent fiscal policy in recent years created fiscal space for a 
stimulus package. The government used special ‘rainy day’ funds it had prudently put 
aside in previous fiscal years (to the tune of 3 percent of GDP) reducing current debt 
financing needs.  The government used this fiscal space from the first years of reforms to 
finance its countercyclical policies by appropriating resources for six different investment 
funds.  A fiscal stimulus package of about 5 percent of GDP (spread over 2009-10) was 
announced in December 2008.  

14. 
In the Government’s own words the stimulus package was intended to be 
“targeted, flexible and temporary”.   “After consultation with all key sectors . . . we are 
using the fiscal space we have created to significantly increase public sector investment.  
The stimulus plan deals with bottlenecks to boost private investment. It fast-tracks and 
front-loads infrastructure projects. It provides support to business to continue operations 
to protect employment and works. It enhances efforts on re-skilling, retraining and 
returning retrenched workers to productive employment. It ensures that an adequate 
safety net is in place” 2
.  By and large this is a fair characterization of the intentions of the 
stimulus program.  Its effectiveness in achieving these intentions will however, depend 
on whether the public sector is able to rise to the occasion of implementing investments 
at a level and pace that has not been achieved in the past.  This will require strengthening 
of the project pipeline, enhancement of the framework for public-private partnerships, 

2 Budget Policy Statement 2009. 

4 

 
   
 
 
 
 
                                                 
and stronger implementation capacity. The Government is well aware of this and a 
special program has been set up to build capacity for investment planning and 
implementation.  Also the institutional framework for public procurement has been 
streamlined.    

15. 
The 2010 elections resulted in the Prime Minister being re-elected but with a 
different coalition partner and a Government committed to continuing the basic 
structural reforms, but with 
increased emphasis on social programs. The 
Government announced a further reform package in August 2010 aimed at stimulating 
the economy. The previous package had been put forward on the assumption that growth 
in the world economy and particularly Western Europe, would accelerate in 2010. The 
continuing slow growth in the EU however, created, in the Government’s view, the need 
for a further stimulus package. It recognizes that competitiveness needs to be enhanced 
by: (i) further diversification toward new sectors and markets; (ii) promoting efficiency 
and productivity gains at the firm level; (iii) reducing leverage by most firms; (iv) 
developing the capital market and financial instruments; (v) encouraging long-term 
corporate planning; (vi) improving the diversity of skills in line with the vision of 
knowledge based economy; and (vii) speeding up the implementation of infrastructure 
projects. This package is expected to be funded jointly by the private sector mobilizing 
42 percent of the required Rs12bn, public sector institutions 25 percent, the Government 
contributing 17 percent and 17 percent from acceleration of projects in the Public Sector 
Investment Program.  The fiscal cost is estimated around 4 percent of GDP for 2010.  As 
part of this package, the new Government announced: (i) the creation of a new Economic 
Restructuring and Competitiveness Program (ERCP) 3
 and (ii) additional financial 
instruments for firms in the textile and clothing industry and SMEs (available through the 
Leasing for Equipment Modernization Scheme).   

16. 
The 2011 budget provides a clear indication of the new Government’s policy 
stance.  See highlights of the budget speech in Box 3 below.  In addition, the 
Government has announced an ambitious five year plan with substantially increased 
expenditures on public investment and social protection. 

3 The ERCP comprises measures to foster and support long-term restructuring and deleveraging of firms.  It has been 
funded through the creation of a  private equity fund with a seed capital of Rs 300 million, with equal contributions 
from the Government and the Banking Sector. 

5 

 
      
 
 
                                                 
Box 3: The 2011 Budget 

The budget is focused on three axes: (i) Rebalancing growth, (ii) Enhancing productivity, and (iii) 
Consolidating social justice. It provides continuity with previous ones, maintaining fiscal discipline and 
competitiveness reforms while focusing more on education and protection for vulnerable groups. 

Rebalancing growth 

• Diversify markets and products by reorienting exports towards new emerging markets.  
• Targeted support to SMEs through training and matching grants. 
• Financial assistance to traditional sectors to help them move up the value chain (sugar, 
agriculture, fishing). 
Incentives to promote growth and job creation in high valued sectors (health, ICT).  

• 

Enhancing productivity 

• New measures to put human capital development at the centre of the policy agenda through 
enhancing education services (tax exemption for families, reintroduction of subsidies for 
examination fees, redesigned scholarship schemes) and active 
labor market programs 
(restructuring of the National Empowerment Program, more flexibility in the use of foreign 
labor). 
• Continuity in business climate reforms and investment in infrastructure (transport, logistics and 
communication).  

Consolidating social justice 

• Social protection measures, especially for families with modest means (ambitious social housing 
programs to construct about 40,000 units over the next ten years, at an estimated cost of MUR 
18.5 billion (US$600 million), and a range of other social programs. 
• These measures to be financed principally from additional taxes on cigarettes, alcohol and 
gambling. 

17. While noting significant risks, both the Bank and the International Monetary 
Fund (IMF have a broadly positive outlook for Mauritius which is contingent upon 
the current gradual global recovery being sustained. Over the medium term 
Mauritius’ growth prospects depend heavily on the global economy.  The country’s 
economic growth is projected to be 3.4 to 4 percent per year over the next three to four 
years, given the heavy dependence on EU markets and the slow growth expected in that 
region (Table 1 below). The gradual acceleration in growth will be sustained by the 
recovery in tourism receipts (accounting for 27 percent of total exports) and the 
successful implementation of reforms aimed at diversifying the economy and promoting 
private sector development. Unemployment will increase slightly in 2010 (up by 0.2 
percent compared to 2009) but decline thereafter. In this scenario, the fiscal and external 
balances should remain under control.  The fiscal deficit is projected around 4.5 percent 
of GDP in 2010 and 6.6 percent in 2011, with the current account deficit in the range of 9 
percent in 2010.  No major changes in monetary policy are expected and a stable inflation 
rate in the range of 3-4 percent per year will likely continue.  

6 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 1: Preliminary macro-projections, 2010-15 

GDP Growth 
(%, real) 

Private consumption Growth 
(%, real) 

Fiscal Deficit  
(% of GDP) 

Debt to GDP 
Ratio 

2010  

2011  

2012  

2013  

2014  

2015  

4.0 

3.5  

4.5  

3.7  

4.1  

6.6  

3.5  

1.9  

5.6  

4.0  

3.3  

5.1  

4.0  

3.1  

5.0  

4.0  

3.1  

5.0  

62.6  

66.2  

67.6  

68.3  

68.9  

69.4  

   Source:  Own projections based on official and IMF data 

18. 
The first risk relates to a slower than expected recovery of the global 
economy, given Mauritius high dependence on trade in goods and services especially 
with the European Union (which accounts for 70 percent). Further deterioration of the 
external accounts cannot be ruled out if global demand remains sluggish (especially in 
EU) and capital inflows dry up. This might affect negatively GDP growth, leading to 
lower fiscal revenues, and a widening of the fiscal deficit.  Similarly, a decline in exports 
(coupled with lower FDI inflows) might increase pressure on the balance of payments 
and the local currency.  Going forward, the country also remains highly vulnerable to any 
increase in commodity prices (including oil) because of its high dependence of imports.  
Although Mauritius has had relatively good access to international capital (including 
official aid) and net international reserves continue at a comfortable level (about 35 
percent of GDP), it is important to keep a careful watch on the evolution of the external 
balances.  

19. On the domestic front, there is a risk of not maintaining the required pace of 
implementation of the reforms aimed at enhancing the competitiveness of the 
private sector.  While Mauritius has proved its capacity to adjust to changing conditions 
(moving from sugar to textile and now to tourism, financial services and ICT), most 
second round reforms in trade and in the regulatory environment will need to be carried 
out with close cooperation with the private sector and public enterprises, that might be 
reluctant to move quickly.  Other reforms in the labor market would require time such as 
upgrading skills through a reform of the education system and partnerships with leading 
firms. 

20. 
Another risk is that the fiscal space could be stretched further as the result of 
underfunding of the public expenditure program and political demands for 
increased social expenditures. There are significant financing gaps and inefficiencies in 
the Public Sector Investment Program (PSIP) that might require additional public 
financing.  In addition there is also a risk that the newly elected Parliament that has taken 
office in May 2010 with a socially-oriented mandate might push for too rapid increase in 
social protection expenditures. 

7 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
21. 
Debt sustainability could become a source of major concern.  Over the recent 
past, the Government has been cautious to maintain the ratio of debt to GDP lower than 
60 percent – the threshold defined by Law. Yet, the new policy measures and the 
ambitious public investment program could increase public debt above this threshold 
from 2010.  An external shock and/or an increase in the fiscal deficit would raise this 
ratio to levels that might lead to the downgrading of Mauritius by international rating 
agencies, raising the cost of financing.  The budget is very sensitive to any increase in the 
spreads because close to four-fifths of the debt is short term and would have to be 
refinanced almost immediately 

22. 
These risks will need careful management from the authorities.  The 
mitigation of these risks will require the development of program that combines 
appropriate safety nets with clear market signals on production and investment priorities. 
The current generous welfare system will have to be appropriately adjusted, while the 
education system needs to respond to the needs of the economy.  Improving public sector 
efficiency and capacity to implement capital projects are critical. What is particularly 
important is that the short to medium term difficulties do not lead Mauritius to 
compromise its longer-term objectives and to sacrifice the progress it has achieved in 
raising competitiveness and moving forward with the basic economic restructuring that is 
required for sustainable longer-term growth.    

III.  The Bank’s Role and Program 

23. 
The Country Partnership Strategy was prepared to lay out the basis for 
cooperation.  With concern about the adjustment required given the limited prospects for 
both sugar and textile exports, the Government approached the Bank for support which 
was formulated under the CPS with two major elements. First, it was agreed that the 
Bank would support the reform through a series of US$30 million Development Policy 
Loans (DPLs). The Bank was asked to play a central role in assisting the Government 
coordinate the support of development partners for the reform effort.  The DPLs were to 
be used as a vehicle to organize the interventions of the Asia Development Bank (ADB), 
(Agence Française de Développement (AFD) and the European Community (EC). 
Second, the Bank would provide investment lending for infrastructure.  The Government 
expressed concern about the high transaction costs of investment lending due to Bank 
procurement practices and safeguards. The Bank was asked to explore whether 
Mauritius’ own procurement, environmental assessment and resettlement legislation 
could be used for investment lending. 4
The assessment will be completed in 2011. 

24. 
The CPS was structured around the Government’s four pillars of reform.  
These were: fiscal consolidation and improving public sector efficiency; improving trade 
competitiveness; improving the investment climate; and democratizing the economy 
through participation, inclusion and sustainability. Progress has been tracked during the 
annual business planning meetings between the Government and its development 
partners. Progress toward achieving the CPS outcomes has been generally good given the 

4 The Bank and Government have concluded the equivalency and acceptability analyses for environmental 
and social safeguards. Once these are approved by the Government and the Bank it will be possible to 
develop future investment operations under the country systems pilot.    

8 

 
 
 
 
  
 
                                                 
adverse external factors (see Annex1 for details). The CPS was also developed as a 
platform for partnership through annual consultations with Government and the other 
development partners. 

25. 
Fiscal consolidation and improving public sector efficiency was on track until 
the global crisis dictated the need for a stimulus package.  Bank support has been 
provided in the context of the DPLs which helped the Government establish and monitor 
a framework for longer-term fiscal sustainability and the reduction of debt.  Bank 
economic analysis was particularly useful in analyzing the fiscal implications of various 
policy options the Government was considering.  Fiscal discipline and efficiency were 
addressed by implementing a Medium Term Expenditure Framework (MTEF) and 
Program Based Budgeting (PBB).  The Bank has worked closely with the IMF and the 
United National Development Program (UNDP) in supporting the implementation of 
these programs.    

26. 
Trade competitiveness has been improved through the reduction of the bias 
against exports in the tariff and import licensing regimes. The decision to move 
forward expeditiously with the reform of the tariff and import licensing regimes was 
greatly facilitated by the work undertaken by the Bank’s Aid for Trade mission which 
analyzed the fiscal, growth and employment consequences of potential trade reforms.  
Subsequent Bank analytic work on technology and innovation has also contributed to the 
policy dialogue in this area.  The framework provided by the DPLs was again a helpful 
feature in providing direction and focus to Government policies.    

27. On the investment climate, despite the recent crisis-related slowdown in FDI, 
Mauritius has maintained its status as the top ranked country in Africa on the 
Doing Business Indicators. Overall, the time it takes to start a business was reduced 
from 46 days in 2005-06 to 6 days by 2010. Mauritius ranking in the Doing Business 
Indicator moved up to 20 in 2010 from 24 in 2009. As in the other two pil lars, the Bank 
has supported the reforms with the DPLs. In addition the Infrastructure Project 
provides technical assistance and institutional development support in the transport, 
water/wastewater and energy sub-sectors with the goal of improving the quality of 
infrastructure and thus strengthening the country’s competitiveness. The project is also 
addressing the need to improve the pipeline of feasible projects ready for investment with 
80 percent of project funds allocated to specific contracts to be awarded. In the context of 
the project the Bank is also working with the authorities to strengthen the pipeline of 
infrastructure projects that are ready for investment through the preparation of high 
quality feasibility and safeguard analyses. In addition the Mauritius Economic 
Transition Technical Assistance Project (METAP) was designed to support a broader 
and longer-term economic reform program by partnering with the Government to 
strengthen investment climate reforms, assist public enterprises to improve their 
efficiency and delivery of public services, and support the institutional framework for 
Public Private Partnerships (PPPs) and utility regulation.  

28. 
The commitment which the Mauritian authorities have shown towards the 
social protection system during the crisis is evidence of the concern to ensure 
participation, inclusion and sustainability. The Empowerment Programme provides 
financial support, training and placement facilities. The program also supports 

9 

 
 
 
 
 
unemployed women and provides capacity-building initiatives for SMEs.  A dedicated 
Eradication of Absolute Poverty program (EAP) with emphasis on education for children 
and on life skills for their parents targets 229 pockets of absolute poverty, including the 
island of Rodrigues. In parallel to these programs, the Government has also pursued the 
strengthening of technical capacity to measure and monitor poverty. To this end, the 
UNDP has provided support for the construction of a Social Registry containing 
information on beneficiaries of social programs in Mauritius. The European Union (EU) 
has supported the setting up of a poverty observatory in Mauritius to monitor the 
effectiveness of poverty alleviation policies. The Bank has been providing advice towards 
rationalization of social programs in the context of budget preparation through analytic 
work. A Social Protection Review and Strategy was carried out in 2009 with Bank 
support and the Government continues to receive technical assistance in the sector to 
design and implement reforms. The Bank's support was instrumental in defining the 
reform agenda announced in the 2011 budget, which is ambitious in its objective to move 
up to 40 percent of Social Aid beneficiaries off welfare through an expansion and 
overhaul of its existing empowerment programs as well as the introduction of appropriate 
incentives to move people into work. This reform has the potential to help meet the 
Government's objectives in terms of poverty reduction as well as consolidating 
government spending and increasing efficiency. 

29. 
The Government’s 
interest 
in an enhanced Bank role, 
led to the 
establishment of a Country Office in Port Louis in 2007, which strengthened and 
deepened Bank engagement. This has enabled the Bank to play a much more effective 
role both with regards to in-country coordination and in linking the Bank’s work in 
Mauritius with its programs in the African mainland.  This has also helped the Bank to 
establish a solid relationship with all development partners active in Mauritius. Donors 
have been supporting the establishment of the Regional Multidisciplinary Center for 
Excellence (RMCE), for which the Bank carried out feasibility study with funding from 
the EU.  

30. 
The Government puts a very high premium on Bank analytic work and some 
key ‘flagship’ studies by the Bank have cemented its role as a primary source of analysis 
and advice.      

31. More recent analytic work has been focused on responding flexibly to 
Government requests. Subsequent analytic work by the Bank has supported the 
Government’s infrastructure and innovation programs. In mid-2009, Government 
requested just-in-time technical assistance to review business sector vulnerability to the 
crisis, and provide technical advice on arrangements to facilitate work-outs of distressed 
businesses.  In addition the Bank is preparing an update of the Country Economic 
Memorandum (CEM) that is focused on: (i) launching second generation trade reforms to 
further improve competitiveness; and (ii) adjusting the labor market so that it can better 
absorb unskilled workers at the bottom end of the market, while providing incentives for 
skills development at the upper end of the market.    

32. 
The need to respond to the crisis showed the strength of the partnership, 
when the Government turned to the Bank to provide insurance against a worst case 
scenario.   In 2008 the Minister of Finance set up a group to manage the Mauritian 

10 

 
 
 
 
      
response.  With serious concerns over declining revenues and Mauritius’ capacity to raise 
financing from the market, the group came to the Bank. There was a very negative 
scenario and they wanted to pre-empt this with some sort of insurance from donors. They 
did not expect to use this but wanted it on a contingent basis.  At that point the Bank’s 
Board had just approved more favorable terms for the Deferred Drawdown Option 
(DDO) which included the elimination of the commitment fee. 5
  The Mauritians were 
attracted by this as a source of contingency funding and requested a large amount which 
they felt would not need to be disbursed, but would create confidence and head off 
potential runs on the currency or the banking system.  

33. 
The Bank responded by increasing DPL3 from US$30 to US$100 million and 
designing it as a DDO. The Bank determined that given the exposure limits for 
Mauritius and the then existing volume of loans outstanding, the DDO would have to be 
limited to US$100 million. Before the operation went to the Board, the Mauritian 
authorities decided that they needed to draw down the money immediately after approval 
in order to finance the emerging gap in the 2009 budget.  There were increasing fears that 
declining revenues would lead to a financing gap that could not be funded on reasonable 
terms. 6
 In June 2009 the operation went to the Board and the funds were duly drawn 
down.  As soon as DPL3 was disbursed the Mauritians requested a fourth DPL for 
supporting the budget for the last six months of 2009. The Bank provided a further 
US$50 million in funding through DPL4 approved on October 15 2009.  This amount 
was matched by Euros 40 million of funding from AFD directed at support for projects 
meeting the criterion of environmental sustainability.  

34. Other donors have since followed the lead provided by the Bank.   Since in 
the view of the Mauritians this still left a potential sizeable funding gap if the crisis 
continued to worsen, they continued to look to the donor community for additional 
sources of funds. Initially the EU did not scale up its assistance to Mauritius, but 
subsequently some additional funding was provided. In 2009 however, the African 
Development Bank (AfDB) decided to make US$700 million available to Mauritius in 
three tranches - US$200 million in 2009, US$300 million in 2010 and US$200 million in 
2011.  In the event, revenues improved such that the GoM has not as yet had the need to 
draw down on the AfDB loan. Nevertheless the availability of this funding to support 
potential shortfalls in the budget has been an important source of confidence for the 
Government and the Mauritian financial sector and the Government is likely to draw on it 
for expanded infrastructure investment.  

35. 
Investment lending was broadened from the approach outlined in the CPS.  
While as indicated, the CPS had laid out the possibility of a series of investment loans to 
support infrastructure investment, it was recognized that in a middle income country like 
Mauritius the Bank had to maintain the flexibility to respond to the Government’s 
evolving priorities.  The CPS had proposed an annual business plan as a way of aligning 

5 The commitment fee was re-instated in 2009.  
6 Most Government debt is held in the form of short-term debt by the Mauritian commercial banks. While 
there is a substantial appetite for this kind of security and ample liquidity in the banking system, the 
commercial banks have very little interest in longer term instruments.  The awareness of the risks 
associated with rolling over the short-term debt has been an important factor in the overall prudent fiscal 
stance of the Mauritian government. 

11 

 
 
 
 
                                                 
the Bank program with Government priorities.  This has been followed through and is 
also proving a useful mechanism for donor coordination. As a consequence the lending 
program was re-designed in order to provide direct support for structural reforms through 
a Technical Assistance Loan and a loan for Manufacturing and Service Delivery and 
Competitiveness.    

36. IFC has focused on its interventions on three key sectors: infrastructure, 
tourism and financial services.  Its activities have been targeted at: supporting the 
mobilization of foreign direct investment to these sectors; introducing climate change 
mitigation and cleaner production standards and best practices; improving access to 
finance for Small and Medium Enterprises (SMEs); and promoting South-South 
transactions. To that end IFC has supported the Cargo Handling Corporation and Multi 
Purpose Terminals project, for which the Government has requested the International 
Finance Corporation (IFC) to search for strategic partners. IFC is seeking to play a role in 
supporting Mauritian companies to expand across the Indian Ocean and Southern Africa 
regions particularly in banking and non-banking financial services.  To support the 
Government policy for a ‘Green Mauritius’, IFC is exploring specifically structured 
funding lines to the banking sector that will allow them to fund projects and project 
components that favor low carbon emission, use of renewable energy and energy 
efficiency projects. IFC has committed and disbursed on a US$75 million debt financing 
package for the State Bank of Mauritius including SME capacity building. IFC is 
currently in discussion with the Mauritius Commercial Bank Ltd concerning the 
possibility of a US$125 million equity investment and a Tier II subordinated loan.  

IV. Going Forward 

37. Mauritius has a relatively high income, political stability and a strong 
investment climate, but still lags upper middle-income country comparators in a 
number of dimensions which are critical for long-term competitiveness.  While 
Mauritius ranks close to Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development 
(OECD) countries in terms of control of corruption and ease of doing business, it lags 
significantly three other development dimensions – logistics, education and knowledge. 
The efficiency and impact of public sector delivery (social protection, education and 
utilities) constitute an important area where performance is significantly weaker than that 
of many comparators.   

38. 
In addition, Mauritius’ development prospects are still subject 
to 
considerable risks.  These include: (i) political risks of a loss of appetite for maintaining 
the structural reforms in place and resistance to further adjustments of declining sectors, 
(ii) external economic shocks impacting sectors such as tourism and foreign direct 
investment and terms of trade shocks relating to prices of imports particularly 
petroleum 7
; and (iii) natural disasters and environmental degradation. Mauritius should 

7 In this regard it is worth noting the significant risk represented by the surge in piracy in the Western 
Indian Ocean.  Already seagoing imports and exports from Mauritius are being negatively affected by war 
risk premiums which affect the cost of transport, and interruptions to energy imports could have broad 
economic implications for Mauritius. 

12 

 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
also be mindful of the piracy in the Western Indian Ocean which will continue to affect 
the cost of transport. In the aftermath of the crises the country still faces challenges such 
costly welfare system, education system not corresponding to the needs of the economy, 
low public sector effectiveness for a middle income country, lack of capacity to 
implement investment projects, which are critical in the medium term and long term but 
require constant interventions.  

39. 
The combination of these lagging sectors and risk factors represent a strong 
argument for a continued Bank presence in Mauritius.  Sustainable growth in a more 
difficult global context will require that Mauritius enhances its competitiveness through 
addressing its logistics bottlenecks 8
 and knowledge and skills constraints, develop 
programs that combine improved public service delivery with appropriate safety nets, and 
design public investment projects and private investment safeguards that go beyond 
‘doing no harm’ to the environment and reflect the importance of Mauritius 
environmental endowment to its economic future.  These are areas where the Bank’s 
experience and capacity can contribute to the programs developed by the Government. 
The Bank has a particularly important role to play as an instrument for transferring 
knowledge of the global economy and strategies in other middle income and small island 
economies, and in providing objective analytic work on the Mauritian economy.    

40. Given the limits on the Bank’s budget and the need to be selective, the 
Government has requested that the Bank focus on activities that will seek to assist 
in: (i) re-engineering the platform for delivering social services; (ii) consolidating 
performance management systems in the public service; (iii) improving delivery of public 
services - with a focus on the utilities, health and education sectors; and (iv) 
strengthening capacity building and Infrastructure projects.  In addition, the Bank will 
continue to support the reform program through both core diagnostic work and just-in-
time support in response to requests from the Mauritian authorities.  The CPS period will 
be extended by one year to 2015 so that it is synchronized with the electoral cycle. 

41. 
The Bank will continue to provide support to the Government program in 
partnership with the other major development players. While most partners provide 
direct budget support the annual business planning events are the venue for taking stock 
and adjusting the respective programs.  Through the DPLs, the Bank will continue to 
focus its support along the broad categories outlines above. The EU will further its 
involvement through the 10th European Development Fund (EDF) and will play 
important role in covering the environmental and climate change issues, as well as 
measures to offset the losses from the sugar sector. AFD is also supporting sustainable 
environment including energy efficiency, and both AFD and AfDB provide funding and 
technical assistance for the water and sewage, and work in the transport sector. 

42. Knowledge sharing is one of the key ingredients of the program in a middle 
income country, and in Mauritius in addition to the planned ESW, the Bank will 
also continue to provide just in time advice and analysis for the Government as 

8 In the 2010 Logistics Performance Survey, Mauritius under-performed its income-level comparators in 
three aspects: infrastructure, logistics competence and tracking and tracing.   Public and private investments 
are needed to remove bottlenecks and enhance competence and delivery in these areas. 

13 

 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
needed.  Bank analytic work plays an important role in Mauritius.  Along with the IMF, 
the Bank is one of the few sources of independent analysis and allows the authorities to 
learn from other countries and benchmark their achievements relative to their 
comparators.  Given budget constraints the Bank and the Mauritian authorities are 
discussing possible arrangements to fund just-in time experts.  Recently the Government 
requested support of this kind in the area of infrastructure including the possibility of the 
Bank recruiting a Senior Adviser to be located in the Country Office or seconded directly 
to the Government.  The Bank will be exploring with the Government the role of such an 
Adviser and options for funding this position, over the coming months.  In line with the 
DPL agenda, a Public Expenditure Review (PER) on civil service reform is planned in 
FY11, to support the authorities’ request to assist in the design and implementation of an 
action plan for the civil service and public enterprise reforms to help shape policy for 
creating a modern and efficient public sector through political economy analysis to 
identify barriers to institutional changes and further public sector reforms. A Public 
Investment Management 
(PIM) analysis would be 
instrumental 
to 
support 
implementation of the large investment program planned. Heavy investment is planned in 
infrastructure and other sectors during the coming years. It would therefore be strategic to 
support capacity building of ministry officials in best practices in Public Investment 
Management (PIM) so that the quality and pipeline of investment projects is improved. In 
this regards, the Bank could draw on its expertise to develop a knowledge product for 
Mauritius. The Bank will also continue the dialogue with the authorities to explore 
additional knowledge products to support the on-going government program, such as the 
Country Status Report in Education.  

43. 
The Bank will facilitate knowledge transfers (both inbound and outbound) to 
help the Government to leverage Mauritius record of successful development 
achievement for the benefit of other countries.  Mauritius has emerged as an exporter 
of  "how to do reform" knowledge to its peers on the African continent under South-
South arrangements which the Bank country office in Port Louis is increasingly being 
asked to facilitate as part of the Africa Region’s Middle Income Country (MIC) Strategy. 
The Bank will also support regional integration through its analytic work and promote 
expanded contacts and interaction between Mauritius and regional bodies. The Bank will 
play an opportunistic role in organizing some of its training and other activities, both for 
Sub-Saharan Africa and more generally, in Mauritius with possible co-financing of these 
activities by the Mauritian authorities. 

44. 
The Bank will continue to support the Government’s efforts to calibrate the 
policy framework and promote efficient and fiscally sustainable implementation of 
social programs and the structural reform agenda. After successfully addressing 
competitiveness issues in the previous series of DPLs, the Government now aims to 
consolidate and reinforce these reforms achieving substantial efficiency gains through 
improved public service delivery, and regulatory and administrative simplification.  The 
core instrument for this purpose will be a new four year series of Development Policy 
Loans of US$20 million each that seek to accelerate the civil service reform to raise the 
productivity of human resources in the public sector; accelerate reforms in public 
enterprises and parastatals to gain in efficiency and effectiveness of the public sector; and 
implement reforms in social protection to ensure that all Mauritians benefit from the 
economic progress achieved in recent years. In addition, the Government is considering 

14 

 
 
 
continuing Bank’s engagement in areas covered by the previous DPL series such as 
competitiveness (notably trade); and exploring further assistance to improve social sector 
delivery (education and health).   

45. 
The Bank will support the efforts of the authorities to mitigate and resolve 
the infrastructure constraints that Mauritius faces. Mauritius has a particularly 
difficult problem in this regard since it needs to balance the rapid expansion of 
infrastructure with maintaining and enhancing the environment, to provide the quality 
needed for both its population and for attracting tourism and residential investment.  
Given the key role that outsourcing is likely to play in the future, communications 
policies and investment has an important role to play.  The Bank will provide investment 
lending in this area of the order of about US$50 million a year. While this is small 
relative to total investment it should allow the Bank to play a key role in helping the 
authorities to remove infrastructure bottlenecks and improve the country’s performance 
in logistics competence and tracking and tracing in the context of  the need to meet 
environmental objectives. The Bank’s lending will be supplemented by selective 
technical assistance in this area in response to specific request.  

46. While currently MIGA has no active contracts in Mauritius, it will continue 
to offer its political risk product for investors into the country concerned about Transfer 
Restriction, Expropriation, Breach of Contract and War and Civil Disturbance risks. Over 
the CPS period it hopes to also make the best use of its new products, the Non-Honoring 
of Sovereign Guarantees and its more flexible, Small Investment Product to best serve the 
needs of investors entering into the Mauritian market. 

47. 
The original results matrix has been revised to reflect the fact that the Bank 
is no longer implementing a joint program with the EU. The original CSP was jointly 
prepared between the Bank and the EU in 2007 responding to the request of the 
authorities and reflecting the close collaboration between both institutions. As a result of 
the international economic and financial downturn in 2008, the Government requested 
quick financial and technical assistance to all development partners. Both Institutions 
responded by accelerating preparation and increasing the financing amount of its lending 
program but this resulted in EU and World Bank programs not keeping in step. The 
results matrix is therefore revised to eliminate the areas that are undertaken by the EU 
and is updated to align with the objectives of the new government appointed in 2010. 

48. 
The substantial program under discussion may require an expansion of the 
Bank’s Country Office in Port Louis. Since the opening of the Country Office in 2007 
the Bank has been able to maintain a much enhanced dialogue and respond much more 
quickly to the requests of the Government.  

15 

 
 
 
 
 
Annex 1: Revised Results Matrix 

Government Long Term 
Objectives 

Main Constraints to 
achieving long term 
goals 

World Bank Strategy 
Outcomes 

Intermediate indicators 
and Milestones  

Progress to Date   

PILLAR 1: Fiscal Consolidation and Improving Public Sector Efficiency 

Reduce debt to GDP ratio 
from 59% of GDP to 55% 
by 2015. 

High debt is threatening 
macro stability 

Improved fiscal management by 
making the MTEF operational 

MTEF operationalized together with 
PBB;  

Improved budget allocation 

Public Expenditure 
management not efficient 
and prioritized 

Tax system is unfair and 
distorts incentives 

Lack of transparency in 
public procurement 

Public enterprises and 
parastatals are costly and 
underperforming 

Inadequate procedures 
for evaluating and 
rewarding public sector 
performance 

Enforcement of new 
procurement rules as measured by 
audits 

Budget transfers from Central 
Government to parastatals is 
reduced 

Improved system and procedures 
that reward performance 

Allocation of budget 
according to pre-set 
ceilings 

2011 PEFA review shows that 
substantial budget reallocation takes 
place during the year 

Compilation and 
publication of tax 
expenditures in the budget 

Minister of Finance 
relinquishing discretionary 
power to remit duties and 
taxes and grant exemptions 

Tax collection increased from 24.3 of 
GDP in 2006 to 25.8 of GDP in 2009.  

Done. 

Adoption and 
Implementation of new 
Procurement Act 

New Procurement Act introduced. 
Review of procurement institutional 
arrangements underway. 

Consolidation of 4 
parastatal bodies in the 
water sector to create a 
single Water Authority  

A strategy for human 
resources is prepared 

16 

 Bank 
Program 
and 
Partners 

AAA/TA 
CEM – 
Managing 
Change in a 
Changing world 
(FY07) 

Exchange rate & 
output 
fluctuations in a 
small open 
economy 
(FY09) 

PER (planned) 
ROSC (planned) 

Lending 
DPL Series 
1,2,3 and 4 for 
total  US$210 
million) 

New DPL series 
(planned) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Government Long 
Term Objectives 

Main Constraints to 
achieving long term 
goals 

World Bank Strategy 
Outcomes 

Intermediate indicators 
and Milestones  

Progress to Date   

Bank Program and 
Partners 

to 

PILLAR 2: Improving Trade Competitiveness 
Streamline 
trade 
Tariff protection creates 
distorting  
anti-export bias 
regulations 
improve 
competitivene
ss of existing 
and new 
emerging 
sectors 
and to increase 
export/GDP ratio 
to 55%  

Lack of competition in 
air access 

High telecom prices and 
limited connection 
capacity 

Streamlined tariff measures  

Tariff reduction program 
under implementation 

Reduction in air fares and more 
destinations served 

Improved telecommunications 
infrastructure 

Establishment of a fiber 
optic cable under EASSy 
project 

Anti-export bias regulation removed;  
Liberalization of tariffs on 87% of 
tariff lines; The highest tariff has 
been reduced from 60% to 30% 

AAA/TA 
Competitiveness: 
Labor & trade 
policy note (FY11) 

Unification of incentive regime for 
EPZ and non-EPZ firms. 

Air access has been liberalised. 

Skills development, 
technology 
absorption & 
innovation (FY11) 

Doing business  

Cable established and cost of IPLC 
reduced by more than 25% 

Education review 
(planned) 

Ineffective approach in 
designing regulations 
and red tape undermine 
competitiveness  

Increased exports  

Identification and removal 
of non-tariff barriers  

Some NTBs identified, based on 
complaints from the business 
community.  

Lack of regulatory 
transparency  

Transparent administrative 
regulations 

List administrative 
requirements on-ine via 
trade portal at customs 

Administrative requirements for some 
Ministries already online in the 
respective Ministries’ portal.  

Lending 
DPL Series 1,2,3 
and 4 for (total  
US$210 million) - 
Trade 
Competitiveness  

Manufacturing and 
Services 
Development and 
competitiveness 
Project (US$20 m)  

DPL series 
(planned) 

PILLAR 3: Improving the Investment Climate 

Become on e o f th e 
top 20 business 
friendly cou n t r i e s a s 
m ea s u r ed by Doing 
Business indica tors  

Cost ly regu latory 
comp l iance (business 
registrat ion , 
work/residence 
permi t) corrup t ion 

Reduct ion in cost of do ing 
business as measured by 
surveys (land , labour 
regu lat ions) 

Creat ion of a one stop 
shop business 
registrat ion mechan ism 

The Do ing Business ind icator ranks 
the coun try at 20 for the year 2010 

S ix ou t of the ten business 
regu lat ion areas success fu l ly 
reformed as measured by the DB 
Report (2010): Reduct ion in the 
cost of DB (average cost to start a 
business reduced from 5% to 4%; 

AAA/TA 
Labor &trade policy 
note (FY11) 

ICA (FY08) 

Doing business 
(FY08,09,10,11) 

17 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Government Long 
Term Objectives 

Main Constraints to 
achieving long term 
goals 

World Bank Strategy 
Outcomes 

Intermediate indicators 
and Milestones  

Progress to Date   

Rigid labour market 

Increase flexibility of 
hiring and firing 

Inadequate 
land use 
planning to 
support the 
new economy 
and fast track 
investments 

Low level of 
technological 
sophistication 

A wo r k i n g l and 
ma r k e t w i t h reduced 
Governmen t 
interven tion 

Improved traffic flow 
along the main 
corridor in 
comp liance wi th road 
safety measures 

Improve recovery rate of 
creditors   

Amendments in the 
Labour Laws 

Developmen t and 
adop t ion of a land 
admin istrat ion and 
managemen t system 
(LAV IMS) 

Implementation of an 
integrated plan for traffic 
decongestion and public 
transport improvement 

18 

Bank Program and 
Partners 

Skills development 
& technology 
innovation  
ROSC  

Lending 
DPL Series 1,2,3 
and 4 for ( total  
US$210 million)  

Infrastructure 
Project (US$50 m) 

Infrastructure -2 
Infrastructure -3 
(panned) 

DPL series 
(planned) 

t ime to set t le commercial d ispu tes 
reduced from 750 days to less than 
100 days and backlog of 
commercial cases reduced by 
60%.); t ime to register property 
t i t le reduced from 210 to 15 
working days) . 

Legislat ion has been revised to 
faci l i tate investmen t (ex post 
veri ficat ion) 

The Compet i t ion Commission has 
been fu l ly operat ional since 
November 2009. 

Insolvency Act enacted. 
Insolvency Unit set up at Registrar of 
Companies. 

Employment Rights Act and 
Employment Relations Act enacted.   

System in p lace to faci l i tate en try 
of foreign labor . Occupat ion Permi t 
del ivered wi th in 3 working days. 
A Nat ional Wages Counci l has 
been estab l ished to rep lace the 
presen t wage set t ing mechan ism 

The LAV IMS has been developed 
and is under p i lo t phase 

In tegrated P lan is under 
imp lemen tat ion 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Government Long 
Term Objectives 

Main Constraints to 
achieving long term 
goals 
PILLAR 4: Democratizing the Economy through participation, inclusion and sustainability 

World Bank Strategy 
Outcomes 

Intermediate indicators 
and Milestones  

Progress to Date   

Bank Program and 
Partners 

AAA/TA 

Social protection 
review (FY10) 

Health policy note 
(underway) 

Social protection 
reform TA (on-
going) 

Safeguards country 
systems – pilot 
(planned) 

Lending (grants) 
HIV/AIDS (IDF) 

Indian Oceans 
commission support 
(IDF) 

DPL series 
(planned) 

Education system 
facilitates the 
delivery of the right 
skills for the economy 

High attrition rates at all 
levels result in low 
education attainment 
levels 

The 
post-secondary 
education 
system 
is 
underdeveloped both in 
the 
technical 
and 
general streams 

Significant expansion of post-
secondary education (technical 
and general) 

Potential efficiency gains 
are identified at all levels 

Increased articulation between 
the education strategy (in 
particular at the post-secondary 
level) and the overall economic 
growth strategy 

Development of a renewed 
strategy of the post-
secondary education sector  
strongly linked with the 
overall economic strategy 

The education strategy was finalized 
in 2009 and is being implemented, 
yet without a clear roadmap and 
action plan. (CPE failure rate in 2009 
was 32.6%; 35% in 2005) 

Eradication of Absolute Poverty 
program (EAP) introduced targeting 
education of children and life skills 
for parents 

Enhance opportunities 
for SME development  

Bias against SMEs in 
favor of large firms 

Elimination of bias (financing, 
regulatory, skills, etc) against 
SMEs as measured by 
increased number of new 
SMEs registered 

An SME consultancy 
services schemes to assist 
start-ups and existing 
SMEs put in place 

Consolidation of 
institutions providing 
services to SMEs to 
improve efficiency  

Empower the 
V u l n e r a b l e 
G r o u p s  

Sound 
Environmental 
Management for 
Sustainable 
Development 

Social safety nets are 
costly and not targeted to 
most needy 

Protection programs reach the 
needy as measured by 
household surveys 

Development and 
introduction of a targeted 
social assistance scheme 

Lack of adequate sanitary 
infrastructure 
for 
sustainable development 

Improvement in the 
environment by increased use 
of cleaner technologies in the 
industrial sector 

Adequate wastewater 
management system in place 
ensuring improved heath and 
sanitation 

Revision of the NEAP 2 
and implementation 
started 
Development of a policy 
Framework and Action 
plan for the Management 
of the Coastal zone 
Introduction and 
promotion of the use of 
leaner technologies in the 
industrial sector 

19 

Opportunities for SME development 
enhanced with the MSDC project and 
schemes at the DBM; Number of 
SMEs registered improved drastically 
since the BFA (2006); 

A Unified Business and Enterprise 
Development Board is being set up 

NEF has several schemes in place to 
empower the vulnerable. Reach & 
effectiveness of social safety nets has 
been improved. Further reform 
underway. 

Maurice – Ile durable initiative for 
environmental protection and tourism 
launched 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Government Long 
Term Objectives 

Main Constraints to 
achieving long term 
goals 

World Bank Strategy 
Outcomes 

Intermediate indicators 
and Milestones  

Progress to Date   

Bank Program and 
Partners 

High rate of increase in 
HIV/AIDS cases 

Stabilization of the prevalence 
of HIV/AIDS at 0.3% 

Development of Strategy 
plan for HIV/AIDS 
(2006-2010) 

Keep HIV/AIDS 
rate under control 
not to exceed the 
current prevalence 
rate of 0.3% 

Capacity building provided to 
National AIDS Secretariat to 
strengthen multi-sectoral response to 
HIV/AIDS  

HIV/AIDS prevalence has not been 
contained and is 1.0% in 2009 
(UNAIDS) 

20 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annex A1 

Annex A1- Mauritius
Key Economic & Program Indicators - Change from Last CAS

Prepared for a l l CASs/Progress Reports, bu t included in Board version o f Progress Reports On ly 
As Of Date 12/2/2010

Economy (CY)
Growth rates (% )
GDP
Exports
Imports

Inflat ion (% )

Nat ional accounts (% GDP)
Current account balance
Gross inves tment

Public finance (% GDP)
Fiscal balance
Foreign financ ing

Forecas t in Las t CAS

Ac tual

Current CAS Forecas t

2006/07 a 2007/08 a 2008/09 b 2009/10 b

Avg. 
2011/12-
12/13 b

2007/08 c 2008/09 c 2009 c

2010 c

2011 a

2012 b

2013 b

3.5
63.5
71.6

8.5

-6.9
26.6

-1.4
0.1

3.6
66.3
71.6

6

-4.7
24.5

-0.8
-0.2

3.8
67.1
71

4.3
68.4
70.8

5.3
70.9
72.9

5.5
52.1
67.7

2.6
49.6
61.5

4.7
47.6
59.3

4.1
50.4
62.3

6

5.5

4.5

8.8

6.9

1

2.7

-3.7
24

-0.7
-0.4

-2.5
24.3

0
-0.4

-2.2
26.5

0.6
-0.4

-5.6
26

-3.2
0

-9.4
24.7

-7.3
27.4

-8.6
25.1

-3
1.3

-4
0.1

-4.5
1.9

3.7
45
57

4

-9.1
21

-2.9
2

4
45
57

4

-9
23

-1.6
1.2

4.3
45
57

4

-8.9
23

-1.1
1.1

FY07a

FY08b

FY09b

FY10b

FY11b

Internat ional reserves
 (as months of imports )
Program (Bank ’s FY)
Lending ($ million)
Gross disbursements
($ million)
30
30
101.5
1.1
Note: Due to a change in fiscal year in 2009, from July -june to Jan-Dec , the figures reported for the period 2009 refers to Jul-Dec 2009
a.  Es t imated year
b.  Projec ted year
c .  Ac tual outcome 

8.5
FY07c
30

8.8
FY10c
120

FY09c
118

9.7
FY08c

FY11d

11

42

50

50

30

FY12b
100

FY13b
80

21 

 
 
 
 
 
22 

Mauritius at a glance

2/25/10

Sub-
Saharan
Africa

Upper
middle
income

Key Development Indicators

Mauritius

(2008)

Population, mid-year (millions)
Surface area (thousand sq. km)
Population growth (%)
Urban population (% of total population)

1.3
2.0
0.6
42

818
24,242
2.5
36

948
47,176
0.8
75

GNI (Atlas method, US$ billions)
GNI per capita (Atlas method, US$)
GNI per capita (PPP, international $)

8.5
6,700
12,480

885
1,082
1,991

7,472
7,878
12,297

GDP growth (%)
GDP per capita growth (%)

4.5
3.9

5.0
2.5

4.7
3.8

(most recent estimate, 2003–2008)

Poverty headcount ratio at $1.25 a day (PPP, %)
Poverty headcount ratio at $2.00 a day (PPP, %)
Life expectancy at birth (years)
Infant mortality (per 1,000 live births)
Child malnutrition (% of children under 5)

..
..
72
13
..

51
73
52
89
27

..
..
71
21
..

Adult literacy, male (% of ages 15 and older)
Adult literacy, female (% of ages 15 and older)
Gross primary enrollment, male (% of age group)
Gross primary enrollment, female (% of age group)

90
85
101
101

71
54
103
93

95
93
112
108

Access to an improved water source (% of population)
Access to improved sanitation facilities (% of population)

100
94

58
31

94
82

Net Aid Flows

1980

1990

2000

2008 a

(US$ millions)
Net ODA and official aid
Top 3 donors (in 2007):
   France
   European Commission
   Japan

33

88

20

75

13
1
1

32
8
7

9
3
2

40
34
3

Aid (% of GNI)
Aid per capita (US$)

3.0
34

3.4
84

0.4
17

1.0
59

Long-Term Economic Trends

Consumer prices (annual % change)
GDP implicit deflator (annual % change)

42.0
26.6

13.5
10.1

4.2
2.1

9.7
7.6

Exchange rate (annual average, local per US$)
Terms of trade index (2000 = 100)

7.7
..

14.9
104

26.2
100

28.5
74

1980–90 1990–2000
2000–08
      (average annual growth %)
0.9
1.2
0.8
6.2
5.2
3.7

Population, mid-year (millions)
GDP (US$ millions)

1.0
1,137

1.1
1.2
2,653
4,583
  (% of GDP)
12.9
32.8
24.4
54.4

1.3
9,320

Agriculture
Industry
   Manufacturing
Services

13.1
26.2
15.8
60.7

7.0
31.0
23.5
62.1

4.4
29.1
20.0
66.5

2.6
9.7
10.7
5.1

0.0
5.4
5.3
6.3

-1.2
1.4
0.2
5.9

Household final consumption expenditure
General gov't final consumption expenditure
Gross capital formation 

75.6
14.0
20.6

63.4
13.6
30.2

60.3
14.1
26.1

74.3
13.2
27.2

6.9
3.3
12.1

5.1
3.6
4.8

3.0
3.9
6.1

Exports of goods and services
Imports of goods and services
Gross savings

51.0
61.2
9.9

65.0
72.2
25.4

61.4
61.9
27.0

53.0
67.7
16.9

10.4
11.6

5.6
5.1

2.2
2.6

Note: Figures in italics are for years other than those specified. 2008 data are preliminary.  .. indicates data are not available.
a. Aid data are for 2007.

Development Economics, Development Data Group (DECDG).

6

3

0

3

6

0-4

15-19

30-34

45-49

60-64

75-79

percent of total population

Ag e d istr ibu tion , 2008

Male

Female

0

50

100

150

200

1990

1995

2000

2007

Mauri ti us

Sub-Saharan A fri c a

Und er -5 mo r tal i ty rate (p er 1,000)

0

2

4

6

8

10

95

05

GDP

GDP per c api ta

Growth o f GDP and GDP p er cap i ta (%)

 
 
 
 
23 

Mauritius

Balance of Payments and Trade

2000

2008

(US$ millions)
Total merchandise exports (fob)
Total merchandise imports (cif)
Net trade in goods and services

..
2,158
-39

2,404
4,614
-1,366

Current account balance
   as a % of GDP

29
0.6

-975
-10.5

Workers' remittances and
   compensation of employees (receipts)

177

215

Reserves, including gold

688

2,570

Central Government Finance

(% of GDP)
Current revenue (including grants)
   Tax revenue
Current expenditure

19.0
17.0
20.9

22.9
19.7
23.6

Technology and Infrastructure

2000

2008

Overall surplus/deficit

-4.8

-2.4

Paved roads (% of total)
Fixed line and mobile phone
   subscribers (per 100 people)
High technology exports
   (% of manufactured exports)

97.0 100.0

Highest marginal tax rate (%)
   Individual
   Corporate

25
25

15
15

39

110

1.0

8.1

External Debt and Resource Flows

Environment

(US$ millions)
Total debt outstanding and disbursed
Total debt service
Debt relief (HIPC, MDRI)

946
453
–

626
161
–

Agricultural land (% of land area)
Forest area (% of land area)
Nationally protected areas (% of land area)

56
18.7
..

56
18.2
3.3

Total debt (% of GDP)
Total debt service (% of exports)

20.6
16.1

6.7
2.8

Freshwater resources per capita (cu. meters)
Freshwater withdrawal (billion cubic meters)

2,273 2,182
..
0.7

Foreign direct investment (net inflows)
Portfolio equity (net inflows)

266
-4

378
34

CO2 emissions per capita (mt)

2.3

2.7

GDP per unit of energy use
   (2005 PPP $ per kg of oil equivalent)

..

..

Energy use per capita (kg of oil equivalent)

..

..

 World Bank Group portfolio

2000

2008

 (US$ millions)

 IBRD
   Total debt outstanding and disbursed
   Disbursements
   Principal repayments
   Interest payments

86
4
18
5

103
30
9
4

 IDA
   Total debt outstanding and disbursed
   Disbursements
   Total debt service

13
0
1

9
0
1

Private Sector Development

2000

2008

Time required to start a business (days)
Cost to start a business (% of GNI per capita)
Time required to register property (days)

–
–
–

6
5.0
210

 IFC (fiscal year)
   Total disbursed and outstanding portfolio
      of which IFC own account
   Disbursements for IFC own account
   Portfolio sales, prepayments and
      repayments for IFC own account

6
6
0

0
0
0

Ranked as a major constraint to business
   (% of managers surveyed who agreed)
      Access to/cost of financing
      Business licensing and permits

2000

2008

3

0

..
..

52.7
46.8

 MIGA
   Gross exposure
   New guarantees

–
–

–
–

Stock market capitalization (% of GDP)
Bank capital to asset ratio (%)

29.0
..

36.9
..

Note: Figures in italics are for years other than those specified.  2008 data are preliminary.
.. indicates data are not available.  – indicates observation is not applicable.

2/25/10

Development Economics, Development Data Group (DECDG).

0

25

50

75

100

Control of cor ruption

Rule of law

Reg ulatory q ual i ty

Pol i tical stabi l i ty

Voice and accountabi l i ty

Country' s percenti le rank (0-100)

hi gher v al ues impl y better ratings

2008
2000

Go vern an ce ind icato rs, 2000 and 2008

Sourc e: Kaufmann-K raay -Mas truzzi , W orl d Bank

IBRD, 103

IDA , 9
IMF, 0

Other mul ti -
l ateral , 152

B i l ateral , 223

P ri v ate, 139

Short-term, 0

Compo si tion o f to tal extern al d eb t, 2008

US$ m i l l ions

 
 
Mi l lennium Deve lopment Goals

Mauritius

Wi th se lected targets to ach ieve b etween 1990 and  2015

(estimate closest to date shown, +/- 2 years)  

Goal 1: halve the rates for extreme poverty and malnutrition
   Poverty headcount ratio at $1.25 a day (PPP, % of population)   
   Poverty headcount ratio at national poverty line (% of population)   
   Share of income or consumption to the poorest qunitile (%)  
   Prevalence of malnutrition (% of children under 5)   

Goal 2: ensure that children are able to complete primary schooling
   Primary school enrollment (net, %)
   Primary completion rate (% of relevant age group)   
   Secondary school enrollment (gross, %)   
   Youth literacy rate (% of people ages 15-24)

Goal 3: eliminate gender disparity in education and empower women
   Ratio of girls to boys in primary and secondary education (%)   
   Women employed in the nonagricultural sector (% of nonagricultural employment)   
   Proportion of seats held by women in national parliament (%)   

Goal 4: 
reduce under-5 mortality by two-thirds
   Under-5 mortality rate (per 1,000)   
   Infant mortality rate (per 1,000 live births)   
   Measles immunization (proportion of one-year olds immunized, %)

Goal 5: 
reduce maternal mortality by three-fourths
   Maternal mortality ratio (modeled estimate, per 100,000 live births)   
   Births attended by skilled health staff (% of total)   
   Contraceptive prevalence (% of women ages 15-49)   

Goal 6: halt and begin to reverse the spread of HIV/AIDS and other major diseases
   Prevalence of HIV (% of population ages 15-49)   
   Incidence of tuberculosis (per 100,000 people)   
   Tuberculosis cases detected under DOTS (%)   

Goal 7: halve the proportion of people without sustainable access to basic needs
   Access to an improved water source (% of population)
   Access to improved sanitation facilities (% of population)
   Forest area (% of total land area)   
   Nationally protected areas (% of total land area)   
   CO2 emissions (metric tons per capita)   
   GDP per unit of energy use (constant 2005 PPP $ per kg of oil equivalent)   

Goal 8: develop a global partnership for development   
   Telephone mainlines (per 100 people)   
   Mobile phone subscribers (per 100 people)
   Internet users (per 100 people)   
   Personal computers (per 100 people)   

Mauritius

1995
..
..
..
..

..
96
62
..

..
36
8

21
20
89

..
98
..

0.1
26
86

100
94
19.0
..
1.6
..

13.2
1.0
0.2
3.2

2000

2008

..
..
..
..

93
105
78
95

98
39
8

19
16
84

..
100
26

0.2
24
88

100
94
18.7
..
2.3
..

23.7
15.2
7.3
10.1

..
..
..
..

95
94
88
96

100
38
17

15
13
98

15
99
..

1.7
22
69

100
94
18.2
3.3
2.7
..

28.7
81.4
29.9
17.6

1990
..
..
..
..

91
106
53
91

102
37
7

24
20
76

..
91
75

0.1
28
..

100
94
19.2
..
1.4
..

5.3
0.2
0.0
0.4

Edu cation ind icato rs (%)

M easles immun i z ation (% o f 1-year 
o ld s)

ICT ind icato rs (p er 100 p eop le)

125

100

75

50

25

0

2000

2002

2004

2006

2008

P rimary net enrol lment rati o

100

75

50

25

0

120

90

60

30

0

1990

1995

2000

2007

2000

2002

2004

2006

2008

Rati o of gi rl s to boy s i n primary & s ec ondary 
educ ati on

Mauri ti us

Sub-Saharan A fri c a

Fi x ed + mobi l e s ubs c ri bers
Internet us ers

Note: Figures in italics are for years other than those specified.  .. indicates data are not available.

2/25/10

Development Economics, Development Data Group (DECDG).

24 

 
 
 Annex B2 

CAS Annex B2 - Mauritius
Selected Indicators* of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management

As Of Date 3/7/2011

Indica tor
Portfol io Assessment
Number of Projec ts Under Implementat ion a
Average Implementat ion Period (years ) b
Percent of Problem Projec ts by Number a, c
Percent of Problem Projec ts by Amount a, c
Percent of Projec ts at Risk by Number a, d
Percent of Projec ts at Risk by Amount a, d
Disbursement Rat io (% ) e
Portfol io M anagement
CPPR during the year (yes /no)
Supervis ion Resources (total US$)
Average Supervis ion (US$/projec t)

2009

2010

2011

1
0.4
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

165
82

4
0.8
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
6.2

227
57

4
1.5
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
5.9

191
48

0

0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

583
58

Memorandum Item
Proj Eval by OED by Number
Proj Eval by OED by Amt (US$ millions )
% of OED Projec ts Rated U or HU by Number
% of OED Projec ts Rated U or HU by Amt

Since FY 80 La st Five FYs
32
1
356.2
10.0
15.6
0.0
9.3
0.0

a.  As shown in the Annual Report on Port folio Performance (except for current FY).
b.  Average age of projec ts in the Bank 's country port folio.
c .  Percent of projec ts rated U or HU on development objec t ives (DO) and/or implementat ion progress (IP).
d.  As defined under the Port folio Improvement Program.
e.  Rat io of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank 's port folio at the 
     beginning of the year: Inves tment projec ts only .
*   A ll indicators are for projec ts ac t ive in the Port folio, with the except ion of Disbursement Rat io,
    which inc ludes all ac t ive projec ts as well as projec ts which ex ited during the fiscal year.

25 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annex B3 

CAS Annex B3 - IBRD/IDA Program Summary 

As Of Date 3/7/2011 

Mauritius 

Proposed IBRD/IDA Base-Case Lending Program  a 

Fiscal year 

Project ID 

US$ (M) 

Strategic Rewards b  
(H/M/L) 

Implementation b   
Risks (H/M/L) 

2012 

2012 

2012 

2013 

2013 

Development Policy Loan DPL5 

Development Policy Loan DPL6 

Infrastruture - 2 

Infrastruture - 3 

Development Policy Loan DPL7 

total 

 20.0 

 30.0 

 50.0 

 50.0 

 30.0 

 180.0 

H 

H 

M 

M 

H 

L 

L 

M 

M 

L 

26 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Annex B3 

Annex B3

Mauritius: IFC Investment Operations Program

Comm itments (US$m )
Gross
Net**

2008

2009

2010

2011*

9.9
9.9

29.9
29.9

29.9
29.9

104.9
104.9

Ne t Comm itments by Se ctor (%)
Financ ial Services

100%

100%

100%

100%

Ne t Comm itments by Inve stment Instrument (%)
Equity
100%
Sub-Debt
0%
Senior Loan
0%
*  As of March 31, 2011
** IFC's Own Account only
FY ends in June

33%
67%
0%

33%
67%
0%

9%
19%
72%

27 

 
 
 
 
 
 
CAS Annex B4 - Summary of Nonlending Services - Mauritius 

As Of Date 3/7/2011 

Product 

Completion FY 

Cost (US$000) Audience a 

Objective b 

Annex B4 

Recent completions 
CEM - Managing change in a  
  Changing World 
Doing Business 2008 
Doing Business 2009 
Exchange rate & output fluctuations in 
  the small open economy 
Investment Climate Assessement 
IDF- HIV 
Labor and trade policy note 
Social protection review 
Underway 
Health policy note 
Skills development, technology  
   absorption & innovation 
ROSC (accounting/Auditing) 
Civil sevice reform policy note 
Procurement review 
Planned 
PER - civil service 
ROSC 
Safeguards country systems pilot 
Skills development analysis 
Education Status report 
____________ 

a.  Government, donor, Bank, public dissemination. 
b.  Knowledge generation, public debate, problem-solving. 

2007 
2008 
2009 
2009 
2010 
2011 
2011 
2010 

2011 
2011 
2011 
2011 
2011 

2011 
2011 
2011 
2013 
2012 

350 
50 
50 
200 
100 
90 
182 
150 

150 
200 
100 
70 
100 

200 
70 
50 
175 
150 

G, D, B, PD 
G, D, B, PD 
G, D, B, PD 
G, D, B, PD 
G, D, B, PD 
G, D, B, PD 
G, D, B, PD 

G 

G, D, B, PD 
G, D, B, PD 
G,B 
G, D, B, PD 
G, D, B 

G, D, B, PD 
G, B 
G, D, B, PD 
G, D, B, PD 
G, D, B, PD 

KN, PS 
KN, PD, PS 
KN, PD, PS 
KN, PS 
KN, PS, PD 
PS 
KN, PS 
KN, PS, PD 

KN, PS 
KN, PS, PD 
KN 
KN, PS 
KN, PS 

KN, PS 
KN 
KN, PS, PD 
KN, PS, PD 
KN, PS, PD 

28 

 
 
 
 
 
CAS Annex B8 - 
Mauritius
Ope rations Portfolio (IBRD/IDA and Grants)
As Of Date 3/7/2011

Closed Projects

41

IBRD/IDA *
Total Disbursed (Ac tive)
 4.16
          of which has been repaid
 0.00
Total Disbursed (Closed)
 172.88
          of which has been repaid
 85.17
Total Disbursed (Ac tive + Closed 177.04
          of which has been repaid
 85.17
Total Undisbursed (Ac tive)
 130.52
Total Undisbursed (Closed)
 0.00
Total Undisbursed (Ac tive + Clos 130.52

Active Projects

Project ID

P105669
P091828
P112943
P116608
Overall Result

Project Name

Last PSR 
Supe rv ision Rating
Deve lopment 
Implementati
Objectives
on Progress
MU-Econom ic Trans ition 
 MS
MS
MU-Infras truc ture Projec S
S
MU-Manufac turing & Ser
S
S
MU:Fourth Trade and Co
HS
HS

Original Amount in US$ M illions

Fiscal Year

IBRD

IDA

GRANT

2009
2010
2010
2010

18
50
20
50
138

Diffe rence Be tween
Expected and Actua
Disbursements a /
Frm 
Orig.
Rev 'd

Cance l. Undisb.

15.9025 4.92752
45.7941 27.7941 16.7941
18.95
3.3075
49.875
130.522 35.9041 16.7941

29 

 
    
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annex B8 

B8 (IFC) for Mauritius

Mauritius
Comm itted and Disbursed Outstanding Inve stment Portfol io
As of 2/28/2011
(In USD Mi l l ions)

Comm itted

Disbursed Outstanding

FY Approva l

Company

Loan

Equity

**Qua si 
Equity *GT/RM

Pa rtici  
pant

Loan

Equity

**Qua si 
Equity *GT/RM

Pa rtici  
pant

2010
0

Sbm ltd
Stanbicmaurit ius

Tota l Portfol io:

75
0

75

0
0

0

0
20

20

0
0

0

0
0

0

75
0

75

0
0

0

0
20

20

0
0

0

0
0

0

* Denotes Guarantee and Risk Management Produc ts .
** Quas i Equity inc ludes both loan and equity types .

30 

 
 
 
 
 
  
 
Annex B10 

CAS Annex B10 - 
Mauritius 
CAS Summary of Development Priorities 

As Of Date 3/7/2011 

Network area 

performance a Major issue b Country  
Country  
priority c 

priority c Reconciliation  
Bank  
of country and  
Bank  
priorities d 

Poverty Reduction & Economic  
Management 
  Poverty reduction 
  Economic policy 
  Public sector 
  Gender 
Human Development Department 
  Education 
  Health, nutrition & population 
  Social protection 
Environmentally & Socially  
Sustainable Development 
  Rural development 
  Environment 
  Social development 
Finance, Private Sector & Infrastructure 
  Financial sector 
  Private sector 
  Energy & mining 
  Infrastructure 

good 
good 
fair 
good 

fair 
fair 
fair 

good 
good 
good 

good 
good 
fair 

high 
high 
high 
high 
high 
high 
moderate low 

other MDB 

skills shortage high 
high 
unsustainable moderate moderate 
targetting 
high 
high 

moderate moderate 
high 
moderate 
moderate moderate 

high 
high 
high 

high 
high 
high 

congestion 

a. Use “excellent,” “good,” “fair,” or “poor.” 
b. Indicate principal country-specific problems (e.g., for poverty reduction, “rural poverty;” for education, “female secondary completion;” for env ironment, “urban air pollution”). 
c. To indicate priority, use “low,” “moderate,” or “high.” 
d. Give explanation, if priorities do not agree; for example, another MDB may have the lead on the issue, or there may be ongoing dialogue. 

31 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RIVIRIVIÉÉRERE
RIVIÉRE
DUDU
DU
REMP
REMPARARTT
REMPART

FLACQ
FLACQ
FLACQ

MOKAMOKA
MOKA

GRAND
GRAND
GRAND
PORPORTT
PORT

BLACK
BLACK
BLACK
RIVER
RIVER
RIVER

SASAVVANNE
SAVANNE
ANNE

PLAINES
PLAINES
PLAINES
WILHEMS
WILHEMS
WILHEMS

PORPORTT
PORT
LOUIS
LOUIS
LOUIS

PPAMPLEMOUSSES
PAMPLEMOUSSES
AMPLEMOUSSES

Mont Piton
Mont Piton
Mont Piton
(828 m)
(828 m)
(828 m)

Mt. Cocotie
Mt. Cocotie
Mt. Cocotie
(771m) 
(771m) 
(771m) 

SS
S

aa
a

vv
v

aa
a

nn
n

ee
e

MM
M

tt
t

ss
s

GG
G

rr
r

aa
a

nn
n

dd
d

ee
e

SS
S

aa
a

vv
v

aa
a

nn
n

nn
n

ee
e

VVaaccooaass
Vacoas

QQ
Q

uu
u

aa
a

rr
r

tt
t
ii
i

ee
e

rr
r

MM
M

iilliittaaiirree
ilitaire

DDééccoouuvveerrttee
Découverte
NNoouuvveellllee
Nouvelle

BBaammbboouu MM ttss
Bambou M ts

RRiivviiéérreeCCiittrroo
RiviéreCitro

nn
n

ss
s

RRiivviiéérree RR ee mm pp aa
Riviére R e m p a

rr
r

tt
t

RRiivviiéérree
Riviére

dd
d

uu
u

PP
P

oo sstt ee dd uu FFllaaccqq
o st e d u Flacq

GGrraanndd RRiivveerr SSoouutthh EEaasstt
Grand River South East

RRiivviiéérree
Riviére

LL
L

aa
a

CC
C

hhaauuxx
haux

RR
R

ii
i

vv
v
ee
e

rr
r

dd
d

uu
u

PPoossttee
Poste

GGrraanndd
Grand

RR
R

iivviiéé
ivié

rr
r

ee
e

NNooiirree
Noire

BBaaiiee dd uu CC aapp
Baie d u C ap

RR
R

ii
i

vv
v

ee
e

rr
r

dd
d

ee
e

ss
s

GG
G

aalleettss
alets

RRiivvii
Rivi
éérreedduu
éredu

RR
R
ee
e

mm
m

pp
p
aa
a
rr
r
tt
t

LaLa
La
Nicoliére
NicoliNicoliéérere

Piton de Milieu
Piton de Milieu
Piton de Milieu
Reservoir
ReserReservoirvoir

RRiivviiéérr ee TTaammaarriinn
Riviér e Tamarin

MareMare
Mare
auxaux
aux
VVacoasacoas
Vacoas

TTriolet
Triolet
riolet

BonBon
Bon
Accueil
Accueil
Accueil

Terre
TTerreerre
Rouge
Rouge
Rouge

Goodlands
Goodlands
Goodlands

GrandGrand
Grand
Gaube
Gaube
Gaube

Grand
GrandGrand
Baie
BaieBaie

Riviére du
RiviRiviéére du
re du
Rempart
Rempar
Rempartt

Bel Air
Bel Air
Bel Air

Vieux
VVieux
ieux
Grand
GrandGrand
Port
PorPortt

Montagne
Montagne
Montagne
Blanche
Blanche
Blanche

Phoenix
Phoenix
Phoenix

Curepipe
Curepipe
Curepipe

Vacoas
VVacoas
acoas

Nouvelle
Nouvelle
Nouvelle
France
France
France

Grand Bois
Grand Bois
Grand Bois

Baie du Cap
Baie du Cap
Baie du Cap

Surinam
Surinam
Surinam

L'Escalier
L'Escalier
L'Escalier

Rose Belle
Rose Belle
Rose Belle

Riviére des
RiviRiviéére des
re des
Anguilles
Anguilles
Anguilles

Chemin
Chemin
Chemin
Grenier
Grenier
Grenier

Bambous
Bambous
Bambous

Quartier
QuarQuartier
tier
Militaire
Militaire
Militaire

Pamplemousses
Pamplemousses
Pamplemousses

Centre
Centre
Centre
de Flacq
de Flacq
de Flacq

Souillac
Souillac
Souillac

MokaMoka
Moka

Rose Hill
Rose Hill
Rose Hill

Poudre d'Or

Mahebourg

Tamarin

PORT LOUIS

Flat
Island

Gunner's
Quoin

Ile D'Ambre

Cannoniers
Point

Pointe
Quatre Cocos

Point
Petite Riviére

Pointe
Sud
Ouest

Pointe
du Diable

Ile aux Cerfs

Ile aux
Bénitiers

I N D I A N
O C E A N

I N D I A N
O C E A N

20°00'S

20°00'S

20°15'S

20°15'S

20°30'S

57°30'E

57°30'E

57°45'E

Crab
Island
63°20'E

19°40'S

19°45'S

63°25'E

63°30'E

Port Mathurin

La Femme

Grand
Montagne

Petit
Gabriel

Rodrigues Island

0 1 2 3 Kilometers

0

1

2

3 Miles

IBRD 33446
INDIAN
OCEAN

MAURITIUS

This map was produced by the Map Design Unit of The World Bank.  
The boundaries, colors, denominations and any other information
shown on this map do not imply, on the part of The World Bank
Group, any judgment on the legal status of any territory, or any
endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.

0 1 2 3 4

0

1

2

3

4

5 Miles

5 Kilometers

DECEMBER 2004

M A U R I T I U S

SELECTED CITIES AND TOWNS

DISTRICT CAPITALS

NATIONAL CAPITAL

RIVERS

MAIN ROADS

DISTRICT BOUNDARIES

INTERNATIONAL BOUNDARIES

