Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized

Document of
The World Bank

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Report No. 78273-UY

INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT
AND INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION
COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY PROGRESS REPORT

Public Disclosure Authorized

Public Disclosure Authorized

FOR
THE ORIENTAL REPUBLIC OF URUGUAY
FOR THE PERIOD 2010-2015

June 13, 2013

Argentina, Paraguay and Uruguay
Country Management Unit
Latin America and the Caribbean Region

This document is being made publicly availablepriorto Board consideration.This does not
imply a presumed outcome. This document may be updatedfollowing Board considerationand
the updated document will be made publicly available in accordancewith the Bank's Policy on
Access to Information.

Uruguay - Government Fiscal Year
January 1 - December 31
Currency Equivalents
(As of March 01, 2013)
Currency Unit = Uruguayan Peso
US$1 = 19.1 Uruguay Pesos

WEIGHTS AND MEASURES
Metric System

IBRD
RegionalVice President
Country Director
Country Representative
Task Team Leader

Hasan Tuluy
Penelope Brook
Peter Siegenthaler
Peter Siegenthaler

IFC
Regional Vice President Jean Philippe Prosper
Country Manager
Salem Rohana
Task Manager
Pierre Nadji

ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS
AAA
ANI
BCU
BPS
CPI
CPPR
CPS
CPSPR
DDO
DPL
ESW
FSAP
FTS
GDP
GEF
GEMLOC
HDB
IBRD
IBTAL
IDF

Analytical and Advisory Activities
National Agency for Innovation
Central Bank of Uruguay
Banco de PrevisionSocial
Consumer Price Index
Country Portfolio Performance Review
Country Partnership Strategy
Country Partnership Strategy Progress Report
Draw-Drown Option
Development Policy Loan
Economic and Sector Work
Financial Sector Assessment Program
Full-time School
Gross Domestic Product
Global Environmental Facility
Global Emerging Markets Local Currency Bond Program
Hidrovia do Brasil
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development
Institutions Building Technical Assistance Loan
Institutional Development Fund

IFC
INE
MEF
MGAP
MSMEs
NCD
NEP
NLTA
NRM
OSE
PforR
PEFA
PER
PPP
PSIA
SFLAC
SID
SIIAS
SINARE
SOE
TA
TF
UTE
YOY

International Financial Corporation
National Statistics Institute
Ministry of Economy and Finance
Ministry of Livestock, Agriculture and Fishing
Micro-, Small and Medium Enterprises
Non-Communicable Diseases
National Equity Plan
Non-Lending Technical Assistance
Natural Resource Management
Obras Sanitariasdel Estado
Program for Results
Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability
Public Expenditure Review
Public-Private Partnership
Poverty and Social Impact Analysis
Spanish Fund for Latin America and the Caribbean
Sustainable Industrial Development
Social Areas Integrated Information System
National Firm Registry System
State-owned Enterprise
Technical Assistance
Trust Fund
Administraci6n Nacional de Usinasy TransmisionesElectricas
Year-on-Year

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This Country Partnership Strategy Progress Report (CPSPR) was prepared under the guidance of
Penelope Brook, Country Director, by Peter Siegenthaler (TTL), Ricardo Habalian, and Pierre
Nadji (IFC).
The Bank team greatly appreciates the collaboration and contributions of the Government of
Uruguay in the preparation of the Country Partnership Strategy Progress Report. In particular,
the team thanks the Minister of Finance, Mr. Fernando Lorenzo, and his team for their insightful
suggestions during the preparation of the Progress Report and portfolio reviews.
Contributions are gratefully acknowledged from Sylvia Albela Russo, Diego Ambasz, Daniel
Benitez, Valeria Bolla, Roland Clarke, Andrew Follmer, Gregoire Gauthier, Michele Gragnolati,
Thomas Haven, Julian Lampietti, Anibal Lopez, Holger Kray, Maria Ana Lugo, Zafer
Mustafaoglu, Hannah Nielsen, Luis Perez, Luis de la Plaza, Rafael Rofman, Salem Rohana,
Eduardo Wallentin, Carmen Yee-Batista, and Maria Pia Zanetti,

ORIENTAL REPUBLIC OF URUGUAY
COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY PROGRESS REPORT

TABLE OF CONTENTS

I. INTRODUCTION .....................................................
1
II. COUNTRY CONTEXT
.....................
3..........................3
III. PROGRESS TOWARDS CPS OUTCOMES
............................. 66...
IV. FUTURE ENGAGEMENT
................... ................
11
11....
V. PROGRAM RISKS AND MITIGATION
...................................
13

Tables:
Table 1 - Uruguay: Selected Macroeconomic Indicators
.............
Table 2 - Planned CPS Lending and Actual Delivery.........................

............... 4
12

Boxes:

Box 1 -New Way of Conducting CPSPR Consultations through Social Media.......

..... 13

Figures:
Figure 1 - Moderate and Extreme Poverty Trends................................5
Figure 2 - Shared Prosperity in Uruguay.......................................5

Annexes

Annex 1 - Uruguay 2010-2015 CPS Revised Results Matrix................
Annex 2 - Summary of Changes to CPS Results Matrix Outcome Indicators

...

......... 17
............ 23

Annex 3 - Summary of Virtual CPS Progress Report Consultation.......................26

Annex
Annex
Annex
Annex
Annex

4
5
6
7
8

-

AAA Program in Uruguay................................
......... 28
Operations Portfolio (IBRD/IDA and Grants)........................29
IFC Investment Operations Program...........................30
IFC Committed and Disbursed Outstanding Portfolio.........................31
Selected Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
.
.......... 32

Annex 9 - Uruguay at a Glance............................................33

I. INTRODUCTION
1.
This Progress Report assesses the implementation of the 2010-2015 joint Bank-IFC
Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) for the Oriental Republic of Uruguay'. The CPS
focuses on four pillars: i) reducing macroeconomic vulnerability and strengthening public sector
administration; ii) competitiveness and infrastructure; iii) agriculture, climate change and
environment; and iv) increasing social inclusion and equity.
2.
The CPS was prepared to support the priorities of the Government. Its
implementation has been marked by increasing external economic uncertainty. The CPS
period largely coincides with the 5-year Government cycle starting in March 2010. The CPS
supports the Government's reform program aimed at consolidating progress on economic
stability and growth, while making economic expansion more sustainable and equitable. The
program was kept flexible based on past experience with unexpected occurrences of economic
and other shocks in the country. This flexibility has enabled adaptation of the Bank Group's
program to the increasing global and regional economic uncertainty over the past years and
support for the Government's proactive strategy of precautionary financing, which aims to
protect vulnerable groups from a reversal of their modest welfare improvement in the event of
external shocks.
3.
The guiding principle established for the CPS - a focus on innovation and results has been adhered to during implementation. To ensure that Bank Group support adds value to
national programs pertaining to the four CPS pillars, it was agreed to select activities that help
access global knowledge and expertise and introduce innovative solutions to complex
development challenges. This principle has been adhered to in CPS implementation: a
considerable amount of new financing was delivered through innovative and results-based
instruments, most notably contingent financing through DPL/DDOs 2 and the new Road
Maintenance and Rehabilitation Project (P125803), the first Program for Results (PforR) in the
Region. The latter leveraged total financing of over US$500 million from the Government
budget and from other external financiers with IBRD contribution of US$66 million. This was
accompanied by an increasing emphasis on knowledge generation and sharing.
4.
Sound macroeconomic policies and a favorable external environment have
produced sustained high growth, which has become more broad-based. A remarkably fast
rebound from the 2008/2009 global financial crisis was registered, with growth rates averaging
6.2 percent in 2010-2012, continuing a historic trend of 10 years of consecutive economic
growth. Growth has become more inclusive as incomes of the bottom 40 percent have grown at a
faster rate than mean income. This is a reflection of general income growth of these groups as
well as improved coverage and targeting of social programs.
5.
There have been advances on structural reforms, albeit at different speeds.
Efficiency of public sector management was increased through measures such as the gradual
1 Report No. 55863-UY, discussed by the Board on October 14, 2010.
2 Programmatic Public Sector, Competitiveness and Social Inclusion
DPL I & II (P116215 and P123242), and
Public Sector and Social Inclusion DPL (P13 1440).

1

introduction of results-based budgeting. Progress was also made on enhancing competitiveness
in areas like customs and logistics management, including the introduction of a regulatory
framework for Public-Private Partnerships (PPPs) 3. However, this has not been sufficient to fully
address the capacity gap between an aging infrastructure and the needs of an expanding
economy. Similarly, there remain important challenges in other areas, notably secondary
education.
6.
Overall, the implementation of the CPS has been effective in helping consolidate
gains in poverty reduction and shared prosperity, and there has been significant progress
towards meeting CPS outcomes. Important CPS objectives have already been achieved, such as
those of reducing macroeconomic vulnerability, improving water and sanitation services,
strengthening climate change mitigation capacity, and consolidating social protection reforms. In
areas like enhancing transport infrastructure and non-communicable disease prevention, progress
has been less pronounced, though core outcomes are on track to be met by the end of the CPS
period. Through this Progress Report, the authorities and the Bank have agreed on a revision of
the results matrix to adjust it to the current context.
7.
IFC support to the private sector has led to job creation, higher Government
revenues, and improved economic opportunities for local economic actors. This includes in
particular medium- and small-sized enterprises (MSMEs) and farmers. As of end-201 1, IFC
operations in Uruguay are supporting close to 3000 jobs, of which 600 are held by women. Close
to 8000 farmers and 10,000 MSMEs are reached through IFC clients. IFC investments generated
$16 million in government revenues and close to $400 million for domestic suppliers.
8.
No significant further modifications to the CPS program are proposed, and the
second half of the CPS period offers an opportunity to consolidate progress on its
implementation. Bank efforts will focus on implementing the existing portfolio and delivering
high quality knowledge, advisory and convening services, effectively responding to Government
needs. IFC will continue to serve the four focus areas of financial services, agribusiness,
competiveness and education. Together with the Bank, IFC will support the implementation of
the PPP legal and regulatory framework, in areas such as transport, waste management,
renewable energy and natural gas, and explore a potential engagement at the municipal level.
9.
The forthcoming political transition period provides an opportunity to deepen
diagnostic work on Uruguay's medium- to long-term challenges. Presidential elections are
scheduled for October 2014, and the new Government will start its term in March 2015.
Diagnostic work conducted in close collaboration with the Government and other partners would
create a solid analytical basis to help the incoming administration formulate its policy priorities.
It would also inform the renewal and further strengthening of the Bank Group's program in the
forthcoming CPS cycle.
10.
An increase in global economic uncertainty is the main source of change in program
risk since adoption of the CPS, yet Uruguay's mitigation capacity has also increased.
Compared to the outset of the CPS period, Eurozone instability and other global and regional
Law No.18.786 dated July 19, 2011.

2

economic developments have raised the probability of a reversal of the currently rather favorable
external economic environment of Uruguay. This threatens important gains made in social
mobility, in particular income gains of the bottom 40 percent of the distribution, in reducing
poverty and in eliminating extreme poverty. However, there have been significant improvements
in reducing the country's vulnerability to external economic shocks, as evidenced by Uruguay's
return to Investment Grade status in early 20124
II. COUNTRY CONTEXT
11.
Three years after taking office in March 2010, the Government has made important
progress on most of its policy priorities. The coalition Government under President Mujica has
adhered to the principle of consolidating macroeconomic stability and sustaining economic
growth while strengthening and expanding social programs in support of vulnerable groups.
Among the important reform achievements over the past years, the following stand out: i)
strengthening social protection policies aimed at enhancing targeting of benefits to the most
vulnerable households; ii) gradual implementation of a health insurance scheme leading to
universal coverage with sustainable financing; iii) introduction of results-oriented budgeting that
allocates public resources more effectively to priority areas; iv) a thorough customs reform to
facilitate trade; and v) an E-government agenda aimed at simplifying administrative processes
and improving accessibility through online tools.
12.
These structural advances combined with solid macroeconomic policies and
favorable external economic conditions have resulted in a strong economic performance.
2012 was the tenth consecutive year of GDP growth, marking one of the longest growth periods
in the country's history. Due to the less favorable economic environment in the final months of
the year, however, economic activity slowed down in 2012 to a growth rate of real GDP of 3.9
percent, close to its potential growth rate of 4 percent. It is projected that the economy will keep
expanding at a rate close to 4 percent over the coming years.
13.
Concerted efforts have led to a significant reduction of Uruguay's vulnerability to
external shocks, in particular regarding public finances. The Government's pre-cautionary
financing strategy has helped build up considerable fiscal reserves to respond in the event that
Uruguay loses access to global capital markets. Effective public debt management has resulted in
debt sustainability ceasing to constitute a major medium-term concern for Uruguay. Gross public
debt declined from 76 percent of GDP in 2009 to 62.2 percent in December 2012. The debt
profile has also improved noticeably following a reduction of the share of foreign currency
denominated debt and an increase in the share of fixed-rate instruments.
14.
The medium term outlook remains solid, but challenges remain for economic
policies. There are good prospects for Uruguay meeting these challenges effectively:
* A fiscal deterioration observed in 2012 (primary fiscal surplus fell from 2.0 percent of
GDP in 2011 to -0.2 percent), to a large degree due to transitory factors such as a large
energy deficit due to low rainfall and high financing costs related to the precautionary
Standard and Poor's (April 2012), Moody's (July 2012), Fitch (March 2013) and DBRS (May 2013) upgraded
Uruguay's credit rating to investment grade, which it had lost in early 2002.
4

3

*

*

financing strategy and market interventions to support to local currency. It is expected
that this will revert to a positive fiscal trend from 2013 onwards.
Lower external price competitiveness and a buoyant internal demand that boosted
imports, mainly fuel and capital imports for large investments projects, have led to the
current account deficit reaching 5.3 percent of GDP at end-2012, up from 1.9 percent in
2010. The current account deficit is likely to increase further in 2013, but should stabilize
towards the end of the CPS period. The growth rate of imports is expected to decrease as
economic growth stabilizes at lower rates and pulp mill construction comes to an end.
Exports should accelerate, largely on account of stronger economic performance of
trading partners and significant exports resulting from major foreign investment projects
coming on-stream.
Strong domestic demand and high commodity prices led to a rise in CPI annual inflation
to 8.1 percent (period average) in 2012 and 2011, compared to 6.7 percent in 2010. In
order to curb inflation, the Central Bank increased the monetary policy rate several times
and increased marginal reserve requirements. The combination of high CPI inflation and
currency appreciation, caused mainly by large capital inflows, has led to a loss of external
price competitiveness. Macroeconomic policies face trade-offs between further monetary
tightening and avoiding a substantial currency appreciation. This will be facilitated by the
expected stabilization of internal demand at lower levels.

15.
Maintaining and eventually increasing the growth rate in the medium and long term
will require addressing several important growth constraints. After several years of
significant expansion, there are signs that future growth rates will depend on increasing
productivity and addressing emerging capacity constraints. Enhancing infrastructure investments,
most notably in different modes of transport, and human resources, by improving the education
system and linking it better to the needs of the economy, are particularly important in this regard.
Table 1. Uruguay: Selected Macroeconomic Indicators
Actual

Projected

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013P

2014P

2015P

Real GDP growth (%)

6.5

7.2

2.2

8.9

6.5

3.9

4.0

4.0

4.0

CPI (% change, period average)

8.1

7.9

8.1
19.3

8.1
20.3

7.1

6.0

20.9

6.7
20.1

7.7

23.5

7.1
22.6

--

--

--

Trade bal. (% of GDP)

0.7

-3.2

1.7

1.6

0.3

-2.5

-2.9

-2.4

-2.4

Current account bal. (% of GDP)

-0.9

-5.7

-1.3

-1.9

-2.9

-5.3

-5.4

-5.3

-5.3

Primary bal. (% of GDP) 1/

2.3

1.8

1.2

1.3

1.9

0.3

0.7

0.8

1.0

Overall fiscal bal. (% ofGDP) 1/
-1.5
-1.1
-1.6
-1.2
-0.6
-2.1
1/ Central Government + BPS; *based on preliminary data for 2012; Pprojected
Source: BCU, INE, MEF and World Bank staff calculations

-1.2

-1.1

-0.8

Exchange rate (average)

16.
The Government's growth strategy, further refined in the current CPS period,
recognizes these challenges. This strategy focuses on:
* Turning Uruguay into a sub-regional logistics hub and promoting non-traditional, high
value exports in areas such as logistics services, software or agro-related biotechnology.
* Further enhancing the resilience of the economy against shocks, including through the
pre-cautionary financing strategy and policies rendering the agriculture sector more
resilient to climate variability and volatility of commodity prices.
4

*
*

Further strengthening the stability of the financial sector and deepening its reach to small
and medium sized enterprises and the poorer segments of the population;
Preparing for the potential exploitation of extractive industries, as a large iron ore project
is being explored and on- and offshore oil prospects are under examination.

17.
Important gains in reducing poverty and increasing shared prosperity have been
consolidated since 2010. After several years of sustained decline, by 2010 moderate and
extreme poverty rates had declined to 18.7 and 1.2 percent, respectively . In 2012, these rates fell
further to 13.1 percent and 0.6 percent (see figure 1). Increases in labor income of the poor were
the main factor behind the fall in poverty, together with the expansion of social programs, in
particular the introduction of new family allowances programs. As shown in Figure 2, since the
end of the crisis in 2003, income growth of Uruguay's bottom 40 percent income earners has
generally been higher than mean income growth, and generally higher than the income growth of
Latin America's bottom 40 percent. This important improvement in shared prosperity reflects the
high income growth rates in general and a significant fall in inequality since 2007, measured by
the Gini Coefficient, reaching 40.1 in 2011, from 42.1 in 2010.
18.
Protecting vulnerable groups from economic shocks remains a key challenge.
Estimates of income mobility suggest that most households that exited poverty in recent years
have experienced only a modest welfare improvement and face high risks of falling back into
poverty. The same applies for those that have escaped extreme poverty. Identifying this segment
of the population and adequately protecting it against potential negative shocks is a key priority
for the Government.
Figure 1. Uruguay: Moderate and Extreme Poverty Trends
Urban areas

Figure 2. Shared Prosperity in Uruguay: Growth of
Bottom 40 Percent income Earners (yoy)

Total Country
20.0%

45

39.4 39.9

40

36.6 34.4%

035.2

0

35
30CO

30.8.0%
a2.

25

21.4

~

2.7

18.7

20

00%
14.3 1.

=13.1

15
0 10
5 2.3

3.

.

.

.

1.9

5.0%k

-5.0%

LAC

-10.0%

URY

1.6
.2 05- 0.
''11110

-dr

-1.0%

0.
2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012
Moderate Poverty -e-Extreme Poverty

6

5

65 (

Annual Growth Rate Mean
Income

5

Source: National Institute of Statistics (InstitutoNacional de

Source: Calculation based on SEDLAC harmonized data

Estadistica, INE), 2012

(CEDLAS and World Bank, 2013)'.

Based on data from urban areas oniy (towns with more than 5000F inhabitants).
6 Nt:Preliminary calculations. LAC includes 18 countries: Argentina, Bolivia,

Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Costa

Rica, Dominican Rep., Ecuador, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, Mexico, Nicaragua, Panama, Paraguay, Peru,
Uruguay and Venezuela Source: National Institute of Statistics, 2012.

5

III. PROGRESS TOWARDS CPS OUTCOMES
A.

Results to Date

19.
Overall progress toward CPS outcomes as defined in the results matrix has been
satisfactory. Significant results have already been achieved under all CPS pillars, in particular
on reducing macroeconomic vulnerability, public sector modernization, strengthened business
climate, improving water and sanitation services and increasing inclusion and equity. Progress
in improving quality and coverage of transport infrastructure and implementing a noncommunicable disease (NCD) prevention strategy has been slowed by implementation
challenges and budgetary constraints, though achievement of core outcomes remains on track. A
detailed description on progress towards CPS outcome indicators is presented in the revised
Results Matrix (Annex 1). A summary of key results follows.
20.
Prudent macroeconomic and fiscal policies have reduced the economy's
vulnerability to external shocks. The Bank provided US$ 520 million 7 in contingent financing
as support to the Government's precautionary financing strategy. Together with contingent
financing from other multilateral partners, this provided a robust fiscal buffer for Uruguay to
prevent a reversal of poverty reduction and shared prosperity gains achieved in recent years. This
financing also played a role in Uruguay's credit risk upgrading to Investment Grade in early
2012.
21.
The use of innovative Bank support instruments has contributed to an effective
fiscal risk management. Uruguay has taken advantage of IBRD's local currency financing
capabilities to support the Government's objective of reducing currency risk in their sovereign
debt portfolio and recently converted IBRD loans for a total of US$150 million into Uruguayan
pesos through the first local currency financing via the swap market. In addition, the Bank is
preparing a weather derivative transaction with Uruguay's power utility (UTE) aimed at hedging
its exposure to low rainfall and high oil prices, both of which affect the cost of power generation.
Finally, technical assistance through the Global Emerging Markets Local Currency Bond
Program (GEMLOC) initiative helped further strengthen Uruguay's issuance and debt market
development strategy with a focus on local currency issuance. These efforts have contributed to
improving the country's debt profile, further decreasing foreign exchange risks and deepening
the financial sector.
22.
Several measures to enhance public sector performance have been implemented.
DPL support contributed to the introduction of performance-oriented budgeting. The 2010-2014
Budget Law8 is the first in Uruguay to organize the budget in programmatic areas and to link
program resources to specific output and outcome indicators, allowing for a better assessment of
the impact of fiscal policies. The Institution Building Technical Assistance Loan (IBTAL)
supported this objective by strengthening capacity in eight ministries through the creation of
planning, evaluation and quality control units. The IBTAL also supported ongoing e-government

Programmatic Public Sector, Competitiveness and Social Inclusion DPL I & II (P116215 and P123242), and
Public Sector Management and Social Inclusion DPL (P131440).
Law No. 18.834 dated October 25, 2011
7

6

and procurement reforms aimed at enhancing Government efficiency and transparency. As of
today, 25 Government processes can now be initiated and completed electronically, and a procurement
regulatory agency (Agencia de Comprasy Contrataciones)was created in 2012.
23.
Reforms supported by the Bank Group have helped improve the country's business
environment. Bank support toward this objective was provided mostly through the DPLs, but
also through South-South exchanges on reforms such as facilitating business registration.
Uruguay's Doing Business ranking has improved from 114 in 2010 to 89 in 2013. Key reforms
in this regard were the substantial reduction from 65 (2010) to 7 (2013) days required to start a
private company, and the transformation of the customs control system from physical inspections
and ex-ante reviews into a more effective and less time-consuming risk-based management
system. Progress was also achieved towards promoting financial market development and
enhancing investor confidence through the implementation of the Capital Markets Law 9, which
regulates the minimum requirements for stock offerings, and the computerization of the Stock
Exchange Register. In addition, IFC trade finance investment with the Nuevo Banco Comercial
(NBC) is currently supporting more than 3,000 MSMEs in the country's export sector.
24.
Progress has been made on upgrading infrastructure, yet not across the board. The
Bank contributed to increased efficiency, accountability and sustainability of the country's main
water services provider, Obras Sanitarias del Estado (OSE) 10 . Results include the
implementation of new operational models and improved customer service practices and
environmental management, together with the expansion of clean water networks and the
connection of 8,500 families to the sewage network. These reforms resulted in a significant
increase in customer satisfaction and a reduction in water losses, which had been increasing prior
to Bank intervention. In addition, a GEF-financed operation" supported the introduction of
energy efficiency as a national priority and leveraged investment projects for more than US$ 20
million that resulted in significant energy savings.
25.
While Bank support has contributed to sustain the condition of the national roads
network, reforms to upgrade broader transport infrastructure have advanced more slowly
than initially envisioned. Road infrastructure upgrading continues to pose challenges due to
increased freight traffic and budgetary constraints. Railway system reform and the introduction
of PPPs in the roads sector have progressed slower than expected. This being said, the approval
of a regulatory framework for PPPs, the creation of the National Logistics Institute, and capacity
building efforts in this area provide a sound basis to advance on these reforms going forward. In
addition, the recently approved IFC investment operation with Hidrovia do Brasil (HDB), a
US$74 million IFC loan plus US$30 million in mobilization, is expected to increase the supply
of efficient, low emission transport services on the river system.
26.
Improvements in natural resource management and climate change adaptation are
an important achievement of the CPS period. The CPS has made a considerable contribution
to the improvement of Uruguay's natural resources management (NRM,), through a series of
' Law No. 18.627 dated November 24, 2009
10OSE Modernization and System Rehabilitation Project (P101432).

Energy Efficiency Project (P068124).

7

activities clustered around the Integrated Natural Resource Management and Biodiversity Project
(P070653), by supporting on-farm investments throughout the country and promoting
technologies that reduce the vulnerability of small producers to the increasing climate variability
experienced in recent years in Uruguay. This includes strengthening information systems on
production, climate and NRM and at the producer and policy level. As part of a Bank-supported
program, more than 9,000 farm-level projects have been implemented leading to improved
natural resource, water and biodiversity management, covering an area of more 800,000 hectares
and providing direct and indirect support to 6,000 mostly small and medium farmers.
27.
Through investments and advisory services, IFC has also contributed to climate
change mitigation. Its financing of resource efficiency developments to reduce water and
energy consumption by Conaprole, Uruguay's leading dairy processor, and support to
developing fuel-efficient and low emission transport modes along the Uruguay River has led to
strengthened environmental and social standards in the private sector.
28.
Social protection programs have been expanded and consolidated. DPL, IBTAL and
analytical support to social protection reformsl 2 focused on consolidating the National Equity
Plan (NEP), which seeks to expand coverage of non-contributory social protection policies to the
poor and vulnerable, and improve their targeting. Since 2010 NEP coverage increased from 80
percent to 83 percent of households in the poorest quintile, contributing to the sustained decline
in poverty. Important progress was made on improving targeting of social programs with Bank
support. A Social Areas Integrated Information System (SIIAS) was created, a detailed register
of beneficiaries of different social programs, and a comprehensive door-to-door review of actual
and potential recipients of social transfers was conducted. These improvements are particularly
important for poor women, who are over-proportionally suffering from current targeting errors,
according to the results of a Poverty and Social Impact Analysis (PSIA) conducted for the 2012
DPL. Finally, the Bank provided an important analytical input on how the fiscal sustainability of
the expansion of these programs can be maintained over time through the recently completed
Public Expenditure Review (PER).
29.
Advances on health reform implementation have led to increased public health
insurance coverage and improved NCD prevention. DPL- and AAA-supported reforms in
health included the expansion of national health insurance coverage. Coverage is expected to
reach 60 percent of the population by the end of the CPS period, up from 43 percent in 2010. The
Non-Communicable Disease Prevention Project (P050716) has suffered implementation delays
due to the time-intensive effort needed to put implementation arrangements in place.
Notwithstanding, activities completed so far have contributed to increasing the share of the
population covered and screened for NCD risk factors, and a drop in mortality rates from
circulatory system diseases. The focus on reproductive health issues and risk factors specific to
women has led to these results being particularly relevant to women.

Programmatic Public Sector, Competitiveness and Social Inclusion DPL I&II (P116215 and P123242), Public
Sector Management and Social Inclusion DPL (P131440), and Institution Building Technical Assistance Loan
(P097604).
12

8

30.
Despite widespread concerns about a reform impasse in the education sector, there
have been advances on education coverage and quality in key areas. The current Government
considers education as the "priority of priorities". However, efforts to reverse declining trends on
education outcomes, in particular at the secondary level, have not led to the desired results. Bank
support in the sector has focused on expanding and improving the country's full-time school
(FTS) program for primary education by financing the construction and rehabilitation of more
than 170 FTSs and delivering capacity-building programs to FTS teachersl 3 . In addition, DPL
and AAA support contributed to the consolidation of the Government's One Laptop per Child
Program (Plan Ceibal), which now covers 100 percent of primary school students. Expanding
such positive examples of strengthening specific education policies to more broad-based
improvements in the sector represents a key challenge going forward.
B.

Program Implementation and Portfolio Performance

31.
A key element of CPS implementation has been an increased emphasis on
innovation and results. Responding to the Government's request, the Bank has channeled
financial and knowledge resources to innovative interventions with strong expected development
impact, providing best practice technical know-how in key sectors and contributing to capacity
building in reform program design and implementation. A significant share of new lendinf was
provided through innovative instruments such as contingent financing through DPL/DDOs and
the Road Maintenance and Rehabilitation Program for Results (PforR) (P125803), the first
project in the region delivered under this new modality. The PfoR disburses against
achievements in specified indicators, enabling a focus on capacity building and strengthening of
country fiduciary and environmental systems.
32.
New Bank lending commitments since the start of the CPS period total US$ 827
million, surpassing significantly the originally indicated amount of US$ 700 million. Of the
new lending amount, US$ 620 million were delivered in the form of DPLs, US$ 141 million in
investment operations and US$ 66 million in a PforR project. In addition, trust funds and AAA
programs have been used selectively to support key institutional reforms and project design and
implementation, such as: i) TF financing by the Spanish Fund for Latin America and the
Caribbean (SFLAC) to support capacity-building on PPPs, development of a low-carbon growth
strategy and preparation of the recently approved OSE Sustainable and Efficient Project
(P118064); ii) a Public Expenditure Review aimed at identifying challenges and opportunities in
fiscal spending and education and health reforms; and iii) GEF-financed operations supporting
biodiversity and energy efficiency.
33.
IFC has approved 5 new investment projects since August 2010. Three of them relate
to trade finance, one to agribusiness (Conaprole), and one in tourist services (Pestana Uruguay),
in addition to the HDB barge transport project expected to be approved shortly. If the HDB
13

3

Basic Education Quality Improvement Project (P070937), and Support to Uruguayan Public Schools Project

(P 126408).

Second Public Sector, Competitiveness and Social Inclusion DPL (P123242) and Public Sector and Social
Inclusion DPL (P131440).
15 Energy Efficiency Project (P068124) and GEF blend-financing of Integrated National Resource
Management and
Biodiversity Project (P077676).
14

9

project is included ($74 million IFC loan plus $30 million mobilization), IFC new financing
during the CPS period will amount to a total of $158 million.
34.
Development policy lending under the current CPS increased to US$ 620 million
from the US$ 200 million initially envisaged. This was a response to the Government's request
for significant levels of contingent financing from the Bank to support its precautionary
financing strategy in the context of increasing global economic uncertainties. The Government's
strategy aims at mitigating risks resulting from deteriorating conditions in international debt
markets, which in small economy like Uruguay can have serious consequences. The increase in
the amount for DPL-DDOs was made possible by an increased level of the total CPS lending
envelope. This increase has enabled investment lending to continue as described in the CPS. The
authorities stated that they would only request disbursement under the DPL-DDO if international
financial conditions were to deteriorate significantly. The modification is in line with the
agreement between the Government and the Bank reflected in the CPS to keep the strategy
flexible and adjust the program in the event of unforeseen domestic or external developments.
35.
Portfolio performance remains strong as a result of a robust Bank-Government
partnership, ongoing implementation support and bi-annual Country Portfolio
Performance Reviews (CPPRs). The disbursement ratio has averaged 41.8 percent during the
CPS period and reached 59.9 percent in FY12, the highest in the region during that year. There is
one problem project in the portfolio, representing 9.3 percent of the investment portfolio by
amount, which currently totals US$ 270.4 million. This project was recently restructured to
address implementation challenges and is expected to return to satisfactory levels shortly.
36.
Implementation of the Strategy has yielded important lessons that will inform the
Bank's engagement in the future. Four lessons stand out in this regard:
* First, the Government and the Bank agreed on the importance of establishing clear
baselines during project design to enable rigorous impact evaluation, a lesson which was
incorporated in recently-approved investment operations in education and water and
sanitation 6 . Similarly, the Bank could provide technical support to strengthening M&E
of Government programs, as recently agreed in the context of the planned impact
evaluation of a new early childhood program.
* Second, there is consensus that the Bank-supported program in Uruguay should gradually
move to using existing Government structures to manage projects (as opposed to the
usual practice of creating separate project units). This said, experience has shown that
adapting Bank programs and procedures to existing structures requires more intense
monitoring and support.
* Third, a more systematic approach to prioritizing, reviewing and adjusting Bank's
supported analytical and advisory activities (AAA) could help ensure that these activities
respond to priority demands from the country, strengthen linkages among different tasks,
and better disseminate findings. Such an approach was initially envisaged in the CPS,
which proposed to institute a formal AAA collaboration agreement.

16 Support

to Uruguayan Public Schools Project (P126408), OSE Sustainable and Efficient Project (P118064).

10

*

C.

Fourth, the flexibility in the lending program agreed upon in the CPS proved effective as
it enabled the Government and the Bank to respond effectively to the increased level of
uncertainty that the Uruguayan economy has been facing, through an increase in fast
disbursing contingent financing.
Adjustments to CPS Results Framework

37.
Most elements of the 2010-2015 CPS results framework remain relevant, and the
achievement of most intended results is on track. Several indicators were adjusted in light of
changes in priorities and of implementation experience. Indicators were included or modified to
reflect changes in the Bank Group's engagement in the country and incorporate expected results
from recently approved operations, most notably the following: i) contribute to sustaining the
condition of the national road network and strengthen road sector management and road safety
through PforR financing; ii) strengthen water and sanitation sector efficiency by further reducing
water losses and increasing the sector's energy efficiency and sustainability, and iii) reduce
learning gaps by strengthening FTS education quality.
38.
Lending operations in energy transmission strengthening and sustainable industrial
development (SID) did not materialize as the authorities and the Bank concluded that they
would produce limited added value. Instead, the Bank supported the implementation of a GEF
grant on energy efficiency and financial support for the Government's SID agenda is being
replaced by IDF-financed technical assistance. Outcome indicators on energy were adjusted
accordingly, and SID-related indicators were dropped as results are not expected to materialize
until the next CPS period.
39.
Several outcomes and milestones were adjusted to better reflect changed realities in
the country and the strengthened focus on areas where the Bank Group program could
influence results. Indicators on fiscal deficit reduction, credit-to-GDP ratio growth and
increased capital market activity were dropped as expected outcomes were not directly
influenced by the Bank Group's program. Moreover, the outcome on sustainable industrial
development was dropped together with the expected lending operation, given that results from
triple AAA and TF support to sustainable industrial development will materialize only in the
next CPS period. In addition, indicators related to the implementation of a NCD prevention
strategy were adjusted following a recent NCD Prevention Project (P050716) restructuring to
accelerate its execution and ensure timely delivery of results. Lastly, education outcomes were
modified to more accurately reflect the Bank program's large focus on FTS.

IV. FUTURE ENGAGEMENT
40.
Implementation of the CPS program has advanced as planned. Most new lending
proposed in the CPS has been delivered in the first half of the CPS period (see Table 2).
Similarly, an ambitious AAA program on knowledge generation and sharing has been put into
practice, with several studies and TA activities providing substantial support to the formulation
and implementation of critical reforms in areas such as on social protection, debt management,
health, PPP and climate change. Selection of new knowledge, TA and convening services
supported by the Bank, and review of progress of these activities has been conducted through a
11

6-monthly joint review of the AAA program. As mentioned above, going forward, AAA
collaboration could benefit from being further systematized in the form of a framework
agreement on a joint analytical and technical assistance program.
41.
The remainder of the CPS period offers the opportunity to consolidate program
results and prepare for the coming CPS cycle. The authorities and the Bank have agreed to
shift emphasis in the Bank's collaboration with Uruguay as follows: first, to strengthen
implementation of the current portfolio, in particular by strengthening M&E frameworks; and
second, to prepare for the coming Government (and CPS) cycle by deepening diagnostic work on
medium- and long-term development challenges, identifying reform options and helping create
broad consensus around them. A first step in this direction was conducted in the form of a virtual
consultation in the context of the preparation of the CPSPR (see Box 1). This would culminate in
the Policy Notes process starting at end-FY14. The diagnostic work and related policy dialog
will have the additional objective of identifying possible areas for new Bank lending or
knowledge programs at the end of the current or beginning of the forthcoming cycle.
Table 2. Planned CPS Lending Program and Actual Delivery
CPS Planned Loans

US$m

Status

US$m

Development Policy Loans I & II

200

Approved: Programmatic Public Sector,
Competitiveness and Social Inclusion DPL I & II
(P116215 and P123242)

360

Improvement of Primary Education

40

Approved: Support to Uruguayan Public Schools
Project (P126408)

40

Integrated Agricultural Developm. &
Natural Resources Management

40

Approved: Sustainable Management of Natural
Resources and Climate Change Project (P124181)

49

Transport Infrastructure Modernization

TBD

Approved: Road Rehabilitation and Maintenance
Program for Results (P125803)

66

Approved - OSE Sustainable and Efficient Project
(P118064)

42

Drinking Water Systems

40

Health Sector Support

TBD

Delayed: Ongoing project has been extended
(P050716)

Output-based Loan for Social Sectors
and Human Opportunities IL

TBD

Dropped: Support provided through DPLs

-

Sustainable Industrial Development

TBD

Dropped: IDF project has been approved instead

-

Energy Sector Strengthening

TBD

Dropped

-

Dropped: Energy Efficiency GEF project
successfully completed in 2011 (P068124)
Additional CPS Lending Deliveries
Public Sector and Social Inclusion DPL (P131440)
Institutions Building Technical Assistance Loan
Additional Financing (P097604)
Total Planned CPS Lending Envelope

700

Actual CPS Deliveries

260
10
827

12

Box 1. A New Way of Conducting CPSPR Consultations through Social Media
The Bank has put an increasing emphasis on engaging with Uruguayan partners from Government,
academia, private sector, think tanks and civil society on key development issues, and on providing a
platform for dialogue. In line with this, a virtual consultation was conducted for the preparation of this
CPS Progress Report, with the objective of gathering views from a broad array of stakeholders. This
was done in addition of several instances of dialog with the authorities.
Through this virtual consultation feedback was sought from a broad audience on: (i) the main
development challenges currently faced by Uruguay; (ii) ideas on possible solutions and best practices
on those areas; and (iii) the role the World Bank could play in the process. The invitation to this
consultation was disseminated through traditional and social media. A blog and a Collaboration 4
Development Platform were used for the consultation.
The feedback received was thoughtful and valuable. Participants shared ideas on how the government
could improve its results and how the Bank Group could add best value. Education, entrepreneurship,
and public sector reform were the most popular topics related to what should be Government
priorities. Logistics, infrastructure, social policies, health, economic management and security were
also mentioned in this regard. A more detailed account of these consultations is reflected in Annex 3.
In relation to the role the Bank Group should play to support Uruguay's development, several
interesting ideas were put forward. Some commentators advocated for continuation or upgrading of
existing areas of Bank Group support: :
* Promoting the use all available modes of transport to develop an efficient logistics network and to
strengthen Uruguay's potential as a regional hub.
* Putting special emphasis on supporting education, Uruguay's main challenge.
* Conducting pilot projects on public sector reforms, applying good governance standards,
promoting greater efficiency, and enhancing administrative decentralization.
* Continuing to support full-time schools as they are seen as effective in deepening social inclusion
through education and training.
Others suggested new areas of priority for the country, to which the Bank Group could add value:
* Strengthening tertiary education in the interior of the country.
* Fostering entrepreneurship and reducing informality by implementing a program - jointly with
the Government- to subsidize for a period of time the contributions of MSMEs to job creation.
* Helping establish community centers where people could meet for cultural activities, sports, and
develop a sense of belonging.
* Training of youth (young mothers in particular) on values, and on specific tasks that would allow
them to upgrade their self-esteem and financially support their families.
Still others saw an enhanced role for the Bank beyond traditional supported centered on lending:
* Going beyond financial support to Uruguay by providing technical assistance and promoting
opportunities for discussion and research.
* Acting as a knowledge platform by inviting international experts that could share other countries'
experiences in specific areas, such as on program evaluation or vocational training.
These inputs inform and confirm the intention of focusing efforts in the remainder of the CPS on
consolidating and enhancing results in existing areas of collaboration and on generating and sharing
knowledge through the Program. While some new areas of engagement will be considered for this
period, the suggestions received in this regard will be particularly useful for the renewal of the
Dro2ram in the forthcominE CPS Deriod.

42.
The AAA program for the remainder of the CPS period will focus on completing
ongoing activities and increasingly integrating activities into programs with clearly defined
objectives. While a more detailed definition of the AAA program will be discussed and agreed
13

with the Government in the coming months, the program is taking shape. It will include the
completion of ongoing AAA (see Annex 3), and the continuation of programmatic analytical
approaches, such as: i) the demand-based analytical collaboration with the MEF on
macroeconomic management, ii) follow-up technical support to the PPP reform, or iii) different
activities around the green growth agenda. The authorities and the Bank share the ambition of
integrating these analytical activities in programs with clearly defined objectives.
43.
There has been agreement in principle to embark on a limited number of new
analytical tasks in the remainder of the CPS period. These tasks aim at identifying next
generation social and economic policies with scope to further enhance shared prosperity and
reduce poverty, and lead the country on a green and inclusive growth path that is more resilient
against different types of shocks. A priori,new analytical tasks would focus on the following:
* Strengthening public sector capacity in managing a modernized railway system.
* Seeking better understanding of how to enhance productivity in key productive sectors in
view of strengthening competiveness of the economy as a whole.
* Developing measures to enhance financial sector deepening, such as mobile factoring.
* Supporting impact evaluations in priority public programs, with a focus on how these
improve living conditions of vulnerable groups and further reduce gender gaps.
* Identifying priorities for strengthening legal, regulatory and administrative capacity on
managing extractive industries.
44.
The key elements of IFC's strategy for private sector development in Uruguay will
continue to be based on its four focus areas in Uruguay. These are: i) financial services, ii)
agribusiness, iii) competiveness; and iv) education. Through Conaprole, IFC expects to support
111 new jobs, reach 200 farmers, and make $81.3 million in purchases from domestic suppliers.
Through Pestana Uruguay, IFC expects to support 100 new jobs, of which 60 are for women,
make $2.2 million in new purchases from domestic suppliers, and generate US$ 600,000 in
additional Government revenues. New investments in growth sectors and infrastructure are
expected to result in significant improvements in competitiveness and logistics costs. Together
with the Bank, IFC intends to support the implementation of the PPP legal and regulatory
framework through advisory and investment services. Potential areas for engagement on this are
transport (ports, rail, logistics), solid waste management and energy (renewable sources, and
natural gas). Bank and IFC will also coordinate their approach to support PPPs at the subnational
level (Montevideo Municipality, OSE, and others).

V. PROGRAM RISKS AND MITIGATION
45.
Risks to the program as identified in the CPS remain low, and efforts to manage
risks more proactively have intensified. A potential increase in intensity and volatility in
global economic uncertainties and the forthcoming political transition are the main risk factors to
reckon with in the remainder of CPS implementation. At the same time, the authorities have
taken on a pro-active stance on managing different risks and volatility, with Bank Group support,
and have intensified efforts to build resilience against economic and climate shocks.

14

46.
The external economic environment has become more volatile and unstable. Since
approval of the CPS, the increasing Eurozone instability has raised the probability of a reversal
of the favorable external economic environment of Uruguay. Changes in other global parameters,
such as an increased volatility in agricultural commodity prices could have significant effects on
the Uruguayan economy. In addition, certain developments in Argentina and Brazil have
increased concerns about potential regional trade shocks. Slower growth in Uruguay's
neighboring countries, and trade restrictions imposed by Argentina, have resulted in a
deceleration of export growth to Brazil from 12.6 percent in 2011 to 5.9 percent in 2012, and a
14.6 percent contraction of exports to Argentina, compared to an increase of 17 percent in 2011.
47.
Yet Uruguay also managed to further reduce its vulnerability to shocks, and a
marked reversal of its currently favorable economic trajectory is considered unlikely over
the remainder of the CPS period. There have been significant further improvements on
reducing the country's vulnerability to external economic shocks. The country has diversified its
export profile and China has replaced Argentina as the second largest trading partner after Brazil.
The debt profile has improved markedly, as reported above. Uruguay's return to Investment
Grade status in early 2012 is both recognition of this improvement and a stabilizing factor itself.
The swift response to the Government's request for increased DPL financing in DDO format and
the conversion of US$ 150 million of IBRD debt into local currency were important
contributions to the Government's efforts to create a sizeable fiscal cushion against a potential
deterioration of access to markets and effective debt management.
48.
Greater financial system stability also contributed to reducing vulnerability against
external shocks. This is a result of the banking system consolidation process that occurred in the
aftermath of the 2002 crisis and proactive Central Bank intervention and supervision. The
financial system has managed to navigate the global financial crisis and its aftermath without
major difficulties. Prudential requirements have been improved and banking regulation and
supervision have been strengthened. The accumulation of foreign reserves by the central bank
contributed further to the confidence in Uruguay's currency, which has been floating since 2002.
49.
Political and Social Risks remain low, yet the forthcoming political transition period
could have an impact on program implementation. There is risk of increased pressure to
expand public programs, in particular in social areas and on infrastructure upgrading with the
end of the administration's mandate approaching. Together with the deterioration in fiscal results
in 2012, this has raised some concerns on the prospects for maintaining a prudent fiscal stance.
However this risk is mitigated by the solid track record of the administration on fiscal stability,
and the legal limits to spending increases in the last year of the Government's term. In general,
political debates are likely to become more polarized as elections near, and this might lead the
Government to slow down the pace on more disputed reforms, such as on restructuring the
railway sector and the modernization of the state. However this is unlikely to significantly affect
implementation of reforms supported by the Bank Group's program, due to the majority of the
FrenteAmplio Government in Parliament and the consensus orientation of Uruguayan society.
50.
Since 2010, the trend of increasing climate variability has continued, with significant
implications for livelihoods, production and fiscal results. Variability in rainfall levels has
been increasing since 1996, giving rise to a number of severe droughts which have had a major
15

impact on rural income and the fiscal balance, the latter through higher energy imports needs. At
the same time, awareness of climate-related risks has increased and so have efforts to strengthen
resilience. The new Sustainable Management of Natural Resources and Climate Change Project
(P12418 1) will enhance small and medium sized producers' resilience to climate variability. This
stands at the center of several other activities aimed at reducing vulnerability to climate risks,
including through innovative measures like climate insurance.

16

Annex 1: Uruguay 2010-2015 CPS Revised Results Matrix
Country Goals

Revised CPS Outcomes

Outcome Indicators

Progress to Date

Bank Group Program Instruments

PILLAR 1 - REDUCING MACROECONOMIC VULNERABILITY & STRENGTHENING PUBLIC SECTOR ADMINISTRATION
1.
Consolidating gains on
Gradually reduce public sector
macroeconomic
indebtedness and improve
stability by reducing
public debt profile.
remammiganSoilIcuinDLI/D
vulnerabilities

Reduce Macroeconomic Vulnerabilities

The net public debt ratio decreases
from its 2009 baseline of 37 percent
of GDP to 23.3 percent in 2015

Underway. Net public debt as a share of
GDP decreased to 27.3 percent in 2012.

The foreign currency-denominated
Central Government public debt share
declines to 55 percent or less of the
total outstanding debt from its 2009
baseline of 56.7 percent.

Achieved. The share of foreign currency
denominated debt has declined
continuously to 47.9 percent in 2011 and
42.7 percent in 2012. This is a significant
improvement which will need to be
sustained in the next two years.

Programmatic Public Sector, Competitiveness
and Social Inclusion DPL I (FY11)
Programmatic Public Sector, Competitiveness
(FI2
Public Sector Mgt. and Social Ic.

DPL/DDO

GEMLOC Uruguay I (closed) & 11 (ongoing)
AAA Public Expenditure Review
IBTAL (and IBTAL
(ongoing)
Competitiveness
Sector,
Public AF)
Programmatic
Conversion of outstanding Bank loans into
local currency (TRE)

2.
Efficient and equitable
management of public
resources

Introduction of a performance
oriented budgeting

Public Sector Modernization

5-year budget for 2010-2014 is
prepared with a programmatic
classification (early 2011).
Define output and outcome indicators
for at least 9 priority areas (2009
baseline: 0).

Achieved. 2010-2014 budget was
prepared with a programmatic
classification.PrgamtcubiSeo,Cmpiivns
Underway. Output and outcome
indicators for expenditure programs in 7
priority areas were defined in the 20102014 budget law and monitored in the
Annual Budget Review 2011 and 2012.

Programmatic Public Sector, Competitiveness
and Social Inclusion DPL I (FY1 1)

Deepen e-government reforms
to enhance efficiency and
transparency

Rise in number of main
administrative processes star0ed and
completed electronically to 25 (2009
baseline: 20).

Achieved. By April 2013, 25 main
administrative processes can be accessed
and completed online.

PEFA

Public procurement is made
more efficient and transparent
through a properly functioning
regulatory agency and the
upgrading of the public
procurement software,

A procurement regulatory agency to
strengthen procurement systems is
created and operational and a
software for the Registry of
Government Suppliers is developed,

Underway. Software contract for the
Registry of Gov. Suppliers signed. The
procurement regulatory agency (Agencia
de Comprasy ContratacionesEstatales)
was created in 2012 and recently staffed
implementing an action plan to strengthen
procurement systems.

and Social Inclusion DPL II/DDO (FY12)
Public Sector Management and Social
Inclusion DPL/DDO
IBTAL (including AF) (ongoing)

17

Country Goals

Revised CPS Outcomes

Outcome Indicators

Progress to Date

Bank Group Program Instruments

PILLAR 2 -COMPETITIVENESS & INFRASTRUCTURE
1.
Improve the counitry's
business and investment
climate and increase
depth and efficiency of
financial sector.

Streamline administrative
processes for firm creation,

Fostering Competitiveness and Financial Sector Development

Reduction in the number of days to
create a firm (Baseline: 65 days
according to 2010 Doing Business DB).

Achieved. The number of days to start a
business fell significantly to 7 days in
2011 (2012 DB) and remained at 7 days in
2012 (2013 DB).

Programmatic Public Sector, Competitiveness
and Social Inclusion DPL I (FY11) & DPL
II/DDO (FY12)
Doing Business Reform Memorandum (FY12)
Public Sector Management and Social
Inclusion DPL/DDO
Productivity and Wage Negotiations TA

Enhance access of low income
households to financial
services.

Stock exchange operations are
rendered more transparent and
efficient through
computerization.

Increase the share of family
allowance beneficiaries that receive
allowances via debit cards to 50
percent (from 0 at mid-2012)

Underway: 15 percent of family
allowances beneficiaries requested a debit
card to receive allowance payments.

Number of POS available in the
country increases by 80 percent, from
13'000 in mid-2012.

Underway: Number of POS available in
the country increased by 31 percent to
17'000 at end-2012.

The Stock Exchange Register
(Registrodel Mercado de Valores) is
computerized. 70 percent of all public
securities are in electronic format.

Achieved. The Registro is computerized
and 93percent of all public securities are in
electronic format.

Financial Sector Assessment Program (FSAP)
Financial Capability Survey
Government Domestic Debt Market TA
IFC - Financial and Advisory Services support
Capital Markets Policy Note (2009 - 2010)
IFC Trade Finance Investment with NBC
Public Sector Management and Social
Inclusion DPL/DDO

18

Country Goals

Revised CPS Outcomes

Outcome Indicators
2.

Improve quality and
coverage of Uruguay's
infrastructure to
strengthen the country's
emerging role as
logistics hub, in support
of medium-term growth
and poverty alleviation
objectives.

Progress to Date

Bank Group Program Instruments

Infrastructure Strengthening

Develop an institutional
frework for coordinating
logistics management across
public and private sector.

The National Logistics Institute is
created.

Achieved. National Logistics Institute
(INALOG) was created by law No.18.697
on 11 November 2010 and made
operational in April 2011 by adopting
structure and providing staffing and
budget.

Sustain the National Road
Network in good or very good
conditions,

At least 35 percent of National Road
Network is in good of very good
condition by 2015 as measured by the
International Roughness Index (IRI)
(Baseline: 46 percent in 2009ot).

Underway. In 2012, 42 percent of Road
Network was in good/very good condition
which is expected to be maintained over
the coming two years.

Efficiency improvements in
water utility (OSE)
management lead to an increase
mtaccess to sewerage services
and reduction in water losses.

9224 additional families connected to
the sewerage network,

Increase demand and supply of
energy efficient goods and
services and contribute to
energy savings

Market share of energy efficient
appliances reaches 10 percent
(residential and commercial) and 60
percent (municipal
lighting).

budget.
Underway. 3,285 additional families
connected to the sewerage network

Transport Infrastructure Maintenance and
Rural Access project (Closed)
Uruguay Road Rehabilitation and
Maintenance Program for Results (FY13)
Grant
AAA Infrastructure and Logistics Study
Development of Financing Options for Public
Private Partnerships in the Roads Sector TA
(PPIAF)
Capacity Building Program on PPP (SFLAC)
OHpD-Bsd i
to
SPportnesi
Globa~IF
Road Safety Trust Fund
IFC financing for PPP projects
Railway AAA (FY1 3)
Energy Efficiency GEF (closed)

Achieved. Market share of energy
efficient appliances increased to 18 percent
(residential and commercial) and to 63
percent (municipal lighting)

AAA Infrtrtu D

L

Programmatic Public Sector, Competitiveness
and Social Inclusion DPL II/DDO (FY1 2)
OSE Modernization and Systems
Rehabilitation project (APL2)
OSE Sustainable and Efficient (FY13)
Preparation of OSE Response to Climate
Change Grant
Sewerage Access in Uruguay Study (TF)
Energy Efficiency GEF (closed)

17 The

"Road rehabilitation and maintenance program" with bank support (PforR) is expected to ensure that the condition of the National Road Network remains above a given
threshold (35 percent). This is deemed to be the best achievable outcome at network level when compared not only to the past declining trend but also to the counterfactual
situation prevailing in the absence of support to the Program.

19

Country StrategyT
Goals

Revised CPS Outcomes

Outcome Indicators

Progress to Date

Bank Group Program Instruments

PILLAR 3 - AGRICULTURE, CLIMATE CHANGE, AND ENVIRONMENT
1.
Widen successful
agricultural export
model to an increasing
number of farmers in
support of
environmentally
sustainable, integrated
and inclusive rural
development,

Develop an integrated and
publicly accessible climate and
agriculture information and
decision support system.

Promote environmentally
sustainable and economically
viable production systems in
small and medium-sized farms,

Agriculture and Climate Change

Climate and agricultural information
and decision support system (SNIA) is
operational.

Improved Natural Resources
Management (NRM) and biodiversity
conservation practices adopted by at
least 5,000 small and medium-sized
farms, covering an area of at least
800,000 hectares.

Underway. MGAP has adopted a
technical design for climate and
agriculture information and decision
support system in place. The University of
Columbia has been contracted to set up the
system.
Achieved. 5,300 small and medium-sized
farms have adopted farm-level NRM and
biodiversity conservation practices,
covering 880,000 hectares, representing 24
percent of total small and medium-sized
farms in UY.

Natural Resources and Biodiversity Mgmt.
Project /GEF Blend (completed)
Sustainable Mgmt. of Natural Resources and
Climate Change Project (ongoing)
Montevideo Landfill Gas Recovery TF
(ongoing)
Wind Farm at Caracoles Hill TF (ongoing)
JFC financing for export-oriented agribus.
projects, and support for small- and mediumsized farms.
ESW on Low-Carbon Growth Strategies for
the Uruguayan Economy (ongoing)
AAA on Weather Index Insurance to Cover
Grassland Production in Uruguay (ongoing)
Adaptation Fund: Building Resilience to
Climate Change and Variability in Vulnerable
Smallholders Project (blended with
Sustainable Mgmt. of Natural Resources and
Climate Change Project) (ongoing)
TA on Climate-Smart Agricult. Water
Management. (FY13)
JFC Financial and Advisory Services to
Conaprole

20

Country StrategyT
Goals

Revised CPS Outcomes

Outcome Indicators

Progress to Date

Bank Group Program Instruments

PILLAR 4 - INCLUSION AND EQUITY
1. Support National Plan for Social Equity
Implement ongoing
reforms in the social
protection system, with
a view to reducing
poverty and reaching
the population that still
lives in extreme
poverty

Rendering social policies more
effective in promoting
inclusion by improving
targeting and coordination of
information on beneficiaes of
social programs.

Main social transfer programs
(Family allowances and Tar]jeta
Uruguay Social) are based on
regularly updated beneficiary
registers.

The Integrated System of Information
of the Social Areas (SIAS) is fully
operational, giving at least nine
participating institutions full access to
data on beneficiaries of all groups of
social programs managed by these
institutions.

2.
Implement health
insurance reform to
achieve universal
coverage and adapt
health system to
changing
epidemiological profile
of country

Strengthen measures aimed at
preventing non-communicable
diseases,

Underway: A comprehensive survey of
TUS beneficiaries is underway and, by
end-2012, 65,000 household were visited.
The target is to visit 100,000 households
by end-2013. This survey aims at
correcting focalization problems, mainly
Type 11 error (i.e., beneficiaries of the
program that don't fulfill the
requirements)
Underway. The Integrated System of
Information of the Social Areas (SIAS) is
fully operational for five participating
institutions. The remaining four
institutions are expected to be incorporated
in 2013.

Programmatic Public Sector, Competitiveness
and Social Inclusion DPL I (FY1 1)
Programmatic Public Sector, Competitiveness
and Social Inclusion DPL II/DDO (FY1 2)
Public Sector Mgt. and Social Incl. DPL/DDO
Social Policy Assessment (Ongoing)
IBTAL (ongoing)
Public Expenditure Rev, on Pensions
IDF grant to Promote Equitable Access of
Society to the Legal System (ongoing)
IC support for projects enhancing access to
finance for low-income groups of farmers

Health Sector Reforms

Increase percentage of women aged
50-69 and covered by the public
provider (ASSE) who had a
mamnmogram in a given year to 20
percent. (Baseline 2009: 7.8 percent)

Underway. The percentage was 8.9
percent as of Dec 2012.

Significant increase in the proportion
of newborns with disabilities being
monitored by early detection and
treatment units. (Baseline 2006: 0).

Achieved. 75.6 percent newborns with
disabilities monitored by early detection
and treatment units as of December 2011.

National health insurance covers at
least 60 percent of population, from
43 percent at end-2009.

Achieved. National Health Insurance
coverage increased to 64 percent in
January 2013.

Health Reform Assessment (AAA)
(Delivered)
Non Communicable Diseases Prevention
Project (ongoing)
Public Expenditure Review

Gradunl increase of coverage of
the National Health Insurance,
including retired workers, and
spouses and domestic partners
of public and private sector
workers.

21

Country StrategyT
Goals

Revised CPS Outcomes

3.
Enhance access to and
quality of education,
especially by
disadvantaged groups.

Contribute to the consolidation
of the Full-Time school
program by building and
rehabilitating full-time schools
and improving learning
outcomes in these schools.

Progress to Date

Outcome Indicators

Bank Group Program Instruments

Education

Reaching an enrolment of 47,000
student places in Full Time Schools
(2009 Baseline: 37,600).

Achieved. Significant increase in
enrolment levels, reaching 47,561 student
places by 2012. Enrolment levels expected
to reach 49,800 by 2012.

Third Basic Education Quality Improvement
Proj ect+ Additional Financing (closed)
Support to Uruguayan Public Schools

Reduction in the gap in repetition
rates in 1st grade between 1st and
2nd quintiles of Full Time Schools
and the 5th quintile of all urban
school to 5.7 percent (Baseline 6.8
percent in 2011).

Underway. Repetition rates gap between
FTS and urban schools was 6.8 percent in
2012.

UY One Laptop per Child AAA (Delivered)
Promoting Innovation to Enhance
Competitiveness Project (ongoing)

Increase in the proportion of students
enrolled in 6th grade in Full Time
School with test scores corresponding
to or higher than the National
Learning Evaluation's Level Two to
45 percent in Mathematics and 72
percent in Reading. (Baselines: 32
percent in Math and 52 percent in
Reading in 2006).

Underway. Proportion of students
enrolled in 6th grade in Full Time School
with test scores corresponding to or higher
than the National Learing Evaluation's
Level Two reached 35.4 percent in Math
and 65.9 percent in Reading in 2012.

22

Annex 2. Summary of Changes to CPS Results Matrix Outcome Indicators
Revised CPS Results Matrix

Original CPS Results Matrix

Pillar 1.1. Reduce Macroeconomic Vulnerabilities
* The fiscal balance of the consolidated public sector remains
above the 2009 baseline of -1.7% of GDP.
* The gross public debt ratio decreases from its 2009
baseline of 60% of GDP.
* The foreign currency-denominated public debt share
decline to less than its 2009 baseline of 56.7 % of the total
outstanding debt.

* Dropped (not directly influenced by Bank Group's

program).
* The net public debt ratio decreases from its 2009 baseline

of 37 percent of GDP to 23.3 percent in 2015.
* The foreign currency-denominated Central Government

public debt share declines to 55 percent or less of the total
outstanding debt from its 2009 baseline of 56.7 percent.

Pillar 1.2. Public Sector Modernization
* 5-year budget for 2010-2015 is prepared with a
programmatic classification (early 2011).
* Increase in the number of expenditure programs for which
output and outcome indicators have been identified (2009
baseline: zero).
* Rise in number of GoU processes started and completed
electronically to 25 (2009 baseline: 20).
* Contract for software upgrading is underway (2011) and
user training has begun (2012).

e No change
e Define output and outcome indicators for at least 9 priority
areas (2009 baseline: 0).
e No change
A procurement regulatory agency to strengthen
procurement systems is created and operational and a
software for the Registry of Government Suppliers is
developed..

Pillar 2.1. Fostering Competitiveness and Financial Sector Development
* Reduction in the number of days to create a firm (Baseline:
65 days according to 2010 Doing Business).
* The ratio of Credit to GDP increases (2009 baseline:
22.9% of GDP).
* Increase in the number of irregularities detected by the risk
management system relative to the number of inspections
(2009 baseline: 0).
* The Registro del Mercado de Valores is computerized and
about 70 percent of all public securities are in electronic
format.Valores)

0 No change
e Dropped (not directly influenced by Bank's program).
- Dropped

VaThe s

chn
gter (Regisro dl Mc
e
is computerized and 70% of all public securities
are in electronic format.
* Increase the share of family allowance beneficiaries that
receive allowances via debit cards to 50 percent (from 0 at
mid-2012).
* Number of POS available in the country increases by 80
percent, from 13'000 in mid-2012.

23

Revised CPS Results Matrix

Original CPS Results Matrix

Pillar 2.3. Infrastructure Strengthening
* Implementation of railway sector reform
* Improvement of institutional capacity in the MTOP to
carry-out multi-modal transport planning.

e The National Logistics Institute is created with Bank
support.
e At least 35 percent of National Road Network is in good of

very good condition by 2015 as measured by the
International Roughness Index (IRI) (Baseline: 46 percent
in 200918).
e 9224 additional families connected to the sewerage
network.

* Access to sewerage services increased; water losses
reduced; and baseline of the impact study on public health
of access to sewerage services completed.

Market share of energy efficient appliances reaches 10
percent (residential and commercial) and 60 percent

" Key sections of UTE's transmission lines and highly
loaded transformer sub-stations are rehabilitated.

(municipal
lighting)..

Pillar 3. Agriculture and Climate Change
"

Expanded information and tracking systems, covering other
livestock species as well as value chain integration

* Climate and agricultural information and decision support

system (SNIA) is operational.

* Consolidation of different rural development programs
lReduced GHG emissions and water contamination in the

* Improved Natural Resources Management (NRM) and

agricultural sector, mainly livestock, dairy, and rice
(baseline: TBD)
" Development of renewable energy (biogas and
cogeneration) facilities at the farm and ago-industrial level

5,000 small and medium-sized farms, covering an area of
at least 800,000 hectares
e Dropped

biodiversity conservation practices adopted by at least

Pillar 4.1 Support National Plan for Social Equity
* Reduction in extreme poverty rate. (2008 baseline: 1.5

Dropped (not clearly attributable to Bank engagement).

percent).
Family allowances cover increased share of targeted
beneficiaries. (2009 baseline: 80% of households in
poorest quintile).
The Integrated System of Information of the Social Areas

(SIPAS) is fully operational.

e

Main social transfer programs (Family allowances and
Tarjeta Uruguay Social are based on regularly updated
beneficiary registers.
The Integrated System of Information of the Social Areas

(SIlAS) is fully operational, giving at least nine
participating institutions full access to data on beneficianes
of all groups of social programs managed by these
institutions.

* The "Road rehabilitation and maintenance program" with bank support (PforR) is expected to ensure that the condition of the
National Road Network remains above a given threshold (35 percent). This is deemed to be the best achievable outcome at
network level when compared not only to the past declining trend but also to the counterfactual situation prevailing in the
absence of support to the Program.

24

Revised CPS Results Matrix

Original CPS Results Matrix

Pillar 4.2 Health Sector Reforms
* Substantially increased share of women between 50 and 69
years of age have had a mammogram by 2012. (Baseline
2006: 25%).
* Significant increase in the proportion of newborns with
disabilities being monitored by early detection and
treatment units. (Baseline 2006: 0%).
* Significant increase in the proportion of population at
NCDs risk being screened in at least three departments
(Baseline 2006: 0%).

* Increase percentage of women aged 50-69 and covered by

the public provider (ASSE) who had a mammogram in a
given year to 20 percent. (Baseline 2009: 7.8 percent)
* No change

* National health insurance covers at least 60 percent of

population, from 43 percent at end-2009.

Original CPS Results Matrix

Revised CPS Results Matrix
Pillar 4.3 Education

* Reaching an enrolment of 47,000 student places in Full
Time Schools (FTS) (2009 Baseline: 37,600).
* Decrease in repetition rate in 1st grade of primary from 22
percent in 2006 and decrease in repetition rate in 2nd grade
from 15 percent in 2006.
* Improved academic achievement in language and
mathematics in 6th grade from 52 percent and 32 percent of
questions answered correctly in language and math
respectively in 2006.

* No change
* Reduction in the gap in repetition rates in 1st grade

between 1st and 2nd quintiles of FTS and the 5th quintile
of all urban schools to 5.7%.
* Increase in the proportion of students enrolled in 6th grade
in Full Time School with test scores corresponding to or
higher than the National Learning Evaluation's Level Two
to 45 percent in Mathematics and 72 percent in Reading.
(Baselines: 32 percent in Math and 52 percent in Reading
in 2006).

25

Annex 3: Summary of virtual CPS Progress Report consultation
A virtual consultation was conducted for the preparation of this CPS Progress Report, with the
objective of gathering views from a broad array of stakeholders. Through this novel approach,
feedback was sought from a broad audience, through social media. The themes put forward for
discussion were: (i) the main development challenges currently faced by Uruguay; (ii) ideas on
possible solutions and best practices on those areas; and (iii) the role the Bank Group could play
in the process. The invitation to this consultation was disseminated through traditional and social
media. A blog and a Collaboration 4 Development Platform were used for the consultation.
The feedback received was thoughtful and valuable. Participants shared what they considered
best practices from other countries, or ideas on how the government could improve its results.
Education, entrepreneurship, and public sector reform were the most popular topics related to
what should be Government priorities. Logistics, infrastructure, social policies, health, economic
management and security were also mentioned in this regard.
The virtual consultation brought forward specific comments on reforms in key development
areas. These are summarized in the following, by area:
Public sector reform: comments focused on the necessity of reducing the size of the state,
improving quality and impact of public spending, the need of strengthening transparency, and the
importance of training public servants to improve their performance.
Logistics: increased investments are needed to improve transport efficiency through
rehabilitation and maintenance on the railway system and the road system. These improvements
would strengthen Uruguay's competitiveness through increased coverage of infrastructure and
establishment of a more conducive business environment.
Social policies: suggestions included consolidation of social protection transfer programs, as
well as better articulation with local governments to assure an equal implementation throughout
the country. Participants suggested that social benefits should be better linked to specific
conditions.
Economy: enhance solid economic policies that lead to macroeconomic stability and help reduce
external vulnerabilities. Moreover, stronger efforts are needed to diversify markets and products,
and accelerate productivity growth. Also, the tax burden in Uruguay was pointed as heavy, both
for its size and its complexity.
Education: this topic received most comments. Participants agreed that this was the main
development challenge that Uruguay is currently facing. Suggestions to improve education
policies included:
*
*

Quality control for teachers at entry and adequate salaries to retain the best
professionals.
Social benefits to vulnerable families linked to specific conditions such as mandatory
school and high school attendance of their children.

26

*

*
*
*
*

Specific school systems that could allow every Uruguayan to access to a decent job.
The system should focus on vulnerable groups in order to reduce the existing gap
between them and the rest.
Create incentives to simulate knowledge generation on science and technology, both
in the public and private sectors
Better quality of public education, by applying modem education programs and
techniques (adapting to the changes occurring in the world).
Create awareness on the importance of technical studies, and promote technical
education, especially in the interior of the country.
Stimulate work habits among youth (especially those that are neither studying nor
working) to prevent dependency or delinquency.

Health: feedback on this area centered on the need of faster reforms, more actions on health
prevention, and better infrastructure for quality health services. Comments referred to an
overwhelmed public health system that responded too slow to patient's needs, and limitations of
capable health professionals.
Entrepreneurship: several participants agreed on the need for Uruguay to stimulate
entrepreneurship. Specific ideas on this included:
*
*

Develop an entrepreneurial culture, starting at education and youth, through
awareness building, training, direct support to start-ups, etc.
Reduce and simplify administrative requirements, as there were too many initial costs
and taxes to start a business. This tended to stop people, especially young and
innovative people- from trying to create a business. It was also felt that this was a
factor leading to informality. It was suggested to address this by encouraging the
creation of companies with cooperative status, simplifying registration formalities, or
abolishing or reducing minimum capital requirement. A broader roll-out of Egovernment was seen as important for this, too.

Innovation: create a culture that stimulates new ideas and creativity in general._This could entail
dedicating resources for students and researchers to improve development of R & D, establishing
a R&D startup pole jointly with the Uruguayan Agency for Innovation and Research (ANII), or
creating Uruguayan brand on innovation (such as http://startupchile.org/).
Security: this topic was mentioned as a key development challenge. Several suggestions were
made to strengthen both prevention of crime and enforcement of the rule of law.

27

Annex 4. AAA Program in Uruguay

Delivered to Client
Health Insurance Reforms NLTA

Health

Integration of Public Policies of Risk
Management of Water Origin NLTA
2011

Client Document Review
Institutional Development
Plan

Local capital market development
NLTA (GEMLOC)

Financial and Private
Sector Development

Client Document Review

Doing Business in Uruguay: Reform
Opportunities

Financial and Private
Sector Development

Memorandum

Opportunities and Informality ESW

Poverty Reduction

Report

Health Sector Study ESW

Health

Report

Public Expenditure Review ESW

Public Sector Governance

Report

Capacity-building Activities for the
Ministry of Economy and Finance on
PPPs NLTA

Transport

2012

2013

Advisory Services
Document

Development of Financing Options for
PPP in Roads Sector NLTA

Transport

Advisory Services
Document

One Laptop per Child ESW

Education

Report

To be Completed
2013

Public Expenditure and Financial
Accountability Review ESW

Financial Management

Supporting the Ministry of Finance to
Promote Uruguay's Economic Potential
NLTA

Public Sector Governance

Wages and Productivity NLTA

Economic Policy

Financial Sector Assessment Program

Financial Systems Practice

Report

Social Programs Assessment ESW

Social Protection

Report

Designing the Uruguay Rail Sector
Regulator NLTA

Transport

Low Carbon Growth Study

Agriculture and Rural
Development

Policy and Regulatory Capacitybuilding NDVI Insurance NLTA

Capital Markets Practice

Advisory Services
Document

Local capital market development I
NLTA (GEMLOC II)

Capital Markets Practice

Advisory Services
Document

Institutional Development
Plan
Advisory Services
document
Document

Advisory Services
Document
Report

Advisory Services
Document

Promoting Sustainable Industrial
Development NLTA (BB + TF)
Climate-smart Agricultural Water
Management

Report

Agriculture and Rural
Development

Advisory Services
Document
28

Annex 5. Operations Portfolio (IBRD/IDA and Grants)
As of 04/24/2013

Active Projects

Difference Between
Last PSR

Expected and Actual
Original Amount in US$ Millions

Supervision Rating

IBRD

IDA

GRANT

Cancel.

Disbursements a
Undisb.

Orig.

Development
Objectives

Implementation
Prgrs

Fiscal Year

UY 2nd Prog PubSct, Comp&Soc DPL/DDO

S

S

2012

260

260

UY Institutions Building TAL

S

S

2007

22.1

11.15731

1.157312

UY Non Comm. Disease Prevention

MU

MS

2008

25.3

12.34728

12.347283

P095520

UY Promoting Innovation to Enhance Compet.

MS

MS

2007

26

7.637738

7.637738

P125803

UY Road Rehabilitation and Maintenance Proj

#

#

2013

66

66

P126408

UY Support to Public Schools Project

S

S

2013

40

34.9

-5.099998

P124181

UY Sust.Mgmt Nat Res & Climate Change

S

MS

2012

49

44.60833

14.741666

P118064

UY-OSE Sustainable and Efficient

S

S

2013

42

41 .895

P131440

UY-Public Sct Mgt & SocInclusion DPL/DDO

S

S

2013

260

260

790.4

738.5457

Project ID

Project Name

P123242
P097604
P050716

Overall Result

30.679001

29

Frm
Rev'd

1.157312
7.637738

8.79505

Annex 6. Uruguay: IFC Investment Operations Program

2010

2011

2012

2013*

3.30
3.30

15.50
15.50

0.04
0.04

39.00
39.00

100

100

100

Original Commitments (US$m)
IFC and Participants
IFC's Own Accounts only

Original Commitments by Sector (%)- IFC Accounts

only
ACCOMMODATION & TOURISM
SERVICES
FINANCE & INSURANCE
FOOD & BEVERAGES
Total

Original Commitments by Investment Instrument (%) - IFC Accounts only
Guarantee
Loan
Total

*

23.08

100

100

100

100

3.23
96.77
100

100

100

100

76.92
100

100
100

Data as of April 01,2013

30

Annex 7. Statement of IFC's Committed and Outstanding Portfolio
Amounts in US DollarMillions
Accounting Date as of: 04/30/2013
Commitment

Institution

Fiscl Yer
Sort ame
FiclYa hr aeIFC
2002evideo
2003/ 2007/1
2013

oarl
Cnpoe40.1

2009

Milagro

2007/ 20081
200912010/
2011/ 2012

NBC Uruguay

2013

Surinor

LN

ET

QL + QE

GT

RM

ALL

ALL

LN

ET

QLE+

GT

RM

ALL

Cmtd -

Cmtd IFC

Cmtd IFC

Cmtd IFC

Cmtd IFC

Cmtd IFC

Cmtd Part

Out IFC

Out IFC

Out IFC

Out IFC

Out IFC

Out IFC

0.0

ToalPrtolo67.8

0.0

0.0

ALL
Out
Pr

0.0

-

40.1

25.1

25.1

-

7.5

-

7.5

7.5

7.5

-

11.3

-

11.3

11.3

11.3

-

-

-

43.8

-

9.0

--0.0

-

9.0
67.8

43.8

0.0

31

Annex 8. Selected Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
As of 04/24/2013

Indicator
PortfolioAssessment
Number of Projects Under Implementation a
Average Implementation Period (years) b
Percent of Problem Projects by Number ac
Percent of Problem Projects by Amount a, c
Percent of Projects at Risk by Number a,d
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount a, d
Disbursement Ratio (%) e
Portfolio Management
CPPR during the year (yes/no)
Supervision Resources (total US$)
Average Supervision (US$/project)

Memorandum Item
Proj Eval by OED by Number
Proj Eval by OED by Amt (US$ millions)
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Number
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt

2010

2011

2012

2013

8
5.2
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
30.2

8
6.3
12.5
8.5
12.5
8.5
35.2

8
5.7
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
59.9

9
2.5
11.1
3.2
11.1
3.2
20.6

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Since FY
80
45
2,525.3
9.1
8.2

Last Five
FYs
3
427.3
0.0
0.0

a. As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY).
b.Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio.
c. Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) and/or implementation progress (IP).
d.As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
e. Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the
beginning of the year: Investment projects only.
* All indicators are for projects active in the Portfolio, with the exception of Disbursement Ratio,
which includes all active projects as well as projects which exited during the fiscal year.

32

-

Uruguay at a glance
POVERTY and SOCIAL
Uruguay
Population, mid-year (milflons)
ONI percapita (Atlasmethod, S$)
ON| (Atlasmeuhod, Ut$ billens)

Latin
America
&Carib.

Uppermiddleincome

34
11,860

589
8,574

2,490
6,563

40.0

5,050

1,341

De~eopmedimnd

LIeexpectancy

Averag e annuna growth, 2005-11
Population(%)
Labc r fere (%y)

0.3
1.3

12
2.0

0.7
11

14
93
76
9

79
74
1

61
73
1

3
94
91
11
118
114

3
93
94
111
111
111

Most recent estimate (latest year available, 2005-11}
Poverty(%ofpopuationbeownaUtonapovertyline)
Urbanpo pulation (%oftotapopuation)
Life expectancyat birth (jears)
nfnt mo rtality (per t000 vebrths)
Childmalnutritio n (%of children under 5)
Access te an improved ater so urce (%ofpopulatin)
Literacy(%ofpopulationage 5-)
Grossprimaryenrollment (%ofschool-agepopultion)
Male
Female

10
98
12
114

110

Goss
,Pi=nr
erlknntt

GNI
per
|
ceia

Accessteinprovedlttero

.e

kuguay
t

g~

KEY ECONOMIC RA TIOS and LONG-TERM TRENDS
1

1991
112

GDP (US$ebilrns)
GrosscapitalformationiGP
Exportsofgoodsandservices/GDP
Grosdomesticsavings/GDP1
Greossnationalsavings/GDP

151
20.7

Currentaccountbalance/GDP
Interest pyments/GDP
Totaldebt/GDP
Total debtservice/expo ds
P resentvalue of debiDP
P resentvalue of debtlexpo ds

0.4
2.3
376
33.1
..
...

160

2001

2010

2011

209

38.83

467

14.3
1B8
116
114
-24
2.8
445
35.2

186
26.8
19.4
64

94
27.1
92
1.5

-22
19
35.6
13.9

-31

16

Ecoomicratts

Trade

Capil

Domensti

formt.on

307
111
22.9
810
Indebbedniss

1991-01
(avera ge ann
growth)
GDP
GDP ercapita
Expods of good sand services

31
2.5
4.8

2001-11
48
4.6
8.8

201
8.9
8.5
6.0

2011
57
53

5.8

2011-15
4D
37
8.6

Ukuguay
to-~k,.

g~

STRUCTURE of the ECONOMY
1991
(%ofGDP)
Agriculture
Industry
M anufacturing
Services
Household final consumptionexpenditure
General govt final consumption expendiutre
mporns ofgoods and services

(sverage amnagrowth)
Agriculture
Industry
M anuffacturing
Services
Household final consumptionexpenditure
General govt final consumption expenditure
Grosscapitalformation
'mportsofgoods and services

8.5
355
28.3
56.0
70.1
120
17.9

1991-01

2001

2010 1

2011

65
24.5
143
69.0

95
26.1
13.8
04.4

1.
247
13.0
652

759
12.5
95

67.7
12.9
26.0

67.9
13.0
273

2001-11

2010 r

Grifi myc

(III

17

G

GF

2011

2.6
0.8
-0.8
0.7

22
4.0
54
47

0.6
0.0
3.6
8.6

4.1

4.7

137

4.5
-10
12
72
82

2.0
3.0
7.1

2.0
8.8
9.6

0.8
1
144

30
7.0
112

-1r

--

uxims
iupu

Note: 2011dataarepreliminaryestimates.
ThistablemasproducedfromtheDevelopmentEconomicsLDBdatabase
*Thediamondsshowfourkeyindicatorsinthecountry(inbold)comparedwithitsincome-groupaverage
sincompete-

ffdataaremissing,thediamondwill

33

Uruguay
PRICES and GOVERNMENT FINANCE
Domestic prices
(%change)
Consumer prices
Implicit GDP deflator
Government finance
(%of GDP, includes currentgrants)
Current revenue
Current budget balance
Overall surplus/deficit

1991
1020
1008

2001
44
43

2010
78
55

2011
6.8
80

%)

Inain
10
0
2

275
06
-11

273
09
-06

411

07

06

4
0110

16A
19
03

245
-24
-4-O

1991

2001

2010

2011

Export and import level (U S$ millJ

1,605
376
207
798
1,544
119
232
530

2,139
300
160
1,323
2,915
279
469
824

7,735
1551
439
3,719
8,365
479
2,355
1299

8i61
1,653
487
3,995
9,067
522
2,563
1,407

00

98
94
104

170
184
92

164
178
93

- 4

TRADE
(US$ mions)
Total exports (fob)
Meat
Vegetables
Manufactures
Total imports (cif)
Food
Fuelandenergy
Capital goods

.UD

2.110
o
06

Export price index (2000-DO)
Inportpriceindex(2000=10)
Terms of trade (2000=0)

120
92
130

06

o1

07

10

0I

11

W-

Fpf

BALANCE of PAYMENTS
2001

2010

2011

CurrentaccourdbaanetoGDP(%)

2,201
1966
235

3,262
3,722
-459

D,6 08
10,110
498

12,702
12,704
3

1

232
40

-68
30

-1,479
118

-1,565
126

Current account balance

42

-498

-863

-1,442

Financing items (net)
Changes in net reserves

71
-113

775
-278

502
361

4,006
-2,564

fermo:
Reserves including gold (US$ millions)
Conversion rate (DEC,focal/US$)

976
2.0

3,099
133

7,744
201

10,302
V-3

2001
2010
2Composilion
9,302
14,030
544
1,055
0
0

2011

(US$ millions)
Exportsofgoodsandservices
In ports ofgoods and services
Resource balance
Net income
Net current transfers

1991

EXTERNAL DEBT and RESOURCE FLOWS
1991
19
(US$ millions)
Totaldebtoutstandinganddisbursed
4,217
407
BRD
IDA
0

,
no

05

24

L

8

L

3

of 2011 debt(US$mil.)
14,350
1,128
0

Total debt service
IBRD
IDA

807
70
0

1,441
111
0

1,532
103
0

1,463
100
0

Composition of net resource flows
Official grants
Official creditors
Private creditors
Foreign direct investment (net inflows)
Portfolio equily(net inflows)

7
141
-137
32
0

6
103
491
297
35

30
-196
11
2,191
0

62
1,281
2,177
0

0
81

52
65

30
46

360
158

42
39
28
11

72
-8
38
-46

88
-42
15
-57

Vrld Bank program
Commitments
Disbursements
Pnncipal repayments
Net flows
Interest payments
Net transfers

0
-14.

85
73
14
59

1121
45

9690

A -EID
B - IDA
C-MF

D -(hw

mdilderal

E - ildd
F - Flivi
G-Shtern

-4
Note:This table was produced from the Development Economics LDB database

3/17/13

