Public Disclosure Authorized

Document of
The World Bank
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Public Disclosure Authorized

Report No. 66158-ZR

INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION
INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION
AND
MULTILATERAL INVESTMENT GUARANTEE AGENCY

Public Disclosure Authorized

Public Disclosure Authorized

COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY

FOR THE
DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF CONGO
FOR THE PERIOD FY2013-FY2016
April 12, 2013

International Development Association
Central Africa Country Cluster 2 (AFCC2)
Africa Region
International Finance Corporation
Sub-Saharan Africa Department
Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency
Sub-Saharan Africa Department

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance of their official
duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without World Bank authorization.

0

CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS
(Exchange Rate Effective as of March 18, 2013)
Currency Unit = Congolese Franc (CDF)
US$1.00 = CDF 919.00
Fiscal Year:
January 1 – December 31
WEIGHTS AND MEASURES
Metric System
ABBREVIATIONS
AAA
ACCES
ACH
AdPi
AECID
AFD
AfDB
AFREA
AGPP
AIDS
AS
ASARECA
BCC
BDS
BOP
BTC/CTB
CAB
CAADP
CAF
CAFEF
CAR
CAS
CASA
CASF
CDD
CDF
CDM
CEM
CEMAC
CICOS
CIDA
CIF
CIRGL
CMU
CNDP
COMESA
COMIFAC

Analytical and Advisory Activities
Africa Clean Cooking Energy Solutions
Automatic clearing house
Paris Airports (Aéroports de Paris)
Spanish Agency for International Development Cooperation
French Development Agency
African Development Bank
Africa Renewable Energy and Access Expansion Program
Agriculture-based Growth Poles Project
Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome
WBG Africa Strategy
Eastern and Central Africa
Central Bank of Congo (Banque Centrale du Congo)
Business development services
Bottom of the economic pyramid
Belgian Technical Cooperation (Coopération Technique Belge)
Central African Backbone
Comprehensive African Agricultural Development Plan
Country Assistance Framework
Conflict-Affected and Fragile Economies Facility
Central African Republic
Country Assistance Strategy
Conflict Affected States in Africa (IFC)
Central African SME Fund (IFC)
Community-driven development
Congolese Franc
Clean Development Mechanism
Country Economic Memorandum
Economic and Monetary Commission of Central African States
International Commission of Congo-Oubangui-Sangha Basin
Canadian International Development Agency
Climate Investment Funds
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region
Country management unit
National Congress for the Defense of the People (Congrès National pour la Défense Du
Peuple)
Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa
Central Africa Forests Commission (Commission des Forêts de l’Afrique Centrale)
1

CSMOD
CTB
CTC
CTF
DBSA
DCG
DFGG
DfID
DGRAD
DHS
DP
DRC
DSA
DTP3
EAC
EC
ECCAS
ECF
EDR
EIA
EIB
EISR
EITI
EMK
ER
ERPA
ERL
ESMAP
ESW
EU
FAO
FARDC
FBO
FCPF
FDLR
FIP
FM
FNCP
FPM
FSAP
FSRDC
FY
GAVI
GDP
GECAMINES
GEF
GFATM
GHD
GHG

Strategic Framework for the Implementation of Decentralization (Cadre Stratégique pour la
Mise en œuvre de la Décentralisation)
See BTC
Technical Cooperation Committee
Conservation Trust Fund
Development Bank of Southern Africa
Donor Coordination Group
Demand for good governance
Department for International Development (UK)
Department of Revenue Administration (Direction générale des recettes administratives)
Demographic and Health Survey
Development partner
Democratic Republic of the Congo (République Démocratique du Congo/RDC)
Debt Sustainability Analysis
Diphtheria-tetanus-pertussis
East Africa Community
European Commission
Economic Community of Central African States
Extended Credit Facility
Support to Street Children and Vulnerable Groups Project (Projet Enfants Dits de la Rue)
Environmental Impact Assessment
European Investment Bank
External Implementation Status and Results Report
Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative
Mining SOE (Entreprise Minière de Kasenge)
Emissions reduction
Emissions Reduction Purchase Agreement
Emergency Recovery Loans
Energy Sector Management Assistance Program
Economic and sector work
European Union
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
Army of the Democratic Republic of Congo (Forces armées de la République démocratique
du Congo)
Faith-based organization
Forest Carbon Partnership Facility
Democratic Forces for the Liberation of Rwanda (Forces démocratiques de libération du
Rwanda)
Forest Investment Program
Financial management
Forest and Nature Conservation Project
Microfinance Promotion Fund (Fonds de promotion de la microfinance)
Financial Sector Assessment Program
Social Fund of the Democratic Republic of the Congo (Fonds social de la
République démocratique du Congo)
Fiscal Year
Global Alliance for Vaccines and Immunization
Gross domestic product
Mining SOE (La Générale des Carrières et des Mines)
Global Environment Facility
Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria
Good Humanitarian Donorship (EU)
Greenhouse gas(es)

ii

GNI
GOXI
GPE
GPF
GPOBA
GPP
GPSA
GTZ
HDI
HIPC
HIV
ICCN
ICT
IDA
IDF
IDP
IE
IEP
IFC
I4S
IMF
INS
IP
I-SSSS
JICA
JSAN
KFW
KOICA
LEDG
LIC
LLIN
LRA
M&E
MDG
MDRI
MDTF
MECNT
MEPSP
MHE
MIBA
MOU
MTEF
MIGA
MIS
MONUSCO
MSE
MSF
MSME
NEPAD
NGO

Gross national income
Sharing in Governance of Extractive Industries
Global Partnership for Education
Governance Partnership Facility
Global Partnership on Output-Based Aid
Western DRC Agriculture-Based Growth Pole
Global Partnership for Social Accountability
German Agency for Technical Cooperation
Human Development Index (UNDP)
Heavily Indebted Poor Countries Initiative
Humanimmuno deficiency virus
Congolese Nature Conservation Institute (Institut Congolais de Conservation de la Nature)
Information and communication technology
International Development Association (WBG)
Institutional Development Fund
Internally displaced people/person
IDA Eligible country
Interim Education Plan
International Finance Corporation (WBG)
See I-SSSS
International Monetary Fund
National Statistical Institute (Institut National des Statistiques)
International partner
International Security and Stabilization Support Strategy
Japan International Cooperation Agency
Joint Staff Advisory Note
German Reconstruction Credit Institute (Kreditanstaltfür Wiederaufbau)
Korea International Cooperation Agency
Local Education Donors Group
Low Income Country
Long-lasting insecticidal nets (mosquito nets)
Lord’s Resistance Army
Monitoring and evaluation
Millennium Development Goals
Multilateral Debt Relief Initiative
Multi-donor Trust Fund
Congolese Minister for Environment, Nature Conservation and Tourism(Ministère de
l’Environnement, de la Conservation de la Nature et du Tourisme)
Ministry of Primary, Secondary, and Vocational Education (Ministère de l’Enseignement
Primaire, Secondaire et Professionnel)
Ministry of Higher Education
Mining SOE (Société minière de Bakwanga)
Memorandum of Understanding
Medium-Term Expenditure Framework
Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (WBG)
Management information system
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the DRC (Mission de l’Organisation
des Nations Unies pour la stabilisation en RDC)
Micro and small enterprise
Doctors without Borders (Médecins sans Frontières)
Microfinance small and medium enterprise
New Partnership for Africa’s Development
Nongovernmental organization

iii

NHA
NORAD
NRM
ODA
OHADA
PARRSA
PARSE
PARSS
PASE
PASEC
PASU
PCDSP
PCP
PDF
PEFA
PEMU
PER
PFM
PHC
PIP
PIU
PMEDE
PNFC
PPP
PPP
PRCG
PRGF
PREPAN
PROMINES
PROROUTES
PRSP
PSD
PSRFP
PTM
PUACV
PURUS
RBF
RCCM
RE

National Health Accounts
Norwegian Agency for Development
Natural resource management
Official development assistance
Legal Framework on Harmonization of Business Laws in Africa (Organisation pour
l’Harmonisation du Droit des Affaires en Afrique)
World Bank Financed Agriculture Rehabilitation Project (Projet d’Appui à la Réhabilitation
et à la Relance du Secteur Agricole)
World Bank Financed Basic Education Support Project (Projet d’Appui au Redressement du
Secteur de l’Education)
World Bank Financed Health Sector Rehabilitation Support Project (Projet d’Appui à la
Réhabilitation du Secteur de la Santé)
World Bank Financed Education Sector Support Project (Programme d’Appui au Système
Educatif)
Analysis Programme of the CONFEMEN Education Systems (Programme d’analyse des
systèmes éducatifs de la CONFEMEN)
Emergency Social Action Project (Projet d’Urgence d’Action Sociale)
Private Sector Development Project (Projet de Compétitivité et Développement du Secteur
Privé)
Peace Consolidation Program
Project Development Facility
Public Expenditures and Financial Accountability Program
Urban Water Supply Project (Projet d’alimentation en Eau potable en Milieu Urbain)
Public Expenditure Review
Public financial management
Population and Housing Census
Public Investment Program
Project Implementation Unit
Regional and Domestic Power Market Development Project - SAPMP (Projet de
Développement du Marché d'Electricité pour la Consommation Domestique et l'Exportation)
Forest and Nature Conservation Project
Public-private partnership
Purchasing power parity
Enhancing Governance Capacity Project (Projet de Renforcement des Capacités en
Gouvernance)
Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility
National Parks Project (Projet de Réhabilitation du Réseau des Parcs Nationaux) (GEF)
Governance in the Mineral Sector Technical Assistance Project (Projet d’Assistance
Technique au Secteur Minier)
High Priority Roads Reopening and Maintenance Project (Projet de Maintien et
Réhabilitation du Réseau de Routes Prioritaires)
Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper
Private sector development
Strategic Plan for Public Finance Reform
Multimodal Transport Project (Projet de Transport Multimodal)
Emergency Living Conditions Improvement Project (Projet d’Urgence d’Amélioration
des Conditions de Vie)
Emergency Urban and Social Rehabilitation Project (Projet d’Urgence et de
Réhabilitation Urbaine et Sociale)
Results-based financing
Multinational Registry of Commerce and Credit
Renewable energy

iv

REDD+

UN-REDD+ reducing emissions from deforestation and forest degradation and promoting
conservation of forest carbon stocks, sustainable management of forest, and enhancement of
forest carbon stocks
REGIDESO
Public Water Supply Society (Régie de distribution d’eau)
RTGS
Real Time Gross Settlement System
RVA
National Aviation Administration (Régie des Voies Aériennes).
RVF
National River Administration (Régie des Voies Fluviales)
SADC
Southern Africa Development Community
SAKIMA
Mining SOE (Société Aurifère du Kivu et du Maniema)
SAPMP
Southern African Power Market Project
SCTP
Transport and Ports Co. (Société Commerciale des Transports et des Ports)
SENGAMINE Diamond concession in DRC (La Minière de Senga Senga)
SEZ
Special economic zone
SIDA
Swedish International Development Cooperation Agency
SIP
Small Investment Program (MIGA)
SME
Small and medium enterprises
SMS
Short message service
SNCC
National Railroad Co. (Société Nationale des Chemins de Fer du Congo)
SNEL
Congolese National Power Co. (Société Nationale d’Electricité)
SOE
State-owned enterprise
SOKIMO
Mining SOE (Société Minière de Kilo-Moto)
SPF
State and Peace-building Fund
SSA
Sub-Saharan Africa
SSR
Security sector reform
STAREC
Stabilization and Reconstruction Plan for Eastern DRC
TIC
Tantalum-Niobium International Study Centre
ToT
Training of trainers
TVE
Technical and vocational education
UN
United Nations
UNCDF
United Nations Capital Development Fund
UNDP
United Nations Development Programme
UNFPA
United Nations Population Fund
UNICEF
United Nations Children’s Fund
UN-REDD
United Nations Collaborative Programme on Reducing Emissions from Deforestation
and Degradation in Developing Countries
USAID
United States Agency for International Development
VAT
Value-added tax
WACS
West Africa Cable System
WB
World Bank
WBG
World Bank Group
WBI
World Bank Institute
WDR
World Development Report

v

IDA
Vice President:Makhtar Diop
Country Director:Eustache Ouayoro
Task Team Leader: Emmanuel Pinto Moreira

IFC
Vice President:Jean Philippe Prosper
Regional Director:OumarSeydi
Task Team Leader:BabacarSedikh Faye

MIGA
Vice President:Michel Wormser
Regional Director:Ravi Vish
Task Team Leader:Conor Healy

The core team comprised Luigi Giovine, MontheBienvenuBiyoudi, Milaine Rossanaly and Olga Kadima.
Substantive inputs were received from IDA/IBRD: Maria L. Amelina, Amadou Oumar Ba, Brigitte
Bocoum, Chiara Bronchi, Jean Christophe Carret, Jerome Chevallier, Amadou Dem, Spyros Demetriou,
Bourama Diaite, Steven Dimitriyev, Mahine Diop, Alexandre Dossou, Louise Engulu, Madio Fall, Jean
Jacques Frere, Johannes Herderschee, Antoine Lema, Thomas Maketa Lutete, Alexandre Marc, Anthony
Molle, Jean Mabi Mulumba, Stephen Ndengwa, Pia Peeters, Rachidi Radji, Simon Rietbergen,
Christophe Rockmore, HadiaSamaha, Papa Demba Thiam, SilvanaTordo, Denis Tshibombi, Moise
Tshimenga, MauriziaTovo. IFC: Babacar Sedikh Faye, Markus Scheuermaier, Jean-Philippe Mukuaki,
Richard Muamba Kasenga; MIGA: Conor Healy.
Support was provided by Linda Carole Tiemoko and Veronique Okito. Alicia Hetzner edited the CAS.

vi

COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
FOR THE
DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF CONGO

TABLE OF CONTENTS
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

I.

INTRODUCTION .............................................................................................................. 1

II.

SETTING THE COUNTRY CONTEXT: A FRAGILE ENVIRONMENT ...................... 1
A.
B.
C.
D.

III.

Political Context ................................................................................................................... 2
Security Situation ................................................................................................................. 3
Poverty Profile, Social Context, and Progress toward MDGs ............................................. 4
Recent Economic Developments.......................................................................................... 5
DEVELOPMENT AGENDA AND GOVERNMENT PROGRAM .................................. 7

A. Opportunities and Development Challenges ........................................................................ 7
B. Country vision and poverty reduction strategy paper ........................................................ 16
IV.

PROPOSED WORLD BANK GROUP ASSISTANCE STRATEGY ............................ 18

A. Implementation of the Previous Country Assistance Strategy and Lessons Learned ........ 18
B. Overview of the New World Bank Group DRC Country Assistance Strategy (FY2013–
FY2016).............................................................................................................................. 20
C. Strategic Objectives and Results ........................................................................................ 22
D. Strengthening World Bank Coordination and Donor Harmonization ................................ 42
E. CAS Instruments ................................................................................................................ 44
V.

RISKS AND MITIGATION............................................................................................. 46

Appendixes
Appendix 1: DRC Results Matrix ............................................................................................................... 49
Appendix 2: CAS Completion Report (CAS FY2008-FY2011) ................................................................ 61
Appendix 3: Tentative AAA Pipeline under New CAS (FY13-FY16) .................................................... 101
Appendix 4: Tentative Lending Pipeline under New CAS (FY13-FY16) ................................................ 102
Appendix 5: DRC Portfolio as of End December 2012 ............................................................................ 104
Appendix 6: Ongoing AAA ...................................................................................................................... 105
Appendix 7: Trust Funds Portfolio (as of January 2013) .......................................................................... 106
Appendix 8: Donors’ Engagements and World Bank’s Contribution to Poverty Reduction in DRC ...... 108
Appendix 9: DRC Progress to MDGs ....................................................................................................... 112
Appendix 10: DRC-Macroeconomic Indicators 2007-16 ......................................................................... 113
Appendix 11: IFC Programs ..................................................................................................................... 114
Appendix 12: Key findings of the 2012 PEFA Assessment ..................................................................... 117
Appendix 13: DRC Transport Roads, 2012 .............................................................................................. 119

vii

Appendix 14: Five Priority Economic Zones Identified under the Government Development Program,
2012–16 .................................................................................................................................................... 120
Appendix 15: CAS standard annexes........................................................................................................ 121

Figures
Figure 1. DRC Voice and Accountability and .............................................................................................. 9
Figure 2. DRC Government Effectiveness, Rule of Law, Political Stability, and Control of Corruption,
2012 .............................................................................................................................................................. 9
Boxes
Box 1. Economic Governance Matrix......................................................................................................... 10
Box 2. Forests and Climate Change in DRC .............................................................................................. 27
Box 3. State-Owned Enterprises ................................................................................................................. 28
Box 4. Improving Donors’ Coordination in PFM Reforms in DRC ........................................................... 44

viii

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
1.
The Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC) is emerging from a long period of conflicts and
mismanagement, which have had devastating impacts on the economy, the institutions, and the
social fabric. In spite of the many challenges and concerns regarding the fairness of the 2011 electoral
process, for the first time in more than four decades, DRC was able to organize back-to-back multiparty
presidential and parliamentary elections.
2.
Over the past few years, with the support of the international partners, including the World
Bank, DRC was able to make significant progress in restoring security to most of its territory and
stabilizing its economy. Implementation of sound macroeconomic policies has enabled DRC to weather
the current global crisis. Since 2010, the DRC’s economic growth has exceeded the average for SubSaharan Africa by 2 percentage points, growing at an annual average of 7 percent. Economic growth in
2013 is projected to reach 8 percent, and future prospects remain broadly positive.
3.
Following the progress made in the implementation of sound economic policies and
structural reforms supported by the Bank and IMF during the previous CAS, DRC reached the
HIPC completion point and in July 2010 received a debt cancellation of US$12.3 billion (the largest
in HIPC history). Moreover, in order to entrench good governance following the HIPC completion point,
an economic governance matrix focusing mostly on publication of mining and forestry contracts,
increased transparency in the management of public resources, and improvement of the business climate
was agreed with the authorities and has been implemented since December 2010. Progress in
implementing it has triggered Bank financial support to DRC since December 2010. In agreement with
the Government and the IMF, new forward-looking measures to deepen governance and development
impact of the extractive industries, PFM, and state-owned enterprise (SOE) management are being added
to the matrix.
4.
DRC has huge potential to grow more quickly, reduce poverty, and improve human
development indicators. Despite its abundant mineral resources and long history of mining, DRC has
not yet reaped their developmental benefits. DRC remains one of the poorest countries in the world,
ranking last on the UN Human Development Index in 2013. Seventy-one percent of its population lives
on less than US$1.25 per day. The country will not meet any of the MDGs by 2015. Poor governance––
truly evidenced by the mismanagement of extractives, weak institutions, wars, and conflict––has
prevented the population from enjoying the benefits of their country’s incredible natural endowments.
Addressing this paradox has been at the heart of the DRC Second Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper
(PRSP) and the May 2012 Government Program.
5.
The new FY2013-FY2016 CAS rests on the fundamental thrust that business as usual is not
an option for a country that will have the world’s 11th largest population in 2050 and that is facing
the challenges of stabilization and peace consolidation in its eastern part. This new CAS is a joint
WB, IFC, and MIGA strategy firmly anchored in the Government’s program as well as the World Bank
Strategy for Africa. It aims at helping the Government make progress towards achieving the MDGs and
strengthen the country’s foundations for higher growth rates, and shared prosperity.
6.
The CAS program focuses on four strategic objectives: (i) increase the effectiveness of the
state at the center and at decentralized levels and improve good governance while strengthening the
development impact of World Bank operations; (ii) boost the competitiveness of the economy by
accelerating private-sector-led growth that will create jobs; (iii) improve social service delivery to raise
human development (HD) indicators, and (iv) address the development deficits contributing to fragility
and conflicts in DRC's Eastern provinces. Gender and climate change are treated as cross-cutting issues
and are addressed through the above four strategic objectives as relevant.

ix








Supporting the first strategic objective on state effectiveness and good governance will cover civil
service reform and rejuvenation in targeted ministries, implementing the public financial management
action plan at the center and at the provincial levels, strengthening the capacity of civil society
organizations to demand good governance, and reinforcing the capacity of state oversight institutions
including the Parliament. As part of the same strategic objective, all Bank-financed operations will be
implemented by Government’s institutions, and no new parallel project implementation units will be
created while the existing ones will be phased out at the end of their respective programs.
To boost the competitiveness of the economy and accelerate private-sector-led growth, the Bank will
support the development of one of the continent’s most cost-effective and abundant power sources
(Inga); and agriculture and agribusiness value chains in geographically targeted economic spaces by
financing hard and soft infrastructure and by addressing value chains specific investment climate
bottlenecks, and skills limitations.
Strengthening basic services delivery systems, targeted social protection coverage, and access to
primary and post-primary and other health services will support the third strategic objective.
The Bank will support the fourth strategic objective through an economic empowerment program by
increasing economic opportunities in eastern DRC and by addressing some of the drivers of conflicts
through analytical work and dialogue with all stakeholders; and by leveraging programs supported by
donors including the UN that focus on the reform of the justice system and the security services. The
regional dimension of the instability in Eastern DRC also will be covered. The February 24, 2013
Framework Peace Agreement offers an opportunity to build on a regional initiative that will anchor
peace and stability in Eastern DRC.

7.
The FY2013-FY2016 CAS will be supported by several of AAAs and 12 lending operations
financed under IDA16-17. Strengthening national capacity for results will go a long way in
reinforcing the national institution for statistics and enhancing the national capacity for monitoring
and evaluation (M&E), which will be an integral part of the program supported by the Bank. The
results framework will pay particular attention to gender-disaggregated indicators. Projects will report on
results quarterly, and the use of surveys and targeted impact evaluations with Bank-financed operations
will be made systematic. However, the lack of data including the recent poverty profile and the weakness
of the statistical system in DRC are big issues. Under this CAS, the Bank will support the preparation of a
household survey in 2013 and the development of statistics system including the national account
statistics through a trust fund (TF) and additional IDA funding for the statistical system. Updated
analytical work based on poverty data from the household survey will be used to prepare the Mid-term
CAS progress report.
8.
As was the case with the preceding CAS, this one will be implemented under challenging
conditions. The main risks are related to both domestic factors, including political, security, deteriorating
fiscal position, opposition to reforms and transparency by deeply entrenched vested interests, low
capacity for effective and impactful program implementation; and lack of engagement by civil society and
high unmet expectations for access to information and demand for good governance; and external factors,
mainly and external shocks in a context of an uncertain global environment.
9.
In recognition that sustained progress on governance is critical for this CAS to achieve its
objectives, its implementation will pay particular attention to issues related to good governance. Good
governance will be the building block to support state effectiveness, service delivery, and improved
business climate for private sector development (PSD) and job creation. Lack of consistent progress in
economic governance that could prevent the delivery of basic services to sizable parts of the population
would make Bank assistance ineffective and less and less relevant. Under such conditions, the Bank
would reduce its financial assistance and engage more on policy dialogue and targeted interventions that
support access to basic services by the poor. The situation will be assessed at the mid-term review when
the CAS Progress Report is being prepared.
x

I.

INTRODUCTION

1.
The last World Bank Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) for the Democratic Republic of
Congo (DRC) covered FY08–FY11 and was broadly aligned with the IDA15 cycle. That CAS was
discussed by the Board of Directors on December 18, 2007. A CAS Progress Report (CASPR) was
presented to the Board on May 26, 2010. In the absence of a fully developed Poverty Reduction Strategy
Paper (PRSP), and taking into account the uncertainty related to the general elections scheduled for end2011, a strategic note for IDA16 and the FY12 Work Program were presented to the Board on June 28,
2011. While the CASPR made some adjustments to the lending program to sharpen the focus of the
Bank’s support to DRC and to strengthen the CAS results framework, the key objectives of the CAS were
retained.
2.
This new DRC CAS covers FY2013–FY2016 and has been prepared jointly with the
International Finance Corporation (IFC) and the Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency
(MIGA).While building on the progress achieved by DRC during the past 5 years, the new CAS aims to
help the Government of DRC address ongoing challenges and assist in the implementation of DRC’s
second Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (PRSP-2) (2011–2015), adopted in late 2011. This CAS has
been prepared in parallel with other development partners, including the African Development Bank
(AfDB), the European Commission (EC), and the United States Aid Development Agency (USAID).
These partners also are preparing their respective country assistance strategies while the United Nations
has completed the preparation of its assistance strategy. To provide operational advice on key priorities to
strengthen the PRSP implementation, a Joint Staff Advisory Note (JSAN) for PRSP-2 was circulated to
the World Bank Board on December 18, 2012. Similar to the previous one, this CAS is a results-based
strategy anchored firmly in the Government’s program as well as in the World Bank Strategy for Africa
(AS).1 The CAS also aligns with the Country Assistance Framework, which is the overall framework for
donors’ coordination, which was jointly chaired by the United Nations Development Programme/United
Nations (UNDP/UN) and the World Bank.
3.
This CAS is organized in four sections. The first section provides an overview of the
country’s political, economic, security, and governance contexts, including a summary of achievements in
key areas over the past few years. The second section presents the Government’s development program,
as outlined in the PRSP-2 and its May 2012 national program; and summarizes the opportunities and
ongoing challenges faced by DRC. The third section focuses on the World Bank Group’s (WBG) new
strategy, laying out ongoing and new activities and implementation arrangements. The fourth section
addresses risks and their mitigation. Appendixes provide additional information and statistics, including
the completion report of the previous CAS and the Results Framework of this CAS.

II.

SETTING THE COUNTRY CONTEXT: A FRAGILE ENVIRONMENT

4.
DRC’s poverty and political instability are concerns in their own right. With a land
surface area of 2.3 million km2, DRC is the largest country in Sub-Saharan Africa (SSA) and shares
borders with 9 countries. The country is endowed with rich natural resources (mineral deposits, forests,
water, and arable land), a strategic location, and a young population. Despite this wealth, 71 percent of
Congolese live below the poverty line of US$1.25/day. DRC is emerging from more than four decades of
conflicts and mismanagement that have devastated the economy and the people. Since 1998, over 3.5
million people are estimated to have died. During the same period, countless millions of others have been
plunged into acute vulnerability due to displacement, loss of economic livelihoods, dilapidated
institutions, and a destroyed social fabric.
1

“Africa’s Future and the World Bank’s Support to It,” World Bank, Washington, DC, March 2011.

1

5.
DRC also is a destabilizing factor for its nine neighboring countries. While most of the
country has returned to peace since the end of wars in 2002, Eastern DRC remains unstable. The recent
crisis involving the M23 armed group2 has plunged the eastern region into yet another cycle of violence
that could have spillover effects at both the national and regional levels. A large number of the drivers of
conflict in Eastern DRC require a development solution that has a regional dimension perspective that
involves all countries of the Great Lakes region in general; and Rwanda, Burundi, and Uganda in
particular. In fact, peace and stability in DRC in general and in Eastern DRC in particular cannot take
place without addressing the social, economic, and political roots of the conflicts.

A. Political Context
6.
The 2011 presidential and legislative elections tested the stability of DRC’s institutions.
These elections were the second to be organized in DRC following the adoption of the 2006 Constitution.
The 2006 elections were managed largely by the international community. Since that time, the authorities
promulgated a new organic law dated July 28, 2010 to create a new Independent National Electoral
Commission (CENI) to manage the presidential, legislative, provincial, and local elections. The
international community was not involved directly in the organization of the 2011 elections, but it did
help defray their costs.
7.
The 2011 elections were marred by violence and contestations of the results. International
observers raised doubts about the fairness and transparency of the process. Joseph Kabila, the incumbent
President, was declared the winner and sworn in as President on December 20, 2011. However, the results
were challenged by Etienne Tshisekedi, who came in second and declared himself president, initially
posing a significant challenge to President Kabila and the stability of the country. More than 19,000
candidates contested the 500 parliamentary seats. President Kabila’s coalition won a large majority in
Parliament (341 of 500 seats) and appointed a new prime minister and government. Nevertheless, the
2011 elections showed how fragmented the political spectrum was and underscored the fragility of DRC’s
electoral institution in addition to the lack of a clear roadmap for organizing the next provincial and local
elections. This situation has undermined the legitimacy of the political personnel.
8.
The unfinished decentralization agenda has caused tensions between central authorities
and the provincial authorities. To prevent the concentration of power that took place in DRC for
decades, and in consideration of the country’s size, the 2006 Constitution defined DRC as a unitary but
decentralized state. The current 11 provincial capitals are located on average 1,700 km from Kinshasa, the
capital city; the closest provincial capital, Matadi, is located 346 km from Kinshasa. The 2006
Constitution assigned important responsibilities to the provinces. The decentralization framework
envisaged the transfer of competencies in health, primary and secondary education, and agriculture to the
provinces. In return, provinces were entitled to 40 percent of fiscal revenues collected by the national
authorities. The number of provinces was set to increase from 11 to 26. In contrast, the reality is that (i)
the existing provinces have limited institutional capacity or means to discharge their responsibilities and
(ii) the large cost associated with creating 15 additional provinces has stalled the process. Despite their
recent increases, provincial revenues consistently have been below the constitutionally mandated share.
This situation has raised tensions between national and provincial authorities. In fact, the weak
institutional capacity and limited accountability of the provincial authorities have impeded the delivery of
basic services and have minimized the benefits expected from decentralization.
9.
The current government is headed by Prime Minister Matata Ponyo, who, as minister of
finance in the previous cabinet, was credited with solid macroeconomic management performance.
2

A new armed group composed essentially of former CNDP (National Congress for the Defense of the People)
rebels, who were integrated in the national army as part of the March 2009 peace accord.

2

His new government, composed mostly of technocrats, was formed on April 28, 2012. Since then, the
performance of public institutions has improved slowly. However, despite the parliamentary majority that
the parties close to the president enjoy, the new Government remains at risk of being side tracked by
those who are unhappy with the new drive for more transparency and accountability. At the same time,
the state-owned enterprises (SOEs) continue to exhibit low levels of accountability, driven mostly by
well-connected managers and staff. In the absence of well-functioning state institutions, the actions of a
small number of individuals remain largely unconstrained and continue to have a disproportionate impact
on the ability of state institutions to deliver for the population, thus undermining the effectiveness of the
state.

B. Security Situation
10.
Since the end of the wars in 2002, DRC has been at peace everywhere except in some
areas in the Eastern provinces. While most of the provinces in the west, the center, the north, and the
south have been at peace for years, some locations in the Eastern provinces have been affected by lowintensity conflicts for decades. The only brief period of peace there was 2009 to 2011. The invasion of
Goma, capital city of North Kivu on DRC’s eastern border with Rwanda in November 2012 for 11 days
by the M23 rebellion was the cornerstone of the instability that continues to negatively affect large swaths
of population. Decisions by the authorities by mid-2012 apparently (i) requiring the rotation of military
troops from their initial postings in the mineral-rich Eastern provinces to other locations in the country
and (ii) arresting one of the high-ranking military officials indicted by the International Criminal Court
(ICC)3 may have contributed to the resurgence of the conflict in North Kivu during recent months. At
present, over 2 million people are internally displaced (doubled from 1 million in 2006), while another
300,000 are refugees in neighboring countries. Violence against civilians also is pervasive. In 2011 over
10,000 acts of sexual violence were recorded in the North Kivu and South Kivu provinces and in the Ituri
District of the Orientale Province.
11.
The persistent instability in the East is the obvious manifestation of crumbling state
institutions. Dysfunctional institutions that are not held accountable have diminished the country’s
resilience to both internal and external shocks. Institutions with the ability to adjudicate the many
conflicts and their underlying grievances over land rights and mineral and historic disputes are a
precondition for peace. Strengthening these institutions could unlock the economic potential of DRC
overall and of the Eastern provinces in particular. For decades, ethnic and communal identities in Eastern
DRC have been manipulated by political actors and armed groups. These manipulations together with
demographic imbalances created as a result of armed conflicts and migrations within the Great Lakes
region have engendered social and political exclusion and loss of identity status. This situation has fueled
instability and created large populations of forcibly displaced people, in and of themselves potential
drivers of further conflicts. Ethnicity and identity also have been used in the competition for and
occupation of land, leading to disenfranchisement and conflicts. Addressing these deep structural
imbalances will require both investment to enhance social resilience through reconciliation and
nonviolent conflict resolution, and the establishment of inclusive and equitable local governance
mechanisms.
12.
Numerous peace initiatives have failed to put an end to fighting among armed groups in
the East. Over 25 armed groups are active in the Eastern DRC, among them the M23, the Democratic
Forces for the Liberation of Rwanda (FDLR), the different Mai-Mai groups, and the Lord’s Resistance
Army (LRA). Since 2004, several waves of armed groups have been integrated in the national army, but a
number of them including Mai Mai always kept back some of their combatants, who continued harassing
civilians and fighting one another or the army, often for control of mines. Finally, addressing the
3

Now under the custody of the ICC.

3

instability in Eastern DRC will require a regional solution that involves all of the countries of the Great
Lakes region in general, and specifically, Burundi, Uganda, and Rwanda. The signing of a peace, security
and cooperation framework for DRC by the 11 countries of the region on February 24, 2013 is an
important step toward a sustainable peaceful solution to the conflicts in Eastern DRC4.

C. Poverty Profile, Social Context, and Progress toward MDGs
13.
Poverty remains widespread and the country will not reach any of the Millennium
Development Goals (MDGs) by the 2015 deadline. With a 2011 per capita gross national income (GNI)
of US$190, DRC’s population of approximately 71 million is among the poorest in the world. More than
71 percent of the population lives under the US$1.25-a-day poverty line (2006) and 14 percent of the poor
in SSA live in DRC. The country’s poverty is more than monetary. It includes a sense of exclusion,
economic instability, and the inability to cope with uncertainties and to project in the future. Poverty also
is experienced as the lack of economic opportunities and physical and psychological insecurity.
14.
While widespread, poverty is more likely to affect people living in the rural areas. There,
75 percent of the population is poor compared to 61 percent in the urban areas. Level of poverty also
varies by province. Available data shows that the poorest provinces in DRC are the Equateur, Bandundu,
and South Kivu, in which poverty is higher than 85 percent. South Kivu’s high level of poverty can be
explained by insecurity, which directly impacts economic activities. In the affected regions, conflicts are
making poverty reduction an elusive goal. In the other two provinces, the main causes are associated with
the total collapse of economic activities due to the closing of large farms and the absence of road
infrastructure. The lack of economic activities in sectors with high growth and poverty reducing potential
such as agriculture has reduced opportunities for DRC to achieve the MDG1 on poverty and malnutrition.
The vulnerability of the population is higher in areas affected by conflicts because they create fragile,
insecure, and violent environments that hamper the people’s ability to maintain sustainable livelihoods.
This insecurity is exacerbated by the quasi-absence of basic services. Displacement of large populations is
another strong contributor to poverty.
15.
All DRC’s human development indicators are low: the 2012Human Development Index
(HDI) ranks DRC last among 187 countries.5 Life expectancy at birth is 48 years (2009); maternal
mortality ratio6 is 670 per 100,000 live births, infant mortality rate is 97 per 1,000; and under-5 child
mortality rate is 158 per 1,000. Causes of death are typical of those found in very low income countries
with very poorly developed health systems. Among these causes, the lack of infrastructure, malaria,
preventable infectious diseases, malnutrition, and pregnancy-related deaths are particularly prevalent and
have impacted the government’s efforts toward achieving MDGs 4, 5 and 6.
16.
Poverty in DRC clearly is gender biased. Discrimination against women is of particular
concern given that women head 21 percent of households. Twenty-eight percent of women have never
gone to school, compared to 14 percent of men. In the 15–49 age brackets, 4 times more women than men
lack education (21 percent compared to 5 percent). Participation in the workforce is biased toward men:
women’s participation is at 55 percent compared to 85 percent for men. When it comes to same job/same
pay, women in DRC are more disadvantaged than in neighboring countries. DRC’s low ratio of 46

4

A UN Security Council resolution adopted March 28, 2013 has established a 2,500 strong intervention force under
MONUSCO with an offensive mandate to disarm the armed groups and address the threats from these groups.
5
UNDP (United Nations Development Programme), New York,
http://hdrstats.undp.org/en/countries/profiles/COD.html
6
Unless otherwise specified, all references in this document come from either DHS (Demographic and Health
Survey) 2007 or MICS (Multiple Indicator Cluster Surveys) 2010.

4

percent7 contrasts with 69 percent in Uganda, 77 percent in Burundi, and 79 percent in Rwanda. Gender
inequalities are profound, as reflected in the fact that DRC ranks 148 of 157 countries in the GenderRelated Development Index.
17.
The alarming nutritional status of women and children has severe consequences. Poor
maternal health care leads to poor nutrition for both mother and child. In DRC, 46 percent of under-5year-olds are chronically malnourished or stunted. Malnutrition in the first 1,000 days of a child’s life
leads to irreversible cognitive losses, which in turn lead to a significant and permanent lost-incomeearning potential when these children become adults. Such high levels of chronic malnutrition in women
and children have been shown to lead to annual GDP losses of 2 percent–3 percent.8Furthermore,
malnutrition is an underlying cause of 48 percent of the under-5 child deaths (DHS 2007). DRC’s
prevalence of malnutrition among pregnant women and children under 5 is among the highest in SubSaharan Africa, driven by poverty, poor access to basic health services, and inadequate hygiene and
sanitation.
18.
The absence of comprehensive and recent poverty information remains a major concern
although data from the 2007 DHS and the 2010 MICS have provided valuable information to all
stakeholders. The latest DRC census goes back to 1984 and the 2013 Household Survey (1-2-3 survey) is
still ongoing. Data from this survey are still being collected although they were primarily intended to
provide a new poverty profile in order to design the Government’s Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper,
which was adopted in 2011. The Bank is financing the ongoing household survey and will support under
this CAS, the development of the statistical system, including the national account statistics, through a TF
and additional IDA funding for statistics. Data from the ongoing household survey will be used when
preparing the CAS mid-term progress report. The Bank also will help the Government and the UNFPA to
prepare a new census in 2014. To coordinate all of these programs, a seasoned statistician has been posted
in the country office.

D. Recent Economic Developments
19.
DRC is now one of Africa’s most rapidly growing economies, but a lack of employment
opportunities poses significant risks. Since 2010, economic growth has exceeded the average for SSA
by 2 percentage points with the DRC economy growing from a very low base. According to Congolese
Central Bank (BCC) projections, economic growth in 2013–15 is projected to reach 7.3 percent––some 5
percent per capita. These projections assume that the agricultural sector is expanding by over 3 percent
whereas observers based in the provinces record double-digit growth. These divergent numbers suggest
that actual growth may be nearly 9 percent. In addition, inflation declined to a single digit in 2012, down
from 15.4 percent at end-2011 and from over 50 percent at end-2009. At the same time, over the past few
years, the Congolese franc has remained stable at approximately 920 CDF per US$1.
20.
The rapid growth of the economy over the past years has not contributed to private sector
employment. The private sector offered formal employment to only 1.2 percent of the labor force
between 2001 and 2005. Moreover, DRC has formidable infrastructure and institutional obstacles to
employment growth. In the absence of reliable data, the estimated employment is based on the 2005
household survey. The survey shows that young people, who constitute more than 50 percent of the
workforce, are most affected by unemployment, particularly in the urban areas. The unemployment rate
for the 15–24 age bracket is 32.2 percent, approximately twice the national average for urban areas (17.8
7

In DRC, women earn 46 percent of the salary of men for the same work.
D. Strauss and J. Thomas, 1997.“Health and Wages: Evidence on Men and Women in Urban Brazil,” Journal of
Econometrics, Elsevier, vol. 77(1), 159–85, March; and World Bank, “Repositioning Nutrition as Central to
Development: A Strategy for Large-Scale Action,” Washington, DC, 2006.
8

5

percent). Despite the fact that small-scale agriculture and large-scale mining are expanding rapidly, the
absence of growth in the manufacturing sector and constraints to small and medium enterprise (SME)
development suggest that job creation has been small.
21.
Despite an overall positive economic outlook, DRC’s economy faces substantial downside
risks because of its continued reliance on mining exports with no local content or significant incountry transformation. Mineral exports remain critical to DRC’s export revenues. A small number of
mining products dominate exports while there is very little transformation in the country. However, when
one or a few commodities account for the largest proportion of exports, the desire to maximize the value
retained domestically is very high. DRC should develop mechanisms to undertake downstream processing
of their raw materials to create a self-sustaining industrial base. The expansion of mineral processing is
seen not only as an avenue for export promotion through vertical diversification, but also as a means to
promote human resources and technological development by upgrading and creating specialized skills in
both the private and public sectors. Primary commodity export prices have increased on global markets
since 2002 but remain volatile. For example, copper prices declined by approximately 67 percent in early
2009 before recovering later that year. Hence, export revenues are vulnerable.
22.
Fiscal revenues have increased dramatically as a share of GDP but remain low for a
country of this size with so many needs. Following the introduction of a value-added tax (VAT) and
other measures in 2012, the authorities’ own revenues are projected to reach 22 percent of GDP in 2012;
up from 19 percent in 2011. Tax revenues increased most rapidly while petroleum royalties were more
stable. In 2010 HIPC debt relief boosted the contributions of grants to the budget. Since then, grants have
amounted to approximately 8.5 percentage points of GDP annually. Thanks to the HIPC initiative
supported by the Bank, between 2009 and 2010, pro-poor spending grew as a share of total spending by
roughly 5 percentage points (from 34 to 39 percent); whereas in 2011, there was a small drop in the share
(to 38 percent of domestically financed expenditure), because higher than expected election costs put
pressure on other spending items. Preliminary data from the2012 budget execution show that the share
may have dropped to approximately 36 percent (but still above the share in 2009) due to the pressure on
the budget from security-related spending because of the conflict in Eastern DRC.
23.
Fiscal revenues have contributed to an investment boom. In 2012 public investment
reached almost 10 percent of GDP, concentrated in public roads and, more recently, electricity generation.
However, the impact of public investment remains low, explained partly by capacity constraints. Line
ministries’ directorates of studies and planning still have difficulties in identifying and evaluating public
investment projects. Furthermore, while representing approximately 75 percent of the total capital budget,
investment projects financed from external resources, in most cases, are developed outside the budget and
not incorporated in the sector Medium-Term Expenditure Frameworks (MTEFs).The effective MTEF
approach requires a major change of the budgeting system and significantly strengthening line ministries’
capacities. Using capital expenditures as shock absorbers has long-term costs; hence the need to look for
alternatives hedge strategies for which TA from the World Bank Treasury Department may be available,
to be combined when possible with support from the IMF and IFC.
24.
DRC’s medium-term economic outlook remains positive: economic growth is projected
conservatively at 7 percent–8 percent during the CAS period with substantial upward potential.
Baseline projections use BCC data, which are biased toward officially recorded activities. These
projections show dramatic growth in the construction sector but do not reflect the growth potential of the
agricultural or manufacturing sectors. On the demand side, public and private investments remain the
main drivers of economic growth. Private investment is dominated by large-scale investment in the
mining and telecommunications sectors, financed primarily by foreign investors. Residential construction
is increasingly important. An analysis of agricultural growth suggests that, once basic security has been
reestablished in Eastern DRC, double-digit growth will be feasible. Improved security and property
6

protection are likely to leverage agricultural gains because, today, only some 10 percent of agricultural
land is under cultivation. Agricultural growth already may have cushioned the inflationary impact of
rising international food prices to the benefit of the urban population, particularly the poorest, who tend to
spend their income disproportionately on food.
25.
Regular missions and technical assistance from the IMF have anchored financial sector
and macroeconomic policies but are no substitute for resilient institutions. Under the IMF-supported
program, the Government has been able to maintain solid macroeconomic performance despite the
resumption of conflicts in the East. DRC’s fiscal and monetary policies are based on IMF-sanctioned
projections that also suggest the policy priorities that would underpin the outcomes. The IMF also is
supporting the development of institutional capacity that will help the authorities to make their own
projections on which they can base policies. Because DRC had failed to publish one last mining contract,
the IMF program expired in December 2012 without concluding the fourth and fifth reviews. An IMF
mission visited the country March 5-12, 2013 and the Fund has been in discussion with the Government
on the next steps of their partnership.

III.

DEVELOPMENT AGENDA AND GOVERNMENT PROGRAM

26.
DRC has the potential to achieve significant economic growth and create job
opportunities due to its abundant natural resources and under-employed, low-cost workforce. With
its rapid population growth rate of 2.8 percent per year, by 2050 DRC will be the world’s 11th most
populous country. The large and rapidly growing population represents a great market for the central
Africa region if a large middle class population can develop. Regional integration cannot be put forward
in this part of the continent without DRC. The country’s full richness encompasses fertile land that can
feed the entire SSA, rivers for hydropower, mineral wealth, vibrant cross-border trade, and a young
population thirsty for economic opportunities. For these huge potentials to be realized, the Government’s
growth strategy should address the structural deficiencies of the economy and deeply reform the
unfriendly investment climate while building a skilled workforce and maintaining macroeconomic
stability.
27.
Although DRC is a resource-rich country, it faces the multiple challenges of (i) improving
governance and building strong institutions,(ii) improving infrastructure and the investment climate to
unleash private sector potential that will create growth and generate jobs, (iii) building human capital, and
(iv) consolidating peace and stabilizing the Eastern part of the country.

A. Opportunities and Development Challenges
Natural resources (mineral, forests, and water) and agriculture
28.
The country’s mineral resources are huge and can make a tremendous difference in
improving living conditions. The copper reserves of Katanga are the second largest in the world after
Chile’s. DRC’s copper reserves are estimated to be as large as 70 million tons. Its cobalt and zinc reserves
could represent 5 million tons and 6 million tons, respectively. The country has the world’s largest
diamond reserves––representing almost 25 percent of the total. DRC also has great potential to exploit
major reserves of gold, cobalt, rare earths, cassiterite, and columbite-tantalite (coltan)––all located in the
East. The latter two are in high demand by global electronic goods manufacturers. Seventy percent of the
world’s coltan production is in DRC. Ensuring transparency and accountability in the management of
these natural resources, building capacity to negotiate and value these natural assets, and developing
strong public finance management and strong public investment management capacity are essential to

7

transform natural wealth into development outcomes. These outcomes didn’t materialize in the past so
DRC should advance on all of these fronts.
29.
DRC’s potential hydroelectric generation capacity could power most of the continent. Of
DRC’s potential capacity of 100,000 MW,9 2,400 MW are developed, but, of these, only 700 MW are
available to the population. As a result, power supply is heavily constrained and subject to blackouts,
placing major limitations on private sector activity. Less than 9 percent of the population has access to
(unreliable) electricity, compared to 30 percent on average in SSA. Improving energy production and
distribution to households and local private companies will spur economic activities and generate growth.
However, these improvements will require (i) the development of an appropriate regulatory framework
that can attract private sector participation and (ii) deep reforms in the governance of the national power
utility and strengthened oversight of this entity in addition to a revision of the current monopoly
arrangement.
30.
DRC has the world’s second largest tropical forest endowment and carbon sink. DRC has
145 million ha of rain forests representing over 60 percent of the total forest area in the Congo basin, the
second largest forest endowment in the world, and the second largest carbon sink in the world. On the
other hand, DRC rain forests harbor 30–40 gigatons of carbon, which equal 8 percent of the world forest
carbon, the equivalent of 3–5 years of world emissions of CO2 equivalent. Deforestation in DRC equals
0.25 percent per year, the highest deforestation rate in the Congo basin, but still a low rate compared to
South America and Southeast Asia. Their net deforestation rates are, respectively, 2 and 4 times higher.
DRC’s deforestation rate is expected to double in the next 20 years providing an opportunity for the
country to pursue a low-emissions development pathway by sustainably managing its forests (REDD+).
31.
The country’s enormous agricultural potential remains largely unrealized and could be
its best source of inclusive growth. The country is endowed with over 80 million ha of fertile, arable
land capable of supporting immense agricultural activities. The country ranks among the world’s areas
with the highest potential agriculture value for the major crops: maize, palm-oil, soybean, and sugarcane.
Today, only 10 percent of the fertile land is farmed, and 13 thousand ha are irrigated, a very small share
of the potentially irrigable area (4 million ha). Furthermore, a stunning 52 percent of all fresh water
resources in SSA are concentrated in DRC. The current land could support 40 million cattle whereas only
700,000 are in place. In addition, if the existing agricultural potential were being fully exploited, DRC
could feed 1 billion people. However, currently, even the relatively small domestic market demand for
food products is not met, so approximately one-third of all the food consumed in the country is imported.
Annual imports include 200,000 tons of rice, 200,000 tons of maize, 120,000 tons of fish, 80,000 tons of
sugar, 60,000 tons of vegetable oils, 50,000 tons of meat, and 30,000 tons of poultry.
32.
Increased productivity, storage, processing, and marketing of agricultural products
would accelerate growth and increase income generation from agriculture. Years of neglect of
agricultural extension services have resulted in a low level of adoption of appropriate technologies and
low agricultural productivity, confining farmers to subsistence agriculture. Substituting domestically
produced food for imports could spur DRC’s agricultural growth by an additional 1 percent–2 percent per
year. Poor infrastructure has locked down productivity and inhibited private investment in inputs and
outputs marketing. Studies have shown that a 10 percent reduction in transportation costs could increase
agricultural productivity by 6 percent. Increasing agricultural production by 10 percent could increase
revenues by 16 percent, compared to 10 percent for services. Because of the labor-intensive nature of
agricultural production, investing in agriculture would support job creation and reduce poverty. Increasing
women’s access to agricultural inputs also would improve women’s livelihoods and increase food
security in households.
9

The current total installed capacity in SSA is 80,000 MW.

8

Governance
33.
Indicators benchmarking countries show that tackling governance problems in DRC is a
priority. The quality of public administration, as measured in the 2012 Country Policy and Institutional
Assessment (CPIA), is stable at 2.0 (of 6.0), compared to the average among IDA borrowers of 2.9. In
2012, DRC ranked 160 of 180 countries with a score of 21 of 100 and was perceived as one of the most
corrupt countries in Transparency International’s (TI) Corruption Perceptions Index (CPI). DRC ranks 50
of 53 countries in the Mo Ibrahim Governance Index. According to the 2011 World Governance
Indicators, DRC ranks in the lowest 10th percentile on voice and accountability and regulatory quality;
and as low as the 5th percentile on government effectiveness, rule of law, political stability, and control of
corruption. This performance remains significantly below the Sub-Saharan averages.
Figure 1.DRC Voice and Accountability and
Regulatory Quality, 2012

Figure 2.DRC Government Effectiveness, Rule of
Law, Political Stability, and Control of
Corruption, 2012

Source: 2012 World Governance Indicators.

34.
Corruption continues to hamper DRC’s development prospects. Corruption remains
widespread and is taking a heavy toll on public service capacity to deliver key services. Many high-level
officials have tried to rapidly take advantage of their positions in a context fraught with uncertainties
because of the repeated conflicts. Political turmoil that has lasted for decades in the absence of a strong
executive able to impose effective sanctions has worsened the situation. At the lower echelons, the
problem is compounded by the extremely low levels and still irregular payment of government
employees’ salaries. The consensus is that, unless decisive action is taken in this area, DRC may not be
able to break the current cycle of corruption, thus further opening the path to fragile institutions unable to
reduce poverty.
35.
For DRC’s exceptional resource endowment to be translated into long-term, sustainable
growth and poverty reduction, strengthening the foundations to build government’s effectiveness is
an essential condition. While successive administrations have struggled to meet this challenge, the new
government is determined to push forward public sector management reforms that will underpin a
credible fiscal policy and sustainable economic development. Areas of focus include strong PFM, a
competent administration at both the national and provincial levels, and transparent and effective
management in the extractive industries as well as in SOEs. To ensure credible and transparent
management of the entire value chains of extractive industries, major efforts are required ranging from
contract adjudication to monitoring operations, collection, and management of revenues to delivering
services to the population.
36.
Work is underway to strengthen DRC’s public financial management and public sector
performance. Over the past five years, DRC has moved toward rebuilding a well-functioning PFM
system. In June 2010 a strategic plan for public finance reform based on the 2008 Public Expenditure
9

Review (PER) was adopted. In July of the same year, a comprehensive legal framework was approved:
the Public Financial Management Act (Loi relative aux Finances Publiques)10 regulates the management
of public finances across the country. The new Public Procurement Code became effective in October
2010.11To mobilize revenues and improve revenue management, in January 2012, the Government
introduced the Tax Payer Identification Number and implemented a VAT. The Government also is
committed to undertake a long-overdue, comprehensive public administration modernization reform. This
reform will be accomplished through creating a proper legal framework, improving human resources
management, and creating a retirement system. Similar administrative reforms are underway in the Kasai
Occidental, Katanga, South Kivu with support from the Bank, and Bandundu provinces, and locally to
support the ongoing decentralization reforms.
37.
However, to avoid potential risks to public funds at the central and local levels, the PFM
system needs to be strengthened, and transparency and accountability improved. A 2012 Public
Expenditure and Financial Accountability (PEFA) Assessment shows that the budget formulation and
execution processes remain weak and that sector budgets often are not linked to the national development
strategy. Consequently, substantial deviations between budget allocations and execution, in amount and
composition, as well as abuses in the use of emergency procedures were observed. Particular attention
needs to be paid to public investment management reforms that will improve the procedures for
identification, selection, supervision, monitoring, and execution of investment programs. Even though
basic systems of accounting, recording, and reporting are in place, DRC’s accounting system does not
comply with international standards. A modern financial management information system has been
introduced, but it is far from ensuring quality and reliability in reporting.
38.
DRC’s implementation of governance and transparency reforms in extractive industries
is moving slowly in the right direction but more needs to be done to entrench transparency and
accountability. A detailed set of measures aimed to bring more transparency and a stronger legal and
regulatory framework to the extractive and natural resources sectors is substantially completed. Some
SOEs still resist being more transparent in managing their assets and operations. Weak management,
limited capacity, poor governance structures, lack of supervision by national authorities and absence of
sanctions have been the key impediments to the mining sector contributing substantially to fiscal
revenues. However, the organization of the conference on governance and transparency in the mining
sector in Lubumbashi under the chairmanship of President Kabila on January 30–31, 2013 was the right
signal that management of the mining sector may no longer be as opaque as it was before.
Box 1. Economic Governance Matrix

Following an impressive effort during 2009–10, DRC reached the HIPC completion point in July 2010. Since then,
economic governance has deteriorated after reports of cases of nontransparent concession awards in the extractive
sectors. Poor governance has negatively impacted the business climate and accountability and efficiency in revenue
collection.
Thus, a stronger commitment to transparency was critical to restore confidence with development partners.
An Economic Governance Matrix was prepared by Government and agreed with the Bank, aiming to improve
governance in the management of natural resources, improve the business environment, and strengthen public
finance management. The matrix was presented to the Bank’s Board in December 2010, and updates were presented
to the Board in April 2011, June 2011, and June 2012.
Major measures include (i) introducing critical transparency measures: publication of contracts (particularly in the
mining, forestry, and oil sectors and traceability of revenue; (ii) adhering to the 1958 New York Convention on the
Recognition and Enforcement of Foreign Arbitral Awards and implementing the enabling legislation to restore
investor confidence and (iii) fully operationalizing the Procurement Code.
10
11

Law No 11/011 of July 13, 2011.
Promulgated by Decree on April 27, 2010; effective October 27, 2010.

10

Progress on the governance matrix has continued, with good progress on the publication of the mining
contracts and related financial transactions by mining SOEs. As of early April 2013, the government has
published 134 out of 135 mining contracts, and reached an agreement with the IMF regarding the treatment of the
remaining COMIDE asset transfer. The New York Convention has been approved by government, and is pending
approval in Parliament during April 2013. The new procurement entities are operational and they include the
regulatory agency, the procurement board, and the conflict resolution mechanism. (The regulatory agency will be
fully operational once overstaffing issues are resolved). Procurement units have been established in most ministries
and other public institutions such as the National Assembly and the Supreme. In addition, since July 13, 2012, DRC
has been a member of the Legal Framework on Harmonization of Business Laws in Africa (OHADA)––an
important milestone to improve the country’s business climate.
The new Government, which came in power following the November 2011 presidential elections, is committed
to reforms and has taken positive steps toward improving governance in DRC. For instance, the Government
organized a high-level conference on governance and transparency in the extractive industries in Lubumbashi on
January 30–31, 2013.
In collaboration with other partners, the Bank will leverage this momentum and has proposed forwardlooking measures as part of the Economic Governance Matrix. These proposals are being discussed with the
authorities. New governance reforms could include institutionalizing the principle of competitive sales of mining
assets which will automatically increase transparency, systematic publication of mining contracts, and transparent
disposal of financial resources deriving from the sales of mining assets, enhanced role of CSOs on supporting
demand side accountability platforms in the extractive industries, annual assessments of the implementation of the
procurement code at the central and decentralized levels, publication of these assessments and establishment of
procurement boards in all provinces and all ministries and key SOEs. The same reforms regarding transparency and
competition also should apply to the forestry and oil sectors. The new Bank facility that supports negotiations of
mining deals will be used to help DRC better negotiates its mining contracts. The country can derive additional
benefits by adopting the new mining code drafted with the Bank support that should promote increased
transparency. In addition, the World Bank has started to discuss the possibility that the policy matrix could serve as
a basis for channeling Norwegian and German support to REDD+. Based on progress in meeting forestry-related
governance indicators, Norway could disburse funds to the DRC through the Bank, potentially tens of millions of
dollars annually until 2020.

Business climate
39.
The business climate remains unfriendly to the private sector, and public sector
institutions are dysfunctional. For example, Port services in Matadi are costly and inefficient by global
standards. Container dwell times average 25 days, more than 5 times the SSA’s top performer. Crane
productivity also is only a fraction of that found elsewhere. Not only is the quality of service poor (44
days to export, 63 days to import), but also, at $10 per ton, port-handling charges for general cargo are
significantly higher than elsewhere.
40.
Amid improving regulation, the small, underdeveloped financial sector is growing
quickly; however, DRC’s access to financial services is one of the lowest in Africa. This low access is
due to (i) high risks and costs of lending; (ii) weak capacity for long-term or large-scale investment
project finance; and (iii) slow development/reform of the nonbanking financial sector, including
insurance, pension system, leasing, secured lending, and other forms of financing. The extremely low
banking penetration is apparent in the fact that less than 1 percent of the population has a bank account
and the limited availability of branch banking (especially outside the largest urban centers). With the
exception of microfinance, credit is restricted primarily to the largest companies or loans that are cash
collateralized or benefit from offshore guarantees. There is some growth in the availability of trade
finance (letters of credit, performance bonds) due mainly to the recent influx of large investment projects.

11

Infrastructure
41.
The limited infrastructure stock and its poor quality have hindered the development of
economic activities and are a drag on private sector development. Regional Diagnostic Studies have
shown that economic growth per capita could have increased by 5 percent per year if the country had had
the same infrastructure stock as Mauritius.12DRC’s infrastructure challenges are responsible for a 40
percent productivity loss handicap. Upgrading and expanding infrastructure are critical for economic
development in DRC. Improving power supply could reduce costs to firms by as much as 80 percent, and
improving feeder roads could reduce the cost of moving agricultural products by 70 percent. Dredging
and upgrading could reduce river transportation costs by 50 percent. A reliable power system could
increase manufacturing turnover by 60 percent and timber and mining exports by 30 percent.
42.
The bulk of DRC’s territory is inaccessible, making moving people and goods very
expensive. Kinshasa is connected to 5 provincial capitals (Bandundu, Kananga, Matadi, Mbandaka and
Muji-Mayi) by road, to 1 provincial capital (Kisangani) by river and air, and to 4 provincial capitals
(Bukavu, Goma, Kindu, and Lubumbashi) by air only. Communication among these capitals and other
provincial centers as well as access to rural areas often is not possible
43.
Communication is slow and expensive. The landline telephone network is almost completely
destroyed, with much of its equipment either out of date or broken. There are no national fiber optic
backbone and no broadband connection available using the existing infrastructure. DRC has neither direct
nor indirect access to submarine fiber-optic cables. It is one of the few African countries that remain fully
dependent on satellite for international bandwidth. The cost of bandwidth is US$4,000–
$5,000/Mbps/month, which is very high by SSA standards. By comparison, the equivalent price in East
Africa is approximately US$500/Mbps/month and continues to decrease as a result of intense competition
among submarine fiber-optic cable companies.
44.
The DRC is undergoing rapid urbanization. Its 12 largest cities are estimated to be growing
4.7 percent annually. In 1956 the country was 9.9 percent urbanized. In 2012, the urban population was
estimated to be 37 percent of the total population, or 24 million people. This number is projected to reach
40 million by 2025. With 400,000 new inhabitants joining the city every year, by 2030 Kinshasa will be
the largest African city, ahead of Cairo and Lagos and the 16th largest metropolis in the world. All urban
centers in DRC lack basic infrastructure and are characterized by their haphazard development, which, in
turn, undermines economic growth.
45.
The DRC is endowed with abundant water resources but access to water still is a
challenge. Its river network, one of the most extensive in the world, and groundwater resources,
considered to be widespread, have remained largely untapped. Despite this abundance, the country faces
major challenges in supplying water to its population. Today, only 26 percent of the total population, as
compared to the SSA average of approximately 60 percent. The unavailability of safe drinking water
poses a major public health threat. Young children die from dehydration and malnutrition, results of
suffering from diarrheal illnesses that could be prevented by clean water and good hygiene.13 Women and
young girls, traditional water carriers are thus prevented from doing income-generating work or attending
school, because the majority of their day is often spent walking miles for their families’ daily water needs.
Because they travel such great distances from their villages on a daily basis, women and girls also are at
an increased risk of violent attacks.
12

Cecilia M. Briceno-Garmendia; Vivian Foster; “Prioritizing Infrastructure Investments: A Spatial Approach”;
Regional Diagnostic Studies, 2009.
13
Metwally, A.M., Ibrahim, N.A., Saad, A., & Abu El-Ela, M.H. (2006): Improving the roles of rural women in
health and environmental issues. International Journal of Environmental Health Research, 16(2), 133-144.

12

Human development
46.
The very rapid demographic growth that DRC is experiencing makes any response to its
difficult social and economic conditions even more difficult and more expensive.At2.8 percent per
year, DRC has one of the highest population growth rates in SSA. At such a rate, the country’s population
will double in fewer than 25 years, putting massive pressure on all sectors. Given DRC’s very young age
structure, high fertility rates, and low levels of modern contraceptive use, this population growth is
expected to continue unabated. Approximately 46 percent of the country’s population is younger than 15
years old. Even greater problems with respect to human capital formation (such as in education and
health) and job creation are likely if measures are not taken to address this demographic growth.
Furthermore, due to the continuing high dependency ratio, estimated at 98 percent, rapid population
growth impedes poverty reduction. Without a rapid decline in fertility, there will be no possibility of a
demographic dividend for DRC. The total fertility rate was estimated at 6.3 in 2007, with differences
between urban areas (5.4) and rural areas (7.0).14High fertility rates, close birth spacing, and teen
pregnancies are additional major contributors to maternal and child morbidity, mortality, and
malnutrition. Furthermore, by 2040, approximately50 percent of the total population will be of working
age, most of them very young. This “youth bulge” poses enormous challenges to the Government on how
to manage it so that these young people have a chance to be effective development agents.
47.
Despite some progress in recent years, education outcomes remain low. The primary
school completion rate is only 59 percent compared to a Sub-Saharan average of 76 percent. Girls remain
disadvantaged compared to boys; the gender parity index is 0.87. Learning achievement remains low:
only 59 percent of pupils demonstrate “minimal” knowledge in mathematics and 47 percent in French
(PASEC 2010). According to a 2008 study,1568 percent, or 3 million, of DRC’s 4.3 million youths aged
12–14 years were out of school. Of these 3 million, only 71 percent had had some primary education. Of
the 5.2 million youth aged 15–19 years who were out of school, 70 percent had some primary education.
However, only 4 percent had completed 8 years of schooling. The situation was even worse for the 20–
24-year-old group (approximately 6 million youth), 93 percent of who were out of school and 75 percent
of who were illiterate. Although more recent figures are not available regarding level of schooling, it is
unlikely that the situation has changed much since 2008. Latest information16 shows that 7.3 million kids
aged 5-17 years are out of school and they represent 28.9 percent of the population of children that should
be attending school and that this proportion was reduced from 38.5 percent in 2007 to 32.5 percent in
2010.
48.
DRC’s education system is fraught with deep-seated challenges, especially for technical
and vocational education (TVE) and higher education. The quality and relevance of vocational
education and training, which cover some 43 streams, generally are poor due to many factors. These
include weak management, irrelevant curricula, obsolete equipment, and unqualified teachers. In addition,
the consensus among stakeholders is that the training provided is largely supply driven with few linkages
to labor market needs. As indicated earlier, gender disparities also are a central issue in the education
sector. Over previous decades, as a result of increased access to basic education, student enrollments in
tertiary education rose rapidly, from approximately 30,000 students in 1980–2001 to 338,000 in 2009–
2010 (although at a slow pace in the science and technology areas). However, the quality of tertiary
education is questionable due to the low number of qualified instructors, poor learning conditions, and
absence of a coherent quality assurance system. Less than 10 percent of teachers in tertiary education
14

2007 Demographic and Health Survey (DHS).Total fertility is based on births reported over the 3 years preceding
the 2007 survey.
15
S. Bashir, “Changing the Trajectory: Education and Training for Youth in DRC,” World Bank Working Paper
168, Washington, DC, 2008.
16
2012 national survey, UNICEF.

13

have a doctorate, and many of the qualified teachers are overage (65 on average). The latter fact points to
a critical staff renewal issue.
49.
Skills demand is becoming an increasingly important constraint to formal firms. Surveys
such as the World Bank’s Investment Climate Assessment (ICA) seem to suggest that human capital is
not among the preeminent barriers (governance, security, and infrastructure constraints) to private
investment. Nevertheless, there is evidence that skills shortages and mismatches in key sectors such as
construction and mining are an emerging issue. In 2010, 9 percent of formal firms perceived skills as a
problem, whereas only 1 percent felt it was a problem in 2006. More medium-sized firms (23 percent)
experienced shortages than smaller and larger ones
50.
Public sector financing of education and health services remains very low. During the
years of conflicts when public financing were severely restricted and the state almost absent, faith-based
organizations (FBOs) stepped in to administer state schools (Ecoles Conventionnées). Today, 72 percent
of the 10.6 million primary pupils attend schools managed by religious communities. Public financing of
education remains low and far below SSA’s average, putting a high burden on households, the majority of
whom are poor. In the tertiary education subsector, too, cost-recovery mechanisms have resulted in
substantial affordability barriers to entry to poorer students. An estimated US$200–$300 is collected
every year from every student who attends a public university or other tertiary institution to cover a range
of recurrent costs, including supplemental salaries for teaching staff. In recent years, national authorities
have issued regulations to implement constitutionally mandated provisions for free education, but in the
absence of effective state institutions, implementation of this policy has been poor.
51.
Similarly, in the health sector, the Government spends only approximately US$2 per
capita per year––one of the lowest levels of health funding in the world, with most of it allocated to
personnel in Kinshasa and a few provinces. Between 2006 and 2010, Government health expenditures
(from domestic resources) oscillated around 4 percent of its budget. This amount represents a substantial
increase from the 2003 level of approximately US$0.40 per capita but remains among the lowest in the
world. DRC’s health budget execution varies highly from one year to the next. The Government has made
a number of salary commitments (incentives and additions to the civil service rolls) that cannot be
covered by budget commitments. In the last decade, international financing of the sector has increased
substantially––on the order of US$200 million annually. Even so, disbursement rates lag significantly
behind commitments because of the health system’s poor implementation capacities. DRC’s decades-long
chronic underfunding of the health sector undermines the improvement and sustainability of health care
delivery in the country. However, DRC has made progress in achieving consensus on a development
strategy and technical standards for health.
52.
Current social protection programs, including safety nets, are fragmented and inefficient
and do not respond to the needs of the chronic poor and most vulnerable. Although the PRSP
specifically addresses social protection, the Government does not have a comprehensive social protection
strategy (the current one was designed in 2004 and needs to be updated) nor clear social protection
policies. The great majority of the country’s many vulnerable people do not benefit from any private or
public interventions. The limited social protection services are concentrated in DRC’s most important
cities and are offered primarily by FBOs and NGOs. In contrast, services provided by public actors are
marginal, and their quality suffers from an acute lack of both human and financial resources. In light of
the country’s damaged social fabric and widespread chronic poverty, social safety nets should receive
particular attention. So far, however, interventions have been designed primarily as temporary programs
focused on short-term emergency relief, especially in the conflict-stricken East, or limited to specific
vulnerable groups.

14

53.
The instability in Eastern DRC and the persistence of low-intensity conflicts have
worsened already low human indicators in that part of the country, sacrificing generations for
decades. In the Eastern provinces, continued armed conflicts and the total absence of effective state
authority perpetuate significant human suffering, resulting in indicators that are consistently lower across
the board, compared to the rest of the country. Gender inequality is high, and gender-based violence is a
bleak day-to-day reality for a large number of Congolese women, as highlighted in the Gender Study17that
was prepared as a background paper to the CAS. State institutions are captured to prey on the poor, and
there is little investment in public goods and services, severely limiting the population’s access to basic
services. The vulnerability of displaced people exacerbates the issue of access to services by the
population. Furthermore, the persistence of the conflict in the East is consuming significant national
resources and distracts the Government from addressing important development issues including support
to social development programs.
Security and peace consolidation
54.
Years of conflict and neglect by the Central Government have led to the near-total
collapse of state authority and services in the Eastern region, allowing armed groups and criminal
elements to operate with impunity. State institutions in Eastern DRC exhibit a marked lack of capacity
and resources to deliver the minimal security and other essential public services that are the prerequisites
to addressing the underlying structural causes of conflict and violence. At the same time, years of conflict
have destroyed most state-owned infrastructure, while continued insecurity impedes the restoration and
deployment of state services beyond provincial capitals. These problems have been compounded by
inadequate transfers of resources from Central Government to provincial authorities, further distorting
incentives and leading some officials to profit personally from insecurity and instability. In addition,
forced displacement is a debilitating consequence of conflicts and instability but also is a contributing
factor, exacerbating existing tensions.
55.
Despite significant investments by the international community in Eastern DRC and a
Government stabilization and reconstruction program (STAREC), peace remains elusive. Since
2006, international partners have been heavily involved in efforts to address security, humanitarian, and
stabilization priorities in Eastern DRC. The UN’s largest peacekeeping operation in the world,
MONUSCO, with an annual operating budget of approximately US$1.2 billion and over 18,000 troops, is
concentrated in the East, supporting efforts to protect civilians and stabilize the region. A massive
humanitarian operation averaging US$300–$500 million per year is providing essential services and relief
to millions of people. Despite these efforts, neither the Government nor the international community has
been able to stabilize the region.
Dysfunctional statistical system and lack of quality data
56.
Credible policy formulation and monitoring of development progress in all sectors are
severely hampered by DRC’s poor statistical capacity. As of 2011, the statistical capacity was 74
percent of the SSA average, particularly on aspects related to source data and reporting.18Monitoring
progress toward the MDGs, IDA Tier 1 and Tier 2 population-based indicators, sector strategies, and the
macroeconomic situation is constrained by a lack of trained staff, insufficient and often poorly
coordinated resources in a donor-driven environment, and the nearly 30-year gap since the last population
and housing census (PHC). Most SSA countries have completed a census in the past 10 years. The quality
17

A gender paper was prepared in 2011 as a background document to help address gender related issues into the
CAS.
18
Analysis of the 2011 data in the Country Statistical Information Database,
http://bbsc.worldbank.org/bbsc/SelectColorParameter

15

of the database for DRC generated from extrapolating information collected from surveys will continue to
decrease as the time lag between censuses grows longer. Routine administrative data are scarce, and their
quality is uncertain. The needs of the decentralized institutions cannot be met by the available statistical
information. However, a positive trend is developing slowly through both the PRSP’s results-monitoring
arrangements and the Government’s funding for national price statistics, the population, and housing
census.

B. Country vision and poverty reduction strategy paper
57.
The Government outlined its vision in the second Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper
(PRSP-2), adopted in 2011, which aims to reduce the country’s poverty rate from 71 percent to 60
percent by 2015. DRC plans to achieve this reduction by maintaining a GDP growth of 7.2 percent per
year and by increasing its public investment to an average of 19 percent of GDP. PRSP-2 rests on 4
pillars: (i) strengthening governance and consolidating peace, (ii) diversifying the economy to accelerate
growth and create employment, (iii) improving access to basic social services and enhancing human
capital, and (iv) protecting the environment and fighting climate change. The document also expects the
achievement of the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) and the elimination of gender-based
inequalities by 2020, both highly unlikely targets. The new post-election Cabinet Development Program
2012–2016 provides a comprehensive implementation plan of PRSP-2.
State effectiveness and governance
58.
The Government’s vision is to promote a modern public administration, to strengthen
governance in the management of natural resources, and to streamline the management of state
enterprises to grow their contribution to the creation of national wealth. The Government has taken
significant actions to tackle some key governance issues. Concerning public sector reform, the
Government adopted a plan to transform its state-owned enterprises into commercial entities in 2009.
Since January 2011, most SOEs have changed their status to commercial, but the transformations are not
yet fully implemented. SOEs have been commercialized and transformed into limited liability
corporations with new governing rules and regulations and boards of directors. For the first time,
performance contracts have been signed for companies such as REGIDESCO (water utility) and SNEL
(Société Nationale d'Electricité). Hence, it is extremely important for the Government to deepen this
reform, including strengthening the supervisory capacity of the Ministry of Portfolio to adapt to the postreform environment and ensuring that boards of directors and managers are acting in the best interest of
their companies and the public.
59.
In September 2010, the authorities adopted the Economic Governance Matrix to improve
governance including transparency, accountability, and effectiveness in the management of natural
resource, particularly in the forestry, mining, and petroleum industries. The economic governance
measures aim to restore investors’ confidence and improve transparency in the management of the
extractive sector (box 1).With support from the Bank, a review of the mining code also is being
undertaken to increase transparency and accountability in the management of mining assets and resources
and to ensure that DRC gets its fair share of its natural wealth. In addition, the Government is
implementing a plan to reach the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative (EITI) validation status in
May 2013.19
19

The validation status was due on March 1, 2013 but final decision is expected in May 2013 during the Sydney
meeting of the EITI board and DRC was allowed more time to address the lack of specific data. The 2010 report was
prepared following the definition of the perimeter, which includes 46 mining companies and 11 oil companies. The
draft report was circulated to the main stakeholders for review. The DRC EITI Secretariat is working hard with the
authorities to redress some of the discrepancies in the financial data.

16

60.
Regarding public finance management, in June 2010, the Government of DRC adopted a
comprehensive PFM Reform Strategy for 2011–18. This plan is being reinforced to take into account
the recommendations of the 2012 PEFA assessment. Furthermore, on March 24, 2011, to advance the
fiscal decentralization agenda, the Government approved the action plan of the Strategic Framework for
the Implementation of Decentralization (CSMOD).
Consolidating macroeconomic stability, sustaining economic growth, and creating employment
61.
The Government has adopted ambitious targets to accelerate growth through the
development of growth pole programs. The objective of these programs is to unleash the growth
potential of key productive sectors including agriculture and agro-business, mining, and forestry. Under
development program 2012–2016, the Government has identified 5 priority economic spaces that could
be targeted for the development of integrated growth poles.
62.
The Government has an ambitious program to improve the access to and quality of
infrastructure services including improving the management of utility companies. For the latter, a
new SNEL Board was appointed in September 2011; a performance contract between the state and SNEL
was signed in February 2012; and the process to recruit a service contract operator is progressing, with the
operator expected to be in place by September 2013. In the water sector, an international water operator
has been contracted under a three-year Services Contract to help REGIDESO reach its objectives under
the Performance Contract signed between it and the state. The Government also is implementing, albeit
with some difficulties, the railways’ (Société Nationale des Chemins de Fer du Congo, or SNCC)
financial and operational viability plan. The focus is on major SOEs in the infrastructure sector which are
critical to improving the business climate and to the delivery of basic services.
63.
Taking advantage of the country’s geographic position, the Government has ambitions to
use regional integration as an opportunity to boost economic growth and create jobs. DRC is
coordinating its market integration, infrastructure, and business environment with three regional
economic communities. They are the East African Community (EAC) and the Common Market for
Eastern and Southern Africa (COMESA) in the East, and the Economic and Monetary Commission for
Central African States (CEMAC) in the West. With the African Development Bank (AfDB) support, the
authorities have launched studies for the construction of the railway and road bridge between Kinshasa
and Brazzaville as part of the regional integration in Central Africa priority investment programs defined
under the New Partnership for Africa Development (NEPAD).
64.
DRC was admitted to the Legal Framework on Harmonization of Business Laws in
Africa (OHADA) in July 2012, which will guarantee creditor rights and will provide more
coherence, clarity, and impartiality to DRC's corporate legal framework. By coordinating business
law among 17 countries in SSA, the OHADA treaty seeks to promote regional integration and economic
growth and to ensure a secure legal environment. In the telecommunications sector, the Government’s
policy to open its markets has succeeded in making the mobile phone service attractive to foreign
investors, with four mobile telecommunication companies operating in the country. The Government
continues to reform the payment system and the banking sector including the Congolese Central Bank,
and to implement the roadmap of measures to improve the business and investment climate.
Improving access to basic social services and enhancing human capital
65.
The Government’s vision is to strengthen human capital, fight against HIV-AIDS, reduce
inequalities, improve the living conditions of the population, and promote community dynamics. In
education, the Government has developed an Interim Education Plan (IEP), which was endorsed by the
Local Education Donors Group (LEDG) in June 2012. The IEP’s priorities include the (i) development of
17

a policy for early childhood education and primary education for all, (ii) reform of pre-service and inservice training for teachers and education advisers, (iii) restructuring of the Ministry of Primary,
Secondary, and Vocational Education (Ministère de l’Enseignement Primaire, Secondaire et
Professionnel, MEPSP) management at all levels, (iv) reform of teacher management, and (v)
development of new policies for school construction and textbooks.
66.
The Government has committed to strengthen service delivery systems in the health
sector and to boost the achievement of basic health outcomes in the country. Some underlying
strategic and planning work already has been done by two existing strategies. The 2006 Health System
Strengthening Strategy focuses on the development of integrated primary health care services at the most
decentralized level of the system (Health Zone). The 2010 National Plan for Health Development
provides a robust framework for future directions, but it remains vague about resource mobilization and
implementation. Some progress has been made in implementing these strategies, particularly in increasing
access to a well-defined package of quality essential health services and rehabilitating health centers in
targeted areas.
67.
HIV-AIDS continues to be a government priority in the 2011–2015 PRSP. Actions and
reforms are underway to reduce sexually transmitted diseases and HIV; improve universal access to care
and treatment; and mitigate the health and socioeconomic impact of the epidemic at the individual,
household, and community level. However, huge financing gaps to support the overall health sector
remain because the resources that the Government has allocated to the sector are insufficient to fund key
programs.
Protecting the environment and fighting climate change
68.
The Government has emphasized measures to manage natural resources and protect the
environment. The emphasis includes (i) adopting and implementing legislation for the new environment
framework law passed in 2011; (ii) taking actions to reduce climate change; (iii) strengthening national
resilience to adapt to climate change, particularly because it negatively affects agricultural production,
water resources, and vector-borne diseases. In addition to participating in the United Nations Reduced
Emissions from Deforestation and Degradation in Developing Countries Program (UN-REDD), the
Government’s intention is to rehabilitate and expand its entire protected areas network.

IV.

PROPOSED WORLD BANK GROUP ASSISTANCE STRATEGY

A. Implementation of the Previous Country Assistance Strategy and Lessons Learned
69.
The World Bank formulated the previous CAS (FY2008–FY2011) as DRC was gradually
returning to peace, and a new, democratically elected government was installed. Formed in March
2007, the Government launched a social and economic rehabilitation program, which was presented in the
first Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (PRSP). It was against this background that the World Bank, in
collaboration with other partners under the Country Assistance Framework (CAF), elaborated the FY08–
FY11 CAS. The CAS was discussed at the Board on December 18, 2007.
70.
The overall objective of the previous CAS was to lay the foundation for a medium-term
poverty reduction effort, with a strong focus on governance and shared growth. While drawing from
Bank experience on working in post-conflict and transitional countries, the document focused on (i)
promoting good governance and consolidating peace through strengthened institutions, (ii) consolidating

18

macroeconomic stability and growth, (iii) improving access to social services and reducing
vulnerability,(iv)combating HIV/AIDS, and (v) promoting local initiatives.
71.
The strategy was slightly adjusted at mid-term to further sharpen the focus of the Bank’s
support to DRC. The CAS program was regrouped under three themes: (i) rebuild state capacity to
increase access to, and improve the quality of, basic services; (ii) create conditions for growth and
economic diversification; and (iii) increase access to health and education. The CAS Progress Report
(CASPR), presented to the Board on May 26, 2010, also strengthened the CAS Results Framework. The
CAS Completion Report (CASCR) uses the updated results framework as the reference for assessing the
CAS program’s performance.
72.
Overall, the performance of the previous CAS program (FY08–FY11) is rated moderately
satisfactory because the program achieved good progress toward major expected outcomes. More
specifically, progress was moderately satisfactory regarding the first 2 pillars (rebuilding State capacity to
increase access and improve the quality of basic services, and creating conditions for growth and
economic diversification), and satisfactory for the third pillar (providing improved access to education
and health). However the outcomes achieved (16 out of 30) were significantly more important than those
partially (10) or not achieved (4). Notably, DRC reached the HIPC Completion Point in July 2010 and
received a debt cancellation of US$12.3 billion. As a result of Bank support, the DRC also made
particularly notable advances in road development (the share of high priority road network classified in
good and fair condition increased from 13.8 percent in 2009 to 36.1 percent in 2012), the forestry sector
(forested land under concessions was reduced from 24 million to 12 million ha following the cancellation
of 76 existing concessions), health (increased access to qualified delivery care from 47 percent in 2007 to
77 percent in 2011), and education (gross enrollment rates of primary education increased from 64
percent in 2007 to 93 percent in 2011). Some progress was made in PFM. Less progress was registered in
decentralization, energy, and public enterprise reform despite the transformation of the status of many of
the SOEs, due primarily to the complexity of the issues, weak implementation capacity, and, in some
cases, insufficient political commitment. The CASCR provides a detailed assessment of results achieved.
73.
The Bank learned many lessons over the prior CAS implementation period. These lessons
relate to the scope of the strategy, the choice and mix of instruments, addressing risks and changing
conditions, involving stakeholders, working with donors, and achieving and reporting results.






Scope of the strategy. In a country such as DRC, whose needs are great and whose financial and
human resources are limited, prioritization and trade-offs are essential. Going forward, more
focused Bank strategies will require better coordination with donors, while ensuring that
coordination inside of the institution is maximized.
Implementing reforms. Reforming state-owned enterprises and public administration, especially
in fragile contexts, requires time and a deep understanding of the country’s political economy. In
DRC, 20 public companies have become commercial entities through the Bank-financed Private
Sector Development Project. Taking the next steps, which include addressing the huge debts
saddling these companies, has been a long process and one that the previous Government had
been unwilling to address decisively. For these companies to become viable entities and for the
country to benefit from the reform, the challenge is for the new Government to directly address
the SOE corporate governance issues.
Choice and mix of instruments. Instruments should be packaged to deliver tangible and
impactful results and not be a wish list of activities to be implemented. The role and importance
of knowledge should be underscored, and the way that knowledge is generated also is crucial to
achieve impact. Going forward, it will be critical to (i) leverage more strongly the Bank’s and
other donors’ analytical work; and (ii) make optimal use of local knowledge to better understand
the political economy issues and be able to support the necessary far-reaching reforms. For
19







instance, the latter will require strengthening dialogue with other stakeholders including national
and provincial think tanks and academia; or initiate the review of projects by the beneficiaries.
For these steps to succeed, the analytical pieces should be limited to a few key strategic areas in
which the knowledge gap is the greatest.
Addressing risks and managing changing conditions. The previous CAS developed built-in
arrangements to address changing conditions, and the scope of the strategy was adapted
appropriately when needed. Mid-term reviews are opportune periods to update strategies, but the
approach in DRC should remain flexible and take into account changes in the environment.
Increasing beneficiary participation. To secure their buy-in, it is essential that beneficiaries be
proactively and frequently involved during project preparation and implementation. The capacity
of civil society needs to be strengthened and not taken for granted so that it can better engage
with the Bank and the authorities during the design, implementation, and monitoring of the
Government’s projects. More broadly, an independent, representative, and dynamic civil society
needs to be fostered and engaged so that achievements in sector, national, provincial and district
governance are sustained and adjusted to the changing context.
Achieving results and disbursements. Results are within reach, even in DRC’s difficult political
and capacity-constrained environment. Disbursing in a post-conflict country is possible only if
doing so is coupled with leadership, a proper M&E framework, and accountability. To achieve
results, focusing on implementation readiness and disbursement arrangements during the
preparation of projects is critical. Achieving bolder results that are transformational and
identifiable should be an important piece of Bank support to DRC; thus, the need to be selective.

B. Overview of the New World Bank Group DRC Country Assistance Strategy
(FY2013–FY2016)
74.
The new CAS provides a framework for World Bank Group support to DRC over 4
years, from FY2013–FY2016.The overall goals of the Bank Group’s proposed program are to support (i)
the consolidation and expansion of DRC’s gains in macroeconomic stability, infrastructure, and human
development through improved governance; (ii) the development of the enabling environment for
sustained and inclusive growth and raising HD indicators; and (iii) the country's transition out of fragility,
with a focus on addressing the developmental deficits that help to perpetuate violence and conflicts in the
Eastern provinces. In addition to being aligned with the Government’s PRSP-2, the new CAS will absorb
the lessons of experience and anchor country-specific analysis from the Africa Strategy (AS); the 2011
World Development Report (WDR) on conflict, security, and development; the 2012 WDR on gender
equality; the 2013 WDR on jobs; and the 2011 DRC Country Economic Memorandum. Finally, the CAS
builds on the 2011 Gender study as well as lessons learnt from the Gender-Based Violence program in
South-Kivu that was completed in 2012.
75.
To achieve these goals, the joint World Bank/IFC/MIGA program will focus on four
strategic objectives. Making a serious dent in poverty will require a high economic growth rate for
decades. In the absence of appropriate redistribution tools, only a sustained high level of economic
growth will help DRC break away from its current poverty level. Achieving this high level of economic
growth and ensuring that basic services are provided to the population will require an effective state that
creates the conditions for the private sector to strive and a serious upgrading of governance. As a result,
more jobs and basic services should be delivered, thus increasing the credibility of the institutions and
helping the country transition away from fragility. The CAS’s strategic objectives are aligned with the
pillars of the PRSP-2:

20









The first strategic objective is to increase state effectiveness and improve good governance. It
supports the first pillar of the PRSP: “Strengthening governance and consolidating peace.”
The second strategic objective is to boost competitiveness to accelerate private-sector-led
growth and job creation. It supports the second pillar of the PRSP: “Diversifying the economy to
accelerate growth and create employment” and the fourth PRSP pillar: “Protecting the
environment and sustaining the fight against climate change.”
The third strategic objective is to improve social services delivery and increase human
development indicators. It supports the third pillar of the PRSP: “Improving access to basic
social services and enhancing human capital.”
The fourth strategic objective is to address fragility and conflict in the Eastern provinces. This
objective supports the Government's STAREC (Programme de Stabilisation et de Reconstruction
des Zones sortants des Conflits) through a multi-sectoral intervention of assistance that targets
key social, economic, and governance impediments to peace consolidation and sustainable
development. This fourth objective also supports the first pillar of the PRSP: “Strengthening
governance and consolidating peace.”
Gender and climate change are cross-cutting themes.

76.
During this CAS period, the Bank Group will continue to provide strong IDA support to
DRC. The CAS period spans two IDA replenishment periods (FY13–FY14 in IDA16 and FY15–FY16 in
IDA17). In IDA16, DRC has been granted an extension of the phase-out period to receive an exceptional
post-conflict allocation,20 which continues to provide a higher per capita allocation than regular IDA
support. The indicative IDA envelope available for FY13–FY14 is approximately US$760 million21 to
support IDA operations. The indicative envelope for FY15–FY16 is estimated at US$500 million.22In
addition, the Bank will work closely with the authorities to fully explore the flexibility in IDA financing,
including the potential use of the Immediate Response Mechanism.23The mechanism could support the
Government’s rapid response to eligible crisis and emergency situations as well as the potential access to
the IDA regional program, which could provide additional resources for participating in regional
integration operations. The potential use of IDA guarantee24 or hedging instruments also could increase
the leverage of IDA financing. Finally, the Bank would continue to play a platform role in helping the
authorities improve donor coordination and leverage financing from other sources to support inclusive
growth and poverty reduction.
77.
Six principles will guide the development of the CAS. They comprise(i) making governance
a principle for engagement, which also will require engaging more with civil society, including the active
engagement and participation of women, and nontraditional stakeholders to enhance the demand side of
20

The extension of the phase-out of IDA16 (FY12–FY14) increased the duration of post-conflict support to DRC
from 10 to 12 years and the total amount of the IDA16 envelope by approximately 20%.
21
The estimate of the IDA envelope is based on resources available from the IDA16 replenishment and is updated
annually. The indicative estimate may vary depending on (i) total IDA resources available, (ii) the country’s
performance rating, GNI per capita, and population; (iii) the terms of IDA assistance (grants/credits) and the
allocation deductions associated with Multilateral Debt Relief Initiative (MDRI); (iv) the performance, other
allocation parameters, and IDA assistance terms for other IDA borrowers; and (v) the number of IDA-eligible
countries. The IDA allocation is provided in SDR terms. While the US$-equivalent amount is provided at the IDA16
replenishment exchange rate of US$1.50233/SDR, the exchange rate for each operation depends on the applicable
prevailing rate at the time of approval.
22
This estimate will be revised on completion of changes to IDA’s resource allocation framework being discussed in
the context of the IDA17 replenishment negotiations.
23
This mechanism enables the inclusion of emergency-related contingent components in selected investment
operations to support rapid response in eligible crisis and emergency situations.
24
Only one-quarter of the amount of an IDA guarantee would count toward its IDA envelope. For example, an IDA
envelope of $25m can support an IDA guarantee of $100 million.

21

good governance and in recognition that disengagement is the worst option; (ii) being selective and
identifying impactful development solutions by focusing on geographically targeted interventions and
enhanced coordination with other donors; (iii) using government structures to implement Bank-financed
projects that support state effectiveness and capacity building; (iv) keeping fragility and conflict in mind,
particularly for activities in the Eastern provinces; (v) maintaining flexibility in the design and
implementation of the program to respond to changing conditions in a fragile setting; and (vi) promoting
regional integration.
78.
Consultations were held with stakeholders in DRC in May-June 2012. They involved
intensive dialogue with civil society, think tanks, youth groups, religious groups, Parliament, members of
the Government, and donors. The overarching theme of the consultations centered on inclusive growth
with an emphasis on job creation. The main recommendations were to (i) improve access of local
enterprises to finance; (ii) reduce barriers to business activities, including red tape and constant
harassment by government officials; (iii) support efforts to move informal activities to the formal sector;
(iv) enhance the skills of the workforce to fill the disconnect between supply and demand in the labor
market; (v) support the reconstruction of a statistical system; (vi) continue support to infrastructure; (vii)
increase allocation of public resources to the social sectors; (viii) improve citizens’ and donors’ access to
information, including publishing budget reports; and (ix) improve transparency in the forestry, mining,
and petroleum sectors.

C. Strategic Objectives and Results
79.
A limited number of outcome indicators will be used to monitor progress in
implementing the CAS. Most of the results that will be achieved during this CAS period will come from
ongoing programs, at least until the mid-term review. The results framework will pay particular attention
to gender-disaggregated indicators. Strengthening national capacity for results will go a long way to
reinforce the national institution for statistics and enhance national capacity on M&E. Projects will be
required to report results quarterly, and the use of surveys will be promoted and made systematic with
Bank-financed operations in addition to targeted impact evaluations.
Strategic Objective One: To increase state effectiveness and improve good governance
80.
The World Bank Group-supported activities will aim to (i) increase transparency and effective
management of public finances at the central level and in the provinces of Bandundu, Katanga, Kasai
Occidental and South Kivu: (ii) increase transparency and effectiveness in the management of financial
resources from the extractive industries and ensure that the country gets a fair share from the management
of its natural endowments; and (iii) strengthen governance of the mining sector SOEs and increase the
operational performance of other SOEs including the water utility, the power utility, and the state airport
authority.
CAS Outcome 1.1. Increasing transparency and effectiveness in the management of public finances at
the central level and in the provinces of Bandundu, Katanga, Kasai Occidental, and South Kivu
81.
According to all stakeholders met during the extensive consultative process that
preceded the preparation of the CAS, poor governance including poor management of public
finances and human capital is at the root of the DRC’s development challenges. Addressing
governance issues is critical for DRC to progress in bolstering economic growth, creating jobs, and
reducing poverty. Support to public sector effectiveness will be centered on two existing operations: a
new investment lending project and close coordination with other development partners involved in PFM.
Actions are necessary to address the supply as well as demand sides of governance. In light of the
entrenched vested interests and the culture of impunity that pervades DRC, making progress will not be
22

easy. Key areas to tackle include strengthening the public sector’s capacity to manage public resources,
particularly the vast endowment of natural resources, effectively and transparently.
Analytical and advisory activities
82.
Following the Public Expenditure and Financial Assessment (PEFA) carried out in FY12
with Bank support, an action plan to improve the management of public finance was adopted. The
action plan will be implemented in FY13 and beyond with the likely support of the UK’s Department for
International Development (DfID) and a group of donors including the European Commission, France,
Germany, UNDP, and the Bank. The Government is keenly interested in direct budget support. Therefore,
having a strengthened PFM system in place is critical. A PEFA update will be completed before the end
of the CAS period (FY15), and the next PEFA will be developed in the four above mentioned provinces
in partnership with other donors.
World Bank financing
83.
Reforming civil service and restructuring the public sector are critical to re-establish the
credibility and the effectiveness of the state. The scope of Bank interventions will be targeted to a
limited number of ministries given the complexities of the undertaking, the huge stock of social debts,
overstaffing, deep political economy issues, and the advanced state of degradation of DRC’s public
sector. Two ongoing governance operations––the Enhancing Governance Capacity Project (US$50
million) and the Capacity for Core Public Management Project (US$29.9 million)––aim to enhance
transparency and efficiency in central and subnational public finance and human resources. The approval
of US$67 million in additional financing (planned for FY2013) to the Enhancing Governance Capacity
Project will increase the Government’s ability to improve financial and procurement management as well
as strengthen capacity in the four provinces (Bandundu, Katanga, Kasai Occidental, and South Kivu)
which already benefit from these operations. A new Public Financial Management and Accountability
Project (US$25 million) with likely funding from DfID is being prepared to support implementation of
the PEFA action plan.
84.
A new operation––the Public Service Reform and Rejuvenation Project (US$100
million)––will focus its interventions on a limited number of key ministries. This project will support
(i) improving human resources management at the central and provincial levels and addressing the issue
of staff who have reached retirement age but still are on the payroll, and the competitive recruitment of
younger, more qualified staff; and (ii) supporting the establishment of an operational public service
pension system combined with the organizational restructuring of targeted ministries while introducing a
meritocratic performance system. This new operation will build on the experience gained at the provincial
level. The operation will complement ongoing efforts to reform the Ministry of Environment and Nature
Conservation under the Forestry Project and parallel efforts to support the Ministry of Agriculture under
the ongoing Agriculture Rehabilitation Project. This new Public Service Reform and Rejuvenation Project
will not specifically target the SOEs. Instead, it will strengthen the capacity of the ministry in charge of
the SOEs to be in a position to supervise and monitor the performances of the 20 public enterprises now
operating under commercial rules and ensure that appropriate and operating governance structures are in
place to foster transparency, effectiveness, efficiency, and accountability in these entities. This project
also will support social accountability by organizing and building the capacity of local civil society
organizations (CSOs), a critical element to strengthen the demand for good governance.
85.
The decentralization process provides significant scope for enhancing transparency and
accountability at the local level. The Bank is supporting the development of public sector and financial
management systems including personnel and payroll management in the same four provinces. Other
donors such as EC, UNDP, and USAID are supporting similar activities in other provinces.

23

86.
Improving the collection and processing of data, as well as optimizing the use of the
limited data available, are key elements in enhancing governance and decision-making. A new
statistics operation financed by the Bank’s Catalytic Fund (US$11.5million) will be prepared to support
the development of the country’s statistical capacity. The new operation aims to strengthen the DRC’s
National Statistical Institute (INS), improve staff working conditions, strengthen technical and
management capacity, and support the preliminary activities needed to gather the national census and to
improve national accounts. Resources from the Catalytic Fund remains limited in comparison to the
needs. Additional funding will be provided by IDA to complement efforts supported by the fund and
likely will target the development of human resources, the production of sector statistics, and a
comprehensive civil registration system. The need for more qualified statisticians cannot be met through
external scholarships for a few. Therefore, the setting up a good statistics training center in country
remains a priority, as does the establishment of a true civil registration system. The Bank will work with
donors to coordinate their statistical activities in support of better data quality and availability. Joint donor
missions organized to date for the Population and Housing Census (PHC) have shown the benefit of
working together, but additional efforts are required.
87.
Accelerating the delivery of basic services and getting the state closer to the population
require effective and accountable local government institutions. For these entities to carry out their
mandated responsibilities in a country the size of Western Europe, the demand and supply sides of good
governance as well as capacity building are essential. Competent and accountable local government
structures will deliver better services that are locally demanded, thus increasing the resilience and
decreasing the vulnerability of local communities. At the same time, effective local governance
arrangements can help address overarching challenges to sustained development, such as corruption and
mismanagement of public resources.
88.
Results achieved under a pilot program initiated in South Kivu have shown that
consistent introduction of participatory public finance practices facilitated by modern information
and communication technologies (ICTs) can enhance people’s participation in budgetary decisionmaking and create mechanisms for effective public oversight over demand-driven capital
investments. Implementation of an Institutional Development Fund (IDF) grant resulted in the adoption
of provincial legislation that institutionalized citizens’ participation in public decision-making. It also led
to significant increases in budgeted transfers from provincial to district administrations. Finally, closing
the accountability loop, infrastructure projects that were selected for construction in a participatory
manner have been completed on time and to the satisfaction of the population. Building on the knowledge
and practice of workable ICT-enhanced participation in public investments, this program will be extended
to the Bandundu, Katanga, and Kasai Occidental provinces. Civil society budget execution reports will be
prepared by the National Civil Society Coordination Network. The Bank also will support the
Parliamentary commissions in charge of finances to be in a better position to carry out the Parliament’s
constitutional mandate over budget execution. In addition, the Bank will support CSOs’ work to clamp
down on corruption in procurement through the Contract Watch Initiative. CSOs will be actively involved
in supervising Bank operations, and the use of External Implementation Status and Results Reports
(EISRs) will be generalized. In this regard, the work of the three CSOs that were awarded funding
through the Global Facility for Social Accountability will be made public and widely publicized. The
Bank also will support the organization of an annual international conference on economic growth and
governance in DRC25 and will support the work of selected groups from academia, CSOs, and think tanks
who address issues regarding economic management, service delivery, and good governance.

25

The first conference will take place in 2013. This annual conference will be institutionalized to open up the policy
debate on economic growth, economic management, and governance.

24

89.
An engagement framework will be designed with civil society, including women, to
promote demand for good governance. This framework will cover demand-driven approaches across
sectors and programs. The framework will elaborate appropriate mechanisms and institutional
arrangements to engage with the relevant citizen groups including tools and techniques required to ensure
broader outreach. The framework also will ensure women’s effective participation.
CAS Outcome 1.2. Increasing transparency and effectiveness in the management of financial
resources from the extractive industries and ensuring that the country gets a fair share of the revenues
from its natural endowments
Analytical and advisory activities
90.
The DRC is a country with vast natural resources wealth, but poor governance has
deprived the population of benefiting from this wealth. The World Bank made a bold attempt to
increase transparency in the management of DRC’s natural resources by supporting the implementation of
the Economic Governance Matrix(box 1). During this new CAS period, the Bank will continue to closely
monitor government’s implementation of agreed actions, will regularly extend and update the governance
matrix, and will support governance improvements and capacity building of the main mining SOEs. The
new Bank facility supporting negotiations of mining deals will be used to help DRC better negotiates its
mining contracts. The Bank will support the creation of an Inter-ministerial Council to oversee the
granting of contracts and mineral asset sales. Civil society also will be invited to the contract negotiation
table. The Bank will further strengthen its policy dialogue to include discussions aimed at setting up
mechanisms to improve local content of mining operations, which will include training of nationals. In
addition, the World Bank has started to discuss the possibility that the policy matrix could serve as a basis
for channeling Norwegian and German support to REDD+. Based on progress in meeting forestry-related
governance indicators, Norway could disburse funds to the DRC through the Bank, potentially tens of
millions of dollars annually until 2020.
World Bank financing
91.
In addition to the capacity to manage the sector, transparency in the extractive
industries in general, and in the mining sector in particular, it is critical for DRC to take advantage
of its vast natural endowments to benefit its population. The Bank essentially is supporting DRC
through two existing operations in the mining and the forestry sectors. First is the ongoing US$90 million
Growth and Governance in the Mineral Sector Technical Assistance Project (PROMINES), co-financed
with DfID. PROMINES has been designed to address capacity building at the Central Government level
and governance issues in the mining sector, and to strengthen the capacity of CSOs to demand
transparency and accountability. PROMINES is helping the Government, the private sector, and civil
society to prepare a revised, forward-looking mining code with embedded transparency requirements. The
code will build on the lessons learned from implementing the current 2002 code. PROMINES will give
DRC a better knowledge of its mining assets by developing a geodesic and geological database, which
will put DRC in a better position to auction these assets.
92.
PROMINES also is providing TA to the oil sector by helping to draft a framework oil
concession contract and preparing a diagnostic for the sector. In addition to the financing from
PROMINES, the Bank is supporting DRC to become EITI compliant by 2013 and, going forward, will
support DRC to entrench EITI principles and processes through a new Multi-donor Trust Fund (MDTF)
under preparation. At the CAS mid-term review, the Bank will provide additional financing to
PROMINES to tackle the governance, operational, and financial performance of the main mining sector
SOEs.

25

93.
Good governance in the extractive industries requires supporting demand-side
monitoring and multi-stakeholder engagement. With the monitoring facilitated by the Economic
Governance Matrix, the Bank’s support has been critical in stimulating the interest of DRC’s CSOs in
issues related to transparency in the extractive industries. The CSOs also are becoming more vocal on
governance-related issues, especially in the extractive industries. This momentum should be maintained
and expanded. In coordination with the Carter Center, the WBI is supporting a number of activities. They
include, first, piloting the new Extractive Industries Contract Monitoring Roadmap by local CSOs. A
second activity is supporting the accountability platform design/planning of the PROMINES Project. This
activity also is supporting the active use of the Sharing in Governance of Extractive Industries (GOXI)
platform by stakeholders to share, learn, and connect for action toward greater accountability and, in turn,
to facilitate better development outcomes from the extractive industries. The platform is used, for
example, by Katanga civil society to exchange with other CSOs on strategies for better governance and to
secure better impacts for the local population. In addition, PROMINES will identify specific high-impact
activities (short or medium term) in which civil society involvement is crucial for successful
implementation on the ground.
94.
The ongoing Forestry Project (US$64 million) is helping to strengthen governance in the
forest sector. The project includes support to decentralized forest management in the three main forested
provinces: Bandundu, Equateur, and Orientale. The project also is facilitating the negotiation of social
responsibility agreements between logging concessions and local communities; and the control, with the
help of an international firm, of illegal chain saw lumber exports to neighboring countries. The DRC
needs to explore aggregate offsets for biodiversity conservation - a mechanism to generate compensation
revenues for the loss of biodiversity from forest exploitation or various extractive industries such as
mining or hydrocarbon development.
Trust Funds
95.
The Bank is also involved in biodiversity conservation in DRC through its GEF National
Parks Project (PREPAN) and Conservation Trust Fund (CTF) Projects. PREPAN (US$7 million)
aims at strengthening the capacities of the Congolese Institute for Nature Conservation (ICCN) at both
national and local levels. The CTF, for which the Bank is the executing agency for the investment of
USD$12 million of GEF resources, will provide long-term sustainable funding for the management of
DRC’s protected areas. The DRC's biodiversity is of outstanding importance globally, most notably
encompassing the World's second largest area of remaining tropical rainforest. Although as yet generating
little direct economic returns from nature-based tourism, the country has a huge potential to generate
revenues from its biodiversity endowment. Gorilla-based tourism in Virunga National Park generated
about $1 million per year of revenues for ICCN, a significant part of its budget, up until early 2012, at
which time civil strife effectively brought a halt to tourism in this area. This amount is only a tiny fraction
of future potential revenue country-wide, once minimal infrastructure and security measures are in place.
96.
The Bank also is involved in three forest/climate change projects. The Congo Basin Forest
is the second largest carbon sink in the world. Compared to business as usual, reduced deforestation
would significantly help to reduce world CO2 emissions (box 2).

26

Box 2. Forests and Climate Change in DRC
The rainforest in the Congo Basin is the second largest rainforest in the world behind the Amazon Basin,
with 300 million hectares (ha) compared to the 800 million ha in the Amazon. Roughly 50 percent (145
million ha) of the Congo Basin rainforest lies within DRC’s boundaries. Since 1990, DRC’s deforestation rate
has remained constant at 0.25%, which equates to the loss of 362,000 ha of trees annually. Compared to a
business-as-usual development scenario in DRC, using current demographic and socioeconomic development
trends, future environmental impacts caused by land degradation and deforestation might be significantly higher.
Potentially 12–13 million ha could be deforested and 21–22 million ha degraded by 2030. Emissions would
equate to 400 million tons of CO2in 2030, resulting from an increase of emissions by 3%–4% annually from
2010–30.
The Forest Carbon Partnership Facility (FCPF) is a multi-donor initiative led by the World Bank. FCPF,
along with other partners such as UNDP and the Norwegian Agency for Development (NORAD), is assisting
DRC to become ready to benefit from REDD+ (reducing emissions from deforestation and forest degradation
while promoting conservation of forest carbon stocks, sustainable management of forest, and enhancement of
forest carbon stocks). The country has made considerable progress on this front and is well on track to have all
key elements of “REDD Readiness” in place by the end of 2014. In addition, the Forest Investment Program
(US$36 million from the Climate Investment Funds, or CIF) will support pilot investments to reduce
deforestation in the vicinity of Kinshasa.
In parallel to the REDD Readiness process and in close cooperation with NGOs and private partners, the
DRC is developing early ideas relative to a first Emission Reduction Programme (ER-Programme) in
Bandundu Province. Once completed and submitted to the FCPF Carbon Fund, the country might enter into
negotiations with the Carbon Fund for the sale/purchase of emission reductions to be generated under the
program. These negotiations might lead to the signature of an Emission Reduction Purchase Agreement (ERPA),
which would be one of the first REDD+-based carbon-forward transactions in the world. The nominal value of
the ERPA would depend on the specifics and performance of the Programme, but it is expected to amount to 10
million tons of CO2 or US$50 million over 2015–20. Other buyers could acquire the leftovers of this program.
The Bio Carbon Fund, for which the World Bank acts as a Trustee, supports the Ibi Bateke Carbon Sink
Project, the first registered Clean Development Mechanism (CDM) project in Central Africa. The project is
aimed at reforesting degraded lands around Kinshasa while providing a sustainable source of charcoal to the
country's capital and testing carbon finance as a source of funding for reforestation activities. DRC also signed
an Emissions Reduction Purchase Agreement (ERPA), in which the Bank buys emission reductions, (carbon
credits) from DRC until 2017.

CAS Outcome 1.3. Strengthening governance of the mining sector SOEs and increasing the
operational performance of other SOEs (REGIDESO, SNEL, SNCC, and RVA)
World Bank financing
97.
To date, corporate governance issues have been addressed through multiple ongoing
sectoral operations. They are the (i) Multimodal Project (SNCC, RVA), (ii) Regional Southern Africa
Market Project (SNEL), and (iii) Urban Water Supply Project (REGISEDO). An Additional Financing to
PROMINES Project will be prepared to tackle the governance, operational, and financial performances of
the mining sector SOEs. The new operation––Public Service Reform and Rejuvenation Project––will
strengthen the capacity of the Ministry of Portfolio to monitor performance and enforce accountability
and transparency in the management of these entities.

27

Box 3. State-Owned Enterprises
The 20 state-owned enterprises (SOEs) responsible for delivering the majority of public services across
DRC are in extremely difficult financial position. Their restructuring and transformation is urgent. Most SOEs
drain national fiscal resources, distort competition, and deter foreign investment in key sectors. The SOEs need to
be thoroughly transformed to be able to deliver quality, commercially competitive services in liberalized sectors
following modern corporate governance practices. All 20 SOEs are plagued with similar cross-cutting issues that
weigh heavily on their ability to achieve viability. These issues include excessive indebtedness, deficient title to
property and assets, unfinished separation of regulatory versus operating functions, and weak management knowhow and discipline.
Due to the strategic sectors that they operate, seven SOEs are considered of paramount importance. They
are SNEL (energy), SNCC (railways), REGIDESO (water supply), SCTP (river transport, railways, and ports),
RVF (river management and hydrology in support of river transport), RVA (airports authority and operator) and
Gecamines (mining enterprise controlling vast territories for exploration on behalf of government).
Transformation of the SOEs involves three phases: stabilization, restructuring, and rehabilitation. Four of the 7
SOEs (SNCC, Gecamines, SCTP, and RVA) received stabilization assistance from international teams of
management experts with limited success. The Belgian private operator, Vecturis, is helping SNCC through the
next phases of its transformation. In 2012, to improve its operational and financial management, RVA signed a
results-based TA arrangement with a foreign airport agency, Aéroports de Paris (AdPi). The Government has
signed performance contracts with SNEL and REGIDESO to be backed by performance-based service contracts
with international companies. Such an arrangement is in place at REGIDESO and setting up the same
arrangement with SNEL will take place by September 2013. A similar plan is being contemplated for SCTP.

98.
Gender. The Bank will proactively support the establishment of mechanisms for greater
gender inclusion in policy- and decision-making bodies at the local and community levels. Through the
support of the Global Partnership for Social Accountability (GPSA), CSOs representing women at the
national and local levels will receive capacity building support. In synergy with the Bank’s mining
assistance program, the Nordic Human Rights Trust Fund could be leveraged to address women’s and
children’s rights in mining areas. Improved collection of gender-disaggregated data and analysis of
gender issues will be supported through the Catalytic Project to Strengthen the National Statistical
Institute.
Development partners
99.
The Bank will collaborate with the IMF to define and monitor economic governance reforms
in DRC. Other development partners include DfID (joint financing of the ongoing mining project,
PROMINES, and PFM); AfDB (PFM governance; and capacity building in energy, transport, and water
sectors); UNDP (justice, statistics); European Commission (PFM and justice), Belgium/CTB
(governance); and USAID (natural resource management, or NRM).
Strategic Objective Two: To boost competitiveness to accelerate private-sector-led growth and job
creation
100.
The CAS will help support the design and implementation of growth pole programs in 2
of the 5 priority economic zones identified in the Government PRSP-2 (2011–2015). The CAS will
initiate a new approach that focuses on transformational projects in energy, transport, skills development,
ICT, and agriculture under a growth pole approach in specific and limited geographic areas around two
zones (Western and Southeastern DRC).26 This approach is justified by the country’s large size and the
importance of achieving impact that will facilitate replication in other places. The CAS will focus on four
outcomes: (i) enhanced business environment for PSD; (ii) improved access to quality broadband network
26

AfDB will support the development of a growth pole in the Bandundu, Kasai Occidental, Kasai Orientale,
Maniema provinces, and northern Katanga province. This project will be a key piece of the AfDB’s new Country
Assistance Strategy, which is under preparation.

28

and services at reduced cost; (iii) increased generation of energy and improved and increased access to it;
and (iv) increased agriculture productivity and production and access to markets.

CAS Outcome 2.1. Enhanced business environment for private sector development
101.
The Bank, IFC and MIGA will collaborate closely to actively support job-creating
private sector development in DRC. IFC’s planned operations in DRC for FY13–FY16 are in line with
the CAS’ second strategic objective, which aims to boost competitiveness by accelerating private-sectorled growth to create jobs. Since 2007, the 3 pillars of IFC’s post-conflict initiative in DRC have evolved
around combined advisory and investment operations focused on (i) improving the investment climate;
(ii) proactive project mobilization and developing key investment projects to promote high-growth
sectors; and (iii) expanding support to the SME sector. IFC’s operations have resulted in an investment
portfolio that covers finance, telecommunications, and mining. IFC’s advisory services, supported by the
CASA (Conflict-Affected States in Africa) Initiative, and in collaboration with the Bank, have focused on
SME banking, microfinance, investment climate (OHADA, business reforms, and the establishment of a
framework for Special Economic Zones), SME development support, and the provision of risk capital and
advisory services to small businesses. MIGA’s planned engagement in DRC is also directly in line with
the CAS’s second strategic objective. MIGA’s business strategy prioritizes IDA countries and postconflict and fragile environments, and its product range is directly suited to investors concerned about the
local business environment. Over the CAS period, MIGA will look to build on its existing portfolio in
the country, which already covers the infrastructure and financial sectors.
102.
During the FY2013–FY2016 period, IFC will continue to partner with the Bank based on
achievements and lessons learned in the previous CAS period and in accordance with the February
22, 2012 guidance given by the Corporate Operations Committee to support a phased reengagement in DRC (following the suspension of new IFC activities since 2009). The guidance provides
for investments in SMEs to benefit the base of the pyramid with no government involvement and
continued advisory services work. The guidance also states that full re-engagement with real sector
advisor and investing will be possible only following the DRC government’s clear commitment to good
governance, notably via accession to the New York Convention on the Recognition and Enforcement of
Foreign Arbitral Awards. When possible, full reengagement will enable IFC to resume direct and largescale/transformational investments in all growth sectors through targeted sector strategies with the Bank;
facilitate private sector entry to infrastructure markets and service delivery; and support deeper and more
impactful investment climate reforms. Alongside the Bank and IFC, MIGA will look for new
opportunities to support private investment into the country. It will do this either on its own or in
partnership with the broader Bank Group, replicating successful experience of joint collaboration
elsewhere, where MIGA’s guarantees have been used alongside other World Bank products such as IFC
loans or Partial Risk Guarantees.
Analytical and Advisory Activities
103.
Strengthening the capacity of SMEs to take advantage of business opportunities and to
effectively and efficiently manage their existing businesses is important for DRC.IFC/Bank support
for SME development will be provided through the DRC SME Development Program (second phase),
which will design/establish a privately owned SME Facility with a virtual scheme in key markets to roll
out IFC SME Management Solutions (Business Edge, SME toolkit, SME Governance). Working with
lead firms in agribusiness, light manufacturing, and telecommunications, the DRC SME Development
Program aims to increase the reach of SMEs through inclusive supply chains. The program also will
intensify SMEs’ linkages to financial institutions. The program’s delivery model will be strengthened
with additional resources provided by the Bank to scale it up and reach a much larger number of SMEs,

29

including female entrepreneurs. The program also will help develop integrated packages and promote new
products and tools (certification, corporate governance, standards).
104.
Strengthening DRC’s financial sector to ensure that economic activities are financed is
critical for the development of private-sector-led growth and job creation. A Financial Sector
Assessment Program (FSAP) is planned for FY2014. The FSAP will be a key element of the Bank’s
assistance to help DRC strengthen its institutions and practices to provide adequate financing, payments
support, and insurance against PSD risks. These risks are associated with short-term credit, trade
facilitation, and long-term infrastructure finance facilities. A modern payment system will be
implemented by end-2013. It will be financed through the new Financial Sector Support operation. A
skills development study, an Investment Climate Strategy, and an ICT policy advisory note will address
some of the knowledge gaps and support policy dialogue.
105.
Furthermore, Bank engagement will include (i) a strategic partnership on supply chains
with the Proactive Investment Promotion Platform and the Project Development Facility (PDF), which
were presented to, and welcomed by, donors in December 2012; and (ii) the program for reopening closed
companies that the Bank is pursuing to support jobs creation. These activities include the identified case
of Bas-Congo, which will return approximately 150,000 small farmers to productive economic activities;
and (iii) options to carry out adhoc operations such as Kintech (the technical pole of Kinshasa’s creative
industries), Kinmeubles (clustered furniture city), and Kinmecanics (motor vehicle repair/maintenance)
with common services centers from which IFC could deploy its support programs to SMEs. In addition,
IFC, through its CASA initiative, will continue to support the Bank’s PSD operations.
World Bank Group financing.
106.
The Western DRC Agriculture-based Growth Pole will build on DRC’s comparative
advantage in agriculture and the unmet demand for cheaper food for the 10 million inhabitants of
Kinshasa. Anew Agriculture-based Growth Poles Project (AGPP) (US$110 million) will be prepared
with IFC. The project will address critical bottlenecks in infrastructure and business climate by focusing
on the Boma-Matadi-Kinshasa corridor (Bas Congo and Kinshasa Provinces) and building on programs
already financed by other donors in the same geographic area. The project will deploy a critical mass of
concrete, complementary interventions in the locations of highest potential. Examples of interventions are
feeder roads, transportation, logistics, power, water supply, agriculture interventions, support to
agribusiness, access to finance, support to SMEs, and trade facilitation. The project will select groups of
interrelated industries with high employment potential that could drive growth in the intervention zones.
107.
Efforts to address skills gaps also will be supported. To respond to the skills needs, the
Bank will use the ongoing analytical work on skills and competencies. IFC will contribute technical
support to the Bank’s planned AGPP including (i) incorporation of the deliverables of the IFC/WBsupported SEZ Program and continued provision of TA by IFC; (ii) provision of business development
services to SMEs’ beneficiaries of the linkages created by the AGPP; and (iii) technical support aimed at
addressing some key investment climate issues that constrain the creation and operation of SMEs. The
project is being developed through the intensive engagement of the private sector. Efforts will be made to
attract Congolese individuals, including the diaspora, to invest and develop micro, small, and mediumscale companies.
108.
To re-launch the private sector, increasing SMEs’ access to finance and supporting the
development of the financial sector in DRC are essential. The World Bank will prepare a new financial
sector development project. This project will aim to modernize the DRC's banking, microfinance, and
public sectors to enable effective and timely delivery of financing to private sector entrepreneurs and
households. The project also will help increase availability of funds among trading partners nationally and
internationally by enabling electronic payments and money transfers to be available almost immediately
30

and accurately, replacing the time-consuming manual clearing and settlement of payments that is subject
to delays and errors. The new operation also will provide support to the growth of the microfinance
industry in continuity with the $7 million in IDA funds in circulation among the Microfinance Promotion
Fund (FPM) and various commercial banks and microfinance institutions, thereby fueling the expansion
of the sector using cheaper long-term credit. IFC will further develop the range of products suitable to
DRC’s financial markets and help build efficient financial infrastructure. Through its Central African
SME Fund (CASF) and in close collaboration with the SME Development Program, IFC’s SME Ventures
Program will expand the provision of risk capital and advisory services to a greater number of small
businesses.
109.
In addition, as part of its partnership with the MasterCard Foundation to scale up
microfinance in Africa, IFC will continue to expand its microfinance programs in DRC to increase
and support the number of commercially viable microfinance institutions and broaden SMEs’
access to financial services. IFC also will explore the possibility of complementing the Bank’s support to
the microfinance fund. In parallel, IFC will continue to help build the capacity of MSMEs to strengthen
their credit-worthiness. When feasible, IFC will develop additional projects with local banks to support
small business banking through its Africa Microfinance, Small and Medium Enterprises (MSME) Finance
Program. These projects will include thematic- and/or industry-focused activities (such as agribusiness,
education, and gender).IFC will continue to provide trade finance advisory to finance professionals and
team up with the Bank to establish nonexistent financial infrastructure (credit bureau, collateral registries,
leasing regulatory framework). Based on market demand, technical feasibility, and financial
sustainability, as well as lessons learned from previous IFC/Bank experience, IFC and the Bank will work
together to establish risk-sharing facilities and introduce/develop housing finance in DRC.
CAS Outcome 2.2. Improved connectivity and access to transport infrastructure
Analytical and Advisory Activities
110.
A series of analytical works is planned to support the regional integration agenda. In
Western DRC, the Bank is supporting the preparation of a trade facilitation study between the ports of
Kinshasa and Brazzaville. This study, carried out jointly with EC and DfID, will help the Governments of
DRC and the Republic of Congo (RC) design and implement measures to facilitate the flow of goods and
services between the two capital cities. More broadly, the Bank will help DRC design an integrated
development strategy to benefit its border countries in the West (RC and Angola), with particular
attention to the interests of Bas Congo Province. Competition among various infrastructure options will
be one of the principles used in the study, allowing for simultaneous development of transport, energy,
and telecommunications corridors, thus guaranteeing continuity of service if one supply route is
disconnected. A similar study is envisaged for Eastern DRC to review trade opportunities and
competitions with countries including Burundi, Rwanda, Uganda, and Zambia.
111.
In addition, a new ESW––Spatial Economics, Growth Impacts, and Decision making for
Infrastructure Investment in DRC––is intended to assist the Government in identifying the potential
growth impacts of its five “priority economic zones” (see map in appendix 14). These potential areas for
“spirals” of growth form a part of the Government’s 2012–16 Development Program. Infrastructure
investment planning often is carried out in sectoral silos, with little attention to the agglomeration
economies that could result from coordinating and sequencing interventions. In many cases, when
projects are evaluated independently rather than as a package, not only are agglomeration economies not
captured, but also the result is overlap and duplication of services. AfDB already has expressed its intent
to help the Government develop Zone 2, and the World Bank is preparing operations in Zones 1 and 4.
Zone 5, the river leg of the Congo Basin Atlantic Corridor, will be studied as well. This ESW could help
determine which zones and which investments within areas are the most efficient and the priorities for

31

economic growth. This ESW might be undertaken in collaboration with, and possibly financed by, the
Regional Spatial Development Initiative of the Development Bank of Southern Africa (DBSA).
World Bank Group financing
112.
The ongoing Multimodal Transport operation (US$255 million) will retain its critical
role in supporting and revitalizing the core railway network in large parts of Southern and Central
DRC, which could collapse without support from the project. The planned additional financing to the
project (US$180 million) is ready and scheduled for Board presentation (FY13). The project will continue
to help the Government implement structural reforms at SNCC (the national railway company),
implement a transport-sector-wide governance plan, and strengthen the transport SOEs’ operational
performance.
113.
A new Urban Development Project (US$100 million) is being prepared to help secondary
cities in growth corridors deliver basic services and reap the benefits from economies of
agglomeration. The project will build up urban infrastructure through labor-intensive methods in the
cities located in Western DRC (Matadi, Kikwit, and Mbandaka) as well as in the East and North Katanga
(Bukavu, Kindu and Kalemie), areas targeted by the two agriculture-based growth poles operations. This
project will focus on how best to use local materials and promote private sector initiatives. It also will
improve urban governance through performance-based allocation of project resources with links to
revenue collection and strengthened financial management. Strengthened urban governance will enable
targeted cities to better provide basic services to their fast-growing populations while supporting linkages
to their rural hinterlands. This approach underpins decentralization by pushing resources to the city level
and supporting inclusive local governance. The project is expected to help generate jobs in construction
and related activities. The urban project will complement the reconstruction program supported by China.
CAS Outcome 2.3. Improved access to quality broadband network and services at reduced cost
Analytical and Advisory Activities
114.
The Bank has started a policy dialogue to review the legal and regulatory framework
according to best practices (no exclusive rights on fiber optic assets, financial autonomy of the
regulatory authority) with the objective that new legislation will be enacted in 2013. Its approval would
make DRC eligible for the Central African Backbone (CAB) program.
World Bank Group financing
115.
The Government has officially indicated its interest in participating in the Central
African Backbone (CAB) program (regional project). The Government already is participating in the
public-private partnership (PPP) approach for international connectivity via the West Africa Cable
System (WACS) consortium, and has installed a submarine landing station in Moanda and a fiber optic
cable between Moanda and Kinshasa. Bank Group support is sought to develop, operate, and
commercialize on a wholesale basis key economic clusters (Kinshasa, Lubumbashi, Goma) connected to
submarine cable capacity with the quickest route (WACS for Kinshasa, cross-border connections for the
other clusters), which will be linked together in a second phase via national fiber links. The Bank has
started to review the legal and regulatory framework according to best practices (no exclusive rights on
fiber optic assets, and financial autonomy of the regulatory authority).
116.
In addition, IFC will help improve access to telecommunications for populations in
remote and/or poorly covered areas by building on the successful pilot phase with a mobile operator to
launch the broad Village Phone Program. The targets are 4,500 village phone operators (jobs) and
improved access for approximately 900,000 people.

32

CAS Outcome 2.4Increased generation of and improved access to energy
Analytical and Advisory Activities
117.
There is an ongoing ESW on rural electrification that will complement the new TA
project on Inga3.DRC also will benefit from the Africa Renewable Energy and Access Expansion
Program (AFREA) funding. AFREA is an Energy Sector Management Assistance Program (ESMAP) for
Africa with the objective to support the scale-up of energy access and clean energy solutions in SSA.DRC
has been selected as a target country for the expansion of the World Bank’s Lighting Africa activities in
the region and a pilot country for the Africa Clean Cooking Energy Solutions (ACCES) initiative,
financed by AFREA. Lighting Africa is a joint World Bank-IFC program to accelerate the adoption of
clean, off-grid lighting technologies by households and businesses throughout SSA that currently rely for
their lighting needs on candles, kerosene, and other inferior and harmful fuels. In DRC, the program will
be co-financed with the Global Partnership on Output-Based Aid (GPOBA) grant and will target
providing output-based subsidies for the dissemination of modern off-grid lighting to increase its
affordability for the poor. The ACCES objective is to accelerate the development of the clean cooking
sector in SSA in order to increase access to modern technologies and cooking fuels that will alleviate the
adverse health, environmental, and socioeconomic impacts of traditional cooking practices. In DRC,
ACCES will cooperate with the forthcoming Forest Investment Program (FIP) to complement its
activities with the focus on the promotion of clean cooking solutions, such as improved and advanced
cook stoves.
World Bank Group financing
118.
Access to cheaper power is a key component of the competitiveness agenda. The Bank will
prepare a new Technical Assistance Project with parallel financing from the AfDB to help the
Government finalize the feasibility studies for Inga3 and midsize hydro-projects, select a developer, and
prepare the detailed design of other hydroelectric sites in DRC. To date, the Bank’s heavy engagement in
the electricity sector through the 2 regional energy projects (Southern African Power Market,
US$560.6million; and Regional and Domestic Power Market Development, $US579.7 million) has
yielded limited results. However, significant progress has been made in the recent months on the
institutional front, including strengthening governance within the National Electricity Company (SNEL),
as demonstrated by the appointment of a new Board and senior management, the signing of the
performance contract between SNEL and the state, and progress in the recruitment of the TA service
operator supported by the Bank. To prepare for the increasing demand for electricity in Katanga’s mining
sector as well as in countries belonging to the Southern Africa Power Pool, including South Africa, AfDB
has financed preliminary feasibility studies of a new 4.8 GW generation capacity at Inga (Inga3). With a
hydropower potential of 40 GW, Inga is the largest and most cost-effective hydroelectric site in the world.
CAS Outcome 2.5Boost agriculture production and increase access to markets
Analytical and Advisory Activities
119.
Studies financed under the regional ongoing Trust Fund will enhance access to the results of
research in the regional agriculture systems in Eastern and Central Africa (ASARECA) as part of the
Regional Integration Strategy for Central Africa.
World Bank Group financing
120.
The Bank will continue to implement the ongoing Support to Agriculture project ($120
million), which focuses on support to farmers’ organizations and linking farmers to market. The
project’s objective is to double yields for maize, cassava, and rice. To achieve its objectives, the project
will enhance the capacity of 400,000 beneficiaries and rehabilitate 2,500 km of feeder roads to connect
farmers with Central Africa Republic (CAR) and the Congo River. In addition, a new Southeastern DRC
Agriculture-based Growth Pole Project is proposed that will focus on agriculture and agribusiness. This
33

project will complement road and rehabilitation efforts under two ongoing projects in the Southeast (from
Katanga to South Kivu). It will complement port rehabilitation activities on Lake Tanganyika financed by
the European Union, and agriculture programs financed by Belgium and the AfDB. If these initiatives are
successful in creating much-needed jobs, the Government, with the support of other development
partners, will extend these programs to other areas. These agriculture operations as well as the AGPP will
significantly contribute to supporting Government’s efforts at alleviating extreme poverty and
malnutrition (MDG1).
121.
Gender. Boosting competitiveness by accelerating private-sector-led growth will facilitate
jobs creation. The Bank program on PSD and employment (growth poles projects based on agriculture
and agribusiness) will specifically support the promotion of small-scale agricultural businesses run by
women, improve their access to finance, focus agricultural service delivery on the needs and priorities of
women farmers, and ensure gender inclusion in community-level and other REDD-related decisionmaking bodies. This support will complement ongoing efforts developed by IFC’s Advisory Services
programs for Access to Finance and SME Development program. At the same time, the Bank program
also will make specific efforts to promote employment of male youth.
Development partners
122.
Key development partners include France (AFD) (infrastructure); AfDB (growth pole
project, regional integration infrastructure––roads, energy, and river transport, environment and climate
change); Belgium (agriculture, rural roads, technical and vocational training); China (basic
infrastructure); DfID (PSD, roads); European Commission (infrastructure, rural roads, energy), KWF and
EIB (energy); FAO (agriculture), and UNDP/UNCDF (business climate).
Strategic Objective Three: To increase access to social services and raise human development
indicators
123.
It is essential that DRC address its stark social inequalities and raise the quality and
stock of its human capital. As conflict situations stabilize, health and education services are among the
most important improvements that people expect. In addition, investing in the human capital of its entire
population, especially in the current context of high fertility rates, will position DRC to take full
advantage of its enormous natural resource wealth in the coming decades and to garner long-term
productivity gains that otherwise would be lost. The Bank’s engagement will emphasize both (i) financing
essential services and (ii) maintaining strategic and sustained engagement to strengthen service delivery
systems in education, health, nutrition, and social protection.
124.
Regarding IDA financing in the social sectors, a core principle will be to focus on
strengthening governance and service delivery systems, while supporting delivery of services to the
population. Another principle will be to build multi-sectoral programs that will have the desired
development impact effectively and in scale, while staying mindful of the need to avoid implementation
complexities. For example, the objective of achieving higher health facility utilization rates might entail
incorporation of demand-side interventions developed in collaboration with the social protection sector.
Another example could be to reduce DRC’s high levels of malnutrition through a complementary
program of agriculture and health sector interventions. A third example might be to increase girls’ school
completion rates by incorporating water and sanitation services as integral parts of a basic education
program. While having a primary sector of focus, all future operations also will seek opportunities to
build on synergies with other sectors to maximize service delivery and results.

34

CAS Outcome 3.1. Increased access to clean water and sanitation
World Bank financing
125.
Support to the water sector will be provided mostly through the ongoing Water Sector
Rehabilitation Project, approved in FY10; no new water operation will be prepared during this
CAS period. The project will support the Government’s efforts to improve access to potable water, which
contributes to the achievement of MDG 7. It aims to increase access to drinking water in three major
urban centers of DRC (Kinshasa, Lubumbashi, and Matadi), and to improve the performance of
REGIDESO. The access rate in the targeted cities will increase from 43 percent at end-2011 to 53 percent
by end-2015. This increase will result in approximately 1.2 million urban residents’ gaining access to safe
water. The project will increase the financial viability of REGIDESO, and improve its operations. An
international water operator has been contracted under a three-year service contract and has started to help
REGIDESO reach its objectives under the performance contract signed with the state.
126.
In collaboration with the Bank-financed Water project team, WBI is launching a
beneficiary feedback in the water sector called MAYINTIC.27The purpose of this program is to
strengthen governance in the sector by supporting the ongoing dialogue between REGIDESO and the
water users. MAYINTIC gives voice to users’ grievances, which are geo-referenced and aggregated
through a short message service (SMS) data collection system. The data generated is made available to
the public. Feedback to users on their complaints is done through SMS, exchanges with local water
associations, and a television show on which REGIDESO representatives must respond monthly to the
complaints received through SMS. This process of gathering beneficiaries’ feedback and monitoring
results will be mainstreamed throughout this CAS period for other sectors. UNICEF is emulating the
same approach by moving most of its M&E activities into SMS-based monitoring.
Development partners
127.
The Water project complements programs supported by other donors. These donors include, in
particular, the AfDB, French Development Agency (AFD), Belgium, German Development Agency
(KfW), and EU. In addition, the Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA) and the Chinese
Cooperation have projects in the same urban areas in which the Bank is active with its financing. While
the Bank-financed project focuses on urban water supply, other donors, including the AfDB, AFD,
Belgian Technical Cooperation (BTC/CTB), and UNICEF are focusing on the semi-urban and rural
sectors. The Water project also is implemented in full partnership with the AfDB-funded Water project
(2007), which focuses on investments while the World Bank supports investments and the reform
process.
CAS Outcome 3.2. Improved access to health services in targeted areas
Analytical and Advisory Activities
128.
The Bank will continue to support analytical work in the social sectors carried out by the
Government and other partners. The Bank will focus its support to the preparation of a higher
education strategy, social protection strategy, skills development, social sector public expenditures review
including health finances, and the development of systems to identify and target the most vulnerable
populations.
129.
Jointly with interested international partners (IPs), the Bank will update the 2008 public
expenditure review (PER) in the social sectors. Building on ongoing engagement on budget issues in
these sectors, the PER will cover the health, education, and social protection sectors. For example,
27

“Mayi” means “water” in Lingala, a local language widely spoken in DRC, and “NTIC” is French for “TIC”
(Technologie de l’Information et de la Communication)

35

building on the existing sector strategy in health, the PER will inform the policy dialogue with the
Government, the decentralized authorities, and the donors to increase the effectiveness of spending in the
sector and ensure that the Government allocates adequate funding to the health sector. Thanks to the
ongoing policy dialogue on health sector financing, in 2012 the Government allocated more funding to
the health sector and, for the first time, provided financing to procure vaccines. The PER will build on
this encouraging development. In addition to improvements in budget preparation and execution, there is
a need for DRC to track expenditures from the Central and provincial levels to service delivery points at
the community level.
130.
The Bank, in collaboration with its partners, will undertake a Programmatic Multi-Year
Non-Lending Technical Assistance Program (FY2013–FY2016) in health systems to identify and
address key bottlenecks in health sector management. The specific areas of intervention will be
identified in the coming months. Some of these areas could include drug supply and management, health
information systems, health worker training and distribution, planning and management capacity at health
zone and facility levels, and use of adequate PFM instruments at the peripheral levels.
131.
The PFM instruments will build on the ongoing activities in capacity building for budget
preparation and execution in the health sector, financed by a Bank-executed Canadian International
Development Agency (CIDA) Trust Fund of US$4.6 million. These activities are helping to improve the
budgetary processes in the sector at the provincial and national levels in line with Government PFM
reform. This PFM reform includes the development of multiyear budget programming through the
introduction of sectoral Medium-Term Expenditure Frameworks (MTEFs) and support to decentralized
budgeting processes in 11 provinces. In addition, these activities will strengthen institutional capacity to
(i) improve health sector budget execution and results monitoring (at the central and provincial levels)
within the existing budget execution framework, as well as (ii) prepare the sector to migrate progressively
toward the new PFM policy and procedures. Such activities are expected to continue beyond FY14 with
additional support from CIDA and, potentially, DfID.
World Bank financing
132.
The Bank already has initiated support to DRC to strengthen its health service delivery
system. IDA’s $75 million additional financing (FY13) to the ongoing Health Project ($260 million),
which became effective in November 2012, will begin to address some of systemic issues at the central
and health zone levels. The capacity of the central Ministry of Health (MOH) to monitor and supervise
the implementation of the National Health Plan will be strengthened in parallel with the establishment of
National Health Accounts. At a decentralized level, the supervisory responsibility carried out by NGOs
will be transferred to the Health Zone management teams with TA provided by the project. In parallel, the
project will finance basic health packages, malaria and HIV/AIDS control, family planning, pre- and postmaternal health, nutrition, immunizations, and piloting results-based financing (RBF) of health services in
5 provinces (83 health zones). The project will contribute to Government’s efforts towards the
achievement of three MDGs (MDG 4, 5 and 6). The rapid demographic growth and high level of fertility,
mentioned earlier as the central development issues in DRC, will be addressed in targeted areas by
supporting family planning and birth control.
133.
Future Bank involvement in the health sector will use a two-pronged approach:
improving governance, management, and financing of the sector while continuing to provide
support to the delivery of essential services to the population. A new health sector project is scheduled
for FY14. This new lending operation will help address health system strengthening, governance, and
service delivery issues. Experiences from RBF approaches will be used to help formulate the new

36

program. Indeed, the Katanga RBF Pilot, which is being evaluated through an impact evaluation28 and
routine monitoring data, is showing significantly better results in the RBF facilities compared to areas that
have no RBF.29 Learning from this pilot will help shape the thinking of the potential benefit of scaling up
RBF in DRC.
134.
Furthermore, given the weak service delivery capacity across the social sectors, the Bank
will finance a multi-sectoral HD Service Delivery Technical Assistance Program (FY14) to provide
strategic financing to strengthen key systems in education, health, and social protection.
CAS Outcome 3.3. Improved access to basic education in targeted areas
Analytical and Advisory Activities
135.
At the basic education level, interventions are needed to reduce the number of out-ofschool children, increase completion rates, and expand access to all, including minorities and those
in the conflict areas in the East. Progress made in basic education calls for expansion of secondary
education opportunities, particularly for girls, who are grossly under-represented. In addition, reforms to
technical and vocational education (TVE) to better align it with the needs of the economy are urgent. The
Bank is supporting a skills development study that should help define training priorities for the needs of
the Western DRC Agriculture-based Growth Poles operation and for the Kinshasa area.
136.
At the tertiary education level, a robust regulatory regime to ensure a level playing field,
quality of education, and value for money is urgently needed. This regime would need to be
accompanied by reform of the financing system to improve equity in access (for example, the introduction
of a student loan system plus a scholarship system for disadvantaged students). Given the low funding of
the subsector, special effort is needed to mobilize other sources of funding, including from the private
sector and development partners active in the DRC.
World Bank financing
137.
Although major access and quality challenges remain at the basic education level, a
holistic and integrated approach to education development in the DRC is necessary. To support
inclusive growth, the country needs adequate human resources. Ensuring a minimum level of education
for all citizens is a way to strengthen their participation in development, increase the potential for peace,
and reduce vulnerability to conflict. Improving quality of learning is a priority at all levels. The Bank’s
ongoing US$150 million Education project (PASE) is the current major operation targeting primary
education, for which approximately US$70 million remain to be disbursed.
138.
Because of its leadership in the education sector, the Bank has been requested to manage
the US$100 million multilateral Global Partnership for Education (GPE) for the next 3 years. This
operation, expected to be approved in FY13, will complement the ongoing Education project. A key
policy dialogue will center on increasing the national budget allocation to the education sector and
supporting training of teachers and learning assessment activities. In addition, a new operation (US$150
million) will be financed in the education sector to reinforce the gains achieved and expand them to
secondary and tertiary education. All three operations support Government’s efforts towards achieving
MDG 2 and 3. The 2012 budget funded the education sector at 9 percent, higher than in previous budgets
and the 2013 allocation has been increased to 11 percent of the budget.

28

http://www.rbfhealth.org/rbfhealth/news/item/500/dealing-difficult-design-decisions-rbf-pilot-programdemocratic-republic-congo-drc
29
Presentation during the International Education Conference in Istanbul, November 12–17, 2012.

37

CAS Outcome 3.4. Strengthened social protection
Key outcome indicators expected to be influenced by Bank-supported activities:
Analytical and Advisory Activities
139.
The Bank will provide technical support to help the Government review its social
protection programs, update the Social Protection Strategy (FY2014–FY2015), and define a
concrete action plan for implementation. One lesson from experience in other countries is that the most
effective approach to prepare for crises is to build elements of a safety net that can be used in normal
times as a permanent program for vulnerable groups (for example, infants, pregnant women, disabled)
and be scaled up to cover others during crises. The assistance provided will focus on developing an
efficient system by building on the ongoing institutional audit of the Ministry of Social Affairs (supported
by the Street Children Project) and on the findings of the envisaged Social Sectors Public Expenditures
Review, as well as on the efforts of other partners, such as UNICEF’s support for the establishment of a
comprehensive database. The multi-sectoral HD Service Delivery Technical Assistance Program (FY14)
mentioned above also will contribute to translating into concrete actions the recommendations of the
institutional audit. Opportunities for partnerships with the private sector will be explored, giving special
attention to the extractive industries to leverage governance efforts under Strategic Objective One.
World Bank financing
140.
The CAS will focus on assisting the Government to improve the allocation and
effectiveness of fragmented social protection expenditures and their impacts on human
development. To contribute to social protection for the most vulnerable, the Bank will finance a Social
Protection and Eastern recovery project (FY14) that will build on the positive experience of the
Emergency Social Action Program (closing in June 2013). This operation will improve delivery of basic
social services by rehabilitating and building community infrastructure, while at the same time fostering
governance at the local level and building social accountability. Given the particularly acute needs of the
conflict-stricken East and the proven effectiveness of such approaches in fragile contexts, a special
economic recovery envelop should complement the allocation for that part of the country.
141.
Because a labor-intensive public works program was piloted successfully in Katanga
province, it would make sense to launch a similar program with much wider coverage, setting the
basis for a safety net system. Given the employment challenges faced by youth and the strong link
between youth unemployment and civil unrest, a public works program should target the youth, and
include capacity building elements to help them bridge the gap between occasional and steady
employment. Whether these pro-youth elements can be built into the proposed new operation or will
require a standalone project can be determined at a later stage and the IDA envelope adjusted accordingly.
142.
Gender. Improving social services delivery and raising human development indicators. The
Bank’s program in the social sectors will focus on gender inclusion in access to schools at all levels. One
of the components of the ongoing health project addresses family planning, reproductive health, and
sexual health care. The proposed PER in the social sectors, as well as the proposed ESWs on higher
education, skills development and health systems and financing, will consider and address gender
inequality in the underlying analysis. Women’s needs and perspectives will be taken into consideration
when designing and implementing the Eastern DRC Economic Recovery Project.
Development partners
143.
Key development partners include DfID (primary health, water, sanitation and hygiene,
primary education); USAID (health, education); EU, WHO, MSF, and Belgium (health); and AfDB,
UNDP, UNICEF, and Belgium/CTB (education).

38

144.
Given the size and the importance of the needs, close coordination with international
partners will be important to avoid duplications, create synergies, and ensure coherence in
approaches. As an example of close collaboration between the WB and IPs, the World Bank President
and USAID Administrator have called for a stronger collaboration between the two agencies, and DRC
was chosen as one of the pilot countries for this initiative. As a result, the 2 teams have developed an 18month action plan to identify additional areas of collaboration such as the necessity to build the capacity
of DRC’s health system to reduce parallel donor systems. An area of current collaboration is financing the
2012–13 Demographic and Health Survey (DHS).
Strategic Objective Four: To address fragility and conflicts in the Eastern provinces
145.
Supporting stabilization and peace consolidation efforts in Eastern DRC are parts of the
broader development agenda and should include a regional dimension. In view of the destabilizing
impact of continued conflicts and insecurity in Eastern DRC on the development prospects of the country
as a whole, the Bank will seek to identify opportunities to work with other partners to optimize the
development impacts of its interventions. In line with World Development Report 2011: Conflict,
Security, and Development, the Bank will design a targeted, multi-sectoral program of assistance that
builds on the existing portfolio and complements the Bank's already diverse assistance strategy. All
efforts should be made to coordinate efforts with Bank programs in Burundi and Uganda, and
communications among members of the respective country teams should be intensified. In addition,
country management units (CMUs) covering Burundi, DRC, Rwanda, and Uganda will coordinate their
work and information on conflicts with the support of the Nairobi Hub and in relation with the Regional
Integration department of the World Bank Africa Region. The program will pursue two main directions,
which follow.
146.
Leveraging national policy dialogue to support peace consolidation. World Bank
engagement in national policy dialogue and reform will be leveraged to prioritize strengthening the
accountability and effectiveness of state institutions in the Eastern provinces. The Bank will ensure that
support for policy dialogue with the Government on economic governance, transparency, financial
management, and management of mining contracts also extends to the Eastern provinces, particularly
areas affected by or prone to destabilization and conflicts. Successful ongoing Bank support will be scaled
up and extended to other provinces, including South Kivu, in which the current support is helping to
improve inclusion, institutional transparency, and effectiveness through participatory budgeting.
147.
Strengthening resilience, peace consolidation, and sustainable development in the East.
To strengthen societal capacities for local peace consolidation and sustainable development, the Bank's
long-standing expertise and experience will be focused on bridging ongoing stabilization interventions
developed within the STAREC/I-SSSS with longer term development solutions. The objective of Bank
engagement will be to mitigate key determinants of conflict and instability; while strengthening the
sustainability, effectiveness, and accountability of local institutions. Given the immense human impact of
conflicts during the past several years, Bank interventions will target areas of acute vulnerability, focusing
on war-affected populations (including returning IDPs, refugees, high-risk youth, and local communities).
Particular emphasis will be placed on income-generating activities, promoting equitable and participatory
forms of local development planning, and strengthening mechanisms for the peaceful resolution of
conflicts related to land and identity.
CAS Outcome 4.1.Improved management of public finances and accountability in targeted conflictaffected areas
Analytical and Advisory Activities

39

148.
To support the revised I-SSSS, and in view of the necessity for the Government to deepen
a security sector reform (SSR)in order to provide effective security to its citizens, the Bank could
support other donors that may want to review public expenditures in the security sector. In the DRC
context, Bank engagement could be only on a supporting basis. It could be envisaged if associated with a
credible, comprehensive SSR process steered by the Government and supported by a broad coalition of
international partners heavily involved in SSR over the years, including the bilateral partners and
MONUSCO.
149.
Given the Bank’s long-standing expertise and experience coupled with its convening
capacity, it is well positioned to support a larger policy dialogue around the drivers of conflict in
the East and the rest of DRC. The World Bank will launch a capacity building initiative to support
national think tanks in analyzing sources of conflict and fragility, developing policy recommendations,
and ensuring that the information is widely disseminated and discussed by all stakeholders. Multimedia
campaigns will be used to disseminate findings and facilitate dialogue around the main issues.
150.
Furthermore, specific analysis of possible Government responses to the drivers of
fragility will be carried out by the Bank together with local think tanks. A series of analytical
activities will be undertaken to support an engagement with the Government on strengthening policies to
reduce conflict around, among others, land, governance of natural resources, and local power-sharing.
This analysis will be carried out in close collaboration with Bank partners, particularly the UN and DfID.
World Bank financing
151.
The Bank will contribute to this pillar through the ongoing Governance project by supporting
the Government’s efforts to transfer its share of budget to provinces, including conflict-affected province
of South-Kivu, and improve budget execution at the provincial and local levels. The Bank will aim at
mainstreaming participatory budgeting in all districts of South Kivu.
CAS Outcome 4.2. Increase social economic opportunities in conflict-affected areas
152.
The World Bank will implement a two-pronged approach to provide support in Eastern
DRC, predicated on rapid deployment for early results; flexible, context-driven design; and the ability to
make corrective adjustments in the course of execution. This approach will build on some of the positive
dynamics observed in South Kivu. Perhaps the three most impactful determinants of success in peace
building are employment generation, improved local governance, and participation. These three will be
pursued as key cross-cutting objectives under all activities.
World Bank financing
153.
The first prong will focus on leveraging the current IDA portfolio to increase its impact
on stabilization and peace consolidation. The Bank will examine how existing and planned operations
could have more impact on peace consolidation in the East, drawing on the relative success of existing
projects in improving economic productivity, livelihoods, and economic governance. This realignment of
projects when appropriate will take into account conflict sensitivity, synergies with the UN and other
organizations, and flexibility to respond rapidly to needs. The sectors through which a peace
consolidation focus will be strengthened during the CAS period will include agriculture, roads, urban
development, governance, and community empowerment.30

30

World Bank operations identified in this context also will include existing and pipeline projects from other CAS
strategic objectives/pillars based on their relevance and ability to contribute to peace and stability outcomes in the
Eastern provinces.

40

154.
The second prong will focus on identification of instruments to drive innovative
approaches. This prong will include a component on data collection and analysis and a component that
will support quick experimentation with small projects that, if successful, could be scaled up under
funding from IDA or other donors. The second component will be funded possibly through a strategic
State and Peace-building Fund (SPF) or similar mechanism:
i. In Eastern DRC, the drivers of fragility due to conflict have been well studied, and a number
of organizations (from the UN to local CSOs) regularly collect data on a wide range of issues.
At present, however, there is no reliable mechanism to link real-time data collection and analysis
with interventions designed to address medium-term peace consolidation and development
priorities. To test and evaluate pilot programs, and monitor their impact on beneficiaries over time,
specific mechanisms need to be set up. These mechanisms are particularly important in DRC due to
the localized nature of conflict and the enormous diversity and complexity of conflict dynamics
throughout the eastern part. These mechanisms also will be of value to World Bank task team
leaders and staff involved in the design and implementation of operations, as well as to local
governments and international partners. The World Bank will work closely with UN, Government
(particularly with the STAREC structure), and NGO partners.
ii. A facility will be created to support small pilot projects that will be deployed rapidly and to
test new experimental approaches. This facility will help identify implementation arrangements
adapted to the operating environment in Eastern DRC (particularly South Kivu). The facility will
address areas with priority stabilization needs that can be subsequently scaled up through larger
projects. It also could support local institutional strengthening, easing the resumption of
Government activities, and testing mechanisms for local conflict resolution.
155.
The Bank will develop an Eastern DRC Economic Recovery project targeting areas in
provinces covered by the STAREC program. The Bank will allocate US$65 million to help build
social cohesion and strengthen community-level capacities in local development planning. The project
will also help reintegrate displaced people. The project will be based on CDD approaches already proven
effective in other fragile and conflict-affected countries. It will complement activities that will be
developed under the Southeastern DRC Agriculture-based Growth Pole. It will also complement activities
undertaking by the new Urban Development project in the city of Bukavu, aiming to improve access to
basic services. This project will undertake labor intensive public works, which would lead to short-term
employment generation.
156.
Gender. When addressing gender issues in DRC’s conflict-affected areas, the fact that conflict
negatively affects women and men in different ways and results in gender-specific disadvantages will be
taken into account. The direct impact of violence falls primarily on young males, the majority of fighting
forces. Women and children, on the other hand, often suffer disproportionately from indirect effects.
Gender inequality reflects power imbalances in social structures that existed in pre-conflict periods and
are exacerbated by armed conflicts and their aftermath.
Development partners
157.
The Bank will prioritize collaboration within the framework of the Government's
STAREC Program and the UN-I-SSSS. In doing so, the Bank will seek to identify areas in which it can
complement and extend current stabilization and peace consolidation efforts that are aligned with its
current portfolio. Where possible, the Bank also will seek opportunities for deeper operational alignment
and synergies with key Government and international partners. It also will participate in key field
coordination mechanisms (notably the provincial joint technical committees) to ensure that its operations
are well informed and optimally coordinated with those of its partners. Key DPs include the United
Nations (MONUSCO and other UN agencies, funds and programs involved in the I-SSSS), USAID,
DfID, and key development-focused international NGO.
41

Climate Change
158.
Climate change in DRC and the Congo River Basin could undermine the productive use
and economic benefits of water and land resources, and escalate the impacts of natural disasters
related to extreme water and weather events. Therefore, it is essential to build the capacity to monitor
and forecast hydro-meteorology (hydro-met) in DRC, and importantly, transfer this improved
understanding of current and future climate to decision-making and planning as a way to build adaptation
and resilience. Over the last decades, the number of meteorological synoptic stations declined from 125 to
24, including 10 installed in airports to assist with air navigation. From 350 hydro-meteorological stations
in 1960, the country has only 10 today: 5 on the Congo River and 5 on the Kasai River. Considering the
need to understand climate change impacts and to enable the resources of the Congo River, whose
discharge is equivalent to almost 70 percent of the discharge of Africa’s 20 largest rivers, a future hydromet TA project will be prepared to strengthen Congo’s hydro-meteorological services.
159.
This new project will help the Government of DRC as well as key stakeholders, including
dam operators, river basin organizations, and the private sector, in reducing the uncertainties and
shocks to climate change. It also will strengthen the application of more accurate water and weather
forecasts in productive sectors such as navigation for river transport and aviation, as well as management
of water for hydropower and agriculture. Investments would have to be cognizant of the complexities of
water management in DRC and the need for training and capacity building, the vastness and hydrological
uniqueness of the Congo River, and the critical status of hydro-met services at present. As such,
investments will focus on optimizing hydro-met monitoring through suitable rehabilitation/installation of
observation equipment, as well as bringing in data and forecasts from remote sensing sources. During the
CAS period, significant advances are expected in the global understanding of climate change but also the
ability to derive useful information from satellite monitoring.
160.
In the context of DRC, the proposed project could bridge these global resources and
expertise to meet the need for relevant hydro-met information at country level. Equally important,
the project would focus on improving the sharing of information and forecasts as public goods that are
used in decision-making, particularly in water resources planning, climate change analysis, and early
warning systems that would benefit vulnerable communities in flood- or drought-prone areas.
161.
In addition to this operation, the Bank will ensure that projects and other activities
under the new CAS will be designed and implemented to integrate both the adaptation and the
mitigation dimensions of climate change. Adaptation is particularly important in the energy (including
hydropower), agriculture, and transport sectors. Complementing other regional activities supported by the
Bank, such as the Inga3 case study in the regional infrastructure and climate change ESW, the proposed
support will seek strong development outcomes while improving climate resilience. In combination with
the support to strengthen the capacity of the Government’s hydro-met services, these initiatives are
mutually reinforcing.

D. Strengthening World Bank Coordination and Donor Harmonization
162.
Going forward, the Bank and IFC are committed to continuous and meaningful
collaboration (where it is likely to add real value) to reach the highest development impact in DRC
by combining resources and leveraging synergies. As part of the continuous joint strategy process,
Bank and IFC teams will be planning joint dissemination and implementation exercises. Periodic reviews
will be conducted jointly to track progress, make needed course adjustments, and explore additional
opportunities for greater collaboration.

42

163.
DRC is a priority country for MIGA, in line with two of the Agency’s key strategic
objectives: supporting projects in IDA countries and projects in post-conflict and fragile
environments. For this CAS, MIGA will continue to engage alongside the other World Bank institutions
in the country and is likely to be most closely aligned with the private sector (second strategic objective).
164.
Currently, MIGA has 2 active projects in DRC that are guaranteed for investment. The
two represent a gross exposure of US$30.1 million and support the infrastructure equipment and
financial sectors. The two operations complement the Bank’s and IFC’s operations to support the
economic diversification agenda. In the coming period, MIGA will look to further capitalize on its
existing engagement. MIGA continues to offer its product for investors looking to enter the local market,
thus supporting its own and the WBG’s wider objectives in the country. MIGA’s support for DRC will
continue to be offered across its Transfer Restriction, Expropriation, Breach of Contract, and War and
Civil Disturbance political risk insurance product lines. As elsewhere in Africa, these product lines can be
used alongside other World Bank products, for example, IFC loans or PRG (Partial Risk Guarantees)
support; or to directly support Government PPPs or Independent Power Projects, as applied elsewhere in
the region. MIGA's Small Investment Product (SIP) also could be useful for the country, whereby more
streamlined procedures could enable smaller projects to be supported. The Bank and IFC will explore
further collaboration with MIGA in the course of this strategy.
165.
Traditional annual donor contributions to DRC are estimated at US$1.6 billion. The
infrastructure sector is the largest beneficiary (37 percent, of which energy is 17 percent, transport 14
percent, and water and sanitation 6 percent). The social sectors rank second with 28 percent (18 percent
for health, 6 percent for social protection and emergency support, and 4 percent for education). They are
followed by agriculture and environment (14 percent); governance (13 percent, including support to
public sector reform and statistics,); and security, the judiciary, and democracy (10 percent).
Development banks contribute approximately 60 percent of annual financial assistance to the DRC
(including 26 percent from the World Bank and 16 percent from the AfDB). Europeans, including the
European Union, provide 25 percent of the total; and USAID 13 percent.
166.
In Eastern DRC, partnerships with international partners including the UN constitute
sine qua non prerequisites for leveraging Bank resources and enabling collective risk sharing. The
Bank will seek to promote closer alignment among diplomatic, security, humanitarian, and development
actors in the international community. This alignment will build on the Bank's current leadership role
(together with the UN) within the Donor Coordination Group (DCG), and its participation in the
implementation of the G7+/New Deal initiative. The Bank also will lend its support, through the EU’s
Good Humanitarian Donorship (GHD) and DCG mechanisms, to the articulation of closer coordination
between humanitarian and development efforts in Eastern DRC, to enable an eventual transition as
conditions stabilize.
167.
Coordination with international partners will be strengthened, enabling the World Bank
to be more selective than in the past. To prepare for such strengthening, the donor community, under
Bank coordination, has prepared a series of 19 policy notes with the objective of reaching consensus on
key policy reforms and providing a detailed picture of existing and intended activities. Among traditional
donors, the mechanism for IP coordination is formalized through the DCG, which, until recently, was cochaired by the Bank and the UN. The coordination platform for PFM reforms recently put in place can be
considered a model for the other sectors on how to engage in a concerted dialogue with authorities (box
4).
168.
For newcomers, such as China and India, donor coordination is not formalized. However,
China recently attended some DCG meetings. Efforts will be made during the DCG period to reinforce
information-sharing with these key partners and further strengthen harmonization and results-oriented
43

collaboration. Several IPs are developing their new multiyear strategies in parallel with the Bank.
Appendix8shows the main donor-supported programs. The DCG will remain the Bank’s main forum for
consultations and partnership as it harmonizes its selective approach to assistance and risk-mitigating
strategy in DRC’s evolving operating environment.
Box 4. Improving Donors’ Coordination in PFM Reforms in DRC
Donors’ public financial management (PFM) practices are limiting the extent of their influence, particularly
because of weaknesses in donor coordination. To address this challenge, and after the successful completion of
the 2012 Public Expenditures and Financial Accountability (PEFA) exercise, international development partners that
make up the PFM thematic group on public finances 31 and the Government signed a memorandum of understanding
(MOU) to monitor the implementation of the PFM reform program and harmonize international development
partners’ PFM interventions.
The joint donor/Government group will meet quarterly to (i) discuss the strategic direction and orientation of PFM
reforms, (ii) review the implementation progress of the Strategic Plan for Public Finance Reform (PSRFP), and (iii)
discuss any coordination issues in funding the reform program. Successful implementation of the MOU is expected
to improve donor coordination and the sequencing of PFM reforms. The action plan will be implemented in FY13
and beyond, with the likely support of DfID and a group of donors including IMF, European Commission, African
Development Bank, France, Germany, and UNDP.
In order to support the scaling up of the World-Bank-executed trust fund to be financed by DfID, a PFM reform
program using a basket-funding mechanism through a multi-donor trust fund (MDTF) is being developed with the
support of DfID. This MDTF should serve as a platform for better donor coordination of PFM reform by using a
common basket-funding mechanism and increasing financial information about donor-funded operations such as aid
budget and on accounting.

169.
DRC has requested and obtained “pilot” country status under the “New Deal,” the most
recent in a number of successive paradigms intended to improve the quality of donor support to
fragile and post-conflict states. Three aspects of the New Deal could be of immediate relevance to DRC
and its partners. They are:
 To reduce artificial barriers between the humanitarian/relief and the development communities of
practice. While many locations remain recipients of humanitarian assistance, the transfer of
services from emergency provision to more sustainable management remains problematic.
 To avoid making a false dichotomy between short-term, quick-impact interventions (from
emergency health services to road repairs) and sustainable long-term interventions in
infrastructure, agriculture, or energy. Both types are needed.
 To adjust implementation arrangements to a realistic assessment of capacity.

E. CAS Instruments
170.
Over the past years, the portfolio has improved. It includes 15 projects and 2 regional
projects for a total commitment of US$3.1 billion, of which US$1.14 billion goes to regional projects.
Infrastructure accounts for 64 percent of the project portfolio, followed by the social sectors (18 percent),
agriculture and private sector development (11 percent), and governance (7 percent). The portfolio has no
problem project. However, great attention needs to be paid to the large share of potential problem
projects, and all efforts should be geared to maintaining the current 100 percent proactivity rating.
Appendix 5 provides a detailed picture of the ongoing project portfolio. The portfolio is complemented by
a number of existing AAA (appendix 6) and Trust Fund activities (appendix 7).

31

These donors include AfDB, DfID, French Cooperation, German Cooperation, UNDP, and World Bank.

44

171.
The DRC portfolio has made great progress toward increasing its disbursement levels
beyond the target set for the Africa Region. In FY2012, the DRC portfolio disbursement reached the
27 percent target––2 percentage points above the target set by the institution. Significant efforts have been
made to increase disbursements, and the overall trend is higher than in previous fiscal years. Several
factors have contributed to this performance including close follow-up with counterparts, regular
performance review meetings, and a large number of tasks managed by decentralized staff. In lowcapacity environments, the standard Bank model of supervision cannot be expected to function
successfully, so Bank teams must be prepared to operate on a more supportive, even hand-holding, basis.
The Bank also must be prepared for higher supervision budgets to finance longer periods in the field
working directly with Government counterparts. Similarly, the Bank should anticipate higher overhead
and administrative costs within project budgets to ensure that Government units have the capacity to
ensure smooth project implementation. Finally, to be closer to beneficiaries and to sustain the day-to-day
dialogue with national counterparts, key IPs, and the entire spectrum of stakeholders, the Bank may need
to address the limitations posed by being located exclusively in Kinshasa.
172.
The portfolio will be consolidated. Limited IDA resources need to be allocated strategically
to maximize development outcomes in key areas. Areas of interventions will be better focused to ensure
greater impact. Consolidation will take account of the Bank’s comparative advantage in sectors important
to unlocking growth while maximizing employment creation. Project teams will be encouraged to
consider additional financing and restructuring, especially in sectors in which scaling up is necessary or in
which a different approach may be needed based on the evolving dialogue with the Government. Such
circumstances most certainly will require making tougher strategic choices in consultation with the
Government. All new Bank-financed operations included in this CAS will be implemented by
Government’s institutions. No new project implementation units will be created, and existing PIUs will
be phased out at the end of their respective programs.
173.
Given the fluid political and security conditions of different parts of the country, the
Bank should be in the position to differentiate its operational procedures as it sees fit. Flexibility––
using multiple and differentiated approaches according to situations––will be a key feature of Bank
interventions, The Bank should be able to use appropriate arrangements according to options provided by
OP8.0. Options include the use of additional financing and project restructuring; use of a third-party agent
or agents to augment and strengthen––but not substitute for––project supervision; use of mobile-phonebased technologies to get insights into implementation of projects and to ensure direct feedback from
beneficiaries in remote areas; and relying on partnerships, especially with UN agencies, NGOs, and
community groups. The World Bank’s Centre for Conflict, Security and Development in Nairobi is hiring
clearance-level fiduciary staff in procurement, financial management (FM), and safeguards. The center is
incorporating these staff when needed into regular supervisory missions. Their participation can help
elevate and resolve implementation issues sooner rather than later.
Proposed new activities
174.
Analytical and Advisory Activities. In partnership with Government and donors, the Bank will
undertake core AAA diagnostics; AAA related to CAS objectives; and just-in-time policy notes as
needed. In undertaking AAA, the Bank will emphasize Government ownership to ensure that findings are
internalized and translated into actions and results. Most of the AAA will be developed with local
institutions including NGOs and think tanks, and dissemination will be an important part of the
knowledge work. Appendix 3 provides a tentative AAA pipeline.
175.
World Bank financing. Under the 4-year CAS, the World Bank will finance approximately 12
new projects and use 3 additional financings to scale up successful interventions. The Bank will finance
an additional two regional investment operations that involve DRC. Appendix 4 provides a detailed list of
pipeline projects. Development policy operations should be considered as part of the menu of instruments
45

that could be used to address critical reforms. The massive work on PFM reforms that the Bank will
support during this CAS period should help create the conditions for the use of this important instrument.

V.

RISKS AND MITIGATION

176.
As was the case with the preceding Country Assistance Strategy, this CAS will be
implemented under highly challenging conditions. Some of the main risks are (i) political and securityrelated and the conflict in the East; (ii) system-wide shocks associated with the external environment due
to the volatility of demand for minerals, high oil and food prices, and the persistence of the euro crisis;
(iii) poor fiscal space, deteriorating fiscal position, and their macroeconomic impacts; (iv) opposition to
reforms and transparency by deeply entrenched vested interests; (v) corruption; (vi) tensions arising from
unmet expectations in improved living conditions in the face of a dynamic youth bulge and the unfinished
decentralization agenda; (vii) low capacity for program implementation; and (viii) lack of engagement by
civil society and unmet high expectations regarding access to information and demand for good
governance.
177.
Political and security-related risks. Recently, the security situation in North Kivu has
deteriorated considerably. If the Government proves unable to control the rebellion, the former’s survival
may be at risk. In such a case, delivering the proposed program would be extremely difficult. The UN
reports that the chances that the rebellion continues to prosper in Eastern DRC are real, considering the
inability of the armed forces to dislodge it and the lukewarm reaction of the neighboring countries to limit
their support. The conflict will last, and resources will be diverted to military expenditures so will not
serve development purposes. This situation is unlikely to affect Bank-financed programs in the rest of the
country but will make critical national reforms difficult to implement. In the end, continuous fighting in
the East will undermine the Government’s ability to deliver, so will weaken it and could lead to its
dismissal. However, the recent signing of the Framework peace agreement offers additional conditions for
the restoration of peace but peace will not automatically happen of the signing of another peace accord.
The present Government is the most committed to reforms since the re-establishment of a democratic
process in 2006. If this Government does not make consistent progress in economic governance and
deliver basic services to sizable parts of the population, Bank assistance would not be effective and could
be considerably reduced. The Bank will focus its intervention on the most critical programs that are
associated with service delivery and social protection.
178.
Shocks associated with the external environment, including poor fiscal space. DRC
remains vulnerable to the reverberations of the European financial crisis. Exports of mining products
represent some 63 percent of GDP in DRC, making the economy vulnerable to natural resource prices on
international markets. In absence of access to international financial markets, a fall in mining prices
would constrain funding for imports or quickly exhaust accumulated foreign exchange reserves as
experience in early 2009. A sharp contracting in import would have devastating effects on living
standards in DRC in particularly in urban centers such as Kinshasa which are dependent on food
imports. Reduced demand for the commodities exported by DRC would negatively impact
macroeconomic management and public finances. However, to date, DRC has demonstrated its capacity
to weather the global financial crisis. As it has increased its capacity to adjust production, its economic
system is becoming more resilient to external shocks. The recent introduction of the VAT has
strengthened the resilience of DRC’s revenue mobilization. Non-concessional borrowing, as was done
under a 2008 scheme, remains a potential source of risk and would have to be effectively managed to
avoid seriously undermining DRC’s fiscal position. The Bank may require access to the Crisis Response
Window and prepare an emergency support operation to provide funding that will help sustain financing
by the Government of social sectors and critical imports.

46

179.
180.
Opposition to reform from entrenched vested interests. The present Government is well
aware of resistance to change, including at different levels of the state. Nevertheless, this Government is
committed to reform the public sector, including public enterprises, and to improve the business climate.
Delivering on its commitment as rapidly as possible remains a critical step toward neutralizing
opposition, building confidence with citizens, and generating a momentum for reforms. It is important for
the Bank and the donor community to be highly supportive of those in DRC who are keen to embrace and
implement reforms and to carefully monitor early successes and build on them. In the coming months, if,
despite the crisis in the East, the Government is able to take highly relevant actions demonstrating its
commitment to increased transparency and better governance, these actions would sustain the momentum
for reforms that, over time, will undermine the resistance of vested interests. The Bank will promote
broad support for, and ownership of, programs both at the national and provincial levels so that success
becomes less dependent on individuals and the Bank will beef up its staffing capacity to respond to the
situation.
181.
Corruption. Critical risks include persistence of poor governance in critical areas (mining,
public expenditure management), misuse of Government’s budget resources and misuse of resources
under donor-financed projects. Based on previous experiences, project oversight has been strengthened,
with more frequent oversight and implementation support missions, and a heightened dialogue and focus
on good governance, including through the economic governance matrix. The Bank will take early
measures as risks emerge, to ensure that resources are not misused.
182.
Tensions due to unmet expectations in improving living conditions and in decentralizing.
As indicated above, the effective decentralization of fiscal and human resources is lagging behind stated
intentions. In several provinces, the Bank has been active in promoting participation of local staff in the
preparation of programs. Past efforts are expected to be amplified during the CAS period. It is important
for the Bank to use its convening power to help national and provincial actors reach agreements on how to
share limited resources as effectively as possible. The Bank will continue to strengthen capacity including
core fiduciary functions of the central and decentralized governments. Promoting the accountability of
provincial and local governments should continue in order to support the country’s stability and increased
and better service delivery. The Bank will strengthen its staffing capacity to support the provinces and
assist in the policy dialogue on decentralization.
183.
Low capacity for program implementation. Restoring strong public service with highquality and well-paid staff remains a daunting challenge. It is critical to design and implement a realistic
program to rebuild capacity in state institutions at the Central and provincial levels. The Government has
launched the preparation of a public sector reform and rejuvenation program aiming to hire talented and
motivated junior staff. Staffing capacity will be reinforced, and the country team will build on support
from the Nairobi Hub and other expertise within the Africa Region.
184.
Low civil society engagement. Civil society consistently has demonstrated its interest in
participating in programs designed to improve the living conditions of the population. Too often, civil
society has been prevented from being too assertive, as doing so would threaten powerful rent-seeking
groups. It is important for the Bank to ensure the broad and active participation of potential beneficiaries
in the preparation and implementation of projects. The use of the Global Facility for Social
Accountability (GFSA) will support Bank efforts in this direction, and the Bank will support a concerted
effort to strengthen the capacity of CSOs. The Bank will strengthen its staffing profile to respond to the
needs.

47

185.
Additional risk analysis and lower case scenario. In response to the volatility of the
environment and to maximize the Bank’s responsiveness to significant shocks, the CMU will launch a
holistic country and operational risk analysis, culminating in the formulation of a flexible/viable
alternative engagement scenario. The current CAS presumes a positive progression toward improved
country conditions and the active engagement of national counterparts. Thus, the country team’s focus
will be directed at harnessing these positive factors toward attaining the CAS’s development objectives.
The risk analysis and formulation of a lower case scenario will help the Bank internalize the potential
impact of shocks (escalation/expansion of conflict, political shocks, natural catastrophes, program or lack
of program with the IMF, other). These actions will facilitate the design of the fundamental elements of a
response around the type of projects to be frozen or scaled up and how the team should organize to
deliver in such conditions. The mid-term review will help the Bank adjust its interventions.

48

APPENDIXES
Appendix 1. DRC Results Matrix
Country
Development
Goals

Issues and
Obstacles

CAS Outcomes

Milestones

Bank Program (and Partners)

CAS Strategic Objective One: Increase state effectiveness and improve good governance
PRSP goal 1: Strengthening governance and consolidating peace
Improve public
financial
management at
national and
provincial level
Pursue the
decentralization
process

Weak public
financial
management
system at
national and
provincial
levels
Inadequate
capacity at
national and
provincial
levels resulting
in budget
overruns

Poor human
resource
management in
the public
service

CAS Outcome 1.1. Increased transparency
and efficiency in the management of public
finances at the central level and in the
provinces of Bandundu, Katanga, Kasai
Occidental and South Kivu
Percentage of national revenue transferred to
targeted provinces
Baseline: 31.5% (end-2011)
Target: 35 % (2016)

Integrated Budget Execution Reports are published on
the Ministry of Budget and Ministry of Finance
websites on a regular basis, at central and provincial
levels.

Reduced discrepancy between projected and
actual expenditures in the 4 targeted provinces
(Bandundu, Katanga Kasai Occidental and
South-Kivu)
Baseline: 51% (end 2011)
Target: 10% (2016)

Budget reports are made available on a comprehensive
manner to the population by 2014.

Percentage of public contracts awarded
through open competitive bidding in selected
ministries and provinces.
Baseline: 0 (2012)
Target: 50% of large contracts (end 2016)

Procurement Dispute Committee and procurement
units at provincial level are in place and operational by
end 2014

PROJECTS
Ongoing:
Enhancing Governance
Capacity (FY08)
Capacity for Core Public
Management (FY11)
Pipeline:
Public Sector Reform and
Rejuvenation project
(FY14)
Statistics project (FY15)
TRUST FUNDS
Support to Statistics TF
TA and capacity building
for budget preparation in
DRC provinces

Increased number of disputes resolved by the
Procurement Dispute Committee in the 4 targeted
provinces and 6 targeted ministries per year

Lack of
transparency in
public
procurement

Procurement plans and reports at national and
provincial level (in the 4 targeted provinces) are

49

AAA
Ongoing dialogue on
Economic Governance
Matrix
Coordinated PFM Reform
PEFA (FY13)
Governance and Public
Sector work(FY12)
Provincial Budget Planning

Country
Development
Goals

Issues and
Obstacles

CAS Outcomes

Milestones
published on regular basis

Bank Program (and Partners)
Municipal
Development (FY14)
ROSC
OTHER PARTNERS
IMF, DfID, AfDB, UNDP
European Commission,
Belgium/CTB and USAID

Improve
transparency and
governance in
the management
of natural
resources.
Improve
traceability of
Government
revenues issued
from natural
resources
Increase its
contribution to
domestic
economy and
local
communities
welfare

Poor
management of
forest, oil and
mining
resources due
to weak legal
framework,
lack of
enforcement
mechanisms,
and weak
institutional
capacity
generally.

CAS Outcome 1.2. Increased transparency
and effectiveness in the management of
financial resources from the forest, oil and
mining industries
Percentage increase in forest taxes collected
Baseline: 10% (end 20 11)
Target: 35% (mid 2015)

PROJECTS
Ongoing:
Promines Project (FY11)
Forestry Project (FY10)
Regular update of the list of holders of forestry rights
that are current in the payment of taxes and inform the
forestry administration on other cases, with a view to
adopt of enforcement measures

Area of forest concessions with signed social
responsibility contracts
Baseline: 2M Ha (end 2011)
Target: 4M Ha (mid 2015)

A National REDD+ Strategy (including the legal
framework) is prepared and validated by national
stakeholders by 2014

Percentage increase in revenue from mining
sector in total fiscal revenue
Baseline: 2% of GDP(end 2011)
Target: 4% of GDP (2015)

EITI Validation status is completed (by end 2013)
Revenue collected are published on quarterly basis
Procurement plans for selling mining assets are
published every 6 months

Percentage of oil petroleum permits
competitively auctioned
Baseline: 0%
Target: 90% in 2015

Inter-ministerial Council (incl. Civil society) for
contract negotiation and asset sales is created and is
operational
Petroleum code adopted by 2014, and effectively
implemented by 2014.

50

Pipeline:
Promines AF (FY14)
TRUST FUNDS
FCPF Readiness Grant
Support to EITI
AAA
Ongoing dialogue on
Economic Governance
Matrix
Ongoing dialogue on
petroleum
OTHER PARTNERS
IMF, EC, DfID, GTZ, CTB,
USAID

Country
Development
Goals
Improve
transparency and
performance
management of
key State-Owned
Enterprises (SOEs)

Issues and
Obstacles
Weak
enforcement
capacity
Lack of
transparency in
the
management of
SOEs
Influence from
vested interest

CAS Outcomes

Milestones

Bank Program (and Partners)

CAS Outcome 1.3. Enhanced governance of
the mining sector SOEs and increasing the
operational performance of other SOEs
Increased efficiency of SOEs that deliver key
public services (SNCC, SNEL, SCTP, RVA,
RVF, REGIDESO) through Public-Private
Partnership (PPP) or management performance
contracts
Baseline: 3 (2013)
Target: 6 (2016)

Restructuring of pre-2011 debts of strategic SOEs is
completed by mid-2014.
Business Plans for achievement of positive cash flows
(by 2016) by strategic SOEs is adopted by respective
Governance Boards by mid-2014.
Certified financial audits of strategic SOEs are
published annually

Ineffective
government
oversight of
strategic SOEs

PROJECTS
Ongoing:
Southern Africa Power
Market AF project (FY12)
Urban Water Supply Project
(FY09)
Multimodal Project AF
(FY13)
Pipeline:
Promines AF (FY14)
OTHER PARTNERS
DfID, AfDB, CTG, EC

CAS Strategic Objective Two : To boost competitiveness to accelerate private sector-led growth and job creation
PRSP goal 2 : Diversifying the economy to accelerate growth and create employment
PRSP goal 4 : Protecting the environment and sustaining the fight against climate change
Pursue structural
economic
reforms to
promote private
sector
development

Years of
conflict have
undermined the
capacity of
private
enterprises to
thrive and
therefore are
not
contributing to
the growth of
the economy

CAS Outcome 2.1 Enhanced Business
environment for private sector development

PROJECTS
Ongoing:
Private Sector Development
Competitiveness (FY04)

Time to register a business is decreased by half
Baseline: 58 days (2012)
Target: 30 days (2015)

One-Stop shop (Guichet unique) is implemented and
operational by end-2014.
An action plan to improve key business indicators
prepared by end-2013.

TRUST FUNDS
DRC Strengthening the
Payment System TF
SEZ Program-Phase II
(IFC)
Pipeline:

51

Country
Development
Goals

Issues and
Obstacles

Lack of access
to finance
Public
enterprises are
a major
bottleneck to
private sector
development in
DRC

CAS Outcomes

Milestones

A fully functioning, modern payment system
providing electronic (cash-less) funds transfer
with real-time clearing and settlement of
accounts, and interconnectivity with other
payments systems in the region in place by
2015

The Real Time Gross Settlement (RTGS) system and
the Automated Clearing House (ACH) are
implemented and operational by mid-2014.

Increased number of SMEs benefiting from the
matching grant fund (of which percent of
women)
Baseline: 0 (2012)
Target: 60 (2016)

Annual plan for advisory services provided to SMEs
by IFC are adopted

Bank Program (and Partners)
Western DRC Agriculturebased Growth Pole (FY13)
Financial Sector Project
(FY14)
AAA
Investment Climate
Diagnostic (Enterprise
Surveys and business
reform Memos) (FY13-14)
Payments System: Regional
Integration/Legal
Harmonization (FIRST TF)
(FY13-15)
Financial Sector
Assessment Program
(FSAP) (FY14-15)
IFC
Entrepreneurship/SME
capacity building “Business
Edge” (IFC)
SME credit lines (IFC)
OTHER PARTNERS
DfID, KFW,
UNDP/UNCDF, EC, AfDB,
CTB, GTZ

52

Country
Development
Goals
Improve
infrastructure
capacity
covering the road
sector, railways,
telecoms and
electricity.

Issues and
Obstacles

CAS Outcomes

Milestones

Poor quality of
infrastructure

CAS Outcome 2.2. Improved connectivity
and access to transport infrastructure

High cost of
movement of
goods, people
and services

Average transit time between copper belt and
Zambian border
Baseline: 17 days (2011)
Target: 5 days (end-2016)

Cumulative number of Km reopened in project areas
(Province Orientale, Katanga and Equateur)
Baseline: 300 km (Dec 2011)
Target: 2,176 km (June 2015)

Lack of
technical
capacity

Number of days/year with roads not passable
by 4×2 in project areas(Province Orientale,
Katanga, Equateur and South Kivu)
Baseline: total of80 days(2011)
Target: 60 days (2016)

Cumulative number of Km maintained in project areas
(Province Orientale, Katanga, Equateur and South
Kivu)
Baseline: 0 km (Dec 2011)
Target: 2,917 km (June 2016)

Weak M&N
system

Bank Program (and Partners)
PROJECTS
Ongoing:
Emergency Urban & Social
Rehab (FY07)
Agriculture Rehab &
Recovery SIL (FY10)
Pro-Routes (FY08)
Multimodal Transport
project (FY11)
Pipeline:
Growth Poles (FY13)
Urban development project
(FY13)
AAA
Municipal Development
(FY14)
Spatial Economics of the
Five Economic Priority
Zones (FY15)
OTHER PARTNERS
DfID, AfDB, AFD, CTB,
EC, Kwf, EIB, JICA

Build a modern
national
infrastructure for
telecoms
Improve the
access rate to
telecoms and
new technologies

Landline
telephone
network almost
completely
destroyed
Costly
broadband
internet and
phone access;

CAS Outcome 2.3. Improved access to
quality broadband network and services at
reduced cost
Increased total broadband penetration
(Household penetration)
Baseline: 0.1% of population (Dec. 2011)
Target: 2.5% of population(2016)

New legal and regulatory telecoms framework adopted
by 2014.
Design and signature of a Memorandum of
Understanding between public and private
stakeholders for the establishment of Special Vehicle

Increased international Internet Bandwidth

53

PROJECTS
Ongoing:
Telecom Component of the
Regional Southern Africa
Power Market APL1 F
(FY04)
Telecom Component of the
Private Sector Development
Competitiveness (FY04)

Country
Development
Goals

Issues and
Obstacles

Strengthen the
liberalization and
competitiveness
of the sector to
attract private
investments

Over
dependence on
satellite
technology, no
national fiber
optic backbone

(Bitps per capita)
Baseline: < 14 (Dec. 2011)
Target: 25 (2016)

Increase the
production and
transmission
capacity of
electrical energy

Wide spread
supply
shortfalls

CAS Outcome 2.4. Increased generation of
and improved access to energy

Develop
infrastructure for
the supply of
energy to
improve
households’
access to
electricity

Inadequate
transmission of
networks
High cost of
power
Weak
institutional
capacity

Develop
renewable
energy sources
Increase
agriculture
productivity

Low
agriculture
productivity
Farmers lack
access to
agriculture
input
Weak

CAS Outcomes

Milestones
Purpose (SVP) to build, operate and manage the new
broadband backbone network by mid-2014.
Recruitment of international operators to
commercialize the excess capacity of the SNEL
network by 2014

SNEL performance contract is signed and
implemented

Quantity of energy delivered to Katanga
Region
Baseline: 2,540 GWh (End-2011)
Target: 5,515 GWh (Dec 2015)

Annual report of the performance contracts is prepared
Annual technical audit of the performance contract of
SNEL is published

Quantity of renewable Energy generated at
Inga (GWh)
Baseline: 4,809 GWh (End 2010)
Target: 9,039 GWh (End 2016)

Bank Program (and Partners)
Pipeline:
Regional CAB APL5 DRC
(FY15)
AAA
Policy Advise ICT dialogue
PROJECTS
Ongoing:
Regional Southern Africa
Power Market APL1
(FY04)
Regional & Domestic
Power Market Dev. (FY07)
Pipeline:
Inga3 and Mid-size Hydromet TA project (FY14)
AAA
Regional Lighting Africa
Program

Increased access to electricity services in
targeted areas including Kinshasa
Baseline: 9 % (2012)
Target:15 % (2016)

OTHER PARTNERS
AfDB, EIB, KfW, USAID,
NORAD, AFD, CTB

CAS Outcome 2.5 Boost agriculture
production and increase access to markets
Increased yields of primary crops in targeted
areas in the Equateur province
Target and Baseline: Increase crop yields from
2012 to 2015:
- Maize (1.5t/ha from less than 1t/ha);

Improved agricultural and animal technologies
provided to farmers in targeted areas in the Equateur
province
Baseline: 73,500 beneficiaries
Target: 400,000 beneficiaries

54

PROJECTS
Ongoing:
Agriculture Rehab &
Recovery SIL (FY10)
Pipeline:
Western DRC Agriculturebased Growth Pole Project

Country
Development
Goals

Issues and
Obstacles
institution to
manage
agricultural and
rural
development

CAS Outcomes

Milestones

- Cassava (12t/ha from 7t/ha);
- Rice (2.0t/ha from 1t/ha)

Of which % of direct female beneficiaries
Baseline: 10 percent
Target: 60 percent
Number of Km of rural roads rehabilitated in targeted
food growing areas
Baseline: 0 (2012)
Target: 2,500 km (2016)

Bank Program (and Partners)
(FY13)
Southeastern DRC
Agriculture-Based Growth
Pole (FY15)
AAA
Enhance access to the
results of research in the
regional agriculture systems
in Easter and Central Africa
(ASARECA) Regional TF
OTHER PARTNERS
DfID, FAO, AFDB, CTB,
KOICA

Strategic Objective Three: Improve social services delivery and increase Human Development indicators
PRSP goal 3: Improving access to basic social services while raising human capital
Increased access
to potable water

Lack of
institutional
capacity to
deliver clean
water
throughout the
country

CAS Outcome 3.1. Increased access to clean
water and sanitation

PROJECTS

Percentage of population in the targeted areas
with access to potable water
Baseline: 43% (End 2011)
Target: 53% (End 2015)

Km of secondary and tertiary water distribution
network constructed.
Baseline: 0
Target: 651 km

Number of people (including women) in
targeted areas provided with access to
improved water sources in project areas
Baseline: 221,148 (March 2010)
Target: 420,180 (March 2013)

Additional number of households with new piped
water connections
Baseline: 0
Target: 40,000 (2016)

Ongoing:
Urban Water Supply Project
(FY09)
Emergency Urban & Social
Rehab ERL (FY07)
Emergency Social Action
(FY05)
Street Children Project
(FY10)
OTHER PARTNERS
DfID, CTB, WHO, MSF,
UNICEF, UNDP, USAID

55

Country
Development
Goals
Improve delivery
of primary health
care

Issues and
Obstacles
Low coverage
and poor
quality of
health service

CAS Outcomes

Milestones

CAS Outcome 3.2. Improved access to
health services in targeted areas

Bank Program (and Partners)
PROJECTS

Rate of DPT3 immunization
Baseline: 85% (end 2011)
Target: 90% (end 2014)

Cold chain equipment available in 80% of health
centers by end of 2014.
80% of delivery rooms in health facilities have
received standard medical equipment for obstetric care
By 2014
50% of health workers have been retrained in obstetric
and neonatal health care by 2014

Percentage of deliveries assisted by qualified
personnel
Baseline: 80% (end 2011)
Target:85% (end 2014)
Number of women 15-49 new users of family
planning
Baseline: 6% (end 2011)
Target: 11% (end 2014)

Family planning commodities available in 80% of
health facilities by 2014.
Coverage of 80% population with long lasting
insecticide bed nets per household completed by the
end of 2013

Percentage of children under 5 sleeping under
LLINs (mosquito nets) in targeted areas
Baseline: 35% (end 2011)
Target: 80% (end 2014)

Ongoing:
Health Sector Rehabilitation
and Support Project (FY06)
Emergency Urban & Social
Rehab ERL (FY07)
Pipeline:
HD Service Delivery
Technical Assistance
Program (FY14)
TRUST FUNDS
Capacity Building in
Budget Preparation for the
Health Sector Project
AAA
Health Systems and
Financing (FY12)
Capacity building for health
sector budget preparation
(FY12-14)
PER (FY14-15)
Programmatic Multi-Year
Non-Lending TA Program
(FY13-16)
OTHER PARTNERS
EC, GFATM, GAVI,
KOICA, USAID, DfiD,
CIDA, Belgium, JICA, GTZ

56

Country
Development
Goals
Increase access
and equity to the
various levels of
education, and
particularly in
basic education,
especially for
girls

Issues and
Obstacles
Low coverage
of education
services
Lack of
sustainable
financing
mechanism for
the delivery of
education
services
Low quality of
education

CAS Outcomes

Milestones

CAS Outcome 3.3. Improved access to basic
education in targeted areas
Increased primary gross enrollment ratio in
targeted areas
Baseline: 89.7% (end 2011)
Target: 105.8 % (end 2015)
Share of female
Baseline: 47% (end 2011)
Target: 50% (end 2015)

Textbooks distributed in targeted areas by 2015
Teachers posted in targeted areas by 2015
Classrooms constructed and rehabilitated in targeted
areas by 2015

Increased completion ratio in primary in
targeted areas
Baseline: 59.0% (end 2011)
Target: 75%(end 2016)
Share of female
Baseline: 51.0% (end 2011)
Target: 65% (end 2016)

Bank Program (and Partners)
PROJECTS
Ongoing:
Education Sector Project
(FY07)
Pipeline:
HD Service Delivery
Technical Assistance
Program (FY14)
Support to Basic Education
Program under the GPE
Fund (FY13)
Post-Basic Education and
Training (FY15)
AAA
Operationalizing Higher
Education (FY12)
Skills Development Study
(FY12)
Gender Study (FY12)
Higher Education Strategy
(FY13)
OTHER PARTNERS
ICR, CRS, EC, CTB,
UNICEF, UNDP, USAID,
AfDB

Enhance safety
net through
improved access
to basic social
services

Widespread
poverty due to
lack of social
safety net
programs to
assist the poor

CAS Outcome 3.4. Strengthened Social
protection system
Comprehensive database of safety net
beneficiaries established and regularly
maintained.
Baseline: dataset only contains information

Updated Social Protection Strategy
Action plan for improving efficiency of safety nets
programs

57

PROJECTS
Ongoing:
Street Children project
(FY10)
Social Fund additional
financing (FY10)

Country
Development
Goals

Issues and
Obstacles

CAS Outcomes

Milestones

street children (2012)
Target: dataset includes beneficiaries of other
safety net programs, e.g., labor-intensive
public works, and is updated at least every six
months with input from provinces (2015)

Stakeholders trained in data collection and use of
database.
Katanga pilot labor-intensive public works program is
replicated in at least three provinces

Number of beneficiaries of labor intensive
public works (share of female)
Baseline: 3,192(30% female; 2012)
Target:18,000 (35% female; 2016)

A national multi-sectoral coordination committee for
the protection of Orphan and Vulnerable Children
(OVC) is established and operational.

Bank Program (and Partners)
TRUST FUNDS
Evaluation of Gender Based
Violence Program in South
Kivu
Pipeline:
HD Service Delivery
Technical Assistance
Program (FY14)
Eastern DRC Economic
Recovery Project (FY14)
AAA
Review of Social Protection
Strategy (FY14-15)

58

Country
Development
Goals

Issues and
Obstacles

CAS Outcomes

Milestones

Bank Program (and Partners)

Strategic Objective Four: Addressing Fragility and Conflict in the Eastern provinces
PRSP goal 1: Strengthening governance and consolidating peace
Leveraging
national policy
dialogue to
strengthen
accountability
and effectiveness
of state
institutions in
support of peace
consolidation.

Weak State
capacity to
provide

CAS Outcome 4.1. Improved management
of public finances and accountability in
targeted conflict-affected areas

public services

Increased budget retrocession to Eastern
conflict-affected province of South-Kivu
Baseline: currently receiving 10-20% of its
revenues as retrocessions
Target: increases to 30% by 2015

Lack of
accountability
in the
management of
public finances
Volatile
political and
security
environment

PROJECTS

Information and analysis produced by the Bank is
utilized in policy dialogue, and contributes to
improved government policy decisions and actions in
the Eastern provinces, and influences government and
donor programs and service delivery at field level by
2015.

Number of communities benefitting from
participatory budget planning processes
Baseline: 4 districts in South-Kivu
Target: all districts in conflict-affected
provinces of North-Kivu and Sud-Kivu, by
2015
Reduced discrepancy between projected and
actual expenditures in conflicted-affected
province of South-Kivu
Baseline: 51% (end 2011)
Target: 10% (2016)

Budget reports are made available on a comprehensive
manner to the population by 2014.

Ongoing:
Enhancing Governance
Capacity (FY08)
Pipeline:
Additional Financing to
Governance Project (FY13)
State and Peace building
Facility (FY14)
Eastern DRC Economic
Recovery (FY14)
AAA
Public Expenditure Review
of the security sector
Capacity-building of local
think tanks
Policy dialogue AAA on
policy actions that promote
peace building
OTHER PARTNERS
Government's STAREC
Program
United Nations (I-SSSS)
EU

59

Country
Development
Goals
Strengthening
societal
capabilities and
resilience for
peace
consolidation,
and sustainable
development in
the East.

Issues and
Obstacles
Lack of
employment
opportunities
Limited access
to services by
the population

CAS Outcomes

Milestones
Number of Km of roads rehabilitated in project areas
in conflict-affected city of Bukavu
Baseline: 0 km (2013)
Target: 4km (2016)

CAS Outcome 4.2.Increasedsocioeconomic
opportunities in targeted conflict-affected
areas
Increased number of person-days of
employment created in project areas in
conflict-affected city of Bukavu
Baseline: 0
Target: 226,000 persons-per days by 2016

Number of Km of drainage constructed in project areas
in conflict-affected city of Bukavu
Baseline: 0 km (2013)
Target: 4km (2016)

Bank Program (and Partners)
PROJECTS
Pipeline:
Urban Development (FY13)
Southeastern Agricultural
Growth Pole (FY15)
Eastern DRC Economic
Recovery (FY14)
AAA:
High level dialogue with the
Great Lakes neighboring
countries
OTHER PARTNERS
Government's STAREC
Program
United Nations (I-SSSS)
DFID, USAID, EU
International NGOs

60

Appendix 2: CAS Completion Report (CAS FY2008-FY2011)

TABLE OF CONTENTS
I.INTRODUCTION
A. DRC’s Economic and Social Background
B. World Bank’s Program Support
II. CASPROGRAM PERFORMANCE
A. Overview and Principles of Engagements
B. Progress by CAS Pillars (Towards CAS Outcomes)
B.1. Rebuilding State Capacity to Increase Access and Improve Quality of Basic Services
B.2. Creating Conditions for Growth and Economic Diversification
B.3. Providing Improved Access to Health and Education
III. WORLD BANK GROUP PERFORMANCE
A. CAS Design
B. Implementing the Strategy
C. Managing the Risks
IV. LESSONS LEARNED AND RECOMMENDATIONS
A. At the country level
B. At the operational level

ANNEXES OF THE CAS Completion Report (CAS FY2008-FY2011)
Annex 1: Results Matrix FY08-FY11 (as of December 31, 2012)
Annex 2: Indicative and Actual Lending Program for FY08-FY11

61

COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY COMPLETION REPORT
DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF CONGO
FY08-FY11

I.

INTRODUCTION

1.
This report assesses the performance of the FY08-FY11 Country Assistance Strategy for the
Democratic Republic of Congo which was discussed at the Board on December 18, 2007. It
describes the support provided through an integrated package of financial, knowledge, and coordination
services, evaluates the strategy’s outcomes and the Bank’s performance, and draws lessons for the new
FY13-FY16 CAS currently under preparation. The May 26, 2010 CAS Progress Report slightly adjusted
the original CAS program and strengthened the CAS results matrix. This completion report uses the
updated results matrix as the reference for assessing the CAS program’s performance.
A. DRC’s Economic and Social Context at Inception of the FY08-FY11 CAS
2.
At the time of developing the FY08-FY11 CAS, DRC was still reeling from years of
economic mismanagement and from the effects of a protracted civil war, with several parts of the
country – especially in the east – still under active armed conflict. After many years of neglect, very few
roads were passable, and schools and health facilities had fallen into disrepair, and HIV/AIDS epidemic
remained uncontained. Although still very fragile, the economy was already beginning to stabilize by
2007. Indeed, inflation was down to 10 percent at end 2007, from 18 percent at end 2006, and annual
GDP growth was averaging 6 percent. However, the country remained saddled with massive external
debt. Debt service on public and publicly guaranteed (PPG) external debt amounted to 26 percent of
exports at end 2006, while the net present value of PPG external debt exceeded 300 percent of exports, 90
percent of GDP, and 700 percent of government revenue. This was clearly unsustainable, making
reaching HIPC completion point and stimulating economic growth of utmost urgency.
3.
In view of the above, the newly elected Government, which was formed in March 2007,
launched a social and economic rehabilitation program organized around five themes: (a) promotion
of peace and good governance; (b) consolidation of macroeconomic stability and promotion of economic
growth; (c) improvement in access to social services; (d) prevention of HIV/AIDS; and (e) promotion of
community dynamics. It is against this background that the World Bank, in collaboration with other
partners under the Country Assistance Framework (CAF), elaborated the FY08-FY11 CAS.
B. World Bank’s Program Support
4.
Picking up from the Government’s own strategy and the CAF, the CAS was organized
around five themes: (i) promoting good governance and consolidating peace through strengthened
institutions; (ii) consolidating macro-economic stability and growth; (iii) improving access to social
services and reducing vulnerability; (iv) combating HIV/AIDS; and (v) promoting local initiatives. The
strategy was slightly adjusted at mid-term in order to respond to (a) the large macroeconomic imbalances
resulting from the impact of the global financial crisis on the DRC economy; (b) the findings of analytical
work undertaken during the CAS period; (c) the outcomes of the aid coordination conference (the
Kinshasa Agenda) of June 2009, which set the stage for enhanced donor coordination; and (d) lessons
learned in implementing the CAS, including the need to address the persistent weakness in Government
capacity.

62

5.
Specifically, activities were added to the program to protect critical imports and expedite
economic recovery, respond to the malaria epidemic, contain a polio outbreak, consolidate the roads
rehabilitation program, strengthen core public sector capacity, rejuvenate the aging public service,
mainstream governance, support climate change adaptation and mitigation, and promote regional
integration through trade facilitation.
6.
In order to further sharpen the focus of the Bank’s support to DRC, the CAS program was
regrouped under three themes: (i) rebuilding state capacity to increase access and improve the quality
of basic services; (ii) creating conditions for growth and economic diversification; and (iii) providing
improved access to health and education.
II.

CAS PROGRAM PERFORMANCE

7.
Overall, the performance of the CAS program is rated moderately satisfactory as the
program achieved good progress toward all major expected outcomes. More specifically, progress
was moderately satisfactory regarding the first 2 pillars (rebuilding State capacity to increase access and
improve the quality of basic services, and creating conditions for growth and economic diversification),
and satisfactory for the third pillar (providing improved access to education and health). However the
outcomes achieved (16 out of 30) were significantly more important than those partially (10) or not
achieved (4). There were particularly notable advances in road development, forestry sector, health and
education, and some progress in public finance management (PFM) and decentralization. Less progress
was registered in energy, and public enterprise reform, due to the complexity of issues, weak
implementation capacity, and in some cases insufficient political commitment. The CAS results matrix is
shown in Annex 1. This section presents an overview of key principles of engagement that underpinned
the CAS, followed by a succinct summary of the specific progress made under each of the three strategic
elements of the CAS.
A. Overview of Principles of Engagement
8.
The Bank followed three basic principles of engagement in developing its relationship with
DRC: flexibility, gradual shift from the emergency mode to a sharper sectoral focus, and donor
coordination. The Bank sought to act flexibly in implementing the CAS. For instance, during the 20082009 global financial crises, the Bank approved and disbursed, in record time, funding to protect critical
imports. Second, there was a deliberate shift away from emergency operations to sustainable
development through the development of a number of sector strategies (such as in health, education,
transport, energy, and telecommunication), and a greater focus on the often harder to implement structural
reforms. Finally, there were efforts to enhance donor coordination within the CAF, including
establishing thematic groups and holding an Aid Effectiveness Forum that resulted in a coordination
framework called the Kinshasa Agenda.
B. Progress toward CAS Outcomes, by CAS Pillars as Restated at Mid Term
B.1. Pillar 1: Rebuilding State Capacity to Increase Access and Improve the Quality of Basic
Service
9.
Progress under this pillar was moderately satisfactory. Bank support mainly focused on: (i)
reforming the public administration, especially within the context of decentralization; (ii) strengthening
public financial management; and (iii) improving access to water and sanitation services in selected urban
centers. 4 out of the 11 outcome indicators for this pillar (36 percent) have been achieved, 5 (45 percent)

63

partially achieved and 2 (18 percent) not achieved. Regarding the milestones, 9 (56 percent) have been
achieved, 4 (25 percent) partially achieved and 3 (19 percent) not achieved.
10.
Public Administration Reforms and Decentralization. Major progress was achieved in
supporting the decentralization agenda considering the importance of decentralized governments in the
management of service delivery in a country as large of two thirds of Europe. Despite the obvious
resources constraints these entities have to go through, provincial governments have seen their financial
resources increased manifolds in Katanga, Bandundu, and South Kivu for example. New financial
management procedures were set up and implemented as well as the approval of new procurement codes
in South Kivu and Katanga provinces. Resources managed at the provincial level increased to 31.5
percent of national resources in 2011 compared to 11 percent in 2008. The Bank, jointly with the
European Commission, UNDP, and the Belgian Cooperation, supported several pieces of analytical
work32 and technical assistance, which were instrumental in the crafting of a package of laws regulating
the functions of the provincial governments, including the organization of civil service between the
central and provincial governments, developing a transparent revenue sharing mechanism between the
central and provincial governments, and assessing the financial feasibility of the proposed territorial
administration reforms including the decoupage from 11 to 26 provinces as mandated by the Constitution.
In addition, the reforms entailed putting in place a legal and regulatory framework for human resource
management and inter-governmental fiscal relations. The process was not easy because of deep political
economy considerations. The complexity of these reforms, the difficulty in reaching a consensus among
the various stakeholders, and especially the inadequate political commitment in many cases, resulted in
limited progress on the finalization of legal frameworks for decentralizations, despite a lot of technical
background work that was accomplished. However, the Government adopted in 2011 several elements of
an over-arching framework for civil service reform in order to make it able to support the process of
decentralization.
11.
However there are still a number of pieces of legislation to accompany this process of
decentralization, which have been in their final draft form for some time, but still await cabinet and
parliamentary approval.33


Rejuvenating the public sector. Good progress has been made in developing and adopting tools
and practices for a more efficient, and results-oriented administration. A critical dimension of
public administration reform includes retiring over-age staff (more than two thirds of DRC civil
servants are past retirement age due to lack of funds to pay their departure indemnities),
rejuvenating the public service, and hence improving the performance of those who stay or are
newly recruited. The payment system has been simplified by reducing the number of variables
from 20 to 3. As a result, 55 percent of civil servants are paid through the payment system in
2011 compared to 31 percent in 2008. Similarly, preparation is underway for supporting the
retirement process based on an incremental approach – ministry by ministry. As of to date, the
Ministry of Environment, Nature conservation and Tourism (MECNT) is one that is most
advanced with a biometric census completed that has identified all MECNT staff including
approximately 2,700 workers eligible for retirement, 1,700 of whom received their retirement
payments in May 2011. Moreover, 2,267 staff of the national railways company (SNCC) that
have past retirement age have left the company following the payment of their retirement rights
with funding from the World Bank. This support from the Bank has reduced the operating costs

32

Decentralization: Opportunities and Risks (2008) technical background notes; and study for Territorial Administration Reform
(Decoupage; 2009).
33
Draft law on Provincial Administration circumscribing the autonomous status of provinces; Draft fundamental (“organic”) law
on Public Service; the Draft law on Public Service pertaining to the national level; the Draft law on Public Service pertaining to
provincial and local administration.

64

of SNCC and has improved the prospect for this company to reach financial self-sufficiency in
the next future. Progress was also made in defining eligible staff and organizing the retirement of
staff in several ministries (agriculture, budget and finance in particular). The next steps in the
public sector will be supported by the new project in preparation which will tackle the reform of
the ministries in charge of finances, budget, planning and portfolio.


Public Finance Management. The objective was to, among other things, to reform budgetary
processes, to establish a more effective and transparent payroll system for civil servants, and to
improve government revenues and inter-governmental resource transfers. The PEFA assessment
carried out between June 2012 and September 2012 showed that about 50 percent of the PEFA
ratings increased from 2008 to 2012. A new public finance law organizing the management of
public resources has created the legal framework that will speed the modernization of the public
financial management systems and increase transparency and accountability in the use of public
resources. Key aspects of inter-governmental fiscal relations were addressed in this new Public
Finance Law through the Coordinated PFM reform Assistance Trust Fund. However, central
government revenue collection and resource transfers to provinces remained below targets. The
new provinces revenue law, supported through the Fiscal and Administrative Impact Assessment
of Administrative Territorial Reform Trust Fund, has been adopted by the Parliament early
October 2012 and it is expected that provinces revenue collection will increase to reduce their
dependency from the national budget. Medium term expenditures frameworks were developed for
the first time for the ministries of Health, Education and Agriculture thanks to Bank support
(under the Capacity Building in Macro-projections for the MTEF and PRSP Trust Fund) but their
use in the preparation of the budget has been lagging. PFM and human resource management
systems have been developed in four provinces (Katanga, South Kivu, Bandundu, and Kasai
Occidental) which have resulted in marked improvements in the way these provinces are
managed compared to provinces where no Bank interventions have been in place. More striking
has been the dramatic increase in internally revenue generation in the provinces of Bandundu and
Katanga over the last two years thanks to the reforms of the provincial collection revenue
agencies. These reforms are complemented by the revenue administration reforms at the national
level where the integrated financial management system of both the customs and tax departments
are streamlined, import valuation procedures enhanced and the large taxpayers unit strengthened.
Central Government budget execution data is regularly published though quality remains to be
improved. The strengthening of the expenditure chain both at the central and at provincial levels
has started and this has translated in stronger discipline in the management of resources at the
provincial level.



Procurement. The Bank provided financial and technical assistance for the development of a
new public procurement law, which was approved in 2010 replacing an obsolete and poorly
transparent system dating back from 1969. For the first time, a procurement regulatory agency
was established as well as procurement implementation entities (ARMP and DGCMP) although
only partially operational since April 2011. At the central level, the procurement units are
operational in 10 major ministries including the ministries of (i) Interior and Security, (ii) Health,
(iii) Infrastructure, Public Works and Reconstruction,(iv)Agriculture,(v)Energy, (vi) Primary,
Secondary and Professional education,(vii)Environment, Nature Conservation and Tourism,
(viii)Budget. The procurement units are also in place in public institutions such as National
Assembly and the Supreme Court, and 6 out of 11provinces have already adopted decrees on
public procurement. In addition, the Dispute Resolution Committee has been established and staff
appointed and installed by Decree No 12/027 of July 25, 2012. More than 1,500 staff has already
been trained on the new system. As of to date, all the procurement plans and decisions are
published on ARMP website (www.armp-rdc.com).An independent firm has been recruited to
65

review the performance of the new procurement system, and the draft audit report has been
prepared.


Water and Sanitation. The Bank supported the rehabilitation of water facilities under two
existing emergency operations, including construction of a new unit at the N'Djili water treatment
facility, adding 160,000 m3 of drinking water per day, and doubling the distribution capacity in
order to provide water to about 3 million people in Kinshasa. A new operation (Water Sector
Rehabilitation Project) was approved and is under implementation to further increase access to
drinking water in some major urban centers of DRC, and to improve the performance of the
country’s water utility (REGIDESO). Selection of an international water operator has been
completed and the operator is about to start its activities which will consist of managing the water
utility and improving REGIDESO operational and financial performance following decades of
mismanagement is ongoing.
B.2. Pillar 2: Creating Conditions for Growth and Economic Diversification

12.
Progress under this pillar has been moderately satisfactory. Bank support focused on: (i)
maintaining macroeconomic stability and improving fiscal management; (ii) rehabilitating targeted
transport infrastructure; (iii) increasing the availability of electricity to serve domestic demand and for
export; (iv) undertaking reforms and building capacity for sustainable natural resource management
(especially forestry and mining); and (iv) improving the business climate, coupled with restructuring and
reforming public enterprises in line with international standards. Progress has been satisfactory thanks to
significant headways in economic and fiscal management, and in transportation infrastructure. However,
little progress was made on the business climate while impressive strides were made in disclosing mining
contracts despite attempts to derail this process by key and well-connected stakeholders. The World Bank
was quite active and the only donor addressing the highly charged reform of public enterprises. Overall, 8
(53 percent) outcome indicators have been achieved, 5 (33 percent) partially achieved and 2 (13 percent)
not achieved. As regard to the milestones, 10 (56 percent) have been achieved, 7 (39 percent) partially
achieved and 1 (6 percent) not achieved.
 Macroeconomic Stabilization and Fiscal Management. A major achievement during the CAS
period was the achievement of DRC at HIPC Completion Point in July 2010 for a debt
cancellation of US$ 16.3 billion in total of which US12.3 billion after the completion point.
Following the achievement of the DRC at HIPC completion point, all external debt indicators
remain below the required thresholds, with the exception of the present value of debt-to-GDP
ratio (over 30%), as a result of government guarantees for loans contracted under the SinoCongolese agreement. The DRC economy, which had grown at an average of 6 percent between
2001 and 2008, began to weaken with the onset of the global financial crisis, dropping sharply to
2.8 percent in 2009. There was a sharp deterioration in the country’s terms of trade and a rapid
depletion of foreign reserves. Inflation, which had reduced to 10 percent by end 2007, increased
to 27.6 percent by end 2008, peaking at 53.4 percent by 2009. Many jobs were lost, especially in
the artisanal mining sector. The Bank, together with the IMF and other development partners,
acted quickly with policy advice and funds to protect critical imports, build foreign reserves, and
stimulate growth.34 In 2010, with the resumption in mining activity, growth was back up at 7.2
percent, and average inflation down to 23.2 percent (end of year 9.8 percent). A spike in
international food and fuel prices early in 2011 boosted inflation but by year end it had declined
again to 15.4 percent at end-2011, and is estimated to fall to 4.5 percent at end-2012.
34

The Bank’s support of $100 million, provided in February 2009, was the first operation in the Africa Region under the Fast
Track Facility.

66

 Transport. Major progress was made in this sector, including the reopening of 1,530 km of roads
in Province Orientale, South Kivu and Katanga. Of the 15,800 km of high-priority road networks,
36.1 percent are now classified as in good or fair condition, compared to 13.8 percent in 2009.
The Bank and DFID contributed the bulk of the financing for these roads’ reopening. The
economic impact of the rehabilitated sections was significant, reducing transportation costs by as
much as 80 percent in some cases and cutting travel time by more than half. For instance, in two
isolated areas in Katanga province, travel time was reduced from 60 hours to 3 hours to cross 110
km. The Bank, through ProRoutes project, contributed to the bulk of the financing of this road
with support from DFID. The Study on “Prioritizing infrastructure investments: a spatial
approach” carried out in 2009, and financed by a Trade Facilitation and Corridor Diagnostic Trust
Fund, helped identify the priority corridors with high potential impact including the road
networks. In addition, the Bank supported the restructuring of the National Railway and the
improvement of governance in other transport state-owned enterprises. This recently included the
provision of finance for a comprehensive railway rehabilitation program, as well as selective
modernization of the other transport SOEs.
 Energy. Significant progress has been made on the institutional front, including strengthening of
governance within the National Electricity Company (SNEL), as demonstrated by the
appointment of a new Board and Senior Management, the signing of the performance contract
between SNEL and the State and progress in the recruitment of the technical assistance service
operators supported by the Bank. Progress has also been made in the overall support to SNEL
performance, as measured by a 30 percent increase in revenue collected per kWh from 2007 to
2011, and an increase of 20 percent of total collection rate within the same period. However less
progress has been made on the rehabilitation side. Works on four Inga units are still underway,
and the delivery of the first Inga unit (G12) will now happen only in 2013. The rehabilitation and
reinforcement of the high voltage transmission line corridor from Inga to Kasumbalesa at the
border with Zambia is also ongoing. Under the SAPMP, 95 km of new transmission line have
been built and contracts for the remaining lines have been signed. The delay in starting the
rehabilitation of Inga units was mostly due to difficulties to attract qualified contractors in the
post conflict environment of DRC, and difficulties for studies and bidding documents to properly
define the scope of the required rehabilitation works leading to non- conclusive bidding process
for many contracts.
 Forestry. Bank support played an important role in the legal review of the 156 logging contracts
by an inter-ministerial commission, which was successfully completed in early 2009. The Bank
helped to consolidate these gains by helping carry out institutional reforms at the ministry in
charge of forestry aimed at strengthening its oversight capacity. This included facilitating the
retirement of some 1,700 past-retirement staff, creating room for more suitably adapted new
hires. Bank support is facilitating the negotiation between forest concessionaires and local
communities and indigenous peoples on social responsibility contracts.35 Bank funding has
enabled the Government to deploy a new timber control system in Western DRC in May 2012
and over 100,000 m3 of illegal wood have been identified and seized since then. The control
system is generating a considerable increase in tax receipts and it is set up to be self-financing.
The Bank is also supporting the rehabilitation of the protected areas around the Virunga National
Park, including a program of community development and conservation activities. Bank support
was also instrumental in helping the country to play an important role in the Copenhagen climate
change negotiations, where it advocated for the creation of a Reduced Emissions from
35

Some 41 such contracts have already been signed, setting the stage for forest industries to make significant contributions to
social infrastructure (schools, medical facilities) in the remote areas where the concessionaires are operating.

67

Deforestation and Degradation in Developing Countries (REDD) mechanism. Forest Carbon
Partnership Facility (FCPF) and UN-REDD (FAO, UNDP, UNEP) are jointly supporting the
country in REDD Readiness. The coordination of these two REDD programs in DRC is regarded
as a model for other countries engaged in REDD, as well as for donor harmonization. DRC is
preparing its REDD+ strategy, is in the process of finalizing the preparation of its investment
program thanks to the Forest Investment Program (FIP) and is ready to request funding for
emission reduction.
 Mining Sector. Significant progress was made in this sector. In 2008, the Bank carried a series of
analytical works to: (i) examine the mining sector’s potential to contribution to economic growth
and (ii) propose measures to strengthen institutions and good governance in the mining sector.
Key reforms are supported under the growth with governance in mining sector project. Following
reports of non-transparent handling of mining concessions in the spring and summer of 2010, the
Bank agreed with Government on economic governance measures aimed at improving
transparency in the extractive industries. According to the information available to date, 100
percent of the existing petroleum contracts and 134 out of the 135 existing mining contracts have
been published. In addition, The Bank supported mining sector project will help strengthen the
capacity of key institutions to manage the minerals sector, improve the conditions for increased
investments in and revenues from mining, and help increase the socio-economic benefits from
artisanal and industrial mining in mining areas.
 DRC was accepted as an EITI Candidate Country at the EITI board meeting in Accra in
February 2008, and produced its first mining revenues reconciliation report in December 2009,
and is at an advanced stage for validation. In April 2010, on the basis of the progress to date, the
country was granted by the EITI Board a 6-months extension period to be able to reach full
validation. Because of the scope of the mining sector in DRC, it was difficult for the country to
meet the requirements in the first place. A new deadline of March 1, 2013 was set by the EITI
secretariat to achieve the EITI Compliant status, and efforts are made by Government with the
Bank support to achieve this target. Finally, decision regarding validation will take place in May
2013 at the EITI board meeting in Australia.
 Private Sector Development. Significant progress has been achieved under the Bank’s support to
private sector development. World Bank support was focused on laying the foundations for an
improved business climate, including: (i) reducing the time for creating business (down by 51
percent over the CAS period); (ii) reducing the time for securing Property Registry and
Construction Permits (down by 54 percent), although the number of procedures remains
unchanged and high; (iii) instituting a one-stop-shop for customs administration; (iv) reducing the
number of taxes (from 118 to 30); (v) preparing DRC for adhesion to the harmonized regional
business laws commonly known as OHADA (which are now effective as of September 2012 after
DRC’s adhesion as a member country)36; and (vi) facilitating DRC participation in the African
Trade Insurance system (with DRC currently constituting ATI’s largest portfolio). Regarding
OHADA, the adhesion of DRC to OHADA brings modern legislation, which, albeit imperfect
and in need of further reform, raises DRC judicial standards to at least on par with many of its
trading partners in the region, as well as institutes supranational oversight of DRC commercial
justice framework that opens more channels for transparency, equity and efficiency in
enforcement of court decisions. On the financial sector, the action plan for modernizing the
36

OHADA is a system of business laws and implementing institutions adopted by sixteen West and Central African nations.
OHADA is the French acronym for "Organisation pour l'Harmonisation en Afrique du Droit des Affaires", which translates into
English as "Organization for the Harmonization of Business Law in Africa". It was created on October 17, 1993 in Port Louis,
Mauritius.

68

banking sector payment system was developed, and the implementation process has been
initiated. Although setting up the Microfinance Promotion Fund has been slow, which is now
fully funded by IDA contribution, it is now supporting this fast growing sector as evidenced by
the growth from 100,000 clients in 2007 to the current 700,000 clients compared to a target of
300,000 clients. The Bank also supported Government in drawing up legal instruments for
adhering to the New York Convention of 1958 on International Arbitration. They have been
approved by cabinet, and are awaiting Parliamentary approval. While a lot of progress has been
made, DRC still has a challenging business environment, and more work lies ahead. In addition,
overall competitiveness is still hampered by the unfinished rehabilitation of the state-owned
enterprises, which play a dominant role in DRC’s economy. Developing their restructuring
strategies was slow because of the complexity of the reforms and lack of a political consensus,
but has been restated with vigor by the new Government in place with the signing the decree
clarifying how social debts will be addressed. This is a major step that will help complete the
restructuring process and support the positive contribution of these enterprises to the economy
following the transformation of the status as commercial entities of 20 more public enterprises.

B.3. Pillar 3: Providing Improved Access to Education and Health
13.
Progress under this pillar was satisfactory and all targeted indicators achieved and even
surpassed. The Bank mainly focused on improving access to basic primary education and increasing
access to a well-defined package of quality essential health services in target areas. While still off track
to reach the Millennium Goals, the country has made some progress in improving education and health
outcomes, compared to conditions during the conflict, and the Bank has contributed significantly to these
results. Health and education services have been delivered in very remote areas of DRC where no partners
or services were available for decades. Programs in landlocked districts with no road access have been in
place and made a difference in districts such as the Mongala and Tshuapa districts of the Equateur
province and as result, supporting the decentralization process in such a large country. Under this pillar,
all the 4 outcome indicators have been achieved. Regarding the milestones, 4 (67 percent) have been
achieved and 2 (33 percent) partially achieved.


Education. Significant results have been achieved including: (i) 396 schools were constructed as
part of the Emergency Social Actions Fund project and 522 classrooms as part of the Education
project and construction and rehabilitation of facilities was over the target; (ii) gross enrollment
rates of primary education increased from 64 percent in 2007 to 93 percent in 2011 compared to
the expected 72 percent; and (iii) a total of 43,355 teachers were integrated to the public payroll
compared to a target of 30,000 teachers; (iv) completion rate increased from 29 percent in 2007 to
59 percent in 2011 compared to a target of 34 percent. In order to improve learning outcomes and
improve the quality of education services about 14 million books and teacher guides were
purchased and distributed to public and private primary schools and teachers' in-service training
were provided. In fact, 125,208 teachers benefited from teacher guides compared to a target of
125,000 teachers. In partnership with other sector donors, the Bank assisted the Government in
developing its basic education strategy which was adopted in March 2010. In order to have an
integrated strategy covering the whole sector by 2013, the Bank has been instrumental in
providing support to the Government in the development of a strategy for higher education, and
for non-formal education and literacy. Bank support has also contributed to a progressive
development of the sector, including an improved access and equity to basic education,
strengthening of the learning environment and more effective management of the system. While
the quality of education remains a key issue, student learning assessment surveys point to
significant progress in comparison to other countries in the region.

69



III.

Health. A lot of progress has been achieved in DRC despite the challenging conditions. The
Bank’s support focused on providing essential health services and infrastructure rehabilitation in
selected health zones. These interventions were successful in the targeted districts. For example,
the percentage of children of 0-11 months vaccinated with DTP3 has increased from 54 percent in
2007 to 83 percent in 2011, and deliveries assisted by qualified personnel went from 47 percent in
2007 to 77 percent in 2011 compared to the target of 65 percent in the same year, thanks to
PARSS project and an Immunization and Vaccination Program. Distribution of treated bed-nets
to more than 1 million households has increased the number of children in the Kinshasa area
protected against malaria from 32 percent to 62 percent. More than 2.8 million bed-nets have
been distributed in the Kwango and Kwilu districts of the Bandudu province by the multi sector
PURUS project and 12 million bed-nets have been distributed by the PARSS through a
combination of routine distribution and mass campaigns. Moreover, the target of constructing 86
health centers was met and in addition, 808 health facilities were constructed/renovated and
equipped. The broad issue of rehabilitating and adequately supplying and maintaining the health
sector remains a daunting challenge, requiring massive resources. DRC’s health sector continues
to be characterized by poor funding, lack of qualified personnel, inadequate essential medicines,
dilapidated infrastructure, and overall poor service delivery. Government needs to mobilize more
resources to the social sector to allow the Bank and other development partners to gradually shift
from directly supporting health service delivery to systems strengthening. A better harmonization
and complementarity of donor support is also crucial for this sector.

WORLD BANK GROUP PERFORMANCE

14.
The World Bank’s performance is rated satisfactory. The CAS was relevant, aligned with the
Government PRSP, well-coordinated with other development partners (both through the CAF and the
Kinshasa Agenda), and its design and implementation allowed for focus, and timely adaptation to
changing circumstances and priorities.
A. CAS Design
15.
The CAS was fully in line with the Government’s PRSP. It’s anchoring in the Country
Assistance Framework (a collection of 17 donors in DRC) was the right approach as it greatly facilitated
donor harmonization, and synergy. The CAS’s flexibility allowed addressing the: (i) global financial
crisis with speed to contain its contagion effect on the Congolese economy with the US$100 million
Mitigating the Impact of the Financial crisis ; (ii) malaria epidemic and polio outbreak with two
Additional financing of US$110 million to the Health project; (iii) economic governance issues through
an Economic governance matrix addressing the issues of transparency and accountability in the extractive
industries, public finances management and the business climate when these became paramount
concerns, especially by mid-2010.
B. Implementing the Strategy
16.
The Bank made considerable efforts to enhance the overall quality the portfolio, especially
by laying a strong emphasis on the reduction of problem projects and a considerable increase of the
disbursement ratio. The number of problem projects was reduced during the CAS period from 3 projects
at end-2010 to 2 at end-2011. There is currently no problem project in the portfolio since the longstanding agriculture and water projects had been upgraded in 2012. It is currently stable with 3 problem
projects. Thanks to the recent upgrade of two long-term moderately unsatisfactory projects, precisely in
the water and agriculture sectors, the proactivity rate has also improved from 50 percent in 2011 to 60
percent in 2012 and it is now at 100 percent. In terms of disbursements, DRC is now one of the top
70

performing large portfolios of the regions: from a disbursement rate of 19.5 percent in FY08-10, the
country surpassed the region's disbursement target of 25 percent by reaching 27.4 percent in FY12. This
was achieved through: (a) intensified dialogue with the Government during the annual Country Portfolio
Performance Reviews, and following up with monthly meetings with government project coordinators to
resolve any impediments to implementation; (b) increased staff presence in the field from around 45
members in 2009 to 64 member in 2012 (including consultants and temporaries); (c) adoption of esignature disbursement arrangements for most of the projects; and (d) a drive for timely effectiveness of
new operations.
17.
As indicated above, the Bank significantly strengthened its presence on the ground, greatly
enhancing dialogue and project implementation. The Country Director relocated to Kinshasa in 2008,
and in the course of 2009-2011, about 15 international staff relocated to Kinshasa as well, including a
Lead Operations Officer and Sector Leaders for sustainable development and human development.
Currently, 10 out of 16 active projects are managed from DRC and neighboring countries.
18.
The Bank also intensified its donor coordination efforts. Official development assistance to
DRC (from a large number of development partners) remains high, financing some 35 percent of
government spending. IDA’s engagement with other development partners was strengthened substantially
during the elaboration of the 2007-2010 multi-donors CAF in 2007, from which the CAS was derived.
During the entire CAS period, the Bank continued to play a leading role in improving donor coordination
and harmonization, including helping organize the Aid Effectiveness Forum in June 2009 that resulted in
a coordination framework called the Kinshasa Agenda and a number of thematic groups, three of which
(governance, industry, and mining) are co-led by the Bank. The Kinshasa Agenda calls for better division
of labor among donors and use of harmonized implementation mechanisms (in the absence of use of
national systems). The Bank has taken the lead in developing joint mechanisms for project
implementation to help reduce the cost of doing business and avoid overtaxing already weak government
capacity37. In addition, the Bank, in coordination with other donors, will continue to move from standalone project units towards sector implementation units integrated in the line ministries.
Partnership with IFC and MIGA
19.
The Bank worked very collaboratively with IFC and MIGA to ensure synergy while
capitalizing on each institution’s comparative advantage and mandate.


IFC. IFC’s activities in DRC included investment operations and advisory services, especially in
facilitating access to finance. In 2009, IFC provided a US$7 million line of credit to local bank
(Rawbank), accompanied by a US$1.2 million technical assistance to help Rawbank develop
products and services targeting small and medium enterprises and women-owned businesses. A
venture capital fund was created to provide risk capital of up to US$500,000 to start-up
companies. IFC’s Africa Leasing Facility is working in partnership with the Central Bank and the
Ministry of Finance to develop leasing activities. A partnership has been finalized with the panAfrican leasing group Alios Finance to create the first leasing company in DRC. IFC is
collaborating with the World Bank is setting up a Special Economic Zone near Kinshasa through
the new Growth Poles project which is currently under preparation. The main challenge for IFC’s
program in DRC was the Government’s cancellation in 2009 of the mining contract regarding the
Kingamyambo Musonoi Tailings (KMT) mining project, in which IFC had an ownership stake.
The case got resolved in February 2012.

37

An illustrative case is the joint implementation unit for energy sector programs funded by the Bank, AfDB, and
the European Investment Bank (EIB).

71



MIGA. MIGA’s exposure over the CAS period was US$41.9 million for five projects. In the
period under review, MIGA supported two investment projects in DRC – (a) US$25.1 million in
Political Risk Insurance to Congo Equipment Company; and (b) a US$4.3 million guarantee for
Congo Oil and Derivatives Company. MIGA is exploring opportunities in energy generation
projects, telecoms, and agribusiness.

C. Managing the Risks
20.
Some of the risks that had been identified in the CAS included risks related to the fragile
political and security situation, the limited capacity to manage macroeconomic shocks, the slow
implementation of economic and governance reforms, a poorly managed decentralization process,
corruption, lack of donor coordination, and poor operational performance. Generally, the CAS
managed well the risks that arose during its implementation, although some impacted the implementation
pace of the Bank funded portfolio. For instance, the slow pace of decision making significantly reduced
the speed at which reforms of the public administration and state-owned enterprises were conducted. The
Bank closely monitored these risks, and where possible, took proactive measures for their mitigation. For
example, the Bank and IMF acted quickly to contain the impact of the global financial crisis of 2008.
21.
The risks related to the security situation didn’t materialize during the CAS
implementation period but fighting in North Kivu broke up in April 2012 fueling a humanitarian
crisis in this part of the country. The new CAS will address some of the underlying causes of the
conflict and will support social cohesion among the communities and access to economic opportunities.
In addition, the political transition following the 2011 presidential and legislative elections was much
smoother than foreseen with a continuity of programs and an excellent relationship with the new
authorities.
22.
Deterioration in economic governance, in particular in the extractive industries prompted
the adoption of a matrix of measures to reinforce economic governance, including improved guarantees
in relation to contract sanctity and measures to enhance transparency and competitive principles in
contract and concession awards. Close monitoring of the matrix has been organized and updates have
been provided to the Board on a regular basis.

IV.

LESSONS LEARNED AND RECOMMENDATIONS

At the country level
23.
Scope of the strategy. In a country such as DRC, whose needs are great and whose financial and
human resources are limited, prioritization and trade-offs are essential. Going forward, more focused
Bank strategies will require better coordination with donors, while ensuring that coordination inside of the
institution is maximized.
24.
Working with donors. DRC is country for which 20 donors are providing 90 percent of the
official development assistance (ODA). Coordinating the strategies of all these donors has been a very
difficult undertaking that goes beyond organizing regular monthly meetings. There are two key roles for
the government still to play (i) better aligning donor interventions with the government’s priorities and
(ii) identifying sectors of concentration or focus for or by each donor. Two areas of urgent concern and
attention are the education and the health sectors where better coordination will be needed and division of
labor should be better defined.

72

25.
Implementing reforms. Reforming state-owned enterprises and public administration, especially
in fragile contexts, requires time and a deep understanding of the country’s political economy. In DRC,
20 public companies have become commercial entities through the Bank-financed Private Sector
Development Project. Taking the next steps, which include addressing the huge debts saddling these
companies, has been a long process and one that the previous government has been unwilling to address
decisively. For these companies to become viable entities and for the country to benefit from the reform,
the challenge is for the government to directly address the SOE corporate governance issues.

At the operational level
26.
Maintaining Flexibility. In a post conflict environment, it is important to design and implement
investment, AAA program and Trust Funds in a flexible manner. As indicated earlier, the country team
demonstrated great agility in responding to unanticipated events. Beyond program design, this should
extend to flexible procurement procedures to accommodate the challenges in such environments. There
were instances where more flexible application of the rules would have yielded quicker and cheaper
solutions.38
27.
Choice and mix of instruments. Instruments should be packaged to deliver tangible and
impactful results and not be a wish list of activities to be implemented. The role and importance of
knowledge should be underscored and the way knowledge is generated also is critical to achieve impact.
Going forward, it will be critical to (i) leverage more strongly the Bank’s and other donors’ analytical
work; and (ii) make optimal use of local knowledge to better understand the political economy issues and
be able to support far-reaching reforms that the country needs. For instance, this will require
strengthening dialogue with other stakeholders including national and provincial think tanks and
academia; or initiate the review of projects by the beneficiaries. For these steps to succeed, the analytical
pieces should be limited to a few key strategic areas in which the knowledge gap is the greatest.
28.
Addressing risks and managing changing conditions. The previous CAS developed built-in
arrangements to address changing conditions, and the scope of the strategy was adapted appropriately
when needed. Mid-term reviews are opportune periods to update strategies, but the approach in DRC
should remain flexible and take into account changes of the environment.
29.
Increasing beneficiary participation. To secure their buy-in, it is essential that beneficiaries be
proactively and frequently involved during project preparation and implementation. The capacity of civil
society needs to be strengthened and not taken for granted so that it can better engage with the Bank and
the authorities during the design, implementation, and monitoring of the government’s projects. More
broadly, an independent, representative, and dynamic civil society is a prerequisite to any sustained
demand for good governance.
30.
Achieving and reporting results. The World Bank’s credibility lies in the ability of its support
to the country to deliver impactful, clear, and attributable results for the authorities but, more importantly,
for the population to recognize. For this reason, clearly identifying in advance the results to be achieved;
measuring the results; and involving stakeholders in identifying and measuring these results are critical.
Achieving bolder results that are transformational and identifiable should be an important objective of
Bank support to DRC; thus, the need to be selective.
38

For example, when a contractor became bankrupt, the Bank objected to Government’s request to negotiate with an
existing contractor that had been selected competitively to undertake similar work, at competitive rates. Rebidding
eventually cost an extra nine months and at twice the price of what Government had been able to get under sole
source

73

31.
Achieving results and disbursements. Results are within reach, even in DRC’s difficult political
and capacity-constrained environment. Disbursing in a post-conflict country is possible only if doing so is
coupled with leadership, a proper M&E framework, and accountability. To achieve results, focusing on
implementation readiness and disbursement arrangements during the preparation of projects is critical.
Achieving bolder results that are transformational and identifiable should be an important piece of Bank
support to DRC; thus, the need to be selective.
32.
Avoiding overruns and delays in infrastructure projects. Past large infrastructure programs
(such as the rehabilitation of the power facilities at Inga) have incurred major cost overruns.
Predetermining costs in a fragile environment has been very difficult, as has obtaining a large number of
competitive bids. Similarly, bidders attach a high risk premium to operating in DRC, which has been
difficult for task teams to handle. To avoid disrupting implementation, programs under the new CAS
should entail more thorough preparation and envisage robust contingencies.
33.
Strengthening Safeguard Oversight. The number of Inspection Panel cases has abated in recent
years due to more thorough preparation and implementation monitoring of World Bank financed projects.
The new CAS period should aim at eliminating altogether situations that warrant such investigations. The
preparation of projects should be done better and more importantly, implementation and supervision
should pay attention to these issues. The decentralization of staff dealing with safeguards has been
positive and should help the team.

34.

Operating outside Kinshasa. DRC is an immense country with severe infrastructure challenges
that make it difficult to move around. Air transportation has been the only effective mean to travel outside
Kinshasa to conduct the supervision of project activities in the field. However given the dreadful security
and the poor safety record plaguing DRC aviation industry, Staff was advised to fly by international
companies with connections to Addis Ababa, Nairobi and Johannesburg in order to organize their
supervision mission in the Eastern part of DRC notably (Kisangani, Lubumbashi, Bukavu, Goma, the last
two cities requiring an additional transport by road from and to Kigali). The transport arrangements
increased significantly the cost of projects supervision. Further, several projects suffered from getting in
contractors who are able to deliver at sub-national level. Project preparation and monitoring in outlying
provinces could be enhanced by a fully-equipped field office at a suitable location outside Kinshasa, in
addition to the Kinshasa office.

74

CAS Completion Report CAS Results Matrix
Annex 1: CAS Results Matrix
CAS Outcomes WBG
Expects to Influence by
end 2011

Milestones/Outputs by 2011

Progress made

WBG instruments

Lessons and
Suggestions for the new
CAS

CAS Pillar 1 - Rebuilding State Capacity to Increase Access and Improve Quality of Basic Services
(Corresponds to DRC PRSP Pillar 1 Good Governance and Peace Building, and Pillar 3 Improved Access to Social Services and Reduced
Vulnerability)
a. Preparation of National
1. and a. Partially achieved. A
CAS outcome 1.1:
Code of Values, on the
Implementation by 2011
leadership seminar was held by
Establishing Capacity for The implementation of
basis of the government
of National Code of
Government in March and September
Core Public Management the National Code of
leadership retreats, and its 2011 to conduct the consultation
Values to provide
Project (FY11)
Values requires a strong
overall guidance and
adoption by government;
process. Following the seminar, 16
political commitment and
basic principles to the
Ministerial Rapid Results Initiatives
financing.
Congolese
IDF: DRC- Demand-side
have
been
implemented
into
eight
administration:
ministries; including the one related to Governance and
1. Number of key
Strengthening of the Civil
the implementation of the Code of
ministries
Society (TF097437)
Values within the public
implementing Code;
administration. However, the process
got disrupted during the presidential
and legislative elections, and the Code GAC DRC empowering
of Values is not yet implemented. The citizens to support better
governance (TF097773)
Establishing Capacity for Core Public
Management Project which was
expected to contribute to its
implementation was only approved
end-June 2011, due to the governance
situation in the country.

75

CAS Outcomes WBG
Expects to Influence by
end 2011
CAS Outcome 1.2:
Adoption by
Government and
partners of the National
Capacity Building
Program (PRONAREC):
1. PRONAREC
approved by
government

Milestones/Outputs by 2011

a. Finalization of PAP-REC
and PRONAREC;

Progress made

WBG instruments

1. and a. Achieved. The Government
has redesigned the National Capacity
Building Program (Programme
National de Renforcement des
Capacités – PRONAREC), which will
now cover the duration of the new
PRSP II and has been refocused on
public sector capacity. A detailed first
phase Action Plan called PAP-REC
(Programme d’Actions Prioritaires –
Renforcement des Capacités), covering
the first three years of implementation,
has been also finalized. After the
conclusion of PAP-REC, the support to
PRONAREC will adopt a more
programmatic modality based on
annual plans, sound fiduciary
management, and effective reporting
that will require disbursement to be
closely linked to results.

Establishing Capacity for
Core Public
Management" Project
(FY11)

These two documents have been
adopted on December 14, 2010 by the
Economic Commission of the
Government (ECOREC), which is
charged with the coordination of
institutional reform policies and
approved by Government Decree in
March 2011.

76

IDF: DRC- Demand-side
Governance and
Strengthening of the Civil
Society (TF097437)
GAC DRC empowering
citizens to support better
governance (TF097773)
Capacity Building in
Macro-projections for the
MTEF and PRSP
(TF094817)

Lessons and
Suggestions for the new
CAS

CAS Outcomes WBG
Expects to Influence by
end 2011

2. Implementation plan
with budget
approved;

Milestones/Outputs by 2011

Progress made

b. Discussion of PAP-REC
and PRONAREC with
civil society and private
sector;

b. Achieved. Discussions of PAP-REC
and PRONAREC with civil society
and private sector took place during
the consultations organized in the
context of preparation of the PRSP2.

c. Funding for initial action
plan acquired;

c. Achieved. Funding was made
available by the Bank.

d. Implementation begins

2. and d. Achieved. A pilot strategic
leadership seminar was held for nine
selected ministries (Finance, Budget,
Planning, Public Service,
Decentralization, Education, Health,
Regional and International
Cooperation and Infrastructure) on 1213 March 2011 with the aim to pilot a
Results Based Management approach
to resolving key impediments to the
implementation of priority policy
agendas. The Establishing Capacity for
Core Public Management" Project
approved (FY11) is designed as a
Technical Assistance Grant with a
programmatic perspective and it is
built on a short term and a long-term
track. The system of results based
management operates successfully in
77

WBG instruments

Lessons and
Suggestions for the new
CAS

CAS Outcomes WBG
Expects to Influence by
end 2011

Milestones/Outputs by 2011

Progress made

WBG instruments

Lessons and
Suggestions for the new
CAS

some ministries as well as at the
provincial level, including in Katanga
and South Kivu.
1. Not achieved. The latest data
available is from 3rd quarter 2009
which indicates that 643,308 civil
servants are registered in DRC. Of this
total, 179,278 (28%) are paid through
the simplified payroll system known as
PTS. The PTS is not yet extended to
the provinces. Remainder receives
occasional allowances. The ongoing
Civil service census (expected to be
completed by June 2013) will clarify
the status and number of workers.

CAS Outcome 1.3:
Establish a more
effective and transparent
payroll system for civil
servants:
1. Discrepancy between
personnel register and
payroll numbers is
reduced from 20%
(2007) to less than 5% in
2011;

2. Partially achieved. Achievement
estimated at 55% to 60% by end-2009
and varies by ministry (latest data
available).

2. Base pay is at least 75%
of real pay in 2011, up
from 10% in 2007;
3. 65% of central
government civil
servants are paid through
a reformed payroll
system by 2011, up from
31% 2008;

3. Partially achieved. By end-2011,
55% of civil servants from Central
Government were paid by the PTS.
a. Public service pay system
is simplified, reducing
number of variables from
20 to 3;

a. Achieved. Public service pay
system is being simplified. The
number of variables is reduced to 3.

78

Governance ESW (FY10)
Enhancing Governance
Capacity (FY08)
Coordinated PFM reform
Assistance to DRC
(TF093502)
Fiscal and Administrative
Impact Assessment of
Administrative Territorial
Reform in DRC
(TF093364)

Support to core elements
of the public
administration reform, in
particular the retirement
process, needs to be
provided through a
flexible instrument,
allowing for long-term
support.

CAS Outcomes WBG
Expects to Influence by
end 2011

4. Civil service
retirement process
and organizational
re-alignment
completed for at
least two ministries

Milestones/Outputs by 2011

Progress made

b. A Human Resource
Database is operational at
central level;

b. Not achieved. The census is not
completed and a fully operational
database is not yet in place. The census
got delayed due to lack of sufficient
funding and is expected to be
completed by June 2013.

c. At least 15,000 public
servants having reached
the mandatory pension age
effectively

4. and c. Partially achieved. In the
context of the President’s Zero
Tolerance Initiative, the retirement
process was re-initiated; including (i)
the launching process of mass
retirement of 1,212 SecretariesGeneral and other Ministry officials in
July 2009 and of 2,569 Ministry
Officials in January 2010. The
Ministry of Environment, Nature
Conservation and Tourism (MENCT)
is the most advanced with a biometric
census that has identified all MECNT
staff including approximately 2,700
workers eligible for retirement, 1,700
of whom received their retirement
payments in May 2011. Progress was
also made in defining eligible staff and
processes in several other ministries
(agriculture, budget and finance in
particular).

79

WBG instruments

Lessons and
Suggestions for the new
CAS

CAS Outcomes WBG
Expects to Influence by
end 2011

Milestones/Outputs by 2011

Progress made

CAS Outcome 1.4:
Fiduciary systems are
established in targeted
provinces:

Governance ESW (FY11)

1. Partially Achieved. By end-2011,
31.54% of national revenue was
transferred to the provinces,39 which is
a significant progress compared to the
11% in 2008.

1. At least 35% of
domestic revenue is
transferred to subnational level by 2011
compared to 10-15% in
2007;
a. 11 provinces have fully
taken over exclusive
competencies;

2. Citizen satisfaction with
public services in
39

WBG instruments

a. Not achieved. Legal framework for
provincial & local Governments has
not yet been promulgated. The
competencies are not yet transferred to
the provinces.

b. New revenue retention and
transfer systems fully
operational;

b. Partially achieved. New revenue
retention & transfer systems being
prepared.

c. Public service and payroll
systems in place in 5
provinces

c. Partially achieved. Systems in
place in Bandundu, Bas Congo,
Katanga and South Kivu, not yet in
Kasai Occidental.

d. Baseline Citizen Scorecard
Survey undertaken

2. and d. Achieved. The first survey

Enhancing Governance
Capacity (FY08)
Coordinated PFM reform
Assistance to DRC
(TF093502)
Fiscal and Administrative
Impact Assessment of
Administrative Territorial
Reform in DRC
(TF093364)

30 percent of budget is used for provincial expenditure, but out of these 60 percent are still centrally managed

80

Lessons and
Suggestions for the new
CAS

CAS Outcomes WBG
Expects to Influence by
end 2011
targeted provinces
reaches at least 60%;

Milestones/Outputs by 2011

Progress made

WBG instruments

was undertaken in 2009 and the second
one will be done in February 2013. In
targeted provinces (Bandundu, SouthKivu and Katanga), results obtained so
far show that: 60% of the population is
satisfied with services provided in the
health sector; 50% in the education
sector, 60% in the water sector, and
66% in the energy sector.

CAS Outcome 1.5: Central
Government revenues are
increased and the budgetary
process is reformed:

HIPC Initiative
1. Achieved. Revenues increased by
125 percent from FC 1.2 trillion in
2008 to FC 2.7 trillion in 2011
(excluding signing bonus from joint
venture with China), as a share of GDP
from 18.5 percent to 18.8 percent
(against 13.3 percent in 2006).

1. 20% increase in
Government revenues
excluding grants (from
13.3% of GDP in 2006);

2. Deviation between
actual and budgeted
expenditure by central
government is reduced
from 34% in 2008 to less
than 20% by 2011. ;

2. Not achieved. The deviation
between the voting budget and
expenditure from domestic resources
increased from 34% in 2008 to 36% in
2010, and then estimated 66% based
on budget execution in 2011, due to
the insecurity in the Eastern DRC.

a. Tax Authority has a fully
automated tax application
processing system;

a. Not achieved. Automated tax
application processing system is not
yet in place, due to the delay in the
81

PER (FY08)
CFAA (FY09)
Enhancing Governance
Capacity (FY08)
Coordinated PFM reform
Assistance to DRC
(TF093502)

Lessons and
Suggestions for the new
CAS

CAS Outcomes WBG
Expects to Influence by
end 2011

Milestones/Outputs by 2011

Progress made

WBG instruments

Lessons and
Suggestions for the new
CAS

approval of the additional financing to
the Enhancing Governance Capacity,
which was expected to address this.
b. New legal framework for
PFM;

b. Achieved. The new organic PFM
Law was enacted on July 13, 2011
while a comprehensive PFM Reform
Strategic Action Plan has been
approved in 2010.

c. Annual report on budget
execution received from
key ministries starting
2010;

c. Achieved. The report on 2011
budget execution is published and
provides information on executed
expenditure by department and
institution.

d. Implementation of the
revised public
procurement legislation

d. Achieved. A new Procurement Law
is in force since April 2010 and new
procurement institutions (ARMP and
DGCMP) have been established at
central level, the procurement units are
set up at the provincial and sectoral
levels. Implementation has started.

CAS Pillar 2 – Creating Conditions for Growth and Economic Diversification
(Corresponds to DRC PRSP Pillar 2 Consolidating Macro-Economic Stability and Growth)
Outcome 2.1: Debt,
inflation and fiscal
management improved:
1. Debt indicators below
the threshold levels by
2011;

1. Partially achieved. Following the
achievement of the DRC at the
completion point of HIPC, all external
debt indicators remain below the
required thresholds, with the exception
of the PV (Present value) of the debt82

HIPC Initiative
PER (FY08)

A deeper engagement is
needed to actively
participate in the
macroeconomic dialogue,
which requires DPLs.

CAS Outcomes WBG
Expects to Influence by
end 2011

Milestones/Outputs by 2011

Progress made

WBG instruments

to-GDP ratio (over 30%), due to
government guarantees for loans
contracted by a joint venture under the
agreement Sino-Congolese to finance
infrastructure.

Capacity Building in
Macro-projections for the
MTEF and PRSP
(TF094817)

2. Partially achieved. Because of
rapidly rising in global food and fuel
prices earlier this year, inflation fell to
15.4 percent at end 2011, and below 10
percent by end September 2012 while
remaining on a downward trend.

2. Inflation below 15% by
2011;

3. Achieved. The domestic fiscal
balance deficit (on a cash basis) would
be contained in 1.7 percent of GDP,
through fiscal discipline supported by
the IMF EFC program.

3. Domestic fiscal balance
deficit < 2% (IMF
definition) by 2011.

a. HIPC Completion Point
achieved by 2010;

a. Achieved. DRC reached the
Completion Point under the enhanced
HIPC Initiative and MDRI Initiative in
June 2010.

b. Debt information
management centralized;

b. Achieved. All debts, including those
contracted under DRC-China
agreement, are recorded in the national
debt office (Direction Générale de la
Dette Publique, DGDP) which has
been integrated into the Ministry of
Finance with the sole responsibility for
coordinating and managing public
83

Lessons and
Suggestions for the new
CAS

CAS Outcomes WBG
Expects to Influence by
end 2011

Milestones/Outputs by 2011

Progress made

WBG instruments

Lessons and
Suggestions for the new
CAS

debt.
c. Monthly debt service
projections produced
quarterly;

c. Achieved. Every quarter, the
national debt office (DGDP) prepares
monthly debt service statements,
including debt service projections, and
provides it to the Ministry of Finance
for payments.

d. Monthly Treasury balance
produced automatically.

d. Achieved. Regarding with IMF ECF
program, monthly treasury balance is
produced and published after 30 days.

CAS Outcome 2.2.:
Targeted transport
infrastructure is
rehabilitated :
1. Increase in % national
roads (RN) in good
condition (2077 km,
13.8%, in good
condition 2009);
2. Average transport costs
on upgraded roads:
- 25% reduction in
transport costs for
goods between
Lubumbashi and
Kasenga by 2010
compared to 2007 ;
- 30% reduction in
transport costs for

Emergency Living
Conditions Improvement
(FY05) – PUAACV
1. Achieved. Progress was made in
improving the condition of the highpriority road network (15,800 km).
36% of the national roads are now
considered in good and fair condition.
2. Achieved. Although no economic
analysis has been carried out, this
objective is considered as achieved
with regard to the huge time savings
recorded in these main arterial roads
(although roads from Akula-GemenaZongo were not completed). Travel
time has been dramatically reduced.
There is a 60% of reduction of
transport costs on the Bank-financed
84

Pro-Routes (FY08)
Emergency Urban and
Social Rehabilitation
(FY07) – PURUS
Emergency Economic
and Social Reunification
Support Project (FY04) –
PUSPRES
DRC Trade Facilitation
Audit and Corridor
Diagnostic (TF095197)

Support road
maintenance program
and maintain the
effective operation of the
Road Maintenance Fund
(RMF) is critical. The
establishment of the
RMF was a condition of
effectiveness for Pro
Routes. Pro routes is
setting up the RMF by
preparing the Manual for
programming,
implementation and
funding of the road
maintenance program
(completed in May 2012)
and providing the road
sector with a sound road
development strategy
including a 15 to 20

CAS Outcomes WBG
Expects to Influence by
end 2011
goods between
Akula and Gemena
by 2010 compared
to 2007;

Milestones/Outputs by 2011

Progress made
road (750km) between Kisangani and
Beni. Between Lubumbashi and
Kasenga, before the roads were
rehabilitated and reopened to the
traffic, it took 60 hours to cross 110
km, which has now reduced to 3 hours.

a. 40 km of roads
rehabilitated in Kinshasa
to improve access for
800,000 residents;

a. Partially achieved. 24 km of urban
roads have been rehabilitated enabling
980,000 inhabitants to have all season
access to urban roads. Works for 15
kms of urban roads are ongoing and
are expected to be completed by
March, 2013. The implementation of
this activity is behind schedule due
mainly to the time taken to have the
bidding documents ready.

b. Additional 1,400 km of
roads (RN) reopened and
maintained in Oriental,
South Kivu and Katanga;

b. Achieved. 1530 km of roads have
been reopened. This includes 400 km
from Proroutes, 930 km from
PUSPRES (Kisangani-Beni and
Bukavu-Kamituga); 60 km (from
Mbuji Mayi) and 137 km
(Lubumbashi-Kasomeno) from
PUAACV. The roads reopened under
Pro Routes will be maintained under
Pro Routes. The Kisangani-Beni road
reopened under PUSPRES will be
maintained over a four year period,
through an Output and performance
bases road maintenance contract under
85

WBG instruments

Lessons and
Suggestions for the new
CAS
years investment and
maintenance program
(study undergoing).
Dialogue is also
maintained with the
Ministry in charge of
Public Works to follow
up on the functioning of
the RMF. The first
technical audit report
related to works funded
by the RMF is currently
under validation process.

CAS Outcomes WBG
Expects to Influence by
end 2011

Milestones/Outputs by 2011

Progress made

WBG instruments

Lessons and
Suggestions for the new
CAS

Pro-routes. The remaining works on
Akula-Gemena-Libenge-Zongo
(376kms) will be carried out and
maintained by Pro Routes AF.
CAS Outcome 2.3:
Increased availability of
electricity to serve domestic
demand and for export:
1. Increase power
delivered from Inga :
(i)
to Kinshasa from
3000 GWhs in 2007
to 3650 GWhs in
2011)

(ii)

to South African
Power Pool to 210
MW from 100MW
by 2012, and to
Katanga region to
300 MW by 2012;

2. 330,000 households
connected in Kinshasa
by 2011 (up from

1. (i) Not achieved. The project has
not yet achieved its intended results up
to now. Because of their complexity,
the contracts have a long
implementation period. In addition,
due to the country’s post conflict
environment, studies and bidding
documents could not properly define
the scope of the required rehabilitation
works leading to protracted or repeated
bidding for many contracts. Currently,
works on four Inga units are ongoing
and first results will be visible by end2012 when the first Inga unit (G12)
will be completely rehabilitated and
commissioned.
1. (ii) Partially achieved.
Rehabilitation works on transmission
lines connecting Inga to the South
African Power Pool are ongoing.
Although the indicator is not fully
achieved, progress has been made and
additional 50 MW are now available.
2. Not achieved. Power distribution
infrastructure is not yet in place, but
works are well underway.
86

Regional and Domestic
Power Market
Development (FY07)
Southern Africa Power
Market Program (SAPMP
APL-1) (FY03 +add fin
FY08)

Rehabilitation works
should be assesses in
depth to properly
estimate their cost and
gather sufficient
information for a
successful bidding
exercise.
Installation of new units
instead of rehabilitation
appears to be less risky.
In post conflict countries,
projects require longer
implementation periods
and more frequent Bank
supervisions.

CAS Outcomes WBG
Expects to Influence by
end 2011
290,000 in 2006);

3. Improved performance
of SNEL as measured by
(i) 30% increase in
revenue collected per
kWh and (ii) increase in
collection of account
receivables from 35% to
55% in 2011;

40

Milestones/Outputs by 2011

Progress made

c. Power distribution
infrastructure rehabilitated
in Kinshasa;

c. Partially achieved. There have
been delays due to costs overruns and
underestimation of cost of appraisal,
but works for the electrification of
Kimbanseke and other areas in
Kinshasa providing access to
electricity is ongoing. Out of the 18
contracts for the distribution
component, 13 have been signed and
are being executed, including the
installation of new transformers,
rehabilitation of existing distribution
sub-stations and supply of distribution
equipment to SNEL for their
maintenance.
3.Achieved. Progress has been made
in the overall support to SNEL
performance. Revenue collected per
kWh has increased by 53% from 2007
to 2011. Total collection rate has
increased by 20% between 2007 and
201140.

d. Rehabilitation of
transmission line to border
of Zambia;

d. Partially achieved. The
rehabilitation and reinforcement of the
high voltage transmission line corridor
from Inga to Kasumbalesa at the
border with Zambia is ongoing. Under
the SAPMP, 95km of new

SNEL data show 57.7% of total collection rate with arrears in 2007 and 78.5% in 2011.

87

WBG instruments

Lessons and
Suggestions for the new
CAS

CAS Outcomes WBG
Expects to Influence by
end 2011

Milestones/Outputs by 2011

Progress made

WBG instruments

Lessons and
Suggestions for the new
CAS

transmission line have been built up to
end-2011. The contract for the
rehabilitation of the existing lines has
been signed and works are scheduled
to start by December 2012.
Forest and Nature
Conservation (FY09)

CAS Outcome 2.4:
Undertake reforms and build
capacity so that natural
resources are managed in a
sustainable manner:
1. Percentage of logging
infractions discovered
that are prosecuted in
pilot provinces

2. The management of key
bio-diversity and natural
habitats is improved (as

1. Partially achieved. A new logging
control system funded by the Bankfunded Forest and Nature Conservation
Project has become operational in
Western DRC in May 2012 and has
already led to seizure of 100,000 m3 of
illegal logs, but no court cases have
been brought as yet. An Independent
Observer for the Forest Sector (IO), the
NGO Resource Extraction Monitoring
originally to be hired under a Bankmanaged Multi-Donor Trust Fund was
recruited by the EU and has carried out
a number of missions but their reports
have not been made public as the
Regulation for the establishment of the
IO Oversight Committee has not been
adopted.
2. Partially Achieved. There has been
significant progress in strengthening
the capacity of the Congolese Nature
88

Rehabilitation and
Participatory
Management of Key
Protected Areas (FY08)
MDTF Grant for
Strengthening
Governance for Nature
Resources in DRC
(TF092910)
DRC: FCPF Readiness
Grant (TF093871)
DRC Forest Investment
Program - Project
Preparation Grant
(TF011253)
Economic Governance

Essential part of success
of politically challenging
legal review of
concessions was to build
and maintain a broad
stakeholder coalition
(government, civil
society, timber industry
association, bilateral
donors).

CAS Outcomes WBG
Expects to Influence by
end 2011
measured by increases in
the management scores);

3. Number of contracts and
pilot initiatives based on

Milestones/Outputs by 2011

Progress made
Conservation Institute (ICCN) to
manage targeted protected areas. At
the central level, with support from the
Bank Project, ICCN has reinforced
human resources in the Finance
Department, which is in the process of
modernizing its financial, accounting
and auditing systems in order to
provide reports on budget execution.
Newly recruited social development
experts have launched a program of
training and support to reinforce the
social development dimension of
ICCN’s conservation role. A contract
for management of the Mikeno Sector
(the mountain gorilla sector of the
Virunga National Park) was signed
with German conservancy institution
in May 2010 and a contract for
management of the Maiko National
Park was signed with an NGO
consortium in January 2012. ICCN has
also completed negotiations with
African Parks Network for a similar
contract to manage the Garamba
National Park. The contract is expected
to be signed in the coming months.
The management effectiveness scores
will be updated annually following
contract signature.
3. Achieved. 7 REDD pilot projects
89

WBG instruments
Matrix process
(December 2010 – on
going)
DRC - Support to the
Extractive Industries
Transparency Initiative
TF (TF091920)
Growth with Governance
in the Mining Sector TA
Project (P106982),

Lessons and
Suggestions for the new
CAS

CAS Outcomes WBG
Expects to Influence by
end 2011
payment for carbon
storage, biodiversity
conservation, and other
environmental services;

Milestones/Outputs by 2011

Progress made
are under implementation throughout
the country led by the National REDD
Coordination supported by the World
Bank. DRC has been able to secure
USD 60 million of investment capital
from the Forest Investment Program,
targeted at REDD+ activities ranging
from sustainable biomass production to
the promotion of community-based
natural resource management. The
country is currently putting in place the
legislative framework for awarding
rights for private sector firms to
conduct forest carbon transactions in
the country. Two contracts with private
companies (Canadian Ecosystem
Restoration Association and Jadora
Company) have been signed for
private-led REDD projects in DRC.
Markets for other environmental
services, such as Biodiversity, are still
lagging behind, which is also a
reflection of the global markets for
ecosystem services in general.

a. Moratorium on new forest
concessions is maintained
and illegal concessions are
cancelled;

a. Achieved. The moratorium has been
maintained and the legal review of
concessions has been completed,
resulting in the cancellation of 76
concessions deemed illegal, halving
the concession area in DRC (from 24
million ha to 12 million ha).
90

WBG instruments

Lessons and
Suggestions for the new
CAS

CAS Outcomes WBG
Expects to Influence by
end 2011

Milestones/Outputs by 2011

b. Third party observer to
assist the forest
administration in law
enforcement in the field is
deployed;
c. ICCN and NGO
partnerships strengthened
to rehabilitate protected
areas;

d. Adopt specific legislation
and guidelines relative to
disclosure of company
information modeled on
requirements of TSX or
ASX;

Progress made
b. Achieved. Third party observer has
been deployed, financed by EU. (See
also 1. above)

c. Achieved. Through the GEFfinanced National Protected Areas
Network Rehabilitation Project the
Congolese Institute for Nature
Conservation (ICCN) has signed
delegated management contracts with
the Frankfurt Zoological Society for
the management of the Mikeno Sector
of the Virunga National Park, and with
the Africa Parks Network for the
management of the Garamba National
Park. Contract for the Garamba park
was not signed yet. Under the Forest
and Nature Conservation Project,
ICCN has signed a delegated
management contract with an NGO
consortium led by Conservation
International for management of the
Maiko National Park.
d. Partially Achieved. The target was
partially achieved, through a Decree
(passed on May 20, 2011) making
mandatory to publish signed contracts
between SOEs of the extractive sector
and private partners. This represents a
91

WBG instruments

Lessons and
Suggestions for the new
CAS

CAS Outcomes WBG
Expects to Influence by
end 2011

Milestones/Outputs by 2011

Progress made

WBG instruments

Lessons and
Suggestions for the new
CAS

major step forward, as a result from the
economic governance process related
to the mining, hydrocarbons and
forestry sectors.

e. Upgrade skills of mines
inspection service to
conduct health, safety and
environmental compliance
inspections in at least 15
mining sites in Katanga;
CAS Outcome 2.5:
Business climate improved
and public enterprises are
restructured and reformed in
line with international
standards:
1. Number of days to
create a company
reduced by 30 percent
between 2006 and 2011;
2. Commercial banks’
compliance with
prudential regulations is
satisfactory (as per IMF
assessment) by 2011;

e. Not achieved. The dialogue between
the Bank and the GoDRC focused on
the design of a more comprehensive
institutional capacity building
program, including evaluation and
monitoring, the implementation of
which was delayed because of
transparency issues in the mining.
Investment climate
(FY07)
IFC Pro-credit Bank
1. Achieved. Number of days to create
a business reduced to 65 days, which is
less than 50% of the 2005 data.
2. Achieved. The IMF assessed that
banking sector has strengthened
supervision leading to satisfactory
compliance, as evidenced by dramatic
reduction in non-performing loans,
number of problem banks and the fully
recapitalized banking sector.

92

IFC Global Trade
Finance Program
FIAS TA (FY08)
Private Sector Devt/
Competitiveness (FY08)
Infrastructure review
(FY10)

The dedicated IC steering
committee has been
successful due to robust
TA and financial support
from IDA, which is tied
to specific action plans,
milestones and
achievements. Local
M&E capacity needs
strengthening.
3 specialized commercial
courts have been
constructed with IDA
support and are fully
operational (Kinshasa,
Matadi and Kisangani);
while 3 others are being
constructed.

CAS Outcomes WBG
Expects to Influence by
end 2011

Milestones/Outputs by 2011

Progress made
3. Achieved. Information available in
ISR indicates that as of end-Dec 2009,
clients in the microfinance sector
exceeded 700,000, indicating a
phenomenal growth.

3. At least 5 microfinance
institutions reach
operational selfsufficiency by 2011;

a. Enterprise creation
procedures and licensing
requirements are
simplified;

b. Action plan to modernize
the payment system
developed and agreed
upon;
c. Credit Bureau is
modernized;

a. Partially achieved. Enterprise
registration process was simplified and
made less costly, as was issuance of
permits and licenses for construction of
premises, construction licenses and
transfer of property titles. However,
further work on simplification of
licensing requirements is needed for
each key industry sector.
b. Achieved. System modifications
have been designed and an
implementation action plan has been
agreed.
c. Partially achieved. A credit registry
is working at the Central Bank and will
be upgraded to a full Credit Bureau
under private management with
assistance from IFC and the German
Development Bank (KfW) by end2013.
d. Achieved. The Microfinance
Promotion Fund (FPM) was registered
as a non-profit organization (ASBL) in
93

WBG instruments

CEM (FY11)

Lessons and
Suggestions for the new
CAS
Reform of business
licensing procedures will
be needed in each key
industry sector (value
chain).
Modernization of
payment system is more
lengthy, complex and
costly to implement due
to fragile starting
conditions in banking
system.
Commercial banks need
training, and have
expressed desire to
finance it, if it can be
properly prepared for
their needs.
Payment system for
small retail transactions
will be possible using
mobile phone networks.
Regulations are already
in place, but
implementation is a slow
process.
Credit Bureau focus is on
modernizing the

CAS Outcomes WBG
Expects to Influence by
end 2011

Milestones/Outputs by 2011

Progress made

d. Micro-Finance Promotion
Fund is institutionalized;

November 2010 and began operations
in February 2011, with initial loans and
TA provided to several microfinance
clients in mid-2011 and a strong
pipeline of client applications being
processed in 2012 (4 outstanding loans
as of June 2012)

e. Inventories of RVA,
ONATRA and SNCC
assets and liabilities
completed

WBG instruments

e. Partially achieved. As of today,
inventory of SNCC assets is 85%
completed due to the complexity and
geographical spread of its operations.
Debts have been determined and a plan
for their resolution has been
formulated. Completion of assets
inventory requires Government policy
decisions their title registration and
ownership rights, to reflect the new
status of these enterprises recently
transformed into corporate entities.

Lessons and
Suggestions for the new
CAS
centralized credit registry
at the Central Bank, to be
followed by a more
integrated credit
information system,
currently under
development.
Inventory of assets is a
partial element of reform
of the SOEs, which needs
much more work, both in
terms of policy
decisiveness as well as
leadership by
government.

CAS Pillar 3 – Providing Improved Access to Health and Education
(Corresponds to DRC PRSP Pillar 3, Improving Access to Social Services and Reducing Vulnerability)
94

CAS Outcomes WBG
Expects to Influence by
end 2011

Milestones/Outputs by 2011

CAS Outcome 3.1: Access
to and quality of basic
primary education services is
improved:

Progress made
1. Achieved. Increase from 64% in
2007 to 93% in 2011. Availability of
timely core statistics remains
challenging despite technical
assistance from various donors. More
coordinated efforts to continue. It is
important to note that baseline data
was probably not entirely accurate at
that time, due to the weak statistical
capacity in the country.

1. Increase in primary
education GER from
64% in 2007 to 72% in
2011

2. Achieved. Primary education
completion rate increased from 29% in
2007 to 59% in 2011 (2010/11 school
year data). It is important to note that
baseline data was probably not entirely
accurate at that time, due to the weak
statistical capacity in the country.

2. Increase in primary
education completion
rate from 29% in 2007
to 34% in 2011

a. Complete construction of
396 schools and repair of
600 classrooms in targeted
areas ;

a. Achieved. A total of 396 schools
have been constructed as part of the
Emergency Social Actions Fund
project and 522 classrooms
rehabilitated as part of the Education
project.

b. 30,000 primary school
teachers are integrated into
the public payroll;

b. Achieved. As of today, 43,355
primary school teachers have been
integrated into the public payroll,
including 17,355 integrated in August
2011 by Bank-funded Education
95

WBG instruments

Education Sector Project.
(FY07)
Youth Education Study
(FY08)
Emergency Social Action
Fund (FY05)
Emergency Urban and
Social Rehabilitation
project (FY07)
Immunization and Vaccine
Program (TF057963)

Lessons and
Suggestions for the new
CAS

CAS Outcomes WBG
Expects to Influence by
end 2011

Milestones/Outputs by 2011

Progress made
project and 26,000 integrated in
October 2010 by Government.

c. Evaluate progress to
reduce school fees paid by
parents ;

c. Achieved. Although no formal
assessment has been done, significant
efforts have been made to reduce
school fees. From the Bank side, the
Emergency Urban and Social
Rehabilitation project financed school
operating costs in targeted areas and
the Education project supported the
integration of primary school teachers
into the public payroll (as described in
the indicator above). Government has
also adopted a fee-free policy in
primary education, for the first three
grades.

d. Reform of teacher career
structure;

d. Achieved. The Education project
restructuring supports this indicator. A
draft teacher career structure (training,
deployment, salary and incentives) has
been approved by the Government.
The final report on the teacher career
structure has been submitted for
Government approval. Reformed
guidelines for pre-service teacher
training have been developed and
applied.

96

WBG instruments

Lessons and
Suggestions for the new
CAS

CAS Outcomes WBG
Expects to Influence by
end 2011

Milestones/Outputs by 2011
e. Education sector strategy
approved.

CAS Outcome 3.2: Increase
access in target areas to a
well-defined package of
quality essential health
services:
1. % children 0-11
months vaccinated
with DPT3 increases
from 54% (2007) to

Progress made

WBG instruments

Lessons and
Suggestions for the new
CAS

e. Partially Achieved. The strategy for
primary, secondary education and
vocational training was adopted by the
Government in March 2010. The
strategy for higher education and that
for non-formal education and adult
literacy are underway for Government
adoption. The development of a global
strategy for the sector is progressing
with some difficulty as the task of
integration of the three sub-sector
strategies in a rational manner is
complex. The selection of a consultant
to support that work is well advanced.
It is expected that the work will be
completed by January 2013.A
consensus has been made to put
priority on primary education, and the
fee-free policy in primary education,
starting with the first three grades, has
been under implementation since Sept
2010.
Health Sector
Rehabilitation Support
(FY06)
1. Achieved. The % of 0-11 months
vaccinated with DPT3 has increased
from 54% in 2007 to 83 % in 2011 in
project districts.

Emergency Social Action
Fund (FY05)
Immunization and
Vaccine Program

97

The transfer of fiduciary
management
responsibility from
BCECO (Min Finance) to
the Project
Implementation Unit
(PIU), while BCECO
experts continued to
provide Technical
Assistance to build

CAS Outcomes WBG
Expects to Influence by
end 2011
75% (2011);

Milestones/Outputs by 2011

Progress made

WBG instruments
(TF057963)

2. Achieved. 77% of deliveries were
assisted by qualified personnel in
2011, compared to 47% in 2007, in
project districts

2. % deliveries assisted
by qualified
personnel increases
from 47% (2007) to
65% (2011);
a. Complete 86 clinics.

a Achieved. All 86 health centers have
been constructed under the Social
Action Fund project. 808 health
facilities have been constructed,
renovated/equipped through the Health
project.

DRC Health ResultsBased Financing (HRBF)
Design (TF092458)

Lessons and
Suggestions for the new
CAS
capacity of the PIU,
resulted in significant
improvement in project
implementation and
disbursement.
Use of implementing
partners (international
NGOs) contributed to
ensuring delivery of
services to the target
population but further
effort needs to be made in
strengthening of local
health authorities'
capacity to ensure better
ownership.
While the emphasis was
understandably on the
provision of basic health
care, more attention
should be paid to health
systems strengthening:
financing, human
resources,
pharmaceuticals,
regulations/governance
and Health Information
systems.
Insufficient coordination
between donors existed

98

CAS Outcomes WBG
Expects to Influence by
end 2011

Milestones/Outputs by 2011

Progress made

WBG instruments

Lessons and
Suggestions for the new
CAS
and opportunities for
complementarities and
synergy were
undermined (situation has
improved )
On HIV/AIDS,
inappropriate project
design and weak
accountability arising
from lack of clarity in the
responsibilities. Project
would have required
much closer monitoring
In general: lack of robust
information available
from HMIS on health
status, service delivery,
performance. External
Evaluation Agency or
surveys complemented
this but needs further
strengthening of HMIS.
Important logistical
difficulties in carrying
out field supervisions
(outside Kinshasa).

99

CAS Completion Report - Indicative and Actual Lending Program for FY08-FY11
CAS Plan

FY08

FY09

FY10

FY11

Status

DDR Supplemental (Demobilization &
Reintegration)
EMRRP Supplemental (PMURR)
Private Sector Development AF
South Power Pool AF
Governance Capacity Enhancement
Roads Rehabilitation and Maintenance
TOTAL FOR FY08
Forest Sector
Water Sector Rehabilitation
Economic Management Support TA
Mining
TOTAL FOR FY09
Multi-modal Transport
Agriculture
Urban Rehabilitation and Development AF
Development Policy
TOTAL FOR FY10
Power Power Pool Expansion AF
Education SWAP
Health SWAP
Governance
Social Fund AF
TOTAL FOR FY11

IDA
50
12
60
30
50
40
242
50
150
30
50
280
180
120
100
50
450
150
80
80
50
50
410

Progress Report Plan

FY10

FY11

Proroutes AF
PROMINES
Multimodal
Street Children
PURUS AF
Regional Trade Facilitation
TOTAL FOR FY10
Core Public Sector Management
Public Service Rejuvenation
Private Sector Development AF
DPO
PARSS AF
PMEDE AF
TOTAL FY11

100

90
50
255
10
40
3.5
340
30
40
30
100
80
100
380

Actual

IDA
50

Actual
Actual
Forwarded to FY09
Actual
Actual

12
60
182
50
50

Actual
Actual
Dropped
Forwarded to early
FY11

64
190

Actual
Actual
Actual
Dropped

255
120
40

Forwarded to FY12
Dropped
Dropped
Actual
Actual

180

Status
Forwarded to FY11
Actual
Actual
Actual
Actual
Dropped
Actual
Forwarded to FY13
Dropped
Dropped
Actual
Actual

30
35

63
50
255
10
40

30
100

30
283

Appendix 3: Tentative AAA Pipeline under New CAS (FY13-FY16)
Activities

Planned delivery

Strategic Objective 1: Increase State effectiveness and improve good governance
PEFA/Public Investment Management

FY13–14

Poverty Monitoring/Statistics and Economic Updates

FY13–16

ROSC

FY14

Strategic Objective 2: Boost competitiveness to accelerate private sector-led growth and job creation
Skills Development Study

FY13

Policy Advice ICT Dialogue/ICT Regulation Services

FY13–14

FSAP/Strengthening the Payment System TA

FY13–14

Investment Climate Strategy

FY14

Spatial Economics of the Five Economic Priority Zones

FY15

Oil and Gas Sector Diagnostic and Advisory and TA

FY14

Regional integration
Addressing the climate vulnerability of Africa’s infrastructure: DRC Inga3

FY14

Competing suppliers to ensure economic efficiency in multi-country region Study

FY15

River and Urban Transport Diagnostic

FY14–15

Strategic objective 3: Improve social services delivery and increase human development indicators
Health Systems Programmatic NLTA

FY14-16

Higher Education Strategy and Skills Programmatic AAA

FY14-16

Social Sector Public Expenditure Review

FY14

Social Protection Strategy

FY14-FY15

Strategic objective 4: Address fragility and conflict in the Eastern provinces
Public Expenditure Review (Security Sector)/Analysis on Sources of Conflict (*)

FY14–15

Policy Dialogue AAA on policy actions that promote peace building

FY14-16

(*) This activity will be undertaken in partnership with other donors.

101

Appendix4: Tentative Lending Pipeline under New CAS (FY13-FY16)
Planned delivery

IDA amount
(US$m)

National projects
Strategic Objective 1: Increase state effectiveness and improve good governance
Public Sector Reform and Rejuvenation

FY13

100

Additional Financing to Governance Project

FY13

67

Additional Financing to PROMINES

FY14

15

Statistics Project

FY15

20

Strategic Objective 2: Boost competitiveness of the economy to unleash private-sector-led growth and job
creation
Urban Development Project

FY13

100

Western DRC Agriculture-based Growth Pole

FY13

110

Additional Financing to MULTIMODAL

FY13

180

New Financial Sector Project

FY14

40

Southeastern DRC Agriculture-based Growth Pole

FY15

100

Strategic Objective 3: Improve social services delivery and increase human development indicators
New Multi-Sector HD Technical Assistance

FY 14

15

New Health Systems and Results Project

FY15

150

Eastern DRC Economic Recovery Project

FY14

65

Post-Basic Education and Training

FY15

150

Strategic Objective 4: Address fragility and conflict in the Eastern provinces
Eastern DRC Economic Recovery Project

FY 14

65(*)

Share of regional Inga3 Feasibility Studies (**)-

FY13

50

CAB Project

FY14

25

-

TBD

Regional projects

Outer years – To be determined

(*)Eastern DRC Economic Recovery Projection also will support social service delivery activities

under Strategic Objective3
(**) Financed with national IDA.

102

Other Pipeline/Planned Operations (Non-IDA Resources)
Planned delivery

Amount
(US$m)

PFM and Accountability Program

FY13

25.0

GEF conservation TF

FY13

11.3

GPE Education Project

FY13

100.0

Catalytic Project to strengthen the National Statistics Institute

FY13

11.8

Phase II EITI Implementation

FY13

0.5

IDF new procurement law capacity building TA

FY13

0.42

REDD Readiness

FY13

3.6

Forest Investment TF

FY13

36.0

State and Peace Building Facility

FY13

7.0

Hydro-met TA project

FY14

10.0

National projects

103

Appendix 5: DRC Portfolio as of End December 2012
Name of Project

Date of
Approval

Effectiveness
Date

Closing
Date

Age

Total
Allocation
(US$mil)

Total Disb. Disb in FY13
(US$mil)
(US$mil)

Growth and Governance in the
Mineral sector (PROMINES)

July-10

Oct-11

Dec-15

1,4

50.00

3,9

0.5

Multimodal Transport (PTM)

June-10

April-11

Dec-15

1,4

255.00

106.6

27.7

Road Reopening (PROROUTES)

Mar-08

Oct-08

June-16

3,7

113.30

28.8

11.4

Enhancing Governance Capacity
(PRCG)

April-08

Aug-08

Feb-13

3,6

50.00

48.5

2.3

Capacity for Core Public
Management (PRCG GAP)

June-09

Oct-11

Sep-16

0,4

29.90

3.2

0.7

Agriculture Rehabilitation &
Recovery (PAARSA)

Mar-10

Dec-10

Dec-15

1,7

120.00

27.3

5.6

Forest and Nature Conservation
(PNFC)

April-09

Sep-09

June-15

2,7

64.00

36.9

3.7

Private Sector Development and
Competitiveness (PCDSP)

July-03

Dec-03

Dec-12

8,3

180.00

165.8

10.3

Education Sector Project
(PARSE)

June-07

Jan-08

Dec-13

4,5

150.00

71.4

10.5

Health Sector Rehabilitation
Support (PARSS)

Sep-05

April-06

June-13

6,2

335.00

251.3

27.4

Emergency Social Action (PASU)

Aug-04

July-05

Mar-13

7,3

101.80

97.7

16.7

Street Children (EDR)

June-10

Feb-11

Aug-15

1,5

10.00

2.3

1.0

Emergency Urban and Social
Rehabilitation Project (PURUS)

Mar-07

July-07

May-12

4,7

220.00

189.4

9.1

Urban Water Supply Project

Dec-08

Nov-09

Mar-14

3,0

190,00

49.1

10.1

1,869

1,090.3

137

(PEMU)
Subtotal 1
2 Regional Projects
Regional Southern Africa Power
Market (SAPMP)

Nov-03

May-04

Jan-13

8,0

560.6

182.1

10.5

Regional and Domestic Power
Market Development (PMEDE)

May-07

April-08

Oct-17

4,4

579,70

103.5

9.1

Subtotal 2

1140.3

285.6

19.6

Total

3,009.3

1,375.9

156.6

104

Appendix6: Ongoing AAA

FY

ESW

Project ID Project Name

2012

P104047 DRC Governance and Public Sector

2012

P116349 DRC Health Systems and Financing

2012

P123857 DRC Skills Development Study

2012

P109868

2012

P113619 Coordinated PFM Reform Assistance

2012

P115349 Statistical Work for NDSS

2012

P118929 TA for Poverty Monitoring

2012

P119794 Issues and options rural electrification

2012

P123040 Provincial Macro Economic Projection

2012

P127283 Oil and Gas

2012

P127546 Support for introducing the "BOOST"

2012

P128640 Operationalizing Higher Education

2012

P130862 Reform Plan

Country Gender Assessment

TA

105

Appendix 7: Trust Funds Portfolio (as of January 2013)
The Bank funding envelop for the Democratic Republic of Congo described in Appendix 5 is
complemented by a Trust Funds (TFs) portfolio amounting to approximately US$30 million in
net commitments. The portfolio consists of 24 active Trust Funds mostly recipient-executed, with
an overall disbursement rate of 42 percent as of January 2013.The funds are distributed among six
major sectors with a large allocation to Forestry and Nature Conservation (45 percent), and
Governance (19 percent). More specifically, donor contributions were translated in the
implementation of the National Parks Network Rehabilitation Project and the Forest and Nature
Conservation Project, which serve as mechanisms to ensure transparency in the forestry sector.
Additionally, two TFs were set up in order to increase the effectiveness of the state at all levels
and improve governance, particularly in the mining sector. Major efforts to strengthen the health
sector are mainly supported by the TF for Capacity Building in Budget Preparation for the Health
Sector.
DRC Trust Funds Portfolio(Figures in thousands of USD)
Project #

TF Name

Amt.

Disb.

Balance

7,000.0

3,204.4

3,795.60

320.0

70.0

6,000.0

Fund
Benef.

Effective
Date

Closing
Date

Sector

FY

Recipient

9/25/2009

1/31/2014

Forestry, nature
conservation

9

250.00

Recipient

8/4/2009

12/31/2018

Forestry, nature
conservation

10

933.7

5,066.30

Recipient

9/9/2009

6/30/2015

Forestry, nature
conservation

10

P083813

National Parks Network
Rehabilitation Project

P096414

IbiBateke Carbon Sink Project

P111621

Forest and Nature Conservation
Project

P126214

DRC - FIP Investment Plan
Preparation Grant

250.0

99.3

150.70

Recipient

8/30/2011

12/15/2012

Forestry, nature
conservation

12

P128887

Forest Investment Plan: MDB
fees for FIP Program 5

250.0

0.0

250.00

Recipient

11/30/2011

10/31/2018

Forestry, nature
conservation

12

P104041

Country Governance and Anticorruption program
implementation
IDF - Demand-side Governance
and Strengthening of the Civil
Society
Growth with Governance in the
Mineral Sector

3,000.0

2,453.7

546.30

Recipient

1/30/2009

10/31/2013

Governance

9

465.5

221.9

243.60

Recipient

8/23/2010

8/23/2013

Governance

11

2,278.7

44.6

2,234.10

Bank

10/10/2011

10/29/2015

Governance

12

P126890

Capacity Building in Budget
Preparation for the Health Sector

1,072.1

229.3

842.80

Bank

10/1/2011

10/31/2013

Health and social
service

12

P126890

Capacity Building in Budget
Preparation for the Health Sector
Project
SEZ Program-Phase II

2,627.4

886.9

1,740.50

Recipient

12/7/2011

8/31/2013

Health and social
service

12

1,875.0

1,865.3

9.70

Bank

6/1/2009

2/28/2013

Industry/Trade

9

100.0

89.7

10.30

Bank

3/15/2011

2/28/2013

Industry/Trade

11

P121445

P106982

IFC00549376

GTF DRC

P123857

Improving Linkages Between
Skills Supply and Demand

68.5

0.0

68.50

Recipient

6/8/2012

12/31/2012

Industry/Trade

12

P071144

Project Pipeline Screening and
Initial Feasibility Assessment of
Potential Infrastructure PPPs in
DRC
Foundation for International
Community Assistance
Democratic Republic of Congo
MasterCard Foundation
Technical Assistance
DRC Strengthening the Payment
System

74.0

10.7

63.30

Recipient

11/27/2012

6/30/2013

Industry/Trade

13

500.0

37.7

462.30

Bank

10/5/2012

9/30/2016

Industry/Trade

13

510.8

0.4

510.40

Recipient

7/17/2012

4/30/2013

Industry/Trade

13

TF013412

P132451

106

Capacity building for the
preparation and use of a 1-2-3
survey in the context of DR
Congo’s PRSP 2.
Multi-Donor Trust Fund for
Statistical Capacity Building III
Technical assistance and
capacity building for budget
preparation in DRC provinces
Capacity building at the DRC
PRSP unit "UPPE"
Women's and Children's Rights
in the DRC Country Program

350.0

348.6

1.40

Recipient

5/13/2010

12/30/2012

Public Adm., Law

10

224.7

48.5

176.20

Recipient

6/10/2011

9/30/2012

Public Adm., Law

11

305.2

294.3

10.90

Recipient

10/29/2010

3/31/2013

Public Adm., Law

11

600.0

10.2

589.80

Recipient

11/7/2011

3/29/2013

Public Adm., Law

12

430.0

425.0

5.00

Recipient

2/8/2010

9/30/2012

Social protection

10

P109868

Evaluation of Gender Based
Violence Program in South Kivu

200.0

38.9

161.10

Recipient

7/27/2010

6/30/2013

Social protection

11

P115318

Evaluating efforts to prevent the
phenomenon of street children in
an African post conflict country

200.0

111.8

88.20

Recipient

7/23/2010

6/30/2013

Social protection

11

P117558

Addressing Gender Based
Violence in South Kivu, DRC

1,984.8

1,599.0

385.80

Recipient

7/30/2010

9/30/2012

Social protection

11

30,686.6

13,023.8

17,662.80

P106432

P120647

P123040

P128452
P078658

TOTAL

DRC Trust Funds Portfolio by Sector (in thousands of USD)
Sector
Forestry, Nature Conservation

Approvals
13,820.0

Disbursed
4,307.4

Disb. Rate (%)
31.2

Governance
Health and Social Service

5,744.2
3,699.4

2,720.2
1,116.2

47.4
30.2

Industry/Trade
Public Administration, Law

3,128.3
1,479.9

2,003.8
701.6

64.1
47.4

2,814.8
30,686.6

2,174.7
13,023.8

77.3
42.4

Social Protection
TOTAL

DRC Trust Funds Portfolio - Approvals
Public Admin., Law
5%

Social Protection
9%

Industry & Trade
10%

Forestry, Nature
Conservation
45%

Health and Social
Service
12%
Governance
19%

107

Appendix 8: Donors’ Engagements and World Bank’s Contribution to Poverty Reduction in DRC

108

109

110

111

Appendix 9: DRC Progress to MDGs
1990 MDGs
benchmark

Millennium Development Goals
1. Halve the rates for extreme poverty and malnutrition
- Poverty headcount ratio at $1.25 a day (PPP) (% of population)

-

Likelihood of
Current status
achieving target
(year) DRC
by 2015
71 (2006)

Low

2. Achieve universal primary education
- Primary completion rate, total (% of relevant age group)

48

59 (2008)

3. Eliminate gender disparity in education and empower women
- Raise ratio of girls/boys in primary school to 100%.

70

86 (2009)

Medium

4. Reduce child mortality by two-thirds
- Reduce under 5 mortality rate (per 1,000)
- Reduce infant mortality rate (per 1,000 live births)

181
117

158 (2010)
97 (2010)

Low
Low

5. Reduce maternal mortality by three-fourths
- Maternal mortality ratio (modeled estimate, per 100,000 live births)

900

670 (2008)

Low

-

1.3 (2007)

45

26 (2010)

6. Combat HIV/AIDS, malaria, and other diseases
- Prevalence of HIV/AIDS (% of population ages 15-49)
7. Halve the proportion of people without sustainable access to
basic needs
- Access to an improved water source (% of population)

Low

Low

Data source: World Development Indicators (December 2011 version) updated with latest sector data aggregated from
various sources. The year for the estimate is in parentheses.

112

Appendix 10: DRC-Macroeconomic Indicators 2007-16
2007

2008

2009

2010

10,028
5,175

11,595
6,530

11,108
9,073

13,124
11,903

GDP Growth
Extractive industries
Non-mining
Inflation

6.3
2.5
6.8
10.0

6.2
11.4
5.4
27.6

2.8
0.8
3.2
53.4

7.2
24.9
4.5
9.8

Gross National saving
Gross Investment
Public investment
Private investment
Current account balance(1)

17.1
18.2
2.3
15.9
-1.1

4.9
22.4
3.7
18.7
-17.5

7.5
18.0
5.3
12.7
-10.5

15.4
23.5
8.5
15.0
-8.1

Government Revenue (including grants)
Total Government expenditure

17.0
26.0
-3.5

17.9
19.4
-3.3

16.8
26.0
-1.7

19.0
27.3
5.8

6,142
-5,257
-635
1.2

6,586
-6,711
-1,321
0.8

4,370
-4,949
-779
6.3

8,321
-7,667
-910
6.9

Nominal GDP at market prices (in millions of US$)
Nominal GDP at market prices (in billions of CF)

Overall fiscal balance, commit. basis
Exports, merchandise
Imports, merchandise
Factor income, balance
Gross international reserve (in weeks of imports)

Source: Congolese authorities and IMF staff estimates and projections (as of January 2013)
(*) projections
(1)including grants

113

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

15,689
17,703
19,352
14,403
16,255
18,288
(Annual percent change)
6.9
7.1
8.3
15.7
13.1
15.2
5.3
5.9
6.8
15.4
5.7
4.0
(Percent of GDP)
9.0
15.0
17.0
20.5
27.4
29.0
6.7
9.8
9.8
13.9
17.6
19.2
-11.6
-12.4
-12.0

20,784
20,878

22,404
23,904

24,234
27,385

6.4
6.6
6.4
3.7

6.9
8.4
6.6
3.5

6.8
7.1
6.7
3.5

16.8
30.0
8.9
21.2
-13.3

17.9
30.2
8.3
21.8
-12.2

19.8
29.8
7.7
22.1
-10.0

21.7
31.8
-3.1

23.4
33.0
-4.2

25.0
33.6
-3.8

27.4
34.1
-3.6

10,585
-9,268
-2,762
7.8

12,034
-9,668
-4,323
8.8

13,405
-9,811
-5,688
9.1

15,090
-10,476
-6,400
9.4

18.9
22.3
29.1
33.5
-1.8
-2.3
(US$ millions)
9,800
9,244
-9,301
-8,555
-1,272
-2,036
7.8
7.1

Appendix 11: IFC Programs
INVESTMENT ACTIVITY

Client

Sector

Commitment
(US$M)

INSTRUMENTS

ProCredit Bank Congo

Finance & Insurance

1.26

Equity

Advans bank Congo

Finance & Insurance

2.65

Equity

Rawbank

Finance & Insurance

5.60

Loan

Stanbic

Finance & Insurance

3.00

Loan

KMT

Oil, Gas and Mining

0.34

Equity

Airtel

Telecom

34.00

Loan

Tigo

Telecom

50.00

Loan

TOTAL

96.85

114

2. ONGOING ADVISORY SERVICES
Programs

Objective

Clients

DRC SME
Development
Program

Enhance the ability of farmers and MSMEs to
increase revenues and expand access to growth
markets by strengthening their management capacity
(financial literacy, business acumen) and their access
to financial services and to information.

Multi clients: large
Farmers,
firms, banks, donors, MSMEs
NGOs, BMOs
(Business Membership
Organizations), etc.

IFC Ventures
(SME Fund)

Beneficiaries

On top of the credit line of US$7 million provided by Rawbank
IFC, IFC offered an 2 year onsite advisory program
(supported by a Resident Advisor and 2 local Staff) to
strengthen the Bank’s capacity to lend to MSMEs

MSMEs
(special focus
on women
entrepreneurs

Provide Risk Capital (equity, quasi-equity & loans):

Farmers,
MSMEs

King Kuba Capital

Special
Develop a pilot SEZ that would provide a competitive
Economic Zones operating environment with respect to business
regulations and infrastructure for national and
international investors. Program implemented jointly
by IFC and the WB as agreed in February 2012. The
deliverables of the SEZ program will be incorporated
into the WB Growth Poles Program.
Business
environment

Support the Government on business reforms

OHADA

IFC and the World Bank have been supporting the
country’s adhesion to Organization for the
Harmonization of Corporate Law in Africa
(OHADA). The objective is to provide a clear and
sound commercial legal system to ensure a more
efficient and fair justice in DRC to the private sector.

MSMEs and
large
corporations

Global Trade
Increase the provision of trade finance to underserved Banks
Finance Program clients through the development of local banks’ trade
finance specialists (training, etc.)

Commercial
Banks’ Staff

Leasing Program Support implementation of leasing in DRC by
assisting leasing companies. Awaiting regulation
adoption by DRC Parliament

Leasing Operators

MSMEs

Village Phone

Airtel (MOU signed)

MFIs, MSMEs,
Populations

Support a client company (Airtel) to improve access
to telecommunications for the populations in remote
are and/or poorly covered areas. Implement the
necessary infrastructure in remote areas to meet the
need of underserved market and develop
entrepreneurship schemes

115

3. SUPPORTS TO CLIENTS AND BENEFICIARIES

INITIATIVE

Number of
MSMEs
reached

MSMEs in
Agribusiness

Number of
Participants

Number of
Participant
Women

MIDEMA: Support to Midema Supply
Chain; bakeries, poultry sector

348

348

1065

369

MINOCO: Support to bakeries in
Brazzaville & Pointe-Noire
(Replication of IFC-Midema Project in
Congo Brazzaville through the
SEABOARD Group Shareholding):

34

34

117

0

VODACOM: Support to Staff

0

0

126

53

RAWBANK: Support for Extension of
clientele base & Portfolio Improvement

336

24

993

887

PROCREDIT BANK: Support for its up
scaling Project targeting bigger SMEs
Support targeting 400 farmers/MSMEs

77

23

288

104

Business Membership Organizations
(BMOs):

100

7

103

67

BE accredited Firms Led Initiatives (with
the Support of SNV, BTC, Crafod)

90

90

109

23

IFC Show Case at Agribusiness FAIR in
Kimpese (Bas-Congo)

36

36

36

5

Long Distance Training – Pilot by IFC

73

61

73

11

WB – IFC: WB Retrenchment Program
(Support to Retrenched Staff from
REGIDESO to launch new career as
entrepreneurs)

282

136

1692

0

TOTAL

1376

759

4602

1519

116

Appendix 12: Key findings of the 2012 PEFA Assessment
Despite recent progress, improving public sector capacity and efficiency is one of the key challenges
in the DRC. The 2008 and 2012 Public Expenditures and Financial Accountability (PEFA) reviews
identify a range of weaknesses in DRC’s Public Financial Management system, including critical
shortcomings in budget preparation and execution processes as well as in internal and external controls.
These shortcomings are a key impediment to service delivery. The key features of the PFM performance
system in DRC are follows:
Planning and budgeting.There is no coherent forward-looking perspective in the budget. Despite the
development of medium-term expenditures frameworks (MTEF) in key sectors (i.e., health, primary,
secondary and vocational education, agriculture, rural development and infrastructure), the link between
sector policies and priorities and the budget is still weak. Major capacity constraints exist in various
departments. The Directorates of Studies and Planning of line ministries still have difficulties in
identifying and evaluating investment projects. Moreover, the new budget classification is still not
operational, nor is it fully understood by all stakeholders. It has not yet been codified into the PFM
information system. Furthermore, there is no clear plan to establish administrative and financial
directorates in line ministries, although this is a key requirement of the Public Financial Management Act
(Loi relative aux Finances Publiques, hereafter LOFIP)41.
Budget execution. Budget execution is affected mainly by (a) redundant and lengthy steps in budget
execution processes, including various political interventions in the approval of commitments and
payments; (b) abuse in the use of the exceptional/emergency procedures; (c) excessive centralization of
budget execution authority in the Ministry of Economy and Finance and Ministry of Budget; (d) and nonincorporation of significant budget expenditures, including payroll into the budget management
information system.
Accounting, cash management, and reporting. One of the most important challenges in the
modernization of the DRC PFM systems is the rebuilding of the entire accounting system. Both at the
institutional and operational levels, accounting and financial reporting are characterized by considerable
delays. A proposed reorganization of the various directorates in charge of accounting, cash management,
and financial reporting is being developed. This reorganization includes the creation of a Directorate
General for Public Accounts and the Treasury and the establishment of a General Regulation on Public
Accounts. It also consists of the development and implementation of an accrual accounting system as well
as the creation of a network of public accountants. This is an essential reform that should improve the
quality and timely production of the accounts and periodic financial reports. However, it requires strong
collaboration of the Central Bank that plays the de facto accountant general’s role in the PFM system.
Internal audit. Internal audit falls under the purview of the General Inspectorate of Finance, which has
overall authority to audit public finances. Recent retirements have reduced significantly the number of
inspectors. Besides, like many government services, the General Inspectorate of Finance suffers from lack
of funding for its operating costs. Consequently, the General Inspectorate does not have the capacity to
perform its mandate adequately and cover key risk areas.
External audits. The Supreme Audit Institution (Cour des Comptes), which has made significant
progress over recent years with support from various donors, including the European Commission. As a
result, the Cour des Comptes has developed its strategic plan and reviewed the Government’s audited
financial statements from FY2004 to FY2008. However, significant challenges remain within the
institution, including (a) delays in the approval of its organic law, which reinforces its independence;
41

Law No 11/011 of July 13, 2011.

117

(b)delays in judgment of the accounts; (c) lack of follow up of audit recommendations and findings; (d)
limited human resources capacity; and (e) lack of audit manuals and a risk-based approach.
Legislative oversight. The Constitution entrusts the Senate and the Parliament with the responsibility of
financial oversight over government spending. The Parliamentary Oversight Committees, with the
support of the Law Committee, are in charge of reviewing the draft budget bill and then to audition
Cabinet and administrative authorities concerning its content. However, the Parliament and Senate have
not played their oversight role over the last years, except for the review of the annual budget laws. They
have not yet reviewed the audited financial statements sent by Cour des Comptes and have not taken any
actions to follow up on these findings and observations. Members of Parliament also are facing serious
capacity constraints and receive no support that would assist them in actually carrying out their oversight
function.
Public sector and PFM systems at the provincial level. Decentralization has been a key tenet of the
country’s democratic processes since 2006 and was further strengthened by subsequent adoption of
decentralization laws in 2008. It is broadly perceived as the only long-term option for preserving national
integrity. With support from a World Bank-funded GCEP, a triumvirate of development partners that
support public sector management reforms at the subnational level, the Government, and subnational
authorities agreed in October 2010 on a decentralization framework. This framework agreement
(plateforme minimale pour les provinces) sets minimum requirements that development partners must
include in their programs when supporting subnational governments. In addition, each development
partner was assigned specific provinces with the understanding that the framework agreement will be the
basis for supporting public sector reforms. While the development of the framework agreement has
improved the public sector management of the provinces, there remain significant challenges. Despite the
apparent support of Central Government authorities to the decentralization agenda, fiscal transfers to
provinces fluctuated between 6 and 15 percent in the period of 2007-2011.In addition, the adjustment
fund (Caisse de péréquation) is not functioning. Another key challenge is the delay in adoption of laws
and regulations by the provinces. There also are few checks and balances at the provincial level. Ex post
controls (General Inspectorate of Finance and Cour des Comptes) are non-existent, and civil society
oversight is still at its early stages. Provincial assemblies are still not exercising their oversight roles and
tend to approve all documents submitted by the local authorities.
Summary of PFM Performance Scores in 2012 and 2008
As a result of the weaknesses in its PFM system, DRC scored very low in the 2008 PEFA assessment—
22 of 28 indicators that measure PFM performance were rated “D”. In 2012, the PEFA assessment
shows an improvement in the overall scoring of the performance indicators. Only 17 indicators were
rated “D” with a majority improving from D to D+. However, the 2012 assessment also highlights the
continued weaknesses in key pillars of the PFM framework. With four “D” scores, budget credibility
ranks as the weakest pillar of the overall PFM system. External controls and legislative oversight also are
areas of concern and where significant improvements are needed despite the clearing of backlog of audit
reports by Cour des Comptes. One interesting finding is the rating for PI 8, Transparency of intergovernmental fiscal relations, which slightly improved from “D” in 2008 to “D+” in 2012 despite the
country’s focus on decentralization. Another notable result is the static rating for donor practices. Like
2008, the 2012 scores rating donors’ practices remain at “D”, indicating a very low trust in the country’s
PFM systems by the donor community. During the review period, none of the donors provided direct
budget support. Financial information about donor-funded operations is partially included in the budget
documents.

118

Appendix 13: DRC Transport Roads, 2012

Source: Ministère de l’Aménagement du Territoire, Urbanisme, Habitat, Infrastructures, Travaux Publics et Reconstruction, République Démocratique du Congo.

119

Appendix 14: Five Priority Economic Zones Identified under the Government Development Program, 2012–16

120

Appendix 15: CAS standard annexes

Congo, Dem. Rep. at a glance
P O V E R T Y a nd S O C IA L

C o ngo ,
D e m . R e p.

S ubS a ha ra n
A f ric a

70.0
180
12.0

853
1,176
1,004

796
528
421

2.8
3.2

2.5
2.8

2.1
2.6

71
35
48
97
28
45
67
94
100
87

..
37
54
76
22
61
62
100
104
95

..
28
59
70
23
65
61
104
108
101

2 0 10
P o pulatio n, mid-year (millio ns)
GNI per capita (A tlas metho d, US$ )
GNI (A tlas metho d, US$ billio ns)

Lo winc o m e

3/29/12

Development diamond*

Lif e expectancy

A v e ra ge a nnua l gro wt h, 2 0 0 4 - 10
P o pulatio n (%)
Labo r fo rce (%)

GNI
per
capita

M o s t re c e nt e s t im a t e ( la t e s t ye a r a v a ila ble , 2 0 0 4 - 10 )
P o verty (% o f po pulatio n belo w natio nal po verty line)
Urban po pulatio n (% o f to tal po pulatio n)
Life expectancy at birth (years)
Infant mo rtality (per 1,000 live births)
Child malnutritio n (% o f children under 5)
A ccess to an impro ved water so urce (% o f po pulatio n)
Literacy (% o f po pulatio n age 15+)
Gro ss primary enro llment (% o f scho o l-age po pulatio n)
M ale
Female

Gross
primary
enrollment

Access to improv ed water source

Congo, Dem. Rep.

Low-income group

KE Y E C O N O M IC R A T IO S a nd LO N G - T E R M T R E N D S
19 9 0

2000

2009

9.3

4.3

11.2

13.1

9.1
29.5
9.3
..

3.5
22.4
4.5
..

28.7
17.0
17.1
..

..
26.0
..
..

-7.9
1.6
109.7
13.5
..
..

-4.6
0.6
271.6
2.5
..
..

-10.4
2.2
109.6
15.7
..
..

-6.8
1.0
43.9
6.2
22.6
68.4

19 9 0 - 0 0 2 0 0 0 - 10

2009

2 0 10

2 0 10 - 14

5.2
2.3
7.0

2.8
0.0
-6.2

7.2
4.3
52.9

6.7
4.0
9.3

GDP (US$ billio ns)
Gro ss capital fo rmatio n/GDP
Expo rts o f go o ds and services/GDP
Gro ss do mestic savings/GDP
Gro ss natio nal savings/GDP
Current acco unt balance/GDP
Interest payments/GDP
To tal debt/GDP
To tal debt service/expo rts
P resent value o f debt/GDP
P resent value o f debt/expo rts

2 0 10

Economic ratios*

Trade

Domestic
sav ings

Capital
f ormation

Indebtedness
(average annual gro wth)
GDP
GDP per capita
Expo rts o f go o ds and services

-4.9
-7.8
-0.5

Congo, Dem. Rep.

Low-income group

S T R UC T UR E o f t he E C O N O M Y
19 9 0

2000

2009

2 0 10

(% o f GDP )
A griculture
Industry
M anufacturing
Services

31.0
29.0
11.3
40.0

50.0
20.3
4.8
29.7

42.9
24.0
5.5
33.0

..
..
..
..

Ho useho ld final co nsumptio n expenditure
General go v't final co nsumptio n expenditure
Impo rts o f go o ds and services

79.1
11.5
29.2

88.0
7.5
21.4

77.1
7.6
30.5

..
..
38.8

Growth of capital and GDP (%)
8

6
4
2
0

19 9 0 - 0 0 2 0 0 0 - 10
(average annual gro wth)
A griculture
Industry
M anufacturing
Services

1.4
-8.0
-8.7
-13.0

Ho useho ld final co nsumptio n expenditure
General go v't final co nsumptio n expenditure
Gro ss capital fo rmatio n
Impo rts o f go o ds and services

-4.5
-17.4
-0.7
-2.4

05

06

07

08

GCF

2009

2 0 10

1.7
8.7
6.3
11.2

3.0
-4.2
..
5.9

..
..
..
..

60

..
..
..
15.7

..
..
..
-12.5

..
..
..
36.3

-20

09

10

GDP

Growth of exports and imports (%)

40
20
0
05

06

07

Expor ts

08

09

Imports

No te: 2010 data are preliminary estimates.
This table was pro duced fro m the Develo pment Eco no mics LDB database.
* The diamo nds sho w fo ur key indicato rs in the co untry (in bo ld) co mpared with its inco me-gro up average. If data are missing, the diamo nd will
be inco mplete.

121

10

Congo, Dem. Rep.
P R IC E S a nd G O V E R N M E N T F IN A N C E
19 9 0
D o m e s t ic pric e s
(% change)
Co nsumer prices
Implicit GDP deflato r

2000

2009

2 0 10

Inflation (%)
50

..
109.0

511.0
515.8

46.2
35.2

23.5
22.4

40
30

20

G o v e rnm e nt f ina nc e
(% o f GDP , includes current grants)
Current revenue
Current budget balance
Overall surplus/deficit

10
0

..
..
..

5.1
-5.6
-6.0

24.3
6.1
-4.2

05

33.0
18.5
2.4

06

07

08

09

GDP deflator

10

CPI

TRADE
19 9 0

2000

2009

(US$ millio ns)
To tal expo rts (fo b)
Co pper
Co ffee
M anufactures
To tal impo rts (cif)
Fo o d
Fuel and energy
Capital go o ds

2 0 10

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

892
444
207
97
669
..
49
..

4,370
..
..
..
4,949
..
..
..

8,321
..
..
..
7,667
..
..
..

Expo rt price index (2000=100)
Impo rt price index (2000=100)
Terms o f trade (2000=100)

..
..
..

100
100
100

..
..
..

..
..
..

19 9 0

2000

2009

2 0 10

2,557
2,497
60

963
915
48

5,021
6,766
-1,745

8,978
10,102
-1,124

Net inco me
Net current transfers

-770
-27

-388
141

-779
..

-881
..

-10

Current acco unt balance

-738

-199

-1,167

-897

-15

Financing items (net)
Changes in net reserves

737
1

214
-15

1,605
-438

1,724
-827

-20

..
2.39E-9

51
69.0

..
809.8

..
905.9

2000

2009

2 0 10

11,692
81
1,188

12,276
0
2,497

5,774
0
849

Export and import levels (US$ mill.)
10,000
8,000

6,000
4,000

2,000
0

04

05

06

07

Exports

08

09

10

Imports

B A LA N C E o f P A Y M E N T S
(US$ millio ns)
Expo rts o f go o ds and services
Impo rts o f go o ds and services
Reso urce balance

M emo :
Reserves including go ld (US$ millio ns)
Co nversio n rate (DEC, lo cal/US$ )

E X T E R N A L D E B T a nd R E S O UR C E F LO WS
19 9 0
(US$ millio ns)
To tal debt o utstanding and disbursed
10,259
IB RD
49
IDA
1,112
To tal debt service
IB RD
IDA

348
6
9

25
0
0

623
0
23

268
0
13

Co mpo sitio n o f net reso urce flo ws
Official grants
Official credito rs
P rivate credito rs
Fo reign direct investment (net inflo ws)
P o rtfo lio equity (net inflo ws)

374
278
-12
-14
0

137
0
0
72
0

2,001
-100
-21
664
0

5,480
-39
-4
2,939
0

Wo rld B ank pro gram
Co mmitments
Disbursements
P rincipal repayments
Net flo ws
Interest payments
Net transfers

19
110
7
103
8
94

0
0
0
0
0
0

0
85
7
78
16
62

0
19
1
17
12
6

No te: This table was pro duced fro m the Develo pment Eco no mics LDB database.

122

Current account balance to GDP (%)
0
04

05

06

07

08

09

10

-5

Composition of 2010 debt (US$ mill.)

F: 106

G: 494

B: 849
C: 323

E: 2,279
D: 1,723

A - IBRD
B - IDA
C - IMF

D - Other multilateral

E - Bilateral
F - Private
G - Short-term

3/29/12

Millennium Development Goals

Congo, Dem. Rep.

With selected targets to achieve b etween 1990 and 2015
(estimate clo sest to date sho wn, +/- 2 years)

C o ngo , D e m . R e p.

G o a l 1: ha lv e t he ra t e s f o r e xt re m e po v e rt y a nd m a lnut rit io n
P o verty headco unt ratio at $ 1.25 a day (P P P , % o f po pulatio n)
P o verty headco unt ratio at natio nal po verty line (% o f po pulatio n)
Share o f inco me o r co nsumptio n to the po o rest qunitile (%)
P revalence o f malnutritio n (% o f children under 5)

19 9 0
..
..
..
..

19 9 5
..
..
..
30.7

2000
..
..
..
33.6

G o a l 2 : e ns ure t ha t c hildre n a re a ble t o c o m ple t e prim a ry s c ho o ling
P rimary scho o l enro llment (net, %)
P rimary co mpletio n rate (% o f relevant age gro up)
Seco ndary scho o l enro llment (gro ss, %)
Yo uth literacy rate (% o f peo ple ages 15-24)

56
48
21
..

60
43
26
..

33
32
19
70

G o a l 3 : e lim ina t e ge nde r dis pa rit y in e duc a t io n a nd e m po we r wo m e n
Ratio o f girls to bo ys in primary and seco ndary educatio n (%)
Wo men emplo yed in the no nagricultural secto r (% o f no nagricultural emplo yment)
P ro po rtio n o f seats held by wo men in natio nal parliament (%)

70
26
5

67
..
5

80

181
117
38

2 0 10
87.7
71.3
5.5
28.2

..
59
38
68

..
..

79
..
8

181
117
27

181
117
46

170
112
68

900
..
8

910
..
..

850
61
31

670
79
17

G o a l 6 : ha lt a nd be gin t o re v e rs e t he s pre a d o f H IV / A ID S a nd o t he r m a jo r dis e a s e s
P revalence o f HIV (% o f po pulatio n ages 15-49)
..
Incidence o f tuberculo sis (per 100,000 peo ple)
327
Tuberculo sis case detectio n rate (%, all fo rms)
18

..
327
30

..
327
38

..
327
53

G o a l 7 : ha lv e t he pro po rt io n o f pe o ple wit ho ut s us t a ina ble a c c e s s t o ba s ic ne e ds
A ccess to an impro ved water so urce (% o f po pulatio n)
45
A ccess to impro ved sanitatio n facilities (% o f po pulatio n)
9
Fo rest area (% o f to tal land area)
70.7
Terrestrial pro tected areas (% o f land area)
10.0
CO2 emissio ns (metric to ns per capita)
0.1
GDP per unit o f energy use (co nstant 2005 P P P $ per kg o f o il equivalent)
1.9

44
12
..
10.0
0.1
1.2

44
16
69.4
10.0
0.0
0.8

45
24
68.0
10.0
0.0
0.8

G o a l 8 : de v e lo p a glo ba l pa rt ne rs hip f o r de v e lo pm e nt
Telepho ne mainlines (per 100 peo ple)
M o bile pho ne subscribers (per 100 peo ple)
Internet users (per 100 peo ple)
Co mputer users (per 100 peo ple)

0.1
0.0
0.0
..

0.0
0.0
0.0
..

0.1
17.9
0.7
..

G o a l 4 : re duc e unde r- 5 m o rt a lit y by t wo - t hirds
Under-5 mo rtality rate (per 1,000)
Infant mo rtality rate (per 1,000 live births)
M easles immunizatio n (pro po rtio n o f o ne-year o lds immunized, %)
G o a l 5 : re duc e m a t e rna l m o rt a lit y by t hre e - f o urt hs
M aternal mo rtality ratio (mo deled estimate, per 100,000 live births)
B irths attended by skilled health staff (% o f to tal)
Co ntraceptive prevalence (% o f wo men ages 15-49)

Education indicators (%)

0.1
0.0
0.0
..

Measles immunization (% of 1-year
olds)

100
75

ICT indicators (per 100 people)

100

20

75

15

50

10

25

5

50
25
0
2000

2005

2010
0

0
1990

1995

2000

2010

2000

2005

2010

Primary net enrollm ent ratio (..)
Fixed + mob ile subscribers
Ratio of girls to boys in prima ry & secondary
education

Cong o, Dem. R ep.

Sub-Sah aran Africa

No te: Figures in italics are fo r years o ther than tho se specified. .. indicates data are no t available.
Develo pment Eco no mics, Develo pment Data Gro up (DECDG).

123

Internet users

4/5/12

Selected Indicators* of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management (As of date 1/10/2013)
Indicator
Portfolio Assessment
Number of Projects Under Implementation
Average Implementation Period (years)

2010

2011

2012

2013

18

17

15

14

a

b

Percent of Problem Projects by Number

a, c

Percent of Problem Projects by Amount

a, c

3.3

3.7

4.3

4.6

11.1

17.6

40.0

14.3

8.4

27.8

36.7

7.2

Percent of Projects at Risk by Number

a, d

55.6

64.7

80.0

57.1

Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount

a, d

66.1

84.7

75.7

53.5

27.0

20.8

27.5

14.9

Since FY
80
63
3,031.1
75.4
60.1

Last Five FYs
3
882.9
33.3
11.7

e

Disbursement Ratio (%)
Portfolio Management
CPPR during the year (yes/no)
Supervision Resources (total US$)
Average Supervision (US$/project)

Memorandum Item
Project Evaluation by OED by Number
Project Evaluation by OED by Amount (US$millions)
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Number
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amount

a.As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY).
b.Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio.
c.Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) and/or implementation progress (IP).
d.As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
e.Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the
beginning of the year: Investment projects only.
*All indicators are for projects active in the Portfolio, with the exception of Disbursement Ratio,
which includes all active projects as well as projects which exited during the fiscal year.

124

Democratic Republic of Congo: IFC Investment Operations Program
Congo, Democrat: IFC Investment Operations Program
2010

2011

2012

2013*

Original Commitments (US$m)
IFC and Participants
IFC's Own Accounts only

85.17
55.17

0.12
0.12

0.50
0.50

0.53
0.53

Original Commitments by Sector (%)- IFC Accounts only
FINANCE & INSURANCE
INFORMATION
Total

9.38
90.62
100

100

100

100

100

100

100

Original Commitments by Investment Instrument (%) - IFC Accounts only
Equity
3.37
Guarantee
6.01
Loan
90.62
Total
100

* Data as of January 01,2013

125

100
100
100

100
100

100

B8 (IFC) for Congo, Democrat

B8 (IFC) for the Democratic Republic of Congo
Congo, Democrat
Committed and Disbursed Outstanding Investment Portfolio
As of 12/31/2012
(In USD Millions)

Committed

FY Approval

Company

10/12/2008
2005
2005/10
0
0
2010

Advans congo
Kmt
Pcb congo
Rawbank
Stanbic drc
Tigo
Total Portfolio:

Disbursed Outstanding

**Quasi
Equity *GT/RM

Loan

Equity

0
0
0
4.9
0
50

2.65
0.34
1.26
0
0
0

0
0
0
0
3
0

54.9

4.25

3

Partici
pant

Loan

Equity

0
0
0
0.53
0
0

0
0
0
0
0
30

0
0
0
4.9
0
50

2.65
0
1.26
0
0
0

0
0
0
0
3
0

0
0
0
0.53
0
0

0
0
0
0
0
30

0.53

30

54.9

3.91

3

0.53

30

* Denotes Guarantee and Risk Management Products.
** Quasi Equity includes both loan and equity types.

126

**Quasi
Equity *GT/RM

Partici
pant

CAS Annex B8 - Democratic Republic of Congo
CAS Annex B8 - Congo, Democrat
Operations Portfolio (IBRD/IDA and Grants)
As Of Date 1/10/2013

Closed Projects

78

IBRD/IDA *
Total Disbursed (Active)
of w hich has been repaid
Total Disbursed (Closed)
of w hich has been repaid
Total Disbursed (Active + Closed)
of w hich has been repaid

907.30
0.00
2,328.65
476.59
3,235.95
476.59

Total Undisbursed (Active)

801.02

Total Undisbursed (Closed)

23.01

Total Undisbursed (Active + Closed)

824.03

Active Projects

Difference Between
Last PSR

Expected and Actual

Supervision Rating
Project ID

Project Name

P100620
P092724
P104497
P086874
P091092
P101745
P086294
P104041
P083813
P106982
P092537
P115318
P117382
P111621
P088751
Overall Result

DRC- Forest and Nature Conservation SIL
DRC Ag Rehab & Recovery SIL (FY10)
DRC Em. Urban & Social Rehab ERL (FY07)
DRC Emerg Soc Action (FY05)
DRC Urban Water Supply Project (FY09)
DRC- Pro-Routes (FY08)
DRC-Education Sector Project (FY07)
DRC-Enhancing Governance Capacity (FY08)
DRC-GEF National Parks (FY09)
DRC-Growth w/ Gov in Mineral Sector
DRC-Multi-Modal Transp
DRC-Street Children Project (FY10)
DRC: Capacity for Core Public Management
DRC:Rehab&Particip Mgt of KeyProt. area
ZR-Health Sec Rehab Supt (FY06)

Development
Objectives

MS
MS
S
S
S
MS
MS
S
S
MS
MS
MU
MS
S
MS

Disbursements a/

Original Amount in US$ Millions

Implementation
Progress

Fiscal Year

MS
MS
MS
MS
MS
MU
MS
S
MS
MS
S
MU
MS
MS
S

2009
2010
2007
2005
2009
2008
2007
2008
2009
2011
2010
2010
2011
2009
2006

127

IBRD

IDA

GRANT

64
120
220
101.8
190
113.3
150
50
7
50
255
10
29.9
6
335
1689

13

Cancel.

Undisb.

Orig.

29.63
92.38
38.50
6.74
148.41
81.93
81.90
0.01
3.80
46.68
154.83
7.90
26.42
5.25
85.69
810.07

7.32
-9.45
-37.69
116.50
20.64
78.64
1.47
1.16
17.47
69.27

-99.07
133.15

Frm Rev'd

16.99
16.72

1.47
74.25

-53.04
56.39

Country MAP

c

128

